

Communications and Political Power
Africa's media in action before independence
To write adequately about Africa's press, radio and television would require a succession of books.
What follows is therefore only a brief outline, with a closer examination of certain areas.
There are more than fifty countries in Africa, of which each has radio, most have a daily press and many have television.
Their present media facilities owe much to their history.
Though a certain amount of work has been done on the history of Africa's media, there is room for research on a far larger scale.
Africa's modern print and electronic media developed as the direct or indirect result of contact with Europe.
Few African societies had a written language, and in those that did, printing was either unknown or undeveloped.
Arab traders brought literacy to West and East Africa, but the technology of printing came from Europe and the United States.
European colonialism south of the Sahara meant that most literacy, and therefore most printing, was in a European language.
This has important implications which are worth considering more closely.
Traditional oral forms of communication, which played a central role in the maintenance of social and political order — ensuring continuity and reinforcing values and norms of behaviour — was gradually confronted by a quite different form based on the new technology of print and, generally, on a foreign language.
If an African language was used, it was a lingua franca, one not necessarily employed in traditional oral communication.
Thus the introduction of the new print media marked the beginning of a break with the past.
It must be stressed that the literacy barrier is a double one.
Of the many Africans who learn to read and write, a large number, perhaps the majority, rarely see their own mother tongue in print.
Certain languages have still not been written down; others exist in written form only as the Bible or sections of it.
Literacy and education tend therefore to reduce linguistic diversity and to enhance major languages at the expense of minor ones.
Radio has therefore proved less restrictive, being able to reach many more individuals through a greater number of languages.
Head listed over 175 indigenous African languages used in radio broadcasting in 1973.
His list was incomplete, and the true total today certainly exceeds 200.
Yet this still means that over a thousand African languages are not heard on the radio.
The legacy of the press
The press is far older in Africa than is generally supposed, the first newspapers probably being those that appeared during the Napoleonic occupation of Egypt in 1797.
In South Africa, the Cape Town Gazette first appeared in 1800, and a year later, the Royal Gazette appeared in Freetown, Sierra Leone.
The first truly indigenous press was almost certainly that of Egypt, which began to appear during the nineteenth century; but it predated black Africa's press by only a few years.
Slaves returning from the Americas to the West African coast soon established local papers.
Of these, the earliest was probably founded in Liberia, where in 1826 Charles Force started the monthly Liberia Herald , whose motto was ‘Freedom is the Brilliant Gift of Heaven.’
In 1858 Charles Bannerman, the first African editor in the British colony of the Gold Coast (now Ghana), started the Accra Herald .
At first he had no press but, undaunted, wrote the paper by hand!
In 1859 missionaries published Nigeria's first paper, which was also the first African paper in an African language.
It was called Iwe Irobin fun awon ara Egba Yorubas (‘the newspaper for Egba and Yoruba people’) and was priced at 30 cowries!
Four years later, Nigeria's first English language paper appeared — the Anglo-African , published by a West Indian, Robert Campbell.
In Sierra Leone, the short-lived Royal Gazette was followed by others, including the African Interpreter and Advocate .
The economic base of these early newspapers was fragile, and few lasted long, but they were significant in their expression of early educated and urbanized African opinion.
Political protest and the expression of informed African opinion soon became the dominant theme of the West African English language press.
In the Gold Coast, J.H. Brew, Timothy Laing, Casely Hayford, Attoh Ahuma and James Mensah Sarbah founded a strong tradition of political satire that was to last well into the nationalist period.
These papers played an important role in trying to raise an early consciousness of nationalism and pride in the face of colonial dominance and alien values.
Thus Attoh Ahuma (who was also known as a clergyman, the Revd S.R.B. Solomon) joined with another local churchman, the Revd Eggijir Assam, to launch the Gold Coast Aborigine , in which they promised to redress what they saw as the colonial imbalance in the education of local Africans:
The two men therefore began to produce a series of articles on local African history in order to show that Africa also had a past worth recalling.
By the end of the nineteenth century thirty-four newspapers had appeared in Sierra Leone, nineteen in the Gold Coast, nine in Nigeria and one in the Gambia.
During the 1890s four major papers were operating in the Gold Coast, two being published in Accra and two at Cape Coast, two hundred miles away.
They carried an amazing amount of news, considering the difficulty of surface transport and the absence of telephone and  telegraph.
Kwame Nkrumah later referred proudly to the enterprise of these pioneer pressmen:
Despite their attempts to express opposition many of these early papers still looked to the press of Europe as models.
In 1883 Owen Macaulay's Eagle and Lagos Critic was founded, having as its aim the infusion into ‘the minds of the community the fondness for reading for its own sake’.
It carried accounts of the debates in the British Parliament as well as reports on local cricket matches, and leavened its rather serious tone with Victorian English jokes.
The reliance of some of Africa's English language press for some of its lighter material on foreign sources continues today, as can be seen from the number of papers which take English and American comic strips such as Modesty Blaise ,Andy Capp ,The Gambols ,Garth ,Peanuts and The Perishers .
The West African English language press rapidly took on a more militant and nationalist tone, particularly in Lagos, Nigeria, thanks to John Payne Jackson.
Born in Liberia, Jackson had learned printing at a mission school.
He became a trader in Nigeria and when this career failed, worked for a time as a clerk to Richard Beale Blaize, publisher of the short-lived Lagos Times .
Though the two men fell out, Blaize is thought later to have financed Jackson when he started the Lagos Weekly Times in 1890.
They quarrelled again, but this time Jackson had established his reputation as a journalist, and kept control of the paper.
From January 1891 it appeared as the Lagos Weekly Record , and was for forty-nine years an outspoken critic of colonialism.
In 1913, Jackson produced a vigorous attack on the new governor, Sir Frederick (later Lord) Lugard.
He also campaigned actively on behalf of the people of neighbouring Dahomey in their struggle against the French.
Jackson died in 1915, the editorship being taken over by his son, Horatio.
In 1925, Herbert Macaulay produced West Africa's first successful daily newspaper, the Lagos Daily News , which was a mouthpiece for his National Democratic party.
From 1933 a rival party, the Nigerian Youth Movement, also had its own paper, the Daily Service .
More important than either of these were Nnamdi Azikiwe's West African Pilot , started in 1937, and a series of other papers he launched in the succeeding years.
By 1940 the Pilot had outstripped all other West African papers in circulation, achieving daily  sales of 12,000.
An outstanding West African nationalist and journalist, Azikiwe at one time owned six papers.
He also subscribed to Reuters (received in morse by radio) and was for a while a Reuters correspondent in the region.
The press of the Gold Coast also reflected and stimulated the activities of nationalists and of the burgeoning political parties.
In 1948 Kwame Nkrumah founded the Evening News , which became the paper of his Convention Peoples Party.
When independence became assured, further party newspapers appeared as it became clear that owning a newspaper was a necessary part of a successful political campaign: for example, in Nigeria, Azikiwe and his NCNC party controlled ten newspapers in 1959, while their rivals, Obafemi Awolowo and the Action Group, controlled fourteen.
The parties of Sierra Leone and Gold Coast similarly had one or more newspapers each.
In addition to this flourishing political press there existed other influential papers.
The British Mirror Group under Cecil King established a significant foothold in the English language press of West Africa.
It purchased the Nigerian Daily Times in 1947 and brought great technical improvements to the paper.
Prior to this, local papers had rarely carried pictures; those that were used had first to be made into printing blocks in London — a process which could take six weeks.
When the veteran Nigerian journalist Abiodun Aloba began his career in 1944, no paper was able to process pictures locally, none had teleprinters and few even had telephones.
Stories of even the most important events often depended on the post.
Cecil King's entry into the field of newspaper publishing changed all this.
His Mirror Group papers were non-partisan, but they were, equally, not identified with colonial rule.
They recruited and trained some of West Africa's best journalists, building on the already established foundations of newspaper readership and reporting.
Most significantly, Mirror papers introduced modern printing techniques, processed photos locally for immediate use and speeded up the presses.
After the first rotary press was established at the Daily Times , that paper's circulation soared from 25,000 in 1951 to 55,000 in 1955; ten years later, it reached 120,000 copies daily.
In 1950, the group established the Daily Graphic in the Gold Coast, and in 1952 it bought the Daily Mail of Sierra Leone.
These well-produced papers were a major challenge to the indigenous political press, some of whose publications failed to survive as a result.
The Mirror Group eventually sold all its papers in West Africa to local interests.
In the case of Ghana, the Daily Graphic was sold to the Nkrumah Government in 1965.
In the vast area of West and Equatorial Africa, formerly ruled by the French, the press was far slower to develop.
The somewhat different style of French colonial rule and the region's more scattered population were two major reasons.
The policy of the French was to form a small native élite, known as évolués , who learned their language and culture.
It was also French colonial policy for there to be larger concentrations of Europeans in their  territories.
This led to the establishment of French language newspapers, edited by Frenchmen, which catered for a combined European and évolué readership.
The latter identified far more closely with French culture than their counterparts in Nigeria or the Gold Coast ever identified with the British.
A measure of the extent to which évolués were drawn into French life was the fact that President Houphouet-Boigny of the Ivory Coast was previously a member of five successive French cabinets during the 1950s.
The French discouraged the establishment of indigenous African publishing.
All the early newspapers — such as Le Réveil du Sénégalais , launched in 1886 and L'Union Africaine , in 1896 — were published by Frenchmen.
The first paper in Abidjan, Ivory Coast, to be owned and edited by an African appeared in 1935.
The Eclaireur de la Côte D ‘Ivoire became a popular anticolonial paper voicing grievances against the police and some of the chiefs, and campaigning for the unemployed and farmers hit by the world recession.
Between 1928 and independence the Ivory Coast had some fifty newspapers, but few of them lasted long.
The Frenchman Charles de Breteuil launched a chain of newspapers in French West Africa which included Paris-Dakar , started in Senegal in 1933, and France-Afrique (later renamed Abidjan-Matin ) established in the Ivory Coast in 1938.
After the war,La Presse de Guinée was launched in Conakry and La Presse du Cameroun in Yaoundé.
All of these were originally produced by Frenchmen for Frenchmen.
The educational and cultural gap between the élite évolués and the rest of the African population was noted by Almond and Coleman as a ‘marked discontinuity in communication’ between the two; at the same time, between this African élite and European Frenchmen, ‘one could argue that a unified communications process tended to develop’.
Both these processes were more evident in the French than in the British territories, say the authors, who nevertheless caution against making too much of this.
For, while Léopold Senghor and Houphouet-Boigny were able to communicate with their political colleagues in Paris, they had nevertheless not forgotten how to communicate with their own people.
French restrictions on an African press were lifted after the Second World War, and between 1945 and independence in 1960 thirty-six newspapers emerged and disappeared in Abidjan alone.
These mostly reflected the emergence and subsequent disappearance of various political groupings and parties.
By the time self-government had been achieved in 1960, Felix Houphouet-Boigny's Parti Démocratique de la Côte d'Ivoire (PDCI) had defeated all other parties, whose papers disappeared with them.
In writing about the press of French-speaking West Africa before 1960, one is referring mainly to Abidjan and Dakar, where the évolués were concentrated.
West and Equatorial French Africa then broke up into fourteen separate, independent countries.
Outside Senegal and the Ivory Coast there was very little press to speak of in the pre-independence period: illiteracy was even higher than in the British territories, and the small, educated élite could not easily sustain newspapers.
There were exceptions, notably in two Francophone countries which were originally colonized not by France but by Germany.
Elolombe ya Kamerun (‘The Cameroon Sun’) was  an early mission paper of that German colony, and others existed, both in German and the local languages.
Togo had a Catholic monthly,Mia Holo , that first appeared during German rule and survived into modern times.
In Dahomey, a few African papers emerged as early as the 1920s.
As far as I have been able to discover, the first papers in French West Africa to be owned and controlled by Africans were Le Cri Nègre and Le Phare du Dahomey .
Elsewhere, there is little to report.
The political awakening that followed the Second World War and the period when French West Africans were able to elect members to the French Parliament saw the establishment of a few party papers, but few Africans could read them and their circulations were extremely low.
Cameroon was something of an exception in having a number of privately owned papers:L'Echo du Cameroun ,Dialogue ,Le Petit Camerounais and Les Nouvelles du Mungo .
French repression prior to independence, and President Ahidjo's tight control after 1960, effectively killed off this brief flowering.
Rosalynde Ainslie commented in 1966 that ‘many of Cameroon's finest journalists now work abroad’.
This brief survey of the Francophone African scene should not ignore the rather curious case of Madagascar, which, at the time of its independence, could boast seventeen dailies with a total circulation of 20,000 copies as well as forty-four other papers and magazines.
In East and Central Africa the press developed along very different lines, reflecting chiefly the contrasting nature of that region's contact with Europe.
While contact between Europe and West Africa can be traced back many hundreds of years, it was only during the middle of the nineteenth century that Europeans arrived in any numbers in East and Central Africa.
There are still those alive today in Zambia, Malawi and Uganda who remember the establishment of the first European boma in their area.
An even more important feature was that many Europeans came not to administer but to settle permanently, which they did on a large scale in Kenya and Zimbabwe, smaller numbers also being found in Zambia and Tanzania.
In addition, the British brought in large numbers of Indians who settled in Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda.
Both immigrant groups have been important influences on the press.
The Germans, who had colonized Tanganyika in 1885, started a paper in Dar es Salaam four years later: the Deutsch-Ostafrikanische Zeitung .
Earlier still, in 1888, the Universities Mission to Central Africa (UMCA) had had the distinction of founding German East Africa's first newspaper,Msimulizi (‘The Reporter’), to be followed by Habari ya Mwezi (‘News of the Month’) in 1894.
These papers were also the first in Swahili.
Habari ya Mwezi was the first in East Africa to employ an African editor: Samwil Sehoza was appointed to the post in 1908.
The German press disappeared after Germany's defeat in the First World War, while the missionary press, though of some historical interest, did not give rise to publications of any major importance.
The English white press, on the other hand, was to play an important part in the colonial history of East Africa.
Whereas the major newspapers of Nigeria and the Gold Coast were organs of protest and political agitation, those of East Africa were, from the start, ‘vehicles for the culture and concepts of the rulers, with the  considerable resources of white capital at their command’.
In 1902 the weekly African Standard was launched to serve the growing number of white settlers and administrators in British East Africa.
In 1910 it moved from Mombasa to Nairobi, changed its name to the East African Standard and became a daily.
Later, after Tanganyika had become British, the company producing the Standard was invited by Tanganyika's governor to set up a paper in Dar es Salaam.
Thus the Tanganyika Standard was launched in 1930.
These Kenyan and Tanganyikan papers took similar lines, generally representing the interests and point of view of the white settler.
During the 1950s the Tanganyika Standard supported the United Tanganyika party, which campaigned for racial ‘partnership’ and was outspoken in its opposition to TANU and African nationalism.
Although it was certainly read by a growing number of Africans and Asians, it remained firmly rooted in the culture and outlook of the small, mainly British, white community.
Under the trusteeship system of the United Nations, visiting missions were sent to Tanganyika regularly to report on the situation there.
From the beginning, these pressed strongly for African political advancement.
In 1954, for example, one of them called for a majority of Africans to be on the unofficial, i.e. representative, benches of the legislative council within three years and for self-government within twenty to twenty-five years.
On the day the document was published, the Tanganyika Standard termed the proposals ‘irresponsible and mischievous’, claiming ‘the great majority of the African population are solidly behind the Government in its present policy’.
It was, however, less strident in its opposition to African nationalism than its sister paper, the East African Standard of Nairobi, and when TANU won the elections in 1958, it shifted its ground, coming to terms with political change and lending its support to African nationalism as represented by what it regarded as the moderation of Nyerere.
Nevertheless, it continued to be critical of what it felt to be the excesses of some of TANU's more extreme and strident members and officials.
This policy was to be carried over into the post-independence period.
Whilst supporting the Government in its efforts towards development, the paper remained cautiously critical of most manifestations of militancy on the part of TANU politicians and others.
It also retained something of its settler image in its news coverage, features and leisure articles until it was nationalized in 1970.
There existed other newspapers aimed at the European market, such as the daily Tanganyika Opinion and the weekly Tanganyika Advertiser , but their circulations were low and they mostly disappeared long before independence.
The white press of Kenya had a far larger market to attract and was altogether more viable: a considerable number of Kenyan newspapers and magazines were readily available in Tanganyika.
Apart from the East African Standard there were the Kenya Weekly News and the Swahili weekly,Baraza .
Launched in 1939, the latter remained the Standard Group's only venture into the Swahili language press and, like the Tanganyika Standard , began as a result of a government initiative.
It was set up at the outbreak of war, when the British wanted to explain events to the African population in  East Africa, and became self-supporting within two years.
Until 1946 editorial policy was a Government responsibility.
The Standard Group also owned the Uganda Argus .
Asians in East Africa had their own newspapers.
In Kenya and Tanzania Asian dailies and weeklies existed in both English and Gujerati.
After the Second World War they began to support African nationalism.
The African press in East Africa had a somewhat patchy beginning.
In Kenya, the Kikuyu Central Association published Mwigwithania in 1928.
It was edited by the young Jomo Kenyatta, who halted publication in 1934 when he went to England.
After the war a series of anti-colonial, anti-settler, Kikuyu language newspapers existed that went mainly unchecked because the British colonial administrators knew Swahili but not Kikuyu.
These papers were ruthlessly suppressed during the Mau Mau Emergency of 1952.
However, the importance of the press in forging links between people had now been demonstrated.
The establishment of this network proved to be a critical factor in African nationalism during this brief period in Kenyan history when the press played a role similar to that of the nationalist press in British West Africa.
The African press in Tanganyika was slow to develop.
Habari ya Mwezi , started at an early date by the UMCA, has already been mentioned, but failed to become an important vehicle for African opinion.
Other missions joined in: from 1910 onwards the German protestant Mission produced Pwani na Bara (‘The Coast and Hinterland’), which by the outbreak of the First World War had reached a modest monthly circulation of two thousand copies.
Like a number of other mission or Church papers then and since,Pwani na Bara leavened its religious content with a generous amount of secular news (its first edition contained articles on the Kaiser's birthday, the Nyamwezi Chief Mirambo and zeppelins) but the missionary press was nevertheless to remain very small.
These were very early days in Tanganyika's modern development, and still only a tiny handful of Africans could read.
Advances were made in education, and the number of literates grew in the period 1910 to 1945, but it is important not to overestimate this growth.
Even at independence in 1961, probably not more than ten per cent of the country's African population could read and write.
However, in the period leading up to the birth of nationalism, this small number of literates formed a politically important minority.
The colonial government entered the field of the press soon after the German defeat when in 1923 it introduced Mambo Leo (‘Affairs of Today’).
Edited by the Department of Education, its stated purpose was to educate Africans.
It was ‘non-political’ and ‘non-controversial’during the interwar years.
In addition to world news (carefully interpreted by the staff of the Department), and articles on current affairs and subjects of local interest, the paper carried explanatory and instructive articles on agriculture, health and sanitation.
In the beginning it had a circulation of two thousand; by 1930 it was selling nine thousand copies per month at ten cents.
Sales continued to rise, its price being held down so that by 1953, fifty thousand copies were sold each month.
After the Second World War the paper came under the  Information Office (later renamed the public Relations Office) whose policy was to explain and promote the achievements and aims of the territory's government.
Through Mambo Leo and its other newspapers, this government also aimed to present British news and the British way of life to the people of the country, in particular to those without access either to the British press or the BBC.
Mambo Leo took on a new importance in the 1950s, when the Government hoped it would help stave off the march of nationalism.
R placed great emphasis on the Government's efforts in education, perhaps believing that this approach would evoke a sympathetic response from its recently educated African readership.
Most editions carried stories stressing the amount of money being spent on improving conditions for Africans in the country, and special attention was given to items concerning stories about the funds provided for health and education by the Colonial Development and Welfare Fund and other British official sources.
However, as Omari has pointed out, the paper also printed letters from readers who took a nationalist point of view, and tried to provide answers to them.
Moreover, it reported some of the speeches and activities of Nyerere, who led the nationalist party (TANU) from its formation in 1954.
When the UN Visiting Mission made its various reports,Mambo Leo was at pains to explain British policy on political advance for Africans.
Its success in reaching what were, by East African standards, very healthy circulation figures encouraged the Public Relations Department to launch a second paper in 1951.
This,Mwangaza (‘Light’), was later to become the first Swahili daily, but although it cost only three cents it never achieved sales higher than about 1,400.
At first Mwangaza was sold only in Dar es Salaam, but sales were eventually extended to Tanga, the country's second town.
It relied on government subsidy and was closed at the end of 1958.
Mwangaza seemed dedicated, even more so than Mambo Leo , to opposing the nationalists.
Omari describes how the paper printed many letters from readers in support of the Government, but it also published others strongly in favour of nationalism and independence.
The latter were sometimes answered by editorial comments to the effect that the country was not ready for African self-government.
Omari gives a translation of an interesting example in reply to a reader who had written that Africans were ready for immediate self-rule:
The metaphor of the fish was clearly an unfortunate one: as Omari suggests, ‘the big fish swallows the small’ could be interpreted as describing the relationship of the colonial power to the colonized.
The 1950s were undoubtedly an important period in the history of the Tanzanian press.
Readership was still small relative to the whole population, but among it were to be found most of those active in the leadership of TANU and other areas of African advancement.
The Dar es Salaam-based Government papers, despite their partiality, did act as a valuable forum for public debate.
Although at first TANU was at a disadvantage in not having  its own daily paper, it probably benefited from the publicity, albeit negative, given by the Government press.
Another Government venture into the field of the press was Baragumu (‘Trumpet’), whose first edition appeared in March 1956.
This was an attractively produced weekly with a fairly evenly-divided diet of politics, leisure and sport.
The paper's first two years of existence coincided with the United Tanganyika party's campaign for African support, and it gave the party a considerable amount of publicity.
When it became obvious that the UTP had failed,Baragumu stopped being political.
In 1959 the paper was sold to East African Newspapers Ltd of Nairobi, publishers of the Daily Nation , and was then printed in the Kenyan capital for sale in Tanzania.
Later renamed and amalgamated with other papers,Baragumu continued as Taifa Tanzania (‘The Nation, Tanzania’).
The fourth public Relations Department newspaper was a weekly give-away,Habara za Leo (‘News of Today’).
Although these were Government newspapers supporting the Colonial status quo, they all employed African journalists.
In later years they were edited by Africans, though European officials in the public Relations Department always had the final say.
Whiteley wrote that the significance of these papers lay in the valuable service they performed of establishing Swahili as a means of communication in printed form.
Mambo Leo , as the first major Swahili newspaper, played a particularly vital role in enabling many Africans to gain valuable professional newspaper experience.
Omari argues, convincingly, that the Government press of Dar es Salaam produced the opposite effect to that intended by its sponsors.
It failed to convince readers either of the case against nationalism or of that for the policies of slow African advance being put forward by the Government.
Furthermore, by arguing the policy in detail through the correspondence columns and presenting opinions on all sides of the argument, the Government press, so Omari suggests, played an indirect part in increasing TANU's popularity.
If this is true (and it is not so far-fetched: if you carry on an intelligent argument with your readers in the columns of a newspaper, you cannot expect them to believe that the responsibilities of self-government are beyond them), then it would seem a good example of propaganda having the opposite effect to that intended.
The popularity of a newspaper is not necessarily a guide to the opinions of its readers.
It can be safely assumed that the overwhelming majority of Mambo Leo and Mwangaza readers were pro-TANU, in view of the size of the electoral victories in 1958, when that party was supported by sixty-seven per cent of an electorate in which Asians and Europeans were disproportionately highly represented.
Mambo Leo was popular not for its opinions but because it was well produced, entertaining and readable; nevertheless, its popularity did not mean that its readers either believed or trusted it.
Leslie found in 1958 that the Government papers and radio were greatly distrusted: newspapers which were anti-government were avidly sought after but not always easy to obtain.
The Government press of pre-independence Tanganyika left the country with an important legacy: a tradition of government involvement in the daily, weekly and monthly press which was to continue virtually unbroken.
(In this respect Tanganyika was not exceptional.)
Mambo Leo was to be transferred to commercial ownership and to disappear shortly after independence, but other papers sponsored or produced by the Government took its place.
Both colonial and indigenous rulers in Africa have been involved in newspaper propaganda since the beginnings of the press on that continent.
Tanganyika had only a limited tradition of an independent African press.
Whereas the Government press could rely on a government subvention to support it for political or educational ends, private newspapers had to find private capital.
Returns on such capital were uncertain at best and at worst nonexistent.
The first in the field was Kwetu (‘Ours’), subtitled ‘The Key to Civilisation’.
Founded in 1937 by Erica Fiah, African trader and leader of the African Welfare and Commercial Association, the paper was initially a platform for that Association, and Fiah told his readers that effective improvement for Africans required them to have political power as well as economic and educational advancement.
Fiah was perhaps the only African in Tanganyika who could be compared with those behind West Africa's press of the same period, men like Akikiwe, Danquah and Jackson.
Like a number of his West African counterparts he had read the pan-Africanist writings of Marcus Garvey.
He was also in touch with the British Independent Labour Party.
In its first year of publication Kwetu had a circulation of one thousand, rising to three thousand by the early 1940s.
It was a paper produced by and for the radical, and generally non-tribal, urban Africans: in fact, it was very nearly involved in a libel case over criticism of Chagga chiefs.
However, Tanganyika was not yet ready for the sentiments expressed by Fiah, and his paper did not survive the 1940s.
No further African newspapers appeared until the 1950s, when two small publishing ventures emerged in Dar es Salaam.
Robert Makange started one of them,Zuhra (‘Venus’).
The paper was described by Leslie as follows:
Leslie contrasted Zuhra with the Government papers like Mwangaza , stating that the former was more sought after;Mwangaza was dull and heavy going.
Unfortunately, no record of circulation figures for Zuhra can now be found.
About the second, the anti-government newspaper Mwafrika (‘The African’), more is known.
Launched as a fortnightly in 1957, this paper had TANU behind it, and its first editor, Mr Bagdelleh, had been a member of TANU's Central Committee since the party's foundation in 1954.
Yet party leaders did not want direct control, in case TANU was banned: they wanted the paper to be able to continue even in the event of this happening.
Leslie noted that African newspapers like Mwafrika and Zuhra were unreliable and irregular in publication, but from 1957 Mwafrika was regularly sold on the streets.
It was not the first African paper, although nowadays some Tanzanians think that it was; nevertheless it is the only one whose direct descendants are still in existence, and may be regarded as the first successful, viable paper (that term has to be used in a relative sense) edited and produced by Africans.
In 1957 its circulation rose from four thousand to twenty thousand by its fourth issue.
TANU later severed its link with Mwafrika — evidently because of that paper's strident racial tone and what were regarded as poor editorial and reporting policies — and helped to found another paper,Ngurumo (‘The Thunder’), in 1959.
This was published and printed from tiny offices in the centre of Dar es Salaam by R.B. Thaker, an Asian printer and stationer who had become committed to the nationalist cause and assisted TANU with its printing work on a number of occasions.
Meanwhile Mwafrika , which, despite TANU's departure still advocated the party's cause, became first a weekly and then, from 1959, a daily.
Until 1960 it was, like Ngurumo , rather crudely produced, with a poor typeface, frequent errors, smudged printing and few pictures.
Its main attraction before independence was that it provided an antidote to the Government propaganda of Mambo Leo , but it looked very shabby by comparison.
The need for an improvement in Mwafrika's appearance grew more relevant as independence became certain and there was therefore less point in attacking colonial policies.
In April 1960 printing was transferred to the Standard's modern presses, and was greatly improved.
Nevertheless, financial problems continued to plague the paper, and in 1961 it was taken over by East African Newspapers Ltd, the Nairobi publishers of the Daily Nation , who wanted to get into the Tanzanian market.
Having also taken over Baragumu , this company combined the two in mid-1961 as the weekly Mwafrika na Taifa (‘African and Nation’), while continuing Mwafrika as a daily and keeping on Robert Makange as editor.
Circulation fell, but Mwafrika na Taifa survived until 1965.
The Nation group then reduced its press in Swahili to one daily paper,Taifa Leo (‘The Nation Today’), produced in Nairobi for Kenya and two weekly papers, one for each country,Taifa Kenya and Taifa Tanzania , both also edited and printed in Nairobi.
By this time, of course,Mwafrika and its successors had long since lost their former political stance.
In Dar es Salaam and elsewhere during 1967 and 1968, one occasionally heard mention of Mwafrika as if it still existed, only to discover that what was being referred to was actually Uhuru , the official daily paper of TANU, This confusion was understandable: the Mwafrika of 1965 bore no relation to what people remembered of the old one, but the pattern set by the earlier Mwafrika and Zuhra seems to have been continued after independence by Uhuru and Ngurumo.
Ngurumo resembled Zuhra in its slangy, irreverent tone, while Uhuru was more like the original Mwafrika — intensely nationalistic, but often rather heavy reading.
One formed the impression that its editor gave his readers what he thought they ought to read rather than what they might want or enjoy.
Before independence, TANU had its own newsletter,Sauti ya TANU (‘The Voice of TANU’), which it produced from its headquarters in Dar es Salaam.
This had a limited circulation: mainly, it seems, through the party for which it acted as a channel of information about policies.
Sauti ya TANU came into prominence in 1958 after its May 27th issue contained allegations by Nyerere that two district commissioners had used illegal methods against the party.
Nyerere was found guilty of libel, and fined.
However, this  cyclostyled news-sheet was generally moderate in tone; in fact, it was often used by Nyerere when trying to cool down the more militant of his followers.
In Zimbabwe and Zambia (formerly the British colonies of Southern and Northern Rhodesia), the history of the press is closely bound up with that of South Africa, both colonies being linked to the South by economic ties, by transport and communications, and by the political pressures exerted by vocal white settler communities.
In the same way that African opinion elsewhere found its voice in the press, so also did white settler opinion ‘which was frequently in conflict with the colonial authority.
Southern Rhodesia soon became a self-governing colony, whereupon its settlers were directly represented in government: a situation different from that existing in Northern Rhodesia.
In 1944 Roy Welensky, white trade unionist, campaigner for settler interests and later prime Minister of the short-lived Federation of the Rhodesias and Nyasaland, founded his own paper.
He used the Northern News to campaign for the establishment of a white-ruled Rhodesia independent of Britain.
In 1948 another settler paper appeared, based in Lusaka: the Central African Post , edited by the retired medical practitioner, Dr Alexander Scott.
Although his was a settler paper, Scott disliked Welensky.
He began to oppose federation, and his paper was looked on favourably by African nationalists.
The South African Argus Group, which also had extensive interests in South Rhodesia, came north in 1951 and bought Welensky's Northern News , turning it into a daily in 1953.
This group was later also able to buy Scott's Post , which it closed down in 1957.
Not to be defeated, the following year Scott started a new paper, the African Times , which was even more strongly anti-Federation and aimed at liberal-minded whites and Africans.
However, it failed financially and ceased publication.
Scott could not succeed without outside finance, and soon this was supplied by David Astor, then editor of the London Observer , who put up half the money for a new venture, the Central African Mail , which began publishing in 1960.
It was outspokenly anti-Welensky, opposed to white supremacy and campaigned for one man one vote and for independence.
The Central African Mail had African editors: first, Titus Mukupo and later, Kevin Mlenga.
Yet it remained weekly until after independence and was unable to compete on equal terms with the pro-Welensky, pro-Federation daily Northern News .
By the time independence came, there had been no truly African press in Zambia.
The situation in Southern Rhodesia was scarcely different.
There the settler interest was, of course, even stronger.
The Argus group of South Africa brought out the Rhodesia Herald in 1892.
Now one of Africa's oldest papers, it continues life in independent Zimbabwe as the Herald .
The Argus group spread its interests, acquiring the Bulawayo Chronicle, Umtali Post and Sunday Mail .
Other settler papers and a few mission-sponsored papers were in existence, the latter providing almost the only significant opposition to white rule and UDI in 1965.
As in Zambia, the African press was virtually nonexistent.
The Bantu Mirror , established in 1936, circulated in both Rhodesias, using African languages, but employed no African reporters: it merely used translations of news from Argus papers.
A small but important African press existed in South Africa.
As early as 1884 the Xhosa editor John Tengu Jabavu launched Imvo Zaba Ntsundu (‘Native Opinion’), which campaigned for African political rights.
The effectiveness and influence of his paper were recognized by the Cape prime minister, Mr Sprigg, who attacked Jabavu in Parliament, describing him as:
Imvo survived into modern times but lost its original African nationalist leanings.
There was also Iswi la Bantu , which was launched by Revd Walter Rubusana, a founder member of the African National Congress.
The ANC had two other papers.
One,Ilanga Lase Natal , was started in 1906 by Dr John Dube, later to become the ANC's first president.
The second was the official ANC paper Abanu Batho .
Its first editor, Dr Pixley Isaka ka Seme, used it in support of the ANC's early campaigns against the infamous Land Acts of 1913 which deprived Africans of the right to land outside the so-called reserves.
Surviving until 1932, it proved to be the last newspaper published inside the country by that organisation.
African, coloured and Indian papers have been silenced by successive measures taken by a white South African government which has consistently attempted to stifle the free expression of non-white opinion.
Fearful that an independent African press would be able to organize African opinion and campaign effectively against settler policies, white commercial interests sponsored their own ventures into African newspaper publishing.
The Native Recruiting Corporation of the Chamber of Mines in South Africa attempted to divert African opinion away from what it regarded as dangerous channels by its Umteteli wa Bantu (‘Voice of the people’), which first appeared in 1921.
Nominally, it opposed the colour bar, but it also opposed any action against it as well as the formation of African trade unions.
The Bantu press newspaper group was a similar venture: part-owned by the Argus Group, it also tried in a paternalistic way to guide Africans in an approved direction.
B.F.G. Paver, later to become chairman of the Rhodesia Broadcasting Corporation, had the idea of bringing several African newspapers under one management which could ensure unified policy and guidance.
The aim was to have a ‘Bantu paper in every province from the Cape to the Congo’— a clear indication of the fact that white settlers in Southern Africa regarded their sphere of influence and authority over Africans as legitimately extending that far north.
The Bantu press established African language papers in Basutoland, Swaziland, Bechuanaland, Johannesburg, Durban, Salisbury and elsewhere.
The Bantu Mirror and African Weekly of Salisbury were printed in a number of central African languages and put on sale in both the Rhodesias and Nyasaland.
In urban South Africa, the group published the famous newspaper the World , which enhanced its reputation during the Soweto disturbances in 1976.
That paper was later closed down and its editor, Percy Qoboza, went to work abroad.
R should nevertheless not be forgotten that for most of its existence the World was despised by black political leaders.
Although, like the other papers in  the group, it had an African editor and staff, final editorial control was in white hands and there was usually close white supervision.
The World's correspondent was actually excluded from the ANC Congress in 1955.
It is worth quoting from a comment made about another Bantu press paper,Lentsoe la Basutho , by B.M. Khaketla, editor of the radical Basutoland monthly Moblebani (‘The Warrior’).
Lentsoe had the support of the British administration.
The powerful influence of the Bantu press was to undermine most other African attempts at a truly independent press not only in South Africa but in the two Rhodesias as well.
However, brief mention should be made here of the Indian press.
The first of these papers was Indian Opinion , which began its long career in 1906, launched by Mahatma Gandhi.
There have been many Indian papers since, mainly in Durban, which have, to a greater or lesser extent, opposed white supremacy.
These have also remained independent of white control.
The most noteworthy — established in 1953 and inspired by the Transvaal Indian Youth Congress — was the Spark , which helped bring together Indian, African, coloured and white opposition to apartheid.
It had the added distinction of being edited at one time by Nelson Mandela, the ANC leader now in prison.
Some writers suggest that one can easily overestimate the significance and influence of the embryonic pre-independence African press.
For example, the Kenyan scholar Ali Mazrui has written that the reason why the Swahili word for a newspaper is gazeti is merely that the first papers that East Africans came into contact with were government gazettes.
Another writer has said that ‘the genesis of African journalism lay in dry official publications of colonial governments.
The press in Africa began with publications owned and/or operated by officials.’
There is some truth in these comments.
Certainly, in East and Central Africa official publications of one sort or another were more numerous than the sporadic and scattered indigenous African papers.
Only in parts of West Africa was there anything approaching a deep-rooted tradition of an African press operating independently of colonial authority.
Moreover, it was these official publications which were responsible for employing the very few Africans who gained journalistic and editorial experience.
Such a legacy was hardly encouraging as far as the setting up of a free, unfettered press after independence was concerned.
Controls during the colonial period varied considerably, but in most European colonies, including those in West Africa, measures of varying degrees of harshness were taken against those indigenous, privately owned papers which were considered troublesome.
Nearly all territories operated strict laws governing the right of Africans to set up newspapers.
Colonial controls find their echo today in certain of the measures adopted by the post-independence governments.
It was a commonly held view in colonial days that contrary opinions expressed in the press would mislead Africans, whom many European administrators looked upon as foolish and  excitable.
Thus a British colonial official in Nigeria commented as early as 1862 that press liberty was a ‘dangerous instrument in the hands of semi-civilised negroes’.
In 1909 a Seditious Offences Bill was introduced in that country to punish publications which were designed to ‘inflame an excitable and ignorant populace’.
The French took even stronger measures than did the British to discourage an African press.
Until the 1930s a ruling was in force which forbade anyone other than a French citizen from starting a newspaper.
Despite the fact that some évolué Africans were, of course, French citizens, the law hindered the development of an indigenous press.
Similarly, in the Belgian Congo a 1922 decree made the publication and distribution of any journal subject to Government permission.
Criticism was allowed in certain territories at certain times, but only on sufferance.
The tradition of press freedom established in a number of metropolitan powers was not extended to the subject territories — although there were some rather clumsy attempts to do so as independence approached.
Moreover, many of those laws on the statute books which empowered colonial administrators to control the printed media remained in force and were used by the new governments after independence.
Radio
Radio started in Europe shortly after the First World War, and the BBC began broadcasting in 1922.
Two years later, broadcasting began in South Africa, to be followed in 1927 by Kenya.
The first radio broadcasts from Salisbury came in 1932 and from Lourenço Marques in 1933.
But these four stations on the African continent aimed their programmes exclusively at white settler communities; not until the Second World War was wireless broadcasting for Africans established.
Radio has made such rapid progress and become so fundamental a part of daily life throughout much of Africa that it is easy to forget just how recently it arrived and how fast it has grown.
Today it is at the centre of things.
Much important political or national news is likely to be announced over the radio.
In the event of a coup d'état or any other kind of change in government, the radio building is always one of the first to be visited by the new administration, brought under control, and used to signal to the rest of the country and the world beyond what has taken place.
Radio has taken on an especially important central role in situations where other communications facilities are either lacking or inadequate.
Today, in most parts of the continent, radio far surpasses the press as the main source of regional, national and international news.
When radio arrived in Africa its potential was recognized by very few.
Before the Second World War broadcasting was aimed almost exclusively at Europeans, from stations in Johannesburg, Salisbury, Lourenço Marques, Nairobi and Dakar.
In 1936 the British began to plan colonial broadcasting for indigenous people, but these plans were shelved when world war broke out a second time.
Yet the war also led to a degree of development of facilities.
In the French territories, the Free French set up transmitters in both Douala and Brazzaville to counter the pro-Vichy broadcasts emanating  from Dakar.
Similarly, the London-based Free Belgian administration broadcast from Léopoldville in what was then the Belgian Congo to German-occupied Belgium as the voice of its country's legitimate government.
In the Gold Coast, Kenya and Northern Rhodesia, the war saw the beginnings of African language broadcasting as the administrations there became concerned to inform the families of African soldiers about the progress of the war.
Transmitters of varying quality, power and suitability were subsequently left behind to be used in the postwar development of radio for Africans.
It should be noted at this point that all broadcasting in the colonial territories was initiated and administered by the colonial governments: the private entrepreneur has been virtually excluded from broadcasting on the African continent.
Moreover, the burgeoning African political parties had no voice in radio until after independence.
First off the mark with African language broadcasting was Northern Rhodesia.
The Director of Information in the colonial administration, Harry Franklin, started the Lusaka station in 1941 and ran it in his spare time.
The few indigenous listeners availed themselves of community sets provided at chief's courts and administrative centres.
An agreement was later made with the administrations of Southern Rhodesia and Nyasaland that Lusaka was to be the centre for broadcasting to Africans in the three territories.
The introduction of the ‘Saucepan Special’ radio set has already been commented on: in the four months following its introduction in 1949, one thousand such sets had been sold.
In 1950, five thousand were in African hands, and by 1954 the figure had reached thirty thousand.
With the invention of the transistor the ‘Saucepan’ became obsolete, but set ownership continued to grow.
By independence ten years later, nearly half the African households along the line-of-rail had radio sets, and in the urban areas eight out of ten Africans had become listeners.
Broadcasting also advanced rapidly in other British territories, particularly during the 1950s.
It was official policy at the outset to broadcast as far as possible in African languages.
In 1960, one hundred and nine African languages were being used by radio stations in tropical Africa, mainly in the British territories.
The picture was somewhat different in the French territories.
French was given priority in administration, education and broadcasting, little or no education being carried out in local languages.
Moreover, the fact that France's African possessions stretched in an unbroken line from Morocco in the north to Gabon in the south led to the setting up of an entire series of relay stations transmitting centrally produced programmes and news bulletins.
The majority of stations in French Africa were under the authority of SORAFOM (La Société de Radiodiffusion de la France d'Outre-mer), which from its establishment in 1956 was controlled directly by the French Minister for Overseas Territories in Paris.
Those included were in Dakar, Niamey, Yaoundé, Bamako, Fort-Lamy, Conakry, Abidjan, Lomé, Cotonou, Douala, St. Louis and Brazzaville.
When separate independence for the fourteen territories was conceded under de Gaulle, this vast network was abandoned and individual stations were established.
Yet French influence continued in a number of ways.
SORAFOM became OCORA and provided  technical assistance to Francophone stations, for which it long remained a major source of material.
(R had, incidentally, one of the finest collections of African music, much of which has been made available on commercial disc.)
Another legacy of the French period of broadcasting is the fact that for a long time few such stations broadcast in African languages: radio services in the Ivory Coast are dominated by the French language even today.
Elsewhere, especially in Niger, strong moves have been made to expand broadcasting in local languages.
The launching of radio in Tanganyika was a very modest affair.
In 1951 an elderly transmitter of only 400 watts was purchased at the cost of seventy pounds and aerials were slung between two coconut palms.
The single studio was extremely primitive, consisting of an attic room with two microphones, one turntable and a mixer.
Broadcasting was on short wave only and at such low power that the reception area was limited, scattered and unpredictable.
Regular programmes began in July 1951, when the station transmitted for one hour only, three days per week.
According to estimates there were then a mere thousand radio receivers in the entire country.
A recurrent problem for the station was that of poor reception, even when the transmitting power was increased.
Another major concern was the provision of listening facilities for Africans, the people for whom the service was primarily intended.
At that time, radio sets were beyond the means of all but a very limited number of them.
Inexpensive rediffusion sets (where one central receiver would serve a large number of speakers in different houses) were introduced in the Dar es Salaam suburb of Ilala and a few community listening posts elsewhere in the capital.
More money was soon made available and a plan for expansion drawn up by an official from the BBC in London.
A 1¼KW medium wave transmitter was installed to improve reception around the capital.
In February 1952 the station began daily broadcasts of one hour.
With the arrival of more funds, further expansion was possible.
A new 20 KW short wave transmitter was purchased and purpose-built studios were provided just outside the city.
Although facilities were still very restricted, the station could now be heard throughout the territory.
Reception was in many places extremely poor, but the new audience was enthusiastic and seemed not to mind the difficulty involved in tuning to Dar es Salaam.
Import figures for radio sets showed that the audience was growing very rapidly: during 1954 and 1955 forty thousand sets were imported.
Despite the involvement of the BBC in its establishment, when broadcasting began in Tanganyika it came under direct government control through the Social Development Department.
But in 1956 the Tanganyika Broadcasting Corporation was founded and, as a public corporation modelled along the lines of the BBC, removed broadcasting from the direct control of civil servants in the colonial administration.
However, the Government was given reserve powers to  
All eight members of the board of the Corporation were appointed by the Governor, and a director was made responsible for the day-today management of the service.
At independence, the powers of the Governor and his administration were transferred to the president and his Cabinet but, as we shall see, these powers were not judged to be sufficient.
By January 1957, seven months after its establishment, the TBC was broadcasting six hours daily on weekdays.
Swahili language broadcasts took up sixty-three per cent of the time, while the rest was in English.
1958 saw the arrival of a new director from the BBC.
This was Tom Chalmers, who had already had a great influence on the development of broadcasting in Nigeria and was later also to have a major impact on the development of radio in Malawi, Zambia, Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland.
One of his main achievements as Director-General of the TBC (April 1958 to 1962) was to increase the effective independence of the organization, which severed its last remaining links with the Government's public Relations Unit.
Broadcasting hours were doubled to twelve hours on weekdays and plans made for separate networks: the TBC was to have a ‘National programme’ in Swahili and a ‘Second programme’in English.
Also discussed were plans for regional broadcasting.
Concentrations of listeners — and potential listeners — existed in such regional centres as Mwanza, Mbeya and Arusha, where reception was poor.
In addition it was felt that if regional studios were established as well as transmitters, these would be able to originate their own material for local transmission, which would help redress any cultural imbalance in programming.
However, it was to be another fourteen years before the first permanent regional transmitter was opened in Mbeya in 1972.
In 1960 the TBC commissioned its first audience survey.
Carried out nationally, this showed that almost ten per cent of urban African households now possessed radio sets; in the rural areas, the audience was far more scattered and the figure lower than one in fifty.
Yet calculations based on the average number of listeners per set showed Tanganyika's regular radio audience to be probably just under half a million.
Great strides had been made in under ten years.
The results of this survey were very encouraging to the broadcasters.
Chalmers wrote a foreword to the report of the survey, expressing his confidence:
This salesman-like language was exactly that: Chalmers was attempting to sell advertising time.
The survey indicated that there were probably over seventy-two thousand sets in use but that only sixteen thousand of them  were licensed.
As the 1960 Annual Report said: ‘If even half these (seventy-two thousand) set owners had paid a licence fee, the TBC's financial position would have caused the Board less anxiety’.
That anxiety was considerable.
The TBC was intended to be self-financing, yet in 1960 it obtained only £5,002 from licences and £6,896 from advertising.
The excess of expenditure over income was £83,604, and the TBC was obliged to rely on subventions from the government; that continued reliance was to be a significant factor in decisions that were taken later.
In the meantime, the board had to try to increase revenue where it could.
This pattern has been repeated in a number of African countries.
Licence revenue has proved unreliable as the majority of listeners do not bother to purchase a licence, and radio stations have had to look elsewhere for funds.
In the first year of its existence the Corporation had earned only £898 from advertising.
Two years later, receipts had gone up to £3,500, and after the audience survey, reached over £13,000.
An office was opened in Nairobi in an attempt to sell advertising time to commercial companies operating from there, and a London representative was later appointed for the same purpose.
The TBC's drive for increased revenue from commercial sources in order to free it from its dependence on government raised serious questions about the role of broadcasting.
The Corporation was required by the law which established it to operate a broadcasting station as ‘a means of education, information and entertainment for the public and to develop the service to the best advantage of the territory’.
The desire for advertising revenue, if pursued too vigorously, might well put those aims at risk.
This conflict was resolved after independence by the setting up of a separate Commercial Service in 1966.
Ironically, in view of Tanzania's later advance along a socialist path, this proved to be the first entirely commercial radio service in English-speaking Africa.
1960 saw a further expansion of broadcasting.
The general standard of programmes improved, with increased variety of production and greater professionalism on the part of the staff.
The output had now grown to 115 hours per week.
The TBC took its responsibilities seriously.
The main national network, which became known as Idhaa ya Kiswahili (‘The Swahili Service’), had as one of its main aims ‘informing and educating public opinion’.
One innovation was a weekly commentary on current events intended to provide listeners with a background to the news of the day.
The Corporation  was anxious to achieve a ‘balance’ of opinion on its programmes when controversial subjects were discussed.
This policy continued but came under increasing government pressure after independence, so that the open discussion over the radio of certain issues became more limited: a point which is discussed further below.
At that time the TBC held to its policy of standing ‘above’ politics, holding the view that the TBC,
This notion of a pluralist democracy did not last long.
The mass media at the time of independence and beyond
The reason for separating this chapter into two distinct parts will become obvious.
The accession to power of nationalist movements and parties — the taking of political power by indigenous Africans previously denied a voice in running their own countries — brought about a dramatic transformation in Africa's media.
While the history of the press has been marked by cleavages between the rulers and the ruled, radio had been under the control of colonial administrators.
New forces were now in charge.
We shall look later in some detail at how independence changed the media of Tanzania and Zambia, but first it will be helpful to consider what facilities existed throughout Africa in that period of transition.
Independence was granted, either willingly or reluctantly, over a period of thirty years beginning with the cases of Ghana, Sudan and Morocco in the 1950s and ending with the somewhat exceptional one of Zimbabwe in 1980.
As the majority of these nations became independent between 1960 and 1962, a fair bench mark to take for Africa as a whole would seem to be the year 1961, a time when the continent was beginning its modern period of self-rule.
In that year two hundred and thirty-one daily newspapers served the whole of Africa, with a total circulation of three million copies, yet the majority of sales were at either extremity of the continent: in white-ruled South Africa and Rhodesia in the south, and Egypt in the north.
The situation in black-ruled Africa was considerably less developed.
No fewer than twenty-two countries were without any printed daily paper whatsoever.
What kind of press would the new Africa have?
Which of the various legacies would most influence the post-independence press?
Was it to be the relatively independent tradition of political argument, criticism and competition that characterized some of the English language papers of pre-independence West Africa?
Or would African governments control the press and so prevent alternative voices from being heard?
The subject is a complex one — as the account of media policies in Tanzania will make clear — but in much of Africa independent journalism soon died.
In some countries it was never even born.
As we have noted, many countries had no press to speak of at the time of independence, and in those that did the press has undergone a considerable amount of change.
In Nigeria, the tradition of a politically independent press has been kept alive.
Though eclipsed or  subdued to some extent during the military period of 1966 to 1979, it has flourished again since, with each of the five political parties owning, or having an influence over, newspapers and radio stations.
By 1981 some parties were planning to launch new papers or broadcasting stations.
Nevertheless, the independence of the mass media elsewhere has declined: newspapers which had formerly been privately owned either disappeared or were taken over in, among other places, Ghana, Ivory Coast, Zambia, Cameroon and Malawi.
Many of the pre-independence laws enabling action to be taken against privately owned media have been enforced by the new African governments, despite the fact that most new leaders issued statements which committed them to the ideals of free mass media and free expression of opinion.
In 1968, President Kaunda addressed the International press Institute's annual assembly, then being held for the first time in an independent, black-ruled African nation: African countries, he said, had ‘gone out of their way’ to encourage the foreign press to report African affairs.
He linked the freedom of the foreign-owned press in Africa to the general principle of press freedom, but remarked that its effects had been far from encouraging: the press had done things that he personally was very unhappy about.
Despite this, he promised that his government would neither challenge press freedom nor take over the privately owned Times of Zambia .
This, he said, was in recognition of the ‘importance of an independent press, completely objective and free from influence of government’.
However, in the same short speech, he made reference to what he saw as the enormous power of the mass media: the press was ‘one of the major forces in shaping this world’— a situation he did not entirely welcome.
Kaunda went on to argue that the image or interpretation given by the press of a particular government coloured attitudes to it internationally:
In this instance he was referring chiefly to the international press.
But it soon became apparent in Zambia and other new countries that inexperienced and possibly unstable governments feared the ability of the press to provide conflicting or alternative ‘truths’, for this put enormous power into the hands of the press proprietors.
This is undoubtedly the main reason why the last twenty years have seen a steady increase in controls over the mass media, either by government takeover or by censorship and suppression.
In Zambia itself the ruling party, UNIP, took virtual control of the Times , but  even before this the president had acquired the power to hire and fire its editor: a power he has used on a number of occasions.
President Nyerere of Tanzania (as we shall see in greater detail later) has taken the view that, in a country faced with problems of poverty, ignorance, disease and underdevelopment on a gigantic scale, press freedom should be limited just as it has been in the liberal democracies in wartime.
In his book on the African media, Dennis Wilcox remarks critically that the difficulty with this ‘typical attitude’ on the part of African leaders lies in their being ‘both judge and jury of what was in the national interest’.
This may be an easy point to win, but it fails to answer the question: is it part of the legitimate exercise of freedom for the press to speak out in opposition to a popularly elected government operating in a situation of uncertain stability, with the ever-present threat of division and disunity?
If the new institutions of the state and government are weak, it is not surprising that those in command should try to prevent the press from undermining public confidence in them.
This side of the argument concerning the freedom of the press in Africa is rarely put by those other than the governments concerned.
Literature on the subject has chiefly been critical; for example, in a special review of the world press in 1973,The Times of London had this to say about the African press in what was a uniformly gloomy and disapproving report:
In effect, what The Times was saying was that it knew what the ‘real’ stories were and that only dictators prevented such stories from being told.
Although this account was not without some truth, it ignored the grave problems of poverty and disunity facing African governments then and now.
African journalists are generally better informed about their position and responsibilities; some are acutely aware of their dilemma.
The distinguished Kenyan editor Hilary Ngweno spoke on this subject at the IPI Assembly in Nairobi:
And he argued that, in conditions of such widespread disunity and tribalism  as Africa suffered, the press had another responsibility, one which involved the very security of the State:
But Ng'weno was clearly in two minds how to resolve this dilemma.
A year later, he wrote:
Most governments in Africa today, whether civilian or military, democratic or dictatorial, look upon the media in general as something that should be instrumental in promoting national goals.
The Zambian journalist Titus Mukupo put it like this:
Babatunde Jose, former chairman and managing director of the Daily Times of Nigeria, a distinguished and experienced journalist and editor, had frequent brushes with the authorities during his long career but understood the problem and was able to appreciate his adversaries' point of view.
The points he made in an address to the Royal African Society in London in 1975 are worth summarizing here.
In his opinion African journalists, who often looked enviously at those in Europe and America, should understand why conditions were different at home.
African newspapers were, in spite of their poor circulation figures, remarkably influential.
Many people believed what they read to be the literal truth: it was even dangerous to use humour at times, because the underlying point was often missed and the joke taken seriously instead.
The existence of this power resulted, ironically, in the fact that those African newspapers which had campaigned vigorously for the nationalist cause now enjoyed less freedom under the very governments that they had helped to create.
At independence, the new governments had looked around for ways of publicizing their activities and seized upon the means to do so.
Papers which had hitherto been forthright thus became slavish and sycophantic.
Certain governments established their own papers and then saw to it that any opposition papers were starved of the advertising they needed in order to stay in business.
Other newspapers were closed down either by law or by  manipulation.
This happened despite whatever the countries' constitutions may have said about freedom of speech.
A few governments have done so quite openly and unpretentiously, by establishing laws of censorship as in Ethiopia, Niger and Cameroon: military regimes have generally had no qualms about controlling the press.
Jose also pointed out that editors and journalists who had defied restrictions or offended powerful men had been punished, and he wryly quoted the memorable and often-repeated remark of the famous Kenyan editor George Githii:
Yet, said Jose, there was another side to the story.
Today responsibilities existed which it was impossible to ignore.
Things were very different from the way they had been in the colonial period:
The strategies used against colonial powers should not, he went on, be used against the new African governments.
As an example he cited the case of the African journalist who wants to expose corruption in high places but is very unlikely to have the professional training for the painstaking investigation required.
Undeterred nevertheless, he splashes the details of his serious allegations all over the front page, only to discover that 
Therefore self-control was, in Jose's view, essential in all areas.
African editors had to decide how to proceed: they could avoid politics, filling their pages instead with ‘large pictures of lovely damsels’, become mere megaphones of the political élite or, alternatively, adopt the philosophy of the Nigerian Daily Times , which he described as ‘militancy without hostility’.
Jose's point about the media's ability to incite trouble is borne out in one case which involved radio broadcasts.
In 1966 a broadcast from a neighbouring country reported the killing of Hausas in the former Eastern Region of Nigeria.
The news was followed by bloody retaliation in the north and a massacre of Ibos.
When Tom Mboya was assassinated in Nairobi in 1969, the Government radio station Voice of Kenya chose initially not to report the news.
It was feared that members of Mboya's Luo tribe would retaliate against the Kikuyu, the group who dominated the country's political life and of which the assassins were assumed to be members.
There was in fact retaliation in any case, and it might even be argued that this silence on the part of the radio — which everyone knew to be under government control — actually encouraged angry Luos to believe that a Kikuyu conspiracy existed within the Government.
Clearly, Jose was speaking from the perspective of a Nigerian journalist: much of what he said was true only of his own and a handful of other countries.
As we have noted, only in comparatively few nations was the tradition of a vigorous opposition press established prior to independence.
In many others, the new governments were faced with a situation of having either virtually no press worthy of the name or merely one in which the colonial government or settler point of view had been dominant.
Personally, I am sceptical about Jose's view that the press has such power to mislead and to be always believed.
In 1980, the first full year of the new civilian constitution in Nigeria, newspapers supporting one or other of the country's five political parties began reporting allegations against their rivals.
For example the National Concorde , launched by the millionaire Chief Abiola to support the NPN government, took to printing stories alleging that Chief Obafemi Awolowo and his UPN supporters had hatched a plot to subvert the constitution and were about to launch this plan over the radio by courtesy of a foreign radio station.
The Kaduna-based Hausa language newspaper Gaskiya ta fi Kwabo (‘The Truth is Worth More than a Penny’), took this allegation further by quoting from a leading Kaduna State politician:
In Jose's own words, ‘eyebrows’ may have been ‘raised’, but I have seen no evidence to support the idea that this or other stories like it have by themselves led to demonstrations.
Many Nigerians seem to regard such allegations with amusement, dismissing them as part of the party political game which should not be taken too seriously.
On the first anniversary of the return to civilian rule President Shehu Shagari vigorously condemned party bickering in the papers and said that he hoped it would end.
Some of the allegations that have been made have led to libel proceedings.
The question of rumour and unsubstantiated allegation is a much broader one.
It is sometimes said by government officials — I have heard it said by leading members of the administrations of Tanzania, Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Zambia — that African journalists are not sufficiently experienced to tell when an interested party in a dispute may be attempting to put over a particular point of view or discredit a government policy by using the press or radio.
For example, Zambian government officials claimed that a story (in the Times of Zambia , June 23rd 1970) to the effect that clothing factory  workers believed they might lose their jobs as the result of a new duty on imported cloth, was the work of clever lobbying by clothing manufacturers and retailers.
Similarly, on June 29th 1970, the same newspaper reported Portuguese troops as having crossed the border from Angola in order to kidnap the inhabitants of a remote Zambian village.
In a country the size of Zambia, with few telephones in rural areas and few reporters based anywhere outside the few major towns, it is impossible to check such a story speedily.
When eventually the story was checked it was found to be false, evidently initiated as part of an intercommunal feud by a tribal group which held a grudge against the government.
In 1975, Wilcox listed seventy-one newspapers in independent black African countries, of which all but twenty were in the hands of governments or ruling parties.
Seven of these twenty were Nigerian.
Since Wilcox produced this analysis a number of the independent papers have either closed down — voluntarily or under compulsion — or been taken over.
Alternatively, in some countries previously without a daily paper it has been the government which has started one: there would probably be no daily newspaper in the Central African Republic, Botswana, Niger, Mauritania or Chad had each of these countries' governments not decided to finance one.
Some governments operate policies forbidding outside or indigenous investment in the press.
Yet starting a daily paper anywhere other than in a few large cities is scarcely an attractive investment.
For this reason, and in the wake of a succession of nationalizations in Ghana, Uganda, Tanzania, Mozambique and elsewhere, the foreign ownership of Africa's newspapers has declined sharply.
Even in Nigeria, Africa's most densely populated country, with the largest urbanized, literate readership, most of the fifteen daily papers on sale in 1981 were running at a loss.
In the field of broadcasting, government ownership and control is almost complete.
In 1975, Wilcox counted only five privately owned radio stations in Africa (excluding the Arab north and white minority-ruled territories of the south); today, some seven years later, I can find only three.
Some radio stations are run by public corporations with a degree of operational autonomy from government, on paper at least— as in Malawi, Ghana, Nigeria and Zimbabwe — but in each case a greater degree of government control exists than is true of the BBC, which provided the model for the corporations of these countries.
All African broadcasting stations rely on governments for a large proportion of their income, insufficient funds being raised either from advertising or the licence fee.
Broadcasting is regarded as a public service, and in many countries the difficult task of collecting the licence fee has been dropped.
The link between government and broadcasting is often very close, generally closer than with the press.
Senior executives of radio stations are frequently drawn from the ranks of the political élite rather than from the professional corps of broadcasters.
When journalists and broadcasters are recruited for an established media organization — a newspaper, radio or television service — there is already an existing tradition, a set of values, professional codes and ethics, into which they must fit.
The process of selection and socialization into a media organization is well documented.
Things are somewhat different when the institution or profession is itself new.
When, for example, the BBC began in 1922, a great deal more than simply the use of the new technology had to be established.
It took the influence and personality of one man, John Reith, to mould the organization in the early years.
But he did have a long-established base on which to build — and that was the British class system.
Reith's BBC adopted the culture and, broadly speaking, the social outlook of middle-class southern England.
In African countries there was less certainty as to what to do.
Very often the tendency was to look abroad, mostly to Western Europe, for a model.
The pre-independence newspapers that campaigned for self-government knew what they were aiming for; their journalists, contributors and backers came from the new, educated élite united by common aspirations and interests.
After independence, things were less clearly defined.
Everyone might agree on the need for national unity, development, and the rapid elimination of poverty, ignorance and disease, but what institutional framework would be workable for the media?
What values should be promoted?
And what did national political freedom and the end of colonialism mean to African-run papers and radio stations?
Could media content continue to be exciting and enjoyable now that it was concerned with the mundane problems of national development in place of the heady business of attacking colonialism?
It was common for African political parties and governments to organize seminars and conferences for media personnel on this very subject.
There was frequently a conflict of opinions.
Many of the broadcasters and journalists had been trained either in Europe or locally by Europeans, and many also looked to Europe as their guide to what broadcasting and journalism were for.
The former director of broadcasting in Tanzania complained to me that the politicians did not understand the professional methods of broadcasters.
By this he clearly meant the professional codes established by the BBC, which had fathered the original Tanganyika Broadcasting Corporation.
(The argument that went on in Tanzania at this time is referred to in some detail in the next chapter.)
The BBC was influential in the setting up of broadcasting in no fewer than seventeen African countries, and the French had a similarly extensive involvement.
Influences on the development of the press were, as we have seen, a little more mixed.
On the one hand lay those who had trained in or followed the European tradition of independence and free investigative journalism; on the other lay a tradition that was also important and which has perhaps been the more lasting.
As we have seen, in a large number of colonies the authorities had been involved in publishing newspapers, Using both the colonial and local languages, they had tried to put over the official point of view, often in an attempt to forestall or counter alternative interpretations and opinions.
This tradition of government involvement has continued in many countries after independence.
Occasionally there existed a press independent of the State but representing white settler interests; this, however, was plainly not a suitable model for the post-colonial period.
Moreover, a major qualification needs to be made to the view that broadcasting in the ex-British territories was everywhere cast in the BBC's image.
It was  only towards the end of the colonial period that the notion of a public corporation was raised.
It may be overly cynical to suggest two things.
The first is that broadcasting was placed in the care of public corporations independent of the government of the day only when the prospect of African government loomed large.
The second is that the British colonial rulers did not genuinely believe in independent, publicly owned public service broadcasting because when in government they made sure that they had full control and tolerated the idea of a corporation only when their rule was coming to an end.
Cynical perhaps, but this was certainly the pattern.
Only when independence under majority rule seemed assured were statutory corporations established by the departing British in an attempt to distance broadcasting from the newly Africanized political and governmental arena.
A less difficult choice existed in the French territories.
Under French rule broadcasting had no pretensions to autonomy and so made a fairly smooth transition from being an arm of French colonialism to being an arm of the new African governments.
Yet there is more to the dilemmas of media tradition and ideology than the question of control.
Irrespective of the type of control, what are the press and broadcasting for?
What are they to do in the changed circumstances?
And, remembering that mass communications depend on individuals making choices, what do people look to the media to provide?
The Australian writer and journalist Hoyd Sommerlad observed that it was  inappropriate to apply western-based criteria to the media worldwide.
Attitudes to the media might vary a great deal even in the case of Africa, whose media have their origins in western contact and rule.
Sommerlad might well have added that, although such an idea might have been anathema at home, nothing prevented the colonial authorities from publishing newspapers in Tanganyika, Kenya, the Rhodesias, Sierra Leone and many of the French territories.
Western academic literature is found to be far from helpful in providing an understanding of Africa's media and their role.
In a well-known work on the general subject of the press within various types of political system, three American writers listed and described four main types of press philosophy:authoritarian, soviet-communist, libertarian and socially responsible .
Nevertheless, the typology does not fit the African scene at all adequately.
The authoritarian philosophy, according to the authors, sees the press as something to be controlled because it is a potential nuisance; there is little or no conception of the press as a possibly positive contributor to human progress and development.
The authoritarian philosophy can be traced back to sixteenth-century England, where strict controls were imposed on the publication of what were regarded by the king and his advisers as seditious pamphlets and journals.
The outlook is one of negative control by the means of censorship, anti-sedition laws and the obligatory  posting of large bonds as security against misbehaviour-. all aimed against a press which was privately owned.
Elements of this view are to be found in Africa today, as in Cameroon, where censorship and other laws have defeated efforts to form a critical, independent press.
However, the term does not describe, even in the most general way, any press philosophy current in Africa.
In contrast, the soviet-communist theory of the press involves the state ownership of all media, which are then harnessed to the achievement of national goals as defined by the ruling party and government.
The modern mass media fit very well into communist notions of society as a collectivity, the name given to the ‘masses’ of workers and peasants whose interests are best served by a vanguard political party.
This idea finds an echo in many African countries but assumes a Marxist-Leninist view of the economic and social order found in only a handful of African ruling élites.
It may be a fairly accurate description of press philosophy and practice in Ethiopia, Mozambique and Angola, yet few other countries have engendered such an ideologically coherent, centralized role for their media.
Elsewhere there is greater flexibility, less certainty and a more liberal approach to economic and political diversity.
The libertarian theory of the media is based on western liberal democracy.
It envisages a press which flourishes amidst industrial prosperity and a high level of development and education — relatively diverse and run by commercial enterprises, some of them very large indeed.
However, none of these conditions prevail in Africa.
The capital necessary to support an independent press is lacking.
Nigeria and South Africa are the only obvious exceptions.
The fourth type of press theory put forward is that of social responsibility .
The idea arose from fears expressed in western industrialized countries that the free market of ideas was being threatened by the fact that the prohibitive costs of entry into media ownership prevented the involvement of anyone other than rich individuals or large corporations.
This situation meant freedom of expression only for the wealthy and already powerful.
It was suggested that some form of social or governmental control could be used to ensure access to the media for all viewpoints.
The idea, which originated in a 1947 United States Commission on the Freedom of the press, found an echo more recently in Britain, where similar ideas were put forward by some leaders of the Labour party.
The philosophy (with the arguable exception of the Netherlands) is not actually practised anywhere in the world, although the concerns that give rise to it have led to a continuing debate in some western industrialized democracies about ways in which the monopolistic nature of the capitalist press might be usefully modified.
Again, this is a philosophy that does not really fit the African scene.
The absence of any coherent and agreed philosophy for the media in many African countries is a matter which is of obvious concern to many of that continent's politicians as well as its media professionals, and a number of African leaders have addressed themselves to the problem.
Kwame Nkrumah, who had himself used the press to mobilize support for his party and its nationalist demands against the British, developed strong views  about the role of the media in the post-colonial period:
The irony of this statement would not have been lost on any Ghanaian journalist working in the period under Nkrumah from 1957 to 1966, for this was exactly what happened to Ghana's newspapers: they became sycophantic, uncritical mouthpieces for the president and his view of that country, Africa and the world.
Nkrumah also claimed to be against the existence of a privately owned press.
His concept of the press was very close to the soviet-communist view outlined above, in which the ruling party knows what truth is and falsehood equals anything which happens to challenge that view.
The reason, according to Nkrumah, was that the motivation of the capitalist press was profit and the news-gathering and reporting functions were merely secondary.
Such ideas, he said, were permeating Africa's media and had to be resisted.
The ‘true African journalist’ sets his sights on higher things:
It is not difficult to understand why so many journalists and broadcasters fell foul of Nkrumah's government.
It was not for them but for the ruling CPP to decide what best promoted the goals Nkrumah outlined.
In most African countries, government involvement in, and even supervision of, the press may not rest on such ideological precepts: sound pragmatic and economic reasons exist for that involvement.
Botswana is just one country whose only daily paper is owned and run by the government, without whose assistance it would probably have no national paper at all.
In other countries where readership is similarly very limited and where the high cost of imported newsprint and machinery and the paucity of advertising revenue combine in much the same way to exclude the private investor, the government has to become involved if a local press is to exist.
Journals or papers designed to be sold in a number of African countries can succeed commercially, as some have shown in recent years, but these are directed at a limited, élite readership.
It is quite a different matter to produce a weekly or daily paper aimed at the widest possible audience, with the aim of informing it about national and local, as well as African and international, news.
Two further reasons have been given for the establishment of government-owned newspapers or for the taking over of existing privately owned ones.
One was given by Kenya's first Minister of Information in 1963:
Mr Achieng Oneko might well have added, using the same argument, that the capitalist private press is unlikely to serve other minorities and tends to favour socio-economic groups which have the highest spending power and therefore attract the most advertising.
Privately owned papers which are unprofitable do exist, but this is because they receive backing for other purposes — political, in most cases.
To return to Oneko's main point, however, there have been a number of government ventures into minority language papers, notably in Zambia and Liberia.
The other reason most often given for government ownership is that government needs a voice of its own and cannot rely on the privately owned press.
This is why in some countries with privately owned papers the ruling party, or even the government, has decided to launch its own.
Far less argument has taken place on the subject of broadcasting which is almost entirely government-controlled and where that control is usually direct.
The main area for discussion has been the extent to which there should be close day-to-day supervision of television and radio.
Should the broadcasting station be placed under a government department under a politically appointed boss?
Or should it be able, despite being owned by the State, to distance itself somewhat from political authority?
The question was argued out in Tanzania, as we shall see from the case study.
That argument is now highly relevant to Nigeria, whose five political parties each control one or more of the nineteen state governments.
State governments are responsible for the radio broadcasting services of the area under their jurisdiction, whereas television is still mostly federally controlled and financed.
(The Federal Government also controls a national radio service.)
Should these state governments be permitted to use their radio services to promote the interests and policies of the ruling parties?
Some Nigerians say that this is already happening.
If so, then this is perhaps a unique case of oppositional broadcasting in Africa.
The problem is, however, that state radio stations are not intended to be used for the purpose of broadcasting beyond state  frontiers; indeed, it was decided in 1978 to forbid these stations from using short wave transmitters with sufficient power to reach other states.
Opportunities for Nigerians living within a single region to receive alternative views on their own sets are therefore limited.
Wilcox provided a useful analysis of African press philosophies in thirty-four independent sub-Saharan black states, of which twenty-seven have a press that is predominantly government-owned.
The reasons given for involvement follow a clear pattern: ‘mobilise the masses around precise objectives’, ‘unifying the country’, ‘to help educate the masses and rally support for the government’, 'to mobilise the people behind the president and party', and so on.
The same arguments, and others which we will come across in the case studies, have been used in favour of control of broadcasting.
Nigeria apart, the universal trend has been one of increasingly centralized political control.
Three case studies: Zambia, Tanzania and Nigeria
I carried out field research in both Zambia and Tanzania.
My research in Tanzania took place in 1967 and 1968 and in Zambia from 1970 to 1973.
Although I did not conduct field research in Nigeria, I visited that country in 1975, 1978 and 1981.
The three case studies illustrate different aspects of mass communication and society.
Zambia
The pioneering work of radio in Zambia has already been referred to.
The medium expanded rapidly during the 1950s and 1960s, both in terms of facilities and set ownership.
When the Central African Federation was dissolved, the three territories concerned developed separate organizations and facilities for broadcasting.
The Zambia Broadcasting Services (ZBS) transmitted two networks nationally and simultaneously.
In the early 1970s these two services together broadcast 240 hours per week in seven Zambian languages and English.
Television was introduced before independence in 1961 — as an extension of Rhodesian Television Ltd. — to serve the large white mining and commercial community on the Copperbelt in the north.
Independence three years later meant that this arrangement had to be altered.
In 1966 the headquarters moved to Lusaka, and television was incorporated into the ZBS, broadcasting being conducted entirely in English.
During the 1970s television was on the air between thirty-five and forty hours a week.
The history of the Zambian press is also brief.
In December 1964, shortly after independence, the Northern News (owned by the South African Argus group) was sold to Lonrho.
Lonrho had just bought out the brewing concern Heinrichs, which in 1964 had started another daily, called the Zambia Times , and a weekly, the Zambia News .
Both Heinrichs papers having lost a lot of money, Lonrho amalgamated the Zambia Times and the Northern News into the Times of Zambia while continuing to publish the Zambia News as a Sunday paper.
It later became the Sunday Times of Zambia .
These two, shorn to some extent of their settler and pro-Federation image, grew in circulation and, for a while, the Times of Zambia remained the sole daily paper.
Meanwhile, the survival of the Central African Mail seemed in doubt: David Astor of The Observer in London wanted to withdraw.
The new  government decided it wanted its own paper and so bought the Mail , which became a bi-weekly in 1967 and went daily in 1969.
In the mid-1970s it was selling around thirty thousand copies compared with the Times's sixty thousand.
The Zambia Daily Mail , as it was now known, received a subsidy from the Government.
Among the other problems encountered was its failure to attract the scale of advertising enjoyed by the Times .
It had fewer reporters, fewer offices and relied more heavily than did the Times on official press releases from the Government and its news agency, ZANA.
Neither paper maintained any correspondents away from the line-of-rail.
Although the Times and Sunday Times did not become official UNIP papers until 1975, the editor of the former had been appointed by the president even before this date.
Since 1975 the major news media of Zambia have been either party or government mouthpieces.
This does not mean that they speak with one voice — the press has often either been critical or published critical opinions — but there is clearly a limit to government tolerance.
In 1980 an editorial shake-up occurred following the detention of several dissidents alleged to have been involved in a plot.
During the 1970s both daily papers showed a heavy reliance on foreign material, and not only for non-African news.
It was quite common to read in either paper a feature article about another African country written by a journalist in London: on the day after Nkrumah's death, both ran stories and obituaries written by European news agencies.
The Mail had a regular page for women which would not be out of place in an English daily, where it may well have originated:
And, in the same edition:
These and similar articles on women's and other pages were syndicated from agencies in Britain.
There was also a regular Mail fashion column by Queen Elizabeth's dress designer, Norman Hartnell.
This sort of material appeared less frequently in the Times but quite often in its sister paper, the Sunday Times of Zambia .
Apart from regular ‘cheesecake’ or ‘girlie’pictures of the sort that help boost the circulation of the popular press in Britain, there were syndicated pieces similar to those bizarre examples quoted above, though perhaps not quite so glaringly irrelevant.
The culture of the features used was overwhelmingly middle class and European: the cookery columns, for example, assumed the reader lived in a house with a gas or electric oven.
The press in Zambia had broken its links  with the South only to forge new ones with the British press and its allied agencies.
The material used was cheap, readily available — very often with attractive photographs or other illustrated matter — and took up space unfilled by the papers' own journalists.
Actual news coverage in the press was  nevertheless more comprehensive than that on the radio and television.
Both papers carried at least two pages of local news, not including sport, and generally had one or two pages of foreign news.
The latter was taken almost entirely from the wire services of Reuters and Agence France-presse, although the Times obtained stories from its sister papers in East Africa and the group's London correspondent.
The Times also occasionally sent journalists abroad to get special stories.
For the coverage of local news, both suffered from a shortage of trained reporters.
One consequence of this was that many stories were not really about events but merely reports or rewrites of speeches made by leading politicians at events.
The context of the event and the event itself often went unreported, simply because the journalist assigned to the ‘story’ covered only the opening speech.
At such opening ceremonies and speeches all the paraphernalia of the mass media would be present: movie cameras, floodlights, still cameras and tape recorders.
Typically, as soon as the minister or other speech maker had finished on each occasion, the media would leave, and the following day all that was reported was an edited version of the speech.
This was generally true of much news reporting in Zambia not just in the press but on radio and television as well: journalists followed the president, ministers and district governors around.
Few stories about their activities went beyond the editing-down of a long speech — except, perhaps, to relate that the occasion was attended by ‘leading party and Government officials’.
A directory I compiled in 1971 listed one hundred non-daily Zambian periodicals, ranging from the fortnightly Zambian language government newspapers to annual journals.
The list included the ‘house’ magazines of leading companies and organizations, newspapers published by mining companies, journals of professional organizations, religious papers, and literary and academic journals.
There was one educational comic for children.
A large number of periodicals survived for a few issues and then disappeared: ten ceased or suspended publication during 1971.
Those published during 1971 claimed sales of around two hundred and fifty thousand.
The non-daily periodical with the highest circulation, of forty-two thousand, was The Miner , published weekly on the Copperbelt.
It was followed by the educational ‘comic’,Orbit (published by the Commission for Technical Education and Vocational Training), which was sold through schools and came out three times a term.
The Government's information service ZIS had six Zambian language fortnightly newspapers, of which only one,Mbila , in Bemba, exceeded twenty thousand in sales.
Similarly, the Ministry of Rural Development published progress in four Zambian languages, but its circulation was very low: although intended for peasant farmers, it was almost impossible for them to obtain.
In contrast to certain other African countries, Zambia had remarkably few periodicals  published by churches or religious organizations; the few that were published all had small circulations.
Recently, some Zambian churches have combined to produce the weekly Zambia Mirror , which has met with a degree of success.
In Zambia, as in every other African country, radio is the most widespread news medium.
However, as in many other countries, its importance has not been fully recognized.
Most books on Zambia hardly mention broadcasting at all, and in public and political debate within the country, discussion of radio and public policy towards this type of broadcasting is curiously lacking.
Radio broadcasters have to be content with a low status, and the medium has been starved of funds.
Yet its importance and impact are beyond question.
It expanded at a rapid rate, the early ‘Saucepan’ sets being replaced by cheap transistor sets which could be operated with less expensive batteries.
ITT opened a radio assembly plant in Livingstone which produced sets that sold for about K12 in the early 1970s (then about £8 or $20).
The advent of the transistor brought rapid expansion in set ownership.
In 1954, about thirty thousand African households had radio sets.
A survey conducted in 1965 showed 42% of African households along the line of rail to have sets.
My own national survey of 1970–3 revealed that 50% of households in the urban line-of-rail centres and 24% of rural households had radio sets.
This meant that approximately two hundred and sixty-two thousand households in the country as a whole had radio.
Each day 45% of urban and 16% of rural inhabitants listened to ZBS programmes, and over half the total population listened at least once per week.
The audience, potential and actual, for television was considerably smaller.
Television transmitters were set up only in Lusaka, Kabwe and on the Copperbelt.
The television sets on sale required mains electricity, available only in certain parts of Zambia's towns; they were also costly to buy and to maintain.
In those areas where it was possible to receive transmissions only 9% of households had a set, and only 8% of our sample watched television daily.
One surprising fact emerged from the survey results.
Although it might be expected that only the better-educated and wealthier sections of the community would watch television, the existence of the extended family system meant that the television sets owned by prosperous Zambians were also watched by a number of relatives who were less well off.
My 1970–3 survey showed that 26% of the TV audience consisted of adult males earning less than K450 per annum.
This income group constituted 30% of the sample.
The total audience was still very small.
These figures, when comparable data for newspaper readership are also taken into account, demonstrate the influence of radio.
17% of urban adult and a mere 2% of rural Zambians read the Times or the Mail every day.
In fact 77% of those interviewed never read a daily paper at all, and 75% read no weekly or other non-daily paper.
A number of factors contributed to the prominence of radio.
First of all, it overcomes the problem of illiteracy.
Also, radio sets do not require mains electricity.
Reception was, and still is, poor in many parts of the country, but with ingenuity and a certain amount of patient tuning it is possible in any  area to pick up services from transmitters in Lusaka, Kabwe, Livingstone and the Copperbelt.
Radio in Zambia broadcast not only in English but also in seven Zambian languages; therefore, unlike television and most newspapers, it was able to communicate with a large proportion of the people in their own language or at least in one they could understand.
It is difficult to quantify the number of languages in Zambia.
Many tribes speak languages which, although substantially different from one another, are still mutually comprehensible.
Data obtained in the 1969 Census (to which I have had access but which, to my knowledge, remain unpublished) suggest that only 15% of the population spoke a mother tongue which was not closely related to one of the seven African broadcast languages.
Thus radio spoke to a large proportion of the population, both urban and rural, either in a language spoken at home or at least in one closely related to it.
The allocation of broadcasting time to the various languages was a delicate and controversial issue.
Equal time was not allotted to each.
The ZBS argued that language groups varied greatly in size.
The two largest ones, Bemba and Nyanja, made up 34% and 17% of the population respectively.
Each of these languages had become the lingua franca in significant parts of the urban areas of Zambia.
One or other is spoken by many more individuals than had learned either language at home as children.
In my national survey of 1970–3, 56% claimed knowledge of Bemba and 42% of Nyanja.
Of the time devoted to Zambian languages, the ZBS allocated 23% to Bemba and 21% to Nyanja.
The smaller language groups were allocated proportions ranging from 16% for Tonga to 8% for Kaonde.
This allocation was a frequent subject for complaint in letters to the ZBS.
Certain chiefs and other prominent members of small language groups felt they were disadvantaged: the ZBS's recognition of a language and its use on the radio gave that language and tribe a status superior to certain other languages and tribes.
Members of those groups which had been left out of broadcasting altogether felt aggrieved and often campaigned vigorously for recognition.
Those belonging to language groups such as Kaonde, Luvale, Lunda and Lozi, which were recognised but received proportionately less time, also protested, saying that all the recognised languages should in fairness receive equal time.
The criteria for allocation had been devised in an attempt to find a balance between having too many languages to do justice to any of them in limited broadcasting hours and discovering which languages were comprehensible to the largest number.
But this fact was not widely understood.
I have read a number of letters to the ZBS arguing in roughly the following terms: ‘The national motto of our country is ‘One Zambia One Nation'’.
And yet we see that this is not so in reality.
One or two tribes have been given much more time on the radio than others.
Does this mean that people from those tribes are better Zambians than us?’
Nonetheless, the language allocation decided upon was strictly adhered to.
Largely established during the colonial era, it hardly changed at all after independence.
The seven languages recognised for the purposes of broadcasting in addition to English were also used in primary school  education, at political rallies and in local newspapers published by the Zambian Information Services.
Zambia Broadcasting Services are a department of the Ministry of Information, all broadcasters being therefore civil servants.
This was not always the case.
In its first year of independence, Zambia, like other ex-British territories, had a public broadcasting corporation on the lines of the BBC.
However, as in most other ex-British territories, this arrangement was not popular with the authorities.
The Zambia Broadcasting Corporation was dissolved.
There is not necessarily a direct correlation between government ownership and the degree of government control.
Malawi has kept a public corporation, and yet there has probably been more direct interference by the government in broadcasting there than in Zambia.
Incorporation into the civil service nevertheless creates many problems.
First of all, the service operates strict rules concerning recruitment which are not always suited to radio.
Broadcasting talent is not something easily tested by civil service examinations or recruitment procedures.
The profession requires people of service.
Moreover, the bureaucratic regulations imposed by the service are inappropriate to radio.
In broadcasting decisions have to be made quickly: a broadcast cannot wait while some minute or other is pending in a civil servant's in-tray.
In Zambia, such procedures have delayed the purchase of essential new equipment.
For a large part of 1975 a major transmitter in Zambia's Copperbelt was off the air because of the lengthy procedures involved in the purchase of a small spare part.
Similar regulations and procedures have delayed both the promotion and dismissal of staff and have hampered the ZBS by failing to provide it with adequate transport when needed at short notice.
The pay structure is equally unsuitable.
Civil servants are paid according to criteria which should not apply in a creative profession.
Zambian broadcasters found themselves a long way down the civil service hierarchy and were accordingly poorly paid, some earning the meagre salary of a junior clerk; certain technical studio operators received little more than messengers did.
Due to the low pay offered the likelihood was that anyone with creative talent would be attracted to a better-paid job elsewhere.
Some of the most gifted broadcasters of the past are now no longer with the ZBS.
Certain staff who might have shown a real aptitude for broadcasting found themselves discouraged by civil service rules on promotion and pay.
No provision was made for the payment of special rates in order to retain the services of particularly talented people.
When broadcasters were promoted they found themselves in administrative posts: talented people were rewarded with jobs which meant that they broadcast no longer.
Given the structure of broadcasting in Zambia, it was impossible to promote employees by any other means.
No one retained a broadcasting role and at the same time enjoyed a good salary.
Finally, the civil service status of the ZBS resulted in confusion as to the role and function of broadcasting.
Was the ZBS to be the official voice of the Government?
Clearly it could not be — every comment, piece of advice or statement on the radio could hardly be regarded as official policy — and yet  the broadcasters' feeling that they were ‘a part of the Government’ certainly acted as an inhibitor on the manner in which some matters were handled on the air.
Many broadcasters felt that they were expected not to say anything on the air which was in contradiction to Government policy.
This meant that important contemporary issues, such as labour relations, ‘shanty’ towns, political disagreements within the ruling party and many similarly controversial or sensitive subjects, were neither fully discussed nor featured on the ZBS.
The existence of a subsidized television service became, to some extent, an anomaly.
Government spokesmen expressed a desire to spread television to rural areas.
In May 1972 the Minister of State for Information, Broadcasting and Tourism called for a complete ‘rethink’ about the role of television in the country.
He said that it should not be regarded as a luxury but used for education, rural development and economic reform: the time had come, he said, ‘for television to change its outlook in this country in order to suit the requirements of a developing country like Zambia’.
He would ‘recommend a stronger transmitter be bought for the benefit of the rural areas’.
Yet it was estimated in 1967 that to cover the country no fewer than thirty-three TV transmitters would be needed at a cost then of about K12 million.
The economic situation in Zambia then and since has prevented any such ambitious project from being carried out.
Television also received a disproportionate amount of public attention in the press and parliamentary debate.
The political élite paid it more attention than it did radio, even though the latter had a greater importance insofar as size of audience was concerned.
Members of Parliament did complain about poor radio reception in their constituencies, and some made occasional allegations of political interference and bias in the radio news.
(Similar allegations in 1971 led to one MP's being suspended from the House.)
In 1971, a Minister of State for Rural Development, Mr Otto Vibetti, made a strong attack on the performance of TVZ:
He went on to recommend a temporary suspension of TV services until these became more Zambian in content, then making a remark which — though a wild exaggeration — was not challenged by any other member, not even by the Minister.
He said that only 0.04% of TV sets in Zambia were owned by Zambians.
Taking the official figure of twenty thousand TV sets, this would have meant that only eight sets belonged to Zambians!
The main part of his argument was nevertheless beyond dispute.
Production standards in Zambian television were poor and the service relied heavily on imported material.
Zambian television also received considerable press attention, while radio was almost completely ignored.
During 1970 and 1971 a series of articles and editorials appeared in the Times on the poor quality of TVZ transmissions, particularly on the Copperbelt.
Reference was also frequently  made to the low standard of programmes, the high incidence of breakdowns during transmission, and other technical and production weaknesses.
The Times made its strongest attack, one of the strongest ever made by that paper on a government department, in an editorial in February 1971:
Yet the paper made no reference on this and other occasions to the overwhelmingly foreign content of TVZ programmes, neither did the weekly column of TV criticism in the Sunday Times question the desirability of this situation.
The writer both of that editorial and the weekly Sunday Times TV feature was an expatriate who seemed unaware of the cultural gap between the content of TVZ programmes and the environment of Zambia.
Few Zambians other than Mr Vibetti questioned the use of government finance to subsidize a communications medium whose main output was then mostly imported and often in conflict with the values both of its audience and of the government that financed it.
Radio was only rarely mentioned in the columns of the daily press.
The Mail in 1971–3 did not give the radio schedules, while the Times usually printed the wrong day's schedules and then only for the General Service (English), omitting altogether the Home Service (Zambian languages) to which the majority of its readership listened most of the time.
The press ignored the fact that the radio was the major communications medium in Zambia.
This was significant in that it tended to be the press which informed and influenced political debate.
The editorial in the Times of February 1971 appeared just before the debate in Parliament referred to and was specifically mentioned by one MP in that debate, which was dominated by the subject of television.
The Minister for Information, Broadcasting and Tourism, Mr Sikota Wina, after rejecting calls for TVZ to be suspended, made the following remark, which is significant as a statement of government policy on the television service:
The question of radio reception was raised later in the same debate by the then Minister of State, Mr Masiye, who gave reasons for poor reception.
He pointed out that the SOFRECOM recommendations for a VHF-FM system would be the only way to achieve national coverage, but that this would be very expensive: a mere K537,000 had been allocated for capital expenditure, ‘just a drop in a sea of water’.
THE WORLD'S NEW MEDIA OFTEN REPORT THE SAME STORIES.
CAMERAMEN, NEWSPAPER JOURNALISTS AND TELEVISION REPORTERS SURROUND IDI AMIN AT THE OAU CONFERENCE, KAMPALA, 1975.
(THE AUTHOR)
THE DEATH IN 1952 OF EDWIN MLONGOTI, ONE OF NORTHERN RHODESIA'S BEST KNOWN BROADCASTERS, WAS AN OCCASION FOR SPONTANEOUS NATIONAL MOURNING.
THE FUNERAL PROCESSION WAS REPORTED TO STRETCH FOR AT LEAST 2 MILES.
(ZAMBIA INFORMATION SERVICE.
PORTABLE TAPE RECORDERS, INTRODUCED DURING THE 1950S, MADE INTERVIEWS WITH PEOPLE IN THEIR HOMES POSSIBLE.
(ZAMBIA INFORMATION SERVICE)
THE FIRST POPULAR MASS-PRODUCED RADIO SET IN AFRICA, THE ‘SAUCEPAN SPECIAL’, IN NORTHERN RHODESIA IN 1950.
(ZAMBIA INFORMATION SERVICE)
TELEVISION PURCHASED IN A PACKAGE.
A COMPLETE TELEVISION STATION IN CONTAINER, READY TO INSTALL ON SITE, PURCHASED FOR ONE OF THE MANY NEW STATIONS IN NIGERIA.
(MARCONI)
TELEVISION STUDIO IN GHANA IN 1966 AT THE END OF A PERIOD OF FAIRLY HIGH SPENDING ON THE MASS MEDIA BY THE GOVERNMENT OF KWAME NKRUMAH.
(MARCONI)
TELEVISION CONTROL ROOM IN NIGERIA, 1964.
IN 1959, NIGERIA WAS THE FIRST COUNTRY IN AFRICA TO HAVE TELEVISION.
(MARCONI)
THE NEW TECHNOLOGY: SATELLITE EARTH STATION AT MT.
MARGARET, KENYA, PROVIDING INTERNATIONAL TELEPHONE, TELEX AND TELEVISION CIRCUITS VIA A GEO-STATIONARY SATELLITE ABOVE THE EQUATOR.
MANY AFRICAN COUNTRIES NOW HAVE THIS FACILITY.
(MARCONI)
A NEWS READER IN GBE-TV STUDIOS, GHANA.
(GHANA BROADCASTING CORPORATION)
A PUBLIC AFFAIRS TELEVISION PROGRAMME IN LAGOS, NIGERIA.
(COMMONWEALTH BROADCASTING ASSOCIATION)
NIGERIA'S NEWSPAPERS — THE MOST DIVERSE IN AFRICA
AFRICA'S NEWSPAPERS — CIRCULATION RANGING FROM A THOUSAND TO HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
Yet few Zambian politicians ever called for increased funds for broadcasting.
The allocation was decided at the highest level of government, and radio broadcasting had long been low on the list of priorities.
Economic difficulties experienced in Zambia since this 1971 debate have delayed still further any substantial improvements, although a new studio centre has been built.
For the most part, only lip-service has been paid to the importance of radio broadcasting.
It has been starved of funds, and leading politicians with the power to do something about it have done little or nothing, apparently content as long as the radio reported what they wanted it to report.
This may seem an excessively cynical view; nevertheless, it was one held by many Zambian broadcasters and did seem to have some basis in fact.
But what role did radio play in Zambia?
It is, of course, impossible to generalize satisfactorily about the role of broadcasting in the lives of its audience.
In one sense, there are as many roles as there are people in the audience: no one person derives exactly the same information, entertainment or instruction as another.
Individuals use their radio and television sets in different ways and for different purposes, and expect different things of them.
Nevertheless, certain clear patterns emerge from interviews conducted in Zambia in 1972.
It must be remembered that it is often difficult to get people to express themselves freely, that there is a tendency in any survey for interviewees to say what they think they are expected to say, and that individuals frequently find it hard to express subjective views on an aspect of their life which they might never have consciously considered before.
During 1972, three colleagues at the University of Zambia interviewed radio listeners in various parts of the capital city, Lusaka.
Those listeners who also had television sets were asked about their viewing.
These few typical examples will help to illustrate the role that radio — and, to some extent, television — play in some Lusaka homes:
What people want and expect from the radio is not necessarily what those who control broadcasting want to give them.
In the national audience research survey I conducted in 1970–73, listeners were asked to state their favourite programme or programmes.
Again, news bulletins and those programmes offering practical help in farming, health and child care, advice on moral and social issues or providing music, stories and plays proved the most popular.
There was less interest in programmes on political subjects  and an actual dislike of political propaganda programmes such as Nation and Humanism .
Most listeners who had something to say about the last-named found them either boring or incomprehensible.
Listeners expected the radio to be relevant to problems as they saw them.
This did not mean that they were wholly resistant to new ideas — that was clearly not the case because many spoke of the helpful advice and information given on the farming, nutrition, health and child care programmes — but they seemed to resist anything which either conflicted with views they already held or seemed to have no relevance to their experience.
At the time my survey was carried out, the social fabric of Zambia was undergoing great changes.
These changes had been occurring, at a varying pace, for most of the present century and affected individuals in a number of ways, As a result, people have looked to the radio to provide explanations, give advice and act as an arbiter of social morality.
The radio was thus given a traditional role once entrusted only to wise old men and women.
Inevitably, this did not please everyone, and the ZBS postbag was often full of complaints.
Letter writers frequently regarded the ZBS as representative of the new social order-. the new nation — and wrote to it with that in mind.
The radio was seen as possessing authority on standards of moral and social behaviour:
A large number of letters like this last one noted a conflict between the advice given on the radio in political programmes and some of the commercial advertisements.
Some listeners wrote about problems with their jobs:
Nevertheless, the great majority of the letters involved marriage and love problems.
These seemed to arise from the process of urbanization, the breaking down of traditional practices, and what was seen as a conflict between the old morality and the new.
Such letters concerning difficulties in love and marriage came almost exclusively from people living in towns.
Rural listeners sometimes considered the questions and the answers given to them to be improper:
The social tensions evidenced in many of these letters found an echo in some of the music played over the radio.
The great cultural diversion of the country, and the conflicts which this gave rise to, found expression in popular song.
There were conflicts within individuals who found themselves looking nostalgically to their own tribal past while at the same time wanting to be part of the newly emerging social and economic order.
In Zambia, as in most other parts of Africa, music has been the vehicle for the communication of a variety of such emotions and comments.
Praise songs were composed for revered and respected figures, and tribal or village history was preserved through song.
Songs provided instruction and advice on social, sexual and economic problems.
Singers in Zambia were very skilled at improvisation, and the same skill seems to be common in many other parts of Africa.
I have been present at occasions of celebration when poets and singers — there is often no distinction since poems tend to be sung or chanted — have made up verses on the spot and provided a seemingly endless number of embellishments.
Everyone is expected to join in the chorus.
Songs can teach, can reinforce the norms of the society and can often provide reassurance of order and continuity in confused and troubled times.
Moreover, music can act as a form for the expression of satire or mocking protest when such expression may be neither possible nor wise in other more direct ways.
The conflict between the old and the new was a common theme.
In the 1950s, the novelist and writer Stephen Mpashi, a man who very much represented success in the new social order, composed a popular song expressing this conflict.
In the song, a newly urbanized man feels somewhat guilty about his and others' deviation from the ways of their ancestors:
Oh, the restless wanders!
He has forgotten his tribe and his family.
He picks up any woman of the town.
He sucks the lollypops of Ndola.
He has forgotten the taste of the sweet wild fruit of the bush.
At the same time, singers also sang of the new delights of detribalized urban life:
We are the smart men about town.
We eat from tables.
We are the smart men about town.
We've got the girls.
We are the smart men about town.
We put on shoes.
We are the small men about town.
We look like teachers.
We are the smart men about town.
Wonderful wires stretch into our houses.
We are the smart men about town.
We have electric lights and tin roofs,
Now come and see what hell-of-a-fellows we are.
Town life does indeed bring the good life to some.
Yet marital relations were a constant theme of controversy, discussion, humour and, of course, song.
Many men found girls in town with whom they lived without necessarily getting married: there were numerous songs about town women and how they compared with those from the rural areas.
According to popular, male mythology the worldly, urban woman was continually demanding more material possessions and, if she did not get them, might desert her man.
Many urban liaisons were between partners from different tribes, and such marriages were rarely entered into in the proper, traditional way.
The traditional lobola payments were rarely made and no contract drawn up between the families.
Some of these relationships were lasting; others broke up because the man wanted to return to his home village.
A woman from another tribe might not easily fit into her partner's home environment, where she would not know the language and where the local women might not accept her.
A marriage occasionally broke up because the wife asked for too much.
This is the theme of one of the most beautiful modern songs from Central Africa, whose composer and singer, Alick Nkhata, is probably the most popular commercial recording artist Northern Rhodesia or Zambia has yet produced.
Good-bye!
Now I go back to my home where I came from.
Don't forget your duty.
Look after our children.
Even though I go, I will help you support them.
It is you who have made the mistake.
You want too much wealth which I can never possess.
I, poor man, must return to my home.
Peter Fraenkel, writing in 1956, noted the absence of any songs on the very important subject of kinship and the traditional ties binding the extended family together.
Such ties have been placed under great strain as the result of urbanization and the arising of great inequalities within society, inequalities which have been mirrored within society, inequalities which have been mirrored within many families.
Men or women who achieved success through education, business or political office found they were expected to support a seemingly ever-growing number of relatives, especially nephews.
In traditional society this would not be regarded as sponging or parasitism, for it was felt that one's relationship to one's own son was no closer than that to the sons of siblings, and most people had more nephews than sons.
In recent times the demands made by traditional society have no longer always been welcomed.
They were often talked about but not sung about: 'We do not sing about such things.
It wouldn't be decent.
Grumbling about them — that is private.
But singing is public.’
Fraenkel's view was that kinship ties were still held in high regard, and 1 believe this to be still true, however irksome people may find them.
However, almost nothing else was considered a taboo subject.
Songs about sex were often very explicit-far more so than would be acceptable in many other cultures.
The following song was broadcast on the radio and was on sale in the record shops, yet the wearing of miniskirts a few years later was denounced as improper and an example of western sexual decadence and permissiveness!
Let me tell you about town wives…
All day long she is never satisfied.
She threatens ‘I'll not stay with you’.
Yet…she remains, for I satisfy her at night.
All night I fondle her.
Her body becomes our playground.
The period written about by Fraenkel preceded independence.
The following years saw a decline in local music production so far as commercial recording was concerned.
The traditional music of the villages continued much as before, but less Zambian music was produced in the towns, where young musicians tended more and more to copy the popular music of Britain, the United States and Zaire.
Formerly, Alick Nkhata and men like him had adapted the western popular music of the time, particularly country and western music, which they married with traditional melodies and themes.
But during the 1970s, urban Zambian musicians adopted rather than adapted western popular music styles.
Why this has happened I am not competent to say, but it could be a fruitful and fascinating subject for research.
Radio and television news was supplied by the national news agency, ZANA.
It received the wire services of Reuters and AFP, which it retransmitted to its customers, including the Times and the Mail .
It also carried out its own news collection from offices in Lusaka, Kabwe, Ndola, Kitwe and Livingstone.
Other news was provided by district information officers at district capitals around the country.
Poor communications meant that very little news from outlying districts appeared in ZANA output, the  only notable exception being when the president went on one of his tours of the country and a journalist from ZANA accompanied the party.
Similarly, when a Cabinet minister or district governor went on tour, a ZANA journalist would usually go with him, sending stories back to Lusaka.
An analysis of news originating anywhere away from the line-of-rail showed that it frequently came from such a tour, which shows what difficulty the news media had in getting rural news.
Only when transport was made available for some other reason did journalists — meaning, as a rule, Government journalists — get a chance to report news from Zambia's rural areas.
At other times they did not have transport and so did not travel.
Local news tended to be dull and repetitive, as the following typical example shows:
There was heavy emphasis on leaders' reported statements at the expense of the event or situation in which the remarks were made:
The context of a growing rift at that time between trade unions and the Ministry of Labour was not mentioned.
Bulletins in Zambian languages were identical in subject matter and from 1245 to 1335 were broadcast every day in Lunda, Luvale, Tonga, Bemba, Nyanja, Lozi and Kaonde in that order, all being translations of the same basic bulletin.
The English news, inserted at 1315, was more up to date, having been prepared in the late morning.
The bulletins used for the Zambian languages were prepared in the early morning, because ZBS staff required time for translation.
Zambian language bulletins concentrated on Zambian news: in the period studied, 81.1% was Zambian news and a further 11.7% from other African countries south of the Sahara.
Only 2.6% of the news used in these bulletins was other foreign news as compared to 14.3% of the English language bulletins.
This was a deliberate policy: it was felt that anyone with sufficient education to understand or be interested in foreign news could be expected to listen to and understand English.
Because these Zambian language bulletins were short they were very limited in content.
About half (53.3%) of the average English language news bulletin was concerned with Zambian affairs, but because there was three times as much news in English there was in fact twice as much Zambian news content in English in real terms.
Looked at from all angles, a member of the minority of the total listenership which spoke English well was likely to be better informed.
Another problem for the listener who relied on Zambian language bulletins was the fact that much of the translation was of a very low standard.
The staff of ZBS were fluent in the language in which they broadcast, but their knowledge of English was frequently inadequate.
Many admitted to  not fully understanding the bulletins they were supposed to translate.
Their translations were often either incorrect or contained a word left in English for which the translator could find no equivalent in his language.
An example of mistranslation occurred when President Kaunda returned from the Singapore Commonwealth Conference in 1970, where he had clashed with the British prime Minister over British arms sales to South Africa.
ZANA reported him as saying on arrival in Lusaka that his fight was with Mr Heath only, and that he wanted the people of Zambia to ‘leave the British people here alone’.
The implication was clear to anyone who understood English well: the president was anxious that Zambians should not make Britons in Zambia take the blame for the policy of the Heath government.
But the Bemba language translator used the word ukubstanduka , which means ‘to boycott them’, so that Kaunda was quoted in Bemba as saying that Zambians should shun or have nothing to do with Britons in Zambia.
Such mistranslations occasionally had their amusing side, as when ‘State Ball’ was translated so as to give listeners the delightful picture of the president playing football with a visiting group of dignitaries at State House.
And when a car collided with a stationary vehicle, listeners were told it had encountered a van full of envelopes and other items of stationery!
About 12% of radio time in Zambia was taken up by news in the various languages.
To determine how important radio was as a source of news 1 selected some news stories and tried to find out if and how Zambians in various parts of the country had learned of these events.
A variety of news items were selected at different times during the three years of the survey.
As was to be expected, town dwellers were better informed than rural people.
Those who had heard about major items of foreign news — such as the Amin coup in Uganda, the deaths of Nasser in Egypt and Nkrumah in Ghana, or the proposed resumption of British arms sales in South Africa — had for the most part received the news from the radio.
Generally, about one half of the urban people had received these items of news, compared with between ten and twenty-five per cent of those living in rural areas.
In both cases, most of those who had heard the news named the radio as their source.
We also asked questions about some important events in Zambia itself: the change in the vice-presidency in 1970, the conference of non-aligned countries held in Lusaka in the same year, the price control measures introduced a year later and the increased prices being paid to farmers for maize in 1971.
The results here were quite surprising.
We found many people, including a large number of radio listeners, who were ill-informed on these matters.
The change in the price of maize was intended to encourage increased maize production at a time of shortage when the country had to import large supplies from Rhodesia: a politically humiliating thing to have to do.
In two important maize-growing areas, fewer than half of those interviewed had heard of the increased price, and in an area where the Government was keen to encourage a substantial increase in local production, less than one in ten had heard of the new prices.
Access to the media was clearly a very significant factor.
Radio listeners and newspaper readers were generally far better informed, but investigation  showed that a great deal of news was either misunderstood or not listened to because it was incomprehensible.
If news bore little or no relation to a person's experience, then it might not be remembered.
Yet this does not explain the lack of knowledge about the price of maize.
It may be that the announcement was not repeated frequently enough.
It is also possible — and in my view more likely — that even this news was not understood.
Press releases given in technical language, with a large number of figures and percentages, were not easy to listen to and understand when broadcast.
Translation often made matters worse, since this tended to be the responsibility of people whose knowledge of English was inadequate for the task: as has already been noted, phrases or words in the original text were frequently left in English.
Another factor working against effective communication may well have been the air time given to Zambian language news bulletins: these were only five minutes long.
News in Bemba broadcast at lunchtime was rarely repeated in the evening Bemba news.
Very few listeners listened to all three news bulletins in their own language each day, and so it was very easy to miss important items.
Also, news bulletins concentrated heavily on the speeches and activities of leading politicians, particularly the president.
On days when he was particularly active, other items of news which might have appeared in the ten-minute English language bulletins were squeezed out of those in the Zambian languages.
However, the radio did play an important role in the dissemination of certain types of news, and it was clearly more influential than the press.
News of major disasters, like the tragedy at Mufulira mine in 1970, spread rapidly around the country by radio and by word of mouth.
Listeners paid attention to, and remembered, those items that seemed significant to them.
1 noticed that they frequently lost interest during bulletins when political activities and speeches were reported or some official announcement was made.
At times the broadcasters themselves did not really understand the significance of what they were broadcasting, so it was hardly surprising that their listeners took the same view: enthusiasm, and the lack of it, are equally infectious.
Those listeners who were mothers of young children often spoke of their appreciation of health and nutritional programmes; they found advice and information on the radio that was relevant and easily understood.
While this should not, of course, be taken to imply that female listeners lack intelligence, it does suggest that radio is not perhaps a suitable medium for putting across complex ideas or instructions.
The broadcaster who gave a complicated radio talk on a technical subject was wasting his time, for no one listened to him — a point which came over in interviews so often that it became indisputable.
For example, President Kaunda's philosophy of humanism was not widely understood, and the reason seemed quite clear: the programme Nation and Humanism , designed to promote understanding of that philosophy, was often very dull.
The participants talked in abstract and theoretical terms, rarely relating the subject to the listeners' experience.
Radio achieved its greatest impact when it related most clearly to the experiences of listeners, who expected it to reflect and comment on life as it was, give advice on difficult contemporary and age-old problems and make  life more enjoyable by providing entertainment.
This is what accounted for the enormous popularity of Julius Chongo's Pocheza M'madzulo , especially in Lusaka and in Eastern province.
Because of his considerable talent as a storyteller, Chongo was able to entertain his audience and the same time to encourage it to think about moral problems, sometimes in a new and challenging way.
The radio cannot demand that we listen to it: even if we leave it switched on, this does not mean we are listening.
We listen and pay attention when it says something in such a way as to attract our attention.
Although most professional broadcasters know this, governments tend to ignore the point — and many radio stations, like the ZBS, are under government direction and control.
Tanzania
Political attitudes towards press and radio in independent Tanzania are in many ways typical of those in newly independent African nations.
At independence in 1961 and during the period immediately afterwards, the new TANU government was concerned that it had no direct voice in the press.
Ngurumo supported it, but was still a private, independent paper.
The colonial administration's paper,Mambo Leo , had, like its stablemates, been turned over to private hands.
Though highly political in the later years of colonial rule,Mambo Leo was now largely apolitical, and its coverage of national affairs tended to be non-controversial.
The Standard supported the government, but not out of any fundamental conviction.
Mwafrika was now a commercial rather than political paper.
No other newspapers of major significance were in existence.
In 1959, TANU had tried to launch its own National Times press with Nyerere as chairman, the ambitious plan being to publish a Swahili daily, an English daily and a Gujerati weekly.
Insufficient capital was raised for the project, which proved abortive; yet TANU leaders remained determined to have at least one daily paper, and preferably two: one in English and one in Swahili.
Eventually, some finance was provided and a weekly paper called Uhuru (‘Independence’) made its first appearance on Independence Day, 9th December 1961.
It became a daily on its fourth anniversary in 1965.
In addition, a decision was made during 1962 to launch an English language daily.
Ainslie interprets this decision as a response to a difficult situation, particularly internationally:
TANU's English language daily, the Nationalist , first appeared on April 17th 1964, thus preceding its sister paper Uhuru as a daily by twenty months.
In Ainslie's opinion, this came about because of its greater international  impact as an English paper.
The international aspect continued to be of importance and was one of the reasons why the Nationalist — a very costly venture — was kept going even when its existence could no longer be justified on any other grounds.
But why was the party so keen to have two national daily newspapers published in Dar es Salaam when it was clear that they would use up much-needed funds in the initial investment and could not guarantee to pay for themselves?
Jointly they represented a heavy financial burden which, as it turned out, became the responsibility of the Government rather than the party.
The emphasis placed on the press by the Government and TANU was to continue long after independence.
Although it has since been modified and greater attention paid to radio, it is still manifest in some of the Government's actions in the field of mass communication.
There were, I believe, five main reasons why the national daily press was stressed at the expense of radio and local newspapers.
Firstly, the radio, represented by the Tanganyika Broadcasting Corporation (TBC), was constitutionally ‘above’ politics at the time of independence.
TANU wanted a medium that would be totally committed to its goals.
The radio was accessible to TANU but nevertheless independent of political direction.
Besides, TANU members had been involved in the press, while they had not been involved in radio.
Broadcasters were supposed to be outside the political arena, and held attitudes different from those of their colleagues in the press, many of whom were political campaigners.
The radio had been virtually closed to TANU's campaign for independence, whereas the same period saw the emergence of a modest, but nevertheless committed, nationalist press.
Secondly, I think few realized in 1961 just how sizeable the radio audience had become or how rapidly it would expand.
A far larger number of sets were in use than licence figures would suggest, but during and especially at the outset of the campaign for independence the number of newspaper readers exceeded that of radio listeners.
Not until after independence was the really massive growth in the radio audience to occur.
The prestige of the written word, considered by TANU to be of particular significance, was the third reason for the emphasis on the press.
Those in power wanted the voice of newly independent Tanganyika to express itself forcefully in a printed medium that could be received not only nationally but also abroad.
There was a frequently reiterated belief that for Tanganyika to be understood properly in the international community it needed to have a strong English language press in which TANU policies would be stated clearly.
Connected with this attitude was the fourth reason for dedication to the establishment of a national TANU press.
In the early days, few people talked about decentralization.
As has been noted earlier, TANU's cadres felt that nation-building could be achieved only through the control of the centre — a view which extended itself to the press.
Tanganyika's local press, which flourished in the pre-independence period with government support, collapsed soon after independence, for the simple reason that, unlike the colonial administration, the TANU government spent all the funds available for the press on supporting its own papers published in the capital.
The fifth reason was that mixed feelings seemed to exist about the mass media generally and radio in particular.
It should not be assumed — though in the literature on the subject it often is — that political élites necessarily desire an effective means of mass communication or have any clear policy on how to use it.
They may want to control the media capable of reaching large sections of the population, yet at the same time be suspicious of the power these media possess: power which is ultimately beyond their control.
Political activities such as party meetings and rallies can be observed and supervised, but there is no way of controlling what an individual listens to on his radio set.
Thus while those TANU members concerned to achieve effective communication for the purpose of education and development preferred the press to radio, whose full potential they failed to recognize, there may have been others who realized that radio had powers to reach people which TANU had not.
TANU had succeeded in coping with a nationalist political movement, but could it cope with the demands of people whose national political consciousness might be further aroused by messages coming from outside the party's framework of control?
In the early days of independence, TANU and the Government appear to have been anxious to lower the political temperature, following the excitement of the previous three years.
This may have accounted in part for their reluctance to promote the growth of radio while at the same time encouraging the development of a press based in Dar es Salaam.
In Africa the press, like television, tends to serve the political, social and economic élite: these are the people who can read, can afford to buy a newspaper and are likely to be living where newspapers can be bought.
Press and television in Africa are generally allowed more freedom of expression than is radio, and one suspects that the reason is that already mentioned: the elitist fear of uneducated people listening to radio and being ‘misinformed’ or ‘confused’.
It is difficult, perhaps impossible, to establish exactly how much was spent on the two papers,Uhuru and the Nationalist , in the years between 1964, when the Nationalist was launched, and 1972, when it merged with the Standard to form the Daily News .
However, I was able to obtain fairly detailed information on the situation in 1968, when the subvention had to be increased substantially.
A confidential Ministry of Information report, written in April 1968, revealed that the two papers owed Sh.900,000/ — to the printers, who threatened to discontinue working on them altogether unless this amount were paid and an assurance received from the Treasury that printing costs for the rest of the financial year would be met.
These amounted to Sh.450,000/ —.
The financial problems of these papers were acute.
The Sh.800,000/ — voted by the Ministry of Commerce and Cooperatives in the 1967–68 estimates was then able to meet less than half the two papers' annual operating deficit.
A further Sh.1,050,000/ — had to be found if they were to survive, and no extra money had been voted by Parliament.
The Nationalist and Uhuru were not commercial propositions, neither were they intended to be — they existed to give TANU and its government a mouthpiece both within Tanzania and in the outside world — but both were losing money more heavily than anticipated.
Publishing costs accounted for  more than Sh.3,000,000/ — per annum, whereas revenue amounted to only just over Sh.1,000,000/ —.
Two reasons can be given for this, the first being their low circulations.
The Nationalist claimed sales of 7,000; in fact its print order during 1967 and 1968 rarely exceeded 4,000, and numerous copies remained unsold.
Uhuru was somewhat more successful, with a print run of around 12,000 and sales of 10,000.
Secondly, neither paper attracted much advertising, probably because of their restricted circulation.
It is also possible that many advertisers were put off by the political tone.
The Standard , read by the better off, was considered the prestige paper, and when advertising in Swahili most firms preferred the Commercial Service of Radio Tanzania, with its mass audience.
Various attempts were made to increase the sales and advertising revenue of the two party papers, though the measures taken were at best mere palliatives.
It is probable that Uhuru could have been commercially successful on its own, unlike the Nationalist , which certainly was not.
Moreover, the papers were run as political ventures; there were none of the commercial, management, planning and sales activities that were to be found at the Standard .
The government subsidy made it likely that the staff of the two papers were less worried about pushing up sales than were their counterparts on the then Lonrho-owned Standard .
This paper's remarkable success in increasing sales between 1965 and 1969 not only showed what could be achieved by a powerful sales campaign (which also brought in advertising at higher rates) but also indicated that new purchasers of newspapers were not attracted to the party press, whose sales remained relatively stagnant.
Between January and June 1965 and the same period in 1969, the Standard's sales rose from 11,844 to 19,496 copies daily.
My own estimates, based on Ministry sources, suggest that Uhuru and the Nationalist cost the Government Sh.7,000,000/ — in subsidies between the financial years 1965–66 and 1968–69.
This sum is equivalent to about one third of the Government grant to Radio Tanzania for the same period, and to more than the entire sum allocated to the development of information and broadcasting services in the first Five Year plan.
In mid-1968, a time of financial difficulty, while urgent discussions were taking place at the highest level on ways to save the party newspapers, the Ministry of Information was trying to find ways of cutting back expenditure on broadcasting and information services.
The saving of the party newspapers at this time was given priority over matters related to broadcasting and other information services.
In effect, the Government had decided that the heavy subsidy given to the readers of the Nationalist and Uhuru , who lived mostly in towns (half the sales and probably half the readership of both newspapers were in Dar es Salaam) should take precedence over, for example, the building of satellite radio stations to improve reception in remote areas or the provision of community listening points.
Both these projects were provided for in the Five Year plan current at the time but were shelved for lack of funds.
The closure of the party newspapers, on the other hand, was then unthinkable.
The crisis was resolved by the vote of extra money by Parliament, and no break occurred in the publication of either newspaper.
Yet recognition of  the difficulties in which the two papers found themselves had the apparent effect of making the Government and the party think more clearly about mass communications.
The Ministry of Information and TANU began to organize seminars and study groups on information services and the mass media and their place in socialism, nation-building and development.
The first series of these was held at Radio Tanzania between May 22nd and August 19th 1968.
Participants included senior radio personnel, editorial staff from the party press and the TANU publicity secretary; there were no participants from non-governmental or non-TANU media.
Out of this and out of a more general TANU mass media seminar in 1968 was eventually to come TANU's mass media committee, which has now become an important influence on Tanzania's mass media as a whole.
Whilst large sums of money were voted by Parliament to establish and keep Uhuru and the Nationalist going, MPs always showed extreme reluctance to extend that generosity to radio.
Even before independence, the Corporation's shaky finances drew criticism and demands for more direct control of broadcasting.
In February 1961 Parliament was asked to approve the grant of an extra £12,000 in the Supplementary Estimates.
Licence fees had failed to meet expectations, and more funds were needed to keep broadcasting going.
Backbencher Mr Sijaona stated that the TBC was uneconomic and recommended that a committee of enquiry be set up to examine possible alternatives.
He made clear what he had in mind:
Another Member, Mr Kasambala, made the same point, adding: One backbencher disagreed; Mr Tunze said that he wanted
It was by all accounts a fairly heated debate, with interventions from the Government benches, including two from Nyerere.
Except for Mr Tunze, all seven African backbenchers who spoke were highly critical of the TBC and advocated more direct control over the way it handled its finances, the news it chose to broadcast, and even the type of entertainment it presented.
The emphasis in these speeches was on the need for unity and the avoidance of  dissent in radio programmes.
The view was that radio should always speak with the same voice as the Government, aiming to educate and improve rather than entertain the public.
An image of national unity should be portrayed even if this was not a true reflection of reality.
Within a year there had been a shift in the Government's attitude towards the Corporation.
In the debate on the annual budget in June 1962 the Minister of Education, who was then responsible for broadcasting matters, gave a review of the TBC's achievements during the previous year.
He spoke as if the Government now regarded the TBC as being within its sphere of activity.
It was clear that the Government now saw itself as taking a greater part in determining TBC policies, and this was confirmed by the addition of an External Service to the TBC's responsibilities.
In his speech, the Minister referred to the Corporation's ‘year of fulfilment’ and included the TBC's activities in his review of Information Services as a whole, pointing to their ‘valuable work…in the publicising and classifying of the momentous political changes which have taken place’.
Backbenchers mostly made the same points that they had made over a year earlier.
Some of them added that they thought the TBC paid too little attention to the speeches of politicians: this was to be a frequent complaint.
Perhaps the most significant contribution to the debate was that made by a member of the TBC board, the former Mwafrika editor Mr Bagdelleh.
The TBC, he said, had got to be an arm of the Government 
He wanted more money to be spent on broadcasting and a separate Ministry to be set up to direct and coordinate all information policy: this was the only way a minister would be able to deal with all the criticisms levelled at the broadcasters.
Although at the time the Minister rejected this suggestion as unacceptable, the Government soon agreed to most of the MP's suggestions.
In 1964 a separate Ministry of Information and Tourism was established under a minister in the Cabinet.
The new Minister, Idris Wakil, who had only recently come from Zanzibar to join the new Cabinet after the union of Tanganyika and Zanzibar, explained the reason for the new Ministry.:
A new trend in official thinking was evident.
From now on, the news media were to be accorded greater importance.
The Government and TANU, at the centre, wanted to talk directly to the people and were becoming  increasingly aware of the communications gap between the centre (the capital) and the periphery or grass roots, given the remoteness from Dar es Salaam of so much of the country.
The weakness of TANU as a communications channel was well known.
The army mutiny of 1964 had created fears about the country's stability and produced a greater intolerance of dissent.
Tordoff noted that the mutiny forced Nyerere to take a tougher line, as was evidenced by his use of the preventive Detention Act; it also accelerated other trends which increased government control over such alternative power focuses as the trade unions, the co-operatives and the armed forces.
The Government wanted to speak directly to the people without having to compete with other voices, to give its version of events, of its own policies and activities, without having these questioned.
It seemed worried about the power of alternative media, beyond its control, to give interpretations different from those it wanted put over.
Though backbenchers were not unanimous in supporting this line, a significant proportion of them did so.
It would shortly be the turn of another group to state the opposite view, but in the meantime majority opinion was in favour of increased centralized political control.
Another reason given for increased central control — and one which I have heard frequently in Tanzania — was that there was a danger of confusing illiterate peasants if the media did not speak with one voice.
It was concluded that the media had no business either relaying bad news about government and party policies and activities or suggesting that alternative measures might be better.
The logical result of this attitude was, of course, the takeover of the most prominent media, which would involve placing them under more direct control, a corollary of this action was the suppression or limitation of any privately owned media that might either be critical of TANU and the Tanzanian Government or campaign for alternatives.
When communications were inadequate and weak, it was argued, the country could ill afford the luxury of competing media.
In Mr Wakil's first speech to Parliament he referred to the Five Year plan, in which an expansion of broadcasting was projected.
The message of the entire plan had to be put across:
Nevertheless, the Minister did not think at this time that it was necessary to end the corporate status of Tanzania's radio service.
The existing ordinance gave him enough power.
The Corporation was in charge of day-to-day  administration ‘on my behalf’, but, he stated:
Plans for broadcasting in the First Five Year Plan included the setting up of community listening points, the building of regional and satellite stations, the replacement of transmitters and the provision of a tape transcription service for the better preservation and use of recorded material at Broadcasting House.
The capital allocation of the Plan to broadcasting was Sh.4,640,000/-;.
The Ministry was to spend considerably more than its total allocation for the period 1964–69.
It exceeded its investment target by thirty-nine per cent, but most of the money went towards tourism.
At the end of the five-year period, no money had been invested in projects for broadcasting except for a new medium wave transmitter in Dar es Salaam.
The plan had been ambitious.
The capital development of the broadcasting services during this five-year period improved the ability of radio to reach remote parts of the country and beyond but did nothing to improve two-way linkages between Dar es Salaam and the regions and districts.
And ironically, in view of the Minister's remarks about business interests in broadcasting, the main beneficiary of this expenditure was the Commercial Service and the companies using it to advertise their products.
When the new transmitter was installed, the Commercial Service produced a brochure for prospective customers which boasted, with some justification: 'East Africa's Most powerful Advertising Medium'.
It sometimes seemed that the Government was less interested in broadcasting from the point of view of fulfilling the three aims mentioned in the plan than in what it could and should do to publicize its own policies and activities.
The Commercial Service publicized the Government and brought in much-needed revenue: a combination which pleased both politicians and Treasury officials.
During 1964 a backbencher asked about the amount of news broadcast by TBC, saying that he thought that the Voice of Kenya broadcast more.
The Minister agreed that the broadcasting of news still needed improvement but was glad to note that, in addition to world news, plenty of news was broadcast about Tanganyika and Zanzibar.
Significantly, he went on:
No mention was made of the place of other Tanzanian news within this Ministerial pecking order.
Indeed, at this time radio bulletins began to contain less and less of any kind of Tanzanian news other than the speeches and activities of the president, ministers, commissioners and so on.
This policy was eventually modified and finally reversed some eight years later.
It is highly unlikely that TBC personnel would have agreed to such criteria for news without heavy pressure from the Minister or someone else prominent in the Government.
Even before it was dissolved the TBC had effectively become an arm of the Government under the Ministry of Information and Tourism, and the Minister was clearly determined to impose controls.
Mr Wakil's short answer above brought supplementary questions.
Why, another member wanted to know, were the speeches of the president often cut short to make way for the programmes which follow?
This was not so, said the Minister: the president's speeches were being broadcast in instalments, on different days, so that nothing should be lost.
However, Nyerere was said to be personally opposed to this kind of personality cult, and eventually the policy was changed.
In the meantime, radio broadcasters felt obliged to give prominence to his speeches and activities as well as to those of his Ministers and other prominent officials.
No one in Parliament objected: the assumption seemed to be that this was what a publicly owned radio service ought to do.
It was perhaps to be expected that during this post-independence period TANU and its politicians in Parliament would want to see the nation establish itself in a symbolic sense.
Radio might help to instil a feeling of national glory and pride, even if the substance did not amount to much as yet.
There was a strong belief that radio should not merely give prominence to the national leadership but also take measures to reduce foreign influence and content in its programmes.
Radio had been established by foreigners and much of its programming planned by them: there was a need for everyone to feel that it was now thoroughly Tanzanian.
MPs demanded a reduction in the amount of foreign music on the air.
One member wanted hotels in Dar es Salaam to stop playing such music over their loudspeakers and play TBC news bulletins instead.
That raised problems, said the Minister.
There was always the question of what people wanted:
The same case could, of course, have been made about listeners' attitudes to the number and length of speeches to which they were now to be subjected.
No one pointed out at the time that radio, like other media of mass  communication, leaves the audience with the choice of looking elsewhere.
While in the case of the press alternatives were difficult to find, in that of radio other stations existed that could be listened to if the national station was found to be boring or did not cater for listeners' tastes.
The nominal independence of the TBC was ended in 1965.
By this time the only real difference was that broadcasters lost their separate status along with certain privileges in pensions and related matters, and became civil servants.
As far as control was concerned, the Government had already taken over.
The TBC Dissolution Bill was debated and passed into law in March 1965.
Introducing the measure, Mr Wakil said:
The Minister explained that the Corporation had been a British creation.
In Britain the party system made it necessary for there to be an independent corporation, since broadcasting had to remain outside political conflict.
In Tanzania the political system was different, and broadcasting policy should reflect the fact:
There was no opposition to the measure, and Radio Tanzania Dar es Salaam (RTD) became a department of the Ministry of Information, Broadcasting and Tourism on July 1st 1965.
But it was not long before the dominance of news about ministers and politics at the centre drew protest from MPs, who said that news from their respective areas of the country was not being heard.
The Minister of Information, Broadcasting and Tourism's customary reply was that communications difficulties prevented the collection of news from all parts of the country.
On one occasion a member complained that no news was ever heard from Kigoma, and wondered why.
The Minister denied that this was so, but his reply gave a further indication of the way news reporting was officially regarded:
Yet there was no discussion of whether the listeners wanted to hear so much about regional and area commissioners and MPs: few politicians ever  questioned the assumption that what they said and did should form the basis of daily news.
In a supplementary question, another member told Parliament that many regional commissioners were ‘crying out’ for news of their activities to be broadcast.
A few days earlier, someone else had asked: ‘Why don't the Information Officers follow the MPs when they tour their constituencies?’
The Minister replied that the duty of information officers was not only to follow commissioners and MPs but also to report on other matters.
He made a similar reply to another member who insisted that radio should give better publicity to what MPs said in the House: it was not, he said, the job of his Ministry to build up the reputation of individual MPs.
Immediately, another rose to his feet:
This time it was the then Second Vice-President, Rashidi Kawawa, who intervened:
But as the policy of giving a great deal of attention to politicians had become established, complaints were inevitable: certain individual politicians were given more publicity than others, which led to jealousy.
Broadcasters themselves were also aware that it was easy to overdo the attention given to politicians and political news; it might make some politicians happy, but not the audience.
Eventually the Government realized this, and in early 1967 there was a banner headline in the Nationalist : ‘people's Efforts Make News’.
Announcing a change in policy, Idris Wakil said that from now on what ordinary people did should make the news.
His remarks reflected the general alteration in TANU policy which was to be embodied in the Arusha Declaration a few days later.
The idea was to move away from an elitist and centralist view of things, yet it was to be a long time before such changes were implemented in the Government's media, and it might well be argued that they have not progressed very far to this day.
There was in fact a mixture of elitism and anti-elitism in the mass media policies of the Government, which had consistently refused to introduce television on the mainland, in contrast to action taken by the Revolutionary Council of Zanzibar and the governments of most other independent African states.
In 1965, on being asked when television would be introduced, the Minister replied that Tanzania was not yet ready to afford such a luxury.
The Government's first intention was to expand radio so that everyone would be able to receive it easily.
Mr Wakil drew attention in Parliament to ‘quite a few other developing countries’ which had embarked on television in some haste and already found it too costly; Tanzania, he said, would have the sense to learn from their experience.
Two points were considered to be crucial.
One was that television should not first be introduced to Dar es Salaam and only later to other areas.
However, existing technology, combined with economic considerations, made that seem inevitable.
There was some optimism that experiments with direct transmission to receivers via satellites might eventually provide great opportunities for countries like Tanzania, which had a scattered population.
The second crucial point was that Tanzania should not have television until it was really ready to make full use of it.
Tanzanian ministers had seen Kenyan and Ugandan television and been struck by the extent to which these stations relied on imported material such as Rawhide, Bonanza, The Lucy Show, Steptoe and Son and the like.
Mainland Tanzania would not, it was decided, have television until it could produce the bulk of the programmes itself.
Little imported material was broadcast on the radio, and there were fears of cultural transference from the West to those sections of society who were, in any case, already well catered for in entertainment and information.
The Government's policy on television in mainland Tanzania could be seen as anti-elitist; the same could not be said of its policy on the press.
The local press, which had flourished during the last years of colonial rule, had been allowed to die.
Instead, the Government had supported a daily press in Dar es Salaam, which catered for a relatively small and mainly urban readership.
Ben Mkapa, then editor of the two party daily newspapers, argued in 1967 that there was good reason for this.
His two papers,Uhuru and the Nationalist , had an important educational function.
The role of his papers, he told me, was to shake people in key positions out of their ‘colonialist attitudes’: too many of those in responsible positions had ‘jumped into the shoes of the departing expatriate and taken over his whole approach to the job ‘.
Ne saw the Nationalist as the more appropriate paper for this task.
With Uhuru , the job was broadly the same, only here the audience was different and the object was to try and ‘disabuse people of their expectations of Government’.
The editor and others working on Uhuru were well aware that their audience was mainly urban, and they wrote accordingly.
It was, perhaps, an inevitable kind of elitism.
Radio was, as we have seen, put under direct Government control only a short time after independence.
But what of the press?
The senior staff of the TANU press felt that, while they might not always be in agreement with everything the Government and its various ministries did or said, they were committed to its goals; the same, they believed, could not be said of the Standard .
Though from time to time the editorial columns of both Uhuru and the Nationalist called for the Government to take the paper over, and a few MPs supported them, the Standard was not nationalized until February 1970.
Many people took the opposite view, holding that Tanzanians should be able to read opinions and interpretations independent both of the party and  the Government.
The argument was partly about nationalism — there were those who resented the fact that the country's most prestigious and successful newspaper belonged to a foreign company and was edited by a European — but, more importantly, it was also about the degree of freedom which could or should be permitted.
Some spoke of the need to have a press and a broadcasting service which discussed alternatives within broadly agreed policy frameworks.
For example, Government- or TANU- employed journalists who had given thought to the matter told me that within the provisions of the Arusha Declaration and its main socialist objectives there was a wide range of issues concerning implementation to discuss.
Some went further and stated that the press must be free to say whatever needed saying; not surprisingly, opponents of this school of thought pointed out that this gave freedom only to those who had a newspaper at their disposal.
In the political framework and atmosphere of Tanzania in the post-Arusha period, it was obvious that the press was going to be controlled: ‘By whom?’ and ‘How?’were the main questions.
In 1968 the Government introduced the Newspaper Ordnance (Amendment) Bill, which empowered the president to order a newspaper to cease publication when he considered it in the public interest to do so.
This Bill was gazetted only two months after the closure of one of Tanzania's few private political newspapers — the last paper which could be considered to have been in open opposition to the Government.
The new law was prompted by events at the end of 1967.
In that year Oscar Kambona, former Foreign Minister, TANU Secretary-General and close political associate and friend of the president, left the Government and, shortly afterwards, the country.
The full story of what happened has never been reported, but it seems that Kambona had lost in a power struggle with other key figures in the Cabinet and TANU.
While originally he had been fully in support of the Arusha Declaration and allied policies, later he began to attack the Government from London.
In particular, in the closing months of 1967, he appears to have attempted to use a newspaper edited by his brother Otini Kambona to express his views.
That paper was Ulimwengu (‘The Universe’), a four-page weekly owned by the Tanzania Co-operative press.
This had no connection with the Co-operative Union of Tanganyika; despite the name of its owner,Ulimwengu was a private paper.
The Government possessed no legal power to close down this paper, nor indeed any other paper at this time: its powers were restricted to refusing the initial registration of a paper, and Ulimwengu was registered.
What had offended the Government was an issue of the paper which came out two days before Christmas 1967.
Few copies ever reached the streets: it seems that most copies were seized.
The editor was detained along with another Kambona brother, Mattiya, and Ulimwengu never appeared again.
On Thursday, 21 st December 1967 another ex-minister and colleague of Oscar Kambona who had left the country at around the same time returned to Dar es Salaam: the former Zanzibar Vice-President, Kassem Hanga.
He was detained on Saturday, 30th December, the same day that Mattiya and Otini Kambona were picked up and at the same time as the closure of Ulimwengu was announced.
The press was at first unhelpful in either  explaining or interpreting the events.
The Sunday News , sister paper to the Standard , quoted the Government as saying that it welcomed criticism but would crush any attempt to change government by unconstitutional means.
Three days later the Standard announced that Oscar Kambona would be making a statement in London.
It said that Kambona had claimed that his brother Otini had been arrested for writing an editorial ‘in favour of human rights and the liberty of the individual’.
This, according to the Nationalist , was nonsense: all the paper had done was to ‘extol Kambona's ego’; the article ‘excelled in lies and innuendo’.
The closure of Ulimwengu could have been challenged in the courts had anyone felt willing, or been at liberty, to do so.
Five months later the Minister of Information was asked in Parliament, during the debate on the Newspaper Ordnance (Amendment) Bill, why this new Bill was necessary if the Government had been able to close down Ulimwengu was it somehow to legalize what had been done already?
The Minister replied:
Part of what the Minister said may have been correct.
Nevertheless the episode had shown the Government that it had no authority to ban newspapers published in Tanzania which were properly registered and also that it might have been in difficulty had it not discovered a technical irregularity in the case of Ulimwengu .
Even with this explanation, one is not necessarily convinced that Ulimwengu was in the wrong, since we have only the Government's side of the story.
As things stood, although the Government was able to refuse registration to a newspaper on the grounds of some technicality or other, nothing in law prevented a person from using one of the existing, properly registered newspapers to put over a particular political line.
One possible political opponent was the workers' paper Mfanya Kazi , published by the trade union NUTA.
The union had already shown some opposition to aspects of Government policy, but this had always been voiced in a guarded or indirect way in its newspaper.
Another possible opponent was Ngurumo .
Although the latter was in the hands of people who rarely expressed anything but praise for the Government and TANU, neither of these institutions had editorial control, and there was always the possibility of its political line changing: after all,Ulimwengu had formerly been a firm TANU supporter.
It seemed to me at the time that the Tanzanian Government feared that papers could be used as mouthpieces for dissident political groups anxious to advance their own positions.
However, this was not the main argument used  by the Government during the debate on the Bill in Parliament, where it met with determined opposition.
The Minister for Information and Tourism, Hasnu Makame, said that there was a need for a provision in the law for the president to ban a newspaper should this be necessary.
Freedom of speech was guaranteed in the constitution and was also basic to the TANU creed; such freedom could nevertheless be abused:
In seemed that the Minister expected little opposition in Parliament, where all MPs were members of TANU.
He may not have been prepared for what followed.
Twenty-four backbenchers took part in the debate, most of them making speeches opposed to the Bill.
One claimed that it would intimidate the press.
Were members to pass it as it stood, this would be an arrogant move indeed: they would be considering themselves to be more sensible than people outside.
Another speaker made the point that the House was being asked to give power over the press to the presidency, not merely to its present incumbent, President Nyerere, who, he said, could be trusted not to abuse his power.
There must, he said, be a place where people are free to say what they like.
Nowadays a large number of the population listened to foreign radio stations and read foreign newspapers: once the Government had the power to conceal the truth within Tanzania, would it also be necessary to try to stop people sending their views to the foreign media?
Yet despite the extent of the opposition the Government was quite uncompromising.
The Second Vice-President took over defence of the Bill in the House and turned the discussion away from considerations of press freedom to a critique of newspapers like the Standard , which were owned by capitalists.
He asked why MPs wanted to leave the Standard in foreign hands.
Had they forgotten the Arusha Declaration?
Had they not supported it when it called for the major means of production to be taken over?
How could freedom of expression be put at risk merely by the Government's saying to any one individual (the Second Vice-President was here referring to foreign capitalist press owners) that ‘what you have said is of no relevance in this country and will stir up trouble and mar the peace’?
Mr Kawawa repeated more than once his view that the Arusha Declaration not only permitted the takeover of capitalist concerns but actually called for ‘the masses’ to have control of the information media.
A number of important points emerged from the Vice-President's speech indicating the creation of more coherent Government attitudes to the press: these concerned its role, the limits there should be to its activities and the relationship it ought to have with the Government.
Firstly, said the Government, it did not want to stifle all criticism of the way its policies were carried out.
It wanted newspapers and the radio to be able to report where things went wrong, especially if this led to matters being put right.
What it was not prepared to tolerate was any questioning of the basic tenets of party  and Government policy.
(One formed the impression that the Government was genuinely anxious about the precariousness of its policies at this time and was afraid that determined opponents might be able to sabotage these policies by questioning them through the news media.)
Mr Kawawa referred to the ‘confusion’ which would result from people being given information which contradicted what they were being told by their own government through Government and party channels.
Secondly, a press which probed deeply and reported news that the Government wanted left unreported — for example, defence matters or other highly sensitive issues — would equally not be tolerated.
No censorship would take place beforehand, but it was made quite clear that on these issues the press was expected to censor itself, to know what ought not to be reported.
Thirdly, the Government took a near-Marxist view of arguments about the freedom of the press.
The idea that this was a necessary part of freedom of speech was rejected.
Freedom of the press was a powerful privilege that could actually be used against other freedoms which were the property of the people as a whole.
In the nature of things, only a tiny minority had the control of, or access to, the press and were thus able to exercise this freedom.
In Tanzania, the Government had control of most of the media and claimed to exercise this control on behalf of the workers and peasants in order to enhance their freedom rather than to restrict it.
The Government refused to accord the privately owned press the right to claim absolute freedom of expression, since this right could be used against the majority who were voiceless.
The proprietors of the privately owned press, however benevolent, were nevertheless wealthy and unrepresentative of the people as a whole.
The possibility that, in spite of this, an independent commercial press might act as the safeguard of people's rights against a capricious or dictatorial government was rejected out of hand.
The rhetorical question was asked: ‘How could a TANU government, a government elected by the people which drew its power from those people, act against the people's interests?’
The danger, from the Government's point of view, was that a well-entrenched, privately owned press would support the interests of those opposed to socialism and whose cause could be served by development along capitalist lines.
The Government needed control over the media, or to have that control in reserve, not only in order to prevent such support of minority interests but also to ensure that the vitally important class of entrepreneurs and middle-level professional executive people — whose loyalty was vital to the success of any government policy — should be won over to the cause or, at the very least, not be encouraged to oppose government policies.
The problem was that this class evidently preferred the ‘moderate’ tone of the Standard to the more intense political hectoring of the Nationalist and tended overwhelmingly to read the English language press.
Fourthly, although the Second Vice-President had outlined clearly why he felt the Government could, and even should, take over all newspapers, it  neither did so nor was, at this time, intending to do so.
In spite of what Mr Kawawa said about the inevitability of capitalists' misusing their press in a country like Tanzania, no plans were made at that time to take over the Standard .
While Mr Kawawa gave many reasons why they should take over the newspaper, he gave no reasons why they did not.
It was doubtless because the government was then concerned about possible foreign reaction to a takeover.
Sensitive to criticism from abroad, it was endeavouring to create a more favourable impression with investors, following what this group regarded as the upheavals of the Arusha Declaration.
Lastly, the Government was obviously concerned about the way the press and radio could, by their manner of reporting, either build up or damage the reputations of political figures.
Opinions may differ as to the extent of the media's influence in the field of politics and their role in the formation of public opinion, but it would be difficult to argue against what Mr Kawawa said on the subject of politicians and the media:
No doubt the Second Vice-President had in mind the days when the TANU paper the Nationalist used to ‘embellish and decorate’ the speeches of Kawawa's rival Oscar Kambona whilst doing less than justice to the speeches of other ministers.
There was an unspoken fear that political figures could use the press, even papers controlled by the party or government, to their own advantage or that editors and proprietors could promote certain political figures by creating a good ‘image’ of them in the press.
As a corollary to this, there was perhaps the suspicion that some of the opposition to the Bill came from politicians who wanted an alternative press in order to enhance their own political future.
Kawawa's intervention succeeded in rallying most backbenchers to supporting the measure, and the Bill was passed.
Ngurumo's editor commented that the new Bill did not really alter anything.
Newspapers tended to get into trouble with governments, something which had happened before independence and since.
There was a feeling in Parliament that the Bill would prevent the press from saying anything controversial — it would ‘gag the press’— but Ngurumo's feeling was that prevailing practices would continue whether the Bill was passed or not.
In other words, there was no need to fear for the freedom of speech in Tanzania: such freedom was guaranteed.
If people did not exercise their rights, that was no fault of the law:
The official attitude to the press reflected a lower level of concern about broadcasting.
During 1967 and 1968 no one knew how many radio sets there were in Tanzania.
Various statistical sources giving figures for the number of receivers show the country as having 120,000 sets.
The true figure was almost certainly four to five times as great, but both Government and RTD officials conceded that there might be as many as 160,000 to 200,000 sets.
None of them imagined the number was in fact as high as 500,000.
They expressed surprise at the figures I produced, and they were to be even more surprised in 1973 when a survey far more extensive than mine gave the number as 1,737,000.
Had it been realised just how large the audience had become and how fast it was growing, greater attention might have been paid to broadcasting during 1961 to 1968.
As it was, RTD received far less investment than it needed to improve reception.
Money was required not only for more powerful transmitters but also for the building of regional studio centres to make programmes for the entire country, so that RTD output would not be so Dar es Salaam-orientated.
Broadcasters were conscious of their obligation to serve the whole country not only by reaching people in all areas but also by playing local music, recording local views, experiences and so on.
RTD, in other words, wanted radio to be less centralized and to have a real two-way contact with its audience.
But the politicians and civil servants could not agree that further expenditure on the development of broadcasting should be given priority:
RTD succeeded almost in spite of itself.
Unlike the press, it engaged in little self-promotion, but commercial companies helped through their advertising of transistor radios.
In addition to local production by Philips at Arusha, low-cost sets were imported from Japan, Hong Kong, West Germany and the Netherlands.
During 1967 and 1968 a small, serviceable set with both medium and short wavebands could be obtained for as little as Sh.200/ —.
If the figures below from audience surveys in 1960, 1967 and 1973 are reliable, then the number of households with radio sets was growing by an average of more than 100,000 per year.
This figure would have been much smaller in the early 1960s and higher at the end of the period.
The growth of radio between 1950 and 1973 is shown opposite.
The role of the mass media in Tanzania, or any other country for that matter, is clearly defined in large measure by its content.
What image of Tanzania and the world did they present to their audience?
To what extent did the mass media follow interpretations of events, both national and international, which originated elsewhere?
The almost total dependence of the media on the western news agencies Reuters and AFP meant that the image Tanzania received of events in Africa and the rest of the world was largely determined by those organizations.
Did this affect the image Tanzanians were given of their own country?
How much foreign material was actually used in the press and on the radio, and did this clash with Tanzanian cultural and political realities?
What attention did the media pay to other countries which faced problems and constraints similar to those of Tanzania?
And what image did the media give Tanzanians of their country as a cultural entity?
I shall deal with this last question first, since I think that approaching the subject of content analysis from a cultural and qualitative perspective can be more informative than using quantitative methods which involve counting column inches and sitting with radio and stopwatch.
In his inaugural speech as president, Nyerere announced that he was setting up an entirely new ministry, that of National Culture and Youth.
It represented a conscious effort to offset colonial influences and to promote a national culture which would reflect the new nation.
This, said Nyerere, was very important to nation-building:
The president went on to ask how many had forgotten about African musical instruments and the kind of excitement which came from performing music and dance that was truly indigenous.
One feels that Nyerere was specifically addressing educated people like himself, who had come from different backgrounds, absorbed European culture and manners, discovered a common nationalist cause and gone through a political campaign successfully together, yet still knew relatively little about one another 's cultural traditions.
Tanzanians were brought up  with their own musical, dance and oral traditions but at school or college were taught the language, culture and even the history of the colonial power.
It was common, even after independence, for schools to be teaching more about the history and geography of the British Isles than about those of Tanzania or East Africa.
And it took longer for schools to begin to teach Tanzanian or African music and literature.
If the colonial culture was to go, there had to be something with which to replace it.
It was feared that an emphasis on individual tribal culture might increase or encourage separatism: was it possible to find common ground out of which would emerge a truly indigenous Tanzanian culture?
Along with many others, Nyerere believed that it was possible, but he emphasized that this should not involve the rejection of outside influences:
Demands were to be made for a complete ban on foreign music on the radio and the exclusion of particular styles of western dress, but these outbursts of cultural nationalism were felt to be an inevitable part of a cultural renaissance.
The task of establishing and  encouraging national cultural activities was pursued with some vigour by the new ministry.
The National Dancing Troupe was immediately established, and made a study of Tanzanian dance and dance mime throughout the country; it was soon performing regularly both at home and abroad.
Its members came from different parts of Tanzania and performed traditional dances from all the regions, as well as choreographing new works.
Thus it was a small but important beginning.
Nevertheless, it was radio which played the greatest role in the development of music.
RTD had built up a collection of Tanzanian regional music.
Although its potential was never fully realized, RTD was still the single most important source of cultural material (mainly in the form of music) from the different areas.
With the co-operation of music groups organized by such pan-tribal or national organizations as the TANU Youth League, the police and the National Service, RTD also promoted new music which was an amalgam of various traditions, both local and foreign.
However, the mounting of a recording safari in remote areas proved an expensive operation, and money was scarce, although the importance of this work was recognised.
Commercially recorded music proved to be more readily available.
When restrictions were placed on the amount of foreign music that could be played, more of the new urban music, which had been recorded commercially, was broadcast.
RTD's output remained heavily influenced by its geographical situation in Dar es Salaam.
The listener was given only a limited picture of life outside the capital and one which was seen through urban eyes.
This was perhaps inevitable, given the nature of the medium.
Radio demands particular technical skills, and a person required a minimum standard of  education before being accepted for training as a broadcaster — a standard that was progressively raised.
The urban bias of radio was thus increased: it was virtually impossible for people who had not become urbanized to some extent to be appointed as full-time radio broadcasters.
The extent to which educational skills are needed in broadcasting can nonetheless be exaggerated.
Some of the best broadcasters in Africa have had little in the way of schooling: there is a place in radio for good storytellers, musicians and other men and women with knowledge and wisdom gained from experience rather than from formal education.
But the civil service structure of broadcasting did not allow such people to be employed on a full-time basis, and when funds were short the fees paid to freelance contributors of this kind were often the first items to be cut.
Unfortunately, the educational background of many radio staff may well have been to blame for the overly formal tone of many programmes, which frequently caused them to sound stilted and unnatural.
Educational and factual programmes sounded dull and lifeless, when they might have inspired.
There was always a marked difference in impact between those programmes where people spoke freely in an impromptu, unscripted way and those where the same subject was dealt with in scripted form.
The former were usually lively and interesting; the latter, almost equally likely to be very dull indeed.
If radio is to contribute effectively to the national culture, its material needs to be presented in an attractive manner.
Should the message be unfamiliar and its manner of delivery unappealing or otherwise distant from the recipient, its relevance or value are unlikely to be accepted.
In the early days of radio the major part of its audience was to be found in the urban areas and among the better educated, and programmes tended to be created with this in mind.
Greater emphasis was placed on urban than on rural events, a practice which did not alter substantially, even though that audience became increasingly rural and uneducated.
The extent to which radio is able to cater for the tastes and interests of an urban, educated audience at the expense of a rural and less well-educated one is easily overlooked.
Two factors contributed to this bias.
The first lay in the fact that letters to RTD from educated people in urban areas far outnumbered those received from the less well-educated.
For obvious reasons, the person with minimal education who wrote to a radio station was an exception.
While radio can overcome the problem of illiteracy in reaching a mass audience in a country like Tanzania, a large part of that audience may be unable to ‘talk back’ to the radio because they cannot write.
One of the record request programmes on RTD was Hongera [‘Congratulations'].
During 1967 and 1968 it received some one hundred and fifty cards or letters every day.
The overwhelming majority of these came from Dar es Salaam and the few other urban centres around the country: a group which constituted only a minority of listeners.
Nevertheless it was this group that determined which records would be played on request programmes.
It was also from members of this group that comments on and criticism of radio programmes came.
The second reason for urban bias was the fact that the radio broadcasters themselves lived in the towns: the people who spoke to them and commented on their programmes were living in the same environment.
The  politicians and officials who expressed public criticism of their work or brought pressure to bear, for whatever reason, did so mostly from an urban standpoint.
All this, inevitably, showed in RTD's output.
The impact of all these divisions in Tanzania — urban-rural, tribal, educational and economic — was greatly reduced by the national language, Swahili.
Without Swahili, the history of nationalism in Tanzania might have been very different.
The use of a widely understood and increasingly popular language which was neither identified with any one tribal group nor with the colonial power was a great asset to the nationalists.
From the earliest days, TANU promoted the maximum use of the language in political activity.
This enabled the party to put across its message more efficiently and effectively than would otherwise have been the case, and helped compensate for the other serious communications difficulties within the country.
Nyerere has always used Swahili at his public meetings; he once declared that he had used interpreters on only two occasions.
Perhaps he assumed a little too readily that his audience understood what he had to say.
Nevertheless, he was probably better able to communicate directly with his people than were most other African leaders — more so, for example, than neighbouring nationalist leaders like Samora Machel in Mozambique, Milton Obote in Uganda or Kenneth Kaunda in Zambia.
Writing in 1957, Whiteley identified over a hundred language groups in mainland Tanzania, many of which were extremely small.
The thirty or so largest groups accounted for about seventy per cent of the total population in the 1948 census.
Yet the Bantu languages of East Africa, of which Swahili is one, are closely related and have a large core of common or similar words.
For these and other linguistic and cultural reasons it is relatively easy for the speaker of one Bantu language to learn another and develop a high level of competence in it.
This has contributed to the widespread adoption and acceptance of Swahili.
For the vast majority of Tanzanians it is a second language, being the mother tongue of relatively few.
In 1969 Whiteley estimated that not more than one million people in Tanzania and Kenya combined were mother-tongue speakers of the language.
However, he thought it was probably the second language of no fewer than ninety per cent of Tanzanians.
Swahili began to spread during the nineteenth century.
The language used by the ivory and slave traders as well as by European explorers like Burton, Speke, Stanley and Livingstone, it spread along the trade routes: inland from Bagamoyo, Kilwa and Mboamaji to Tabora and then south towards the gap between Takes Tanganyika and Malawi, west to the town of Ujiji on Lake Tanganyika, north-west to Karagwe and north to Lake Victoria.
By the time the Germans arrived, Swahili was well established as the language for all travellers, traders and intruders to use.
There was never much doubt about which language the colonial rulers would use in local administration.
By 1914, the Germans had found that they could conduct most of their correspondence with village headmen in Swahili, and the British also found this a great advantage.
Colonial officers were expected to learn Swahili; they could then be posted and reposted anywhere in the territory.
The use of one language simplified administration, and it also simplified communication between Africans, which became increasingly important.
As the use of Swahili grew, communication became easier on a territory-wide scale.
Furthermore, it made the emergence of a countrywide nationalist movement possible.
Not all the Christian missions felt the same about using Swahili.
The Universities Mission to Central Africa (UMCA) started using the language from the 1890s.
At their centres in Zanzibar, Tanga and elsewhere, they produced hymn books and other religious literature in Swahili and started the first Swahili newspaper in 1898.
The Lutheran Church, Benedictines and White Fathers also favoured the use of Swahili wherever possible, depending on where the mission was stationed; it met with a certain amount of resistance in the provinces around Lake Victoria and in the north.
Some missionaries in the Sukuma, Nyemwezi, Chagga and Haya language areas preferred to use these languages in evangelism and religious literature.
At some of the mission schools literacy was also taught in local languages.
However, resistance to Swahili did not last.
The Chagga of Kilimanjaro were perhaps the group most fiercely opposed to the increased use of Swahili, but when they elected their paramount chief in the early 1950s they were unable to agree on which of the Chagga dialects to adopt as their common language, and they, too, adopted Swahili.
It was a language with little or no tribal identity.
The challenge to Swahili came less from local African languages than from English.
For a long time after independence, English was the language of the educated élite, just as it had largely been that of the colonial administration.
TANU's campaign — and the adoption by Nyerere and his ministers of the Swahili language for most great state occasions — gave the language a status it had not previously enjoyed; but secondary education, the University College in Dar es Salaam, Parliament, the higher law courts and other important institutions still used English, which was not to be easily displaced.
However, between 1961 and the present day, the progress of Swahili in these fields has been steady.
It soon became the language of Parliament, then of the Cabinet and of most areas of the civil service; the law courts also began to use it.
The amount of English on the radio was reduced, and government documents, which had previously been printed almost entirely in English, began to appear in Swahili during the mid-1960s.
The Government promoted Swahili as a national language not only because it was useful in administration but also because it was seen as an instrument ‘for uniting the people of the nation's different tribes’.
Some attached an even greater importance to it:
But languages are not culturally neutral.
Swahili's cultural heritage was by no means the cultural heritage of all.
Mgonja and others have sometimes ignored the fact that Swahili was originally the language of the coastal people and not spoken in the country as a whole.
There were, and still are, many other regional cultures which are not Swahili but are nonetheless Tanzanian.
This is certainly a problem which mitigates against the widest acceptance of the language, though the number of people resisting its use today is probably very small, composed of the older and the less well educated.
My survey revealed that a few people in Sukuma-speaking areas still had difficulty in answering questions in Swahili; others who understood Swahili nonetheless asked to be interviewed in Sukuma.
Moreover, despite the widespread day-to-day use of Swahili in the areas visited, many still did not use the language in their own homes.
Yet its adoption as the language of primary education, and the increased mobility of people living in the country, means that the use of Swahili will spread.
Despite undoubted problems in certain regions its presence as a widely-spoken African language has contributed greatly to furthering national communication in Tanzania.
Tanzania is one of the very few countries in Africa that broadcasts in only one African language plus that of the former colonial power.
Swahili has been the dominant language since broadcasting began, but the widespread acceptance of it as the national language did not mean that no controversy was involved.
Before independence, a daily half-hour in Asian languages had been introduced in 1959 to cater for the territory's substantial Asian minority.
An audience survey showed that Asians were keen listeners to radio: in 1960, out of approximately twenty-one thousand Asian households nearly eighteen thousand (86%) had radio sets.
Yet it was known that, although most Asians knew Swahili, English or both, there were still some who spoke only one of the languages of the Indian subcontinent.
Programmes were therefore introduced in Gujerati and Hindustani.
The Tanganyika Broadcasting Corporation defended its decision by saying that, despite the fact that many Asians could speak English and Swahili, ‘the language of childhood and of the home is Asian’.
But of course the very same argument could have been used in favour of broadcasting in any of over a and of childhood for only a minority of Tanzanians.
A Masai MP, Chief Edward Mbarnoti, used this argument to promote the use of his people's language.
The use of Masai in broadcasts should be introduced for a time but should not, he said, become ‘a permanent privilege’.
His plea was nevertheless unsuccessful.
Most politicians were opposed to the idea of any special treatment for language groups, and pressure was put on the TBC to drop Asian language and even English broadcasts.
Mr Sijaona, an influential and outspoken backbencher who later became a minister, said this in 1961, and it was a theme taken up by others on a number of occasions:
In 1962, TBC policy changed.
Its board had been largely Africanized, and it adopted the view expressed by Mr Sijaona.
Further attempts were made by Asian leaders to have Asian languages reintroduced, but these were resisted.
The same argument was later employed against the use of English on the radio.
English language broadcasts remained but were made part of the country's external radio services.
The separate English Service was ended in 1970 and incorporated into the External Service, which could be heard both inside and outside the country.
The logic of this move was that, as Tanzanians understood and
spoke Swahili, English language broadcasting was for non-Tanzanians.
The local transmissions of the External Service were for the many expatriates working in the country who understood little or no Swahili.
Nigeria
The history of the mass media is longer and more complex along the west coast of Africa.
The press in English-speaking West Africa grew up in a nationalist tradition: newspapers were the mouthpieces of emerging, campaigning, nationalist politicians.
One writer has made the observation: ‘To study either nationalism or the press in British West Africa is to study the other.’
This is very true of contemporary civilian politics in Nigeria, where the mass media occupy a central place in the new democracy.
So far in our case studies we have examined only those media in one-party systems; the contrast between these and a multi-party political situation is immediate and obvious.
Just as the press gave African nationalism its primary means of dissemination and propaganda, so today, along with radio and television, it gives politicians their prime means of reaching national audiences and of attempting to secure a national following.
Despite the entry for a time of media conglomerates such as the Mirror Group and Thomsons into the West African press, I think it is still fair to say that the primary motivation for producing a newspaper in Nigeria is political rather than commercial.
As we shall see, Nigerian newspapers are able to command quite large circulations, but high overheads and stiff competition for limited advertising support mean that few would survive on commercial grounds alone.
During 1980–81 Nigerian spending on development projects was at the rate of about $30 million a day.
A significant proportion of this expenditure found its way in to the mass media field.
In these circumstances any analysis of the Nigerian news media can quickly become outdated; however, this does not mean, that an account of trends to date will not guide us towards a better understanding of present practices.
Nigeria has become the world's fifth largest oil exporter.
It is unusual among oil producers both in being a democracy and in having a very large population on which to spend its wealth.
In October 1979, Nigeria's hundred million people returned to democratically elected civilian rule after thirteen years of military government.
The country is a federation of  nineteen states, and in 1979 there were five separate national political parties each with a degree of power, effectively controlling at least two states.
Each party also has members in the Federal National Assembly.
The leading party, the National party of Nigeria (NPN), forms the Federal Government but does not have a majority in either the Senate or the House of Representatives.
President Shehu Shagari, who was then the NPN presidential candidate, did not win a majority of the popular vote.
There is a considerable amount of heated dispute in Nigerian politics.
Much of this is conducted through the news media, where the political atmosphere is reflected quite clearly.
In 1980–81 the major media were the fifteen daily papers, twelve or so political weeklies, twenty-five radio stations and twenty television stations.
A Nigerian politician who has no access to, or is not reported by, any news medium is at a grave disadvantage.
The mass media report politics; they are also, in every sense, political institutions of central importance to the functioning of Nigerian democracy.
The Federal Radio Corporation (FRCN), established after the dissolution of the old Nigerian Broadcasting Corporation, is a statutory corporation whose members are appointed by the Federal Government in Lagos.
Since the return to civilian rule the corporation has claimed to adopt an attitude of impartiality towards the five parties.
Leaders and officials of parties other than the NPN nevertheless complain that it does not give them fair treatment.
Cases of actual bias against the four parties are difficult to find, except in the special case of one faction of the people's Redemption party (PRP), which I shall come to shortly.
What happens, I believe, is that a Federal institution like the FRCN tends to report Federal Government news more often and thus leans towards support for the NPN's view of things.
This is not to suggest that Radio Nigeria, as the FRCN now describes itself, either ignores or is openly or blatantly unfair to the other parties.
To take just one example, FRCN Kaduna's programmes like Democracy in Action and Alkawari Kayane , give coverage of political affairs from all states and from the point of view of all parties.
In its treatment of a split in 1980–81 within the people's Redemption party (PRP), Radio Nigeria decided to recognize Aminu Kano's leadership rather than that of the rival faction.
It did so after the Federal Electoral Commission (FEDECO) decision that the officially recognised PRP was that led by Aminu Kano.
In FRCN's view, therefore, the two state governors who had been expelled from the PRP led by Aminu Kano in fact belonged to no party at all, and their claim to be in the official PRP had no validity.
FRCN Kaduna took this argument a step further and in 1981 stopped reporting the activities of the two expelled governors or their supporters except when these were strictly official and non-political.
Nigerian Television (NTV), also federally organized and centred, took the same view.
An order to this effect came from the president's office.
However, this is not a simple case of total censorship or heavy government control.
The Federal Government of Nigeria cannot stifle all news it does not like.
The Nigerian constitution guarantees freedom of expression, 'including the freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart ideas and information without interference'.
It also defends the right for anyone ‘to  own, establish and operate any medium for the dissemination of information, ideas and opinions’.
The only exception to this is that no one other than a state government or the Federal Government may operate a television or radio station without the approval of the president.
Some of the drafters of the constitution wanted specific guarantees of press freedom, but it was eventually decided that the press should enjoy the same freedom of any Nigerian citizen, there being no need for special treatment.
Constitutionally, Nigeria's press is as free as any.
Nonetheless, constitutions may of course guarantee nothing if governments are determined to defy them and if there is no recourse to an independent judiciary able to act against unconstitutional practices.
With Nigeria, after only just over two years of the new system, it is still too early to be sure, but in general governments at federal and state level appear to be respecting the guarantees of freedom of expression.
The freedom and diversity of the media in Nigeria taken as a whole has been guaranteed in a rather unexpected way.
Newspapers, radio and television are mostly government owned, but there are no fewer than twenty governments!
These governments are formed from different parties, each with different views on national and local issues, so that while each government operates a form of censorship over the media it controls, such censorship does not necessarily block the free flow of information.
What one newspaper will not print another paper may be very happy to publish; what one state radio may silence may well be carried by another.
A politician denied access to one television studio might find another welcoming him very readily.
And the audience of a state radio station is not entirely limited to that state.
Each of the nineteen states has its own radio station.
These stations are run by boards appointed by the state governments so that they tend to act as mouthpieces of the respective state governments.
The extent to which they report the activities and reflect the views of other parties and political opponents varies.
In certain states, broadcasters have been disciplined for reporting political opposition.
But what is censored in this way in one state has often either found its way into the radio output of another or been reported by a newspaper.
In addition to these nineteen separate state radio stations, there is the FRCN, with stations in Lagos, Kaduna, Ibadan, Enugu, Owerri and at the new federal capital now being built at Abuja.
The restructuring of broadcasting in Nigeria began at the end of 1978.
The idea was to leave FRCN with the responsibility for national and international broadcasting: the Nigerian government would speak with one voice to its people and to the outside world.
(previously the independence of the Broadcasting Company of Northern Nigeria, BCNN, at Kaduna and its use of powerful short wave had meant that Nigeria had two voices in international broadcasting.)
Henceforth the states would have responsibility for local or regional broadcasting and were to be autonomous.
No state station was intended to operate short wave (SW), but in those states where existing radio stations already used it, they were allowed to continue doing so.
Other states now plan, despite federal disapproval, to introduce SW transmission and so to broadcast longer distances.
Meanwhile, the FRCN  has found itself without an outlet in most state capitals.
In many of these the state radio is hostile to the Federal Government; the latter has therefore decided to establish FRCN radio stations in every state capital.
After the return to civilian rule, the newly formed state radio corporations, which had been set up to be independent of Federal Government authority, were immediately subjected to local political control.
Some general managers of state radio stations are former NBC men or women accustomed to thinking in a national as well as a local context.
Their concerns now became far more parochial and ethnic, and party considerations undoubtedly began to play a greater part.
The new system definitely means a reduction in employee mobility: appointments and promotions in state stations are frequently politically and ethnically motivated, and the chances of success for local people are greater than for those from other states.
This was less often the case under the NBC.
The state governments, of whatever party, attach great importance to the expansion of their own mass media facilities.
A number of state stations have been opening second channels, some in stereo, yet many state governments are not content merely to expand radio.
New television stations and newspapers are also being established: the NTV monopoly has already been broken.
Lagos State, controlled by the Unity party of Nigeria (UPN), now has its own television station on the air, but in early 1981 it was still not possible to watch this new state television service in central Lagos.
Due to a dispute over wavelengths, Lagos State's television was effectively jammed by NTV.
Anger against NTV is said to have been severe, with stories of NTV staff being attacked in public.
In February 1981 the Federal Government decided that there was insufficient room on the VHF television band; the new state television services would therefore have to use the UHF band.
At that time few television sets in Nigeria had the facility to receive UHF, and some state government spokesmen have accused the Federal authorities of deliberately making things difficult for any new state television station.
Until the commencement of the Lagos state television, NTV had a monopoly.
Local radio stations in the state capitals were handed over to these states in 1978, but the same policy did not apply to television.
The NTV, with its headquarters in Lagos, had television stations in all nineteen state capitals which link up at certain times — especially for the main evening news bulletin — and have federally appointed management.
Governors of states whose ruling political parties are in opposition to the Federal Government have announced plans to start their own channels.
In addition to Lagos at least ten other states have well-advanced plans for their own television stations.
In Ondo, Kano and plateau States new television establishments already exist, staff have been recruited, contracts with equipment suppliers have been signed and people have been sent abroad for training.
Similar plans have been set in motion in Bendel, Gongola, Oyo and elsewhere.
In Jos, capital of plateau State, the NTV station is still relatively new.
The first General Manager there, Dr Girgis Salama from Egypt, has been asked by Governor Solomon Lar to set up plateau State Television in direct competition with the television station Salama himself had launched.
By  early 1981 Dr Salama had already taken to the new station over half the NTV Jos staff, chiefly men and women he had originally recruited.
The state allocated twelve million naira to the venture in the 1981 budget.
The expenditure of public money on this, yet another television service, has been criticized in some quarters, but the Governor told me his decision was based on the fact, as he saw it, of NTV's pro-Federal bias.
In his view the NTV paid insufficient attention to what the plateau State Government was doing.
When established, plateau State Television will reach few people.
Initially, the transmitters will serve only Jos, and others will later be built elsewhere; but most people do not have mains electricity.
The use of UHF rather than VHF will further restrict the coverage possible.
Television viewing will continue to be restricted throughout Nigeria by the high cost of sets, the difficulty of obtaining good, inexpensive maintenance, the underdevelopment of mains electricity supplies (power failures are frequent occurrences), and the insufficient number of transmitters.
What of the media that are federally owned, of which the most important are the FRCN and NTV? politicians from those four parties not in the Federal Government claim that federal radio and television are ordered either to ignore or play down news favourable to them.
At a meeting of some state governors from these parties in March 1981, an outspoken communiqué was issued:
No evidence was produced to support this statement.
The nine state governors of the Unity party of Nigeria (UPN), the Great Nigeria people's party (GNPP) and the people's Redemption party (PRP) have nonetheless complained more vigorously about Federal policy towards the mass media than about almost anything else.
They have complained, above all, that they are not adequately reported by the federally owned media during or after the monthly meetings which they have held regularly since coming to power in October 1979.
There do seem to be some grounds for their complaint.
In February 1981, the nine governors were joined by three governors of states where the Nigeria people's party (NPP) is in power.
They issued a statement criticizing the Federal Government's proposals on the allocation of revenue to the various constituent parts of the federation, including the  states.
The statement, issued jointly by thirteen out of nineteen governors in the federation, was a newsworthy event by any standards, and yet it was either played down or ignored by the FRCN and NTV.
The view of these two organizations, as far as I have been able to discover, runs something like this.
The ‘opposition’ governors imagine themselves to be more important than they really are; they have state, not federal, responsibilities; their comments on federal matters should therefore not be regarded as of primary importance; and, if they were reported fully at all times, this would be giving them a greater prominence in national affairs than they deserve.
This argument is not without some validity.
Nigeria's constitution is still very new, and no one yet knows how it really works.
Politicians and others are trying to discover the limits of power.
The news media can, by the way they report and by the significance they attach to personalities, events and the statements of individuals, colour the attitudes of the public and in turn influence the way in which the constitution is interpreted and the political system works.
The problem for the media is that they find it very difficult to secure agreement across the political spectrum as to what would be accepted as impartially presented news.
Despite evidence of external controls, both the NTV and the FRCN are aware of the need to find a position of impartiality that can be perceived as such by political opponents.
They are aware that to be labelled as the mouthpiece of the Federal Government alone, or worse still, as that of the ruling party, the NPN, would greatly damage their credibility.
It would be simply untrue to charge either of them with strict censorship of controversy and opposition: they both regularly report controversy, including the most outspoken criticism of the Federal Government and its policies.
The broadcasting of discussions and debates between politicians of widely different positions takes place regularly and, when interviewed, critics of the Federal Government appear to be given the same kind of deferential treatment as Federal spokesmen.
For example, Dr Yusuf Bala Usman, political secretary to the then Governor of Kaduna State, was interviewed on NTV Kaduna in February 1981 and asked for his views on Libyan policies in Chad.
Bala was outspokenly critical of Nigerian foreign policy which, he said, helped French ‘imperialism’ and French-supported ‘puppet regimes’in West Africa.
The tone of the interviewer was respectful, as if Bala Usman were an unquestioned authority on all matters concerning international relations.
Though neither NTV nor FRCN can be regarded as unqualified spokesmen for the Federal Government, the state radios are certainly partisan spokesmen for their respective state governments and are seen as such by their political opponents.
Thus in July 1981 a violent demonstration took place in Kano against a particular policy of the Governor.
A mob attacked Kano government offices and burnt down the state radio station.
The radio was referred to by Governor Rimi's opponents as ‘Radio Rimi’.
The attitudes of governors to the mass media vary, but most are reported to bring pressure to bear on the press, radio and television.
In those states whose governments have refused to have anything to do with the presidential liaison officers appointed by the president to set up offices in  the nineteen state capitals, radio station staff have been likewise forbidden to make contact.
Censorship and control are nevertheless often made to look absurd.
In the NPN-controlled Niger State in January 1981, a heated political controversy arose between the governor and the assembly.
At first the state radio station did not include the matter in its regular news programmes; nonetheless, the story was being broadcast by the state radio.
FRCN Kaduna's Hausa current affairs programme Alkawari Kayane had reports directly from its own correspondent in Minna which were carried in the FRCN programme being relayed there by Radio Niger.
The station had two alternatives: either to drop a popular, well-produced current affairs programme that many could pick up direct from Kaduna anyway, or to report the story and reflect it in their own news bulletins.
They chose the latter course of action.
Some state governments also spend large sums of money on the press.
In 1981 Nigeria had fifteen daily newspapers, almost all of them highly partisan.
A few were in the hands of private companies, but the majority were owned either by the Federal or state governments.
State governments were planning to start new daily newspapers in Kano, Minna and Maiduguri.
Yet there is insufficient advertising to support fifteen daily newspapers: more papers are chasing less advertising, in competition with both radio and television.
State newspapers are therefore funded out of public money, and there have been attempts to follow the example of the Daily Times , funded from the profits made out of various commercial activities.
In 1980 and 1981 plateau State's Nigerian Standard was losing money heavily.
Investments were made in a multi-storey office block in Jos in the hope that its rents would help pay for the newspaper, but the building was still largely empty six months after completion.
Niger State hopes to fund its projected daily paper with revenue from the printing of exercise books and the like.
While it is difficult to give definitive answers to questions about control, the prevailing pattern does seem to be loose and informal: there seem to be few cases of actual censorship.
Most media professionals appear to know what is expected of them in their various organisations, each of which has different political backers, and the media product tends to be created accordingly.
Nigeria has a pluralist mass media system.
It is nevertheless a fractured kind of pluralism which reflects the political situation and in turn helps, to a large extent, to define and create the situation it reports.
A great deal of attention is being paid to the media there.
It is surely significant that when the government of newly independent Zimbabwe was seeking finance to buy out South African interests in the country's newspapers and establishing a new framework within which its press, television and radio could operate, it went to Nigeria both for finance and for advice.
Nigeria's mass media are a vital part of the new democracy: everyone wants to be heard, each party wants a platform and each government wants a mouthpiece.
At present the NPN and the Federal Government have access to, or a strong influence in, national radio and television networks and six daily newspapers.
The seven NPN-ruled states each have their own radio station.
The UPN has one state television station (a further four are planned), five state radios and three  daily papers.
The NPP is building television in its own states, while it has three state radios and three daily newspapers.
The GNPP and PRP possess the state radios in the two states they each control, and the PRP government in Kano State has started newspapers there.
This is, of course, a crude over-simplification: in each case, there is a difference between the relationships.
The Nigerian Standard , for example, can be described as the mouthpiece of the plateau State Government and even of the plateau State NPP, but not the NPP nationally.
Kano State Radio is the mouthpiece of the government of Governor Abubakar Rimi, which is a very different thing from being a PRP radio station; indeed, the PRP, led by the late Aminu Kano, had the doubtful distinction of being without any mass media outlet at all during most of the period between the 1979 and 1983 elections.
In the two years following the return to civilian rule the activity of a considerable number of the news media became increasingly partisan.
When President Shagari went on a state visit to Britain in March 1981, the large press corps accompanying him included no representative of any ‘opposition’ newspaper or broadcasting organisation.
The only news medium represented which was neither federally run nor NPN-supporting was the Lagos newspaper the Punch .
This paper, whose own political position is uncertain, is perhaps one of the freest spirits in Nigeria's mass media constellation.
On the day after President Shagari's arrival in Britain, one UpN state newspaper reported nothing of the visit, commenting instead in an editorial that he should not have left the country at a time when the doctors were on strike: it had been ‘unpatriotic’ for him to do so.
Most radio stations in non-NPN states had already stopped taking the national news from FRCN in Lagos, and so it is probable that they too ignored the event.
Concerned about its lack of a voice in local radio, the Federal Government has now decided to reverse the policy of the previous military regime which broke up the NBC in 1978.
State governments will continue to have their own radio stations — that much is guaranteed by the constitution — but in 1981 the FRCN was authorized to draw up plans for the setting up of its own stations in every state.
The reflection of political partisanship in the establishment of broadcasting stations could, if current trends continue, lead to a near-doubling of the present number of radio and television stations so that each state capital will have two of each: one which is part of the federal system and the other belonging to the state broadcasting service.
The mass media of Nigeria have political backers and are therefore given a political role which emphasizes the expression of opinion and places far less importance on the reporting of facts.
In December 1980, there was a serious outbreak of rioting by religious fanatics in the northern city of Kano.
The uprising was put down by the action of the police and the army, and an unknown number of people were killed, among them Muhammadu Marwa Maitatsine, leader of the fanatical sect which was at the centre of the trouble.
At the tribunal of enquiry set up later, the police gave evidence that he had died of gunshot wounds and been found buried in a shallow grave.
However, shortly afterwards, curio-sellers in Kano were seen to be selling photographs of the man, his wives and followers, and of some of the  incidents that had taken place in December.
One picture showed Maitatsine in police custody, apparently alive.
This was later reported by the BBC and produced the following response in the New Nigerian , a Federal Government-owned newspaper published in Kaduna:
Quite apart from the misreporting here, and the extraordinary exaggeration — the tribunal cost nowhere near three billion naira — the piece is notable for its complete lack of concern for the facts.
Instead, what matters is to answer the question: 'In whose interests are ‘facts'’ reported or disputed?’
There has been another, more recent, example of this.
In March 1981 it was reported from Nigeria that troops from the neighbouring Republic of Benin had occupied villages in Sokoto State.
A correspondent of the Federal Government's News Agency of Nigeria (NAN) reported that the Benin flag had been seen flying at places within Nigeria and beyond the recognised border.
It was also reported that the Governor of Sokoto had decided to take up the issue with the federal authorities in Lagos.
Then in April, President Kerekou of Benin visited Lagos.
After his talks with President Shagari, the entire story was denied by both sides and attributed to ‘enemies’ of both countries.
The Nigerian Standard , owned by the plateau State Government, took up this theme in an editorial which described the reports as the ‘handwork of some adventurers’ and claimed that certain western nations were envious of the stability of African states and the cordial relations they enjoyed with one another.
The paper urged its readers to be on their guard.
It omitted to point out that the story had come entirely from Nigerian, and mainly official, sources.
There is a shortage of determined, energetic and independent-minded newsmen and women.
Few journalists ever cover stories that require patience, time and money.
Nigerian newspapers, radio and television stations compete for stories.
As a result, stories pass them by — sometimes even those right under their noses.
A spirit of enquiry is lacking: no one, save a few politicians, seems to ask questions.
Journalists rarely investigate, tending to report only the words and actions of others.
This is not entirely the result of political control, since the privately owned press shows no greater inclination towards investigative journalism.
In Nigeria, freedom of the mass media seems to be valued mainly as the freedom to criticize rather than to discover something worth reporting.
It may be that the task of thorough investigative reporting is really too costly and difficult.
Facts and figures which are relatively easy to obtain in other (including many African) countries are extraordinarily hard to get hold of in Nigeria.
The telephone service is still quite inadequate.
Postal services between urban centres are  slow and unreliable; reference works on that country, when obtainable, are full of inaccuracies.
Generally, the only way to find something out is to go and see the individual concerned; however, appointments cannot be made when the phone refuses to work.
One goes in person to see the relevant official who may be able to answer a question, only to find he is ‘not on seat’— perhaps he, too, is trying to find someone!
As a result journalists in Nigeria either depend on press releases, speeches, statements and hand-outs or go on hearsay, rumour and stories fed to them by politicians.
Such material is generally impossible to check, and the only way to get a response may be to print or broadcast.
The media regularly feed off each other 's stories: a practice which may be defensible where the original story is an accurate one but which can otherwise lead to the dissemination of a falsehood.
In most liberal democratic countries there is some measure of agreement in the news media on political facts.
News media which claim to be non-partisan attempt to discover the ‘middle ground’ and to maintain a balance between the different sides in political arguments.
Such middle ground is as yet quite undefined in Nigeria, extremes being apparent on all sides.
This fractured pluralism, as I have described it, contains few points of common agreement.
Consequently, the man in the Kaduna street who watches an NTV report, hears the same story over the state radio and then reads about it in three or four daily papers receives several interpretations of the same event which are very different from one another— so much so that they may appear to be reports of separate events.
The interesting question for the future is: whose definition or interpretation of political reality is likely to win?
On that hinges much of Nigeria's political future.
The rival politicians know this, which is why they are paying so much attention to the news media.