

The dawn was breaking as the cars rolled off the ferry at North Wall; there was a sullen, red-streaked sky, with banks of threatening clouds building up on the horizon.
After the stale fug in the tiny cabin, she gulped down the clean sea air, the car window wide open.
It was a hired car.
If they were watching for her, they wouldn't expect her to travel on the night boat from Liverpool, with a rough sea battering at the B & I ship, while the drunks and the seasick threw up in the smelly lounges.
Even so, she had hidden herself in the claustrophobic cabin, afraid she might be recognized.
She was difficult to disguise, being tall and strikingly blonde with a face that had appeared too often in newspapers and smart magazines.
The charming wife of the youngest member of the Cabinet.
Articles about her family life, the handsome Georgian house in Gloucestershire,Homes and Gardens , colour supplement,Vogue profile material.
All the pre-packaged nonsense of a plastic person, she said once, but that only made her husband angry.
‘If you hate it all so much, why don't you go back to the bogs?’ was his retort.
The bogs; that was how he dismissed Ireland.
He'd said it once too often, and this time she'd taken him at his word.
Slowly the line of cars inched towards the Customs sheds.
She drove into the green section.
She had nothing to declare.
She was waved on by a sharp-eyed young officer, who boasted he could smell a smuggler from fifty yards away.
She hadn't realized until she was bumping along the road away from the dock that she'd been shaking like an aspen leaf.
There had been no time for a cup of coffee and she'd eaten nothing the night before, going straight to her cabin.
She felt weak and her head ached.
No cigarettes  either: early-open cafés tempted her going through Dublin, but she resisted.
The Irish are the most inquisitive race in the world.
Every head would turn if a woman walked into one of those male preserves.
She couldn't risk that.
The roads were empty in the grey light, and she jumped traffic lights, making smart time.
As she turned on to the dual carriageway that ended only a few miles beyond Naas, the rain spat against the windscreen.
She fumbled, looking for the windscreen wipers in the unfamiliar car.
The little arms flashed back and forth against the glass, fighting the lashing water.
‘That's Our Lady weeping for your sins, Miss Claire,’ their cook used to say when the heavens opened.
So many tears, she thought, and so many sins to be washed away.
And so much blood.
Centuries of blood-letting; at times the rivers of Ireland ran tainted water that the cattle wouldn't drink.
It was so dark she switched on her car lights.
‘God,’ her husband said, whenever she'd brought him home before her father died, ‘what a bloody awful climate…’
He never noticed the brilliant sunny days, hot as the Mediterranean, when the sky was vivid blue, and the air as sweet as wine.
She saw the signpost, white on green, pointing to the turn off, opposite Kill.
How many times she had felt a lift of excitement when she saw that sign and knew that Riverstown was only ten minutes away.
Coming back from school in England, being met at the airport, hoping to find Francis the other side of the door into the main building.
Running to hug him without being in the least self-conscious.
He was her brother, and she loved him best in the world after her own parents.
And next came the wonderful, handsome, shabby old house where they had grown up together.
Less than a mile now, down the twisty road past Straffan.
The storm had spent itself, and a thin sun was showing through.
She stopped the whirring wipers, wound the window down and smelt greedily the scent of grass and overgrown hedgerows that nobody bothered to trim.
There at the end of the road was the turning to their gates.
There was a signpost saying ‘Clane’, and its other arm said ‘Naas’ in faded lettering.
The local children loved to turn them round.
Nothing had changed in the last three years.
The visitor would still travel miles in the wrong direction.
From the gates ahead, she had left for her wedding in the big Church of Ireland church in Naas.
Miss Claire Arbuthnot, shrouded in her English mother's family lace, with pearls shining like drops of new milk round her neck.
Claire had heard the Irish maids talking in the kitchen, ‘Pearls are tears…
God love her, she shouldn't be wearin' those on her weddin' day…’
Her half-brother had said, ‘Why do you have to wear his bloody family jewellery…’
‘Because it's my wedding present and I'm not a superstitious idiot like you.’
And then, because she couldn't bear to quarrel with him the night before she left for a new life, she said, ‘I'm wearing your mother's brooch, Fran.
It's my something blue.’
He'd looked ashamed then, and mumbled about being sorry.
On the morning she saw him standing in the body of the church, dark as a gypsy in his morning suit.
The little brooch with its sapphire heart was pinned to the silk bow of her dress.
She gave him a special smile as she passed by on their father's arm.
But the girls' whispering had been right.
She still had the pearls, but there had been many tears since she first wore them.
She didn't turn into the gates, although they were open.
Her mother always got up early and exercised her dogs before breakfast.
Claire drove past, bearing left down a small side road, following the curve of the grey stone wall that surrounded Riverstown.
Billy's cottage was set back off the road, behind a neat little hedge.
He had kept lurchers when they were children, and used to take Francis lamping for rabbits.
She had been furious, that he wouldn't take her too.
It wasn't fit for a young girl, he'd explained in his thick brogue, and her half-brother had grinned and mocked  her behind his back.
The dogs' descendants were still with him, though rheumatism made it difficult for him to go scrambling over the fields at night with the powerful torch to blind the rabbits.
They began to bark as she walked the few yards to his front door.
There was no bell.
She knocked.
She saw a lift in the lace curtain and wondered whether Billy had his woman with him.
Everyone knew about Billy's woman, but he kept her hidden and it was supposed she must be married.
The door opened and he stood there, staring at her, a squat little old man in shirt-sleeves and braces, a cap set on his head.
He was never seen without it, except at Mass.
He hated showing his bald head.
For a moment he stared, and then his face broke up into a huge smile.
‘Jaysus, it's yerself!
Will ye come in?’
Sitting in his kitchen, with a cup of tea ant a begged cigarette, she didn't try to pretend when he said, ‘What's wrong wit' ye, Claire?’
He'd been there to pick her up when she fell off her first pony; he'd taught her to fish and to know about dogs, and whatever mischief she and Francis got up to, he never told a tale.
He was, as her mother had said for twenty years, the laziest codder God ever put breath into, but Claire loved him, and he loved her as if she were his own.
She looked him in the eye, and saw him turn and blink.
There was tinker blood in him, so her father said.
Tinkers always shifted away if you held their gaze.
‘I've come to help Frankie,’ she said.
Fear shuttered his face.
Now he wouldn't look near her.
‘Sure there's no helping him,’ he muttered.
He went to the stove and lifted the lid off the teapot to distract himself.
‘Pay no thought to him,’ he muttered.
‘Not God himself could do anything for him.’
‘Billy,’ she said quietly, ‘he's my brother.’
‘Only the half of him,’ the old man said.
He poured more tea into her cup, fumbled with the bottle of milk and dropped the tin-foil top.
‘It's the other half that's been the death of him.’
She exclaimed in anguish, and he couldn't keep his  head turned from her.
‘Dead!
You mean they've found him?’
‘No, no, no…not yet so, but they're lookin'.
He's no time left at all.
Have you been up to the house yet?’
‘No, and you're not going to tell Mother I'm here.’
‘And how would I, seein' she's away?’
Claire said, ‘Where's she gone?’
He frowned, sucking at his lower lip.
‘Off to stay wit' auld missus Keys down in Cork.
You're to bolt and bar the house up, she says to me.
He'll not hide himself at Riverstown.’
He slid a sly look at Claire when he said that.
He had always hated Mrs Arbuthnot.
He rubbed his stubby nose.
‘I padlocked them gates after herself drove away,’ he muttered.
Claire said, ‘They were open, that's why I thought she was at home.’
‘I'd better go up and take a look,’ he mumbled again, but he didn't move.
After a long pause, Claire said, ‘Would it be the Gardai who opened them…?’
Knowing that the Irish police would have come to Billy for the key.
He was already frightened, and the question irritated him.
‘Jaysus, if it's the others in there, waitin' for him…’
Claire touched his arm.
He was old and she could see the empty teacup was trembling in his hand.
‘It's not them,’ she said.
‘They'd know Frankie wouldn't come home.
It could be the Special Branch waiting for me.’
He let out a deep breath.
‘You?
Oh, Mother o' God, what have ye to do wit' any of this?’
‘I told you, I've come to try and find him,’ she answered.
‘I didn't tell anyone, not my husband, no one.
I just got on the ferry.
But my husband will guess.
He'll guess I've come back and why.
He'll tell the authorities in Dublin.’
‘I never liked that fella,’ Billy snorted.
‘You'd no business marryin' a fella like that.’
‘I don't like him much either,’ Claire admitted.
She  managed to smile at him.
‘You're going to help me, Billy, aren't you?’
He shook his head vigorously.
The cap stayed glued on.
‘No.
Ye'll get divil an' all help from me, gettin' yerself into trouble.
Go home to England and yer husband, like him or not, and yer children.
What about them?’
She felt very tired suddenly, and angry with him for trying to find a weak spot.
‘You don't have to help me,’ she said.
‘I'll manage on my own.’
He muttered a curse; he knew Gaelic, and spoke it among his own.
He had always pretended to his employer that he didn't.
‘Ye'll stay where ye are.’
He heaved himself up from the kitchen chair and reached for his coat behind the door.
‘I'll take the dogs for a walk up by the river and see what's to be seen.
If the Gardai's up there, I'll talk to them, so.
I'm not to know about the gates…
There's bread and a bite of ham in the larder.
I'll not be long.’
Claire watched him through the window, lifting the lace curtain as he had done.
His steps were slow, moving to the kennels where the lurchers lived, fastening them to their leads, shouting at them as they leapt up at him in excitement.
He was an old man, and frightened of the death squad of his countrymen, yet allegiance to them was in his blood.
A deeper allegiance than his love for the children of the Anglo-Irish landlord he had worked for since he was a homeless lad knocking at the kitchen door to ask for a cup of tea and an odd job.
Why should Billy put himself at risk for the sake of his hereditary enemies, whether he'd helped to bring them up or not?
And she remembered then the old adage tossed around the dinner table by her parents' friends, when the drink had loosened their tongues, and things were said that stuck in the mind like grit in the eye.
‘The trouble is, you just can't trust them.
All smiles to your face, and the minute your back's turned, they'll rob you blind.
Or walk out and let you down at the last minute.’
It was servant talk, of course.
But the taint was  there, right throughout the race of native Irish.
You can't trust them.
And you never intermarried.
It wasn't just class, as Francis used to say when he raged against the system.
It was race, and there would never be peace while that discrimination lasted.
Claire turned away from the window.
She sat down in the one comfortable chair; it had come from their housekeeper's room, and had found its way to Billy's kitchen, like the strip of Turkey carpet with the hole in the middle.
The turf stove was alight, and she felt drowsy in the warmth.
When they were on holiday from school, she and Francis used to came to Billy's cottage and sit in the kitchen, drinking tea.
He taught her brother how to roll a cigarette, and she remembered him doubling up with delighted laughter as the boy coughed and spluttered on his first smoke.
‘You'll help me, won't you, Billy?’
The stout refusal, and then the shambling figure going up the long path beside the river, up to the house.
He wouldn't find her brother Francis there.
Nor would the hard-eyed men from Dublin, if her husband had alerted them.
Nor, thank God, the merciless executioners of the IRA.
He was being hunted; she was the only person in the world who knew where he would go to hide.
Billy Gorman trudged up the long path to the kitchen garden and the back of the house.
On his way he passed the main drive, and he could see that at the end of it the gates were open.
He cursed under his breath, shaking his head at his own folly in coming up to the house at all…
But he couldn't turn back now.
Whoever was inside could have seen him from the windows.
He took a cheap cigarette out of his jacket pocket, paused and lit it with a match in his cupped hand.
It wouldn't be them.
It wasn't their way to come in the open.
They struck in darkness: the kicked-in door, the burst of gunfire, the hooded killers vanishing like demons into the night.
But  not always, he remembered.
They killed the poor idiot from Sallins in broad daylight…
He sucked in smoke and coughed.
Too late to stop now; better him meeting them than Claire, he thought, and drew courage.
For some reason he remembered old Doyle, the gardener, dead now for thirty years, leading him up the same pathway round to the back door and into the kitchen for the mid-morning cup of tea.
He'd been a hard man to work for, but he taught Billy everything he knew about that garden and how to take care of it.
And when he died, he left the few bits in the cottage to Billy.
The back door was ajar.
He saw a shadow moving through the kitchen window, and half turned to break into a shambling run.
‘Billy!
I was just comin' down to look for you.’
There, framed in the doorway, was young Joe Burns, looking to Billy like a guardian angel in his blue Garda uniform.
He gasped with relief.
‘Jaysus, I thought ye was a burglar…
I'll tie up the dogs.’
The kitchen was cold; the Aga was turned down while Mrs Arbuthnot was away.
For a moment or two Billy was too relieved even to ask what he was doing in the house, or how he'd managed to get in when it was all locked up.
The young policeman said in his friendly way, ‘It's a careless man ye are, Billy, leaving them gates and the back door open.’
He was a pleasant boy, newly recruited into the local force at Clane.
He'd been born there and the Burnses had been part of the village for generations.
Billy squinted at him; his heart had stopped hammering with fright.
‘I locked up everything meself,’ he insisted.
Joe Burns shook his head reproachfully.
‘Ye thought ye did,’ he said.
‘We knew at the station Mrs Arbuthnot was away; she always lets us know, these days.
I was passing when I saw the gates not shut properly, so I thought I'd best come in and see if everything was all right at the house…’
Billy rubbed his nose and shook his head.
‘I'd swear I locked them,’ he muttered.
The policeman wasn't  convinced, but Billy thought, I locked them gates.
I locked all the doors.
I've been doin' it for thirty years, since old Doyle died.
I didn't forget.
He looked into the smiling blue eyes of the policeman.
There were three cigarette butts in a saucer on the kitchen table.
He'd been there for some time.
‘Well now,’ Burns said, ‘ye've saved me the trouble of comin' down to see you.
I was on my way when you come up.’
But not in a hurry about it, Billy said to himself.
Sitting in a kitchen cold as charity, smoking.
Waiting.
‘When's Mrs Arbuthnot comin' back?’
Billy said, ‘I don't know.
She'll ring me up the day before.’
‘It must be terrible for her,’ Joe went on, ‘her son gone missing and all this stuff about him on the radio and television.’
‘He's her stepson,’ Billy mumbled.
‘It's not the same.’
‘Ah, you're right,’ Joe Burns nodded ‘It's the daughter she had…the one that married that English fella.
Isn't he in the British Government or something?’
Billy didn't answer; he grunted.
‘You've known them all, Billy,’ the easy voice went on.
‘Is it true what's said about them two?’
‘What two?’ he asked.
‘The brother and sister.
It's said they were so close she'd be after coming over when he disappeared.
I don't think she'd take a risk like that meself…’
‘What risk would that be?’
Billy gazed at him in innocence.
He could scent danger, as his beloved dogs could sight a hare a mile away.
And every antenna quivered with alarm.
The blue uniform didn't signify safety any longer.
Billy didn't know what was wrong, he only knew that something was.
Generations of subservience had taught the humble Irish not to answer any question that might get them into trouble.
Joe Burns lowered his voice, as if they might be overheard.
‘She's married to this important man,’ he said.
‘The IRA might do some harm to her.
Listen Billy, if ye hear she's come home here, ye'll give me a call at the station.
Ask for me, if there's any news of her.
I'd like to be the one to pass it on.’
He gave a slight grin.
‘It'd do my prospects a bit of good.’
‘Sure an' I will,’ Billy agreed.
‘But I wouldn't say it's likely.
Jaysus, I can't believe I forgot them gates and the kitchen door…
Shouldn't we check through the house to be sure nobody's been in?’
Joe Burns said, ‘I've already done that, Billy.
I'll be off now.
Don't worry yerself, I'll not mention a word of it to anyone.
And don't forget now; you hear anything, you let me know!’
Billy nodded, promised again, and they went out together.
He locked the back door, gathered his dogs and separated from the Garda at the top of the drive.
Burns waved cheerfully to him and walked back to the main entrance.
‘I'll see ye,’ he called.
Billy didn't hurry till he was out of sight.
Joe Burns was lying about finding the gates and the back door open.
He was lying when he said he'd checked the house.
The door from the kitchen into the main hall was always double-locked, and the key was in Billy's pocket.
The whole story had been a lie.
Burns had opened the gates and the back door himself and slipped inside.
He hadn't been coming down to see Billy.
Billy had caught him by surprise.
If there was news of Claire Fraser, Joe Burns wanted to be the first to hear it.
As Billy came back down by the river and up the hill towards the cottage, he knew the danger in the kitchen had a name at last.
Fear flooded over him.
He saw the car with its English number plates parked in full view of the road.
He didn't waste time.
She'd left the key in it.
He could be very agile when he chose.
He had an old banger of his own, bought with Philip Arbuthnot's legacy.
He backed it out of the shed where it was parked and drove Claire's car in off the road.
He heaved the shed doors shut, so it was hidden.
He was puffing and out of breath.
He'd forgotten to shut  up his dogs; they'd waited patiently outside the front door.
He didn't go inside at once.
He sat on his own doorstep and tried to think what to do.
Frank Arbuthnot had disappeared from his Dublin bank four days ago.
The news on TV had been full of it.
‘Leading merchant banker vanishes.
Fear for his safety.’
That was the headline in the Independent .
Strong hints about his IRA sympathies, as if everyone didn't know he'd been a self-proclaimed Sinn Feinner since he was a youngster.
Rumours that he'd been kidnapped or murdered as part of the split that was rending the Provisionals and the old Republican idealists.
And Billy had listened to the TV pundits and read the papers, and said to himself it was sure to happen in the end.
He'd supped with the devil and no spoon was long enough.
After what happened to the poor idiot, Donny, at Sallins, just two miles down the road, an Arbuthnot wouldn't be a trouble to their consciences.
And now the child had come back, putting herself in danger for the sake of that brother.
He thought of her as the child, though she was married and a mother.
He'd dandled her on his knee when she could hardly walk.
He sighed a deep, despairing sigh.
She must go back to England.
He'd drive her to Dublin himself.
She couldn't stay in Ireland if he was right about Joe Burns.
It wasn't just Frank they were looking for, if they hadn't shot him already and buried him in some bog.
Claire got up when he came into the kitchen.
‘You found someone up there,’ she said, seeing his face.
He cleared his throat.
Better not tell her the truth.
Better just argue her into going back where she belonged.
‘Only Joe Burns.
He's in the Gardai now,’ he said.
‘I left the bloody old gate open and he came in to check the place.’
Claire sat down again.
‘Don't lie to me, Billy.
You said yourself you padlocked it.
You've never forgotten to lock up in your life.
I don't believe it was Joe Burns.’
‘It was so!’ he insisted.
‘Asking questions about  yerself.
I'm to ring him if you come here, says he.
I will, says I. I near had a heart attack thinkin' of you down here under his nose!’
‘I've nothing to fear from the Gardai here,’ she said.
‘I've known them all my life.
Joe Burns's father used to work here as cattleman — you know that, Billy.’
‘You can't stay here,’ he muttered.
‘Love of God, Claire, half the police in Ireland are lookin' for Frankie — if they can't find him, how can you…an' what if he's murdered?’
Claire said slowly, ‘That's the second time you've said it.
Why do you think he's dead?’
‘Because he mixed himself up in poor Donny's murder.’
He spoke very low.
‘Ye won't know about that.
The poor old divil was standin' on the Sallins railway bridge, watching the trains.
He's been doin' it for forty years.
Everyone knew Donny was mad for watching trains.
No harm in him, he was just a bit of an eejit.
There'd been a big robbery in Dublin: hundred thousand taken and the bank manager shot dead.’
He lit a cigarette and passed the packet to her.
His voice trembled.
‘They got off the train, jumping as it went slow under the Sallins bridge.
They saw old Donny standin' up there watching them.
By Jaysus, they run to the top and stabbed the old fella to death.
The Gardai said they thought he'd identify them.
So they stabbed him.
And anyone could see he was as simple as a child, just by the look of him.’
‘I remember Donny,’ Claire said quietly.
‘We used to give him sweets on a Sunday.
He was always standing round hoping there'd be a train.
There never was on Sundays.
I knew he was dead, Billy.
And I know how Frank felt about it.’
‘He went to the auld mither and gave her money.
He came to see yer mother and talk to her about paying a reward.
She'd have none of it, bein' a wise woman.’
Claire didn't have to ask how he knew.
Nothing was a secret in Ireland.
Her mother's maids would have overheard  and repeated every last word through the village before the day's end.
‘There was a lot of talk about it,’ Billy went on.
‘Some of the local lads were calling Frank names.
Decent people kept quiet; it wouldn't help Donny to get into trouble.’
‘That's the root of all evil in this country,’ she said.
‘The decent people staying quiet because they don't want trouble.
Letting the killers get away with it.
But my brother wouldn't.
If he saw something wrong he said so.
He'd speak out for a poor helpless old man like Donny, just as he did for Ireland.’
‘Aye,’ Billy Gorman said.
‘And much good it's done him.
Now I'll make us a bite to eat.
I've put that car of yours in me shed.
I'll drive you to the airport and you catch a plane home, like a sensible girl.’
‘I am home,’ Claire said simply.
‘And I'm not going anywhere till I find Frank.
Don't worry, Billy, I won't stay more than a few hours and by that time I'll know one way or the other.
You won't get into trouble, I promise you.’
She got up and came to him; she leant down and kissed him.
He went pink to the edge of his cap.
‘Let's have the bite to eat, shall we,’ she suggested.
‘I'm starving with hunger.’
‘Billy,’ she said after they'd eaten, ‘I'll need to borrow your car.’
‘Why so?’ he asked.
‘Because I can't run round in a car with English number plates,’ she explained.
‘You've told me about Joe Burns.
That's the first thing anyone would look at round here.’
‘The first thing they'd look at,’ Billy countered, ‘is a woman drivin' my auld rattlebones of a car!
Have ye no sense at all?
And where would ye be goin' then?’
‘I can't tell you,’ Claire said.
‘You mustn't know, Billy.
It's better not.
I'll take the English car and be done with it.’
He slapped his fist on his knee in exasperation.
She had him and he knew it.
But then, even as a child she'd  usually persuade him to let her do this or that against his better judgement.
He mumbled and sighed.
‘I'll change the number plates from my car to the other one,’ he said.
‘How long will ye be gone?’
‘I don't know,’ she said.
‘I should be back before it's dark.’
She saw the worried misery in his face and added gently, ‘Don't worry; I'll be perfectly all right.
Will you change the plates, then?’
‘I will, so,’ he sighed again.
‘The sooner ye're gone, the sooner ye'll be back…then I'll run ye up to Dublin and get ye on the plane,’ he said hopefully.
‘Ye'll promise me that.’
‘I can't promise anything,’ Claire answered.
‘But I will be careful.’
She followed him to the door; he got some tools out of the shed and squatted down to unscrew the number plates from his old Renault.
He became absorbed in the task, grumbling at the stiffness of the holding screws.
The task was a blessed diversion; he couldn't stop her going, he could only concentrate on turning the bloody old things till they loosened.
If God was good to them she'd find no hide nor hair of Frank Arbuthnot.
Claire said, ‘Will it take long?
I'd like to go up to the house.
Give me the keys, will you, Billy?
Just throw them over.’
‘Here ye are.’
He tossed the bunch to her.
She caught them neatly.
Frank had taught her how to catch.
And how to shoot the rooks nesting high up in the trees with a rifle.
Vermin, he called them, when she protested at killing a sitting bird.
They slaughtered all the other fledglings and grabbed the space for themselves.
Just like the English in Ireland.
‘I'll be back in a little while,’ Claire said.
Billy cursed under his breath as his hand slipped.
He didn't look up.
‘Mind yerself,’ he muttered.
‘I will.’
She closed the door and waited for a moment, then turned and went into the little bedroom.
Neat and clean, evidence that Billy's woman was good about the house.
High up on a ledge above a window, she found  what she knew Billy Gorman would never give her: the keys to the gun room at Riverstown.
She slipped the bunch into her pocket and went out of the door.
He was hunched over the car.
She turned and set off down the path leading to the river and the house.
The Minister's secretary buzzed him on the intercom.
He had arrived late, which was unlike him, and seemed tense and irritable.
Very untypical, she thought.
‘Mr Brownlow is here, sir.’
‘Thanks, Jean; show him in, please.
And hold any calls till I buzz, will you.’
Mr Brownlow came in, took off his gloves and met the Minister for Trade and Industry, the Rt.
Hon.
Neil Fraser, as he moved out from behind his desk.
It was a well-known face, he thought, a smooth, production-line politician with all the right connections and ingredients for success.
Except that Ministers don't normally look as if they hadn't slept all night.
‘Good morning, sir,’ he said as they shook hands.
‘No news of your wife, I take it?’
Fraser said, ‘None, I'm afraid.
Nothing your end?
Please sit down.’
Brownlow didn't look like a policeman.
He looked like a senior civil servant.
He said, ‘We've traced the taxi, and the garage where she hired a car.
And she bought a ticket on the night ferry from Liverpool.
So there's no doubt she's gone over.’
Neil Fraser leaned back in his chair.
‘I never imagined she'd do such a thing.’
‘But you suspected she might have gone to Ireland, didn't you?
It was such a pity you didn't contact us immediately you got back and found her gone.
We might have got her at the ferry.’
He wasn't going to let the Minister off the hook.
In his view Fraser had delayed because he didn't want to face the truth.
And that delay meant Mrs Fraser had arrived in the Republic of Ireland, when prompt action could have prevented the whole mess.
And a fine mess  it might turn out to be.
‘She could have gone to friends, or just driven up to London,’ Fraser defended himself.
‘I could hardly start a major scare until I'd made certain, could I?’
‘No, I take your point.
But we'd rather have a major scare that turned out to be a false alarm than the real thing and a late start, sir.’
Fraser said wearily, ‘Have you been on to Dublin?’
‘No, sir.
There's some things to be cleared up first.
I'd like to ask you some questions.
They may be a bit personal.
I hope you don't mind.’
In case the Minister thought of pulling rank, Brownlow added, ‘Your wife's in very great danger; I'm sure you realize that.
Getting her out of Ireland is all that matters.
We've got to have all the facts.’
‘I know that,’ Neil Fraser answered.
‘I'm going to order some coffee.
Would you like some, Superintendent?’
‘Thanks very much.
And it's Brownlow, sir.
We don't use our rank.’
‘No, of course you don't.
I'm not functioning very well today, I'm afraid.’
Brownlow managed a brief smile.
‘That's understandable.
Do you mind if I smoke?’
Fraser shook his head.
Brownlow was right.
He had delayed.
Hoping against all hope that Claire hadn't snapped the last link between them and gone to look for that bastard…
Knowing in his heart, while he telephoned the night porter at their London flat, and went the round of their friends, that she had made her choice.
Did this hard-nosed Special Branch officer expect him to discuss that…
How much of what happened before she left must he disclose?
as if Brownlow could read his mind, he broke in quietly.
‘It's her life at stake,’ he said.
‘If they get their hands on her, they'll kill her.
Don't make any mistake about that.’
Neil Fraser leaned forward slowly, and for a moment  covered his face with his hands.
Brownlow waited till he had composed himself.
‘Ask anything you feel is necessary,’ he said, and Brownlow knew he'd get the truth.
‘Was there any kind of crisis that brought this to a head?
Did you quarrel?’
Neil nodded.
‘Yes, we did.
We had a serious row two nights ago.
I went up to London early that morning and it wasn't made up.
That's why I came back on Tuesday night; normally I stay in London during the week — my wife usually spends a couple of days at the flat with me.’
‘Lucky you went home,’ Brownlow remarked.
‘What was the row about?’
He had noted the bitter edge to Fraser's voice.
A lot of pent-up emotion there, he thought.
Not the first row, by any means…
‘Ireland.
And her half-brother.’
‘What were your wife's views on the situation over there then?
Was she a sympathizer?’
‘With the IRA?
Good God, no!
My wife's family are the sort of people they attack first.
No, Claire's not political in the least.
She doesn't give a damn about politics — never has.’
Not much of a recommendation for a politician's wife, Brownlow observed.
Fraser was being tipped as a future Prime Minister.
He prompted, ‘Is she worried about her brother?’
Neil Fraser said flatly, ‘She's devoted to him.
It didn't matter what he did, she wouldn't hear a word against him.’
‘And is that why she's gone to Ireland?’
‘Yes,’ Neil Fraser replied.
‘That's what we argued about.
I tried to convince her there was nothing she could do.
I'm afraid I lost my temper and said if he'd fallen foul of the IRA it bloody well served him right for supporting them.’
‘She took this badly?’
‘Pretty badly.
I shouldn't have put it so strongly, but I never thought she'd actually go…
I pointed out how dangerous it would be, and — well, how damaging to me  in my position if my wife went to Ireland at a time like this.’
‘Quite so,’ Brownlow agreed.
‘Having him for a brother-in-law must have been embarrassing at times.’
‘That's exactly what I told her,’ the Minister said.
‘The press have been decent about it for years; even the Opposition hasn't suggested that his attitudes affected my credibility or my wife's.
But going there could…’ he paused, and then said angrily, ‘it could ruin me.’
Brownlow waited for a moment, made an extra note.
‘You rang her home in Ireland and there was no reply?’
Fraser nodded.
‘That's all I could do, without alerting everyone in the neighbourhood.
I tried at regular intervals throughout the night and first thing this morning.
There's no one there.
Have you been through to Dublin?’ he repeated.
‘No, and I'm not going to,’ Brownlow answered.
‘Their people are very good and we have a close cooperation with them.
Much closer than the general public knows.
But we can't take a chance this time, sir.
One careless word could set those bastards on your wife.
We can't ask the Irish SB people for help, we'll have to sort it out ourselves.’
‘How can you?’
Fraser asked.
‘What can you possibly do?’
‘Send in an expert,’ Brownlow said.
‘A specialist, used to working over there.
Undercover.
Find your wife and bring her out.’
‘You mean the SAS?’
‘I think we'll leave the details out of it, sir.’
The Minister surprised him by getting up.
He seemed suddenly positive.
‘If that's what you propose, I've got the man,’ he said.
‘He's a personal friend, and my wife likes him.
He knows us both very well.
I'll give you the name.’
He wrote it down and handed Brownlow the slip of paper.
‘I also know,’ he went on, ‘that he's in England at the moment.
I don't want to tell you your job, Brownlow, but if anyone can persuade my wife to come  home, and be a good man in case of trouble, it's him.
I'd like you to contact him at once.’
Brownlow read the name and the rank, folded the slip and put it in his wallet.
If anything went wrong, he could blame it on the Minister's interference.
And there was no denying the man's qualifications, if be belonged to that branch.
He got up.
‘I'll get on to it right away.
Say nothing to anyone about your wife; tell your staff she's with friends, anything convincing.
Act absolutely normally, and with a bit of luck she'll be home before you know it.’
They shook hands again.
‘Thank you for coming.’
Neil Fraser opened the door to the outer office himself.
Brownlow went down in the lift, found his car in the side street and got in.
He told the driver to take him back to his office.
‘If that's the kind of bloody fool that runs this country,’ he muttered to himself, ‘Gawd help us.’
Frigging around instead of facing up to where the bloody wife had gone and putting a stop to it at once.
His career would be ruined.
Much good that'd do her, if what his department suspected was true.
Not that he'd tell Fraser.
Frank Arbuthnot had been an IRA paymaster for years.
Suddenly he goes missing.
Very publicly missing.
Hadn't it occurred to that burke of a husband that the whole thing could be a put-up job to get his wife over to Ireland?
What a coup for the bastards, if they kidnapped or murdered the wife of a Cabinet Minister.
He didn't need Fraser to tell him about the brother and sister.
The Special Branch knew everything about Claire Fraser because it was their job to dig around the politicians and their families, especially with an Irish connection like hers.
Close as bloody Siamese twins they were.
Of course she'd go home, if anything went wrong with him.
And wouldn't it be neat for his IRA friends to bait the trap for Fraser's wife with her own brother.
Whether he agreed to it or not?
From what Brownlow knew about  Frank Arbuthnot and his half-sister, he wouldn't be a tethered goat from choice.
He went into the building, up in the lift to the fifth floor, and called a conference among his senior colleagues.
An hour later he put in a call to Major Michael Harvey in an army barracks in a secluded part of South Wales.
The path from Billy's cottage wound down towards the river bank.
The early rain had left little puddles in the dips along the way.
When she and Frank were children, they used to skip the puddles, or sometimes land in the middle, spattering themselves, with shouts of glee.
The air was fresh and sweet, the river swept along on its way, swelled by the backwash that made a tiny waterfall further along.
Her father had complained to the Water Board every year for the last fifteen of his life that their damned backwashing was washing away his river bank.
Nobody took any notice, but official letters were always polite.
The shady ground under the coppice of trees was a blue and white carpet of anemones — what trouble Claire had with that word when she was little, at times it still defeated her.
Later the daffodils would muster, blazing like an army of yellow heads the length of the bank and right up to the steps leading to the old house.
So many happy memories met her with every step she took.
A childhood full of games and innocent adventures, the changing retinue of family dogs, ponies to ride and hunt, with Frank taking the leading rein.
Her parents were always up at the front.
Only her brother was willing to go home early, towing a child and a fat pony.
School was not taken very seriously.
She went to the nearest Protestant school, which was over at Kilcock, and learned to read and write with the daughters of their friends.
How often she and Frank had spent the day down by the river, fishing for the cunning trout, or lazing in the damp grass, talking.
There were five years between  them, but she thought of him as older.
Her earliest memory was of him holding her tightly by the hand, when she was just a toddler, in case she strayed too near the rushing river.
There were a nurse, and her parents, but they were dim figures compared with Francis.
He was tall and strong, and kept her safe.
He shared his secrets with her, and from childhood on, Claire would have given her life to please him.
Their rooms adjoined, and if she had a nightmare, he was first in to comfort her and laugh the fears away.
He told her about the fairies who lived in the holes on the river bank, and how Billy was half leprechaun.
They used to giggle and splutter when they saw the old man, thinking of him sitting on a toadstool in the moonlight.
She learned about their ancestors from him, and how they came to Ireland and built Riverstown.
For a long time, she was afraid to pass the portrait on the stairs of the one he called the Hanging Judge.
She felt so close to him as she retraced the steps of her childhood and young adult life, that for a moment she was overcome by pain.
There was a worn and weather-beaten seat, hewn out of a fallen tree trunk.
Claire sat down, as they had done so many times together, and the years fell away as if they had never been apart and she had never married.
‘I'm different to you, Clarry.’
He was fourteen then, thin and very dark, with the intensity of adolescence.
‘How different?
You're a boy, that's what's different.’
She resented the claim because it raised some barrier between them.
She was nine, blonde as a daisy, with big, blue eyes, unaware of her own prettiness.
Rather a tomboy, always climbing trees and tearing her clothes and trying to out-ride and outrun everybody else, so she could match up to Francis.
‘I know that, you eejit,’ he retorted.
‘I mean really different.
I'm half Irish.’
Claire stared at him.
‘What's different then?
We're all Irish!’
‘No,’ her brother insisted.
‘You're an Anglo.
So's  Dad.
My mother,’ he said, lowering his voice, ‘was from the bogs.
The Ryans are proper Irish.
That makes me half.’
Claire said crossly, still worried, ‘Everyone knows that.
You're not different to me, Frankie.
Mummy's English —‘
He looked down at that.
‘I know,’ he said.
Her mother wasn't Frank's mother, because she had died when he was born.
There was no conflict.
People had step-mothers and fathers.
Claudia Arbuthnot was never cross with him or punished him for anything.
His father did that.
But he was his real father so it was all right.
Claire pulled at his sleeve.
‘Don't be different to me, Frankie.
I don't want you to be different.’
Her eyes filled with tears.
His were very dark; his hair was black.
He was amazingly like Daddy.
Suddenly he hugged her, then as abruptly pushed her away and jumped up.
‘Don't be such a silly cry-baby.
Race you to the old seat!’
He was sitting, laughing at her as she hurtled up to him, scarlet-faced and out of breath.
‘You bloody pig,’ she gasped.
‘That's not fair.
I can't run as fast as you!’
‘That's because you're an Anglo,’ he taunted, and was off, daring her to try and catch him.
She had a terrible temper, and it always made him double up when she swore at him and clenched her fists.
By the time he let her catch him, Claire had forgotten what he'd said, and he had temporarily forgotten why he said it.
She only remembered it long afterwards, the night his father turned him out of Riverstown.
The day they found the fox.
A few spots of rain fell on Claire.
Claire Fraser now, over twenty years later, sitting on the log seat with tears in her eyes.
The sun was slipping behind a bank of shower-filled cloud.
She got up and quickened her walk up to the house.
The key of the back door was in her pocket, the other keys, the stolen bunch, cutting into her hand.
Out of so much love, so much misery had come.
Out of closeness, such division.
Was it true, what he said, that wretched day they said goodbye?
‘It's not  anybody's fault, Claire.
Not Dad's or Claudia's or mine.
If you want to know why things have turned out as they are, you've got to go back to the beginning.’
She let herself into the kitchen, where young Joe Burns had asked about her.
Questions that frightened Billy into telling lies.
Joe's father had worked for her father, and Joe himself had earned a few shillings helping out, when he was a scrawny boy with a runny nose.
But Billy didn't trust him.
And Billy knew his own people better than any Arbuthnot ever would.
Claire unlocked the door into the main part of the house.
It was dark and shuttered in the hall.
She flooded it with electric light.
There was a whisper of dampness in the air.
You couldn't close up an Irish house without the weather getting into the fabric.
And there they were, her ancestors, watching her from the walls.
Nearly two hundred years unbroken, living at Riverstown.
Births and marriages and deaths; the tombstones on Naas church a testimonial, her own father's the most recent.
But his first wife, Eileen Arbuthnot, was not buried there.
The division had begun with her.
At the foot of the stairs Claire paused and looked up.
There was the portrait she had been so frightened by when she was little.
A dour, ill-painted picture of a man in a dark coat and tight cravat, with a stern tight mouth and lifeless eyes.
The Hanging Judge.
He'd hung Irishmen like apples from the gallows tree.
Claire turned away.
Look back to the beginning.
Whoever said that spoke the doom of Ireland.
The first Arbuthnot came to Ireland in 1798 to try the rebels who had burned the English garrison alive in their barracks at Prosperous.
An odd name for a poverty  stricken Irish village in Kildare.
Judge Arbuthnot passed sentence of death by hanging, or exile to the penal colonies in the West Indies, on the men of Prosperous.
Some had lit the torches and roasted other men alive in the middle of the night.
Others had stood by.
They suffered equally.
Hugh Arbuthnot took time off from his duties to tour the countryside, and decided that apart from its inhabitants, it was one of the most beautiful places on earth.
The fields were green and lush with pasture, the river Liffey flowed through land that was as rich as his Scottish farm was bleak and poor.
His people had wrung a meagre living from it.
In Ireland, nature had been over-generous.
Cattle grew fat, the rivers abounded with fish.
The air was mild, and the rain didn't trouble a Scotsman.
He applied for a grant of land and this was sold to him for a nominal sum.
He neither knew nor cared who had been evicted from it and left destitute.
The site where Hugh Arbuthnot chose to build his house was a rise in the ground, overlooking the river.
Fine lime trees formed a natural avenue for the approach; copper beeches and great elms gave shelter from the wind in the east; should the river flood, as he'd observed it did after heavy rain, the house was safe upon its hill.
He brought his wife and children over and they settled into the fine house which he called Riverstown.
His son built a stone wall high enough to keep the poachers out, with handsome wrought-iron gates.
The stone pineapples on the two piers at his gateway signified that the owner was a justice.
He was a shrewd man, not over-kind-hearted, but the misery of the famine brought people dying of hunger to his gates.
They were not turned away.
The Arbuthnots prospered.
They married with a view to inheritance, attended the local Protestant church and contributed handsomely to its building programme.
Their sons and daughters went to England for their education, to Trinity College, Dublin, where Catholics were barred, or to English universities.
Younger sons went into the British Army, and one became a distinguished admiral in the Royal Navy.
They tended to choose wives and husbands within their circle in Ireland, and would always describe themselves as Irish.
Their excellent record as landlords and non-involvement in local politics saved Riverstown from being burnt down by the IRA in 1922.
Neighbours who were not so well thought of stood and watched at gun-point, while their homes went up in flames.
Philip Arbuthnot was three years old when the Peace was signed that divided Ireland.
He was the eldest son, his two brothers having been killed in the Great War.
He inherited Riverstown and its eleven hundred acres when he was twenty-seven and married.
Neither of his parents had come to the wedding.
The rumours said that his bride was already pregnant when he married her.
Nobody believed Philip could have done such a thing as marry one of the Ryan girls for love.
Philip was tall with curly black hair and a little moustache that made him look old-fashioned.
He was a sportsman and a countryman, uncomplicated in his attitude to people and to life.
When he met Eileen Ryan she was sitting on a bank with a dazed look, her bicycle up-ended in a ditch.
Her fine red hair glittered like gold in the watery sunlight.
Philip stopped, got out and asked her if she was all right.
‘I don't know for sure.
Where am I?’
There was a sweet lilt of brogue in her voice.
Philip knew concussion when he saw it.
And at the moment he helped her into his car, he fell in love with her.
It wasn't a long courtship.
It wasn't a courtship at all, according to Eileen's outraged family, who viewed her meeting with a member of the Protestant gentry with deep suspicion.
They didn't want one of them hanging round Eileen, who was too young yet to know what a fool she was making of herself.
They didn't see marriage and didn't want to see it.
They foresaw only shame and gossip among their own people.
The parish priest was consulted and summoned  Eileen.
He came to see her father and advised that she be sent to relatives in Cork and kept there till the danger to her immortal soul was past.
A week later, they eloped to England, and were married in London.
The Protestant marriage didn't reconcile his father, who believed that his son had been caught and was marrying because he had some misplaced sense of honour.
His mother flatly refused to receive a daughter-in-law who was no better than one of her own maids.
The fact that the Ryans were wealthy farmers made no difference.
The Ryans were bog Irish.
Eventually, they supposed, some means would be found of paying the wretched girl off, when Philip came to his senses.
His father died eighteen months later of undiagnosed cancer of the lung.
He didn't disinherit his son, as some of their more extreme friends advised, nor did he tell Philip's mother that he had met his son and daughter-in-law in London.
A pretty little wisp of a girl who was certainly not pregnant, she obviously adored Philip.
She had a delicacy and charm about her that the old man recognized.
He'd seen women in his boyhood with shawls over their heads and bare feet, with the same air of ancient breeding.
He wished them happiness, but he didn't ask them to come home.
When he died, his widow moved to a property in Meath and Philip brought his young Irish wife back to Ireland to live at Riverstown.
Mrs Gerard, the old housekeeper, had given notice.
She was not, she told Mrs Arbuthnot, prepared to work for the likes of her.
They drove through the gates and up the avenue of ancient lime trees.
It was a bright autumn day in 1938 and as they rounded the bend and came in sight of the river, Philip took her hand and said, ‘Look, darling, isn't that wonderful?
Just look at the leaf colour all along the bank there…’
She saw the excitement in his face and smiled to please him.
Surely the great blaze of reds and golden yellows was a marvellous sight, but they did nothing to ease the apprehension in her heart.
At home  they took such things without comment.
There was little time to stand admiring the view of this or that season when there was a big farm to run and a house and family to be looked after.
‘Oh, God love us, the dirty old east wind is coming up,’ her mother would say as the trees turned colour.
‘It's lovely, Phil,’ she said softly.
‘Like a picture painting.’
He squeezed her hand and said, ‘A painting, sweetheart.
Not picture painting.’
He didn't see the faint blush of embarrassment because she turned her head away.
All he saw as he glanced at her was his little wife, shy as a fieldmouse, clinging to his hand.
Of course she was nervous, he thought, seeing the big white-painted facade of his home come into the open.
It was a big place, though the Ryans' farm was substantial enough.
She'd nothing to worry about, especially since that old bitch Mrs Gerard had walked off in a huff.
Eileen wouldn't have found her easy to cope with.
He'd set the staff straight if there was any nonsense…
The gardener was waiting for them at the front door.
He opened the car door for Philip, who handed his wife out.
‘This is Doyle,’ he said, introducing her.
‘Mrs Arbuthnot.’
Doyle had his cap off and noticed that the new missus half put out her hand to shake his, not knowing what to do.
‘Welcome, sir; welcome, mam.’
Philip guided her by the arm into the front entrance and the hall, where a frightening array of girls in uniforms with white aprons and the cook, whom Eileen had known since she was a child, came up one by one and greeted them.
She could feel her cheeks burning as girls she'd been to the convent school with in Naas said, ‘Welcome, mam’ and some had slyness in their smiles.
The cook said, ‘Mrs Gerard's gone, sir.
Will ye be getting someone else?’
‘That's up to my wife,’ Philip said firmly.
‘But I think  we'd like tea in the library.
And early dinner, please, Mary.
Mrs Arbuthnot's tired.
We had a long journey.’
‘Was the crossing rough, sir?’
Eileen stood there while he chatted to Mary, who was a distant cousin on the Ryan side.
Of course he was at ease; he could joke with his servants and turn away, dismissing them with a happy, ‘Good to see you all, and very good to be home.’
How could she do the same, when he wasn't there?
He was so happy.
When they were alone in the library, a fusty-smelling room full of books behind iron grilles, he hugged her and kissed her.
‘It's wonderful to be back,’ he said.
‘Wonderful you're with me, darling.
You're going to love Riverstown.
How about a little smile then?’
He sat her down on his knee and kissed her, waking all the wicked senses that she'd been taught to suppress all her life.
She was a delightfully fiery little thing, Philip thought, forgetting all about tea, opening her coat and beginning to unbutton her blouse.
It was Eileen who heard the knock and leapt away from him before the door had time to open.
The silver tray was set down by Lily, who was senior parlourmaid and in her thirties.
She didn't look at Eileen.
She addressed herself to Philip.
‘What time would you be wanting dinner, sir?’
Philip knew her well.
She was his mother's toady, sneaking on the other maids, angling for the hated Mrs Gerard's job.
He said, ‘Ask Mrs Arbuthnot.’
Eileen panicked.
What time?
Philip didn't eat tea like they did at home.
He ate dinner and all she could remember was living with him in London; when they rented a flat, he wouldn't let her cook.
There was a woman hired to do what she felt was a wife's job.
What time?
The gleam in Lily's eye was mocking as she repeated the question.
‘Cook says, what time would you be wanting yer dinner, mam?’
‘Eight o'clock, please.
’ Eileen remembered their  routine in London.
It had taken her months to get used to eating so late and so many times a day.
‘Very good, mam.’
The door closed and Philip held out his arms.
There was no desire left in her and she shook her head.
‘I'll pour the tea,’ she said.
‘We can go early to bed,’ he suggested.
‘Or would you rather see round the house first?’
She gave him the cup; a little had spilled in the saucer, because her hand wasn't quite steady.
‘I'd rather go to bed with you than see round any house,’ she said.
‘If we were in London now, that's what we'd do.
But not here, Phil.
Not with all of them watching and sniggering.’
‘Don't be ridiculous,’ he exclaimed.
‘Nobody's watching!
Darling, for heaven's sake, you're the mistress here.
You dealt with Lily perfectly well.
It's bound to be a bit strange for you at first, but saying you won't make love to your own husband in your own house because of the servants…’
‘They're servants to you,’ she said quietly.
‘But I went to school with them.
Mary Donovan is a cousin of my father's!
How am I going to do it, Phil?
How am I going to manage this house and be a wife you can be proud of, when I've been brought up a different way, and everybody in the place knows it?’
He could look quite hard, she thought suddenly.
Quite the Arbuthnot, dealing with some nonsense from the Irish.
‘If there's any difficulty, Eileen, or advantage taken because you used to know them, we'll sack the lot and get a completely new staff.
So put that out of your head once and for all.
Now give me a piece of that fruit cake and stop being silly.
We'll have a brief conducted tour.
By the way, I want you to change the furniture round, get new curtains, that sort of thing.
It's your home now.
Remember that.’
Her eyes filled with tears.
‘I do love you,’ she said.
‘I'll do my best, I promise you.
I'll love Riverstown because it's yours.’
‘That's my girl,’ he said.
‘Try this cake.
Mary makes the best fruit cake in Ireland.’
She cut a slice to please him.
It tasted heavy and there was too much whiskey in it for her taste.
‘Mine's better,’ she thought.
‘But I can never go into my kitchen and cook for my husband.
I can't stand and gossip with Dadda's old cousin and make a fruit cake from Mammy's recipe.
I'm Mrs Arbuthnot and my whole life is changed for ever.
Thank God I love him, or I'd be out of this house and home before you could say ‘knife’.
And I can't talk like that any more either.’
‘Phil,’ she said softly.
‘Let's go on that tour.
I want to see our bedroom.’
Only it wasn't theirs.
It was a big room with a high, moulded ceiling and a draped bed that stood in the middle of it like a throne.
The surfaces were bare; the mahogany gleamed with fresh polish.
His mother had left nothing of herself behind.
No photographs, no knick-knacks gathered over the years.
But it was still her room.
‘Mother didn't change things much,’ he said.
‘The room could do with a turn-out.’
‘Blue is a dark colour,’ Eileen said at last.
‘It could be prettier a pale shade.
A new carpet maybe…’
Anything to take the presence of the Hon.
Blanche Arbuthnot of Dankelly Castle, Co.
Louth, out of the room where Eileen was expected to lie in bed with her son.
There was a conference going on in the kitchen.
Tea had been made and a big cake like the one served in the library was cut up in thick slices on the table.
Lily was holding forth, her pinched face sallow with indignation.
The expression ‘white-livered’ was an apt description of her nature.
‘And there she was, sittin' there playing the high an' mighty madam, cocked up in Mrs Arbuthnot's chair.
Eight o'clock please, Lily…’
She mimicked Eileen's voice.
‘Mrs Gerard was right to pack her bag and go.
If ye'd seen the airs and graces of her!’
She drank her tea and held out the cup for one of the under-maids to fill.
She was a tyrant to the girls.
Doyle, who tipped his tea into a saucer, looked up over the rim of it.
‘I mind her father,’ he said.
‘Dirty as the auld pigs he tended to, not a penny to bless himself, till his auld skinflint uncle died and he got a hold of the place.
He married a bit o' money though.
Sure an' they must be pleased seein' the geddle come up in the world like she has.’
He wasn't a malicious man.
The searing jealousy of the women didn't affect him.
He liked a good gossip and knew something about everybody in the area.
He was the same age as old Jack Ryan and well remembered the smell of the pigs he brought with him into the pub of an evening.
Jack had been his uncle's heir.
He was a rich farmer now, while Doyle was still dirt poor and broke his back in the Arbuthnots' garden with only a lazy boy to help him.
If he resented anything it was Jack Ryan's meanness.
If he saw Doyle in the pub he'd slide out of buying him a drink.
Mary sat with her elbows on the kitchen table.
Her arms were plump and mottled, fat hands cradled the teacup.
‘They even brought Father Dowd to her,’ she announced.
‘Divil a bit of good it did.
She ran off breakin' my poor cousin's heart.’
She slipped in her relationship to the new mistress with a mixture of satisfaction and gloom.
It didn't please Lily or the other maids to hear her claim superiority over them.
‘Ye must be shamed out of yer life, Mrs Donovan,’ Bernadette piped up from her corner of the table.
She was next in line to Lily, five years older than the girl who had come to Riverstown and had the whole world in her pocket, so far as Bernadette could see.
All that money, and the fine clothes on her, and a gentleman  for a husband.
She was damned to hell, of course, she comforted herself.
Marrying outside her faith.
‘Ah, well.’
Mary decided privately that that Bernadette needed putting in her place.
‘I've dinner to get for the new master and his lady wife.
And to clean up my kitchen before she makes a tour of it.
Doyle, ye've got mud on my floor from yer dirty boots!’
‘I don't know how I'll bring meself to serve her,’ Lily grumbled.
‘Sitting in Mrs Arbuthnot's place at the dining table.
I'd like to tip the soup in her lap!’
‘I'd mind yerself, Lily,’ Doyle said at the kitchen door.
‘It's himself we've got to please, not her.
He'll not put up wit' yer nonsense any more than the Major would.’
Philip's father had served in the Irish Guards in the First World War, and was always referred to by his rank.
He glanced resentfully at Mary Donovan.
‘There's divil a bit of mud on me boots,’ he muttered and went out into the back yard.
Upstairs, Eileen resisted as Philip tried to undress her.
‘Not in here,’ she whispered, avoiding his eager kisses.
‘Can't we go somewhere else?’
In the end they made love in his father's dressing room, confined on a narrow bed, and Eileen fell asleep.
He woke her gently, smiling at her.
‘You are a little tiger,’ he said.
‘You've scratched me to bits.
We've got to change, darling, so you'd better get up.’
He saw her bewilderment and said, ‘We always change for dinner at home.
I know it's a bore, but it's expected.
Have your bath, sweetheart, and wear something nice for me.
How about the blue we bought together?’
It was a tactful way of explaining that change meant evening dress for her and dinner jacket for him.
Poor little sweet, he thought, splashing in the hot water in his father's bathroom.
It was all very strange to her, but she'd soon get the hang of it.
She didn't mind him telling her things, and learned very quickly.
She had modelled her speech on his and asked him to correct her if she said something wrong.
Her clothes had been a problem.
That was solved by buying a complete new wardrobe.
She was so pretty it didn't matter what she wore.
Nothing at all, was better still.
They were going to be late, unless he put that thought aside and got ready.
He gave her a glass of champagne in the drawing room before dinner.
She looked very beautiful in the long slim blue dress.
He'd given her a string of cultured pearls as a wedding present.
His mother had taken all the family jewellery with her.
There was a little blue brooch pinned to the neck of the dress.
It didn't complement anything much, but he hadn't seen it before.
‘Where did you get that, darling,’ he touched it lightly with a finger, as if it were a toy out of a cracker.
She had the brightest smile in the world, and the dress made her grey eyes look blue.
‘It's my granny's,’ she explained.
‘She give it to me on my eighteenth birthday.’
‘It's very pretty,’ Philip said.
‘Grandmother, darling, not granny.
It makes you sound like a little girl.
And she gave it to you.’
‘Sure an' I know she did.’
Suddenly, cheekily she spun round in front of him, mocking his attempts to turn her into an Anglo-Irish lady.
‘Ye'll not make this particular sow's ear into a silk purse, young fella-me-lad!’
Lily, about to knock on the door to announce dinner, heard them laughing and paused, listening.
She heard Philip say, ‘Quite right, sweetheart.
You've married a pompous idiot!’
She couldn't make out Eileen's answer but she muttered, ‘Eejit, is right,’ before she knocked on the door.
‘Dinner is served, sir and mam.’
They had been living at Riverstown for two months before the first invitation came.
It was addressed to Mrs Philip Arbuthnot and a letter was enclosed with the card.
It was written in a sprawling hand that was difficult to read.
Eileen, who'd been beaten into writing legibly by the nuns, felt as if the writer didn't care whether her letters were decipherable or not.
She knew the name, of course.
The family were not rich; much of their land had been sold to pay the debts of successive wastrel sons.
The baronetcy was a reward for acts of loyalty or oppression, depending upon which view you took of a small rebellion in the 1720s.
They were old gentry, tolerated because they were permanently in decline and had fallen prey to drink and idleness.
The family had been relieved of the embarrassment of a huge, unmanageable Georgian house by a convenient fire in the twenties.
Sir William Hamilton was said to have started it himself, rather than repair the roof, which let in torrents of water in one wing.
The insurance company, refusing to accept the IRA as culprits, declined to pay.
The family found themselves with a gutted ruin and one surviving wing.
A local builder obliged by knocking down the remains in exchange for the materials he could salvage, and the place had been known as the Half House by local people ever since.
The present Lady Hamilton was English and had some private money.
Eileen read the letter slowly.
Dear Mrs Arbuthnot,
We hear that you and your husband are living at Riverstown since the poor Major's death and would be so pleased if you can come and dine with us on December 19th.
It is a little close to Christmas, but that seems a good excuse for a party and it's high time we entertained some of our friends.
We are so looking forward to meeting you and do hope you can come.
Sincerely, Claudia Hamilton
P.S. I'll send you an aide mémoire if you can.
Eileen passed the letter to Philip.
‘What's an aide mémoire ?’
‘It's a reminder; that's what it means, to remind you to come.
It's a very nice letter.
You'll like her, darling, she's great fun, marvellous horsewoman.
He's a good chap, but he's mostly tight.
I think we should go.’
‘All right,’ she said.
‘If you want to.’
‘If they weren't nice people, I wouldn't dream of it,’ he said firmly.
‘They'll like you and you'll like them, darling.
Sooner or later, you've got to mix with our neighbours and this is a good way to start.
Now, I've got to be off.
See you at lunch time.’
He kissed her, squeezed her shoulder and was gone.
She had been surprised how hard he worked on the place.
She,per contra , had so little to do.
There was a little hand-bell by her place; she rang it for Bernadette to come and clear the breakfast plates away.
After that first tour of her new home, Eileen had avoided going into the kitchen as much as possible.
Mary's attempts to be familiar with her when Philip wasn't there had been painfully embarrassing.
Sensing his wife's difficulty, Philip suggested she revert to his mother's custom and order the meals through Lily, as if she were the departed housekeeper.
Lily's sour resentment was easier to manage than her blood cousin's attempt to presume and profit by their distant relationship.
And Lily's instinct for the winning side soon tempered her attitude to the new mistress.
She became ingratiating and saw herself finally taking over the housekeeper's role.
There was surprising strength in Eileen Arbuthnot.
Shy and lacking confidence she might be, but she was not a woman to challenge outright and gradually the staff accepted her.
They grumbled and gossiped among themselves, but Philip knew that his wife was in control.
She left the dining room that November morning and took the dogs for a walk down by the river.
The old Labrador and the two Jack Russell terriers loved to go rabbiting along the bank.
She hadn't a dog of her own yet.
Domestic pets were not a part of Irish life; animals were worked, not cosseted.
There was no sentiment towards them and no positive cruelty either.
People were poor; even the better-off worked grinding hours on their farms, and if anything was to be fussed over, it was the old people or the children.
It was a mild morning, with a wintry sunshine dappling the ground under the trees.
The river washed down on its run through Dublin into the sea, and a solitary man with a low-slung dog at his heels walked along the opposite bank.
Eileen loved the river.
She didn't fish, of course.
Sports were not considered fit for girls.
A race or two on prize day at the local school, modesty insisting on decent skirts and proper bloomers underneath them, was as much as the Irish girl was permitted.
The others might bring up their daughters to ape men, but not the Children of Mary.
She had a young brother, Kevin, who was fond of her in his quiet way.
He didn't say much, but he was always kind to her.
Her eldest brother thought of nothing but the day when he'd have the farm and be able to marry his sweetheart.
He was thirty-five and had a while to wait, everyone reckoned.
The Labrador ambled beside Eileen.
The terriers bounded along ahead on their short legs.
Philip loved the smelly, aggressive little dogs and was always fussing in case they got stuck down the rabbit holes.
Eileen couldn't understand why he felt like that about them.
But she took extra care if she was out with them alone.
He wanted her to accept the Hamiltons' invitation.
She shivered, pulling the coat closer round herself.
Marrying him was one thing; loving him and defying her family and Father Dowd had taken more courage and determination than she knew was in her.
But the injustice of their attitude was the undoing of their arguments.
Earning the obedience and respect of the women in the house, who saw her as no better than they were, was yet another obstacle.
Many nights she had cried with loneliness when he was fast asleep beside her and risen smiling the next morning to continue the battle.
It was all but won and she felt at peace.
Even the house, with its big grand rooms and dark paintings of Arbuthnots, seemed less strange once she had altered the bedroom and rearranged the study into a cosy sitting room where she and Philip spent their evenings together.
But meeting the neighbours who knew who she was and that her mother-in-law had moved to another county rather than come face to face with her — that really frightened her.
She was native Irish.
All her life she had been taught that Philip and his kind were aliens in possession of land which they had stolen from its rightful owners.
Oppressors of Ireland and its people, persecutors of the Catholic Church.
Alien corn, Father Dowd called them once when he was being entertained at home and he and her father were discussing politics.
The alien corn had been rooted out and burnt.
Everyone said that the priest had encouraged many of the burnings during the twenties.
His own family had been driven by starvation to emigrate to America.
The terrible wrongs of the past were stronger than the Christian commandment to forgive.
Eileen knew what she had thought of the Arbuthnots and their kind, until she fell in love with Philip.
She knew what they in turn thought of her and her people.
It had been made very plain over the centuries.
And fundamentally nothing had changed.
When the old Major, so soon to die, had travelled secretly to see his son and meet her, she recognized his courtesy because he was a gentleman, but there was no welcome and no warmth in him.
He came in coldness, as she thought at the time, and left in coldness, to go to his grave.
There was a bench, fashioned out of a fallen tree trunk; the weather was mild enough to sit and watch the river.
The old dog sank down by her feet; the terriers scuttled off to rootle through the brushwood.
She called after them to no purpose.
She remembered that terrible scene with her father, when he forbade her to see Philip again and told her she was going down to Cork till she came to her senses.
He didn't listen to her when she tried to explain that they were going to marry.
‘Marry in the Protestant Church!
No daughter of mine'll set foot in it — I'd see ye dead first!’
He didn't want to hear about the compromise they'd come to: an Anglican marriage, the sons to be in their father's religion, the daughters  baptized Catholics.
All he could see was the shame and disgrace such an alliance would bring on a good Irish family.
She'd gone to her room and cried in misery.
And there her mother came to add her warnings.
They were gentle, because Bridget Ryan was a quiet woman; Jack Ryan blustered enough for both of them.
She sat on the edge of the bed and reminded Eileen what was at stake: the damnation of her soul.
Hadn't she understood what Father Dowd said that very afternoon?
None of her family or friends would speak to her; she'd be cut off from her own kind.
And what about his friends?
Did she imagine they'd accept her?
Wouldn't she always feel a fool, knowing they were laughing at her and her Irish ways.
‘Bog trotters,’ Bridget Ryan reminded her.
‘That's what they call us.
Paddy an' his pig.
We're all right in our place, but that place is under their feet.
Are ye telling me ye'll ever be at home among them?’
The next morning Eileen left the farm.
She would never hear from her parents or her brothers and sisters again.
She was outcast, as they had threatened.
Now she took Claudia Hamilton's letter out of her pocket and re-read it.
Dinner on December 19th.
Philip said they should go.
‘You'll like her, darling.
She's great
Philip was confident she'd be a success.
He was always telling her how pretty she was, how well she ran Riverstown.
He was a happy man, in love with his wife and deeply content.
Twice he'd driven over to see his mother and come back optimistic that she'd come round to the marriage and visit them one day soon.
Everything was wonderful, he said, and she knew it was for him.
And if his mother came, she'd have to entertain her, instead of slamming the door in her face for the way she'd behaved.
Philip had written a very conciliatory letter to her father, hoping they'd accept him as a son-in-law.
Eileen was amazed that he expected a reply.
She got up, suddenly chilled after sitting so long.
There was no sign of the terriers.
Her spirits sank.
‘Buttons, Ruby!’
‘They're here, mam, wit' me.’
Doyle shambled up the path, the little dogs trotting beside him.
‘There's an auld wind come up,’ he said.
‘Ye'll catch yer death o' cold, sitting there.’
‘The sun's gone in,’ Eileen said.
‘It'll come on to rain soon.’
‘It will, so.
I'll bring them little divils back to the house for ye, mam.
Ye'd best go in before the rain.’
‘I will, so,’ she said, and for a moment there was a blessed communion between them.
Doyle grinned at her and she had to turn away because her eyes filled with tears.
She looked poorly, he thought.
And sad, sitting there on the bench, not noticing the weather change.
It must be lonely living away from your own.
She was a nice enough girl and he felt sorry for her.
He tethered the little dogs with a piece of twine and he didn't hurry walking back.
Doyle never hurried.
Time was made for man, not man for time.
He'd get to the back door in time for his morning cup of tea and a warm by the kitchen range.
‘You look lovely, sweetheart,’ Philip said.
He had come in from his dressing room and Eileen was waiting, dressed and ready for the dinner party.
He wore his clothes so well, she thought, looking at him; not a bother on him, while she had tried on three different dresses before choosing one in desperation.
He was born confident, sure of himself.
How could he understand what an agony the evening must be for her.
‘Lovely,’ he repeated.
‘Where did you buy that?
I don't remember it.’
‘I bought it,’ she said, ‘from that big shop in Piccadilly.
It cost a fortune.
I'm not even sure I like meself in it.’
‘Well, I do,’ he said.
‘Now, darling, get your wrap on and we'll go.
Claudia's English and she doesn't like people to be late.’
He squeezed her hand as they pulled into the drive of  Half House.
‘You'll be a wild success,’ he murmured.
‘Everyone will fall in love with you.’
Claudia Hamilton was very tall.
She was thin and her bare arms were muscular.
She had fair hair that was done in a roll round her head, bright blue eyes and a loud English voice.
She greeted Philip with a kiss, which didn't please Eileen — until she realized that it was common practice.
They all kissed each other, these strange people.
Then she held out her hand to Eileen and gave it a strong clasp that made her wince.
‘How lovely to meet you.
And what a divine dress.
Come along in and let me introduce you.’
She didn't know any of the names; she smiled and shook hands and was passed from one to the other like a parcel.
Being inspected, appraised.
Philip's Irish wife.
Everyone was very friendly.
She was given a dry Martini, which she hated and put down almost untouched on a table when nobody was looking.
People made conversation with her, avoiding awkward topics like her marriage.
London was safe and she answered questions about their stay there and managed to smile and be animated.
Claudia was talking to Philip; she wished he was beside her, but after the first ten minutes, he'd been taken away to talk to someone else.
She wondered what they were saying to each other.
Once she'd seen Claudia watching her and been encouraged by a broad smile.
‘You're doing well,’ it seemed to say.
They went into dinner.
She hesitated, glancing anxiously at Philip, who was on the other side of the table.
‘You're here, next to James.’
Claudia guided her to the seat on the host's left.
‘Don't let him drink too much,’ she whispered.
It was an astonishing thing for a wife to say about her husband to a woman she'd met for the first time.
The food was not very nice; the regiment of cutlery ranged either side of her plate took any appetite away.
She managed to get it right by watching the woman opposite to her.
She sipped the wine, picked at the first course and let James Hamilton carry the conversation.
He did his best.
He chatted about the weather, the racing, the poor scent out hunting — did she hunt?
Well, of course, she must take it up…his wife was mad on it.
Break her neck one day if she wasn't careful.
Terribly sad about her father-in-law's death.
Such a grand fellow.
How was poor Blanche these days?
Pity she'd gone off to Meath.
‘I don't know how she is,’ Eileen said suddenly.
‘I've never met her.’
Hamilton looked puzzled.
His wife had explained the situation to him, but he never listened to what he called women's gossip.
He knew Arbuthnot had married a local farmer's daughter, but that was about all.
‘Haven't you?
Why ever not?
She turned into a recluse or something?
Not like Blanche.’
‘She didn't want Philip to marry me.’
Eileen couldn't stop herself.
They know, they must do.
I'm not going to pretend.
I'm not ashamed of anything.
‘That's why she went to Meath.
So's to be out of the house before I came into it.’
‘Really?’
He looked at her with interest.
What an extraordinary girl.
How very embarrassing to say all that in front of everybody.
He wondered how many people had heard.
Pretty little thing, but Philip must clue her in a bit about how to behave.
‘I'm sure she'll come round,’ he said.
‘She may,’ Eileen answered, ‘but I won't.’
She drank a little wine and noticed that the girl on Hamilton's right was staring at her.
Imperceptibly Hamilton had switched from talking to her to the girl who was still staring at her.
The man on her other side was eating.
There was a pool of isolation and she was in the middle of it.
There were twelve people round that table and they were all known to each other, on kissing and Christian name terms, with the same background and interests in common .
The exclusion only lasted a few minutes, but it seemed a lifetime to her.
‘Tell me, Mrs Arbuthnot.’
The man next to her had stopped eating.
‘Do you think there'll be a war?’
‘War?’
She shook her head.
‘War with who?’
‘Germany,’ he explained.
‘You girls are all the same.
Never read anything in the papers except the fashion articles.
I'm afraid there will be.’
‘But we won't be in the war.
It's nothing to do with us.’
He paused for a moment and she realized that she had said something wrong.
But what?
‘Not for some people, I suppose,’ he said.
‘But I can't see Philip sitting back and doing nothing about it.
Anyway,’ he gave her a distant smile, ‘let's talk about something cheerful.
How do you like living at Riverstown?’
She muttered something, anything non-committal would do.
He wasn't in the least interested; he went on cutting up his meat and making little packets of food on his fork.
What did he mean about Philip?
If England went to war, why should Philip go and fight in it?
But of course he would.
His father had held army rank and won a medal in the last war.
Her own uncles, more fools them, had gone off to France to fight and come back gassed.
Her plate was taken away.
She refused the sweet.
Philip couldn't persuade her to say pudding, when it was ice cream or some sugary mousse.
She felt slightly sick.
The wretched man was right, of course.
She didn't read the English Times or the Irish Times , which were the only two papers that came into the house.
There were no tabloids, none of the women's weeklies with their recipes and home hints that her mother loved reading.
War!
She wouldn't let Philip go.
She knew that the women left the men to linger in the dining room.
She was prepared for the move when it came and followed Claudia Hamilton and the other ladies upstairs.
It was a lovely bedroom.
There was a big, flouncy bed, covered in silk cushions, pink lighting and fluffy white rugs.
‘The bathroom's through there,’ Claudia said.
She sank down on the bed.
‘I'm dying to go, darling.’
The girl who had stared so hard at-Eileen darted through and closed the door.
Claudia patted the bed beside her.
‘Do sit down.
And may I call you Eileen?
And you must call me Claudia.
Lady Hamilton reminds me of my mother-in-law, God forbid!’
She laughed and patted Eileen's arm.
Why, Eileen wondered, is it all right for her to say that about her husband's mother, and wrong for me to tell the truth about Mrs Arbuthnot?
The other women laughed and an older one, a Lady something, she couldn't remember a single name, said, ‘Don't be naughty, Claudia.
She's not as bad as all that.’
‘She's ghastly,’ Claudia insisted.
‘She rings up and complains to James that she hasn't any money and she wants this and she wants that.
She's not getting a penny from me, I can promise you.’
She turned to Eileen.
‘My dear, you're lucky.
I had to heave the old hag out of the house when I got married.
Imagine, she expected to live with us!’
Eileen didn't know what to answer.
A lot of people's old mothers lived with them when they married.
No man would turn his mother out of her own house on account of his wife.
‘Mind you,’ Claudia went on, ‘Blanche isn't bad.
She's a bit of a battleaxe, but I don't suppose she'll be a bother to you.
Maggie, hurry up, what are you doing in there?’
The bathroom door opened and the girl identified as Maggie came out.
‘Sorry,’ she said.
‘Anyone else?’
Eileen got up, glad to escape.
She shut and bolted the bathroom door.
The bath and basin were pink and there were bottles and jars of bath salts and essences she'd never even heard of.
Beautiful towels, as soft as swans-down, with initials embroidered on them.
She ran some water and washed her hands.
She could hear voices, but not loud enough to distinguish what was said.
‘Eaves-droppers never hear good of themselves,’ her mother used to say.
Eileen didn't try to listen.
She flushed the lavatory, although she hadn't used it.
She looked pale and tired; there was nothing she could do about it, because she'd left her handbag with her makeup behind  on the bed.
When she opened the door, they stopped talking, so she must have been the subject.
Claudia got up, opened the door and led the way out.
‘Let's go and have our coffee,’ she said.
‘I know James will keep the men in there for hours.’
They disposed themselves in the drawing room.
The girl called Maggie had no alternative but to sit in a chair close to Eileen.
‘Do you smoke?’
‘No.
I never did.’
She shook her head.
What did Claudia Hamilton mean by ‘hours’?
How much longer would she have to sit with these women before Philip came in and they could decently go home?
Of course she didn't smoke, she thought, watching them lighting up and puffing away.
It wouldn't have been tolerated in her family.
Tobacco was for men and a few old tinker women who sucked on a pipe.
‘How long have you been married?’
She knew that Maggie was being polite, trawling for subjects to pass the time till she could safely move away.
‘Nearly a year,’ Eileen answered.
‘You're engaged, I see — when's the wedding?’
God, Maggie thought to herself, she makes it sound like a wake.
I wish the men'd hurry their damned port and come back.
‘Next spring,’ she said.
‘Of course, if this beastly war breaks out we'll have to make it earlier.
Maybe it won't, and my father says it'll be over in six months anyway, so none of them will have to go.’
‘I don't see why anyone wants to fight for England,’ Eileen said.
‘Not now we're independent.
I won't let my husband go joining up.’
‘My brother can't wait,’ was the answer.
She said it quite casually, as if everybody went to war.
‘But men are so silly, aren't they?
I don't think you'll keep the Paddies out of it, they love a fight.
Ah, here come the chaps.
There's my fiancé, do excuse me.’
The Paddies!
Eileen had blushed scarlet at the contemptuous word, and the equally contemptuous way  it was said.
I'm a Paddy, she wanted to stand up and say.
And proud of it.
To hell with the lot of you.
But she stayed in her chair and Philip came over to her.
He noticed that she looked very flushed.
He bent and kissed her lightly on the forehead.
‘Hello, darling.
Sorry we were so long.
Are you all right?’
She told the sort of feeble lie she would have despised in someone else.
A little social lie, which one of those drawling females would have used.
‘I've got a bit of a headache,’ she murmured.
‘I wouldn't want to stay too long.’
He nodded, taking the empty seat beside her.
‘We won't.
Just a few minutes more.’
James Hamilton came over.
She noticed that he moved unsteadily; his face was very red.
‘Whiskey, Philip?
Hasn't your wife got a drink?
Claudia…what the hell are you doing?
This poor child hasn't got a drink!’
‘I don't want one,’ Eileen protested, but he didn't even listen.
He was drunk and irritated.
He wanted to pick a row.
It's not just the Paddies who like a fight, she thought bitterly.
My father's never sworn at my mother in a public place in his life.
‘Oh, shut up, James,’ Claudia called from her seat across the room.
‘Not everyone wants to get tight, you know.’
She wasn't even embarrassed.
Eileen couldn't believe it.
Philip got up.
‘I'm afraid we must go.
I've a very early start in the morning.
I've got to see the men and then go up to Dublin.
It's been a lovely evening.
Come along, darling, we must say goodnight.’
She thanked Claudia Hamilton.
‘It's been lovely,’ she echoed.
‘A great party.
Thank you so much.’
‘So sweet of you to come.
I'll ring you up, we must have lunch one day soon.
‘Night, Philip darling.
Let's all get together over Christmas.
It'll be such fun.’
He helped put the wrap over her shoulders and she was silent on the short drive home.
She felt degraded and diminished without being able to isolate a single  snub except that one word, Paddies.
But didn't that say it all?
Didn't it put the viewpoint of these people towards the Irish?
The real Irish.
‘It wasn't too bad, was it?’
Philip asked her when they got home.
She didn't want to hurt him.
She didn't want to disappoint his hopes that she would integrate and enjoy being with his friends.
She loved him too much to tell him the truth.
‘It was nice,’ she said.
‘I was a bit shy of them.
But they were all very nice to me.
Philip, what's this talk about a war?’
‘Don't bother your head about it,’ he dismissed it lightly.
The men had talked of nothing else when they were alone.
‘How's the headache, by the way?
You're not getting a cold are you, darling?
Stay in bed tomorrow if you think one's coming.
I'll be out all day, you can stay cuddled up till I get back.’
‘I'll see,’ she said.
She hoped he wouldn't make love that night.
She felt too cold and empty-hearted to respond.
‘I have a little headache,’ she admitted, and that was the third lie she had told him that night.
Over at Half House the party was going strong.
Whiskeys and brandies were poured and drunk, cigars pierced and lit, some not too steadily.
There was a lot of laughter.
James Hamilton had passed from aggressiveness to fuddled good nature, calling everyone his best friend, pressing more drinks upon them.
Claudia called for champagne and someone else suggested they put on some records and dance in the hall.
And naturally they gave their opinions on the new Mrs Arbuthnot.
‘I think she's quite sweet,’ Claudia said.
‘A bit gauche, but really rather nice.’
‘Damned pretty girl,’ several of the men agreed.
‘I don't think she's nice at all,’ Maggie announced.
Claudia spoke up.
‘I heard you say something about Paddies.
Whatever made you do that?’
‘Because she had the bloody cheek to say no one should fight for England if there's a war,’ Maggie said.
‘We all know she's bog Irish, but she should keep those sort of remarks to herself.
I wasn't going to stand for it anyway.
We were all very friendly and nice and you made a big effort, Claudia darling, but I don't think it was appreciated one bit.
Personally I thought she was hostile and chippy.
I love Philip, he's a dear, but I'm not having her in the house.’
‘Don't be silly, Maggie, you can't take that attitude.’
The woman whose title had baffled Eileen waved her hand at the other girl dismissively.
She felt that Maggie Gibbs had gone too far.
Of course the girl was gauche and tactless, but that was no reason to be unkind.
‘You can't say things like that,’ she repeated.
‘The Arbuthnots have been here for generations.
You can't refuse to have Philip's wife to parties.
You don't have to make a bosom friend of her, after all…’
‘People with her attitude burnt my grandmother's home to the ground in ‘22,’ Maggie declared.
‘They brought her out with a gun in her back, a woman of seventy, and set fire to the place while she watched.
She went home to England and died.
No, I'm not having someone with Republican sympathies near me.
And David won't either, will you, darling?’
‘We'll see,’ her fiancé said soothingly.
‘Don't get het up about it now, there's a good girl.’
He didn't share his future wife's passionate feelings about the past.
It amused him to think how much Maggie and Eileen Arbuthnot had in common, with their rooted prejudices.
He loved his home in Ireland and got on with the people.
But he was a newcomer.
His father had bought a place in Kildare before the Great War.
The Gibbses traced their family back to one of Cromwell's captains.
‘Come on, Claudia, let's dance,’ he said.
‘I love this record.’
They circled a few times on the parquet floor in the hall.
‘Try and calm Maggie down,’ she said.
‘Don't let her go round damning that wretched girl and starting a vendetta.
I liked her; she's going to find it difficult enough.’
‘You like everybody,’ her partner said.
‘I'll do my  best, but I can't promise.
You know these Black Irish, they never forgive or forget.’
‘I'll have her to lunch,’ Claudia Hamilton said.
‘Maybe I can drop a hint or two and put her right, otherwise Maggie will have them both ostracized if she goes round saying that girl's a Republican.
The twenties aren't all that long ago, you know.
Thanks for the dance, David.
You're a divine dancer.
I wish James would get on his feet sometimes.
Let's go and have a drink, shall we?
And by the way, I've bought a marvellous young hunter from old Devlin.
He won't be ready till next season, but I'm really going to knock their eyes out with this fellow.’
They went back to the drawing room and settled down into the sofa to talk horses.
It was impossible not to like Claudia.
Life in Ireland had rubbed some of the English corners down; she had adapted very quickly to the relaxed way of living, and proved herself a great sport who loved a party and hunted like a demon.
People were expected to come on time, but that was accepted as Claudia being a bit eccentric.
That particular party broke up at five, and two guests were persuaded to go to bed rather than drive all the way back to West Meath.
Another day dawned and the mists from the river swirled and eddied round the banks and crept up to the house the Hanging Judge had built.
In the bedroom on the first floor Philip woke as the sun came up.
He slept with the curtains drawn back and the top of the window open.
Eileen had been horrified, sure it would give them both their death of cold to let the fresh air in at night.
He turned and looked at her sleeping beside him.
He did love her so much.
She was the most girlish girl he'd ever known.
Small and soft, with little bones and delicate hands and feet.
Most of the well-bred girls he knew were coarse as cows beside her.
He loved her courage and her loyalty.
Once committed to him, she had withstood her family and, even more difficult, the power of her Church.
He regretted the Ryans' intractability because he felt it made Eileen unhappy.
They wouldn't have been an  embarrassment to have around.
They were proud people in their way and would never have intruded.
His mother was rather a stranger to him, so he didn't feel the loss of her so keenly.
Nurses had brought him up and by seven he was away at private school in England.
She was a busy woman, much occupied with her garden and her charities.
She had more time for dogs and horses than for children.
She'd call on them one day, he was confident of that.
When there were grand-children, she'd reconcile herself completely.
She was old and a snob.
He didn't blame her; he didn't really care enough to be hurt.
He missed his father, though.
They had been friends when he was grown up.
They hunted and fished and went racing together, and there was a gap when his father died.
He would have warmed to Eileen had he lived long enough to get to know her.
He did want her to settle down and find her place now that they were married.
He couldn't instil enough confidence into her, that was the trouble.
On the surface he'd helped her to adjust, and a woman less sensitive and intelligent wouldn't have accepted him correcting her speech and table manners.
But in his heart he sensed that she was lonely and ill at ease.
The servants weren't a problem any more.
It wasn't just fear of him that made them change.
They respected Eileen.
And in spite of themselves they were proud of her.
She had dignity, and natural grace.
Like tonight, faced with the ordeal of going to a grand dinner party with people who all knew each other and were far removed from her experience, she had acquitted herself proudly and well.
If war broke out he'd have to join his father's regiment, but he wasn't going to tell her that.
He wasn't going to let anything worry or unsettle her.
What she wanted was a baby.
He could leave her if there was a child; and he knew, as all his friends agreed that night, that if England went to war with Germany, Ireland might remain neutral, but they could not.
He woke her gently, and as the mists sank back into the river in the sunlight, they made love.
But it was two long years of disappointment before she conceived.
She felt so sick that it was lunchtime before she could drag herself out of bed and come downstairs.
Doctor Baron reassured Philip.
‘Sure she's fine,’ he insisted, dismissing the silly man's fears.
‘She's a fine healthy girl and all she is a bit queasy of a morning.
That'll pass when the baby turns.
Nothing to worry about at all.’
If she hadn't been Mrs Arbuthnot, he'd have told anyone else to stop spoiling her and give her work to do around the house.
That'd keep her mind off herself quick enough.
He'd no patience with women putting on airs and moaning about the most natural thing in the world.
He'd seen women give birth on their cabin floors and get up and cook their man a meal when he came in…
He had little sympathy with Eileen, although he was polite and briskly reassuring.
He despised her for betraying her family and her faith.
She was a rich lady now; let her take comfort in that.
No mother to fuss over her, no aunties and cousins to come visiting and swapping stories about the terrible births they'd had.
No old school friends to call and help her pass the time.
There were visitors, of course.
Lady Hamilton from the Half House and one or two others of her sort.
He'd heard their shrill voices when he made a routine call and seen Eileen Ryan sitting up in her big bed looking strained and miserable.
He still thought of her as Eileen Ryan, old Jack's daughter.
He wondered whether they knew about the baby.
They'd have heard it from Mary Donovan.
She'd have been up there on her Sunday off, bursting with the news.
He saw Mrs Ryan one evening in his surgery.
She had a nasty burn on her forearm.
Spitting fat, she explained to him.
It looked like there might be pus in it.
He agreed, and gave her some ointment.
He didn't mention her daughter or the daughter's pregnancy.
He didn't want to embarrass the poor woman.
Eileen didn't improve much after the three months.
She felt weak and seedy and if she went for a walk her ankles puffed up.
Mary made her special brews to take the swelling down.
Lily brought her breakfast in bed.
Doyle picked some choice early plums from the conservatory and sent them up to her.
‘Poor soul,’ Mary Donovan said, as they stood round drinking the mid-morning cup of tea.
‘There's something wrong there, for sure.
A breath o' wind'd blow her over!’
‘It's a sad state to be in,’ Lily agreed.
‘Not a move from her mother…’
‘She wouldn't hear a word from me about it.’
Mary was deeply disapproving.
‘I went all that way on me day off, and hoped I'd do some good between them.
‘I've no daughter,’ she says to me.
‘Her name isn't mentioned in this house.’
God forgive us, she was as bitter as gall.
I didn't see the auld man.
I had me tea with her and the two boys and she didn't press me any further.’
‘It's a terrible thing for them,’ Bernadette ventured.
‘I think my mammy'd be the same.’
She was still jealous.
She had no man and no prospect of one.
She thought of Eileen as ‘That one’, though these days she didn't dare say so.
Lying up there with Mr Arbuthnot and the local gentry fussing round her, as if she was a queen!
And the size of the box of chocolates Lady Hamilton brought her last time!
She finished her tea and sulked.
‘What about the boys?’
Doyle asked.
‘Not a murmur out o' them,’ Mary answered.
‘Shamus sitting there like a stuck pig, and Kevin lookin' at his teacup.
I tell ye, I was sorry I'd taken the trouble.’
She lifted the pot and tipped a little boiling water into it.
‘I'll offer a Mass for them all,’ she said.
‘That's all ye can do when things get so bad.’
Mrs Ryan never came, nor was there an answer to the letter Philip sent her.
But when Eileen was in the seventh month, Mrs Blanche Arbuthnot came to Riverstown on her way to stay with friends in Limerick.
Blanche Arbuthnot turned in through the gates of her  old home.
The Labrador bounded up in the back seat, excited by familiar smells.
She quelled her with a brisk command.
‘Sit, Bunny!’
She was the Major's gundog and had pined so badly when her master died, Blanche had considered putting her down.
But, as if she knew her life depended on it, Bunny had attached herself to her.
Now they were equally devoted; she took the bitch everywhere with her.
It all looked so familiar.
The green lawns were bright and cut close, the thickets of daffodils had not quite died down along the edges of the drive.
Nothing had changed since she came as a bride more than forty years ago.
She wouldn't admit that she felt nervous.
She switched off the engine, glanced at herself in the driving mirror and got out, letting Bunny jump on to the drive.
The front door opened before she had time to walk up to it, and there was Philip, smiling a welcome to her, and behind him was her daughter-in-law.
‘Hello, Phil, dear,’ she said.
‘I've brought Bunny, I hope you don't mind.’
‘Of course not,’ her son said and then the moment she had been dreading came.
‘Mother, this is Eileen.’
She was smaller and slighter than Blanche had imagined.
The baby overbalanced her; she moved awkwardly when she came up and held out her hand.
‘How do you do, Mrs Arbuthnot,’ she said.
Her mouth smiled.
The light-coloured eyes were full of hatred.
Philip couldn't see, of course.
He was beside her, smiling in his good-natured way.
A faint colour crept up into Blanche's cheeks.
‘How do you do.
It's so nice to meet you.’
‘Do come inside,’ the girl said, and stood back to let Blanche go ahead of her.
She had been expecting changes and had steeled herself not to resent them.
Philip wouldn't allow anything too drastic, that was one comfort.
It was untouched, except that there were very few flowers, sparsely arranged in tight little vases.
‘Where are we having tea, darling?’
Philip asked, as if he didn't know.
‘In the den,’ his wife replied.
‘The den?’
Blanche knew immediately she shouldn't have asked, but the word made no sense to her.
Where would you find a ‘den’ at Riverstown?
‘Dad's old study,’ her son said.
‘Eileen's made it very cosy.‘
‘We use it a lot,’ the girl said, showing her into the room.
Blanche looked round her at the wallpapered walls and the flounced pink curtains and said, ‘How very nice.
Such a pretty colour scheme.’
She sat down and the Labrador flopped at her feet.
This had been her husband's favourite room.
There was no trace of him now.
She was surprised how much it hurt.
Philip looked very well, and kept giving his wife reassuring looks which Blanche wasn't supposed to see.
If he was happy that was something, but for how long?
How long before the difference in their background began to jar?
This dreadful, vulgar room!
Lily brought in a silver tray with tea and sandwiches and one of Mary's marvellous sponge cakes.
Blanche smiled up at her.
‘How are you, Lily?
It's so nice to see you.
You're looking very well.’
‘Oh, I am, Mrs Arbuthnot, mam.’
She saw the furtive look at the new mistress of the house and thought, ‘You know which side your bread is buttered, never mind the fifteen years you worked for me.’
‘How do you like your tea?’
Eileen asked.
For a moment their eyes met.
‘Not too strong.
Just milk, no sugar.
Thank you.’
She took a slice of cake.
There was silence.
She had never felt so uncomfortable in her life.
Her son was married, her daughter-in-law expecting their first baby and she didn't know what to say next.
‘How's Mary?’
It sounded so forced, but she couldn't leave the silence.
‘Mary?’
Eileen Arbuthnot echoed.
‘Yes, Mary Donovan-you've still got her, haven't you?’
‘Oh, yes.
She's very well.’
‘Can't you tell by the sponge cake?’
Philip made a joke out of it.
‘Eileen says her whiskey cake is better, but I haven't let her prove it yet.’
‘Mary'd never forgive you if it was,’ Blanche answered.
Or if you went into her kitchen and interfered.
But I can't say that.
I can't behave naturally because I mustn't give offence.
They haven't mentioned the baby.
I suppose it's up to me.
She cleared her throat.
‘Philip told me the splendid news, Eileen.
When will the baby arrive?’
‘Early August, Doctor Baron says,’ the girl answered.
‘Baron?’
Blanche was aghast.
‘Surely he's not looking after you?’
She switched to Philip.
‘He's an absolute idiot, I wouldn't have him to whelp Bunny.
My dear, you must get somebody from Dublin.’
She knew that she had made a fatal mistake.
The girl's pale face flushed an unbecoming red.
‘He's been our doctor since I was born.
He's good enough for me.’
Blanche suddenly felt quite tired.
What an effort, and then to see it wasted.
There was no point of contact and there never would be.
She pulled herself together and said, sounding brisker than she realized, ‘Anyway, it's splendid news.
One more cup of tea and then I really must be on my way.
It's quite a drive.’
Philip said, ‘Mother's going to stay with the Dornaways.’
Eileen said, ‘Who are the Dornaways?’
‘The Earl and Countess of…’
He was trying to be jolly again.
‘Dornaway Castle is quite a place.
I'll take you down there one day.
They're awfully sweet.’
‘They've asked me for ten days,’ Blanche said.
‘It's such a lovely house, your father and I always enjoyed  going there.
You must drive Eileen over to meet Bobby and Jill.
I'm sure you'd like them,’ she added.
The red flush had faded, leaving her terribly pale, with dark rings under the eyes.
She said quietly, ‘I think they'd be a bit grand for me, Mrs Arbuthnot.’
Blanche put down her cup.
‘They're not at all grand.
Bobby Dornaway is my nephew.
I'm sure they'd be delighted to meet you.
It's so nice I can take Bunny.
She moped so badly after your father died.’
She spoke to Philip.
‘I didn't know what to do.
The local vet kept saying I should put her down — he's not a patch on old Pat Farrel — he was marvellous with dogs.’
‘Pat Farrel is a cousin of my father's,’ her daughter-in-law said.
‘He's a good man with cattle too.’
‘Yes, so he is.
Such a nice man.
I keep Bunny in the house now,’ Blanche hurried on.
‘She was so damned miserable in the kennel, poor old girl.
So now she's a house dog.’
She bent down and patted the silky black head.
‘Aren't you, you silly old thing?’
‘Will you excuse me a moment.’
Eileen got up, glanced at Philip and her mother-in-law.
He looked concerned.
‘Are you all right, darling?
Not feeling sick, are you?’
‘No.’
She managed a watery smile.
‘No, I'm fine.
I won't be long.’
‘Poor little thing,’ he said to Blanche.
‘She's had such a rotten time.
Been sick practically the whole seven months.
By the way, you shouldn't have said that about Baron.
He's always looked after the Ryans.
Eileen insisted on having him.’
‘I'm sorry.’
Blanche wasn't used to being rebuked by her son.
‘But he's an old butcher.
She's not a very robust girl, I'd say.
But it's not really my business.
I only meant it for the best.
Good Lord, Philip, look at the time.
I must be getting on my way.’
‘I'll go and call Eileen.’
He got up and left her sitting alone.
Eileen was not sick.
She thought that the spasm of pain would be followed by vomiting, as it often was, but by the time she reached her bedroom it had passed.
She  crawled on to the bed and hugged herself like a child with no one there to bring comfort.
That hateful, arrogant old woman, with her superior airs and her chilly snobbishness, patting her bloody dog and talking about the child she was carrying as ‘splendid news’.
So cold and unfeeling; Eileen couldn't have imagined anyone behaving in her own son's home as if she were a stranger, making small talk and occasionally bestowing a few words on her daughter-in-law.
Dismissing the doctor who had brought Eileen and all her brothers and sisters into the world as someone she wouldn't have to whelp her mangy bitch.
Patronizing Pat Farrel, knowing, surely, that he and the Ryans were close relatives on both sides.
She didn't mean to cry, but tears came so easily these days, and it was so difficult to stop.
She felt angry and degraded, the child she carried equally despised.
She couldn't stop crying, and then the pain came back and nagged at her, till she held her hands to her lower belly.
Philip came running down the stairs.
Blanche was already in the hall, clutching Bunny's lead.
‘Is she all right?’ she asked, seeing him come down alone.
Her son was white-faced, a sure sign of anger in the Arbuthnots.
Lily, coming out of the study with the tea tray, backed in again quickly, out of sight but able to hear.
‘She's thoroughly upset,’ he snapped at her.
‘Crying her eyes out upstairs, poor darling.
Why the hell couldn't you have been nicer to her, Mother?’
They stood facing each other in the hall, mother and son who had never been close, locked in the eternal triangle.
‘I did my best,’ Blanche Arbuthnot answered.
‘She wasn't exactly friendly to me.
If you care about her and the baby, you'll get a proper doctor to look after her.
Don't bother to see me out.’
Philip said, ‘She's having pains.
If anything happens I'll never forgive you.’
He turned and went back upstairs.
From her vantage point inside the doorway, Lily saw Mrs Arbuthnot open the front door and slam it after her.
Then she hurried out to the kitchen to tell them all the news.
Blanche got into the car, settled the old dog on the seat beside her and switched on the engine.
She was trembling.
It was too much, at sixty-three, too much to lose her husband and be left with the son who was the least favourite of her three children, and this dreadful marriage.
The house she loved was full of strangeness and hate.
Her eyes filled with tears.
If only Teddy or Richard had been spared from that terrible war, she wouldn't be cast out like this.
They would have laughed Philip out of such a hopeless misalliance…even so, he could have married his colleen and it wouldn't have mattered because he was the youngest son…
I'll never forgive you, she thought.
How that whey-faced girl had poisoned him, that he could bring himself to say such a thing to his own mother.
She wiped her eyes and let the clutch in.
The exit on to the Naas road was the most dangerous in Kildare.
Tears blurred her vision as she swung out, hammering on the horn.
She only just missed a donkey cart that was too far over to the left.
The driver yelled curses at her, slashing in fright at the helpless donkey.
Blanche drove on and three hours later she was safe in Dornaway Castle, where she seemed so shaken that they put her straight to bed.
‘I did everything you told me,’ Eileen mumbled.
‘Yes, darling, of course you did.’
He held her hand and soothed her, but she was fretful and kept repeating herself.
‘I did my best.
She was so horrible…’
Tears were seeping down her cheeks.
He wiped them away, murmuring to her to forget about it, not to worry.
He was just so desperately sorry she was upset.
Doctor Baron had given her something, she ought to let him put the light out and go to sleep.
‘I hate her,’ she whispered.
‘She hates me and I hate her.’
‘Don't say things like that,’ Philip begged her.
‘Please, sweetheart.’
He had rung for Baron, who came over and examined her briskly.
‘She's just having a grumble,’ he reassured Philip.
‘Nothing to worry about; it can happen around the seven months, but we don't want her going into labour.
I've given her a draught.
You settle her down now and she'll be right as rain in the mornin'.
I'll look in on her round dinner time.’
But Eileen didn't sleep, and by nine o'clock the pain had become stronger.
He telephoned the doctor again.
A slow-witted girl drove him mad, trying to spell his name, saying himself was out on a call and the missus visiting relatives.
No, sure she'd no notion where to find him, but he might ring the house in an hour or so, to see if there were any messages.
When he came upstairs to the bedroom he found Lily standing by the bed, and Eileen clutching her hand and moaning.
‘The missus rang for me,’ she whispered.
‘Sure, God love her, she's goin' to give birth.’
‘The doctor's out,’ Philip said.
‘Nobody knows where he is or when he'll be back!
Lily, stay here with her.
I'm going to get Lady Hamilton to come over.’
Claudia drove the ten miles separating them at reckless speed.
She knew panic when she heard it, and sheer panic was in Philip Arbuthnot's voice.
She ran into the hall and up the stairs.
She was in a dinner dress, with a coat thrown over it.
They had been in the middle of a party when his call came.
She saw the housemaid, Lily, standing on one side, and Philip, grey and hollow-eyed with fear, holding on to Eileen.
She didn't scream; she moaned and cried with pain, pulling at the bedclothes, jerking her swollen body up and down with the contractions.
Mary Donovan put her head round the door.
‘Oh, thank God your Ladyship's here,’ she breathed.
‘Shouldn't we go for the midwife?’
Claudia didn't waste a minute.
‘Philip, get the car out.
Lily, pack some night things for Mrs Arbuthnot, just the minimum.
Mary, you come and hold on to her.
I'm going to phone the Rotunda and say we're bringing her in now.’
Claudia insisted on driving.
‘You look after Eileen,’ she said.
‘You're in no state to drive anyway.
I'll get there, don't worry.’
He sat in the back, cradling his wife in his arms.
Every racking pain tore at him; he hadn't wept since he was a child, but his cheeks were wet as he tried to comfort her.
‘Darling, don't fight it, try to relax.
We're getting you to hospital.
You'll be fine.’
‘No, no, not hospital.
I don't want to go to hospital.’
Her fear surprised him.
‘Don't take me there,’ she whimpered.
‘I'll die if I go there.
The baby'll die.’
And then the pain came, turning her protest into a low cry of anguish.
She had started the second stage of labour when they carried her into the Rotunda and hurried her away into the labour ward.
Claudia took charge; Philip stood helplessly while she talked to the ward sister and exerted her considerable authority to get the doctor called immediately.
Then she turned to Philip and took his arm.
‘Come on, we'll go to the waiting room.
They'll bring us a cup of tea.’
It wasn't a long vigil.
They sat in the dingy room, with its green painted walls and picture of the Sacred Heart, a tiny red eye of an oil lamp burning in front of it.
The smell of disinfectant was acrid.
‘She'll be all right,’ Claudia insisted.
And then, because she had spoken quietly to the ward sister, she thought it best to warn him.
‘It may be a bit difficult for the baby.
It's very early, you see.’
‘I don't care about the baby,’ Philip said, and with  those few words he doomed his unborn son.
‘I want Eileen safe and well.
That's all I care about.’
When the door opened and the sister appeared, he sprang up.
‘Mr Arbuthnot?
Would you come and see Doctor O'Brien, please.’
‘My wife…’
Claudia heard him say as he went out.
‘How's my wife?’
The pain and the exertion had stopped.
So had the warm gushing blood that streamed out of her body, taking her life with it.
She floated between dreams and fits of consciousness, then she saw Philip leaning over her and she thought someone said, ‘You've got a lovely little boy, thanks be to God…’ but it didn't seem real.
Her mother-in-law was real.
The anger wouldn't go away.
She mumbled in delirium.
‘I hate her…
I hate them all…
Mammy.
Where's Mammy?’
The doctor had left them.
There was no more he or anyone could do.
The ward sister said, ‘Your wife said she was a Catholic.
I've sent for the priest.
She's calling for her mother.
She wouldn't be here in time.
Here's Father Cochran now.’
She was surprised and offended when he left the room.
He stood in the corridor outside while the priest prepared his wife for death.
He felt nothing.
Nature is kind, he thought, sometimes it's kind.
As it was cruel to Eileen, who'd bled to death after the birth of her tiny baby.
He couldn't cry, he couldn't feel; he didn't know how long he stood outside the door, leaning against the greasy wall.
It was a boy, they told him.
Very small, but no signs of jaundice and breathing normally, thanks be to God.
It was early days, he must understand, but there was hope.
He must have closed his eyes because the priest was suddenly in front of him.
He was an old man, blinking behind very thick glasses.
He carried a shabby bag with his stole and the sacraments in his left hand.
‘You can go into her now,’ he said.
‘It was a beautiful  death she made.
She just smiled and went to heaven.’
He said the same to all bereaved.
It eased the pain of loss for the devout.
He touched Philip on the arm.
‘God's given you a child,’ he said.
‘Try to be comforted.’
There was nothing Philip could say.
Standing so close he smelt the fusty clothes and a sour whiff on the old man's breath.
What was beautiful about the death of a young girl, leaving a motherless child?
There was no comfort her priest could give Philip.
‘Thank you, Father Cochran.’
‘I'm told the baby's very small,’ the priest said.
‘T'would be wise if I baptize him now.’
Philip Arbuthnot said, ‘My son will be brought up an Anglican.
Excuse me.’
He turned his back and went in to say goodbye to his wife.
Claudia Hamilton made the arrangements.
He didn't want Eileen to lie in the Catholic cemetery in Naas, since the place reserved for the Arbuthnots was forbidden to her.
She was buried in Dublin.
Her family were not invited to attend.
The baby was strong enough to go back to Riverstown with a monthly nurse after six weeks and he was duly baptized a Protestant in the Church of Ireland in Naas.
Claudia was among his godparents.
He was called Francis Alexander William, which were all family names.
Philip was not allowed to be lonely.
Friends rallied to him and Claudia installed a housekeeper and a nanny.
The little boy was strong and he flourished.
Philip went to see him twice a day, encouraged by Claudia, who hoped the child would make up to him for Eileen.
But he turned more and more to her.
James Hamilton had joined the British Army at the outbreak of war.
By the time he was killed in North Africa, Claudia and Philip had become lovers.
It was Mary Donovan who suggested that Eileen's younger brother might slip in to see his nephew before he left for America.
It was a nagging frustration for Mary to go up to the Ryans and not be able to talk about what  was going on at Riverstown.
Surely Bridget Ryan had aged since her daughter's death.
There was a quietness about her that Mary had seen before when people were losing their hold on life.
Old Jack was drunker at night than usual, and the yob of an elder son glowered by the hearth and waited for him to die.
One evening Kevin came to the bus stop with her.
They stood hunched against the rain and he said in his laconic way, ‘How's Eileen's boy?’
Now, two days before he sailed for New York, Mary smuggled him in to see the child.
He came in through the back door on Lily's afternoon out.
The rest of the maids had been threatened with hell-fire and damnation if they breathed a word.
Bernadette had been sacked for cheeking the nurse.
Mary had smiled to see her go.
The nurse slept in her room for two hours while Francis dozed in his nursery.
Kevin went up the back stairs, Mary chattering like a magpie.
He didn't bother to listen.
His sister had lived in the big gloomy house for such a little time.
She had left no impression.
She had come and gone like a shadow.
‘He's in here,’ Mary said, opening a door.
Kevin had never seen a nursery before.
At home the children all slept together and the new baby with its parents till it came off the breast.
Everything was white and clinical as if the child were in a hospital.
There was no holy picture on the wall, with its little oil lamp, no homely touch he recognized.
A cot swathed in draperies and blue ribbon stood isolated in a corner.
He approached, and looked in at the boy.
‘He's awake, so,’ Mary whispered.
He had a thatch of black hair and wide eyes, so dark blue they were changing colour already.
There was nothing to remind him of Eileen.
Just a black Arbuthnot, like the rest of them.
He turned away, and his eyes filled with tears.
‘So that's all that's left of her,’ he said.
‘Don't mind that he takes after them ,’ Mary  murmured.
‘I've seen babies lose all their hair and come out a different colour.’
‘It's what's in him that counts,’ Kevin said.
‘But he'll never know the Irish half of him.
That bastard had him baptized a Protestant.’
‘She gave her life for her faith,’ Mary said.
‘She was too frail in herself.
But not in vain, thanks be to God.
The nurse who brought him home said the sister baptized him herself the very night he was born.
So much good did it do them to take him up to that heathen place in Naas.
God's grace is in him, Kevin.
It'll come out in good time!’
He leaned down and touched the child with one finger.
The skin was soft and smelled sweet.
He remembered the sour smell of his tiny sisters that wrinkled the nose.
‘Good luck to him,’ he said.
‘Maybe one day he'll know the truth about himself.’
He turned away.
He didn't want to sit gossiping in the kitchen with that old slob of a cousin.
He wanted to get out of that hated house and everything it represented.
Many of his friends were joining the British Army.
It seemed a kind of treason.
He had relatives in America on his mother's side.
He would have shared the farm with his brother in the end, as was the Irish custom, but he didn't want that kind of life.
He didn't want to end up a mean and ignorant man like his father, or spend the years bickering with brother Shamus.
There was no real future for the Irish in Ireland while the country was divided and people like the Arbuthnots held the land and the power in actuality.
In America, it was an advantage to be Irish.
He said goodbye to Mary, cutting the blessings short, and hurried away down the drive to the road.
He walked hunched into himself, as if the rain were beating on him, though that afternoon the sun was shining.
It was nearly twenty-six years before he saw his nephew again.
Claire went through to the gun room.
Years ago, it held the family collection of sporting guns, encased in mahogany.
It was a male preserve, consecrated to sport, where guns were cleaned after a day's shooting and guests would be shown valuable old museum pieces that had been used by earlier Arbuthnots.
It belonged to an age Claire could well remember, when there were big shooting parties at Riverstown, and she followed on foot with her mother and joined the guns for lunch.
Frank was a superb shot.
That at least he and his father had in common.
When they were young there had been no need to lock the gun room.
For years, since the trouble began in the North, all firearms, even the most ancient, were kept under lock.
Her father gave up shooting quite suddenly, after Frank left home.
Occasionally, when she came over from England with Neil, they'd go out and take a few pigeons on a Sunday morning, but his heart wasn't in it.
Neil was devoted to Claudia, but he found Philip frankly daunting.
A man who had turned his own son out of the house was not exactly comfortable as a father-in-law.
To Neil, hide-bound Englishman that he was, Philip Arbuthnot was best described as Irish, because he couldn't account for him in any other way.
Deep down, they hadn't liked each other.
She fitted the key and turned it.
The room was shuttered and smelt of oily rags and leather.
She switched on the light.
The cases were empty.
The Purdey guns had been sold after Philip's death, since there was nobody to use them.
One gun remained in the rack: Frank's Churchill 12-bore shotgun.
And hanging from a hook in its holster, her father's army revolver.
She  stood hesitating.
Where did her father keep the ammunition for it…in one of the bottom drawers; she found the clip with the cartridges.
She put them in her pocket, unlocked the cabinet and took the revolver down.
It didn't fit into her pocket.
It was heavy and clumsy, difficult to hide.
She took her jacket off and wrapped it up, folding it awkwardly over one arm.
Billy wouldn't notice if she put it on the back seat.
She locked up after her.
She couldn't think ahead because she dared not.
She knew where he was, and she knew that he would need a gun.
If the worst came to the worst, she could fire it with both hands.
The car was ready when she got back to the cottage.
She forced herself to smile at Billy, clutching the coat with its hidden weapon close to her side.
‘Oh, that's great,’ she said.
‘It was a dirty old job,’ he complained.
‘Drive it out and I'll put mine inside the shed there.
Did ye lock the place up after ye?’
‘Yes.
It's fine, don't worry.’
She opened the back door and dropped the coat and the gun on the back seat.
She reversed the car out and swung it round to give Billy room to put his in its place.
The car was his pride and joy.
It looked scarred without its bright red number plates.
He shut the shed doors, puffing a little, and leaned against them to catch his breath.
‘My bloody old lungs,’ he grumbled.
‘Never been right since the bronchitis last winter.
Have ye far to go?’
She shook her head.
‘Not too far.
I've plenty of petrol.
Thanks, Billy.
And don't worry about me.
I'll be back before dark.’
She let the clutch in and drove towards the road; she waved at him out of the window.
He waved back at her and, as the car disappeared from sight, he screwed up his face in anguish and let out a groan of frustration and fear.
Not far, she said, and then gave the lie by saying she'd plenty of petrol.
Back before dark.
Where was Arbuthnot hiding, that half the police in Ireland and the  IRA couldn't find him, and Claire could?
They'd always had secrets, those two.
Walking together holding hands, not like brother and sister at all.
Him watching over her, and her thinking he was God Almighty.
She'd grown up into a beautiful fair girl, and every lad in the county had his eye on her, as Billy knew from all the women's gossip.
But all Frank had to do was speak against them and that made an end.
She could have married a fine young fella, he thought bitterly, with a grand house and a slice of West Meath to go with it, but Frank saw him off.
At twenty she'd rather go riding or fishing with him than up to Dublin or down to a dance.
So she was packed off to bloody England and came back with an Englishman.
He spat in disgust and went into his cottage.
A mile down the road, Claire stopped the car.
She got the revolver off the back seat and put it into the glove compartment with the cartridges.
She didn't need the signposts on the way.
She knew every mile of the back roads to Kells through Kilcock, Trim and Fordstown.
How often they'd driven there in Frank's car, towing the double trailer behind them, excited by the prospect of a day's hunting with the Meath.
He looked so well in hunting clothes.
She was proud to be seen with him, and knew they made a picture when they rode up together.
For a moment her eyes blurred at the memories of happy days, days of innocence.
Before Kevin Ryan came back from America and bought the Half House from the last improvident Hamilton, nephew of her mother's first husband who'd been killed at Tobruk.
That was when everything changed.
Until then Frank had been safe because they had each other, and the things that troubled him were half buried and might well have sunk past danger.
But as if Eileen Arbuthnot cried for vengeance from the grave, her brother came back and laid claim to her son.
It was midday, and gloriously bright.
Children were out playing in the schoolyards, shouting and enjoying the sunshine; shops were closed up for the dinner hour.
Kells itself was shuttered till the afternoon.
She drove past the great Celtic cross, so ancient that its age was only speculation, down the main street, past the gates of the Marquis of Headfort's magnificent estate, now sold to foreigners with money, made the final turn to Cloncarrig.
His voice on that last telephone call came back to her, made only a few days before he disappeared.
She knew it so well, and though time and distance had separated them, it made her heart beat double.
‘Claire, I wanted you to know…they've murdered poor old Donny.
Killed him in cold blood.
I'm finished with them.
I wanted you to know,’ he said again.
And she had answered, ‘Oh, thank God.
Thank God!
But can you do that — can you break off just like that?’
‘I can and I have,’ he said.
‘Come over here,’ she begged him.
‘You can't stay in Ireland if you've fallen out with them…please, darling Frank, come here to me.’
She heard the mocking laugh, but it was bitter.
‘I don't think Neil would be exactly overjoyed to see me.
Don't you worry about me.
I've friends who'll pull strings.
Nobody will dare touch me.
And anyway, if I need to hole up till things are fixed, we know where I can go.
Remember old Reynard?’
And then, dismissing himself, he asked if she were well and happy, and she lied and said she was.
‘God bless you then,’ was his goodbye, before the line went clear.
Her marriage had ended the night when she told Neil Fraser she was going back to Ireland to look for her brother.
She drove the car slowly, looking for the turning she remembered off the road.
It was still there, a gap where a gate should have been, leading on to a rutted farm track.
A low drystone wall surrounded the place, but it was crumbling and all along the edge the nettles triumphed.
She drove in and bumped along, skirting the worst pot-holes, heading for a clump of beech trees where the car would be hidden from the road.
Broad green fields surrounded her, with distant woods  bounding the horizon.
She stopped, looked round and saw the emptiness of Ireland.
Rooks cawed and swooped high in the trees.
She took the revolver, the bullets and her coat to wrap them in, and began to walk towards the woods.
Beyond the woods lay a valley and in the valley a lake, where the ruins of a fine Georgian house were reflected on a clear day.
And beyond that, past a gentle rise, she would find her brother if he were still alive.
The helicopter took off from South Wales an hour after the Special Branch had spoken to Major Michael Harvey.
It was an army chopper, but operated under a commercial flying company.
Before noon it landed at the heliport and a car was waiting to speed its passenger to London.
He was not at all what Brownlow expected when they came face to face.
He was a slight man, a little above average height, but by no means a. prime physical specimen.
He wore shabby corduroys and a jacket and looked thoroughly nondescript.
He could have been anything except an army officer in the most sensitive intelligence branch, renowned for undercover operations in Northern Ireland.
‘You haven't wasted any time,’ Brownlow said, as they shook hands.
‘You said it was urgent.
I thought so too.’
Harvey sat opposite to him and refused a cigarette.
He was a very still sort of man.
‘It's a bloody mess,’ Brownlow declared.
‘If Fraser hadn't mucked about when he got back and found she'd gone, we might have caught her before the boat sailed.’
‘I suppose he wanted to be sure,’ Major Harvey suggested.
‘But it's a pity.’
‘You know them socially, I believe.’
‘Yes.
I've stayed with them several times.
Had some days shooting with him.
They're a nice couple.’
‘How come he knows about you?
I thought you people kept top security at all times.’
‘I was assigned to look after him for a while,’ Harvey  answered.
‘We got on very well.
He was a high risk at one time.
We became friendly.’
‘The wife too?
How did she take to you, Major?
I gather she's pretty pro-Irish.’
Michael Harvey said, ‘She didn't want them to shoot her husband; I didn't think she was particularly pro-anything.
Besides, she grew up there.
So did I, as a matter of fact.’
‘Did you?’
Brownlow felt he'd been rebuked and it irritated him.
An arrogant bugger, he decided.
He sat up straight and became official.
‘The view is, she's gone over to look for her brother.
He's a right bastard.’
He dared the Major to defend him.
‘We've had a lot of conflicting information from over there.
The story goes that he's fallen out with his friends in the Provos, and he's either on the run, or they murdered him and dumped the body.
The nasty part is that, either way, it could be a ploy to get Mrs Fraser into the Republic, where they can pick her up.’
‘That seems the most likely.
Would the brother connive at it?
The whole disappearance could be a put-up job.’
Brownlow shook his head.
‘No way.
She's his one soft spot, from what we know about him.
I think he's at the bottom of a bog with a hole in his head and they're waiting to scoop her up at the right moment.
As I explained to Fraser, we can't say a word to the Irish police because that bloody country's like an echo chamber.
One word, and everyone gets to hear of it.
The Provos have got contacts everywhere.
So it's got to be handled from our end and with the utmost security.
And discretion,’ he added.
‘We want Mrs Fraser brought back home, but no shoot-outs.
No repercussions.’
‘Is that the official instruction,’ Harvey asked him, ‘or just a general directive?’
‘A general directive,’ Brownlow admitted.
‘Nobody can tell you how to do your job.’
‘Doesn't stop them trying,’ was the retort.
He looked at his watch.
‘There's been no publicity.
From what you  said on the phone, she's kept a low profile too, which is lucky.
Our one chance of sorting this out is to get to her before the Provos know for sure she's in Ireland.
So I'll be on my way.’
He stood up.
‘I'll be in touch.
With any luck, I could be back this evening.
If I'm not, things have gone wrong.
But I'm optimistic.
She's not a fool, and she knows what she's dealing with.’
He shook hands and went out.
Brownlow pinched his lip between finger and thumb.
He knows Claire Fraser a bloody sight better than he let on, he thought.
That's why the husband picked him.
He's not just a trigger man.
Brownlow had been dealing with human vagaries for thirty years.
The Major had closed ranks when he criticized Mrs Fraser, and by implication, Ireland.
He shook his head.
He would never understand them.
And by ‘them’ he meant the English who identified with a country and a people that had never accepted them.
He wondered whether Major Harvey, ex-Green Jackets, Wellington and Sandhurst and Ulster undercover expert, would describe himself as Irish.
He wouldn't be the least surprised.
The flight to Dublin took just on an hour.
Michael Harvey read the newspapers while the stewardesses offered drinks and the passengers examined each other at the start of the flight.
He put the papers away and leaned back, gazing out of the window at the bright banks of sunlit cloud as they reached thirty thousand feet.
He thought of Claire Fraser, and the first time they had met, at Brandon Manor in the heart of the Cotswolds.
It was three years ago, when her husband was a new Cabinet Minister and there was a scare that he might be a target for the IRA.
Informers named him and two other public figures.
Michael Harvey was assigned to look after him inside the house.
He could mix unobtrusively with their friends and cause no comment.
The humbler guardians of politicians patrolled the grounds and watched the roads.
Just after Christmas, when the January weather was at its worst.
Fraser was on his way down from London, suitably escorted.
Harvey was staying there for the weekend.
‘Hallo.’
Claire Fraser came to meet him.
‘Come in and have a drink.’
‘Thanks very much.
Sorry to have to inflict myself on you again.’
She had a charming smile.
‘Don't be silly.
We can sleep at night with you in the house.
Gin and tonic?’
‘Whiskey and soda, if that's all right.
It's whiskey weather today.’
She paused by the table with the bottles and glasses and looked at him.
‘That's a very Irish way of putting it,’ she said.
‘So's the rain,’ Michael Harvey countered.
‘Reminds me of Rademon on a Sunday.
All the pubs shut and nothing to do but go to church.
Do you know the North at all, Mrs Fraser?’
‘No, we never went up there.
My father couldn't stand them.
I hope I'm not being tactless.’
He smiled and took the glass she offered him.
‘Not in the least.
My home was in Galway.’
‘Really?
We had some cousins down there — the Grahams.
Did you know them?’
‘My family did.
I spent holidays at home, but went to school over here, and then into the Army.
The place is sold now anyway.’
He sipped the drink.
There was a big log fire, the inevitable Labrador stretched out in front of it, central heating keeping the atmosphere warm; nice expensive furniture and even more expensive country house pictures on the walls.
Fraser was a rich man.
A hospitable host, full of charm and not jumpy, in spite of the scare.
He had done his best to make Harvey feel at home.
Harvey was armed at all times, forever primed in case of unexpected noise or movement in the house.
Fraser and his wife had shown up extremely well in the circumstances.
A lot of people  would have been uncomfortable or jittery, having a bodyguard at their elbow.
Claire was a very good-looking woman, Harvey considered, watching her pour a drink and sit down opposite to him.
Good figure, smart clothes, very blonde.
He was completely immune to women when he was on a job.
After Belfast, he knew what women could do and smile at the same time.
The most he conceded was that Claire Fraser was nice and didn't pester him with silly questions.
‘I haven't been home since Easter,’ she said.
He noticed the word.
Home.
Keep your eyes open, he'd been told.
She has a brother who's highly suspect.
‘Neil hates going.
And now, of course, we can't.’
‘No,’ he agreed.
‘It wouldn't be very wise.’
‘I'm not going to ask you if you do,’ Claire said, and smiled.
‘No,’ he said again.
‘I'm glad about that.’
‘I talk to my mother on the phone,’ she remarked.
‘But it's not the same thing.
She's promised to come over here in the spring.
It's lonely for her since my father died.’
‘Wouldn't she move over to England?’
He wasn't really interested in the small talk, but the whiskey was soothing and he could relax till Fraser came in.
‘Good Lord, no,’ Claire said.
‘Mother's been in Ireland since her first marriage.
She's more Irish than the Irish.
She's seventy and she only stopped hunting last season because she's got arthritis in her wrist.
Do you know Kildare at all?’
‘Not well,’ he said, which wasn't true.
She seemed anxious to talk that night.
Previously, she had said very little and her husband kept the conversation going.
But then they hadn't been alone for any time before.
‘My mother was married to James Hamilton,’ she said.
‘They lived at a place called the Half House.
He was killed in the war and then she married my father.
It was sold ten years ago.’
She offered him a cigarette and then withdrew it, ‘Oh, I'd forgotten.
You don't smoke.’
‘I never did,’ he said.
‘Tried it once and couldn't stand it.’
She wanted to say something, he felt, and the cigarette was just a moment's loss of nerve.
He waited.
‘It was so Irish to call it the Half House.’
She sounded casual.
‘One of the Hamiltons burnt it to get the insurance and made a mess of it.
So they lived in one wing and everybody called it that.
It was even on the writing paper, if you can believe it.’
She laughed and he joined in.
‘Kevin Ryan bought it,’ she said.
He looked non-committal.
‘People couldn't stop talking about it.’
‘Isn't he the Senator?’ he asked, knowing she wanted the lead.
‘Yes, and a big business man.
His family were local farmers.
He went to America and made a fortune.
He's a very powerful man.’
‘Have you met him?’
There was something uneasy about her.
She was asking something from him, this stranger whose job was to shoot the IRA assassins if they came.
He didn't know what it was, but now it wasn't small talk and he wasn't just ticking over any more.
‘Once,’ Claire Fraser answered.
‘With my brother.
My half-brother.
Ryan is his uncle.’
‘Oh,’ he said.
She got up, fiddled with the drinks, pouring herself another whiskey for something to do.
With her back to him, she said, ‘Ryan's one of the bosses of Noraid.
He turned my brother Frank.
He completely turned him.
Major Harvey, can you imagine how I feel, with Neil's life being threatened?’
She turned round to face him.
His defences went up.
There were tears in her eyes.
‘You shouldn't feel anything,’ he said.
‘It's nothing to do with you.
And don't worry.
Nothing's going to happen to him.
I think that's your husband coming in now.
Excuse me.’
He put his glass down.
‘Thanks for the drink.’
Dinner had been strained that evening.
Neil Fraser looked tired and on edge, his wife was subdued and  made an excuse to leave them early.
When they were alone, the Minister offered him a brandy.
‘No thanks, I've got to keep my wits about me.
Wouldn't do to drink too much.’
‘I'm very grateful to you, Major,’ Neil said.
‘You make my wife feel much happier, knowing you're in the house.
She shouldn't worry, but she does.’
‘That's only natural,’ Harvey said, wondering why he was bringing her into it.
‘She's marvellous, considering most women would be throwing a wobbly.’
‘How long will it be before they give me the all-clear, do you think?’
Harvey shrugged.
‘I wouldn't know.
My own feeling is, the greatest danger is in the early days.
If they haven't made an attempt by now, I suspect they know the scheme's been blown and they've called it off.
But don't quote me.
As soon as the situation's normal, you can be rid of me.’
‘I've enjoyed having you with us,’ Neil Fraser said.
‘So has Claire.’
He sipped rather too deeply at his brandy.
‘The trouble is she feels as if it were her fault.
She feels guilty because my life's been threatened.
She was quite upset tonight, I don't know if you noticed.’
‘No, I didn't.
We were talking about Ireland before you arrived.
Just chatting.’
He was conditioned not to give anything away.
Fraser wasn't going to get any lead from him.
He wished he'd finish his drink and go to bed.
The last thing Michael Harvey wanted was to be drawn into a personal discussion.
‘It's her half-brother that's the problem.’
Fraser had settled into his chair.
He was going to get this off his chest, and nothing was going to stop him.
Harvey kept quiet.
‘Claire's father married a farmer's daughter.
Right out of the blue; ran away and married her in England.
There was the most God-awful row with the family.
They wouldn't accept her at any price.
Then she died having the boy.
There was some story about her and Claire's grandmother having a set-to and she had the baby too early — anyway, my father-in-law never spoke  to his mother again.
Typically Irish, I'm afraid.
Seems to me, they live on feuds.’
‘It does sound like it,’ Harvey admitted.
He eased his sleeve up and looked at his watch.
Fraser didn't notice or didn't care.
‘The old boy married a second time and she's a splendid woman.
English-born, actually, and we got on like a house on fire.
Claire's much more like her.’
He looked gloomily at his empty glass.
‘Trouble is, Claire and that brother were inseparable.
He was always jealous because she married me.
And he's up to his neck in it.’
‘Gone over to the other side?’
Harvey queried.
‘Backwards and forwards to the States, speaks at Noraid rallies.
Nothing can be pinned on him, not that the bloody Irish Government gives a damn what people like that do.
But it weighs on Claire.
Wasn't too easy for me, when I was standing for election.
Never mind.
They're a hopeless people.’
Harvey moved out of his chair.
‘Not all of them,’ he said.
‘I've known a few who weren't too bad.
I think we should shut up shop, if you don't mind.
The new night shift is coming on outside and they'll expect the household to be in bed.
I hope you don't mind, sir.’
The ‘sir’ was to soften it.
He was not surprised to find Neil Fraser was ignorant and prejudiced.
He didn't have much time for politicians as a breed.
‘Yes, it is late.
Goodnight, Major.
See you at breakfast.’
He slept in a room opposite the Frasers', with his door ajar.
He couldn't help hearing the row.
It began with muffled voices that meant nothing.
Then they rose in anger.
‘He wouldn't help them!
Frank wouldn't do anything to hurt you.’
‘Like hell he wouldn't — all he's ever wanted is to get you back!’
‘You say things like that and you expect me to bloody well sleep with you.’
Harvey got up and closed the door.
Then he opened  it again.
It was his job to watch over Fraser during the night.
He dozed with an eye and an ear open.
If they chose to quarrel at the tops of their voices, that was their business.
‘You don't want to any more — go on, admit it!
It's just another excuse tonight.’
Christ, he muttered to himself.
Married bliss.
The door to their room opened.
She was crying.
He felt sorry for the husband.
They always cried to put you in the wrong.
His ex-wife had cried at him for three years.
‘Oh, for God's sake, darling, don't let's go on,’ he heard Fraser say.
‘Come to bed.
I'm sorry.
I just wanted you tonight.’
‘I'm sorry too,’ she said.
That was a change, Harvey admitted.
‘I'm so sorry, Neil.
I'm so uptight about all this I just couldn't.’
The door closed and the voices were a murmur.
Harvey settled back on the bed, checked his gun was handy and closed his eyes.
He was used to sleeping on the lightest level.
It didn't bother him.
An odd kind of row, he mused, letting himself drift.
Rows about sex were ordinary enough.
He and his wife had fallen out over it more than anything else.
But what kind of a brother was this Frank Arbuthnot?
Clearly, he was very much under both their skins.
He dozed.
He was relieved from duty by the end of the week.
One more weekend and the security screen could be lifted.
Two men had been arrested in Liverpool and their informer in Belfast named them as the assassins.
Once this was established, Neil Fraser and the other two targets would be low risks as usual.
‘What are you going to do now?’
Fraser asked him.
‘Or is that a tactless question?’
‘I'm due for leave,’ Michael Harvey said.
‘Oh?
Then why not come down and have a day's shooting next Saturday,’ Fraser suggested.
‘We've got some guns staying with us and it should be a good party.
We'd really like to give you a good day.
Wouldn't we, darling?’
He slipped his arm round his wife's shoulders.
They'd seemed on close terms since the night he overheard them quarrelling.
‘Yes, we certainly would.’
She was enthusiastic.
‘Do come down, Major Harvey.
It's been so dreary for you in the last couple of weeks.
We'll have a lot of fun, now that everything's back to normal.
And the shooting is marvellous!’
In spite of himself he was tempted.
‘I may be a bit rusty,’ he said, and they both laughed.
‘I mean with a high bird,’ he amended.
‘Say yes,’ Claire encouraged him.
‘Do,’ Fraser echoed.
‘Well, if you're sure you can stand the sight of me…
I'd love to.’
That was the start of their friendship.
It was irregular because his duties took him out of touch for weeks at a time.
Whenever he rang up he was welcome to come for a night, or meet them in London and have dinner.
He was amused by Claire's attempts to introduce him to attractive women.
‘She's awfully nice,’ she'd say, preparing the way for yet another girl.
‘Very pretty; I'm sure you'll like her.’
And he would cock his head and say, ‘I'm sure I shall.
But I'm just as happy spending the evening with you and Neil.
I'm not in the market.’
He'd told them once that he'd been married.
‘Three years and we got divorced.
This job doesn't go with a wife, let alone children.
So…’
A shrug-that dismissed so much unhappiness and disappointment.
He was glad neither expected any details.
It was an odd friendship; Fraser was a gregarious man, ambitious, keen-witted for the main chance, much sought after.
Harvey couldn't see what he had to offer someone like that.
Except, of course, a sense of security.
He could talk to Michael Harvey and trust him not to make use of what he said.
He could sit with his very big brandies when Claire had gone to bed and talk about the Gordian Knot of the Arbuthnot relationships.
He couldn't cut it and he was enmeshed in it himself.
For  such a successful man in his middle years, his reliance on the young army officer was touching.
He seemed to Michael Harvey to be very lonely.
This was perhaps what they really had in common.
It was a marriage in a vacuum, with two sweet children and all the material trappings of affluence and success.
But Neil Fraser couldn't reach out and touch his wife.
Harvey wondered whether he had ever been able to, even in the beginning.
Like a ship on a slow tide, she had moved away from him, without either of them knowing until it was too late and the drift couldn't be stopped.
If Claire had flicked an eyelash at him, Harvey would never have come near them again.
But she didn't.
She liked him and trusted him as a friend who was valuable to her husband.
And sometimes they talked about Ireland and the old days when they were children.
They could laugh at the absurdities of life and people that made no sense to those who hadn't lived in Ireland.
It was a bond between them, although his links were long broken.
His family had sold up and settled in Cheshire.
He didn't go over to the Republic or see friends.
His background and knowledge had directed him to the branch of military intelligence centred on Northern Ireland.
They never mentioned Ulster, except in general terms.
The plane was making its descent on Dublin.
The sign to fasten seat-belts lit up in front of him.
Dark clouds enveloped the aircraft and it began to bump through them.
Somewhere to the rear a child began to wail.
He could see the grey ruffled silk of the sea on the left as they banked and came in towards the airport.
Inevitably it was raining.
Frank Arbuthnot was missing.
Harvey agreed with Brownlow on balance that he was most likely dead and buried.
It wasn't his brief to find him.
But Claire Fraser was out there and he had undertaken to find her and persuade her to come home.
He was quite prepared to use force if that was necessary.
He had hesitated when he was asked to go.
One mistake could blow his cover  and ruin years of careful work in the North.
Then he remembered something and knew he was in duty bound to take that risk.
A lunch on Sunday in the Gloucestershire garden by the pool.
The sun beating down on them and the children splashing and laughing in the shallow end.
The most unlikely moment for Claire to talk about a day when she and her brother went walking across the land of a man who believed he'd come back from the dead as a fox.
He went through the green door in the Customs Hall and out into the main lounge.
A man with a cardboard saying ‘Mr Keogh’ in rough pencilled letters came up to him.
Michael Harvey followed him out to the hired car.
He took the keys from him and drove off.
Some distance from the airport he pulled up.
The rear seat lifted.
The weapons and ammunition were underneath it.
A bag with a change of clothes was in the boot.
Jeans, a thick jersey, an anorak sold throughout Ireland by Dunne's stores, scuffed  jodhpur boots.
Kildare was racing country.
Dressed like that no one would look at him twice.
The first thing, he decided, was to check out Riverstown in case she had been there first.
It was a long walk.
The woods were damp and overgrown; she stumbled through brambles and fallen branches.
At the head of the valley she was forced to get her breath.
It was a marvellous site and, seen from so far away, the house didn't look a ruin.
What parties they'd been to when they were young, and Tom Reynard was holding court for his friends and their children.
The Arbuthnots hunted on odd days with the Meath and Tom lived for the sport.
He was reputed to be rich, and was famous for his hospitality.
He never married, but there were nieces and nephews and always a stream of people staying.
Life was joyful at Cloncarrig and Tom, red-haired and ruddy-faced, presided over the dissipation of his fortune without giving it a thought.
‘Why the hell should I worry myself about money,’ he would demand, glass full of whiskey in hand, warming his backside by the fire after a day's sport.
‘I've made provision for all I'm ever going to need!’
And he'd join in his guests' laughter.
‘Does he really believe it, Daddy?’
Claire asked her father one evening when they were back at Riverstown, after a long wet day and a huge hunting tea.
‘Believe what, darling?’
They were sitting in the study at home, toasting by the fire before going in to dinner.
Frank was stretched out in an armchair, eyes closed, as if he were half-asleep.
Claudia was still upstairs, resting after her bath.
She'd led the field with Tom for a five-mile point at the end of the day.
‘Believe he'll turn into a fox when he dies,’ Claire said.
Philip Arbuthnot smiled.
He adored his daughter; he couldn't resist putting a hand on her head and ruffling the bright blonde hair.
She reminded him so much of Claudia.
‘I think he does,’ he answered.
‘He's spent enough money on the idea anyway.
And if it makes him happy, what's the harm?’
‘But when he dies, we'll never be able to hunt in Meath again, in case it's him ,’ Claire pointed out.
Philip laughed at the simple practicality.
She was such a natural, uncomplicated child, unlike his son.
You never knew for sure what Frank was thinking.
He'd loll in his chair as he was doing then, and suddenly come out with some remark that made everyone else uncomfortable.
He was going to public school in England after the Christmas holidays were over.
It was a late start because of the poor education he'd received at the local Protestant school.
He should have gone away to prep school at eight, but Claudia didn't want him to feel rejected just because there was a baby half-sister, so he stayed at home.
A tutor and a year's hard studying had just helped him catch up.
Even so, without his father's family connection he wouldn't have scraped through the entrance exam.
It might be difficult for the boy to go so late, but there was  no other way of educating him properly.
Philip hoped he would take advantage of the chance and do his best.
‘Dad.’
He saw his son sit up, lean forward and look at him with the wary expression that irritated him so much.
‘Dad, I saw Mr Ross out today.’
‘Oh, did you?’
The Reverend Hugh Ross was headmaster of the local boys' boarding school in Meath.
A worthy churchman more addicted to hunting than to academics.
Philip hardened in anticipation of what his son was leading up to.
‘We had a few minutes waiting around,’ Frank said.
Claire saw his hands clench and thought, ‘Oh, poor Frank, he's trying to say something that will make Daddy cross.’
‘Did you?’ his father repeated.
‘I didn't even see him to say good day to.’
‘He says there's a place at Barraclough, if you'd let me go next term.’
He looked down at his hands and then back at his father.
It had taken the last half-hour to muster the courage to mention the subject yet again.
Listening to Claire chattering about that old lunatic Tom Reynard while he pretended to be dozing and was framing sentences in his mind.
It wasn't going to work.
He could see by the set of his father's mouth.
Anxiety urged him into further risk.
‘I'd work very hard, Dad.
I'd do just as well, I promise you!’
‘I'm sure you'd work,’ Philip answered.
‘You've done very well to reach your present level.
But it needed a full-time crammer to get you there and you're still below average.
I've explained it often enough to you, Frank, and I wish you'd accept what I say.
An Irish education isn't good enough for someone in your position.
None of our family went to school over here.
Even Claire will go to England to a decent finishing school, and she's a girl.
There's no question of your going to Barraclough, and I shall have a word with Mr Ross!’
‘He's only trying’ to help,’Frank protested.
Everything about his father said the subject was closed.
‘I'm  Irish,’ he said, and it sounded aggressive because he didn't want his voice to quiver.
‘I don't want to go to England!’
Claire opened her eyes very wide and sat very still.
It was the first time in her life she'd heard Frank say something bold to his father.
Some kind of crisis had developed in the last few minutes, and she didn't know why she felt afraid.
Philip Arbuthnot's colour faded.
‘You're an Arbuthnot,’ he said.
‘And you're not going to grow up an Irish yob!
You go to school in England, and that's the end of it!’
The boy got up.
He was tall and thin, his strength outgrown.
For months he had lived with the fear of this exile to England, among boys a year younger than himself, separated from his home and his family for a reason he rejected.
Fear of his father and fear of the strange environment fused into a passionate anger.
At last his father had put into words what Frank had known instinctively lay between them.
‘If you say that about the Irish, why did you marry my mother?’
Claire burst into tears.
She started to sob out loud.
Philip had started out of his chair and half raised his hand to strike his son.
Now he turned away.
‘Go to your room,’ he said.
‘Don't you ever dare speak about your mother like that to me.
Get out!’
Claudia opened the door.
She was flushed and handsome after her rest, wearing something red, with ruffles round the neck.
Claire saw her as a red blur through the tears.
‘Good Lord, what on earth…’ she started to say as Claire wept, but Philip interrupted.
‘Frank's not having dinner tonight.
And I think Claire's had a long day.
Go upstairs with Mummy, darling, and you can have a light supper and early bed.’
Frank brushed passed his stepmother and went upstairs.
He locked the door of his room.
He didn't break down at once.
He tried to keep the anger at its  peak; he cursed his father, and slammed his fist on the chest by the window so that the photograph of his mother overbalanced and fell on its face.
He turned it over.
He couldn't flesh her out, however hard he studied the picture.
She was just a girl with a sweet smile and a pretty face, her hair drawn back into some kind of fishnet behind.
The fashion of fourteen years ago.
She could have been any girl in any photograph.
Claudia was real.
Claudia, with her made-up face and her bad language in the hunting field, a powerful image which overwhelmed the memory of the frail Irish girl who hadn't survived his birth.
She was no mother to him because she'd taken his real mother's place.
He didn't like her energy and her enthusiasm; she made too much noise in his life.
She had stopped trying to make him like her; that was a relief.
The one good thing she'd done was to give him Claire as a sister.
If she hadn't started crying, what might not have happened between him and his father?
He slumped down on his bed and gave way to a brief and painful fit of crying.
It was over and he was undressed when the knock came on his door.
He thought it must be one of the maids with some food sent up by Claudia.
It was the sort of thing she'd do, thinking it wrong to punish a boy by making him go hungry.
‘I don't want anything, thank you.
I'm going to sleep.’
‘It's me,’ Claire said.
‘Let me in, Frankie, please.’
She was in her dressing gown and her face was pink and puffed from crying.
‘What are you doing,’ he whispered.
‘You'll get into the hell of a row being out of your bed.
Go back, like a good girl.’
He couldn't push her out.
She shut the door and climbed on the bed.
‘What's the matter with your eyes?
You've been howling!’
‘No, I haven't!’ he denied it fiercely.
‘You're the bloody cry-baby, not me.’
‘He was going to hit you,’ she said, and her mouth turned down at the corners.
‘Don't be cross with him.
I'll ask him not to send you to school.
But don't say anything more to make him cross!’
The big blue eyes were brimming over again and he sat beside her and put one arm around her.
He should have known it was her, creeping out to comfort him.
‘I won't,’ he promised.
‘I'll go to his bloody school, but they won't make an Englishman out of me.’
She leaned her head against his shoulder.
‘I don't want to go away either,’ she said.
‘You heard him say I'd go to England too.
What's a finishing school?’
‘I don't know,’ Frank said.
She should go back to her own bed and not risk either of them getting into more trouble, but he liked having the silly little thing cuddled up to him like a rabbit.
It was warm and he didn't feel lonely when she was there.
She'd cried because she thought he was going to be hit.
‘If he hits me,’ he said, more to himself than to her, ‘Bejaysus, I'll hit him back.’
Claire lifted her head, catching the first word.
‘You mustn't say that,’ she murmured.
‘Doyle says ‘Bejaysus’.
Mummy told him off for saying it when I was there.
Mummy says ‘Christ’, I've heard her.
So does Daddy.
What's wrong with what Doyle says?’
‘Doyle's the gardener, that's what.’
And he's Irish, Frank added to himself.
I'm not to say ‘Bejaysus’.
I'm not to grow up an Irish yob.
I'm to be like you.
Whether I feel like you or not.
I'm to forget that half of me is different.
‘What are you saying to yourself?’ she asked him.
She was feeling sleepy and reassured.
She yawned.
‘Nothing for you to know,’ her brother said.
‘Come on, Clarry, go to your bed.’
‘All right.
Kiss goodnight?’
It was their ritual, ever since she'd been able to string words together.
‘Kiss goodnight,’ he said, wanting her to go.
He felt hurt and angry and older than he'd ever felt in his life before.
The child belonged back m her nursery.
Claire offered her cheek and then planted a hard kiss on his.
Both arms were round his neck in a stranglehold.
‘I love you,’ she said.
‘You're my best brother.’
‘Philip, you'll have to talk to him,’ Claudia said.
‘You can't leave it and have this thing festering about his mother.’
She lit a cigarette.
They'd finished dinner and were sitting in the study together.
For some reason she remembered how awful it was when she first moved in after their marriage.
Pink and flowery — in terrible taste.
It was a full year before she felt able to suggest redecoration.
‘There's nothing festering,’ he said irritably.
‘He just said the first impertinent thing that came into his head.
He's scared stiff of going away to school and all this ‘Irish’ nonsense is just an excuse to get out of it.
He's going to Rowden and that's final!’
‘I expect he is scared,’ she said reasonably.
‘Weren't you, at his age?’
‘I'd already been away since I was nine,’ Philip retorted.
‘We kept him at home and mollycoddled him, that's the trouble.
Oh, no, darling, I'm not blaming you.
You wanted him to settle down and accept you, and then Claire came along — I was furious with him for upsetting her like that- and he was allowed to slack and play the fool at that damned school till he was right behind.
That's all there is to it.’
‘It's not,’ she said, ‘and you know it.
He feels alienated.‘
‘Claudia, don't go quoting those bloody child psychology books at me!
Alienated, my foot!’
He reached forward and rattled the poker in the fire.
‘You should talk to him about Eileen,’ she insisted.
‘I tried once, but he just clammed up completely.
I felt he resented it.
He's looking for an identity and he hasn't found it with you.’
‘I told him about his identity tonight,’ he snapped.
‘I told him he was an Arbuthnot.
If he doesn't like it, he can lump it.’
He attacked the fire again, breaking up the turf.
Claudia didn't say anything.
She was full of words, but she was too wise a woman to speak them.
He didn't love the boy, that was the real trouble.
And the boy knew it.
Was it because in some way he blamed Francis for his mother's death— or was the reason less dramatic?
What he'd found acceptable in a girl because he loved her aroused antagonism in a son.
It was the mixed blood he didn't like, the native Irish in Francis that lived uneasily with all that dour Scots ancestry.
But he would never admit such a thing.
She loved Philip and their life was happy in all respects.
But he had hardened after Eileen died.
He had broken the rules and the punishment had warped him.
For years Claudia had tried to reconcile him to his mother.
It was hopeless.
He said flatly that she had upset Eileen and brought on premature labour.
He had never seen or spoken to her since.
At last she said, ‘Philip, does Frank know how much you loved Eileen?’
‘I don't understand you.’
‘Yes you do.
Have you ever talked to him about her?
It might help if he realized how much you did love her.’
He sighed and reached to take her hand.
‘You're an amazing woman, you know.
How many stepmothers would think of that?
No, my darling, I haven't discussed Eileen with Frank, and I don't intend to.
He's my son and I love him, just as I love Claire.
I shall do my very best for him and, if anything you say is true, getting away to a different atmosphere with other boys will be the answer.
Rowden is a fine school and it'll give him plenty of sports and develop a side of him which could never see the light of day in Ireland.
He'll learn there's more to being a man than hunting and lolling about the place.
Now, give me a whiskey before we go to bed.
And stop worrying about the boy.
He'll be fine in the morning.’
The morning came, and they breakfasted together.
Nothing was said.
Frank didn't apologize and Philip behaved as if nothing had happened.
At the beginning of January Frank travelled to England with his father to  start his first term at Rowden.
He got long, ill-spelt letters from Claire every week, telling him what Doyle had done, and how Mary the cook was going into hospital, and the Labrador had taken first prize at the Eadstown Field Day.
His father wrote a regular monthly letter and, after Frank had been at Rowden for two years, one of the letters told him that his grandmother Blanche Arbuthnot had died, and left him all her money and her house in Meath.
‘Blanche, are you quite sure you want to do this?’
Blanche Arbuthnot finished pouring him a cup of tea.
He noticed she needed two hands to lift the silver pot.
She had grown very frail.
Hugh Lorimer had been her solicitor for years; he was also a family friend.
The firm of Lorimer and Leach was long established in Fitzwilliam Square.
They were as much part of the Anglo-Protestant establishment as the clients they looked after.
Blanche said, ‘My dear man, of course I'm sure.
I've thought it over very carefully and you know I don't make up my mind in a hurry.’
He took the teacup from her.
‘It's a very final step,’ he said.
‘Quarrelling with Philip is one thing, but disinheriting him completely…’
‘Blaming me for his wife's death and refusing to speak to me for seventeen years is hardly ‘quarrelling’,’ she retorted.
‘It's no good, Hugh.
I'm not paying lip service to convention.
My money's going to my grandson.
And this place.
Philip's very well off; John left him Riverstown and everything on trust till my death.
He won't suffer any hardship.’
‘Tell me, Blanche, does he know you're ill?’
She said casually, ‘I think the Dornaways wrote to him, but I haven't heard any more.
He's very proud; it's too difficult for him to do anything about it now.
And too late, as far as I'm concerned.’
‘It's never too late,’ Hugh Lorimer insisted.
‘Let me write to him.’
‘No, Hugh dear.
Philip knows I've got cancer.
I've  got to put my affairs in order.
I want you to draw up the will exactly as I've said, and let me have it as soon as possible.’
‘You've never seen the boy?’
‘Not officially.
I've seen him twice out hunting, when we were following by car.
He's the image of Philip.
Nice-looking boy, very good seat.
I think of him a lot, you know.
Cake?’
He shook his head.
If the son was proud, the mother was no less so.
But she couldn't hide the pain.
‘It was so dreadful, his mother dying like that.
I know Claudia's been a good stepmother-she's the kindest woman in the world — but I thought he looked a sad sort of a boy.
And, since we're talking about it, I want to make amends for the way I treated his mother.
I wasn't at all kind, and that's been on my conscience ever since.’
‘It's no good blaming yourself,’ he countered.
‘It was a hopeless misalliance.
Most people would have reacted as you did.
Her death was a tragedy, but who knows what kind of disaster that marriage would have been if she'd lived?
You can't hold yourself responsible for what happened.‘
‘I don't,’ Blanche Arbuthnot said.
‘But who can say how it would have turned out?
I don't make judgements any more.
No, Hugh, I'm talking about something much less dramatic.
I've heard rumours round the place that Philip doesn't like his boy.
The favourite is my grand-daughter Claire.
I want to protect Francis in case they fall out.
I know the Arbuthnots.’
She smiled, and her face dissolved in wrinkles.
She was a bad colour, he thought.
Once famous for her complexion, she was almost jaundiced now.
‘They're as hard as the Scots and as unforgiving as the Irish.
Not that my John wasn't the best in the world.
Maybe Francis will think of me kindly one day.
I hope so.
I've missed knowing my grand-children so much.’
‘All right,’ Hugh said.
‘If you really want it done this way, I'll get it drawn up and sent down for you to sign.
You can always change your mind, my dear.’
‘Not unless I do it in the next three months,’ she told him.
He said, ‘I didn't know it was that soon.
I'm so sorry.’
‘Don't be,’ she said.
‘I've had a very good life and quite a long one.
I don't want to linger on in hospital with tubes and drugs and all that messy business.
I shan't suffer much, they tell me, and I'll be here in my own surroundings.
It's as good a way as any.
Now, my dear Hugh, I'm going to send you on your way.
One thing the damned illness does is make me tired for very little.
It's been so lovely to see you.
Give my love to Jean and maybe you'll come down and bring the will wit you?
We might as well have lunch, if I'm up to it.
Why doesn't Jean come too?
Haven't seen her for ages.’
‘Why not?’ he said.
He shook her hand.
It was dry and limp.
He felt unbearably sad.
He left, promising to come down with his wife and make a party of it.
It was an empty promise.
He hurried the will into proper form and brought it down for signature.
Blanche was confined to bed most of the time; he didn't stay long because she was so weary and there was a nurse who bustled him out.
He had telephoned Philip Arbuthnot twice and been fobbed off.
He wouldn't come to the phone when he heard who it was.
He knew his mother was dying and he either couldn't or wouldn't go to see her.
Hugh's last scruples about seeing him cut out of the will were satisfied by writing him a personal letter of appeal.
It was answered by Claudia.
It was despairing and made him uneasy for a long time afterwards.
Philip had no reason to play the hypocrite.
He would not be going to the funeral either.
Surely, the letter said with a surprising burst of bitterness, Eileen Ryan would rest easy in her grave at last.
Blanche Arbuthnot was buried in the family plot at Naas.
Claudia Arbuthnot attended with a crowd of cousins and old friends.
The two children were not there.
Francis was at school in England in the middle of his studies, and Claire was considered too young.
It gave  Hugh Lorimer some satisfaction to inform Philip that his son had inherited the estate in Meath and a personal fortune of a quarter of a million pounds.
The TWA jet from New York landed at Dublin airport at just after ten o'clock in the morning.
It was a full passenger load; the tourist class was full and Kevin Ryan had just managed to secure a seat in first class.
He had slept during the flight and woke refreshed, with a tremor of excitement niggling in his stomach.
It was his first visit to Ireland in twenty years.
He wondered how much he would find changed.
He was very different from the dour young man who'd set off all those years ago.
He was thicker set, with a suspicion of belly overhanging the crocodile belt; his sandy hair had been fashionably crew-cut and he wore glasses.
He checked the time of arrival on a big gold bracelet watch, and there were handsome cuff-links with a shamrock in tiny emeralds in each shirt-sleeve.
He was rich and he liked to show it.
He dressed expensively, wore hand-made shoes and pure silk shirts.
He smelled of aftershave and talcum powder.
His wife, Mary Rose, slipped into a mink coat as they prepared to disembark.
They had been married fourteen years and there were four strapping children.
Kevin peered out of the window at the grey tarmac and the rain, and wondered what the family would say when they saw him and his wife.
Photographs had winged their way across, and presents at Christmas and Easter, with Mammy's birthday a speciality.
The father was long dead.
Kevin had been poor then and unable to get home for the funeral.
A visit to the grave was on his schedule.
His eyes pricked at the thought.
He had long forgotten how he had despised the old man for being mean and ignorant.
That was one pilgrimage to make with Mary Rose.
The other he reserved for himself.
Not that he hadn't told her the story of his sainted sister Eileen, and how she died giving birth to her child.
Hounded to her death by a cruel mother-in-law, neglected by her husband…the same husband who'd carried on with a woman when she was hardly cold in her grave.
And then married her.
It was a grim tale and the children were brought up on it, along with Mary Rose, who ummed and aahed in horror every time she heard it.
It was part of the folklore among their friends, part of the legend which was growing up around-Kevin Ryan, the man who'd married old Heraghty's daughter and made a small furniture-manufacturing business into a multi-million-dollar corporation with branches right across the States.
Ryan, the Irish philanthropist and champion of Irish freedom.
He had political ambitions, and knew how to make friends at Tammany Hall.
And he was generous with his money.
He supported orphanages and schools, underprivileged children went on camping holidays at his expense.
He was a financial and moral pillar of the Catholic Church, and Mary Rose devoted herself to committees and fund-raising when he decided to run for the Senate.
He had been defeated the first time, but that foray into the arena had taught him a lot.
A great deal of money and effort had been wasted, but at least some useful lessons had been learned.
Next time, he'd won.
He had talked of going home for years; yet excuses came up for delaying till next year and the year after.
Kevin didn't know why he put it off because the reasons for doing so were always valid.
His eldest son had a mastoid operation; there was a big building programme that needed his personal attention.
Mary Rose was pregnant for the fourth time and not feeling too good.
And then the time was suddenly right, and there they were, stepping out on to the blessed soil of his native land.
It was right because he was rich and confident enough to introduce Mary Rose to his terrible clod of a brother and his wife, and to Mammy, who was old and senile and sat like a statue in a corner by the kitchen fire.
He could show her the house where he was born and the farm, and be proud now, because he was the big success come home, and the family and friends would  be in awe of him.
Hadn't he actually been elected to the State Senate — old Jack Ryan's youngest lad?
It would be a triumph.
He'd hired a smart car for their visit; he joked with Mary Rose about driving on the right side of the road.
She shut herself in out of the drizzling rain, and expressed her delight with everything.
The roads were quaint, the way they twisted round, and wasn't Dublin just beautiful, with all those darling old buildings…
He took her on a tour of the city, and she enthused over the faded glories of Georgian architecture and the charm of the bridges spanning the river Liffey.
She sighed over the poverty and squalor of the streets they had to pass through on their way out of Dublin.
So poor, she said, forgetting the misery of the ghettos in New York; the poor children going barefoot in the dirt.
‘Seven hundred years of British rule,’ Kevin declared, and she saw the tight line of his mouth.
‘You don't undo that in a hurry.’
She was surprised by his hatred sometimes, but then he'd been born there and grown up, while she was second-generation American.
He was right, of course.
She had been brought up on Ireland's suffering under British rule.
But for her husband it was so real.
And then there was his sister.
What a tragedy that must have been for them all.
Mary Rose was a kind and simple woman, in awe of her husband, as she had been of her father, as she was of her parish priest.
She dressed elegantly and had social graces which Kevin didn't have, but her role in life was rooted in the peasant culture of her family's origins.
She was the mother and the wife and the queen of the home, as Our Lady had been queen of the little family at Nazareth.
She was perfectly content and regarded the liberated woman as a creature to be pitied.
She loved her husband and her children, and for Kevin's sake, she would love his family too.
The drive up to the Ryans' farm was muddy and unkempt.
The old house loomed up at them with a  shelter of laurel bushes and some lean-limbed yew trees.
Mary Rose had seen photographs, but they were flattering.
On a wet day, it was dark and uninviting, the door and window frames painted green, contrasting with the dirty grey stone facade.
Kevin didn't notice this, or pause to open the door for his wife and take her with him.
He sprang out of the car and was banging on the front door.
He felt elated, warm-hearted at the sight of the place where he'd been born.
His brother opened it, the heavy figure of his wife Bridget in the hallway behind him.
‘Hello there, Shamus.’
They grasped hands and pumped up and down, and Mary Rose picked her way through the muddy forecourt and approached, her smile at the ready.
The brothers weren't alike, except for the sandy hair.
Shamus was thinner and looked quite a lot older.
She noticed his collarless shirt was faintly grimy and there was a button missing.
His cardigan was not very clean either and had a hole in the elbow.
He greeted her very warmly and blushed in the sweetest way when she gave him a sisterly kiss.
He surely hadn't used a razor that morning either.
‘Come in, come in,’ he urged them.
‘There's tea in the kitchen and a drink if ye'd rather.’
Kevin detained him for a moment.
‘Is Mammy all right?’
‘Ah, sure, she's not too bad at all,’ his brother said.
‘Bridget minds her like a saint, don't ye?’
The plain, large woman in a flowered overall said quietly, ‘I do me best.
She's no trouble.
Wets herself now and again, but that's about all.
Come in, she's waitin' for ye.
Not that she'll recognize ye, her sight's none too good, but we've been tellin' her for days ye'd be coming.’
It was very warm in the kitchen.
Mary Rose took off her mink and handed it to a large redheaded girl, who looked at it and stroked the silky fur before she hung it up on the back door among the muddy anoraks.
‘Is it real fur?’ she asked.
There was a shyness about  her that Mary Rose found appealing.
Her own children were much more strident.
She called it confident.
‘It's mink,’ she said.
‘Maybe you'll have one like it when you're a big girl.’
‘Come and say hello to Mammy.’
Kevin caught her arm.
The old woman sat in a corner by the range.
She was very upright, like a wizened doll, decked out in a bright flowery overall with carpet slippers on her feet.
Her hair was snow-white and brushed back into a neat bun.
A very long time ago, she must have been pretty.
Kevin bent down and kissed her.
She grasped his hand with a thin claw.
‘Kevin?
Is it ye, Kevin?’
He had tears in his eyes.
He held on to her, stroking the poor little bony hand holding fast to his.
Twenty years.
Half blind and so rapidly aged.
He'd forgotten how women aged in Ireland.
Hard unremitting work and bearing children made them old before their time.
He swallowed and said, ‘Mammy, this is Mary Rose.’
She peered past him.
‘Who?
Who'd ye say?’
‘My wife, Mary Rose.’
He repeated it slowly, guiding her hand for Mary Rose to take.
‘'TIS a pretty name,’ Mrs Ryan said gently.
‘I can't see ye too well.’
She let the stranger touch her for a minute, and then the woman bent and kissed her on the cheek.
She smelt like a rose too, the old woman thought.
She wished she could see her better.
But it was Kevin she wanted.
Mary Rose gave place gracefully, and with some relief.
There was a uriny smell about the old lady, and she remembered what her sister-in-law had said.
She sat down and decided that although it was so early in the morning, she wouldn't mind a drink.
The meeting lasted almost two hours.
Kevin and his brother were putting back the whiskeys and talking about things that meant nothing to her.
She made conversation with Bridget, who pressed more gin and lime upon her.
They began to drift into amiable silence when they had asked each other questions about their  children and the schools, and the plans they had for their holiday in Ireland.
It certainly was warm and they were really dear people.
It was just great the way they took care of the old lady.
Back home she'd have been in some nice comfortable clinic.
They kept the real values in Ireland, just like Kevin said.
She was glad they weren't going to stay at the farm, though.
It would have been too much for poor Bridget, looking after them, when she had so much to do.
After a while Bridget asked if she'd like to see over the house, and Kevin's room, which he'd shared with Shamus, of course.
Her three daughters were in it now.
It was a dark house, Mary Rose thought, climbing the stairs to the first floor.
It needed fresh paint and bright drapes, and her high heel caught in the floorboards.
‘Kevin's room,’ she said, standing in the open doorway.
‘It's just wonderful to think of him being a little boy…’
Three beds cluttered one wall.
It wasn't at all tidy.
A large picture of the Sacred Heart gazed down at her, the blue-eyed Saviour with his smooth red hair and silky beard looked faintly sorrowful.
A red devotional oil lamp burned on the table below.
Mary Rose had listened to a TV debate once when one of the panel had derided the sentimental Aryan view of Jesus Christ.
‘He was a black Jew; the Church has turned him into some kind of Barbie doll.’
Mary Rose was so shocked she'd switched the set off.
‘It's just wonderful to see all this,’ she murmured.
They went back downstairs.
She said to Bridget, ‘Kevin's told me all about his sister.
What a sad thing to happen to you all.’
‘She got what she deserved,’ Bridget Ryan said.
‘Deserting her family and her faith.
She broke the auld one's heart!’
Mary Rose couldn't believe she'd heard her properly.
But there was no mistaking the bitterness of the voice or the gleam in her sister-in-law's eyes.
Eileen was a  saint to Kevin, but perhaps the folks at home knew more than he did.
Deserted her faith.
That was very shocking.
‘Oh,’ she said.
‘I didn't know.
Kevin didn't say anything about that…’
Bridget Ryan shrugged.
‘He was the only one had time for her,’ she said.
‘She was no good, that one.
For the love of God, don't mention her name.
It's never spoken in this house.
We'd best go on down and I'll show ye the sittin' room.
I wanted to bring ye both in there, but Shamus says, for Christ's sake they're me own brother and his wife.
We're not entertainin' strangers.’
Kevin got up when they came in.
‘I've been showin' Mary Rose the house,’ Bridget announced proudly.
Her husband laughed.
He was a little drunk.
‘Sure and she wanted us sittin' in that draughty old morgue of a sittin' room.
If she's not polishing the auld bits and pieces, she's naggin' me for new curtains!’
‘We're going out tonight, the four of us,’ Kevin announced.
‘I'm takin' us all out to the Cill Dara and we'll have a fine dinner and a few drinks.’
He too was a little high, his wife noticed.
She also noticed that his brogue had thickened and he'd lost his American accent.
He had his coat off and was standing in front of the range, with a glass in his hand, rocking on his heels, one hand stuck in his trouser pocket.
He looked different.
Coarser.
She put the thought aside, ashamed of her disloyalty.
It was strange to her, that was all.
They were nice, friendly people, with all the good-heartedness she'd expected, but they were different from her own family.
Different from their friends at home.
Her mother hadn't been too pleased with Kevin as a son-in-law.
She was a snob; Mary Rose knew her mother wanted a lawyer or a doctor, but there was no one she liked as well as the sharp young Irishman who was working his way up in Heraghty's business.
He was a bit too horny to start with, but she had the four children and it wasn't a problem now.
From time to time he slept with her and showed he loved her, but business and politics were his priority.
He came towards her and threw his arm round her.
‘Isn't she a grand girl?’ he demanded.
She felt his fingers digging into the side of her breast.
Too hard; it hurt.
‘Aren't I a lucky fella?’ he demanded of them again.
She put her hand up and eased his fingers off.
‘Kevin…’ she whispered.
‘We're off to the hotel,’ he said.
‘A little sleep, eh, me darlin'?
Then we'll meet ye all at the Curragh Bar for a few good old jars, and then we'll go on to the hotel.
Mind ye dress up, Bridget.
Mary Rose has got a trunkful of bloody glad rags…’
They left, with Shamus and Bridget waving them goodbye at the door.
‘Ye'd best drive,’ Kevin told her.
‘I don't want the feckin' Gardai pullin' me up for drunken drivin'.’
He dozed on the short drive, but unfortunately he was wide awake and very horny when they reached their hotel room.
Before he fell asleep he held her in his arms and said, ‘Ye don't know what it means to me, coming home again.
My heart's here in Ireland, Rose.’
‘I know it is,’ she answered.
She wasn't really thinking about that.
She was worrying that they'd made love at the wrong time of the month.
Drink never diminished his sexual powers; he was more potent and demanding drunk than sober.
She really didn't want a fifth child.
He slept for most of the afternoon.
They met in the bar as arranged.
The Curragh Bar was a smoky place, its walls plastered with racing pictures and signed photographs of famous jockeys drinking with the landlord.
Horse brasses and horse memorabilia everywhere.
Mary Rose had no affinity with them or with racing.
Kevin kept on meeting old friends.
The drinks were bought and finished and bought again.
The talk was loud and nostalgic, incomprehensible to her.
She heard Kevin say, ‘Jaysus, I'd like to have a place of my own here,’ and felt quite shaken.
Not a house like that grim old farm, set in the middle of nowhere, with dank trees and mud clinging to you every step you took.
It was the drink making him talk like that.
She smiled resolutely and decided to get a little high herself.
It seemed the only thing to do.
Women were drinking in the bar along with their men.
It wasn't frowned upon for a woman to start talking loud and making a fool of herself.
If you can't beat ‘em, join ‘em, as her father used to say.
Mary Rose switched to vodka and tonic, with plenty of ice and a twist of lemon.
Kevin was paying her compliments again, squeezing her waist and showing her off.
She did look nice, she admitted, not being a vain woman.
Blue suited her and she'd worn her pearl and diamond brooch because he wanted everyone to see it.
Her sister-in-law's glad rags were not very glad.
She had such a bad figure, that was the trouble.
Irish women didn't seem to take any care of themselves.
She needed a good diet sheet and daily workouts, Mary Rose decided, and began advising her how to go about it.
Bridget listened and nodded and thought to herself ‘the silly bitch is jarred’ and took no notice.
When they were about to leave for the restaurant, a man standing near the bar came up to Kevin and said, ‘If ye're wanting a place here, the Half House is on the market.’
‘We might look at it,’ Kevin suggested the next day.
‘There's no harm.’
He was in high spirits in spite of a hangover after last night.
Dinner had been cheerful and alcoholic, Kevin playing host to his family and slipping back into his old environment as if he had never been away.
Mary Rose was happy for him and when he suggested looking at the house with its quaint-sounding name, she was enthusiastic.
The estate agent came down from Dublin to show them over.
He saw what appeared to be rich American clients and insisted on taking them to lunch first.
In the middle of his sales talk about the land and  the area, it gave Kevin satisfaction to say, ‘I was born here, my brother farms up at Bryanstown.’
They drove up the short drive, past a lodge with a roof that looked in need of mending, good grass fields and post-and-rail fencing like broken teeth after years of neglect.
The Half House met them round a corner, and Mary Rose exclaimed.
‘Oh, isn't it just beautiful!’
The estate agent beamed at her.
‘Women bought houses, men bought land’, was a proven saying in the business.
Kevin had never been there before.
They got out and he stood looking at it for a moment or two before he walked to the door after Mary Rose.
It was well named.
The wing of a Victorian Gothic pile, with handsome windows and a fine mahogany front door.
Three floors of it, and the ubiquitous Irish basement.
Splendid trees and a glimpse of garden that had run down badly.
The hunting, shooting Hamiltons, so grand in their heyday, were bankrupt and gone.
He walked into the hall.
He didn't listen to the sales talk, he wandered slowly through the rooms, aware that Mary Rose was showing far too much enthusiasm if he was going to knock the price down.
It was a fine big house and the more he saw, the more it pleased him.
On the first floor, his wife slipped her arm through his and said, ‘Honey, just look at that view.’
The hills were purple in the distance and the magic sky of Ireland smiled in sunny blue above them.
Green fields, a coppice of trees, and not a roof in sight.
‘Punchestown racecourse is on the right,’ the agent announced.
‘Only a few minutes’ drive away.’
Kevin remembered his father going to the spring meeting, and coming back rolling drunk, with or without winnings in his pocket.
Kevin was not a racing man.
‘Let's see the roof,’ he said.
They were there for most of the morning.
They toured the house a second time and Mary Rose began to think about drapes and colour schemes.
The whole idea was  too romantic and the awful prospect of the Ryan farmhouse or its equivalent vanished like a nasty dream.
If Kevin wanted a root in the old country, then this, she decided, must be it.
And wouldn't the children go wild, when they came over?
Wouldn't it be just wonderful to own a gracious old house in the heart of Ireland?
They could visit and bring friends over.
Kevin was a politician and of course his life was in the States, but hadn't he said only the night before, ‘My heart's here in Ireland, Rose.’
It would do his election chances good to have the status of a place like this in back of him.
There were outbuildings and stables, all of them run down and needing money spent; or the bulldozer, Kevin decided.
The garden could be brought back; a swimming pool could replace the old kitchen garden with its drystone wall.
At the end he said to the agent, ‘It needs a fortune spending on it.
The roof's bad, there's no central heating, there's damp and the cellars are full of rot.
I'm interested, but not at anything like the price.’
‘The land's worth it,’ he protested.
‘Then why isn't it sold?’
Kevin demanded.
‘Lookit, I'm local and I know the way of things here.
I'll need a survey, but I'm not going to pay good money for it unless they bring the price down.’
And he named a ruthless sum.
The agent hesitated.
The wife wanted it, that was his best hope of a sale.
But the man was hard and not likely to be influenced unless he got a bargain.
And there hadn't been a serious offer for the property in the last twelve months.
He nodded and said, ‘I'll have a word with the solicitor looking after Captain Hamilton's affairs.
He's in England at the moment.
I think we can come to some compromise, Mr Ryan, if you're really interested.‘
When they were alone Mary Rose said to him, ‘You're not going to lose it, are you?’
Kevin put his arm round her.
‘No, Rose, I'm not.
But I'll get it at my price, not theirs.
I'm not putting money  in the pocket of the bloody Hamiltons more than I can help.
You want it, don't you?’
‘I think it's the most romantic place,’ she sighed.
‘Just beautiful.’
‘Then that's good enough,’ he said.
Captain Hamilton, living in a modest flat in Fulham, was only too relieved to get rid of the house and the whole burden of debt.
Ryan got the property at half the asking price, and the contracts were signed by proxy when he had returned to America.
Two months later the first of the workmen moved in.