

Hobson and Angell
Cobden's liberal pacifism was, as we have seen, more than an ideology of protest.
It was frequently used by statesmen — Palmerston, Gladstone — to provide a moral gloss to a foreign policy that actually owed little to principle and much to the pragmatic calculus of the balance of power.
So long as Britain remained the leading industrial force, it was relatively easy to reconcile moral purpose with the defence of British power.
As that power declined, however, the gap between Cobdenite principle and Government practice tended to widen.
Under pressure of emerging economic and imperial rivalries during the last quarter of the nineteenth century, many of the underlying assumptions of Cobdenism were called into question.
But the theory did not, as might be expected, simply disappear.
Latter-day Cobdenites faced the future by returning to the subversive roots of their creed.
Increasingly it was the critical functions of Cobdenism that mattered, not its capacity to lend high moral tone to the self-interested actions of the British state.
Mid-Victorian liberals had supposed that, as the beneficent influence of commerce penetrated the decadent societies of the East, ancient  tyrannies would give way more or less peacefully to new principles of social order mirroring the civilization of bourgeois England.
As this occurred, the existing mechanisms of formal and informal imperial control would dissolve into bonds of friendship between equal trading partners.
These rosy expectations were not fulfilled.
Instead, during the last quarter of the nineteenth century, Britain embarked on a major expansion of formal imperial control.
The impact of European economic expansion in Asia and Africa tended to produce, not thriving bourgeois communities, but anarchy and chaos.
The Indian Mutiny of 1857 was the first of many rebellions which gradually transformed British attitudes to the  non-white world.
The people once optimistically seen as potential partners in commerce and civilization, were re-defined as ‘lesser breeds without the law’.
No longer was it England's mission to lead willing peoples towards enlightenment.
In place of that delightful task was a heavy burden of paternalistic duty:
Take up the White Man's burden
Send Forth the best ye breed
Go bind your sons to exile
To serve your captive's need;
To wait in heavy harness
On fluttered folk and wild
Your new-caught, sullen peoples,
Half devil and half child.
Such attitudes were reinforced by the increased contact with more remote societies as tropical Africa was opened up during the later decades of the nineteenth century.
The replacement of the merchant venturer by the imperial bureaucrat as the chief agent of expansion, represented a fundamental challenge to the values of Cobden's England.
As the apparatus of imperial rule expanded in Asia and Africa, the aristocratic militarism that Bright had decried gained a new lease of life.
Among the upper classes the public schools laboured to subvert the principles of liberalism, inculcating future imperial governors —‘Head Prefects of the World’— with élitist and anti-democratic values.
Simultaneously, imperialist sentiment among the masses was nurtured by the new mass-circulation press which used sensationalized accounts of the dramas of imperial expansion as a way of establishing the habit of newspaper reading among a large and ill-educated public.
Small wonder that, by the time of the Boer War, the pacifists felt like a small and beleaguered minority.
Following the great betrayal of 1882, when Gladstone presided over the annexation of Egypt, they could not even rely on the Liberal party to resist the imperialist tide.
Imperial expansion was driven forward not only by the collapse of order in extra-European societies, but also by intensifying competition from Britain's European rivals for ‘a place in the sun’.
British Governments staked their claim to  disputed areas by formalizing imperial control.
As British diplomats manoeuvred to protect extra-European spheres of influence against foreign rivals, they found themselves inexorably drawn into taking sides in the hardening alliance system on the European continent.
Early in the new century, agreements to resolve imperial clashes with the old rivals, France and Russia, drew Britain into close association with the anti-German Dual Entente.
Imperial competition with Germany, embodied in an escalating naval race, became interlocked with the enmities between the continental powers.
During the first decade of the twentieth century it became apparent that Britain could no longer sustain its role as an independent makeweight in the European balance of power.
Unable to police the world unaided, Britain was losing its freedom of manoeuvre — including its freedom to avoid involvement in future European wars.
The wave of imperial annexations and Britain's entry into the European alliance system, did much to sap the foundations of pacifist optimism.
But the frontal assault on Cobdenite assumptions was the challenge to free trade itself.
When, in 1860, Cobden, a private citizen acting on behalf of the Government, negotiated a commercial treaty with France, it seemed that the era of universal free trade was well on its way.
But from the 1870s, as European and American industrialization intensified completion in international markets, the trend reversed.
By 1900 most of Britain's industrial rivals had substantial tariffs in place.
This included Britain's own semi-independent white dominions — Australia, New Zealand, Canada and South Africa.
Their resistance to throwing their home markets open to British manufacturing industry was symptomatic of the loosening of imperial bonds.
Those imperialists who took the full measure of Britain's declining ability to dominate the world either economically or militarily, moved towards a strategy of imperial consolidation.
Rather than continuing to attempt to police the whole world, they looked for a tighter unity of the formal Empire.
Only in this way, they believed, could Britain hope to count in the twentieth-century world, alongside the emerging super-powers of America, Russia and Germany.
The first step towards the consolidation of the Empire as a coherent military  and political bloc, was the establishment of an imperial customs union.
In 1902 Joseph Chamberlain, Colonial Secretary in the Conservative Government, resigned from the Cabinet in order to campaign for Tariff Reform.
By imposing a general tariff on foreign imports, Britain would be able to open negotiations with the White Dominions for a mutual removal of tariff barriers, drawing them into closer economic ties with the homeland as a first step towards final political federation of the Empire as a whole and the establishment of a supreme representative Imperial Parliament in London.
The primary purpose of Chamberlain's Tariff Reform programme was imperial consolidation.
But it also offered other advantages — protection of British jobs against cheap foreign imports, and an inflow of customs duties to the Treasury which could be used to pay for the escalating costs of both armaments and social reforms.
As Chamberlain's doctrines swept the Tory rank and file, liberal pacifists feared that Tariff Reform would provide the new imperialism with a level of popular appeal that would make it unstoppable.
It was J. A. Hobson who made the most influential and original attempt to come to grips with the nature of the new imperialism.
Born into a provincial Liberal family in 1858, Hobson developed unorthodox views which prevented him from securing an academic career in his chosen field of economics.
His sin, anticipating Keynes, was to question the value of limitless saving.
Over-saving, he argued, was a product of inequality.
Unless the proceeds of industry were more equally distributed — putting cash in the hands of working-class people who would spend it not save it — the market for the products of industry would tend to dry up, leading to recurrent crises of over-production or, as he preferred to describe it, under-consumption.
He worked as a journalist in the 1890s, and took an active role in discussions among liberal and socialist intellectuals.
In 1899 he went to South Africa to report on the tensions in the Transvaal.
His book on the South African War — which placed the blame squarely on the shoulders of the Johannesburg mineowners and their cosmopolitan financial backers — was widely distributed by the pro-Boer movement.
Imperialism , which was published in 1902, represented a fusion of his South African  experience with his earlier ideas on under-consumptionist economics.
Hobson's work is mainly remembered because Lenin used it to construct his own, quite distinct, theory of imperialism.
Hobson's Imperialism is important in our context not because of its impact on the development of Marxist theories of ‘the last stage of capitalism’, but as an attempt to restate for the new century the fundamental principles of Cobdenite free trade.
It was the ‘liberal socialism’ espoused by Hobson, not Lenin's Marxism, that played the dominant part in British peace politics well into the inter-war years.
For Cobden, capitalism had been the chief agency of peace between nations.
Hobson, while proclaiming the validity of Cobden's analysis, nevertheless gives capitalists the central role in promoting the new aggressive imperialism.
The key to this paradox is that they were talking about different kinds of capitalists.
Cobden's hero was the trader, who had no use for protective tariffs which impeded the expansion of commerce between nations.
Hobson agreed.
The merchant had no particular interest in which Great Power established law and order in the regions with which he traded, so long as somebody did.
And even if a protectionist Power were to exclude British goods from some newly developing market, it was ‘mercantilist superstition’ to believe that this would do permanent damage:
The intricate and ever-growing industrial co-operation of the civilised nations through trade does not permit any nation to keep to herself the gain of any market she may hold.
Had it been only the interests of traders that were being considered, there would have been no need for Britain to have responded to the competitive challenge of other European states by formalizing and expanding her own empire, with all that this entailed in provoking international tensions, arms expenditures, and general insecurity.
Though Hobson argued that the new imperialism was irrational from the standpoint of the peaceful commercial nation, he did not believe that its source was to be found  merely in an irrational aggressiveness on the part of peoples or Governments.
Rather: ‘The business interests of the nation as a whole are subordinated to those of certain sectional interests that usurp control of the national resources and use them for their private gain.’
Behind the policy of imperial expansion stood the sinister figure of the financier engaged not in honest trade but in channelling the surplus product of British industry into overseas investment.
Unlike the provincial businessmen represented by Cobden, the financiers of the City of London had long been intimate in the aristocratic circles that dominated Westminster and Whitehall.
To safeguard and expand their overseas investments, they used their political influence to suborn the ‘the public policy, the public purse, and the public force’ to the promotion of their private interests.
In this they were supported by a number of other vested interests: arms manufacturers, imperial bureaucrats, admirals and generals.
The high-minded imperialist rhetoric of politicians like Joseph Chamberlain served, wittingly or unwittingly, simply as a cover for the selfish profiteering of the vested interests.
‘This’, wrote Hobson, ‘is, perhaps, the most important fact in modern politics, and the obscurity in which it is wrapped constitutes the gravest danger to our State.’
The secretive greed of the bankers had replaced the open belligerence of the aristocrats as the main threat to peace.
Sinister though their role was, Hobson did not believe that the financiers were out to provoke war between the European powers.
Certainly the struggle for overseas investment opportunities provoked tensions; and small colonial wars could yield large profits.
The competition in armaments was good for business and great bankers knew how to use their inside political knowledge to make money out of fluctuations in the currency markets caused by international disputes.
But, knowing that a great war would kill the goose that laid the golden eggs, the bankers could probably be relied upon to use their enormous influence to prevent it:
The modern science of militarism renders wars between ‘civilised’ Powers too costly, and the rapid growth of effective internationalism in the financial and great industrial magnates [sic], who seem destined more and  more to control national politics, may in future render such wars impossible.
The bankers' peace, however, was not a genuine one, but a rampant militarism which threatened to destroy the foundations of civilized life as surely as, if less quickly than, war itself.
Just before the outbreak of the First World War, H. N. Brailsford, a liberal socialist who did much to popularize Hobson's ideas, coined the phrase ‘dry war’ to describe relations between the European powers:
Modern conditions have involved us in rivalry of armaments which is now a conscious struggle to achieve by expenditure and science, by diplomacy and alliances, a balance of power which always eludes us, and because it is always variable and unstable condemns us to a bloodless battle, a dry warfare of steel and gold.
In Europe international tensions would be kept artificially alive in order to justify massive expenditure on armaments and the construction of centralized bureaucracies and armies capable of suppressing any democratic movement attempting to challenge the power and wealth of the bankers and their hangers on.
Outside Europe international finance would pool its resources to open up the biggest prize of all — the vast reservoir of cheap labour awaiting Western exploitation in China.
An England grown fat on imperial tribute, its manufacturing industry relocated in the East, and its proletariat reduced to servicing the conspicuous consumption of idle rentiers, would provide little basis for democratic resistance to the power of the financial oligarchy.
In Hobson's bleak vision, European civilization, for all its nineteenth-century promise, was heading for the fate of the Roman Empire.
Hobson and Brailsford's belief in the improbability of war in Europe was shared by most pre-1914 pacifists.
Many, however, were less pessimistic about the malevolent desire of powerful vested interests to obstruct the progress of democracy and genuine peace.
The imperialist politicians who, at the turn of the century, seemed to be carrying all before them, turned out to be far less powerful than Hobson and others had feared.
The long drawn out war in South Africa did much to discredit imperial adventuring.
Popular responses  to military emergencies — like celebrations that followed the relief of Mafeking — might depress the radicals.
But imperialists were equally dispirited by their inability to turn such moments of excitement into a sustained popular identification with their long-term goals.
Despite intensive efforts to reinvent the national identity along imperial lines — including the rebuilding of central London as a theatre for imperial parades — the English remained obstinately English, refusing to think of themselves even as ‘Britishers’, let alone as members of the Greater Britain projected by imperialist dreamers.
‘We have not even a name, with any emotional associations, for the UK itself’, remarked one political theorist.
‘No Englishman is stirred by the name ‘British’, the name ‘English’ irritates all Scotchmen, and the Irish are irritated by both alike.’
Hobson's belief that protectionism was the logical next step for imperialist politics was reinforced by the launching of Joseph Chamberlain's Tariff Reform campaign in 1902.
But the voters were unresponsive to Chamberlain's vision.
They measured Tariff Reform on strictly financial grounds and found it wanting.
In 1906 the Liberals came romping back to power on an electoral landslide caused, above all, by their success in branding the Tories as the party of bread taxes.
The electoral unpopularity of Tariff Reform might not have been decisive in defeating Chamberlain's programme had it not been for the fact that the most powerful sections of Britain's business élite — and in particular the bankers of the City of London — agreed with the voters.
Whatever windfall profits might be earned from minor wars and international tensions, there was little doubt in the City that their interests lay in sustaining Britain as the free trading capital of a world-wide empire of finance, rather than retreating into the protectionist bloc envisaged by proponents of Imperial Federation.
This was good news for pacifists, but bad news for Hobson's theory, and it opened the way to a more optimistic interpretation of the role of finance in international relations.
No single book ever had a greater impact on pacifist thinking in Britain than Norman Angell's The Great Illusion .
First published (under a different title) in 1909, it eventually  sold over a million copies and was translated into 25 languages.
Angell's central argument was a simple restatement of the interdependence of modern capitalist economies.
The ‘great illusion’ was the belief that a modern European state could increase its wealth by seizing the territory of its competitors:
As between economically highly organised nations a customer must also be a competitor, a fact which bayonets cannot alter.
To the extent that they destroy him as a competitor, they destroy him, speaking generally and largely, as a customer.
A. J. P. Taylor's grandfather, a businessman who had no doubt read the book, put the point more succinctly in the early months of the First World War: ‘Can't they see as every time they kills a German, they kills a customer?’
For Angell the key evidence of the irrationality of war lay in the very delicacy of the newly evolved mechanisms of international finance.
‘The [financier], wrote Angell, ‘has no country, and he knows, if he be of the modern type, that arms and conquests and jugglery with frontiers serve no ends of his…’.
Attempts by an aggressor power to exact indemnities or to confiscate the wealth of private individuals in a conquered state would cause chaos in the international money markets, undermining the basis of the conqueror's own prosperity.
Angell shared none of Hobson's anxieties about the long-term consequences of the export of capital from Europe.
It was, he believed, the job of civilized nations to impose — by force if necessary — law, order and the virtues of capitalism on less developed peoples.
The problem was how to prevent the necessary use of force outside Europe from precipitating war in Europe itself.
However necessary it might sometimes be to put down rebellious non-Europeans, there was no good reason why Europeans should fight among themselves over spheres of influence.
Following Hobson, Angell explained that no advanced nation could hope to keep the economic advantages of colonial expansion to itself, not even by imposing tariff barriers.
It really didn't matter to Britain if it was the Germans who brought efficiency to the Turkish  economy — so long as someone did.
Indeed the nations that stood to gain most from European expansion were those which burdened their economies least with the unproductive business of armies and bureaucracies.
Angell's analysis reflected a Eurocentric racism widespread in pacifist thinking.
Quakers had long distinguished between the policeman and the soldier, and the suppression of disorder among heathens was seen as legitimate in a way that prosecuting war between civilized Christian peoples could never be.
As George Dangerfield remarked in 1935: ‘the Englishman of the seventies and eighties…was strongly in favour of peace — that is to say, he liked his wars to be fought at a distance and, if possible, in the name of God.’
Such attitudes enabled Angell to compile a list of war-mongering nations with Britain coming last: colonial wars didn't count!
Peace was a stage of civilization not yet reached by non-Europeans.
Reforming the British Army to operate as a potential expeditionary force on the Continent was anathema to pacifist opinion.
Consequently, Lord Haldane was careful to present his Army reforms as designed to create ‘an Imperial police force which can be sent on small expeditions, on short notice’— a rationale which, he calculated, would be acceptable to most pacifists.
One obvious way to reduce the risks of conflict between the powers was to encourage the formation of an ‘ultra-imperialist’ consortium of powers to open up new territories like China.
Angell endorsed such proposals enthusiastically.
Some radical writers, like Brailsford, were more circumspect:
We have found, so far, no solution which is satisfactory from the standpoint of the debtor nation.
The inroad of foreign capital always means for it some loss of independence, and it has nothing to gain by agreement among competing Empires…
The pacifist and the nationalist are here divided in their sympathies.
The former, thinking only of European peace, rejoices when Russia and Britain end their differences by the partition of Persia.
The latter seeing only that a nation has been destroyed, regards the agreement as a peculiarly evil development of Imperialism….
The ideal expedient would preserve European peace without destroying the  victim nationality.
To propose that expedient requires an excursion into the realms of Utopian construction.
We can propose nothing which seems feasible today….
It was only after the collapse of peace in Europe that radicals could begin to envisage ‘such a weakening of all the Great Powers of Europe as shall enable the more backward nations to throw off the yoke fastened on them by the Cabinets and financiers of ‘civilised’ States.’
Where Hobson and Angell really diverged was in their assessment of the attitudes of the rich towards international conflict short of war itself.
Angell said little about the vested interest of arms manufacturers in war scares, or of financial speculators in international instability.
Militarism was kept alive not by vested interest but by pure superstition.
This did not mean that there was no danger of war.
It was what people believed their interests to be, not what they actually were, that determined their actions.
Angell was not complacent.
He stressed the urgency of the pacifist work of enlightenment: ‘…the only solution will be found in the reform of opinion…’.
But he believed that pacifism could expect support from all the major vested interests in a modern capitalist society.
Perhaps because Angell's analysis did not attack the Establishment, he was never short of friends in high places.
Before 1914 he numbered among his acquaintances the Chairman of the Committee of Imperial Defence, the leader of the Tory party and the Liberal foreign secretary.
A wealthy industrialist established a foundation to promote his ideas among the rich and powerful.
In response to the book, Angell clubs sprang up not only in Britain but also on the Continent, one more link in the vast variety of international organizations that networked Europe, promoting peace and international understanding.
In 1910 representatives from over 100 international organizations — religious, cultural, professional and political — had met in Brussels to establish a Union of International Associations.
Women were organized internationally in the International Women's Suffrage Alliance.
Most important of all, the two greatest social forces of the epoch — capital and labour — were themselves organizing  on international lines.
All these developments appeared to confirm Angell's view that the boundaries of the real communities in Europe had long since ceased to be represented by state frontiers.
The publication of Angell's book coincided with the triumph of a campaign to abolish slavery in the Congo.
This agitation is worth mentioning at this point, both because it perfectly exemplified the continuing strengths of liberal pacifism, and because its leader and organizer, E. D. Morel, was later to play a key role in sustaining British pacifism after the outbreak of war in 1914.
Morel, a shipping clerk who had taken up campaigning journalism on behalf of Liverpool's African merchant interests, set up the Congo Reform Association in 1903, following his success in persuading the Government to issue a formal protest about the brutal regime of forced labour exercised by the Belgian King, Leopold, in the Congo.
Six years of intense agitation followed, until Leopold's death finally opened the way for reforms in the Belgian Congo, and the opening of the colony to free trade.
Throughout this agitation Morel's appeal to the presumed interests of Liverpool merchants was quite open and unashamed: the liberation of Africans enslaved by Leopold and his monopolistic ring of financiers, and the interests of genuine traders in free trade, went hand in hand.
Just as in 1876 — Morel frequently compared his efforts with the outburst against the Bulgarian atrocities — the campaigners were outraged by Foreign Office insistence that wider considerations of the balance of power should be taken into account when deciding how far to push their humanitarian crusade.
Impatient with the intricacies — and amorality — of international diplomacy, Morel demanded unilateral action by the British Navy.
A blockade of the rubber ships would soon bring Leopold to his knees.
‘I am convinced’, he wrote in 1905, ‘that…at the present stage of world politics, the British people can get anything they want if they put their backs into it.’
It was the Foreign Office's reluctance to upset the entente with France by pressing too hard on the Congo issue which first convinced Morel of the baneful effects of traditional diplomacy, and provoked him to develop a coherent critique of what he later called ‘the intrigues and  imbecilities of professional diplomats.’
Morel's attack on ‘secret diplomacy’ was to have immense influence after war broke out in 1914.
It is not without significance that it had its source in a campaign which effectively combined Cobdenite principles of free trade with a ‘bellicose philanthropy’ worthy of the most self-righteous of Victorian imperialists.
Socialism, Liberalism and Peace before 1914
Socialism, as it developed in Britain, had little distinctive contribution to make to the formulation of foreign policy.
Most socialists, if they were interested at all, took their foreign policy from middle-class radicals, and pacifist politics continued to be dominated by essentially Cobdenite assumptions about the relationship between capitalism and peace.
The major challenge to the dominance of such assumptions in progressive politics came, not from the mainstream Labour and socialist movements, but from a minority of socialists who anticipated post-1914 developments by seeking an accommodation with nationalist and imperialist ideas.
Nationalist responses to the crisis of the international order were, of course, most apparent on the Right.
But, although they defended free trade against Joseph Chamberlain and the Tariff Reformers, most of the leading Liberal politicians and an influential minority of socialists accommodated themselves to the underlying assumptions of the new imperialism.
The appalling health of the population, revealed by Boer War recruitment, did much to persuade the Establishment of the need for an extensive programme of social reform to improve the condition of the working class.
If Britain was to survive in the new world of rival empires she must look to the fitness of her population, both for the military and for the economic struggle.
Some left-wing reformers — notably the leaders of Fabian socialism, Sidney and Beatrice Webb — were quick to take up ‘national efficiency’ as an argument for social reform.
The Webbs, who had little sympathy with Liberal cosmopolitanism, were happy to come to terms with the imperialist agenda in order to promote their own brand of statist socialism.
The argument for ‘national efficiency’ helped to win the Liberal Party leadership to the case for social reform after they gained office in 1905.
For the new Liberal Government, the introduction of medical inspection in schools and the construction of Dreadnoughts were not contradictory undertakings, but complementary facets of Britain's rivalry with Imperial Germany.
Lloyd George began his governmental career after 1906 as leader of the social reformist left in the Liberal party.
With his background in the pro-Boer agitation, he initially followed the pacifist line of counterposing social reform to spending on armaments.
But he was quick to perceive that there was little future in such arguments, at least for a Government Minister.
His subsequent rise to power as the charismatic leader of Britain's ‘war socialism’ provides the best illustration of the tendency for left and right-wing collectivism to converge around a nationalist economics utterly alien to the Cobdenite traditions of the pacifists.
But some of Britain's leading socialists were ready to follow a similar trajectory.
H. M. Hyndman, the ex-Tory founding father of British Marxism, saw the defence of bad states against worse ones as a legitimate socialist position.
The humiliation of Tsarist power in the Russo-Japanese war of 1904–05, led him to substitute the Kaiser for the Tsar as the main threat to democratic and socialist progress in Europe.
He saw no evidence that the German Socialists were either willing or able to restrain Prussian ambitions, nor did he place any faith in bourgeois internationalism.
Hyndman drew the pessimistic conclusion that it was British power, rather than any kind of pacifism, which held the key to peace.
In 1910 he followed the logic of the ‘German threat’ into support for naval expansion.
Robert Blatchford, Britain's most popular socialist writer, came to the same conclusion, but went further, writing enthusiastic articles for the Daily Mail in support of military conscription.
Like Hyndman, and the Webbs, Blatchford had always looked to the state as the main agency of social change.
This ‘realist’ attitude towards international affairs was partly a product of unqualified support for the expansion of state intervention in the domestic economy.
If the state was everything, and civil society nothing, then pacifist faith in the  power of the international community to restrain the war-making proclivities of nation states was merely wishful thinking.
The single-minded pursuit of ‘national efficiency’ was not compatible with a pacifist orientation in international affairs.
Rising international tension left these statist socialists no option but to support the British state against its less democratic German rival.
The full implications of this convergence between state socialism and nationalism only became apparent after war broke out in 1914.
It paved the way for a national socialism which was to play an important — if frequently neglected — part in the evolution of British Labour politics.
In proposing a rupture between liberal internationalism and nationalist socialism, Hyndman and Blatchford were ahead of their time.
Such views were to move into the mainstream of Labour politics only when liberal capitalism collapsed under the strains of the First World War.
Meanwhile the frontier between liberalism and socialism remained open, both ideologically and organizationally.
The Labour party, which had forty MPs by 1914, had established itself since the turn of the century largely on the basis of an electoral pact with the Liberals.
It acted in Parliament as the representative of Labour interests within a broader alliance of progressive forces.
This was not an unnatural alliance.
The social reforms promoted by post-Gladstonian liberals had much to offer the workers, while, in their commitment to self-help and autonomy from state controls, the major institutions of the British working class — trade unions, the co-operative movement — had a genuine affinity with Liberal suspicion of unrestrained collectivism.
William Morris, drawn into politics by the Bulgarian Atrocities agitation, had originated the trend for middle-class intellectuals disillusioned with liberal foreign policy to place their faith in the workers.
After becoming a socialist in the early 1880s he retained what he called ‘an Englishman's wholesome horror of government interference and centralisation.’
Leaders of the main pre-war socialist party, the ILP, had long cultivated friendly relations with Liberal intellectuals.
In the late 1890s, for example, Ramsay MacDonald worked closely with J. A. Hobson on the Progressive Review , a liberal socialist journal which attacked ‘Manchesterism’ in the  name of domestic social reform, while remaining ‘keenly alive to the dangers of a powerful State, taken as an instrument of absolute control and adducing ‘reasons of State’as an over-ruling principle of policy.’
Many social reformers, both liberal and socialist, shared Hobson's distrust of the big state; and, in pacifist campaigns against militarism, they maintained the links between liberal socialism at home and a revised and updated Cobdenism abroad.
The pre-war career of H. N. Brailsford illustrates the easy co-operation of liberal and socialist internationalism before 1914.
As a young man Brailsford abandoned an academic career to fight Turkish oppression alongside the Greek army in 1897.
When he returned he took up journalism.
Thereafter, he devoted most of his energies to the attempt to develop debate about alternative foreign policy in pacifist, liberal and socialist circles.
Despite joining the ILP in 1907, he continued for a long time to write leaders for Liberal journals.
He did not anticipate an open struggle for power between the Liberal and Labour Parties, but looked for proportional representation to resolve the tensions over distribution of seats between the two parties within an ongoing alliance of progressive forces.
The immediate task, as he saw it, was to open foreign policy up to democratic pressure, so that both the disinterested masses and the interested merchants and manufacturers could concert their influence for peace against the machinations of militaristic bureaucrats and their allies in the aristocracy of finance.
Brailsford deplored the incapacity of pacifists to get to grips with the larger drift of British foreign policy — the effective entry of Britain into the European alliance system.
To those — like C. P. Scott, editor of the Manchester Guardian — who opposed all alliances in the name of the Cobdenite principle of non-intervention, he replied that non-intervention was a sterile doctrine that would cut Britain off from its rightful place within the emerging community of European nations.
The alternative to the balance of power politics pursued by the British Foreign Office was not isolation, but the Concert of Europe.
‘When we think of peace,’ he wrote, ‘we must learn to think as Europeans.’
He looked to ‘a natural grouping of the more advanced Western powers’— Britain, France and Germany — to lay the foundations for a genuine Concert of  Europe which would mediate the conflicts between the powers and, through the systematic regulation of its activities, turn the potentially disruptive operations of international finance into a force for peace and tranquillity.
Brailsford was no utopian.
He combined largeness of vision with a restless search for immediately practicable steps.
As a first step to bringing democratic pressure to bear on foreign policy he advocated the establishment of a select committee of MPs to shadow the operations of the Foreign Office.
In 1911 Liberal backbenchers did establish their own unofficial committee.
But it was not until war actually broke out that any concerted attempt was made to organize an informed public opinion outside Parliament that would be capable of mounting detailed criticism of and pressure on the Foreign Office.
Before the war the attitude of the typical radical remained one of ‘semi-indifference….
The conception of conflict between nations, on which foreign policy was based, was distasteful to him; he had no wish to acknowledge it.
He was internationally minded; he believed in concord between nations, and so ardently that he did not question over much whether concord between nations actually existed.’
Meanwhile pacifists were generally content with the abstract moralizing suggested by the Manchester Guardian's opposition to the formation of a Liberal Foreign Affairs Committee on the grounds that the ‘success or failure [of foreign policy]depends on the application of a few simple principles to facts which as a rule are not very numerous nor very complicated.’
While such wilful ignorance prevailed it is not surprising that pacifist opposition to Sir Edward Grey's foreign policy tended to be episodic and dominated by side issues.
The greatest stir was caused by Britain's growing friendship with Russia, culminating in an Anglo-Russian Convention in 1907 and an official visit to Britain by the Tsar two years later.
Most radical opinion was outraged by the fact that Britain should be reversing its traditional hostility to Russia just at the moment when defeat by the Japanese in 1904–5, and the revolutionary upheavals which followed, had rocked the foundations of Tsarist tyranny.
The loans and diplomatic favours that paved the way for the entente with Russia helped to prop up a regime  seen by radicals as the major threat to freedom — and to peace — in Europe.
This was the one international issue between the Boer War and 1914 which mobilized large public demonstrations.
Solidarity with the Russian democracy even engaged the sympathies of trade unions, normally quite indifferent to foreign affairs.
The main focus of pacifist activity in the immediate pre-war years was the naval race with Germany.
The apparent success of the Admiralty and the arms firms in 1908–9 in bouncing the Cabinet into a major escalation of naval building, alerted radicals to the dangers of militarism.
Their concern was not only with ‘the danger that the guns may suddenly go off, as it were.’
Indeed, some pacifists even drew comfort from the idea that modern weapons had become so destructive that no one was likely to contemplate actually using them; others were reassured by the apparent improvement in Anglo-German relations after the upheavals of the Balkan Wars of 1912.
But whatever happened on the diplomatic front, it seemed, arms expenditure rose.
‘With nothing left to fight about’, wrote Brailsford in 1914, ‘our chief concern is that we may have something to fight with.’
What concerned the radicals was militarization itself, and the corruption of democratic process involved.
Although the socialist ILP played a leading role in agitations against the ‘arms ring’, exposure of the close links between naval officers, Admiralty bureaucrats and their private industrial suppliers did not necessarily lead pacifists to draw socialist conclusions.
The favoured solution, the nationalization of the arms firms, was generally presented as an anti-monopoly measure quite acceptable to liberals, not as (what actually it would have been) the state taking over the commanding heights of the economy.
It was the vested interests of arms manufacturers, not capitalism as such, which they were trying to break.
And even those, like Brailsford, who insisted that the arms manufacturers were only junior partners to the financiers, took care to distinguish these malign features of capitalism from the equally selfish but nevertheless socially beneficial activities of ordinary manufacturers and traders.
The search for middle-class allies still inhibited most socialists from attributing militarism, imperialism and the war danger to capitalism as such.
In one respect the pre-war pacifists probably under-estimated the importance of the emerging military industrial complex.
Committed to the cult of the workers as ‘disinterested’ opponents of militarism, they generally remained silent about the degree to which workers themselves had come to have a vested interest in the arms race.
The Labour Party wrestled with the problem by linking demands for disarmament with plans for legislation guaranteeing the Right to Work.
But it was unable to impose the Party line of opposition to the annual defence estimates on MPs representing constituencies with large defence contracts.
Nor was this a marginal problem.
It was estimated in 1913 that as many as 1.5 million people had a vested interest, directly or indirectly, in defence spending.
During the last years of peace Keir Hardie, the leader of British socialism, played a central role in committing the Socialist International to a policy of the general strike against war.
In 1912 the Labour Party overcame its caution sufficiently to agree at least to inquire into the feasibility of such a strike.
But the new interest shown by socialists in the old anarchist nostrum of ‘the general strike against war’ did not rest on an acceptance that only the proletarian revolution could prevent war.
Neither British nor continental socialists saw any contradiction between endorsement of the strike weapon and the pursuit of co-operation with middle-class pacifism.
Indeed, at the same time as they debated the general strike, leaders of the Second International became increasingly interested in the implications of modern capitalist developments for the elimination of war.
Most of them moved towards a similar view of the pacifist tendencies of modern capitalism to that expounded by Norman Angell.
In 1911 Bebel, the German socialist, declared:
I say openly that the greatest guarantee for the preservation of world peace today is round in the international investments of capitalism.
These investments make war so dangerous for both sides that it would be pure madness for any government to push things to the brink over Morocco.
Keir Hardie favoured the general strike, not as an  instrument of class struggle and revolution, but because he believed it could make a valuable contribution to maintaining the peace of bourgeois Europe.
Well aware that most workers were indifferent to foreign affairs, he fully expected the majority of them to be swept into fratricide by patriotic propaganda if war actually came.
He did not believe a strike would be easy — or even, necessarily, possible — to arrange.
Rather, the socialist leaders were trying to intervene in the high politics of Europe by means of a deliberately constructed myth.
They hoped that the very talk of a general strike would act as a restraining influence on militarism.
If the élites could be persuaded that war might trigger revolution, then they would think twice before unleashing it.
Hardie said in 1910 that:
It was too late to begin to take action when the war fever had maddened the blood of the people, but if the warmongers in Germany and in this country knew beforehand that the working class of the two countries had come to an understanding, and would stand by it, the influence of that knowledge upon their counsels would be such as to compel them to submit to arbitration the points which would otherwise have been submitted to war.
The ‘international strike against war’, as espoused by Hardie and other Second International leaders, represented a sophisticated politics of bluff, quite compatible with their attempts to form class alliances against the war danger.
When the bluff failed, it is hardly surprising that no-one seriously considered attempting to implement the general strike against war.
The coming of war in 1914 unleashed forces which pre-1914 pacifists — liberal or socialist — did not begin to understand.
Without substantially re-thinking their politics, there was little they could do to resist these forces.
Sustaining Pacifism, 1914–15
Trade, travel and intellectual intercourse bring [states]constantly closer together.
They copy each other 's institutions; and, to strengthen their common interests, they have built up a series of common institutions — international unions to govern postal, railway and tele-graphic communication, conferences and conventions to regulate affairs both of property (such as copyright) and labour; international law courts (at the Hague and elsewhere) supported by a network of Arbitration and other treaties; a sort of World-Duma, in the periodical Peace Conferences at the Hague; and last but not least, the growing international organisation of the Labour and Socialist movements.
That is one picture; national peace and the beginning of a Union of nations: in a rudimentary form, the United States of Europe is an accomplished fact.
Pre-war Europe was a community networked by transnational institutions.
Rooted in civil society and operating with some independence from inter-state relations, such institutions provided a potential check and counter-balance to the tendency towards anarchy inherent in a system of rival nation states.
The hopes of both liberal and socialist pacifists in pre-war Britain were, as we have seen, very largely invested in this emergent transnational community.
The crisis posed for such a pacifism by the Great War was twofold.
Transnational links were shattered by closing frontiers and the tide of nationalist sentiment sweeping through society.
Pacifists struggled to keep alive some remnant of the pre-war networks, and their modest successes laid a basis for the eventual revival of internationalism as the passions of war cooled.
The deeper crisis of pacifism, however, emerged more gradually.
As the state mobilized the  population for war, the very basis of transnationalism — a civil society autonomous from the state — was drastically undermined.
Individual liberties, voluntary organizations, political parties and the whole apparatus of economic life were subordinated to the war-making purposes of the state.
The Great War marked the beginning of the end of the era of liberal capitalism.
In the long term, the future of British pacifism lay in its capacity to adapt to the demise of the world order from which, often unconsciously, its most fundamental assumptions were derived.
On August 2nd, 1914 British Labour mobilized its biggest demonstration for many years.
The crowds assembled in Trafalgar Square cheered demands for Britain to keep out of the spreading European crisis.
Liberals and Socialists agreed that the only purpose served by an Anglo-German war would be to place Europe at the mercy of the Russian autocracy.
Within hours, however, the German invasion of Belgium overshadowed the Russian menace, and put a sudden end to pacifist resistance.
The Liberal Cabinet united, shedding two unrepentant pacifists — Gladstone's biographer, John Morley and the ex-socialist leader John Burns.
Another minister, Edward Pease, who was also Chairman of the Peace Society, decided to stay on.
The Labour Party, after some initial ambivalence, had moved by the end of August to outright support of the war effort, accepting an electoral truce and joining with other parties to lend support to the recruiting drive.
Earlier, the TUC had declared an industrial truce for the duration of the war.
Serious efforts to sustain pre-war international networks were confined to the socialists of the ILP and a section of the women's suffrage movement.
On August 11th the ILP sent greetings —‘across the roar of the guns’— to their German comrades.
The statement, however, contained no demand for an immediate armistice, and until 1916 few ILP leaders saw any prospect of public agitation to stop the war.
Internationally some attempt was made to sustain the networks.
The International Socialist Bureau, the office of the Second International, moved from Belgium to neutral Holland.
In May 1915 the Italian and Swiss Socialist Parties called for a conference of socialists who had ‘remained true to the old principles of the International…and were ready to fight for the mobilization of Socialists in all countries against war.’
Delegates from most of the belligerent countries managed to get to the Zimmerwald Conference in the autumn, but representatives from Britain, appointed by the ILP and the British Socialist Party, were denied passports.
Lenin wanted to use the conference to launch an international struggle to turn the war into the revolution.
Most other delegates dismissed this as quite unrealistic and agreed merely to encourage the International Socialist Bureau to continue seeking opportunities for a peaceful settlement, ‘without annexations or indemnities’.
No such opportunities, however, were in sight.
The feminists had rather more success.
When war broke out the best known suffragettes turned overnight from militant confrontation with the male establishment to enthusiastic participation in the crusade against Prussianism.
But members of the largest suffrage organization — the non-militant National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies — were deeply divided on the merits of the war.
Early in 1915 most of the younger activists resigned in order to devote their energies to developing a women's peace movement.
In the autumn they established a Women's International League based on a joint platform of women's rights and pacifism: ‘only free women can build up the peace which is to be.’
After the war this became the British section of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, a transnational organization which exists to this day.
The occasion for the split in the National Union was a call from women involved in the International Women's Suffrage Alliance for delegates to attend a Women's Congress in The Hague in April 1915, the first major international meeting of any kind since the outbreak of war.
The Congress endorsed a call for neutral countries to mediate between the belligerents.
More ambitiously, it appointed envoys to present their views directly to the politicians.
Over the summer of 1915 these women were remarkably successful in gaining audiences with the powerful throughout Europe and in the United States.
Underlying this exercise in unofficial shuttle diplomacy was an assertion that, denied the elementary rights of citizenship in most of the war-making nations, women could stand above  the battle ‘providing the motive power’ for peace.
Catherine Marshall, a leading feminist pacifist, wrote:
War is pre-eminently an outrage on motherhood and all that motherhood means; the destruction of life and the breaking-up of homes is the undoing of women's work as life-givers and home-makers.
The diplomacy came to nothing, but the Hague Congress did much to crystallize the belief that women had a special role to play in the politics of peace.
Feminism, particularly the maternalist feminism expressed by Catherine Marshall, long remained a powerful source of pacifist activism.
The substantial minority at The Hague who opposed the plan to send envoys believed that the time was not yet ripe for direct public agitation to stop the war.
The need of the moment, they argued, was not dramatic gestures, but hard thinking and patient propaganda about the conditions required for a lasting abolition of international anarchy.
Such views echoed the standpoint of Britain's major wartime peace organization, the Union of Democratic Control (UDC).
The initiative which led to the formation of the UDC was taken by Charles Trevelyan on August 5th, the day after he resigned from a junior ministerial post at the Board of Education.
What was now essential, he believed, was the development and promotion of the principles which would enable democratic forces throughout Europe to ensure that when peace returned it was built on secure foundations.
He contacted E. D. Morel, whose Congo Association had been a model of effective agitation; Normal Angell, the best known public advocate of pacifism; and Ramsay MacDonald, who had resigned the leadership of the Labour party when it agreed to vote for the war credits.
This was not a powerful cabal, and they had little expectation of early success.
‘They talked of starting a new party,’ commented Bertrand Russell who was involved in the early stages: ‘…it seemed like eight fleas talking of building a pyramid.’
At first Trevelyan attempted to prevent a public launch, in the hope of winning support from some rather more substantial Liberals.
But Morel and MacDonald saw no advantage in delay and by September 1914, the UDC's Four Points were public property:
1.
There should be no annexation of territory without the consent of the population involved.
2.
Parliament must exercise democratic control over the conduct of foreign policy.
Secret diplomacy must be abolished.
3.
International disputes should be resolved through the methods of conference and arbitration.
A permanent International Council, deliberating in public, should replace balance-of-power diplomacy.
4.
National armaments should be limited by mutual agreement, and the pressures of the military-industrial complex regulated by nationalization of armaments firms and control over the arms trade.
This programme focused on the construction of a better international order after the war, rather than attempting to elaborate detailed terms for an immediate negotiated settlement.
The UDC was not established as a stop-the-war organization.
While it published scorching critiques of the diplomacy that had led Britain into war, MacDonald insisted that ‘whatever our views may be on the origins of the war, we must go through with it.’
The UDC's first pamphlet, written by Morel, was unequivocal in asserting the necessity of military victory over Germany if Belgian sovereignty was to be restored.
It took the military stalemate of 1915 to persuade the UDC that the time was ripe to talk about peace without victory.
Meanwhile, they argued, pacifists should set themselves the more modest task of sustaining the voice of reason amidst the dementia of war.
With single-minded purpose and consummate skill, Morel set about organizing a movement.
Within two weeks of the outbreak of war, he had drawn up a ‘Plan of Campaign for Distribution of Literature, Organisation of Meetings, etc.’
Cash was solicited from wealthy sympathisers, notably Quakers with whom Morel had worked closely in the Congo Association.
An impressive range of intellectuals were persuaded to write for the UDC.
Within a year half a million pamphlets had been sold.
Local branches were systematically established — fifty in the first twelve months, 100 at the peak of UDC influence in late 1917, at which time there were around 10, 000 individual members.
These branches became centres of  propaganda, organizing public meetings, canvassing influential figures, co-ordinating letter writing to the local press, distributing literature, and sending speakers to other organizations.
A wide range of such organizations were affiliated to the UDC during the war years, with a collective membership of 650,000.
Beyond the disaffected Liberals who were Morel's first point of contact in most localities, the UDC found supporters in the ranks of defunct local peace Societies, and other pacifist groups like those established in 1913 to promote ‘Angellism’.
In sharp contrast to previous pacifist agitations, the Nonconformist churches played only a minor role.
Few church bodies were affiliated, and no churchmen joined the UDC Executive.
By and large the Nonconformist churches supported the war, destroying themselves as a significant political force in the process.
In 1918 the Liberal journalist H. W. Massingham remarked that the Labour party had become ‘the natural home…of the younger Nonconformists and of the younger clergy’.
The new recruits to Labour did not, however, bring with them the institutional structures of Nonconformity which played so important a part in both Liberal and peace politics before 1914.
A different Christian response to the war was represented by the formation of the non-denominational Fellowship of Reconciliation by a small group of non-resisters.
In September 1915, the UDC refused to accept their affiliation on the grounds that the UDC had less to gain from any activity the Fellowship might undertake on its behalf than it had to lose from being associated with the doctrine of non-resistance.
This was understandable since the Fellowship cultivated a quietist spirit remote from active engagement in politics.
Not all Christian pacifists adopted this quietist approach.
Many Quakers and, as we shall see, large numbers of Christian socialists in the ILP played an active role in resisting the war.
While the churches had little to offer to the UDC, the women's movement was important from the outset.
Helena Swanwick, a leading figure in the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, was invited to join the Executive.
Morel directed the local branches to look to the (non-militant) suffrage societies for support.
Women's Co-operative  Guilds and other working class women's organizations were affiliated, and the UDC was closely involved in preparations for the Hague Congress.
The primary basis of UDC support, however, was what Morel described as the ‘enthusiasm and spiritual driving power’ of the ILP, together with the local structures of the trade union movement.
In March 1915 a significant step was taken with the appointment of Egerton Wake to spearhead a UDC campaign in the Trades Councils and local Labour Parties.
Before the war, Wake had been a respected Labour party organizer, and by the autumn of 1917 he was again working closely with Arthur Henderson.
His sojourn with the UDC is suggestive of the role played by that organization in maintaining a basis of grass roots campaigning activity at a time when the official Labour Party had abandoned electioneering for the patriotic excesses of all-party recruiting platforms.
From the start, the formation of the UDC represented a conscious attempt to unite the fortunes of radical liberalism with those of the pacifist section of labour movement.
Hence Trevelyan's invitation to MacDonald to chair the new organization.
As in the Boer War, the issue of peace cut across class lines, opening the way to a political realignment.
The City of London branch of the ILP, which had long cultivated a middle-class membership well informed about international affairs, developed close links with many of the leading figures in the UDC.
The leading ex-Liberals, however, not wishing to cut themselves off from potential new Liberal recruits, held back from actually joining the ILP.
However closely it cultivated its links with the labour movement, the UDC was not simply a device for maintaining Labour politics during the wartime political truce or for bringing individual ex-Liberals into the labour movement.
Its leaders were determined to maintain an independent and non-partisan identity.
In the eyes of pacifists, after all, the Labour party was no less discredited than the Liberals, especially after Labour joined a coalition Government in May 191 5.
Until the final stages of the war the future form of radical and socialist politics in Britain remained obscure.
With the whole political system in a state of flux, UDC leaders, like  other members of the political classes, speculated endlessly about the coming realignments.
But the only wisdom was patience.
‘We cannot tell at all how the pol[itica]l situation will develop,’ wrote Trevelyan to Morel in July 1915, adding: ‘There is no hurry.’
The UDC s contribution to the politics of progress had more to do with the transmission of old values than with any radical new thinking.
Its founders were clinging to the wreckage, not setting out on a brave new voyage.
Established within days of the outbreak of war, the UDC represented the most ambitious attempt to sustain the mental world of pre-1914 pacifism.
In The Morrow of the War , the UDC's first pamphlet, Morel condemned pre-war diplomacy for its  aristocratic neglect of the ‘business interests of the nation’:
The connection between politics and business — and by business we mean the entire framework of peaceful commerce upon which the prosperity of this country depends — appears to be ignored, or, at least, treated with indifference and something like contempt.
And his appeal to ‘the democracy’ to assert its pacifist instincts was explicitly aimed at capital as well as at labour:
…peace will be permanently preserved only if our artisans and industrialists keep up with the artisans and industrialists of other countries a constant and deliberate communication through their political parties and other organisations….
Other UDC leaders, like J. A. Hobson, had long taken a more critical view of ‘the relations between business and politics’.
But even the most socialist of them shared the view, articulated by Brailsford before the war, that the first task of the pacifist was not to overthrow capitalism but to ‘check the worst consequences of a capitalistic foreign policy, and, if possible, turn it to some partial good.’
While revolutionaries may condemn such temporizing, this was an orientation which continued to inform the approach of most peace activists, including socialist ones, down to the present day.
In the early years of the Great War, however, Morel soon  discovered that, outside a handful of Quakers, capitalists had little to offer the pacifist cause.
Norman Angell, the leading spokesman of a strictly bourgeois pacifism, took no active role in UDC affairs.
By and large, capital had come to terms with war — an alliance given prominence in 1916 by press agitation for Allied plans to translate the wartime economic blockade of Germany into a post-war policy of concerted discrimination against German exports — the so-called ‘War After the War.
Morel's even-handed appeal to ‘artisans’ and ‘industrialists, quickly gave way to the belief that ‘if any radical changes were to come in the system of intercourse between states…the driving force must come from the organisations of labour.’
Neither Morel, nor any of the other ex-Liberals involved in the UDC, underwent a conversion to socialism.
Even when, towards the end of the war, they decided to join the ILP, they embraced socialism, not as a radical break with previous assumptions, but as a natural extension of their pre-war New Liberal commitment to social reform and co-operation with labour.
However much specific capitalist abuses figured in their thinking about the causes of war, the principal enemies remained secret diplomacy, militarism and the delusions of economic nationalism, not capitalism as such.
Reacting against the economic nationalism of 1916, Morel attacked (in capital letters!) those who sought ‘TO PREVENT THE BRITISH WORKING CLASSES FROM TRADING WITH THE GERMAN WORKING CLASSES WHEN THE WAR IS OVER.’
The curious absence of the traders themselves from this formulation reflects Morel's concentration on winning labour to the pacifist cause.
But the essential conservatism of UDC thinking is revealed in the fact that, apart from a footnote on women's suffrage, the only addition made to a platform written within weeks of the outbreak of war was a commitment to the defence of free trade.
The experience of total war, and the construction of a war economy which transformed relationships between economic and political life, required, it seemed, no adaptation of the UDC's original response to August 1914 — except a reaffirmation of the central panacea of Cobdenite pacifism: Free Trade.
Resisting War and Materialism, 1916–17
During 1915 mounting pressure from the pro-conscription lobby threatened to precipitate a crisis in the popular legitimacy of the war.
Many Liberals were deeply unhappy that, in the name of fighting ‘Prussianism’, Britain should adopt precisely the system of compulsory military service whose absence had for so long distinguished the ‘freeborn Englishman’ from the less fortunate citizens of continental states.
For the labour movement there was an added anxiety: that military compulsion would be used to discipline and control the workers, introducing full-scale industrial conscription by the back door.
In September 1915 the TUC unanimously opposed conscription, despite its overwhelming support for the war.
The UDC decided against taking up the issue, judging that, despite the breadth of opposition, when the Government made up its mind that conscription was necessary, the defence of civil liberties would crumble before the appeals of patriotism.
They were right.
When the Military Service Act was introduced in January 1916, the Labour Party Conference, while dissenting, agreed not to campaign for its reappeal, thus enabling the Party leader, Arthur Henderson, to remain in the Coalition Government.
From then on, the labour movement offered no serious opposition to conscription as such.
Skilled munitions workers, in the Amalgamated Society of Engineers (ASE) were militant in defence of their own exemption.
But the defence of sectional privilege was easily mocked:
Don't send me in the Army, George,
I'm in the ASE,
Take all the bloody labourers,
But for God's sake don't take me!
Later in the war, as we shall see, the engineers' struggle came close to merging with the larger pacifist cause: In 1916, however, the brunt of resistance to the Military Service Act fell on those who were prepared to resist it directly — the conscientious objectors.
Within months of the outbreak of war a group of young men, most of them in the ILP, had established the No-Conscription Fellowship (NCF).
Clifford Allen, who quickly emerged as the political and spiritual leader of the movement, saw in the collapse of the Second International:
…the great purging by fire of the half-formed socialist character….
We have perhaps learned one great lesson — that Socialism must be something of a religion to us before it can have any meaning in times of real stress.
The primary object of the new organization was neither to mount a conventional political campaign against the introduction of conscription, nor to use the unpopularity of conscription to begin an agitation against the war itself.
Rather, it existed to provide organized support for young men of military age determined to resist conscription if and when it was introduced.
The NCF established close relations with like-minded Quaker pacifists and the Fellowship of Reconciliation.
Clifford Allen's new ‘religion of socialism’ drew on Christian as well as secular sources.
Above all, it was Allen's identification of socialism with a belief in the ‘sanctity of human life’ which distinguished the NCF from any previous expression of socialist pacifism.
For the absolute pacifist, Christian or secular, conscription had transformed the refusal to kill from a matter of private conviction into an issue of public controversy.
‘It is a privilege’, wrote Allen, ‘that the young men of our generation should have such an opportunity of bearing witness to the faith that is in them.’
For Allen it was the anticipated testing of conscientious objectors by state persecution that offered the prime source for a renewal of socialism after the  catastrophe of 1914.
He also, at first, saw conscientious objection as a key to mobilizing opposition to the war itself.
The readiness of individual pacifists to suffer for their faith would be ‘a far more powerful propaganda than  countless meetings….
Just in so far as we cause the Government to persecute those who believe in peace, so we may be doing the greatest service…to stimulate the national consciousness in [the]direction [of peace].’
From the outset, this project was seriously flawed.
The Government, responsive to its own Liberal supporters, was more concerned to accommodate than to confront conscientious objectors.
Under the Military Service Act provision was made for exemption from military service on grounds of conscience.
Problems arose mainly because the Tribunals of local worthies charged with enforcing the Act usually disagreed with Parliament's intentions, and sent men who were obviously conscientious objectors into the Army.
There, if they maintained their resistance, they were frequently treated with great brutality and, in a few cases, threatened with posting to the front, where they could be summarily shot.
Alerted to these abuses, the Government intervened to stop them.
Resisters were court  martialled and sent to civil jails.
From July 1916 a system of alternative service was introduced, enabling objectors to choose civilian work under Home Office control instead of going to jail.
The NCF opposed the Home Office scheme on the grounds that, by performing work of national importance, objectors would merely be releasing someone else for military service —‘killing by proxy’.
Only by refusing all compromise and inviting martyrdom could the NCF hope to sabotage the workings of the Military Service Act and shock the public into reconsidering its support for the war.
Writing from Maidstone prison in April 1917, Allen repeated his refusal to exchange the physically destructive conditions of hard labour in prison for ‘spiritual death in safe civil work.’
Nine out of ten of the 16,500 conscientious objectors, however, rejected this absolutist stand and accepted alternative service.
This was predictable, not only because of natural human frailty, but also because, despite Allen's initial hopes, there was in fact little political purpose to be served by adopting the absolutist position.
As the NCF tried to come to terms with the fact that most of its supporters were opting for the Home Office scheme, bitter arguments broke out.
Catherine Marshall, who did much of  the day-to-day work of the NCF, placed humanity before principle, intervening with the authorities to secure improvements in the treatment of absolutists and ‘alternativists’ alike.
She was attacked by some of the more irreconcilable young Quakers for betraying the spirit of absolutism by helping the authorities in the administration of the Military Service Act and turning the NCF into ‘a society for the prevention of cruelty to conscientious objectors.’
The accusation had force.
Marshall's skilful lobbying, which relieved the suffering of many an objector, did much to prepare the way for the relatively unproblematic acceptance of the right to conscientious objection and alternative service in the Second World War.
What had begun as a movement of resistance to the new apparatus of militarism, became itself a tolerated part of that apparatus.
The political sting had been drawn from pacifist witness.
It is difficult to see how this could have been avoided.
A propaganda of peace based on the readiness of objectors to undergo hard labour was likely to meet with derision, if not anger, at a time when hundreds of thousands of young men were fighting and dying for their country in far more appalling conditions.
While the NCF was, of course, sensitive to this point, it did rather undermine its initial political strategy.
By the end of 1916, Allen was acknowledging from his prison cell that any propaganda effect of conscientious objection would occur, if at all, after the war.
About the same time, Brailsford, who had toyed with the idea of working for the NCF, judged it more harshly: ‘a blind alley which won t bring us even infinitesimally nearer to peace.’
To many pacifists, the conscientious objectors appeared to be substituting self-righteousness for any coherent thinking about the likely consequences of their actions.
Bertrand Russell, who took over the chairmanship of the NCF when Allen was jailed, later remarked: ‘In some men the habit of standing out against the herd had become so ingrained that they could not co-operate with anybody about anything.’
By 1919 Allen himself recognized that, in their often fanatical pursuit of principle, the absolutists had ‘repelled’ and ‘muddled’public opinion, rather than opened the way for a broader peace politics.
We seemed to wrap ourselves in coil after coil of finely spun logic, to raise our pedestal upon a mountain of phrases and formulas and to be unresponsive to the altered mood of those whose opinions we sought to change.
All this was understandable, given ‘the strained and anxious psychology of young men…aggressively on their defence in a world of enemies.’
But Allen insisted that the record of the NCF could hardly stand as a model for spreading the pacifist word in years to come.
This did not prevent later generations of pacifists from taking the NCF as precisely such a model.
From the early summer of 1916, the growth point of pacifist protest was not resistance to conscription, but the demand for a negotiated peace.
As the death toll mounted, and the futility of the war of attrition on the Western Front seeped into public consciousness, the pacifists moved onto the offensive.
In May 1916 all the main peace organizations joined together to launch a petition calling for peace by negotiation.
Over the summer, for the first time since the outbreak of war, peace rallies were held in most parts of Britain and some 200,000 signatures were collected.
Organizations representing some 750,000 people, mainly trade unions, also endorsed the petition.
From the autumn, peace organizations joined forces with the ILP to promote peace candidates in by-elections.
In November, Britain's two main socialist parties — the ILP and the British Socialist party (which had settled accounts with its old guard pro-war leadership in the spring)— announced the formation of a United Socialist Council to organize joint propaganda and agitation for peace.
This was not yet a mass movement, but the basis for a large-scale mobilization of anti-war opinion was at last being laid.
From the autumn of 1916 the politics of the war underwent a series of rapid transformations.
Tentative behind-the-scenes suggestions by a minority of Cabinet Ministers that the Government should examine the option of peace without victory were brushed aside when, in December, Lloyd George replaced Asquith as Prime Minister, and formed a new Coalition Government explicitly committed to his policy of imposing unconditional surrender on Germany —‘the knock-out  blow’.
Within days, the Germans launched a new peace offensive.
British pacifists, painfully aware of their own marginality, looked across the Atlantic to the still-neutral United States.
For a heady moment it seemed that they would not be disappointed.
On 22 January 1917, President Wilson responded to the obduracy of the Allies with a passionate endorsement of the argument that only a peace without victory could lay the foundations for a world without war:
Victory would mean peace forced upon the loser….
It would be accepted in humiliation…and would leave…a bitter memory upon which the terms of peace would rest, not permanently, but only as upon quicksand.
Only a peace between equals can last….
Such a proposition was no more acceptable to the Germans than to the British and they put an end to further talk of peace by declaring unrestricted submarine warfare in the Atlantic.
By April 1917 the United States had entered the war.
Soon after the outbreak of war, Lowes Dickinson — a Cambridge classicist who coined the term ‘international anarchy’— convened a small group to discuss ways of organizing peace after the war.
In May 1915 a League of Nations Society emerged.
Despite the involvement of several members of the UDC, the Society took pains to disassociate itself from ‘any ‘stop the war’ programme…or criticism of foreign policy.’
Dickinson, a cautious man, advocated limited innovations — in particular an agreement among states to observe a cooling-off period in international disputes, during which mediation could proceed and public opinion could mobilize against war.
Others, including Hobson and Brailsford, went further, arguing that any League would have to concern itself with economic and social, as well as purely diplomatic, matters if the deeper causes of war were to be addressed.
It was generally agreed by advocates of the League that it would have to have the power to enforce its decisions, by military means if necessary.
As Hobson pointed out, only a system of ‘collective security’, resting in the last analysis on the threat of force against an international law-breaker, could prevent a return to competitive armaments and international  anarchy.
But how could the warring states of Europe be persuaded to abandon national sovereignty to the degree necessary to make collective security a reality?
For two years the League of Nations Society led a modest existence, discussing ideas, publishing proposals and keeping in touch with like-minded organizations in France, Holland and, significantly, the United States, where a League to Enforce peace had been established in 1915.
The role attributed to America in League of Nations thinking had much in common with Gladstone's belief in Britain's mission, as a naval power with no territorial ambitions on the Continent, to ‘bring Europe into concert’.
When, in 1916, pacifist thinkers cast around for an alternative power which claimed to represent the universal interests of mankind, their eyes turned to the United States.
In May 1916 Woodrow Wilson, the US President, declared his support for the idea of a League of Nations.
For Brailsford, who had a tendency to overstate his case, this marked a decisive turning point in world history.
Schemes for arranging Perpetual Peace had a long and depressingly futile history.
Wilson, however, spoke for a genuinely new international morality:
In the profound peace of [America's]unassailable continent…a new human type…is evolving…without the old formative influences of nationalism and militarism….
The new fact in the world's history is that for the first time a great power with a formidable Navy, a population from which vast armies might be raised, and an economic and financial strength which might alone be decisive in any future conflict, is prepared to stake its own peace, not merely to guarantee its own interests, nor to further the partisan aims of its allies, but to make an end in the world of the possibility of prosperous aggression…. beyond the American continent her only interests are the open door to trade, freedom of the seas, and the maintenance of peace.
By announcing America's ‘preparedness’ to intervene in the European conflict, while maintaining her neutrality between the combatants, Wilson had emerged as the main hope for  peace in Europe.
‘A policy of trust, with America to back it, ceases to be an idealistic folly.’
The peace that the Old World could not keep would be enforced by the New World.
American intervention, and that alone, made a ‘peace between equals’— and thus the avoidance of another European war — a possibility.
Russell took a similar view.
Despite his involvement with the NCF — and later with the Peace Pledge Union — Russell never accepted absolute pacifism.
There was, he believed, no route from a world of warring states to genuine peace except via the imposition of the rule of law in international affairs: ‘a stable peace requires all disinterested nations to form a police force in any quarrel.
Mere humanity is not strong enough.’
In December 1916, following the German peace feeler, he wrote to president Wilson:
You have an opportunity of performing a signal service to mankind….
Every nation believes that its enemies were the aggressors, and may make war again in a few years unless they are utterly defeated.
The United States government has the power, not only to compel the European governments to make peace, but also to reassure the populations by making itself the guarantor of the peace.
Such action, even if it were resented by the governments, would be hailed with joy by the populations….
It is almost certain that an offer of mediation from you would give rise to an irresistible movement in favour of negotiations….
The people, said Russell, desired peace: but only the Americans could enforce it.
pacifist hopes of Wilsonian liberalism receded when, in April 1917, the US came into the war, deserting the cause of peace without victory.
Paradoxically it was US entry that pushed the League idea into the forefront of politics in Britain.
In May 1917 the League of Nations Society held its first major public meeting, with a galaxy of Establishment speakers.
The growing enthusiasm, or at least token support, for League ideas among supporters of Lloyd George's ‘knock-out blow’, did much to discredit the idea in pacifist circles.
Most of the UDC leaders had been unimpressed from the  outset.
Brailsford, Russell and those who looked to the US to enforce peace, did so partly because they could not convince themselves, in 1916, that ‘a revolutionary mass movement for peace’ was in the making among Europe's democracies.
Others were less ready to settle for second best.
Trevelyan's first draft of the UDC's four points had called for negotiations with democratic movements on the continent ‘to form an international understanding depending on popular parties rather than on governments’.
In 1914 this was dropped in favour of a clause proposing ‘setting up an International Council’.
But the leading members of the UDC remained deeply sceptical of the capacity of any ‘international committee of the governing classes’ to solve the problem of war.
Writing at the same time as Russell appealed to President Wilson, MacDonald insisted that it was disarmament, democracy and international socialism that provided the key to stable peace: ‘Then we shall want no League of Nations to Enforce Peace, with its dangers and surrenders to militarism.’
MacDonald's rhetoric did not solve the problem identified by the League's advocates — peace through democracy required a scale of popular revolt that did not appear to be on the agenda in the winter of 1916.
The entry of America into the war, however, left pacifists with little alternative but to invest their hopes in democratic revolt, unaided by the trans-Atlantic deus ex machina .
Just when the light in the West went out, however, a new hope was rising in the East.
Hopes for a liberal alliance between US power and European democracy had been dashed.
But the overthrow of Tsardom in March 1917 raised the possibility of a more radically democratic alliance for peace between popular movements in Europe and the new Russian government.
For the first time since the outbreak of war, the Revolution had brought to power a Government prepared to break ranks with the Allied stance of no peace without victory.
Instead the Provisional Government, following the lead of the Petrograd Soviet, called for negotiations for a general peace ‘without annexations or indemnities’.
Pacifism, Revolution and the Labour Party, 1917–18
British pacifists responded to the Russian Revolution with euphoria.
At last a genuinely transnational agitation for a people's peace appeared to be on the agenda.
‘The Russian Revolution’, Russell wrote in March 1917, ‘has stirred men's imaginations everywhere and has made things possible which would have been quite impossible a week ago.’
Immediately he threw himself into the organization of a monster Albert Hall rally to welcome the Revolution.
‘Our people are more cocky and believe they are winning’, wrote MacDonald after 7000 people had turned out to celebrate May Day in his Leicester constituency.
In response to the dispatch of a delegation of patriotic labour leaders to Russia, the United Socialist Council summoned a national conference designed to challenge the right of the patriots to speak for socialist and working-class opinion on the war.
On June 3rd, 1100 delegates from socialist parties, trades councils, women's organizations and peace societies assembled in Leeds under the slogan ‘Follow Russia!’.
For the organizers of the Leeds convention, the Russian revolution opened the way to peace without victory.
The invitation to the conference warned that, unless the democratic forces in the Allied nations followed the Russian example and insisted on general peace negotiations, the new Russian Government could be forced into a disastrous separate peace with Germany.
But if the democracies seized the opportunity then, under Russian leadership, they could build a transnational movement capable of imposing peace on Allied and German militarists alike.
Moving the first resolution at Leeds, MacDonald declared:
When this war broke out organised Labour in this country lost the initiative.
It became a mere echo of the old governing classes' opinions.
Now the Russian Revolution has once again given you the chance to take the initiative yourselves.
Let us lay down our terms, make our own proclamations, establish our own diplomacy, see to it that we have our own international meetings.
Two weeks later he wrote to the Petrograd Soviet sketching out his vision of peace from below: ‘a great International of the democracies, organised as a parliament of the world and strong in the legislatures of every nation….
By the destruction of your tsardom you have opened the way to this new world.’
Alongside resolutions on Russia and Peace, the Convention called for the immediate restoration of civil liberties, and for the establishment of all-inclusive local committees to carry forward the agitation — provocatively named Workers' and Soldiers, Councils.
In the event, efforts to establish local Councils quickly faltered, and the provisional committee appointed to oversee the process wound itself up.
The ILP and BSP had formed the United Socialist Council in October 1916 when the Labour Party had appeared to be irrevocably committed to the war.
At Leeds Robert Williams declared war on the established institutions of the labour movement: ‘We want to break the influence of the industrial and political labour ‘machine’— and this Convention is our attempt to do so.’
But within two months of the Convention dramatic political events were taking peace politics into the heart of the labour ‘machine’ itself.
This created an entirely new situation in which few saw any purpose in pursuing the attempt to build the structures envisaged at Leeds.
By the end of the year the UDC, which in the summer had fully backed Leeds and urged its local branches to support the establishment of Workers' and Soldiers Councils, had come round to full support for the Labour Party.
When the Labour Party agreed to join Lloyd George's ‘knock-out blow’ Coalition in December 1916, many socialists and pacifists abandoned hope that Labour would ever recover its independent political identity.
The Russian  Revolution, however, was to have a dramatic impact on the Party.
Within a year Labour had drastically overhauled its structure, adopted its constitutional commitment to socialism (Clause IV), and nailed its flag to the pursuit of War Aims acceptable to the leading ILP and UDC pacifists.
For an exciting moment at the beginning of 1918 it seemed possible that the pacifists might push Labour into collision with a Government still adamant that nothing short of overwhelming military victory could provide the basis for peace.
They failed to do so and the chance of forcing a negotiated peace was lost.
However, the boost given to Labour's independent political identity by these events made an important contribution to the future shape of party politics in Britain.
As had occurred before, and was to occur again, pacifist agitators had more impact on the reorganization of the party system than they did on the issues of war and peace that they were trying to affect.
Two days before the pacifists assembled in Leeds, Arthur Henderson, Labour's representative in the War Cabinet, had arrived in Petrograd intent on persuading the Russian socialists to maintain their commitment to the Allied war effort.
In particular he was anxious to combat moves, initiated by the Dutch socialists in April and supported by Russian Mensheviks, for a conference of socialists from all belligerent countries in neutral Stockholm.
The Mensheviks, convinced that only an early peace would enable them to consolidate the new regime, looked to the Stockholm conference in much the same spirit as did Ramsay MacDonald — to mobilize democratic forces in Western Europe to impose a negotiated peace on the warring states.
As Henderson gradually became aware of the fragility of the Provisional Government and its vulnerability to Bolshevik calls for peace at any price, he was forced to reconsider his position on Stockholm.
The risk that the conference would enable German socialists to divert Allied socialists from their commitment to victory had to be balanced against the certainty that a refusal by Western socialists to respond to Russian calls for a new peace initiative would play into the hands of Bolshevik revolutionary defeatism.
The collapse of the Provisional Government followed by a separate Russian peace would, Henderson  believed, seriously undermine the very possibility of an Allied victory.
By the time he returned from Russia, at the end of July, Henderson was convinced that, in the interests of Allied victory, the Labour Party should attend the Stockholm Conference.
Before Henderson went to Russia Lloyd George himself had been toying with the idea that a Stockholm conference might help to keep Russia in the war.
By the time Henderson returned, however, he had concluded that, with little to be hoped for from revolutionary Russia, Britain and France would just have to hold out until American involvement became fully effective.
In this situation an international socialist conference demanding peace short of victory would not be at all helpful.
Despite Cabinet hostility, however, Henderson proceeded to persuade a specially summoned Labour party Conference to support the Stockholm initiative.
He explained his change of mind by pointing to the danger that if Stockholm went ahead without the Allied socialists, the case for the Allied war effort would be lost by default:
I have not wavered in the slightest degree in my attitude to this war, nor have I changed my mind as to the need of a final and complete settlement, but I want to say that in a war in which losses of such terrible magnitude are being imposed on all the Nations it appears to me not only wise but imperative that every country should use its political weapon to supplement all its military organisation, if by so doing it can defeat the enemy.
This was still a far cry from pacifist arguments for a democratic diplomacy capable of imposing peace without victory.
The gap between Labour's new position and that of the Cabinet, however, was even wider.
Within hours of the Conference vote endorsing Henderson's position the Cabinet's decision to refuse passports to the Labour delegation was announced.
Henderson resigned from the Government the next day.
In developing a more independent stance on the war, Henderson was driven forward not only by the logic of party politics, but also by a rising tide of war-weariness and peace  agitation.
The failure of the Leeds Convention's call for the establishment of Workers' and Soldiers' Councils reflected the inappropriate nature of the proposed organizational structures, not the absence of popular support for peace agitation as such.
One indication of the widening appeal of pacifism was an upsurge of agitation among working-class women.
For a few months in the summer of 1916 a ‘Women's Peace Crusade’ had been active in Glasgow.
The initiative was taken by Helen Crawfurd, a militant suffragette and socialist whose involvement in the 1915 Glasgow Rent Strike had awakened her to the possibilities of resistance by working-class women.
Expressing some frustration with the polite middle-class tone of the dominant peace organizations, the Peace Crusade built on its links with the Glasgow Women's Housing Association to organize daytime gatherings of housewives, soap-box meetings in working-class districts and mass open-air rallies.
In June 1917, shortly after the Leeds Convention, Crawfurd relaunched the Crusade, which now spread rapidly beyond Scotland.
Promoted by the ILP and the Women's International League, Peace Crusade branches sprang up throughout Northern England and the Midlands, getting large numbers of women out onto the streets to demonstrate for peace negotiations, despite constant harassment from patriotic bystanders.
The emergence of the Women's Peace Crusade was symptomatic of a growing war-weariness among the population at large.
The impact of war on ordinary lives was beginning to create the conditions for a mass peace movement.
On July 1st, 1916-the first day of the Battle of the Somme — 20,000 men were reported dead or missing and another 35,000 wounded.
The offensive gained a strip of territory one mile wide and three and a half miles long.
By December, British casualties on the Somme had risen to over 400,000.
The troops had advanced up to seven miles over a thirty mile front.
There was no sign of a breakthrough.
During 1917 the war of attrition continued.
The first attack in the Battle of  Passchendaele , at the end of July 1917, cost 68,000 casualties: nothing was gained.
By November 1917, when the battle ended, there had been nearly a quarter of a million casualties.
And still no breakthrough.
For each dead soldier, several  civilians mourned.
In the absence of any significant movement on the Western Front people were bound to start asking what their sacrifices were for, and whether, if military victory was unattainable, some other way of stopping the slaughter should be found.
Meanwhile rising prices and growing food shortages stimulated growing resentment, especially since these deprivations were popularly attributed as much to profiteering as to the effects of German submarine warfare on Britain's food supplies.
By the autumn of 1917, food queues had become a major grievance and demands for a more equitable distribution of food led to mass demonstrations and even strikes in many parts of the country.
While letters from serving soldiers tended to play down the awfulness of the trenches their wives, writing back, did not show the same restraint.
Stories of hardships experienced by womenfolk at home created a fierce anger among men who faced their own appalling conditions with resignation: ‘We out here won't have our wives and children starving.’
The last straw for the soldiers was not so much their own suffering as the perception that the home and hearth which, ostensibly, they were fighting to defend, was itself under threat: ‘You would think they would come to some terms when they see the country in that state.’
It has recently been suggested that the scale and many-sidedness of working-class militancy at the end of the Great War reflects a partial shift away from the profoundly defensive characteristics of working-class culture.
Local communities became less a defence against the pressures of a hostile world, more a basis for active resistance:.
It was this that accounted for [the]breadth and resiliency [of the militancy], its tendency to spill over the boundaries of normal industrial action, its unique ability to involve women as well as men, and its political dimensions.
William Gallacher, looking back at the activity of the Women's Peace Crusade in Glasgow at the end of 1917, put the same point: ‘…if you have the women with you there are no heights to which you cannot rise.’
At the time, Gallacher  was a leading figure in the engineering shop stewards' movement, whose narrowly craft-based militancy was expanding to embrace other issues and other grades of workers during the autumn of 1917.
By January 1918 the food issue was reaching bursting point with strikes and demonstrations reported from all over the country, and threats of national strike action to force fair play from the Government.
It was in this tense situation that the Labour Party, the pacifists and the Government found themselves manoeuvring for the leadership of the growing public demand for peace.
The Russian Revolution and the continuing military stalemate were compelling arguments for the opening of peace negotiations — for peace without victory.
In November Lord Lansdowne, an aged, distinguished and highly conservative Tory politician, convinced that continuation of the war would lead to the collapse of the social order, appealed publicly for a negotiated peace.
Much of the Liberal pacifist opinion which had held aloof from the UDC rallied to Landsdowne, though hopes of securing support from other major political figures for a direct challenge to Lloyd George were disappointed.
The Bolshevik revolution lent new urgency to Russian demands for general peace negotiations, and, in December, the new regime's publication of secret treaties between the Allies laying down agreed post-war spheres of influence in Turkey and the Middle East, appeared to lend force to claims that the war was being fought for imperial gain.
On December 28th the Labour Party and the TUC issued their own Memorandum on War Aims.
Based on the principles of no annexations and no indemnities (except reparations for Belgium), Labour's War Aims were broadly in line with the thinking of the UDC.
In particular the Party had been persuaded to drop its earlier insistence on restoring Alsace-Lorraine to France in favour of a plebiscite under League of Nations control.
The adoption of the War Aims  Memorandum was a key moment in Labour's emergence as a genuinely independent political party, destined to replace the Liberals as the chief alternative to Conservatism.
For the first time the Labour Party — hitherto little more than a pressure group promoting immediate working-class interests in Parliament — was  announcing a coherent and  independent intervention in the debate on foreign policy.
Among the ex-Liberals in the UDC this initiative settled any remaining doubts about throwing in their lot with the Labour party.
The favourable response to Labour's initiative in circles well removed from the Party's normal supporters helped to persuade Lloyd George that the time had come for the Government to reassert its authority.
Significantly, he chose a conference of Trade Union Executives meeting on January 5th to announce the Government's commitment to war aims curiously close to those just announced by the Labour Party.
A few days later president Wilson proclaimed his ‘Fourteen Points’, his own version of the new consensus.
One reason why Lloyd George had considered it essential to narrow the gap between the Government's declared war aims and those of the Labour party was that a crisis was looming in industry over new measures to conscript previously exempted skilled engineers into the Army.
There was a real danger that industrial unrest over this ‘comb-out’ would precipitate the event that revolutionary pacifists had long dreamt about — a national anti-war strike in the munitions factories.
The day after Lloyd George's speech to the assembled Trade Union Executives, the National Committee of the unofficial shop stewards, movement resolved to consult its members about calling a national strike linking opposition to the ‘comb-out’ with the demand ‘that the Government should at once accept the invitation of the Russian Government to consider peace terms.’
Two months earlier, a Government-backed propaganda body had reported, with regret, that the limited licensing hours imposed since 1915 in munitions towns were having an unexpected outcome.
Unable to get a drink, the workers were standing around in the street listening to pacifist orators.
In the pubs, the report added, they would have been ‘safe…as the pacifists are generally teetotallers who will not show themselves in these abodes of iniquity.’
The Cabinet, however, regretted nothing, and, when Parliament re-assembled a week later, the government announced its firm intention to proceed with the new conscription plans.
The scene was set for a confrontation which, because of the simultaneous peaking of unrest over the food question, threatened to bring not only a few militant engineers, but whole working-class communities into direct action against the continuation of the war.
By the middle of January 1918 the Labour leaders knew that they were sitting on a potential volcano.
In this situation, the rapid incorporation of Labour's War Aims into what looked like an Allied propaganda offensive posed complex questions both for the Labour leadership and for the peace movement.
To Henderson it seemed that, whatever Lloyd George's ulterior motives, the Prime Minister was being forced away from the politics of the ‘knock-out blow’ by the combined pressures of Labour and President Wilson.
A plans were being made for a meeting of Allied socialists in February to endorse Labour's War Aims.
After that it would be up to the German socialists to respond, pressing their own Government to adopt positions convergent with the emergent consensus among the Allies.
Meanwhile it was crucial to prevent popular unrest from spilling over into a major social and political crisis.
Such a crisis, Henderson feared, would provide Lloyd George with the opportunity to play the patriotic card and crush Labour's growing appeal as the party of responsible pacifism.
Even worse, a major outbreak of direct action could precipitate the kind of revolutionary chaos which, as he saw it, had reduced Russia to its abject position of surrender to Prussian militarism.
At the Labour party Conference in late January Henderson successfully resisted pressure for the withdrawal of Labour Ministers from the Coalition.
Speaking in a debate on the food question, J. R. Clynes, Minister of Food in the Coalition Government, used the apparent progress on the international front to preach patience at home:
They had laid down their War Aims and they were waiting for Germany to speak.
Meantime there was greater need for unity, greater need for national composure than ever.
They might have to wait some time….
Were British workmen to show themselves willing to suffer in the pursuit of the Peace Terms or War Aims which Labour had laid down?
Clynes's uncertainty about whether Labour was laying down War Aims or Peace Terms was significant.
In appealing to conference delegates he stressed the latter.
But it was the former which, as a member of the Government, he was really concerned to promote: Labour's War Aims Memorandum was to serve primarily as a reason to continue fighting the war.
For the pacifists of the ILP, however, the Memorandum was seen as a first stage in the creation of a new diplomacy from below; ‘our own proclamations…our own diplomacy…our own international meetings’, as MacDonald had said at the Leeds Convention.
Withdrawal from the Coalition Government was critical if the process was to go any further: how could Labour make genuinely independent peace overtures to the German socialists while retaining its direct involvement in the Lloyd George Government?
The decision of the Conference, by a margin of nearly three to one, to stay in the Government, fed MacDonald's fears that the newly adopted War Aims would become a mere ‘plaything of Governments….
If the Labour Party, having made its pronouncement, lapses back into the  acquiescence which it has shown since the war broke out, its Memorandum may do more harm than good.’
A leading argument deployed by the ILP and its supporters at the Labour Party conference was that only by quitting the Government could the Labour Party hope to retain its authority with ‘the men in the workshops’ and thus avert ‘the terrible danger of insurrection.’
W. C. Anderson — who had moved the Workers' and Soldiers' Council resolution at Leeds the previous June — pressed the point, warning:
Side by side with the present food situation was the increasingly dangerous industrial position.
A terrific industrial upheaval at the present moment might be dangerous from the standpoint of a democratic People's Peace.
There was need for restraint….
For all its political militancy, the ILP was no less fearful of revolutionaries put their faith in industrial action: ‘A general strike in the big key industries of Europe will put an end to the  war in less than a week’, declared Solidarity , a shop steward paper, early in February.
John Maclean, appointed Soviet Consul in Glasgow by the Bolshevik Government, believed:
There is a spirit of revolution developing in the workshops….
Our unified purpose should be to seize the chance when our enemy at home was weak, to sweep the capitalist class out of the way and bring about peace.
We were in the rapids of revolution.
For the pacifist mainstream, however, the threatened industrial explosion fed nightmares of social collapse rather than dreams of international peace.
In the event the industrial upheaval was averted.
By holding firm on the divisive issue of the ‘comb-out’, while making substantial concessions on the food question, the Cabinet successfully outfaced the shop stewards' movement.
By early February it was clear that the skilled engineers had retreated from demands for peace negotiations into a narrowly sectional defence of their exemption from conscription.
With neither the political crisis that Labour's resignation from the Government would have caused, nor the industrial explosion, which — however much pacifists might fear it — would undoubtedly have created new possibilities for their politics, the momentum that had been building up since the Russian Revolution nearly a year earlier was sharply checked.
When the Allied Socialists met later in February 1918 MacDonald's fears were fully realized — the keynote speeches insisted that the War Aims were not a basis for negotiation with German socialists: the latter would have to accept them wholesale before any ‘Stockholm'-style conference of all belligerent socialist parties could be considered.
That put paid to ‘democratic diplomacy’ as anything other than‘the plaything of Governments’.
On March 3rd, unable to hold out any longer in the hopes of a peace initiative from the West, Trotsky was forced to sign the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk.
Germany now had its separate peace with Russia, and three weeks later it launched a new Western offensive.
The opportunity for a negotiated peace had been lost — and with it the hope that anything good might come out of the Great War.
A banner headline in The Herald , an anti-war socialist paper, on 12th January 1918 had declared; ‘A People's Peace — Now or Never.’
This was correct.
If the warring nations of Europe could be persuaded to abandon their dreams of victory, then there was some hope the peace they negotiated would be a just and lasting one.
Pacifist hopes for a peace without victory, at first invested in.
American mediation, had been given a new lease of life by the Russian Revolution.
Brest-Litovsk and the German offensive that followed finally shattered these hopes.
From March 1918 it was clear that only a crushing military victory by one or other side would bring ‘peace’.
And a victor's peace, as pacifists had always understood, could be nothing but a temporary truce, setting the scene for new wars of revenge once the defeated powers had recovered their strength.
The consequences of Lloyd George's containment of pacifism in the early months of 1918 were to be inscribed in the history of Europe over succeeding decades — down to 1945 if not beyond.
It had indeed been ‘now or never’ for the peace movement.
For the Labour Party the outcome was more ambiguous.
The fate of the War Aims Memorandum revealed clearly the tension between pacifist conceptions of democratic diplomacy from below, and Henderson's concern to use the ‘political weapon’ to supplement Allied military power.
But the disappointment of pacifist hopes of winning the Labour party to a genuine democratic diplomacy did not lead to a new rupture in the Party.
The German offensive in March 1918 had swung public opinion so solidly behind the war that pacifists were reduced to morose inactivity and bitter post-mortems on the missed opportunities of the winter.
The dramatic military reversals and advances of following months left no space for a recovery of peace politics while the war continued.
Equally important to the maintenance of Labour's new-found unity in the closing stages of the war was that all leading figures now sensed the possibility of major political advances after the war.
To many, Labour's independence had seemed finally lost when the Party agreed to join the Lloyd George Coalition in December 1916.
Henderson's resignation eight months later, however, opened the way to a major overhaul of its structure and policy.
The 1918 Reform Act, which greatly  extended the franchise; the huge wartime growth of the trade unions; and the new popularity of collectivist ideas — all served to encourage the Labour Party to set its sights on power.
And it did so, after the adoption of the Clause IV commitment to ‘the public ownership of the means of production’ in 1918, as an avowedly socialist party.
Labour's adoption of socialism evolved out of discussions among Labour leaders attempting to formulate a response, short of actual resistance, to the imposition of military conscription in 1916.
The key idea was to propose that in return for conceding the right of the state to conscript manpower, Labour should demand the ‘Conscription of Riches’.
At first there was some disagreement about what the slogan actually meant.
Hyndman, now a keen supporter of the war, argued that Labour should be demanding general nationalization of industry in the name both of equality of sacrifice and of war-fighting efficiency.
Other jingo socialists went so far as to attribute the same view to Winston Churchill, quoting him as saying:
Our whole nation must be organised — must be organised and mobilised — MUST BE SOCIALISED….
There must be asserted, in some form or other by the Government, a reserve power to give the necessary control and organising authority, and to make sure that everyone, of every rank and condition, men and women, shall do their fair share.
Democratic principles enjoin it; social justice requires it; national safety demands it.
Whatever Churchill may have said, most of Labour's leaders were less ambitious, demanding only the addition of steeply progressive taxation to the existing apparatus of wartime control of industry.
But however the ‘Conscription of Riches’ was interpreted, the secret of its success as a slogan was that it fused basic socialist ideas about state control and greater equality with patriotic support of the nation at war.
In popularizing this slogan Labour was enormously aided by widespread resentment against ‘profiteers’— a word universally used during the war to describe the conduct of shipowners, food wholesalers, arms contractors, landlords and all the other ‘Brit-Huns’ who were said to be exploiting  wartime scarcities to line their own pockets while workers and soldiers loyally gave their all for the war effort.
‘The detestation of ‘the profiteer’ by Labour', comments one historian, ‘arose as much from an affront to its patriotism, as it did from latent class consciousness, and the victim of capital was seen as the patriotic community no less than the working class….’
One did not have to oppose the war to oppose its consequences; and there was nothing in the least unpatriotic about the demands for ‘equality of sacrifice’.
A placard carried by the child of a Clydeside rent striker in 1915 declared: ‘My father is fighting in France; we are fighting the Huns at home.’
There were moments during the war when popular hostility to ‘profiteering’ came close to providing a mass basis for pacifist politics.
This was true in January 1918.
But it was not a reliable basis.
popular anger against inequalities in the distribution of food could be swiftly transferred into a grim determination to defeat the Hun, as became clear when the military stalemate broke in March 1918.
Through its support for the war and its positive participation in the construction of the war economy the Labour movement helped to create a fund of popular support for socialist objectives.
Rent strikes secured state intervention to restrict the power of private landlords.
Protests over food shortages forced the Government to implement rationing schemes first devised by the Labour and Co-operative movement.
In these and other ways working people were able to translate their resentment of unpatriotic profiteers into a positive commitment to the use of state controls to impose democratic restraints on the unregulated operations of market forces.
In late 1917, proclaiming Labour's new commitment to ‘the democratic control of industry [through]the common ownership of the means of production’, Arthur Henderson pledged the Party to ‘strenuously resist every proposal to hand back to private capitalists the great industries and services that have come under Government control during the war…we do not mean to loosen the popular grip upon them, but on the contrary to strengthen it.’
The rootedness of Labour's new-found socialism in wartime democratic nationalism posed serious problems to those who sought to use the Labour party as a vehicle for pacifism.
Traditionally pacifists had looked to the evolution of a transnational civil society and the gradual withering away of the nation state as the key to human progress — a view elaborated most influentially by Richard Cobden.
The implicit contradiction between such visions and the socialist emphasis on the state as the instrument of social justice had not prevented most pre-war socialists from accepting a broadly Cobdenite approach to the problem of peace.
The collapse of liberal capitalism and the construction of the war economy made the contradictions between socialism's domestic and international politics harder to evade.
Under war conditions, pacifist socialists were forced to rethink their attitude to the state, if only because many of them — not just conscientious objectors — suffered state repression.
Ramsay Macdonald, who before 1914 had treated the expansion of the power of the state as entirely unproblematic, now showed a quite new awareness of the danger that socialist ideas could be used to legitimate the construction of a state capitalist tyranny.
It was essential, he asserted, to think again about ‘the limits which democratic Socialism imposes upon the state.
'44
The most sophisticated rethinking was undertaken by members of the National Guilds League.
Guild Socialists like G. D. H. Cole sought to reconcile syndicalist ideas of workers control with Fabian commitments to the rights of consumers and of citizens.
Leading pacifists were drawn to Guild Socialism, and the ILP itself moved far towards endorsing the idea of self-government in industry.
Despite the appeal of such ideas among both socialist intellectuals and trade union activists, the attempt to develop a non-statist socialism was ultimately subordinated to a Labour Party socialism which placed its emphasis on nationalization and the power of the state.
Wartime popular mobilizations demanding state intervention to establish equality of sacrifice laid the basis, not for a libertarian revolt, but for a fusion of socialism with the most powerful force of all — the democratic self-assertion of the nation-in-arms.
The explicit conflict between Henderson and MacDonald over the meaning of ‘democratic diplomacy’ was ultimately less important than the implicit contradictions in Labour's politics between liberal internationalism and socialist  nationalism.
Tensions over the degree to which hopes for peace could be invested in the processes of inter-state relations were already familiar to pre-1914 pacifists, and they will continue to exercise peace activists so long as nation states exist.
What was new was that socialism and internationalism, the two basic components of Labour's ideology, were beginning to pull in opposite directions.
On the one side stood Henderson's commitment to maintaining popular control of economic life.
On the other side, faithful to the spirit of the UDC's liberal internationalism, Labour insisted on an early return to unrestricted free trade.
In 1918 the contradiction went largely unobserved.
During the 1920s, however, the clash between these two legacies of the Great War for socialists was to become a central issue in their attempts to grapple with the problem of unemployment.
‘Figs Cannot be Gathered from Thistles’: the 1920s
In the course of the 1920s pacifist ideas moved towards the centre ground of British politics.
There was a growing recognition that the war had solved nothing.
Versailles was a victor's peace and it created a minefield of unresolved national problems in central Europe.
Since the settlement rested on the simultaneous destruction of both the great powers dominating central Europe — Germany and Russia — it was extremely unlikely to last once those nations rebuilt their military and economic strength.
Moreover the reparations clauses of the Treaty, far from helping to restore the economic life of Europe, merely complicated the enormous problems of putting the world economy back together again.
Even the least sophisticated found it easy to blame the chronic unemployment which afflicted Britain on the war.
The tenth anniversary of the armistice, in 1928, was marked by a cascade of anti-war literature, which set the seal on a broad pacifistic consensus that was to dominate the centre ground of British politics well into the 1930s.
At the heart of the new pacifist establishment was the League of Nations Union (LNU).
Formed in October 1918, the LNU brought together advocates of the League who had supported a negotiated peace, with prominent patriots who wanted the Allies to consecrate their victory with the establishment of a League of Nations.
From small beginnings the LNU recruited 60,000 members in its first two years, and 600,000 — including half the MPs in the House of Commons — by 1926.
The LNU was dominated by Lord Robert Cecil who, as a minister under Lloyd George, had been instrumental in persuading the wartime Government to take the idea of the League seriously.
product of an ancient and powerful Tory  family (his father, Lord Salisbury, had been Prime Minister), Cecil combined leadership of a non-party mass organization with an insider role both at Westminster and Geneva, the headquarters of the League of Nations.
During the 1920s the LNU steered a careful non-partisan path, involving leading members of all three political parties — though Liberals outnumbered the others: the League had become the favourite cause of Liberalism in decline.
Stanley Baldwin, the Conservative leader from 1923, included Cecil in his Government partly, no doubt, to help secure pro-League opinion in what increasingly appeared to be the key question of electoral politics: how to compete with Labour for the ex-Liberal vote.
Although Cecil, unable to cope any longer with the contradictions involved in his two roles, abandoned his ministerial career in 1927, the LNU continued to combine educational work, designed to foster a broad current of sentiment in favour of League ideals, with its role as a semi-official adviser to the Foreign Office.
It was only in the 1930s that the attitude of the Government towards the growing international crisis forced the LNU to choose between its two roles.
It finally cashed in its accumulated non-partisan capital in a campaign of truly massive proportions — the Peace Ballot of 1934–35.
For the LNU the lesson of the Great War was clear.
So long as international affairs were left to the uncontrolled interplay of nation states, mutual suspicion would generate arms races which, in turn, would generate wars.
In 1925, Viscount Grey, the first President of the LNU, who, as Liberal Foreign Secretary, had taken Britain into the war, endorsed the view that ‘great armaments lead inevitably to war’.
The object of the League was to create the conditions of international security that would make general disarmament possible.
Under the Covenant of the League, disputes between nations could be settled by discussion and arbitration.
Since any delinquent state would face the combined power, economic and military, of member states, national armaments could be kept to a minimum.
Even Conservative Governments could be persuaded of the wisdom of this approach since, so long as no powerful state threatened the status quo, support for the League was the cheapest way of maintaining the Empire.
As Cecil explained in 1925:
We have a small army and a vast Empire….
It is immensely important to us to preserve the status quo by the peaceful methods of arbitration and international co-operation, rather than by the maintenance of armies and navies which a return to the balance of power would force upon us.
Although the League was a League of governments, not of peoples, it was officially committed to the view that public opinion was the ultimate guarantor of peace.
Cecil told the first League Assembly.:
…by far the most powerful weapon at the command of the League of Nations is not the economic or the military weapon or any other weapons of material force.
By far the strongest weapon we have is the weapon of public opinion.
Despite this, the LNU invested its hopes less in the efficacy of a transnational effort to sustain a people's peace — no other country had an organized public opinion remotely comparable to Britain's — than in its capacity to influence British Governments.
For all Cecil's faith in the power of public opinion, it was, in the end, the power of the British state that mattered:
At the heart of the LNU,[writes its historian, was]…a faith in British public opinion as a force capable of moulding a new world order.
A large and influential Union could sway the Government which in turn could lead the League and the world.
Within the Labour party there was considerable suspicion of the League, expressed, above all, by the UDC intellectuals on whose expertise in foreign affairs the Party was heavily dependent in the 1920s.
Since it was rooted in the ‘victor's peace’, little good could be expected from the League.
Versailles, said Ramsay MacDonald in 1919, was ‘a peace to end peace’, and ‘figs cannot be gathered from thistles.’
Far from opening the conduct of foreign affairs to democratic  control, the League lacked any democratic assembly of the peoples and would merely provide a cover for all the bad old habits of secret diplomacy.
‘The structure and composition of the league are thoroughly bad’, wrote Hobson: ‘The breath of democracy is nowhere to be found.
Nations do not meet at all, only States….’
Unless Versailles was radically revised, argued Morel, the League would become ‘the most powerful engine of oppression the world has ever seen.’
The oppressors he had in mind were the French.
Using all the propagandist flair he had deployed against slavery in the Congo, Morel ran a frankly racist campaign against what he called ‘The Black Horror on the Rhine’— the (mythical) sexual marauding of African troops stationed with the French occupying forces.
In January 1923, France invaded the coalfields of the Ruhr in an attempt to enforce delivery of reparation coal, thereby triggering the hyper-inflation which helped to undermine the Weimar Republic and open the way for Hitler.
Morel tried to organize an agitation to press the Government to take a strong line with France, but the UDC's local groups had long since disbanded, and the LNU, which favoured a conciliatory approach to the French, warned its own local groups against agitation.
Morel s objective was to win the Labour Party for a policy of radically revising the Versailles Treaty.
But when MacDonald formed the first Labour Government in 1924, he brushed aside Morel's claim to the Foreign Office and took the job himself, combining it with the premiership.
In line with his overall political goal of proving that Labour was ‘fit to govern’, Macdonald abandoned the visions of democratic diplomacy which had so excited him in 1917 and proceeded to adjust to the reality of a balance of power mediated through the League, helping to resolve the Ruhr crisis by lending his support to the rescheduling, rather than the abolition, of German reparations payments.
Morel died soon after, but not before he had the bitter pleasure of seeing the Labour Government brought down with the aid of a ‘red scare’ engineered, it appeared at the time, by Foreign Office officials.
In the 1924 election manifesto, the Labour party explained  that it was by the international record of the Government, rather than by any direct schemes of job creation, that the electorate should judge its efforts to solve the problem of unemployment.
The appeasement of political tensions in Europe provided the key to the recovery of British exports and the reduction of unemployment.
As Brailsford had noted some years earlier: ‘The decline of our trade with Germany, Russia and Austria would alone account for the whole volume of our present unemployment.’
Two years later he told mutinous Clydesiders that a concentration on foreign affairs, far from indicating a neglect of the problem of unemployment, would lay the basis for its resolution.
A more critical account of such thinking was given in 1922 by Elie Halevy, the French historian, and it deserves extensive quotation.
Halevy, who had an acute eye for the ideological delusions of the British, observed that when Labour leaders looked for solutions to the problem of unemployment they turned, not to socialism, but to the traditions of liberal internationalism:
So ideas already a century and a half old have returned to favour…(the ideas of Adam Smith & Ricardo).
Their teachings were popularized by Richard Cobden three-quarters of a century ago, and by Norman Angell, the author of The Great Illusion , on the eve of the war; today John Maynard Keynes is their successor.
The Labour Party has adopted these ideas.
But are they the Labour Party's?
Far from being socialists, Adam Smith and Ricardo, Richard Cobden, Norman Angell and Maynard Keynes are doctrinaire liberals, conscious opponents or socialism….
When (Labour) tries to define a programme capable of rallying the masses at the next general election, it falls back, not on a specifically socialist programme, but on the old programme that half a century ago had been that of bourgeois liberalism in England.
Peace and Plenty.
Plenty through Peace….
Peace everywhere, forever, and at any price.
At the core of Labour's programme was an objective shared by all British Governments in the 1920s — the restoration of the gold standard as the basis of a new liberal internationalism run, as before 1914, from the City of London.
In retrospect it is  quite evident that this was a doomed endeavour.
The British economy was no longer sufficiently dominant in the world to sustain the balancing role it had performed before 1914.
The obvious alternative was for New York to take over from London, but in financial matters, as in military ones, America was not yet prepared to undertake the role of world leadership which Britain could no longer fulfil.
The determination with which, against the odds, British Governments attempted to restore economic liberalism in the 1920s partly reflected the influence wielded by the City of London.
Just as important, however, was the power of ideas.
After the Wall Street crash of 1929, with the slump forcing up tariff barriers around the world, Ramsay Macdonald's Second Labour Government clung dogmatically to Treasury orthodoxy and the defence of free trade.
The Conservatives returned to their panacea of imperial protectionism and even the Liberals, the historic party of free trade, began to question the dogma, influenced by Lloyd George's experience in running the war economy and Keynes's argument that deficit budgeting behind temporary import restrictions was the key to triggering a domestic economic revival.
Philip Snowden, who had been a harder-line pacifist during the war than the more pragmatic Macdonald, was now Labour's Chancellor, and he stood like a rock against all attempts to introduce new economic thinking.
Shoulder to shoulder with the bankers of the City of London, Snowden fought off the attack on economic internationalism, while, with the Cabinet refusing to follow through the full deflationary logic of the Treasury approach to the slump, Britain drifted into financial crisis.
In August 1931 the Labour Government collapsed, and Macdonald emerged to lead a Conservative-dominated National Government which, within months, took Britain off the Gold Standard and introduced protective tariffs.
Liberal internationalism was dead.
Between them, the success of the LNU and the Labour Party's revival of liberal internationalism, left little space for more radical pacifist or socialist currents.
Early in 1921 the ex-absolutists of the NCF established the No More War  Movement, which had 3000 members in 1927 and continued to play a role on the pacifist left until it merged into the Peace pledge Union ten years later.
The No More War Movement denounced the League, with its reliance on force, as an affront to genuine pacifism, and looked to the more revolutionary currents within the labour movement to provide the basis for a politics of war resistance.
It was not easy to steer a course between absolute pacifism and revolutionary violence.
For some leading feminists, pacifism ruled out revolution.
In 1915, for example, Catherine Marshall condemned socialist ideas of class struggle as ‘pure militarism’ and, responding to events in Russia in 1917, Helena Swanwick confided her belief that ‘no real building can come out of revolutions which make a dust and a mess and bitterness and reaction.’
After the war, Philip Snowden, arguing against flirtations with the Communist International, appealed to the pacifist conscience of the ILP:
The ruthless and bloody ways of Capitalism are not our ways.
Better to continue to suffer under its domination and its oppression than gain economic power through blood and slaughter.
For what shall it profit us if we gain the material world and lose our own souls?
The founders of the No More War Movement were made of sterner stuff, and preferred to follow Clifford Allen's wartime advice that socialist pacifists should embrace the revolution and ‘use our intelligence to restrain violence in the new revolutionary movement’.
In February 1919, Will Chamberlain, a leading absolutist, argued:
…it will be the duty of those who have resisted militarism during the war to do all we can to stem the tide of militarism in the Labour movement.
The time may yet come when we shall have to face the bullets of our fellow workers in warning them that armed force is no remedy, whether in the hands of the capitalist or the worker.
During the period of extreme social instability immediately  following the war, when there was some possibility of revolutionary developments in Britain, these concerns appeared relevant.
Trade unions were debating their right to use the strike weapon to achieve political demands (including the release of conscientious objectors still languishing in jail), while Cabinet Ministers suffered periodic bouts of panic that the revolution was about to break out.
When, in August 1920, the threat of British military intervention against Soviet troops advancing into Poland, triggered a massive upsurge of anti-war sentiment, it seemed that a new wave of revolutionary pacifism might erupt, taking up where the crisis of January 1918 had left off.
In the event, however, the crisis served mainly to demonstrate the dominance of older pacifist traditions over revolutionary ideas.
Since early 1919, agitation against Britain's support for the various anti-Soviet armies in Russia had been co-ordinated by a Hands Off Russia Committee run by the far left, but supported by UDC intellectuals, Quakers and many Liberals.
The labour movement was generally unresponsive to this agitation until May 1920, when — with Polish forces invading the Soviet Union — there was an enthusiastic response to the action of London dockers in refusing to load munitions onto the Jolly George , a ship bound for Poland.
Even so, calls for a general strike to force the Government to end all support for intervention were heavily defeated at the Labour Party Conference in June.
What changed this situation was the defeat of the poles in July, and the Red Army's counter-thrust into Poland.
Intervention in Russia threatened the ‘First Workers Government’, but it didn't threaten world peace.
A successful Soviet attack on Poland, on the other hand, would place the whole Versailles settlement in jeopardy.
For a few days at the beginning of August 1920, it was widely believed that the Government was preparing to send a new British Expeditionary Force to relieve the Polish Army.
This was August 1914, all over again.
The response of the Labour movement was immediate and impressive.
On August 9th the TUC and the Labour Party issued a joint statement:
…war is being engineered between the Allied Powers  and Soviet Russia on the issue of Poland….
Such a war would be an intolerable crime against humanity….
[Therefore, the statement continued,]the whole industrial power of the organized workers will be used to defeat this war.
Constituting themselves as a Council of Action, the leaders called a Special Conference of labour movement organizations for August 13th, at which decisions would be taken to ‘instruct their members to ‘down tools’…’.
When Lenin heard about this, he believed that the revolution in the West was going to succeed after all.
The action of the labour leaders, he wrote, had ‘the same significance for England as the revolution of February 1917 had for us…it is the transition to the dictatorship [of the proletariat]and there is no other way out of the situation.’
He was, of course, entirely mistaken.
Ever since 1920 the belief that the threat of strike action prevented war against the Soviet Union has inspired successive generations of socialist and peace activists.
Despite the best endeavours of every serious historian who has written about the subject, this myth is still widely believed.
It is true that some powerful people, notably Winston Churchill, favoured military intervention.
But Lloyd George never had any such intention.
When the putative revolutionaries of the TUC and Labour Party met Lloyd George the day after their threat of direct action, it became clear that there was no real disagreement.
They all wanted to maintain peace, and they were all committed to defending Polish independence, a point which Bevin, on Lloyd George's behalf, impressed on Soviet diplomats in London —‘his first experience of diplomacy’, A. J. P. Taylor remarks, with characteristic acerbity, ‘but unfortunately not his last.’
When the delegates assembled for the Special Conference on August 15th they heard a lot of revolutionary-sounding rhetoric from leaders who knew that they were kicking at an open door.
The strike call was endorsed and Local Councils of Action were set up throughout the country, to await events.
As it became clear that the Bolsheviks were prepared to make peace on terms which fully restored Polish territorial integrity, the wave of anti-war feeling subsided as quickly as it had appeared.
On August 22nd only 6000 people turned up to the London demonstration called by the Special Conference.
In a bid to ‘sweep away secret bargaining and diplomacy’ Labour appointed two delegates to attend the Riga peace conference.
But with the danger of a Soviet advance now over, Lloyd George no longer needed Labour's help and refused to allow them passports.
The excitement of August did little to change attitudes to continuing indirect intervention.
As before the Polish crisis, there was little protest except from the far left who kept the local Councils of Action going for some months as centres of mobilization and revolutionary propaganda.
On August 19th, Palme Dutt — revealing a capacity to assess political realities independently of the Moscow line which, in all his long years as Britain's foremost guardian of Communist orthodoxy, he was seldom to repeat — insisted the issue was ‘not essentially a revolutionary class issue, but simply an expression of war-weariness and horror at the prospect of being dragged into another war.’
The Home Office agreed, attributing the upsurge to the ‘general fear of war that exists in the lower middle and working classes, and not to any tenderness for Russia.’
If the Red Army had continued its advance into Poland things might have turned out differently.
Had Lloyd George felt compelled to send British troops there would undoubtedly have been a massive outcry, including, quite possibly, strike action.
However, the fact that Labour was committed to Polish independence, as well as non-intervention in the Soviet Union, suggests its opposition to a war to defend Poland, would have been rather less unanimous than the bold statements of early August seemed to promise.
There was, of course, no love lost between the leaders of the British labour movement and the Bolsheviks.
In 1924 the First Labour Government devoted much effort to restoring normal relations with the Soviet Union.
One motive was a desire to kill communism with kindness.
As Philip Snowden told the House of Commons, increased trade would help to ‘approximate the Russian system to that of other countries with whom they were having commercial relations.’
Welcoming Lenin's New Economic Policy, he expressed the hope that the development of Anglo-Soviet trade would persuade Russia to ‘throw away the last shreds of Bolshevism and Communism  by which it is at present fettered.’
Even more important was the anticipated effect of increased trade on the British economy.
Without diplomatic relations, Morel explained, ‘the whole machinery of commerce is semi-paralysed.’
In the words of a Council of Action handbill issued in October 1920: ‘peace with Russia would mean for British workers Cheaper Food, Cheaper Clothes, Cheaper Fuel, Cheaper Building, and More Employment.’
It was the abiding appeals of bourgeois pacifism, not any new-fangled ideas about proletarian revolution, which informed popular support for the readmission of Soviet Russia to the international community.
The most interesting controversy about the problem of combining socialism and internationalism occurred within the ILP.
After the experience of the 1924 Labour Government, Clifford Allen, now Chairman of the ILP, set up a small commission to plan a coherent economic strategy for a future Labour government.
Brailsford, who was editing the ILP's newspaper, was a member, as was Hobson.
The outcome was a programme for ‘The Living Wage’ which called for an incoming Labour Government to undertake a massive redistribution of income through family allowances, better social services and increased social security benefits, all paid for by taxing the, rich.
There was some ambiguity about whether the object of the policy was to precipitate a capitalist crisis and open the way for large-scale nationalization and socialist planning, or whether — as Hobson preferred to think — the result of such redistribution would be to increase demand and put capitalism back on its feet.
While this ambiguity worried socialist doctrinaires, there was something to be said for leaving the question open, since nobody actually knew how capitalism would respond in practice to a determined reforming government, and meanwhile the ambiguity would tend to maximize the breadth of support for the programme.
More problematic was a second tension.
Despite the predominance of liberal internationalists in the development of the ILP's programme, those who followed through its full logic could not escape profoundly nationalist conclusions.
At first, the most important of these was John Wheatley, a  socialist businessman from a Glasgow Catholic background who, as a highly successful Minister of Housing in the 1924 Labour Government, carried some political weight.
Already in 1922, Wheatley was attacking the conventional view that internationalism held the key to ending unemployment:
In their search for a market for great stores of goods, the capitalists screamed about the necessity of putting Germany on its feet, Austria on its feet, Russia on its feet, and talked about granting credits which would enable those countries to purchase from us, so clearing our markets and setting our industries going.
But why not set Glasgow on its feet, Dundee on its feet, Lanarkshire on its feet?
Couldn't the people in these places use more goods if they had the power to purchase them?
Brushing aside Allen's pleas not to ‘take as selfish view of Socialism, a national view’, Wheatley argued that the ‘Living Wage’ strategy would only work if import duties were introduced to prevent foreign capitalists, employing sweated labour, from reaping the benefit of the increased demand in the British economy.
Labour, he insisted, must abandon its commitment to free trade: ‘If socialism is to be established piecemeal, it must be protected from capitalism as it is erected.’
Accepting that such an economic strategy would be difficult for Britain to sustain in isolation, he looked to the consolidation of the British Empire as a ‘bloc against capitalism’, working, perhaps, in co-operation with the Soviet Union.
Wheatley died, in some political isolation, in 1930.
But what Fenner Brockway called ‘the Wheatley school of national socialists’, did not die with him.
In 1925, Oswald  Mosley and John Strachey were both members of the Birmingham ILP, and they collaborated to produce their own strategy for a socialist solution to unemployment.
 Mosley , whose economic thinking owed more to Keynes than to Hobson, was more concerned with the expansion of credit than with the redistribution of income as the key to economic recovery.
Nevertheless he was at one with Wheatley on the need to abandon free trade and develop a protected imperial bloc.
More clearly than Wheatley, he identified the gold standard  policies of the Treasury and the City of London as the major obstacle to national economic recovery.
In 1929, Mosley became a minister in the Second Labour Government, with a brief to assist in the development of schemes to reduce unemployment.
Exasperated by the resistance of the Cabinet to new ideas he resigned from the Government and took his ease to the Labour party Conference in October 1930, where he very nearly won it.
Within six months, however, he had left the Party and set out on the road that led to the formation of the British Union of Fascists in 1932.
 Mosley's political trajectory was an extreme reaction to the dilemma in which British socialists found themselves.
John Strachey finally broke with  Mosley in 1931 and became a Communist.
This was not a solution either.
Communism involved, as Orwell wrote, ‘a kind of transferred patriotism and power worship.
Since the Russian Revolution did not spread to the West, Communists became prisoners of a state with  pretensions to a universal mission, and their identification with the foreign policy needs of the Soviet Union represented little advance over the subordination of an older generation of radicals to the interests of the City of London.
In the 1940s, Communists (though not Strachey who, by then, was switching his allegiance to the other superpower), looked to the Red Army to enforce the peace with the same uncritical admiration as nineteenth-century ‘imperialist pacifists’ had looked to the power or the British Navy.
Another socialist who agreed with  Mosley in 1930 was Nye Bevan.
Twenty five years later, Bevan expressed his hostility to the EEC in terms redolent with the memory of 1930: ‘Are we now expected to go back almost a century, reject socialism, and clasp free trade to our bosom as though it were the only solution of our social evils?’
In the 1950s, as in the inter-war years, it seemed that you had to choose between socialism and economic internationalism.
No effective combination of the two was available within Britain's political culture.
In between, during the Second World War, Bevan made an important contribution to finding a means of reconciling British socialism with a wider international vision.
Unlike Strachey, he discovered a way of doing this which did  not involve the subordination of British socialism to the ideological hegemony of either of the emerging superpowers.
Before discussing this, however, we must face the 1930s.
‘The Necessary Murder’?— Facing Fascism
The Wall Street crash, and the collapse of efforts to reconstruct the nineteenth-century liberal international order, set the world on the path to a second global war.
As the descent into anarchy accelerated in the later 1930s, the British peace movement split apart as never before or since.
This disunity, however, was not a symptom of declining activity — far from it.
Militant anti-war protest has (with the possible exception of the early 1980s) never been so widespread in Britain as it was in the years immediately before the Second World War.
In the peace Ballot of 1934–5 the LNU conducted the largest exercise in doorstep campaigning ever undertaken by any pressure group.
Thereafter peace groups proliferated.
In 1936 there were 40 different peace societies in Birmingham alone.
Some co-ordination was supplied by local Peace Councils, many of them affiliated to the National Peace Council, organizing a rich ferment of local Peace Weeks, Peace Exhibitions, Peace Pageants, Peace Demonstrations.
There was, however, little coherence.
‘Half of those who participate in these activities’, remarked one frustrated local LNU branch in a letter to Gilbert Murray in 1936, ‘…want our Government to do one thing and the other half the exactly contrary thing….’
By the end of 1937, Gilbert Murray himself, now committed to rearmament, was confiding privately: ‘We are no longer a peace Party opposing a Jingo party.
We are a ‘League of Collective Security’ party opposing pacifists, Isolationists and pro-Germans.
We are actually for a ‘spirited foreign policy!’
Hence a successful peace Week with all the Peace forces well represented injures our cause, or at least muddles our supporters' minds.’
This was a minority position.
Most peace activists remained united by their continuing opposition  to rearmament, if by little else.
As faith in the League declined, some called for a new alliance system — and a new Government — to stand up to fascist aggression.
Others pinned their hopes on the appeasement of German grievances, supporting the Chamberlain Government's efforts in this direction.
Through all this confusion, few individuals remained entirely consistent.
Storm Jameson, a woman novelist active in the peace movement, later recalled: ‘For some years after 1933 I lived in equivocal amity with pacifists and combative supporters of the League of Nations, adjusting my feelings, in good and bad faith, to the person I happened to be with.
I swayed between the two like a tightrope walker.’
Similarly, Vera Brittain was finally converted to absolute pacifism — and rendered temporarily speechless — while listening to Christian pacifist speeches at a rally to which she had been invited to put the case for collective security.
These confusions should not surprise us.
The peace movement in the 1930s was faced with quite insoluble problems.
Ever since the spring of 1918, when pacifist hopes that a ‘peace between equals’ could indeed turn the First World War into a ‘war to end war’had been finally dashed, there had been no convincing reason to believe that a second global bloodletting could be avoided.
With the exception of some Christian pacifists and a handful of far-left revolutionaries, no part of the peace movement, before 1939, came to accept that another war was unavoidable.
This refusal of the activists to reconcile themselves to war testifies to their sincerity, not their naivety.
They knew the odds were against them.
But they also knew there was a remote chance that their efforts might help to prevent catastrophe.
One historian has called this ‘a mood of despairing hope’.
The probability of war informed everything they did.
But without the hope that war could be averted there would have been no movement.
Indeed when the hope finally collapsed, in the first six months of 1939, the peace movement collapsed with it.
It is important to grasp what it was that peace activists thought they were trying to prevent.
Technology had advanced since the appalling slaughter of the Great War.
Above all the aeroplane — in its infancy in 1914-18- threatened to transform the nature of warfare, eliminating once and for all the distinction between soldiers and civilians.
In 1932 Stanley Baldwin had revealed that, in the opinion of the experts, there was no defence against aerial bombardment.
The bomber — like the ICBM which haunts a later generation — would always get through.
‘The only defence,’ Baldwin explained, ‘is offence’.
And he added, with a simplicity that subsequent proponents of deterrence have learned to avoid: ‘[this]means that you have to kill women and children more quickly than the enemy if you want to save yourselves.’
Those who contemplated a new war thought about it in much the same way as a later generation thought about nuclear war: most of Peter Watkin's film The War Game could have been made in the 1930s.
Bombs and poison gas would rain down on undefended cities.
Hunger, disease and civil disorder would destroy what was left of civilization.
Only military dictatorship would be capable of sustaining an ordered society in the aftermath of such a conflict.
Eventually perhaps — this was Bertrand Russell's speculation — the Americans would re-colonize Europe and rescue it from barbarism.
For some people — Russians and Germans among them — the Second World War was like that.
But not for the Americans, nor the British who were not bombed heavily enough to prevent them from turning the experience into a basis for a cosy national myth.
The prevalence of the idea of the Second World War as a ‘good war’ in Anglo-American culture makes it very hard to appreciate that those who tried to prevent it had good reasons for doing so.
It was only with enormous reluctance and great misgivings that even those most acutely aware of the evils of Nazism came to persuade themselves of what we, as beneficiaries of the Second World War, too often take for granted — that the catastrophe of another war was the lesser of two evils.
In 1936, Bertrand Russell, after rehearsing the expected consequences of a new war, posed the question: ‘Can we imagine any great modern war which would do more good than harm?’
He was only slightly ahead of his time.
Who, today, believes that a nuclear war would do more good than harm?
Who would think it sane to use nuclear weapons against a new Hitler?
The efforts of pacifists to prevent the Second World War have won them few friends.
The record of the peace  movement in the 1930s has been a favoured weapon in the arsenal of its opponents ever since, and an astonishing amount of nonsense has been talked on the subject.
The idea that the peace movement was responsible for the National Government's policy of appeasement will not withstand examination.
There is now an extensive historical literature dealing with British appeasement.
Many diverse factors have been shown to have influenced the decision makers, amongst which public pacifism was of minor importance.
This is not surprising.
Throughout the 1930s a Conservative-dominated National Government was in power.
It had an invulnerable parliamentary majority.
Its defence and foreign policies reflected the views and perceived interests of Whitehall, the Conservative leadership and those rich and powerful individuals who were in day-to-day contact with the process of government.
popular movements made little impact on this Establishment.
On the one occasion when they did, in the run-up to the 1935 Election, it was — as we shall see — the peace movement that was agitating for a policy of resistance to aggression, and the Government that was forced by public opinion to suspend its deeply unpopular policy of appeasement — until the Election was safely out of the way.
There is little point, however, in conducting this discussion as a polemic against ill-informed and malicious misrepresentations of peace movement history.
The point is not to seek to vindicate, but to understand the differing responses of pacifists to the most difficult situation they have faced in this century.
Within weeks of the 1931 Election, the Japanese invasion of Manchuria alerted public opinion to new threats of war which, within five years, were to destroy the League's credibility as an instrument for the maintenance of peace.
The bombing of Shanghai, widely shown on newsreels early in 1932, helped to trigger the fears of civilian bombing which played such a large part in popular thinking about war and peace during the 1930s.
In 1933, reacting to international condemnation of their aggression, the Japanese left the League.
At the same time, Hitler's access to power dimmed prospects for the Disarmament Conference in Geneva.
Germany finally quit the Conference — and the League — in  October.
Meanwhile Anglo-Soviet relations had deteriorated to a point where many on the left feared that a renewed war of intervention was being prepared.
A sudden wave of fear that a new world war was in the making found expression not through the LNU — whose recruitment declined sharply during 1933 — but in some rather less disciplined eruptions of protest.
Two weeks after Hitler became German Chancellor, the Oxford Union declared: ‘This House will in no circumstances fight for its King and Country.’
Amidst a blaze of publicity, the resolution was quickly taken up by student bodies all over the country.
The final phrase carried a suggestion that they might be willing to fight for the League, but it seems unlikely that this thought had crossed the minds of many of the young gentlemen who voted for it.
In July Beverley Nicolls' Cry Havoc was published, an incoherent and emotional anti-war tract which predicted that a second world war would break out within a year.
‘Not so much a book as a scream’, commented a reviewer in The Spectator , fairly.
The book rapidly became a best-seller.
At the Labour Party Conference in Hastings that autumn, a resolution committing the party to a policy of war resistance — including the general strike — went through unopposed.
Charles Trevelyan, founder of the UDC, spoke for a substantial body of opinion when he moved the resolution in a spirit of revolutionary pacifism: ‘…the rulers must know that if war comes they will fight with a divided nation.
They can make their bourgeois war themselves, but they will make it without the workers.’
More conventional thinkers in the Labour leadership saw discretion as the better part of valour and held their fire.
When, a few weeks later, Labour overturned a large Tory majority in a by-election at East Fulham, this was widely seen as evidence of the popularity of pacifism — despite the fact that Labour's candidate, John Wilmot, had been more concerned to appeal to Liberal supporters of the League than to whatever sentiment may have existed in Fulham in favour of war resistance.
Despite the Hastings resolution, John Wilmot was, in fact, more in tune with majority sentiment in the Labour Party than Charles Trevelyan.
The destruction of the labour movement in Italy, Germany and, in 1934, in Austria boded ill for a  strategy of international proletarian war resistance.
By the summer of 1934 the Labour leadership had repudiated the Hastings resolution with a joint TUC/Labour Party statement reaffirming their commitment to ‘preventing War by organising Peace’.
The statement explained that war resistance was appropriate only if the Government engaged in military action unsanctioned by the League — a qualification that is nowhere to be found in Trevelyan's resolution.
These developments in the Labour Party reflected a more thoughtful mood among pacifists after the panic of 1933, a mood which opened the way for the LNU leadership to regain the political initiative.
Despite its enormous membership, the LNU in the 1920s had not been a popular movement — it did not see its function primarily as campaigning to change Government policy.
After Cecil abandoned his ministerial career in 1927 there were moves towards a more campaigning stance, but these were held in check by the overriding need to retain the Union's Conservative supporters and, with them, its non-partisan character.
The balancing act became increasingly difficult to sustain.
Alarmed by falling recruitment, and by the growing isolationism apparent in Government circles, Cecil hit on the idea of the peace Ballot-a nationwide house-to-house canvass of opinion.
It was not until the 1940s that public opinion polling became an established part of the political process.
Meanwhile the opinions of newspaper proprietors played a disproportionate role in determining politicians' views of what the public wanted.
Cecil's immediate motive in proposing the peace Ballot was to outflank Lord Rothermere's claims of growing public support for his isolationist and anti-League position.
Most of the LNU leadership was sceptical.
Could they reach enough households to make an impact?
But Cecil, putting his prestige on the line, and buoyed up by favourable results in a number of local newspaper polls, persuaded them to go ahead.
The Peace Ballot was the largest and most sustained mobilization ever undertaken by a British peace movement —‘an attempt to mobilise Public Opinion on the scale of a General Election, but on a single issue.’
Between the autumn of 1934 and May 1935 more than 11.6 million individuals were polled in their own homes — thirty-eight per cent of the total  electorate.
A National Declaration Committee was set up to run the campaign, involving not only peace organizations, but also the Labour and Liberal Parties, the TUC and the Co-operative Movement, and churches of many denominations.
Across the country local committees were formed to co-ordinate activity.
Cecil's initiative brought together a huge army of 500,000 canvassers — 35,000 in London, 6500 in Birmingham, 3000 in Edinburgh, 500 in Gloucester.
Men and (especially) women, pacifists and Communists, Liberal, Labour and (some) Tory activists, Co-operators and Christians trudged through the streets distributing and collecting Ballot forms and — despite the organizers' pretentions to scientific objectivity — persuading people to declare their support for the League of Nations.
There was even a journal for the activists,The Ballot Worker .
One reason why the Peace Ballot was able to attract such enormous support was that it brought the LNU off the political fence.
Against a background of bitter hostility from the right-wing press, alarmed Conservative politicians attacked the Ballot, complaining that the questions were politically biased and that the whole enterprise was becoming a front for anti-Government activity.
This was a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Increasingly the Ballot became exactly what its Tory critics most feared, a mobilization of protest against the half-hearted attitude of the Government towards the League.
With a General Election in the offing the Ballot provided a perfect framework for opposition parties to co-operate in setting the foreign policy agenda, without in any way compromising their own independence.
Moreover, because it retained the support of many establishment figures, the Ballot even isolated the Tory party from some of its natural supporters.
The Ballot itself was carefully constructed to maximize support for the League, and minimize areas of disagreement.
Three questions — on British membership of the League, multilateral disarmament, and the world-wide prohibition of the private manufacture and sale of armaments — received over ninety per cent support.
More than eighty per cent of those polled also endorsed the ‘all-round abolition of national military and naval aircraft’, a formulation designed to evade  pacifist opposition by implying, but not explicitly stating, support for an international airforce under League control.
The final question, on how to deal with aggressor states, was split into two parts:
(a)
by economic and non-military measures?
(b)
if necessary, military measures?
Nearly ninety per cent supported economic sanctions, but less than sixty per cent were prepared to endorse military sanctions, while twenty per cent opposed them and a further twenty per cent evaded the issue altogether by declining to answer the question.
By offering voters the option of supporting economic sanctions without military sanctions, the authors of the Peace Ballot were fudging the real issues.
This fudge was deliberate.
Without it, it is doubtful whether the more extreme pacifists could have been persuaded to take part in the canvassing.
More important, support for the League would be maximized if people were given the opportunity to support it without supporting war.
What the economic option appeared to offer was the possibility of coercion without bloodshed, of defeating an enemy without having to fight.
As an official leaflet explained: ‘All the organisations which ask you to fill up this Ballot paper believe that a boycott on trade and credit would in practice always be enough to stop any nation from starting a war.’
Thus, as Bertrand Russell was to point out, the nation could ‘satisfy [its]love of power…without firing a shot.’
It was the prevalence of this illusion that held the key to the overwhelming popularity of the League and of collective security in Britain in the mid-1930s.
It is hardly surprising that the LNU leaders did not go out of their way to point out that, without the final threat of military sanctions, an economic blockade against an aggressor power was most unlikely to succeed.
This belief in the efficacy of economic sanctions reflected the continuing hold of ‘imperialist pacifism’ in the popular imagination.
Economic sanctions, as E. H. Carr, a leading critic of the League's supporters, was later to point out, are the weapon of the strong.
During the final months of the peace Ballot campaign it was becoming clear that Mussolini was preparing to invade Abyssinia, and it was in relation to this  danger that the issue of sanctions was generally debated.
Even those who thought military sanctions might be necessary believed that this would be limited to using the Royal Navy to close the Suez Canal to the Italians.
‘There is no doubt’, wrote an LNU MP of his constituents during the 1935 Election campaign, that ‘they're quite prepared for the Navy to have to fight.’
The use of the British Navy to enforce the will of the international community hardly counted as war.
In Whitehall there was a deep awareness of the fragility of British power: one false move and the whole house of cards could come tumbling down.
During the emerging Abyssinian crisis, Cabinet caution reflected a realistic assessment of the dangers to the British Empire of becoming entangled in a naval conflict with Italy in the Mediterranean, especially since Mussolini's colonial adventure posed no immediate threat to British interests.
Considerations like this played a major part in determining Government policy in the crises of the 1930s.
But liberal public opinion, as expressed through the Peace Ballot, had no time for such cautious realism.
In 1935 the League was genuinely popular with the British public because it allowed them to believe, not for the first time, that there was no limit to Britain's power to do good in the world.
More or less deliberately, what Lord Robert Cecil had pulled off in the peace Ballot was an irresistible fusion of pacifism and patriotism.
For a few months this carried all before it.
By the time the Ballot result was declared in June, Mussolini's Abyssinian ambitions dominated the international agenda.
There was also a British General Election in the offing.
paradoxically, the very success of the Ballot undermined its efficacy as an anti-Government front.
Whatever their private reservations, Ministers were fully persuaded by the Ballot that their appearance of half-heartedness towards the League and sanctions had become a most serious electoral liability.
This was all the more so since the most fervent supporters of the League were precisely those traditional Liberal voters whose vacillations between the parties tended to determine the outcome of inter-war elections.
So the Prime Minister, Stanley Baldwin, assured Cecil that the League remained ‘the sheet anchor of British policy’ and a policy of economic sanctions was adopted.
Samuel Hoare, the Foreign  Secretary, used a meeting of the League Assembly in Geneva to declare British readiness to participate fully in ‘collective resistance to all acts of unprovoked aggression’.
The LNU leadership congratulated themselves: public opinion had forced the Government into a firm stance.
Mussolini, however, was less impressed and he launched his invasion on October 3rd.
An all-party rally under LNU auspices called on the League to close the Suez Canal to Italian forces.
While negotiations continued in Geneva, the Tories went to the polls declaring that ‘collective security by collective action can alone save us from a return to the old system which resulted in the Great War.’
Their Liberal and Labour opponents, whose foreign policy clothes had been so comprehensively stolen, were reduced to assertions — unconvincing to most voters — that the Government was lying through its teeth.
In fact, of course, it was.
Within weeks of its return to power the duplicity of the National Government's support for sanctions became embarrassingly obvious.
An agreement between Hoare and his French counterpart, Pierre Laval, was leaked to the press.
They intended to offer Mussolini control of two thirds of Abyssinia provided he would save their faces by allowing Haile Selassie to continue to rule over the remainder.
The outcry was spontaneous and virtually universal.
Even The Times protested.
On December 18th Hoare resigned, to be replaced by Anthony Eden, widely seen as a champion of the League.
The overthrow of a Foreign Secretary was a considerable achievement for a popular agitation, but this was to be the limit of the peace Ballot's success.
During the months that followed, as Mussolini bombed and gassed the Abyssinians into subjection, no serious attempts were made by the British Government to implement effective sanctions.
This put paid to Baldwin's attempt to pose as a champion of collective security.
More importantly, it put paid to public faith in the League.
Within a year of the triumphant conclusion of the Peace Ballot, the consensus that it registered had entirely disintegrated.
Denied the comfortable illusion that the League could restrain aggression without killing people, pacifists now had to face a harsh choice.
Should they reach an accommodation with traditional balance-of-power thinking by seeking to build an  anti-fascist alliance?
Or should they abandon all illusions in the capacity of military preparations to prevent, rather than precipitate, war and opt for a policy of peace at any price, of absolute pacifism?
Against Fascism and War
The Abyssinian war of 1935–36 hardened the emerging division between those who looked to collective security to prevent a repeat of the Great War, and those who totally refused the use of force in international relations.
It was at this time that the modern meaning of the word ‘pacifist’ became established: the semantic change registered a deep and abiding split within the peace movement.
Not until the growth of the nuclear disarmament movement in the 1950s were significant bridges rebuilt between the two wings of what, in the 1920s, could be described as a single pacifist movement.
Normal Angell and Clifford Allen were among those who fought a rearguard action in defence of the older, more general, meaning of the word ‘pacifism’.
They argued that since the concentration of military forces in the hands of the League would be a step towards their total elimination, absolute pacifists should have no difficulty in supporting collective security as a step in the right direction.
The fundamental issue at stake here was not the merits or otherwise of the League, but whether the peace movement should lend its support to any reconstruction of security arrangements short of the total renunciation of the use of force.
To do so, said the ‘true’ pacifists, was to collaborate in war preparations.
Not to do so, said their opponents, was to cut pacifism off from any possibility of influencing practical politics.
Clifford Allen said in 1933:
I submit to you that Pacifism is not and never can be a political method so long as it is chiefly concerned with abstaining from the use of force….
You can, of course,define Pacifism by a reference to force, but you cannot thereby save the world from the use of force….
You must cease taking part in practical affairs and go instead into the wilderness as an educator of opinion or as a  religious evangelist….
Either therefore insist upon believing in Pacifism as measured by the use of force and go out of politics, or define Pacifism as something emphasising the power of reason and stay in politics.
In the mid-1930s, however, most absolute pacifists were not yet ready to accept the apolitical logic of their beliefs.
For the time being they could evade Allen's choice by challenging the assumption that the League represented anything more than the collective security of a group of satisfied imperial powers.
This was the line taken by the No More War Movement, and most of the socialist left agreed with it in the early 1930s.
During the Abyssinian crisis the Socialist League (the main left-wing grouping in the Labour party) opposed the call for sanctions against Italy, fearing that Britain was being ‘led under the banner of the League into another imperialist war.’
The ILP was so worried by this possibility that it eventually disassociated itself from calls for dockers to boycott coal and oil shipments to Italy for fear that ‘working-class sanctions’ could not be distinguished publicly from League sanctions and would help to create a psychology for war against Italy.’
The Communist Party, on the other hand, abandoned its earlier hostility to the League after the Soviet Union joined in 1934, and argued, with some  subtlety , that socialists should ‘take full advantage of all existing institutions, peace pacts and covenants, and imperialist contradictions, that can place stumbling blocks in the path of the warmongers.’
The Communist change of heart was part of a broader reorientation on the left.
The Nazi threat to socialism and the working-class movement — whether in Germany, the Soviet Union, or the Western democracies — made it increasingly difficult to maintain an attitude of equal hostility to all imperialist powers.
The ILP did so only at the price of appearing to abstain altogether from the politics of what almost everyone else took to be the real world.
In the later 1930s, according to Fenner Brockway, the ILP:
recognized that so long as Capitalism continued the alternatives were either a patched-up imperialist peace or an imperialist war.
A patched-up peace would mean an  extension of Hitler's tyranny over more peoples: a war would be fought by Britain and France for their own imperialist interests.
We held it was the duty of revolutionary Socialists to denounce both imperialist peace and imperialist war as the inevitable consequences of Capitalism and, whichever came, to carry on the independent class struggle of the workers, directing it towards the conquest of Worker's Power….
But mass movements cannot be built on denunciation alone, and few people believed that ‘worker's power’ was on the immediate agenda.
The majority of socialists agreed with the Communist Party in turning away from the abstentionist logic embraced by the ILP.
They could see a difference between imperialist war and imperialist peace, and they fervently believed that, even short of the revolution, their own actions might be capable of preventing another Great War.
It was not primarily from the left that the groundswell of absolute pacifism emerged in the later 1930s.
In October 1934 a letter appeared in the press appealing for men to send postcards to its author, the Revd Dick Sheppard, affirming the statement: ‘we renounce war and never again, directly or indirectly, will we support or sanction another.’
50,000 people responded.
Sheppard, already famous as ‘the radio parson’— he had been the first person to broadcast a church service — was Canon of St Pauls.
Like his counterpart in the LNU, Lord Robert Cecil, he was an eccentric member of the Establishment.
The passionate sentimentality of his rhetoric reached out to ordinary unpolitical people, while his personal charisma provided a necessary substitute for political or ideological coherence in the new movement.
While the peace Ballot held the field among peace activists, Sheppard made no attempt to establish an organization, but in July 1935 the ‘Sheppard peace Movement’ was founded, and in May 1936 this became the peace pledge Union.
The PPU was the largest absolute pacifist organization in history.
Its governing body included church leaders, Christian Socialists (notably the ex-leader of the Labour party, George Lansbury), and writers and intellectuals including Siegfried Sassoon, Vera Brittain, Aldous Huxley and Bertrand Russell.
By September 1939, 130,000 people had signed the pledge.
Since membership  required nothing more than a signature, it is difficult to assess the real weight of the movement.
The pledge was perfectly designed to register the horrified rejection of war with which very large numbers of otherwise unpolitical people responded to the various war scares of the later 1930s.
Many must have signed and left it at that.
Nevertheless, with 30 full time staff and more than 1000 local groups, the PPU was nearly as big as CND fifty years later.
Sheppard died in 1937 without having developed any clear idea about what could be done to prevent war, apart from renouncing it.
Those who became active in PPU groups, however, could not long avoid Clifford Allen's question — did pacifism, as such, provide an adequate basis for political action?
One answer was provided by Gandhian philosophy, as interpreted by an American pacifist, Richard B. Gregg.
Non-violent resistance was seen as the answer to international aggression, and the job of the PPU was to train an élite core of resisters.
The process of training — small affinity groups, personal regeneration, spiritual exercises — became the major activity of many PPU groups.
Aldous Huxley envisaged ‘a kind of religious order, membership of which involves the acceptance of a certain way of life, and entails devoted and unremitting personal service for the cause.
Not everyone was happy with the approach.
‘Can't you tell them,’ Sheppard whispered to Kingsley Martin during a meeting with Gregg, ‘that we haven't time for all this intensive cultivation and that our job is to stop the next bloody war.’
One alternative to ‘Greggism’ was for the pure pacifist minority to seek allies elsewhere in politics.
Having rejected collective security and, with it, the great majority of left and liberal opinion, the only potential allies available were Tory isolationists and right-wing appeasers.
Much stress was laid on the demand for a World Conference at which a British sacrifice of imperial advantages would create the space for appeasing the grievances of the ‘have-not’ powers — Germany, Italy, Japan — through a general scheme of ‘territorial, economic and monetary readjustments….’
(Lenin would have called it, with some justification, redividing the imperial spoils.)
While the PPU pointed out that their proposed World Conference was quite different to Chamberlain's policy of  pragmatic concession to Hitler's demands,Peace News — the organ of the PPU — nevertheless backed the Munich settlement in 1938 and supported German demands against Poland a year later.
Pacifist denunciations of what some saw as the ‘hate-mongering propaganda or the left's anti-fascist stance became increasingly strident.
Communists responded with allegations that the Peace pledge Union had become ‘the pro-fascist tendency in the peace movement.’
Such allegations were not entirely without foundation.
Pacifists needed no persuading that fascism threatened civilization.
But, given the destructive power of modern weapons, they did not believe that civilization could be protected by war.
In an increasingly desperate search for peace some pacifists were even prepared to make overtures to Fascist organizations.
As war approached, growing numbers of PPU supporters came to accept the necessity of abandoning these unhappy attempts at political engagement.
Instead they turned to the Christian quietism of the Fellowship of Reconciliation — the fastest growing absolute pacifist organization in the late 1930s.
Pacifism could not be justified by its ability to prevent war.
What mattered was its affirmation of human values in a world where war was inescapable.
In a dark age the pacifist's role was to bear witness against barbarism, or, as Auden was to put it ‘to show an affirming flame’:
No pacifist method has yet been perfected in this country to counter Hitler.
If we do not oppose him by force then we must be willing to see all that we love and value go under for at least a generation.
Can we face this?
I know what Christ would have done.
In his time the Jews must often have felt their culture and civilization was in danger of being swallowed up by Roman domination.
But there can be no doubt as to the Christian method in face of that challenge.
It is a frightfully difficult answer.
We do not want more reason but more steadfastness.
Can we rise to such a dispassionate judgement?
Not many could.
As hopes for the League disintegrated and the Peace Ballot consensus broke apart, those who followed the logic of collective security found themselves forced to unlearn many of the lessons of the First World War.
In the absence of a viable League, they turned back towards alliances.
One left-wing enthusiast for the League, Konni Zilliacus, claimed that an alliance of anti-fascist states would constitute the embryo of a future World Government.
But he did not explain how a government excluding some of the world's most powerful states could establish its authority — short of a new world war.
And nobody advocated that.
The point of an anti-fascist alliance was to prevent war, not to prepare for it.
Collective security, which had been understood as an alternative to the diplomacy discredited by the catastrophe of 1914, became increasingly difficult to distinguish from the traditional pursuit of a balance of power in Europe.
The extent of the retreat was masked, however, by the existence of the Soviet Union.
Alarmed by Hitler's rise to power, Stalin was actively pursuing an alliance with the Western democracies.
In September 1934 the USSR had joined the League of Nations, and six months later they signed a pact with France.
In the late 1930s, the demand that Britain make an alliance with the Soviet Union became the key alternative to Chamberlain's foreign policy — the only combination that had the power to resist Hitler and thus prevent war.
‘I see no hope of avoiding war,’ wrote Brailsford in the summer of 1936, unless we can soon create a firm defensive alliance of England, France and Russia plus some smaller ‘Left’States.
But', he added, ‘only a Left Government in this country would enter such an alliance with Russia….’
This assumption — that nothing would persuade the Chamberlain Government to make an alliance with the Soviet Union — was axiomatic on the left.
It was generally assumed that Chamberlain would prefer to sacrifice imperial interests in a compromise with Hitler, than to join the USSR in an anti-fascist alliance.
A ‘pact with the Soviet Union to defend democracy against fascism’ sounded like a very different proposition from an ‘alliance with Russia to sustain the British Empire against German imperialism’— however difficult it might be to distinguish the two things in practice.
The ideological loading  of the new language of international relations served to obscure the degree to which the left had capitulated to traditional balance-of-power diplomacy.
If the pursuit of a Soviet alliance lent strategic and ideological coherence to the alternative foreign policy, it was — for most of those involved — the civil war in Spain which provided the emotional core.
For nearly three years, from July 1936 to March 1939, the elected Spanish Government held out against Franco's fascist rebellion.
While Hitler and Mussolini, on the one side, and Stalin on the other sent military assistance, Britain and France refused aid to the beleaguered Government in the name of ‘non-intervention’, knowing that this policy favoured the rebels.
Socialists often presented the Spanish issue in balance-of-power terms, accusing the National Government of standing idly by while fascism gained control of Britain's vital Mediterranean sea routes.
But the real issues had nothing to do with the balance of power, which merely dictated that Britain should be on terms of benevolent neutrality with whoever won in Spain.
Support for the Republic provided an escape from the complexities of international relations and the frustrations of confronting an apparently immovable reactionary government in Britain.
Here the individual could act directly — raising cash, medical supplies, taking in Basque refugee children, or — for more than two thousand young men — volunteering for the International Brigade.
Solidarity with the Spanish Republic undermined the pacifism of many on the left, and Russell knew that he was swimming against the tide when he urged the friends of peace to ‘avoid the crusading spirit…in relation to Spain, on the grounds that even the best cause is not worth a great war.’
Those who campaigned against ‘non-intervention’, however, clung to the belief that if Britain could be persuaded to join the Soviet Union in active resistance to fascism, then a general war could still be avoided.
The small war in Spain had to be fought, they argued, precisely in order to check the fascist advance before Hitler felt strong enough to launch the big war.
The more difficult issue, however, remained.
If the National Government as presently constituted could not be persuaded to ally with the Soviet Union it would have to be replaced.
But how?
The obvious vehicle was the Labour  Party.
But no Election was due until 1940 — and that might well be too late.
Even if there was still a peace to be saved in 1940, it seemed most unlikely that Labour would win the election.
The continuing electoral hegemony of the Conservatives rested not only on the division of the anti-Tory vote between Labour and Liberals, but also on the fact that large numbers of manual and white-collar workers, benefiting from the rapid growth of new industries, services and housing in the Midlands and the South of England, felt that they had good reason to be grateful to the Government.
As in the 1950s and 1980s, and for many of the same reasons, Labour's ‘forward march’ seemed far from guaranteed.
Where was the breakthrough to come from?
The Government could only be brought down if sufficient Conservatives were prepared to vote with Labour and Liberal MPs to defeat it in the House of Commons, forcing a new election or opening the way to a reconstituted anti-fascist National Government.
Such a split in the Tory ranks had no precedent, and would only become imaginable when public outrage at Government policy was aroused to such a pitch of fury that large numbers of Conservative backbenchers felt obliged to break ranks.
Moreover the Labour Party would also have to be prepared to co-operate with Liberals and dissident Conservatives in the formation of a new Government.
Most Labour stalwarts, patient people who had set their sights on achieving un-encumbered Labour rule however long it took, were distinctly unenthusiastic about such a prospect.
Soured by the extreme sectarianism of Communist attacks on the Labour Party in the early 1930s, many Labour activists agreed with their leaders that all the talk of an anti-Government alliance merely disguised a Communist ploy to subvert the Labour Party.
Far from lending their weight to agitation for political realignment, Labour's leaders organized to resist and ultimately expel those who persisted in advocating it.
In the face of such obstacles, what is surprising is not that the movement for an alternative Government failed.
Rather, the fact that it made any headway at all bears witness to the degree to which wide sections of the British public became alarmed by the apparent drift of Chamberlain's foreign policy.
From the mid-1930s, in the places where members of  different political parties met, there was much talk about possible realignments in the political middle ground.
After the 1935 election, the LNU, aware of its potential as the biggest non-party organization in Britain, edged towards a more direct political challenge to the Government.
Convinced of the need for a more rapid rearmament programme, the LNU leaders joined with Winston Churchill, leading Liberals and Walter Citrine of the TUC, to sponsor a new campaign for ‘Arms and the Covenant’.
There was talk of the emergence of a new centre party.
But most LNU members remained hostile to rearmament, while Churchill was distrusted in all parts of the political spectrum.
The new campaign put down few roots.
Left-wing engagement with this process of realignment was delayed by a concerted attempt by the ‘United Front’ campaign of the three main left organizations — the ILP, the Communists and the Socialist League — to gain a secure foothold within the Labour Party.
When this was defeated, early in 1937, the way was open for the ‘People's Front’— a broad anti-fascist alliance intended to involve Liberals and dissident Tories as well as socialists and the Labour movement.
Advocates of the popular front made little attempt to build a single co-ordinated organization.
Such an organization would have been an easy target for Labour's disciplinarians.
In any case, they had no wish to construct a new political party.
The point was to persuade existing ones to work together.
The case for the people's front was argued out in existing organizations — local Peace Councils or Aid for Spain Committees, trade unions, the Co-operative Party, the LNU.
The resignation of the Foreign Secretary, Anthony Eden, early in 1938 provided an opportunity for the popular forces to intervene.
Around the country LNU branches held meetings demanding Chamberlain's resignation, but the leadership pulled back from direct involvement in party politics.
And Eden, who wanted the leadership of the Tory Party, offered no support to the movement triggered by his resignation.
In the spring the left launched a new popular front campaign — the United Peace Alliance — with support from the Co-operative Party.
After a promising start, the campaign fizzled  out in the summer when the full Co-operative Congress refused to back it.
The nearest thing to a sustained campaign for a People's Government was the Left Book Club.
Established, in close co-operation with the Communist Party, by the publisher Victor Gollancz in March 1936, the Club rapidly became rather more than a purveyor of books — though, with 50,000 members by the beginning of 1938, it did that effectively and in vast numbers.
G. D. H. Cole's The People's Front , the Club choice for July 1937, looked to local readers groups as the main basis for developing the agitation.
By the end of 1937 there were 730 such groups, and 1200 by the spring of 1939.
In many places the Left Book Club made the Labour Party look like a stagnant backwater, while demanding a less disciplined or full-time commitment than membership of the Communist Party.
The success of the Left Book Club leant some credence to popular front politics.
New alignments among MPs and electoral pacts amongst the parties would be necessary to the overthrow of the National Government.
But these were seen as consequences, not causes.
The central concern was less with lobbying amongst the powerful, than with creating an irresistible tide of popular opinion that would force the politicians into appropriate action.
The very fact of unity between diverse political forces, popular frontists believed, together with an agreed programme of resistance to fascism and domestic social reforms, would transform the political situation in the country.
Left-wing and progressive opinion, disorientated by Baldwin's election victory and the seeming immovability of the National Government, would be reinvigorated.
Precisely how these new popular energies would influence the world of high politics could not be anticipated: perhaps the movement would have to wait for one of Cobden's ‘accidents’.
But it was reasonable to believe that, as the international crisis mounted, the politicians would react differently if surrounded by a mass of mobilized and informed opinion than if left to their own devices.
Until the autumn of 1938 Hitler's direct expansionism caused less passion among the British public than events in Spain or, before that, Abyssinia.
Neither the reoccupation of the  Rhineland in March 1936, nor the annexation of Austria two years later caused any great stir.
But the Czech crisis of September 1938, which took Europe to the brink of war, did produce the kind of public response which popular frontists were looking for to transform the political situation.
In a series of dramatic and highly publicized meetings with Hitler, culminating at Munich on September 29th, Neville Chamberlain ensured that the effective destruction of Czech independence did not immediately precipitate a general European war.
In the House of Commons, Labour called for a firm stand in alliance with France and the Soviet Union.
But when war seemed most imminent they faltered, hoping against hope that Chamberlain would be able to find an acceptable way out.
Even the Communist Party was momentarily shaken by the apparent imminence of war — was it possible that Chamberlain was going to fight Hitler after all?— but the errant comrades were quickly pulled back into line.
The general public were frightened, relieved and (many of them) finally outraged by Chamberlain's diplomacy.
Munich fully exposed the divisions and confusions within the peace movement.
The Peace Pledge Union, which had praised Chamberlain's efforts, subsequently issued a leaflet describing Munich as a pacifist victory:
A War Has Been Stopped
War Can Be Abolished By The People
Disarmament can be achieved, because if you can stop a war, you can abolish armaments.
The statesmen of Europe heard your voice and dared not disobey.
Complete the job you began so well in September….
This was absurd.
As Gandhi pointed out at the time, Munich was a victory for Hitler's violence, not for pacifist protest.
But many more thoughtful pacifists still clung to the hope that the appeasement of Germany's Versailles grievances would serve to moderate, or even undermine, the Nazi regime.
Clifford Allen, who since 1934 had built up an all-Party group of experts committed to collective security and domestic reform, resisted pressures to take up the cause of the People's Front, and, instead, devoted the last year of his life to actively  assisting Chamberlain's diplomacy.
While he did not  glamorize the Munich settlement, he insisted that ‘the Prime Minister was right to choose the catastrophe of yielding to improper procedure rather than to choose the terrible catastrophe of war.’
Another leading pacifist, Cyril Joad, put the same point more succinctly: ‘Ce n'est pas magnifique, mais ce n'est pas la guerre.’
During the crisis itself, the most effective intervention came from Victor Gollancz.
In the last week of September, using the Left Book Club groups, he organized the distribution of two million copies of a leaflet explaining clearly and simply why peace could not be preserved by giving way to Hitler's demands.
A quarter of these were on the streets the day they were delivered from the printers.
In sixty-seven different towns the Left Book Club organized public meetings to discuss the crisis.
Within days of the settlement Mass Observation reported widespread shame ‘that we had let down the whole tradition of England's pledges for honesty, fair play and resistance to threats.’
Buoyed up by a wave of patriotic outrage rooted in the well-established propensity of liberal England to display shame at the actions of its Governments, the left was quick to seize the opportunities presented by Munich.
Outside Parliament attention focused on two by-elections.
Even before the crisis there had been talk of fielding a Popular Front candidate in Oxford.
Eventually both Labour and Liberal parties agreed to withdraw their candidates in favour of A. D. Lindsay, Master of Balliol (and a long-standing member of the Labour Party), who fought the election exclusively on the issue of Munich.
He was opposed by Quintin Hogg (the future Lord Hailsham).
Lindsay's supporters included not only Communists, Liberals and a quarter of the Parliamentary Labour Party, but also four future Tory Prime Ministers — Churchill, Eden, MacMillan and the young Edward Heath.
The by-election provided a timely opportunity for even the least politically-minded people to express their disgust at the Munich settlement.
Louis MacNeice, who went to Oxford to help, later spoke for:
Those who by their habit hate
Politics…
The nicest people in England have always been the least
Apt to solidarity or alignment
But all of them must now align against the beast…
That prowls at every door and barks in every headline.
When the votes were cast on October 27th, Hogg won, but with a greatly reduced majority.
Three weeks later, in a by-election at Bridgewater, the People's Front triumphed.
Here the combined efforts of Richard Acland, Liberal MP for a neighbouring constituency, and the local Left Book Club helped to persuade the local Liberal and Labour parties to stand down in favour of Vernon Bartlett, a journalist, broadcaster and former employee of the LNU.
Bartlett's surprise victory overturned a large Tory majority.
For a moment it looked as though the desperate urgency of the international situation might enable peace activists to shift the dead weight of the party system.
Within the Palace of Westminster things were also moving.
Previously Labour's leaders had qualified their rejection of a Popular Front by hinting that they might consider if there was evidence of a serious backbench Tory revolt.
After Munich this seemed possible.
Dalton was excited: ‘to split the Tory Party would be real big politics.’
For several weeks he scurried back and forth in the corridors of power, trying to patch together an arrangement for co-operation with the Tory dissidents.
Dalton seems to have been worried that the Party rank and file would be bewildered by the turn around.
Events in Oxford and Bridgewater should have told him otherwise — as should the call, by representatives of 120 local Labour Parties meeting to discuss Spain, for Labour to take the initiative in forming an alliance of progressive forces to bring down Chamberlain.
John Strachey, a leading Left Book Club and Communist intellectual, wrote to his schoolfriend Robert Boothby — now a left-wing Tory MP — reassuring him that the left would support a pact with the Tory dissidents, even if the Communist Party was excluded (which it was bound to be).
The Communists, he pledged, would keep a low profile in the interests of overthrowing Chamberlain.
But all the  excitement was premature.
By December it was clear that nothing would happen.
For the time being Chamberlain survived — largely because Eden, the big fish among the Tory dissidents, would not jump.
Stafford Cripps, erstwhile leader of the Socialist League in the Labour Party, had been keen on a deal with Tory rebels in October.
Now he gave up on them.
Following Bartlett's victory at Bridgewater, he launched a grass roots campaign for an electoral pact with Liberals and Communists.
On January 25th, 1939, the day Barcelona fell to Franco, he was expelled from the Labour Party.
A few other Labour MPs lent support, and met the same fate — notably Charles Trevelyan, last of the surviving ex-UDC Liberals in the Parliamentary Party.
Despite an outcry from local Labour Parties, the leadership easily won the day at the Labour Party conference at Southport in June.
The movement for a People's Front was dead.
One reason the movement collapsed was the imminence of a General Election.
In 1935 the fact that an Election was anticipated had probably increased support for the Peace Ballot: but that was because the Aeon had steered clear of party politics.
The popular front movement was, however, openly aiming not just to popularize alternative policies, but also to produce a realignment of the parties.
While the General Election remained remote, loyal party members were prepared to flirt with realignment and even to admit that Labour stood no chance of victory if it fought alone.
But, as the Election approached, Labour activists were more likely to place wishful thinking before any realistic assessment of the electoral facts.
With new confidence, speaking as though the secret post-Munich negotiations had never occurred, Attlee condemned talk of alliance as a defeatist betrayal of the Party's socialist purpose.
Advocates of the popular front remained fundamentally anti-war.
They never campaigned for military preparedness.
Despite their de facto acceptance of balance-of-power politics, few were prepared to accept its corollary — the arms race.
Thus they laid themselves open to the jibe that, while demanding ‘Arms for Spain', they were indifferent to the defence of Britain.
It is true that some opponents of the Government saw rearmament as the main issue — notably  Churchill.
But there was no popular basis for this view, as the Aeon leaders discovered when they tried to mobilize support for Churchill in 1936.
In the Labour Party the supporters of rearmament — Dalton and Bevin — were forced to work behind the scenes.
In 1937 they persuaded the Parliamentary Party to abstain, rather than vote against, the arms estimates, and during 1938 the Labour Front bench started to attack the Government for not rearming faster.
But there was no groundswell of support for this position — not until 1940.
Most popular frontists remained content with the reassuring doctrine that collective security was a substitute for rearmament.
If Britain had more allies, they argued, it would need fewer armaments.
Underlying this refusal to face up to the logic of resistance was not merely a residual pacifism, but, more importantly, an inability to accept that armaments in the hands of the Chamberlain government would make the world a safer place.
Many feared that the object of rearmament was not collective security, but merely a desire to deter Hitler from moving West.
Chamberlain, they expected, would stand idly by — or even join in — when Hitler attacked the Soviet Union.
Opponents of rearmament in the Labour Party (and until 1938 this included the leader Attlee) argued that, however desirable under a Labour Government, the Party could not support Chamberlain's rearmament without appearing to endorse the foreign policy that went with it.
This was not merely a question of parliamentary tactics.
‘Acceptance of rearmament’, Attlee wrote in 1936, ‘will lead to demand after demand being made on your liberties.
It will in effect lead to a demand that you shall accept Fascism practically, in order to conquer Fascism.
We shall not be a party to that: If Fascism was, as the Communists insisted, simply capitalism with its back to the wall, then it was realistic to see in Chamberlain's rearmament programme not the promise of defence against German Fascism, but stage one in the construction of British Fascism.
Bevan put the point forcefully at the 1937 Labour Party Conference:
If a strongly armed British Government is necessary, a united nation behind the Government is also necessary.
If the immediate international situation is used as an excuse  to get us to drop our opposition to the rearmament programme of the Government, the next phase must be that we must desist from any industrial or political action that may disturb national unity in face of fascist aggression.
Along that road lies endless retreat, and the end of it is a voluntary totalitarian state with ourselves erecting the barbed wire around.
After Munich the idea that the main danger came from Chamberlain rather than Hitler became difficult to sustain.
Some leaders of the popular front movement — Victor Gollancz for one — began to call openly for an acceleration of rearmament: though here he parted company with the Communist Party.
It had occurred to some popular frontists that rearmament as an instrument of social control could cut both ways.
Rearmament created bottlenecks in the supply of skilled labour, placing trade unions in a position to press for changes in foreign policy as a condition of their support for the ‘dilution’ of labour.
The fear of precisely such pressure had played a part in persuading the Government not to push ahead too fast with the construction of a war economy.
But no-one on the left formulated a clear strategy of supporting military preparedness as a way of enabling the labour movement to increase its economic and political muscle — and thereby its ability to influence British foreign policy.
In April 1939, under pressure from Tory backbenchers, the Government announced the introduction of military conscription.
Brailsford was one of the few popular frontists prepared to go the whole hog and accept this.
The CP, after some initial confusion, made it clear that, while it did not oppose conscription in principle, it was unacceptable under Chamberlain.
Labour, with a more tender concern for civil liberties, was less prepared to endorse the principle, and equally opposed to the practice.
Conscription, they protested, had less to do with military preparedness than with providing the Government with the power to coerce the labour movement.
Attacking British liberties, said Bevin, was no way to persuade Hitler that Britain was ready to fight.
If Chamberlain really wanted to do that he should resign and make way for a government of genuine anti-appeasers.
The fact was that distrust of Chamberlain ran so deep that even the most  unequivocal supporter of rearmament in the labour movement could not give unreserved support to his Government's military preparations.
Munich had inspired a last-ditch attempt to bring down Chamberlain and save the peace.
When that failed many activists became demoralized.
The point of the alternative foreign policy had always been to prevent war, not to prepare for it.
Despairing hope gave way to hopeless despair.
Moreover many lost faith in Britain's ability, under any government, to prevent the slide into war.
After Munich the initiative lay with Hitler.
People as diverse as the Communist Palme Dutt and the Tory Hugh Cecil concluded that Britain no longer held the key to the world situation.
The belief in Britain's power to do good in the world, which had for so long underpinned popular internationalism, no longer seemed tenable.
Paradoxically they may all have been wrong.
There was something Britain could still have done.
When Hitler took over the rump of Czechoslovakia in March 1939, Chamberlain was finally persuaded to adopt a stance of resistance to further German expansion, and to open negotiations for a Russian alliance.
That in itself was a minor triumph for the Popular Front agitation; Chamberlain moved partly because he feared the domestic consequences of not doing so.
But the change was only cosmetic.
Over the summer, Anglo-Soviet negotiations were allowed to drag on until, in August, Stalin despaired of a Western alliance and signed the Nazi-Soviet pact.
We cannot know whether a British Government that genuinely wanted a Russian alliance could have produced a different result — but it would have stood a chance.
At the time, however, the opportunity for an alliance failed to trigger a new mass movement.
Few believed that war could now be prevented, and hardly anyone understood that the real issue in Moscow was not whether Britain and Russia could prevent war by agreeing on a joint policy of resistance, but whether Stalin could be persuaded not to make a separate peace with Hitler.
The tragedy is that, at the moment when a massive explosion of agitation in Britain for a Soviet alliance might have substantially shortened the coming war, the popular movement was inert.
The activists had given up on a people's  peace — and they were not yet ready to explore the possibilities of a people's war.
Socialist patriotism and People's War
Despite Labour's election victory in 1945, there can be little doubt that it was the Right who — in the long term — picked up the winnings from the Second World War.
Not only did the post-war Labour Government make no decisive encroachments on the economic basis of capitalism, it also accepted without question the underlying foreign policy assumptions of the Establishment.
It is often assumed that the Second World War had a more radicalizing impact on British politics than the First.
In the field of foreign policy this is quite untrue.
The First World War produced not only a mass peace movement while it lasted, but also a post-war current of public pacifism which, for a time, threatened to overwhelm the traditional operations of the Foreign Office and the Ministry of War.
The second great European blood-letting produced no such peace movement, and the lessons it taught were those of militarism, not of pacifism.
In 1944 the Labour Party, in sharp contrast to its statements at the end of the First World War, declared: ‘It is better to have too much armed force than too little.’
Labour insisted on the war guilt of the German nation as a whole, and issued an explicit refutation of the Angellite thesis that wars could produce no economic gain for the victor:
The Germans have clearly demonstrated by their heavy exactions and by their systematic exploitation of the occupied territories that very large contributions, in labour and in goods, as well as in money, can be collected from one country for the benefit of another.
It is the brutalizing effects of warfare, not any pacifist  revulsion against them, that rings through the language in which international politics were discussed in Britain throughout the 1940s.
In the First World War radicals had looked to the emerging superpowers to enable democratic movements to set Europe to rights — whether by the enforcement of a Pax Americana, or by the boost given by the Russian Revolution to the campaign for a negotiated peace.
By 1939 the radicals were older, and sadder.
Everything had been tried: and everything had failed.
H. N. Brailsford, whose 1916 book had done much to popularize the idea of the League, spoke for a generation whose hopes had been shattered by the events of the inter-war years when, at the end of 1939 he confided to his ex-wife:
I have hideous moments in which I go shivering, cold and physically sick before writing a war-like article….
I see all the horror, and yet my reason can find no way out.
So when the shivering fit is over I write my bellicose article and no one would guess that I ever hesitated.
Three years later he wrote:
I'm  besieged by pleas…to write something to help my day and generation.
but what?
I'm so pessimistic about the coming settlement that I'm paralysed.
Am I just once again to write, as I did in 1916, a book of amiable daydreams, which everyone will ignore?
After the war, of course, the superpowers did move in to set Europe to rights.
But the establishment of the bloc system in the late 1940s was to be a sad end to visions of the New World — Western or Eastern — restoring the balance of the Old.
The Second World War brought to full maturity the deep-rooted affinity between nationalism and socialism.
Writing in 1942, Franz Borkenau argued that ‘internationalism is essentially a bourgeois-democratic affair’, and he added:
If there is any social force which, pre-eminently, has worked towards making the nation-state important again after its partial abeyance in the age of liberalism, that force is socialism.
Before 1914, when European socialist parties had little prospect of power, the contradiction between their ambition to establish democratic control over economic life, and their sympathy for a liberal internationalism rooted in the principles of the free market, remained largely unacknowledged.
But as labour movements gained influence in their respective nation states, the nationalism implicit in their socialist goals came to the fore.
Labour movements embraced nationalist economics ‘because they coincided with their most urgent interests.’
Workers looked to the national state, over which democracy gave them some influence, to protect them against the ravages of an unregulated world economy.
As E. H. Carr put it in 1945:
The socialisation of the nation has as its natural corollary the nationalisation of socialism….
[Hence]the loyalty of the masses to a nation which had become the instrument of their collective interests and ambitions….
‘Planned economy’ is a Janus with a nationalist as well as a socialist face.
Against this powerful combination of socialism and nationalism, liberal economics stood little chance.
In Britain, as we have seen, the ‘nationalization of socialism, was delayed by the continuing power of liberal internationalism in the political culture.
Although the popularity of the war economy lay at the root of the growth of socialism during the First World War, liberal internationalism was quick to reassert itself once the war was over.
The collapse of post-war attempts to reconstruct the world economy in 1929–31 opened the way for a new wave of economic nationalism in Britain.
During the 1930s, however, it was the Conservatives who capitalized most effectively on the larger consequences of the Wall Street Crash, using them not only to bring down a Labour Government and introduce tariffs aimed at imperial consolidation, but also to promote among the masses the spirit of patriotic self-congratulation so eloquently projected by Stanley Baldwin:
I think that we must all be full of the sense or profound thankfulness that we are living in this country, under a  system of National Government….
True to our traditions, we have avoided all extremes.
We have steered clear of fascism, communism, dictatorship, and we have shown the world that democratic government, constitutional methods and ordered liberty are not inconsistent with progress and prosperity.
The collapse of appeasement put paid to Baldwin's isolationist patriotism, and.opened the way for the Left.
In the prosecution of the war, the Left discovered far greater opportunities for political advance than any that had arisen from the anti-war struggles of the 1930s.
As in the First World War, the imperative need for active working-class collaboration in the war effort greatly enhanced the importance of the labour movement in the industrial and political life of the country.
The Labour Party's part in bringing down the Chamberlain Government in May 1940 was recognized by the central roles allotted to Labour Ministers in Churchill's Coalition Government.
The transference of Ernest Bevin direct from the leadership of Britain's largest trade union to the Ministry of Labour, symbolized Labour's role in the new order — not least because Bevin's control over the allocation of manpower came to displace the traditional operations of the Treasury, as the lynch-pin of Government economic management.
The infusion of Labour's socialist ambitions with nationalist sentiment was one consequence of gaining power on the back of the war economy.
In 1945, when the Labour Party asked and received retrospective electoral approval for the trans-formation of 1940, it did so in the language of nationalism.
Nation- alization — like the National Service that had won the war and the National Health Service — placed working-class demands for justice and equality firmly within the context of a nation taking control of its destiny:
Each industry must have applied to it the test of national service.
If it serves the nation, well and good; if it is inefficient and falls down on its job, the nation must sec that things are put right.
Only in this way could Britain, competing in a world of emerging economic giants, ‘keep her place as a Great Power’.
The power of Labour in the War Cabinet helped to channel the energies of radical activists into support for the People's War.
Equally important, however, was the surge of popular nationalism unleashed by the catastrophic military events of 1940 — Dunkirk, the fall of France, the threat of imminent Nazi invasion, the Battle of Britain, and, finally, the Blitz.
It is worth pausing for a moment to examine the nature of this sentiment since, more than any other factor, it explains why all attempts to build a mass peace movement, both during and after the war, were to fail.
Despite the affinities between socialism and nationalism, not many British socialists before the 1940s had framed their message in unashamedly patriotic language.
This was a consequence not only of the continuing pull of liberal internationalism, but also of the deeply undemocratic character of the generally available language of patriotism.
In the 1930s Popular Frontists had sought to ‘follow the French example…win from the enemies of peace and the working class those symbols and that ‘heritage’ that are the British equivalents of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity and the Marseillaise .’
Unfortunately, as one British Communist explained to the French comrades: ‘Il y a une toute petite différence entre La Marseillaise et God Save the King .’
There is no need to discuss here the critical role of the monarchy in structuring the ‘Ukanian’ identity: this has recently been dissected with great brilliance by Tom Nairn.
As I revise this chapter, celebrations of the anniversary of the so-called Glorious Revolution of 1688 once again bring home the fact that while other nations trace the origins of their freedom and identity to popular uprisings, the British happily attach the word ‘revolution’ to a mere coup d'état .
The essential point was made by R. H. Tawney:
In the transition to political democracy, this country underwent…no inner conversion.
She accepted it as a convenience, like an improved system of telephones; she did not dedicate herself to it as the expression of a moral idea of comradeship and equality, the avowal of which could leave nothing the same.
She changed her political garments but nut her heart.
She carried into the democratic era, not only the institutions, but the social  habits and mentality of the oldest and toughest plutocracy in the world.
She went to the ballot box touching her hat.
In 1940, for a brief moment, the democracy stopped touching its hat.
Confronted by the imminent threat of Nazi invasion, and convinced that only by straining every nerve could Britain avoid the fate of France, millions of people came, perhaps for the first time, to perceive the nation not as something to which they were admitted by the grace of kings, but as their own authentic community.
J. B. Priestley's celebration of the ‘little holiday steamers’ which ‘snatched glory out of defeat’at Dunkirk gained him an enormous radio audience.
He used it to attack paternalistic officialdom and to articulate demands for social progress: ‘I'd tell people to forget their old ordinary life because ultimately, anyhow, we'll either have a better life than that, or bust.’
The Establishment didn't like this kind of thing and Priestley's broadcasts were, eventually, stopped.
When the bombs fell in the autumn the intellectuals were quick to celebrate the initiative and self-generated activity of the common people, and to discover within it a basis for a new reconciliation between patriotism and democracy.
It was George Orwell who gave the most memorable expression to the socialist patriotism of 1940.
Britain's existing rulers could not, he argued, organize effective resistance to Hitler.
It would need a revolution to eradicate ‘inefficiency, class privilege and the rule of the old’ and thus liberate ‘the native genius of the English people….
We cannot win the war without introducing Socialism, nor establish Socialism without winning the war.’
Orwell's socialism would reflect the democratic virtues characteristic of the English working class —‘the genuinely popular culture…that goes on beneath the surface, unofficially and more or less frowned on by the authorities.’
Against the Nazi war machine, English socialism would deploy, not merely an efficiently planned economy, but a popular will to victory rooted in ‘the English genius’— gentleness and anti-militarism; defence of the autonomy of local communities against centralizing power; respect for liberty and the rule of law.
At the root of Orwell's  socialism was a belief in the decency of ordinary working people and their capacity to prevent the necessary centralization of a socialist economy from degenerating into totalitarianism.
They were, he acknowledged, deeply  xenophobic :
In all countries the poor are more national than the rich, but the English working class are outstanding in their abhorrence of foreign habits….
During the war of 1914–18 the English working class were in contact with foreigners to an extent that is rarely possible.
The sole result was that they brought back a hatred of all Europeans, except the Germans, whose courage they admired.
In four years on French soil they did not even acquire a liking for wine.
For the time being, however, the political implications of English insularity were overshadowed, for Orwell, by his belief that ‘patriotism, against which the socialists fought for so long, has become a tremendous lever in their hands.’
It is, of course, difficult to disentangle the reality of popular attitudes from the myth-making of the intellectuals.
Nevertheless the evidence of opinion polls and by-elections suggests that the new democratic nationalism was not merely imagined by the intellectuals who sought to articulate it.
It is sometimes suggested that the inconvenience, misery and personal tragedy caused by the war outweighed the appeals of patriotism.
This probably misconstrues the function of patriotic sentiment.
Patriotism did not exist in spite of the inconveniences caused by the war, but because of them.
At the simplest level, patriotism lent meaning and purpose to personal  catastrophes that would otherwise appear intolerable.
A more complex linkage might be found between the disruptions of individual lives and local communities, the extraordinary geographical mobility of individuals, and the sense of ‘the nation at war’ as a concrete lived reality.
Be that as it may, what is clear is that the events of 1940 precipitated a popular nationalism which — unlike Tawney's deferential democracy and Baldwin's conservative nation — the Left could work with.
Just at the moment when France's Jacobin revolutionary tradition reached its lowest ebb, the British Left discovered the radical possibilities of patriotism.
The Labour leadership, fully committed to the Churchill coalition, tended to see pressure from below more as a threat to the orderly regimentation of the people, than as a source of constructive initiative.
The Labour Party ceased to contest by-elections and ruled out extra-Parliamentary agitation of any kind as incompatible with its membership of the Government.
As a result, membership slumped and in many parts of the country the Party ceased to exist as a mass organization.
Large numbers of Labour Party activists rejected the ban on political agitation, believing that pressure for a more socialist approach to the war effort was a precondition of victory.
Some argued that the Party should threaten to withdraw from the coalition unless the Tories accepted demands to extend war controls to the nationalization of major industries.
Although most Labour activists drew back from a direct challenge to the Coalition Government, the victory of two independent left candidates in by-elections in the spring of 1942 increased pressures on the Party to abandon its adherence to the electoral truce.
By fighting by-elections, it was argued, while remaining in the Government, Labour could demonstrate the public demand for more radical measures and increase its muscle at the Cabinet table.
At the Labour Party Conference in May 1942 the dissidents were narrowly defeated.
This left the way open for the consolidation of the independents around a new organization: Common Wealth.
Founded in June 1942, Common Wealth was a cross between a political party and a non-party campaign.
Its main activity was contesting by-elections.
For most of the membership the purpose of doing so, however, was not to build a new political party, but to bring pressure to bear on the Government to conduct the war in a more radical spirit.
It provided a channel for protest while the war continued.
About 15,000 people joined, and three MPs were returned in wartime by-elections.
When the Labour Party returned to the electoral politics in 1945, Common Wealth rapidly disappeared from the political scene.
It belongs to a tradition of tactical independent electoralism alongside the post-Munich Popular Front candidacies of 1938 and the attempts to put up independent anti-nuclear  candidates in the 1950s and 1960s.
Indeed some of the same individuals were involved in all three episodes.
Common Wealth was formed by the merger of two organizations -J.
B. Priestley's ‘1941 Committee’ and Richard Acland's ‘Forward March’.
In the winter of 1940–41 a number of public figures contacted by the left-of-centre owner of Picture Post , Edward Hulton, agreed to work together for greater efficiency, vigour and democracy in the prosecution of the war.
Priestley was the best known member of the ‘1941 Committee’.
As in the 1950s, when he played a similar role in the emergence of CND, he was primarily interested in a committee of notables lobbying the powerful, and had no intention of starting a mass movement.
When Common Wealth was formed —‘a vague sort of national movement, with provincial branches etc’, as he recalled with distaste in 1968 — he quickly withdrew.
The dominating figure in the new organization was Richard Acland — MP, an ex-Liberal converted to socialism in 1936, and a vigorous supporter of the pre-war Popular Front movement.
In May 1940 he told Lloyd George:
In my view this country is filled with immense new moral forces which have been dammed back for ten years by the great dead bulk of the Labour Party Machine lying like a fallen tree across the road to progress.
Acland placed himself at the head of the ‘moral renaissance’, consolidating a personal following built around his best-selling books and endless public meetings into a loose organization called ‘Forward March’.
Acland brought morality to the forefront of politics.
More than any other wartime figure he addressed himself to the conscience of middle-class radicalism, arguing that the only worthwhile victory possible was one based on the common ownership of the means of production and a moral revolution in which selfishness and the profit motive would give way to an ethic of service to the community.
In a curious way, and despite its commitment to vigorous prosecution of the war, Common Wealth provided a refuge for pacifist-minded individuals who could not bring themselves to oppose the anti-fascist war.
By investing the war with a transcendent moral purpose, Acland may have  helped his followers to silence the promptings of their pacifist consciences.
Equally important in this respect was Common Wealth's approach to foreign policy, acutely summarized by one historian: ‘The Aeon and the Popular Front might have failed, but the People's War fostered a vision of a progressive Utopia arising phoenix-like from the ashes of Europe.’
This vision, by no means confined to members of Common Wealth, represented the main achievement of peace politics during the Second World War.
It is discussed fully in the next Chapter.
First, however, it is important to examine some rather less visionary — but certainly more influential — exponents of People's War.
The major focus of popular agitation during the war years was provided not by Common Wealth but by the Communist Party.
When, in the autumn of 1939, Chamberlain chose, after all, to go to war with Hitler, and Stalin chose not to, the Communists were, understandably, thrown into some confusion.
After a brief flirtation with a policy of ‘War on Two Fronts’— supporting the war while opposing the Chamberlain Government — the Party settled for the Moscow line, calling for an immediate ‘People's Peace’ to end the ‘Imperialist War,.
As Hitler extended his European empire, and the threat to the British Isles came closer, this policy lost all credibility.
By the spring of 1940, the Communists had tacitly accepted that agitation for an immediate peace with Hitler was out of the question.
During the autumn and winter of that dramatic year they put themselves at the forefront of agitation for more effective air raid precautions, and used their influence in the war factories to defend workers’ living standards while criticizing the inefficiency of management.
The Nazi-Soviet Pact and the ‘Imperialist War’ line certainly lost the Party members, and, more importantly, disrupted its close working relationship with the non-communist left in Popular Front organizations like the Left Book Club.
Nevertheless the constructive work of Communists in the Blitz and the war factories kept the Party alive and put it in a good position to exploit the opportunities for expansion that followed Hitler's invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941.
From this point until the end of the war the Communist Party proclaimed its  enthusiastic support both for the war effort and for the maintenance of Churchill's Coalition Government.
As — to many people's surprise — Russian resistance first held up and then began to turn back the Nazi forces, the Communists, identification with the Soviet Union became their major attraction to tens of thousands of new recruits.
By the autumn of 1942, claiming 64,000 members, the Communist Party was a quarter of the size of the much depleted Labour Party.
Common Wealth was a marginal protest movement: but the Communists seemed set to become a major force in British politics.
It was not only solidarity with the Soviet resistance that brought members flooding into the Party.
Equally important was its decision to combine support for the war effort and for the Government with the most vigorous campaigning politics.
In the factories the major focus of Communist activity was the campaign to increase production, waged in such a way as to increase the power of shop steward organizations, often in alliance with Government officials, at the expense of traditional managerial prerogative.
It was the Communist Party which seized most fully the opportunities for extending working-class power on the shop floor created by wartime full employment and the intervention of the state in the economy.
Alongside Ernest Bevin's conduct of the Ministry of Labour, they were at the forefront of the process by which workers came to see their interests as identified with the extension of state power in economic life.
Thus they contributed greatly to the popularity of national economic planning which underpinned Labour's election victory in 1945.
But the Communists' most dramatic political intervention was the Second Front Campaign.
For three years, from the autumn of 1941, the Party mounted successive agitations for the immediate opening of a Second front against Hitler in North Western Europe.
The Government's refusal until June 1944 to cross the Channel left the bulk of the fighting to the Russians.
Brushing aside military and logistical arguments, the Communists claimed that this reflected the continuing influence of the ‘Men of Munich’ within the Government, men who wanted Britain to stand on the sidelines while Russia and Germany fought one another to a standstill.
They were  supported by the press lord, Beaverbrook, and the combination of the Daily Worker and Daily Express created a unique political movement which still awaits its historian.
The Second Front Campaign produced the biggest demonstrations of the war period and, most of the time, opinion polls showed that the demonstrators spoke for the majority of a public moved by both feelings of solidarity with the hard-pressed Russians and by a desire to get the war over with.
These were difficult times for the voices of pacifism to make themselves heard.
The only substantial oppositional movements in Britain were demanding, not peace, but the more vigorous prosecution of the war.
Most sections of the left were interested, not in stopping the war, but in using it to swing the balance of social power away from Britain's traditional rulers.
Whatever else divided them, the Labour leadership, the Communists (after June 1941) and much of the independent left had embarked on a parallel course — promoting popular power through People's War.
Not since the Crimean War nearly a century earlier, when middle-class radicalism latched on to the opportunities for attacking the aristocratic Establishment in the name of efficient prosecution of the war, had pacifist opinion found itself so isolated in Britain.
And it had been the experience of that war that convinced Richard Cobden of ‘the utter uselessness of raising one's voice in opposition to war when it has once begun.’
During the ‘phoney war’— the eerie nine months between Chamberlain's declaration of war and Hitler's attack in the West — there was a substantial current of support for a negotiated peace.
R. R. Stokes, a Catholic Labour MP who feared that the price of resistance to Hitler would be the establishment of Communism throughout Europe, led a small group of MPs in calling for peace negotiations — a position which accepted the partition of Poland as a fait accompli .
There was, at first, significant support for this position among Labour activists, as well as in the PPU.
Many PPU leaders shared Stokes's fear that Communism might prove an even greater evil than Nazism.
In October 1939 Vera Brittain wrote:
Even supposing that we do destroy Hitler…[this will]probably lead…to a revolutionary situation in Germany, controlled by puppets who owe allegiance to another Power.
We, the democracies, will still be faced by totalitarianism, in a form less clumsy but no less aggressive, and even more sinister in its ruthless unexhausted might.
Given such an approach it is hardly surprising that relations between pacifist and Communist opponents of the war during 1939–40 proved difficult.
The PPU launched its own Women's Peace Campaign in direct competition to the Stop the War agitation promoted by the Communist-led Women Against War and Fascism.
Hitler's assault in the summer of 1940 put paid to the agitation for peace negotiations.
Several leading supporters of the PPU resigned, and, even among the Quakers, ‘a silent majority’ seemed ready to condone the war.
After Dunkirk, pacifists concentrated, not on stopping the war, but on trying to ameliorate the barbarism with which it was being conducted.
They protested against the saturation bombing of German cities, and campaigned to allow famine relief supplies into German-occupied Europe.
Although there were nearly four times as many conscientious objectors as during the First World War, there was no organization remotely like the NCF.
Anxious to avoid confrontation with pacifists, the authorities made life relatively easy for the objectors.
Fenner Brockway paid tribute to the understanding and respect for individual conscience shown by the state.
Some of the more militant resisters complained that they were being ‘diddled’ by the ‘ingenious, tolerance of a state which deprived them of the opportunity, welcomed by Clifford Allen twenty-five years earlier, ‘for the young men or our generation…[to bear]witness to the faith that [was]in them.’
Only three per cent of COs went to jail, compared with thirty per cent in the First World War.
The great majority of pacifists quietly performed various kinds of alternative service.
Some set up agricultural communities where they could take refuge from public contempt for ‘conchies’ and convince themselves that their experiments in communal living would, once ‘the grim period  of war is over…be remembered as the forerunner of the new society.’
So long as Hitler threatened Europe the prospects for a revival of peace politics were minimal.
It is true that, while outright military victory remained improbable, Labour leaders Toping for a German revolution) resisted calls for the post-war de-industrialization of Germany and toyed with the idea of placing Britain at the head of a revolutionary European resistance to Hitler.
Hugh Dalton wrote in June 1940:
We have got to organise movements in enemy-occupied territory comparable to the Sinn Fein movement in Ireland….
The ‘democratic international’ must use many different methods, including industrial and military sabotage, labour agitation and strikes, continuous propaganda, terrorist acts against traitors and German leaders, boycotts and riots.
It is [he added, engagingly]quite clear to me that an organisation…of this character is not something that can be handled by the ordinary…machinery or either the British Civil service or the British military machine.
A few weeks later Churchill put him in charge of organizing the Special Operations Executive (SOE), charged with ‘setting Europe ablaze’.
The romance, however, did not survive.
In the course of 1941, Attlee accepted that neither he, nor, more importantly, Winston Churchill, were really interested in fomenting revolution.
When it came to subversion, one historian has remarked, ‘the Coalition was more politically vulnerable than the Nazi Government.’
With the entry of Russia and America into the war, victory became conceivable and Labour's German policy hardened accordingly.
Labour's war was against the German nation, not just the Nazis.
Attlee, however, was no more anxious than Churchill to actually fight the Germans.
The Labour Ministers fully supported Churchill's resistance to the opening of a Second Front.
In June 1942 the Cabinet formally agreed that there would be no attempt to invade Northern Europe until the Russians had broken the back of the Nazi offensive in the East.
The Russians could win the war, while Britain conserved  her young men and concentrated on the defence of her Empire.
It was realized that such a policy risked leaving Soviet Russia as the dominant force in a post-Nazi Europe.
But there would be time enough to intervene on the Continent if and when the Russian advance began.
Meanwhile Attlee was just as keen as Churchill to maintain Britain's extra-European Empire.
In July 1943 Attlee pointed to the need to draw the Americans into sharing the burden of maintaining order in post-war Europe, in order to liberate British resources for the maintenance of the Commonwealth.
The alternative, as he saw it, was that the Americans would take over the Empire, while Britain exhausted herself trying to set the continent to rights.
Attlee's arguments pointed clearly to the foreign policy eventually pursued by the post-war Labour Government — attempting to manipulate the emerging US superpower in a way that was compatible both with the maintenance of Britain's overseas Empire and with her traditionally limited commitment to entanglement in European affairs.