

THE MYSTERIOUS ENCOUNTER AT PINMORE
In June 1966 the late Derek Cross decided to photograph the Paddy — the nickname of the Euston to Stranraer express — at Pinmore.
It had been a year since the old Port Road to Stranraer line had closed and the London to Stranraer trains were diverted via Ayr and Girvan.
The removal of the box at Pinmore made his photograph possible as it gave an unimpeded view of the subject.
Mr Cross had chosen the ideal spot for his photography some three days earlier and the picture he wanted could only be taken during the ten days around the longest day when the sun came through a gap in the hills.
To explain the nature of the Stranraer line, the initial grade up to the Pinmore tunnel is 1 in 54 and runs for about 4 miles.
The tunnel cuts through a saddle into the valley of the Stinchar river, so on a calm morning even a heavy train on the bank could hardly be heard from the Pinmore side of the tunnel.
The summit of this very steep grade was in the tunnel and once out of it engines would shut off to get their breath back.
The train was due to pass through Pinmore at 5am.
Mr Cross walked to the signal box at Girvan and waited until the train was belled off Kilkerran which gave him sufficient time to drive to Pinmore.
That particular morning, which was midsummer's eve, the train was 20 minutes late.
Mr Cross drove to the tiny village of Pinmore, parked his car in the old  goods yard of the deserted station and made his way towards the line.
Suddenly, a girl aged about 16 walked up from one of the scattered houses in the village and stood in the same spot he intended to use for his photography.
He wished the girl good morning and mentioned that he intended to photograph the Paddy.
To his surprise, she did not reply but looked at him so vaguely that he inferred that she had not heard him.
In due course, Mr Cross took the photograph he had come for and the girl crossed the narrow road and watched the train drop down into the valley.
Although Mr Cross was perturbed at his strange encounter, he dismissed his consternation and decided that she must have been a village girl who had watched the train and then returned home.
On reflection, however, he became increasingly puzzled by the mysterious young lady.
He had known that the train was running late, but how could she have known it?
Yet she had timed her appearance so exactly that it seemed as if she had been forewarned of the train's arrival.
Even if she had heard the locomotive's whistle as it entered the tunnel, she would not have had time to run to the bridge in time to meet Mr Cross as he parked his car in the goods yard.
Derek Cross intended to photograph the Glasgow to Stranraer goods train that followed the Paddy, but he felt so uneasy that he drove straight back to Girvan.
He explained his reason for returning so hurriedly to the crew of the Stranraer goods train.
The late Jimmy Irvine, one of the drivers, said, ‘Och, ye've seen that lassie that threw herself under a train at Pinmore in 1939.’
Some time later, Derek Cross learned more details about the tragic death of the girl.
Shortly before the war, she had committed suicide by throwing herself from the bridge into the path of a train.
In 1939 fashions were similar to the 1960s vogue, which may explain why Mr Cross believed the girl was real rather than an apparition.
He was left with the distinct feeling that he had encountered someone from the spirit world on that early midsummer's morning.
STRANGE SOUNDS ON THE WAVERLEY ROUTE
In April 1961, when making recordings on the Carlisle-Edinburgh ‘Waverley’ route that has made a niche in the hearts of so many railway enthusiasts, Peter Handford had spent the day on Whitrope summit, but had eventually abandoned attempts at recording because of the unfavourable direction of the wind.
He decided to move down to Stobs to attempt recordings on the other side of Whitrope summit on the climb from Hawick.
It was nearly dark when he arrived at Stobs and set up his equipment in a previously selected position above a deep cutting on the Whitrope side of the station.
By the time the first train had climbed up from Hawick through the station into the cutting and away towards Shankend, it was pitch dark.
Mr Handford was disappointed with the recording as the sounds did not meet his expectations, but by then it was too dark and too late to make a change of location.
Another train came by, but again the recording was unsatisfactory.
It was by now only an hour or two before midnight.
Another train was due and, listening through headphones, he was puzzled by inexplicably eerie sounds which seemed to come from a group of trees nearby, above the cutting.
He switched on the recorder briefly to record any distant sounds which would add atmosphere to those of the approaching train and the distant whistle of the engine.
All Mr Handford heard, however, were the eerie sounds  which seemed to be a faint moaning and chuckling coming from the nearby wood.
The expected train eventually arrived, but just as it approached, one channel of the recorder inexplicably failed, ruining the recording.
For the next hour or two, Mr Handford tried to rectify the fault in the chilly darkness, but as it proved impossible, he decided to wait until daylight and to get some sleep meanwhile.
In the morning, having rectified the recorder fault, he walked down towards the station to look for a new location.
He decided that on the way he would take a look at the nearby clump of trees from which the eerie sounds had drifted during the night.
There was no sign of animal habitation, no sheep in the area, no birds' nests or birds to be seen in the trees.
Having walked among the trees, he noticed a group of metal markers protruding from the ground recording the names of German soldiers who were buried there after their deaths in a prisoner-of-war camp that was established in the area during World War I.
In subsequent night-recording sessions, of which there were several on the Waverley route, Peter Handford always took care to use a location in a clearing in the woods above Stobs Station rather than return to that first location above the cutting.
THE DISAPPEARING PASSENGER AT KIRKHILL
When dealing with the paranormal or supernatural, it is easy to look for rational explanations, but logical reasoning cannot always explain the strange events that occur in people's lives.
James Tomlinson had a mysterious experience which defied rational explanation and he is resigned to the fact that he will never satisfactorily solve the enigma of the disappearing passenger.
Mr Tomlinson was a guard on an EMU on the electric railway system in the Glasgow area and the incident occurred in the mid-1970s.
On about the last trip of the night-shift, around dawn, the EMU on which he was working was approaching Kirkhill, the terminal of that particular service.
On arrival at the station, Mr Tomlinson saw a man about 5½ft tall wearing a dark coat and a soft trilby hat.
He was carrying a briefcase and was walking along the cross-over on to the platform.
As the train halted, the man was standing on the platform, obviously waiting to board the train for the return journey.
When Mr Tomlinson had changed the train indicator board on the EMU for its return journey, he turned to look down the platform.
The passenger was nowhere to be seen.
Mr Tomlinson became very anxious and looked for the passenger both on and under the train.
He had completely disappeared.
The driver had not seen anyone on the platform and neither had the booking office clerk.
So the mystery remained: where had the man gone?
James Tomlinson could not and still does not believe that he imagined seeing the mysterious passenger.
Although he was subjected to ridicule by his colleagues, he remained firmly convinced.
His only explanation is that possibly the gentleman had travelled on the line for many years in the past and that his ghost fitted into a well-worn slot in time.
So was the ghostly passenger preparing to embark on another train journey as he had done many times during his life on earth?
We shall never know, and James Tomlinson remains mystified by his unique experience.
A TRICK OF THE LIGHT
The following story concerns the sighting of a Deltic seen clearly entering Hadley Wood South tunnel, bearing the number 55020 Nimbus , even though the locomotive had been cut up seven months previously.
The story was written by an observer and appeared in the Deltic Deadline , issue No 17.
When the day's main force has been spent, and the sun is sinking slowly beyond Penzance, the twilight comes to the confines of Hadley Woods.
That strange zone of time and light between day and night is broken only by bats wheeling and diving across the expanse of the East Coast main line.
Somewhere a dog howls.
An up local slows to a halt at the signals on the edge of the woods.
Everything seems as it should be.
The moon is beginning to take the twilight, temperature drops alarmingly, there's a real chill in the air.
In the distance comes the familiar note of a Deltic engine but there's nothing scheduled.
It's a bonus for the late train spotter.
Out from the New Barnet footbridge comes the Deltic, the throb of the Napier engines very reassuring, it seems.
However, somehow different, somehow surrounded by a glow, an aura, perhaps a trick of the light.
While the local train gets the road and moves off, the Deltic moves on, again the familiar engines making the exhaust stand up into the dusk sky.
Nothing can be wrong, surely?
As it passes I turn and watch it enter Hadley Wood South tunnel.
I shout to my friend, ‘Did you get the number?’‘55020’ comes the reply.
‘Yes, that's what I thought’.
For a few silent moments this doesn't click into place.
Then, we suddenly realise what we've said.
But,Nimbus was cut up seven months ago.
At Hadley Wood Station we are told that no southbound train has passed through.
A trick of the light?
One can understand a steam locomotive appearing wreathed in smoke and surplus steam to fascinate the unsuspecting person and seemingly so solid that one could reach out and touch it, but a Deltic?
Here is a new dimension of the paranormal, the sound of a diesel motor coming from a train that appeared long after it had been scrapped.
It should be remembered that Hadley Wood tunnel and the East Coast main line was a favourite haunt of the Deltics that used it for almost all of their working life, so it is not surprising that one of their number should reappear on its familiar route.
for the record, No 55020 Nimbus was taken into service on 2 December 1962 and named the same day.
It was withdrawn on 18 December 1979 and was cut up at Doncaster on 2 February 1980.
MYSTERIOUS NOISES AT WINSOR HILL TUNNEL
In the early summer of 1956, Peter Handford was in the process of preparing to record traffic on the now defunct Somerset & Dorset line.
He went first to Winsor Hill tunnel, situated in a lonely spot approached by a climb over a viaduct from Shepton Mallet.
The chosen location was on the Shepton Mallet side of the tunnel, where he intended to record trains approaching the climb.
The tunnel, a short one, was a single bore as the up and down lines were separated there.
As always, when deciding on recording locations, Mr Handford reconnoitred the surrounding area.
On the far side of the tunnel, near the side of the line towards Bath, there was an immensely deep rock quarry, disused and deserted but containing some old equipment, rusting away at the bottom.
The whole area had a horribly uneasy and melancholy atmosphere and he noticed that from time to time on that bright summer's day occasional metallic rattlings came from the depths of the quarry.
The sounds were inexplicable since the wind was blowing from the Glastonbury direction and the high ground shielded the quarry from it, as shown by the fact that the stunted bushes on the lip of the quarry did not move.
The strange metallic noises continued at intervals, whenever he was in a position to hear them.
Although Peter Handford had intended to return to the Bath side of the tunnel at night to make recordings of the several trains which at that  time ran from the north towards Bournemouth in the early hours of Saturday morning, he did not do so, partly because he was reluctant to visit the place in darkness and also because each time he visited Winsor Hill tunnel to make recordings he experienced problems and misfortunes of one sort or another.
On the first occasion a violent thunderstorm blew up on that beautiful summer day, wrecking any attempt at further recording and causing damage to the equipment.
On other occasions a wind suddenly blew from a direction which made recording trains on the climb from Shepton Mallet impossible, or a sudden rain storm blew up at an inopportune moment.
Worst of all, perhaps, on a day of perfect weather conditions, the recording equipment suffered an inexplicable fault which was impossible to rectify on location so that the whole trip was wasted.
Years later, when Peter Handford had met the late Derek Cross, they discussed the Somerset & Dorset line.
Quite unprompted, Mr Cross related his experience of the place which tallied precisely with Peter Handford's, especially with regard to the disused quarry on the Bath side of Winsor Hill tunnel.
THE GHOST OF DARLINGTON NORTH ROAD STATION
The following story was published in the Darlington and Stockton Times on 9 January 1960.
More than a century ago the nightwatchman at North Road Station had a ghastly experience.
This was before the North Road bridge was built, and the Stockton and Darlington Railway line passed over the Great North Road by a level-crossing.
Mr James Durham, the nightwatchman, had a cabin near the crossing and his beat was from the old goods station, east of the crossing to the passenger station on the west.
One winter's night about midnight, after his first perambulations, Durham went to the porter's cellar at the station to have supper.
The cellar had been originally part of a railwayman's house and was provided with a fireplace and a gas jet and the room gave access to a coal cellar.
Descending the stone steps from the station platform, Durham turned up the gas and had just sat down on the bench and opened his bait tin when he was startled by the apparition of a strange man followed by a large black retriever dog emerging from the coal cellar.
Realising that his visitor was no ordinary mortal, the watchman did not challenge him but jumping to his feet he kept his eyes fixed firmly on the intruder, hoping thereby to induce him to retire.
He noticed that the ghost was smartly  dressed in a cut-away coat with gilt buttons, a stand-up collar and Scotch cap.
Walking towards the fire the ghost raised his hand and struck the watchman a smart blow on the body which produced a strange sensation.
Mustering all the courage he possessed the watchman assumed a defiant attitude and dealt the ghost a straight right blow to the body.
Durham's hand went right through the apparition and struck the fireplace, bruising his knuckles.
The ghost shrieked out and fell backwards to the wall, whereupon the dog rushed forward and seized Durham's leg.
Although as he explained afterwards, Durham experienced a sense of pain, an examination of the skin revealed no mark or puncture of the skin.
The ghost, having regained its upright position, called the dog by a click of his tongue and the intruders retreated into the coal cellar.
Taking his lantern the watchman followed and although there was no other entrance but from the porter's room, he could find no trace of his antagonists.
The railway ghost caused a great stir in Darlington at the time but many were very sceptical about its bona fides.
The excitement was intensified when it became known that some time previously a railway clerk named Winter, who kept a black retriever, had shot himself in the porter's cellar but Durham had claimed that he was unaware of the tragedy when he had encountered the ghost.
Many people questioned the watchman  as to his condition on the night of the incident.
One of them was Edward Pease, who invited Durham to his home and asked him many questions.
Had he been asleep at the time?
Was he subject to nightmares?
Had he been drinking?
Durham maintained that he was a teetotaller, his mind was free of trouble at that time, and that he had all his faculties.
The Rev Henry Kendal, Minister of Union Street Congregational Church from 1859–1893 testified to Durham's straightforwardness.
Durham was a regular attender at Mr Kendal's church and he was regarded as a strong reliable  man whose word could be trusted.
Sometime after, the Society for Psychical Research was founded in 1882 and Mr Kendal sent details of the North Road Station incident to the President, Prof Sidgwick, who asked for further details of Durham's bodily state on the eventful night.
It was pointed out that he was a regular watchman who slept during the day so as to be able to perform his nightly duties.
He had only been in the cellar for about one minute when the ghost appeared and he had had no time to doze.
In 1891 the Society conducted a ‘Census of Hallucinations’ throughout the country and Mr W. T. Stead, the journalist, assisted by enclosing some 100,000 census papers in the Review of Reviews which he edited.
This magazine published the story of the Darlington railway ghost as one of the most thrilling of a series of ghostly anecdotes.
Mr Kendal inspected the cellar in 1891 and found the place exactly as it had been when Durham used it.
A few days ago I went warily — in broad daylight — down the steps to examine the cellar.
The whole room, part of larger premises, is now used for coal storage but the salient features of the story, the fireplace and coal recess are in situ and it was not difficult to reconstruct the strange winter scene of over four generations ago.
A James Durham died on January 7th 1917 aged 75 and I recently stood by his grave in the North Cemetery.
The ghost fighter has now reached that blessed state: ‘Where the wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest.’
THE BOY AT ENTWHISTLE HALT
D. K. McKenzie remembers a chilling story told by his uncle, Tom Ackroyd, who, from the time he left school in 1925, worked for the railway.
In 1935 Ackroyd was put in charge of Entwhistle Halt on the Darwen-Bolton line.
There was nothing special about the halt: it had a signal cabin, about a dozen levers, and a pair of gates to allow carts to cross to the farms scattered across the moors.
Apart from the occasional passenger, the main traffic was milk chums en route to the dairy and dye wagons from Preston.
The sidings were situated about half a mile away and there was a water-tower nearby.
Ackroyd enjoyed a quiet bachelor life and lived in a small house by the crossing.
Ackroyd's strange experience began one day as he looked out from his lonely signal box.
He knew most of the men who used the line and passed the time of day with them.
However, there was one person he saw frequently yet never spoke to him, nor even knew his name.
He first noticed a young boy early one summer, about a year or so after he had taken over Entwhistle Halt.
One Saturday at about 3 o'clock when the 2.47 had not long gone through and he had put the ‘line clear’ through, he was standing at the window and saw the lad.
He was no more than eight or nine, playing in the meadow on the far side of the up line to Darwen.
He was running, just as children of that age do, almost as if he was chasing the shadows across the moor.
At first, Ackroyd thought nothing about it, but he saw him again the following Saturday at about the same time.
All through the summer he ran about in the meadow, chasing the shadows.
The sheep were obviously used to him, for they never moved much for him.
He came so often afterwards that Ackroyd began to look out for him when Saturday came round.
He was a thin lad, dressed in dark short trousers and a grey pullover.
Although he did not appear to be undernourished, he was pale-faced.
After a while, Ackroyd thought that he belonged to one of the local farms, and that because of his pale complexion he was recovering from an illness.
The young boy did not appear after about September, but as the winters were so severe on the moors Ackroyd was not surprised.
During the summer months of the war years, Ackroyd watched the boy playing in the meadow beside the line.
Towards the end of spring, he saw him earlier than usual, and he saw him several times standing close beside the crossing gates on the up side, his face almost pressing between the bars.
In an inexplicable way, the lad looked a pathetic sight.
His little pale face always looked pinched and very sad.
He stood at the gates evening after evening, but was always gone when the 5.13 to Blackburn went through.
One Saturday, late in June, in the last year of the war, Ackroyd had passed the 5.13 through as usual and received the 5.29 from Chorley and seen it in.
Normally, he let it through at 5.43, except that on that particular Saturday he received it a minute or so late.
It was 5.33 when he rang through the ‘train in section’ and 5.48 when he put the signal to green and heard the train start up.
Suddenly, however, he heard a lot of confused noises — the brakes screeched, steam hissed, and people were screaming and shouting.
Ackroyd put the signals to red, rang the station down the line to tell them that he had a problem and then rang the next station above to alert them that he still had a train in his section.
He then alerted the down line either side of him.
All this he did before he even knew what had happened.
When he had time to take account of the  situation, it seemed that Bill Oldenshaw had fallen under the train at the crossing and been killed outright.
The driver had not even seen him.
At about 8 o'clock there was a knock on Ackroyd's door.
He opened it and found the line foreman standing on his doorstep.
‘Now, then, Tom Ackroyd,’ he said.
‘Ow do,’ replied the signalman.
‘It's a bad business is this, Tom,’ he said.
‘That were Bill Oldenshaw, him as has the farm over by Stones Place.
That's the second from the family that's gone same way.’
‘Nay,’ said Ackroyd.
‘I've been here some time now and it's never happened before.’
‘No, well,’ said the foreman.
‘That last one were a long time before your time, Tom.
I reckon it were about the time of the Great War.
It were Bill's older brother.
Bill were not more than a baby when his brother Harold died.
Oh aye, I remember hearing that tale when I first joined.
I were no more than a lad myself.
Harold was about eight or nine and he was always playing and running about in that meadow yonder.’
Ackroyd knew immediately where he meant and his blood ran cold as he knew what the foreman was going to say next.
‘Aye, he used to look out for his dad's cart on a Saturday at about 4.45 and he'd wait for it to come across the line there.
Anyway, this Saturday he was late, no one knew why, and Harold just stood with his face against there waiting.
Then he must have seen his father and the cart because the next thing anyone knew, he was through that gate and across — and that's when he went right under the 5.29.’
THE APPLEBY HALL OAK CHEST
Some years ago, when the locomotive shed was closed at Keadby and engine power was concentrated at Frodingham, a pump-house was built beside the line to supply water to the new Frodingham locomotive depot.
This pump-house was fully automatic and the latest example of technological design.
It required servicing approximately once a month and usually three electricians from Scunthorpe carried out the work.
The most convenient time for this routine servicing was on a Sunday and the three men soon became familiar with the sophisticated equipment.
One Sunday, when the three men had finished their lunch break, they decided to walk across the scrubland which was adjacent to the main railway line.
The weather was fine and they were enjoying their walk when they came across the neglected remains of a large house which they had often seen in the distance from the pump-house.
After viewing the outside and the wild, overgrown garden, they decided to explore the crumbling interior.
It was a sad sight with the faded grandeur of a once noble family home.
The interior had been vandalised and parts of the house were obviously unsafe.
The men moved about cautiously, looking with curiosity at what they might find.
Suddenly, under a pile of wood, rubble and plaster, they found an old wooden box in remarkably good condition.
After examining it, they considered it would make a good tool-box and decided to take it with them.
On examining their find more closely at the pump-house, they found that the box was of stout construction and very old.
The inside of the lid bore a faint inscription which the men could not read.
They decided to leave the box in the pump house until their next visit.
Suddenly, however, strange events took place.
Inexplicably, the usually reliable pumps started to malfunction and finally broke down.
And one of the electricians, a seemingly healthy man, was suddenly taken ill and rushed to hospital with a suspected heart attack.
One of the men then read an article in the Grimsby Evening Telegraph about Appleby Hall.
Apparently, an old oak chest had been part of the family's possessions for generations and bore an inscription inside the lid which said in effect, ‘Whoever removes this chest from Appleby Hall, ill luck will befall them.’
Realising the cause of the inexplicable events that had recently occurred, the electrician telephoned the police.
Subsequently, the box was collected from the Pump-house and returned to Appleby Hall where it was returned to its place among the ruins.
as if by retribution, the sick electrician made a remarkable recovery and the pumps resumed their efficient, reliable operation.
The strange experiences no doubt left an indelible mark on the memories of the three electricians who would never forget the malevolent power of that old wooden box.
‘HUMPHREY’ OF NORMANBY PARK
Normanby Park steel works and rolling mills were, in their heyday, one of the most viable processors of steel in the world and provided employment for thousands of people in and around the Scunthorpe area.
Like any vast industrial complex, it had its own substantial railway sidings to move and accept train loads of iron ore and to ship the completed products en route to its customers worldwide.
However, despite its firm footing in the industrial world, the works had a frequent visitor from another plane, a ghostly figure known as ‘Humphrey’.
It was believed that Humphrey was a farm worker employed on the Normanby Park estate in the distant Past and that he had been found guilty of stealing from his employers.
Apparently, he was beaten to death and, as a result, swore that he would forever haunt the local area.
If the legend is true, he kept his word for he was seen on countless occasions over the years.
In the shape of a little old man, bent and stooping, with an old bag on his shoulder, he appeared and disappeared at whim, often through walls and machinery, and terrifying anyone who saw him.
He frightened train crews who saw him walking aimlessly on the railway tracks as if he were a real person.
One night, a works policeman was disturbed in his office by a tramp-like figure wearing a strange hat.
The policeman turned and spoke to the man and asked him what he wanted.
However, the intruder refused to reply and disappeared  through a wall.
This incident so affected the policeman that he suffered a nervous breakdown from which, it is said, he never fully recovered.
Much to the consternation of the operators, Humphrey's shabby figure would appear and then disappear into high-speed machinery.
One young man, who was attending a large machine which was railed off as a safety precaution, warned Humphrey of the dangers of moving machinery.
The ghost, however, paid no heed, walked through the machinery and disappeared through a wall.
It seems that Humphrey had several favourite places where he viewed the progress of the works, one such place being between the weighbridge and the steel works.
One of the works engine drivers had a traumatic experience when he saw the old tramp pass straight through the train of works wagons as he was moving them.
The shocked driver assumed that he had run over and killed someone on the line, but on investigation there was no injured person to be found.
About twenty years ago, after dusk, a weighbridge office employee reported seeing a tramp-like figure walk into the weighbridge office, look around, and then walk through the back wall of the office.
Humphrey did not confine his activities solely to the steel works and walked across the fields he had known during his earthly days.
One old lady recalls her days as a midwife many years ago when on one occasion she had to deliver a baby in an old farm cottage near the works.
As she prepared to mount her bicycle to return home after the delivery, the proud father called out, ‘If you see Humphrey, don't be frightened, he is quite harmless.’
When she learned who Humphrey was, she only visited the cottage in daylight.
An unnerving experience was witnessed by the train crew of a Class 31 diesel locomotive that was leaving Normanby Park sidings with a train of empty iron-ore hoppers, en route to Immingham docks.
As the train approached the main line, from the sidings, the locomotive's second man drew the driver's attention to the shadowy figure of a tramp walking along the  line in front of them.
The driver braked hard and sounded the whistle, but the man ignored the warning and disappeared under the train.
Fearing the worst, the driver and second man got off the locomotive and examined the train and the line side, but could find nothing untoward.
When the guard learned what had happened, he simply laughed and said that it must have been old Humphrey.
THE ELSHAM PHANTOM TRAIN
Rumours of a ghostly train that appeared in foggy conditions near Ancholme Bridge on the line between Elsham and Worlaby led Ted Smith and Jack Brookes, two reliable men in their mid-fifties, to investigate the tales and discover the truth for themselves.
Both men were sceptical about ghosts and the supernatural and their jaunt in suitably foggy conditions was aimed at returning to their friends who believed the stories and good-humouredly disprove them.
Not for one moment did the two men believe that they would see anything, and they were determined not to allow the foggy weather to play havoc with their imaginations.
As the light of that winter day faded and the swirling fog closed in, the two friends took shelter in a platelayer's cabin at the northern end of the line's long curve.
Before long, their confidence changed to an icy fear as they discerned through the enveloping fog the shape of a railway engine lit up by an eerie glowing aura.
They were able to make out the locomotive's smoke-box and cab, and the glare of the fire reflecting through the spectacle plate on the cab front.
Knowing that it was a basic railway practice to use detonators in foggy conditions to protect signals, etc, and as the sound they emitted carried some distance, the men awaited the series of bangs that would herald the presence of a train.
Whatever this strange apparition was that held them in its awe, reality would return when the bangs announced a train that belonged to this world.
‘It's a bit strange, isn't it?’ asked Jack.
Ted nodded.
‘Doesn't look right to me, and it doesn't seem to be getting any nearer.’
‘Surely the fog signals are out,’ said Jack.
‘Hope it's not that ghost train they keep talking about.’
Both men laughed nervously, neither sure of the truth.
‘Tell you what,’ said Ted.
‘Let's go and see if we can see the fogs, then when we're sure about them, perhaps we can get a close look at the engine — perhaps it's broken down.’
Jack agreed and they set off down the track side, treading carefully in case they tripped over signal wire.
Reassuring themselves that the train had broken down, both men felt confident that they would find nothing untoward on the line.
Soon, however, they found themselves in a nightmare situation for although they were walking towards the train they seemed to get no nearer to it.
They could see the train, but it seemed to be in a haze or a glowing flame.
The two men continued walking, trying to fathom the mystery of the fog-bound train.
‘Just a minute, Ted,’ said Jack.
‘There's something strange going on and we're not getting any nearer, and look, there's some fog detectors clamped on the rail.’
Ted frowned and shivered.
The fog was getting acrid now.
Both men cleared their throats.
The haze still surrounded the distant locomotive and train, discernible but somehow blurred.
‘Come on, Jack, let's go home.
I don't like this at all.’
Jack readily agreed.
He was feeling the clammy cold that seemed to penetrate his thick coat and chill his bones.
The two men groped their way back to the cabin, occasionally glancing back to see what had happened to the strange engine.
Nearing the platelayer's cabin, they both stopped and looked back.
They could not believe their eyes — the train appeared to be following them.
Strangely, they could not clearly discern the engine in detail, for the haze still surrounded it.
Without doubt the train was following them and it had passed over several fog detonators without setting them off.
Terror gripped the two men as they ran as fast as they could  away from the ghostly train towards Elsham signal box.
They burst in on the somewhat startled signalman who was puzzled by the dramatic appearance of the two familiar faces.
Ted sank down with relief into a chair.
‘Harry,’ he gasped.
‘There's a strange train on the line coming this way and it has run through all the fogs without setting them off.’
‘Get away with you,’ replied Harry.
‘I've no train on the line.
What are you talking about?
Just to satisfy you I'll ring Ancholme junction box and see if the signalman knows anything about it.
If there had been a train on his section, he would have offered it to me.’
Using his telegraph instrument he communicated with his colleague.
No train had been past him and his fogs were out.
Harry was convinced that he could account for every train he had accepted.
Their spirits revived by a cup of hot tea, the two men took their leave of the signalman.
By now the fog had lifted, but it was so dark that it would have been futile to return to the scene of the mysterious train to discover for themselves any clues as to its reality or otherwise.
Jack and Ted kept their unusual experience to themselves, fearing the ridicule of their friends.
It was not until several years later that they were able to unravel the possible cause of the visitation.
One evening in their local pub, the Dog & Rabbit, an old gentleman who had moved out of the district on retirement, returned to visit his daughter who lived in the area.
The old man loved to reminisce and would talk for hours about the past.
He was a veritable fund of knowledge.
Ted and Jack were drawn into conversation with the old man and Ted, remembering the mysterious incident, asked him if he could bring to mind any relevant details.
The old man's eyes lit up.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘I can tell you all about that.
It were in the 1920s and it was a passenger train from Cleethorpes to Doncaster and the driver, well, he was a hard, fast driver and he wasn't popular with firemen.
This particular day he had a  young fireman called Tom Smith, a big strong lad with a fiery temper.
The driver, Fred King, used to goad them, always at them, never left them alone so instead of getting the best out of them he seemed to be determined to get the worst instead.
This particular day Tom Smith had been out on the drink the previous night and now had a sore head and a filthy mood on him.
King was pushing him hard, telling him he was no good and such like, when to King's surprise Smith started to answer back and no one ever did that, so things worsened and it wasn't long before they started fighting, an alarming situation on a small cramped footplate.
It is believed that one of them moved the regulator and opened it up with the result that the train was soon out of control.
Then reverse curves were coming up and the train ran through the first curve but was going too fast for the next one and the train left the track, killing certainly the driver and fireman and one or two passengers, I believe.
A very sad occurrence and such violence.
They say that the accident haunts those curves especially in dense fogs, but you'll not worry about that, it's probably an old wives’ tale.
Anyway, who will have another drink?
It's my round.’
THE GHOST OF BRADLEY FOLD WEST
The signal box at Bradley Fold West, situated between Bolton and Bury, was a small but important unit miles from anywhere controlling the up and down main lines and both goods loops.
It had a cross-over, a set of catch points and four block instruments, two for permissive block working and the other two for absolute block for the main lines.
The control exercised from this remote box, therefore, was vital to the smooth operation of this busy line.
Jack Rothera, an ex-Navy man, had wished from his boyhood days to work on the railway.
After his demobilisation from the Navy he was accepted by the railway authorities to train as a signalman.
His first training began at Bradley Fold West and he soon realised what a wholly essential facet absolute concentration and alertness was about.
One slip or lapse and a terrible accident would never be far away.
Jack enjoyed his early training and displayed the sort of ability much sought after by the Signal and Telegraph Department.
Johnnie Warburton used to work turn-about with him and they enjoyed each other 's company.
Johnnie also excelled at the job and adapted at the same rate as his friend.
Jack well remembers his first shift on his own.
He had let a light engine out of the down loop ready to go to Bolton and had refused the bell code for a fast down freight from Bradley Fold station box.
He was just telling the driver of the light engine that he would be away in a minute, when from Bradley Fold station box came the 4-5-5 signal (train or vehicles running away on the right line).
As the  heavy freight train rushed towards his box, the next box down the line at Rose Hill Junction accepted the light engine, telling the driver to accelerate.
Jack was able to stop the freight train without accident.
Life for Jack Rothera soon settled into an interesting routine and nothing untoward happened to disturb the smooth operation of his signal box.
Johnnie Warburton renewed his acquaintance with Jack when they were designated to work alternate shifts.
It was a happy working relationship and each had complete trust in the other's abilities — until Johnnie's happy-go-lucky attitude changed to an unusually quiet and sombre mood.
Before long, Johnnie vowed that he would leave the signal box forever.
Jack was puzzled at Johnnie's sudden change in behaviour and although initially he reasoned that his colleague must be troubled with a domestic problem, he could not forget Johnnie's parting words that he intended to leave the box for good.
What puzzled Jack was that he himself was very happy at Bradley Fold West and he had settled into the routine and managed the duties without any problems.
What could have upset Johnnie?
Jack speculated that perhaps there had been some interference by a superior, or that vandals may have seen the lonely outpost as a target for action.
Jack had experienced broken windows and other similar nuisances, but nothing else.
After much thought and reasoning, however, Jack reached no satisfactory conclusion regarding Johnnie's unhappiness.
Nevertheless, he was not prepared to take chances, so he checked and rechecked the security of the box and the store-room below in case vandals from a nearby village might be intending to pay him an unwelcome visit.
A few days later Jack took over the shift at 9pm.
At 1.47am he received the bell signal from Rose Hill Junction enquiring if the line was clear for the 2am target train, an express parcels and newspaper train.
As all was clear, Jack turned the block over to line clear.
Some 2½ minutes later he received the bell code indicating that the train was entering the section.
He turned the block over to ‘train online’, warned it on to Bradley  Fold Station and pulled his signals off.
The train could now be heard coming up the bank.
It was going like the wind, as it always did, and in seconds it had passed the box exactly on time, rushing on to Bradley Fold No 3 signal.
Having put his signals to danger, and cleared back to Rose Hill Junction that the train was out of section, Jack prepared to book the train's passage in the train register book.
As he did so, he heard footsteps passing under the bridge and over the point catwalk and continuing under the box.
Remembering Johnnie's warning, Jack concluded that the prowler had come in search of the coal which was stored in bags under the box.
Grabbing his torch, he raced down the steps and shone the light into the dark corners, but there was no one to be seen.
The strange occurrence was uppermost in Jack's mind the following night and he determined to catch the intruder if he returned.
As on the previous night, the mail train roared past the signal box at the usual time and Jack again heard footsteps in the still night walking under the box.
Taking a heavy poker in one hand and a torch in the other, he charged down the steps, feeling certain that the intruder had entered the storeroom.
He shone his torch, but as before, no one was there.
Feeling frightened, he scurried back up the stairs and sank bewildered into his armchair.
Jack was convinced that the uninvited visitor was a light-fingered local looking for free coal.
The thought that he might be dealing with a supernatural force did not enter his mind.
Next day Jack pondered the mystery of the unexplained footsteps and laid plans to catch the intruder.
On commencing the night-shift, a sinister, inexplicable atmosphere was evident.
Jack felt edgy but convinced himself that his nerves were playing tricks on him.
He heard strange clicking noises at the windows and footsteps coming up the steps.
Flinging open the.
door, he shone his torch, but nothing stirred.
Returning to his chair, he sat and waited.
Now he heard a low whistling sound which seemed to come from the rear of the box.
With his poker and torch he sought out the noise.
He found nothing.
THE GHOST OF BRADLEY FOLD WEST
An hour later he opened the door and shone his torch.
Although the fresh night air was welcome, Jack was again aware of an unusual feeling of dread and foreboding.
He had never been afraid or apprehensive before, but now he realised that something was amiss.
He closed the door and opened the sliding window in the front of the box looking across the tracks, the clear air showing the gleaming metals of the line.
Looking right then left he saw the signals with their warning lights reassuring him of their presence.
Suddenly he felt that he was being watched.
Turning around quickly he saw a shadow moving across the ceiling light.
He pinched himself and warmed his hands on the fire, shuddering against the extremes of the cold night air and the warmth of the signal box.
What was the shadow and the feeling of being watched?
He looked forward to the end of his shift.
As the mail train thundered past and disappeared into the distance he heard the familiar sound of footsteps.
Rushing down the staircase, he turned the corner to the store-room which was fitted with a safety lock requiring four turns of the key.
Nobody was there, but the air was heavy with a sense of foreboding.
Then an agonising cry rent the still night.
Jack hastened to the front of the box shining his torch across the tracks.
To his horror, he discerned a recumbent shape at the side of the line.
He ran towards it fearing the worst, but to his amazement the figure faded and disappeared as he neared the line side.
Baffled and frightened, Jack now understood the significance of Johnnie Warburton's warning.
But what was the agonised cry and the figure lying by the line side?
Had someone been killed by the mail train?
The footsteps, the mysterious whistling noises, the shadows, and the figure that resembled a body lying by the track.
Why had he been witness to these events?
In a state of nervous confusion, Jack was unable to answer these bewildering questions.
Jack walked slowly back up the stairs numb and shivering.
It had turned cold now, but the air remained still.
Huddling by the fire he waited impatiently for daylight and his relief.
By now Jack was determined to relinquish his night-shift duties.
The thought of undergoing such traumatic experiences was unthinkable.
Years later, Jack was told that some time before his tenure of Bradley Fold West signal box a man from a nearby village was killed on the line.
According to reliable sources, but unknown to Jack, at least three other signalmen had experienced the same chain of events, but all had kept their frightening experiences to themselves to avoid the ridicule of their workmates.
THE GHOSTLY CARETAKER
Jack Cartwright and his wife June and their two children Alan, 11, and Melissa, 13, had been on a camping holiday in the West Country, but unfortunately everything had gone wrong.
The weather had been appalling and as a result the whole family had caught colds.
Their misery was complete when the previous night vandals had visited their camp site and caused considerable damage, including slitting the Cartwrights' tent.
When the electrics on their normally reliable car had started to fail, Jack and June decided to cut short their holiday and return to their home in South Yorkshire.
Packing up their equipment, they set off home.
Their long journey was broken several times by the necessity to make repairs to the car.
Darkness began to descend quickly as rain-filled clouds turned the sky to a menacing black void.
Before long, the family ran into a ferocious thunderstorm.
Driving with difficulty through torrential rain while thunder and lightning crashed overhead, Jack found himself in a narrow West Country lane, realising that he had missed the turning that would have brought him back on to the main road.
By now it was dark, they were obviously lost and their headlights had begun to fail.
Their only hope was to find a farmhouse where a friendly farmer might be able to offer them shelter for the night.
As they began to despair, their son noticed a railway station sign.
Peering through the pouring rain Jack saw a post with an old weather-stained sign hanging from it.
As they drove towards  their refuge, they found themselves in a large station yard, now overgrown with weeds and bramble bushes and obviously derelict.
Like so many abandoned branch-line properties, the dereliction was complete.
The storm had now passed its zenith and although the rain was still pouring down, the Cartwright family felt relieved at finding some form of shelter.
Jack drove the car as near as he could towards the station building and switched off the faltering engine.
He took a torch with him, left the car and entered the old building.
After what seemed an age, Jack appeared out of the gloom and got back into the car.
‘I've had a good look round, June,’ he said.
‘The roof seems sound and I think I can force one of the windows and get in.
It's a bit of a mess but at least we can be warm and dry in our sleeping-bags.’
When they reached the building, Jack shone his torch through a broken window illuminating the interior of what evidently had been the booking office.
The floor was covered with the rubbish of years, but the place seemed dry and the family's spirits rose.
Jack went back to the car for a screwdriver with which he prised open a rotting window.
The family moved in everything they needed to make their stay as comfortable as possible.
June lit their camping lamp which cast weird shadows around the room.
After a meal, Jack suggested a walk to explore their surroundings.
They found a long platform and the remains of a goods shed.
The track-bed was weed-ridden and strewn with rubbish.
A sense of abandonment overhung the.once proud station.
Picking their way through the rubble, the Cartwrights concluded their exploration, although they had no idea of where they were.
As the children walked ahead, Jack and his wife agreed that they could sense a strange atmosphere, something eerie and unpleasant.
The children then ran back excitedly to them.
‘There's a light in one of the rooms and we've heard voices,, said Melissa.
Their father told them that as they were the only people present in the deserted station, it was not possible to see or hear  such things.
The children, however, were persistent and led the way round to the side of the building, stopping at what had probably been a small parcels office.
Peering through the filthy window, they saw an empty room littered with small rubble, several pieces of broken dust-covered chairs and an old table, but no sign of life.
Jack looked at the children.
‘But this is the place, Dad,’ said Melissa.
‘There was a light like an old oil lamp giving a yellow glow, and we heard voices, too.,
Jack believed that they could not be imagining it.
‘I know,’ he said.
‘Let's see if we can get in from the inside as this door is either seized up or securely locked.’
Jack fetched his torch and screw-driver, then climbed through the window, struggling to avoid the broken glass.
Marking his way carefully to the door that would give entry to the parcels office, he shone his torch around him.
Only dust and rubble showed the years of disuse.
Nothing stirred.
After much effort, Jack succeeded in prising open the door with his screw-driver.
He shone the torch around the room before entering.
No footmarks disturbed the dust, cobwebs hung like festoons and a strange musty smell pervaded the atmosphere.
Suddenly he became aware of an eerie feeling, as though he was being watched.
Nervously, he stepped into the room and walked around, crunching the broken plaster that had fallen from the crumbling ceiling.
There was no one in the room and no oil lamp, but a strange smell pervaded the air.
He left the room and was about to close the door behind him when he was hit in the back by the door itself slamming shut.
He turned and tried to open the door again, but it was impossible to do so.
Feeling frightened by his experience, he was relieved to return to his family in the booking office.
Half an hour later, the Cartwright family were in their sleeping-bags, each of them uneasy and bewildered by the recent strange events.
The old building creaked occasionally, but apart from that and the occasional rumble of distant thunder, there was silence.
At about 2am, however, Jack woke with a start.
He could  distinctly hear voices which seemed to be coming from the parcels office next door.
Quickly putting on some clothes, he decided to investigate.
He tried the door to the parcels office, but it seemed to be locked tightly.
The voices were now audible, obviously coming from the room.
Jack was determined to solve the mystery.
Putting his shoulder to the door, he found to his amazement that it opened easily.
Looking inside, he was aware of a misty atmosphere and a figure sitting in a chair at a desk.
The voices had stopped now but an illuminating mist seemed.to fill the room with a white incandescent glow.
The shape of the figure at the desk was vague, but distinctly human.
He seemed to be poring over some papers and the room itself appeared to be tidier than when he had visited it earlier.
It was as if Jack had stepped back in time to the scene of an earlier age.
Suddenly, the figure seemed to be aware of Jack's presence and turned towards him, as if to ask what he wanted.
Jack could see the face now, that of an elderly man with a deeply wrinkled face and steel-framed glasses.
His face was gentle and benign.
As Jack took a step towards the figure the mist suddenly cleared and the figure disappeared.
Abruptly, Jack found himself in darkness.
He switched on his torch and found himself alone in the office.
He was about to shut the door when again an inexplicable force on the other side pushed it firmly shut.
Jack again tried the handle, but the door was locked.
Totally mystified by his experience, he crept back to the booking hall and tried to sleep.
In the morning, Jack related his experience to his wife who listened sympathetically but reassured him that it must have been a nightmare.
As they prepared to leave and resume their homeward journey, Jack decided to take a last look around the parcels office.
Gingerly opening the door, which gave way easily, he saw the festoons of cobwebs, litter and crumbling plaster, exactly as before.
Satisfied, he gently pulled the door, which closed easily behind him.
With a final look back at the station buildings, Jack drove away from the scene of his mysterious experience.
The family's first stop at a garage for a minor repair led Jack into conversation with the proprietor.
He told him about their ruined holiday and where they had spent the previous night, although he did not reveal his unusual experience.
The proprietor listened, then said, ‘You're a braver man than I am, mister.
That station is supposed to be haunted by old Garrity who was that porter there in the old days, and not many people go near it in daylight, never mind after dark.’
Jack laughed.
‘Well, he didn't bother me.
Perhaps we were lucky.’
THE STRANGE VISITOR OF COVENT GARDEN
The frequent manifestation of a melancholy figure at Covent Garden Underground Station has earned it the unwanted title of the most haunted station on the London Transport system.
The sequence of events began in the early 1960s when Jack Hayden was the station foreman.
It was Christmas week (whether this time of the year had any significance or not cannot be explained) and Mr Hayden was in the staff mess room writing up the log book.
The time was approximately 12.30am and all was quiet when suddenly the door handle rattled.
Mr Hayden looked up from his writing and saw a figure dressed in old-fashioned clothes reminiscent of the style worn at the turn of the century and his expression was one of sadness.
Mr Hayden, who at this stage was not thinking of the supernatural, said, ‘I think you are lost, sir.
The lift to the trains are upstairs.’
The stranger made no move.
However, when Mr Hayden stood up and made to show the stranger the way, the figure melted into thin air, leaving the foreman completely mystified.
Thinking fatigue had got the better of his tired mind, Jack Hayden did not worry unduly until the following Monday morning when a porter who had been working on the station Platform came to the mess room and saw a strange figure looking at Mr Hayden.
When the porter entered the room the stranger melted into thin air.
The porter was so terrified that he fainted.
On recovery, Mr Hayden described the stranger to the porter who agreed that it was the same figure he had seen.
This traumatic experience had such a shattering effect on the porter that he left London Transport for good, swearing never to visit Covent Garden Station again.
Mr Hayden, after further thoughts about the matter, decided to tell the station master, Mr A. Jones, about the occurrence, seeking his advice as to the right measures to adopt in these strange circumstances.
Mr Jones suggested that Physic News magazine should be approached with a view to investigating the incidents and perhaps providing a satisfactory answer.
Physic News were very interested ad one of their researchers visited Jack Hayden and discussed the matter in detail.
It was decided that a seance should be held in the mess room and, depending on the result, they would discuss what further measures could be used to identify the ghost.
The seance was held and Mr Hayden was later shown some photographs and asked if he could recognise any of the people.
After examining the photographs, Mr Hayden recognised William Terris who had been murdered in about 1900 in The Strand which lies just around the corner from Covent-Garden Underground Station.
It is thought that William Terris was wearing evening dress, which suggests that he had visited Covent Garden Opera House nearby.
However, why his ghost should have been attracted to the station and the area around the mess room has never been explained satisfactorily.
William Terris' ghost seemed to have an affinity with Mr Hayden because the foreman saw him nearly every day in some part of the station for some two years.
He did not feel afraid of the ghost and tried to speak to him, but the figure was sad and morose as if struck by a remorseless tragedy.
Physic News told Mr Hayden to talk to the ghost as if to help him, but no response was ever forthcoming.
Eventually, Jack Hayden was promoted to station inspector which made a move away from Covent Garden Station necessary, but he was somewhat frustrated at not being able to  re-establish contact with ‘Charlie’, as he had christened the ghost.
However, it appears that many other people were destined to see William Terris, fortunately without any ill effects.
Workmen from the Maintenance Department, which is responsible for the smooth running of the lifts and escalators in the station, have seen William Terris' ghost on numerous occasions as they work mostly at night so that their work causes the least interference with the travelling public.
Terris does not seem to mind the electricians who undoubtedly disturb him on his preserve.
One gentleman, who has not actually seen the apparition, has on several occasions heard footsteps walking up a stairway in the station.
In fact, the uncertain times of Terris' appearances have had such an effect on workmen that the Maintenance Department do not allow their staff to work in the station through the night in case the ghost interferes with their potentially dangerous work.
One lady who only saw Terris once would not work in the station again and demanded a move to a ‘normal station’.
Jack Hayden obviously has a very close affinity with William Terris' ghost because when he made a purposeful visit to Covent Garden Station recently he saw him ‘as large as life’, as if waiting to welcome him back.
So it would seem that the ghost of William Terris will haunt Covent Garden Station whenever he pleases, but the object of his frequent appearances will remain a mystery.
THE RETURN OF THE DILIGENT SIGNALMAN
Signal boxes can be very emotive places by virtue of their often remote locations, and inexplicable events have been known to take place in them.
Although today these vital units of the railway system are being phased out by the modern fully automated control centres, there still remains the lonely, isolated signal box, often miles from anywhere, that on a dark winter's night can conjure up strange happenings and instil fear even in the heart of the most level-headed signalman.
The signal box at Claxby, 2 miles from Market Rasen in Lincolnshire, is a small box constructed in the GCR type of architecture.
It lies ½ mile from the main road to Market Rasen and Lincoln and about 2 miles from the attractive village of Claxby which clings to the ironstone ridge of the Lincolnshire Wolds.
The signal box is the setting for an unexplained sequence of events that to this day have puzzled the local authorities.
For years, the lonely box had played its part as an essential signal post on the busy main line without anything untoward disturbing its peaceful operation.
One night in the early 1960s, however, its tranquillity was upset by strange occurrences.
Aubrey Clark, who for many years had worked his shifts in Claxby box, was on the night turn.
Shortly after 5am, the next box along the line, Holton le Moor, contacted Claxby but received no reply.
Attempts were made at frequent intervals to  contact Mr Clark without success.
The signalman at Holton le Moor box felt concerned and stopped the next train entering his section and asked the driver to stop at Claxby and see if everything was in order.
The driver found the box silent and Mr Clark slumped in his armchair, obviously dead.
Control was informed of the news and the relief signalman, Ted Hudson who lived in Market Rasen, was summoned to take over the operation of the box.
Mr Hudson knew the box intimately and had known Aubrey Clark well.
When Ted arrived at the box, the signalman's corpse had been laid out on the signal frame- and was covered with a sheet, from where he was removed by ambulance to the local hospital.
The signals were at caution and the train crew were talking on the level-crossing.
Ted resumed the operation of the cabin and tried to shake off the depressing atmosphere that now pervaded the small room.
Mr J. Daubney, who was a relief signalman at Wrawby and Barnetby, relieved Ted at about 5.30pm.
As Daubney felt that the box reeked of death, Ted decided to bum Aubrey's old armchair and replace it with another to remove the visible signs of the tragedy.
Mr Daubney was in charge of the box for the rest of that week but felt uneasy.
He rang Holton le Moor frequently to talk to someone, fearing that the lonely hours would revive the still recent memories of the death of Aubrey Clark.
The following week, Ted Hudson undertook the 6pm to 6am shift.
The first two nights passed uneventfully, but on the third night, Ted heard the sound of heavy breathing which seemed to come from the armchair.
When he rose and looked around, the breathing stopped.
He walked to the door and looked out, but no one was there and all was still.
But when he returned to the chair and sat down, the breathing started again.
Ted convinced himself that the sounds came from the birds nesting in the eaves or the rafters and banged the walls nth a brush.
The wooden walls shook and the alien noise echoed around the small building, and for a while the noise stopped.
After a while, however, the heavy stertorous breathing began  again.
The sound was louder now and seemed to fill the box.
Impatiently, Ted went outside with a brush and prodded the eaves to drive out any birds that might be disturbing his peace.
However, not a single bird flew out.
On returning to the box and resuming his duties, he was more puzzled than frightened for he did not believe in ghosts.
The following night the same sound disturbed his normally peaceful night-shift and as he could find no logical explanation he decided to accept whatever it was, but resolved to keep the mystery to himself to avoid the ridicule of his workmates.
On his last night-shift of the week, Ted had been told that the platelaying gang would be undertaking essential track repairs near the box starting at midnight.
Unknown to Ted, however, this work had been postponed.
It was a moonlight night and from 11pm Ted was waiting for the platelayers' arrival as their company would liven his long shift.
Almost at midnight, he was disturbed by a terrific kick on the door.
Thinking that it was the platelayers playing a joke on him, he said ‘Come in’, but no one entered.
He had hardly sat down again when there was another strong kick at the door.
‘Come in,’ he repeated, but again no one entered.
Somewhat perturbed, Ted flung the door open still believing that the platelayers were playing tricks on him.
He looked outside and there at the bottom of the steps was Aubrey Clark dressed in his motor-cycle gear, his helmet glinting in the moonlight.
(Aubrey, in fact, travelled to work on a motor scooter.
On reaching the box, he would take off his helmet and put it over one arm, while his tuck-box was held under the other.
He would then climb the steps and on reaching the top would kick the door and whoever was on duty would open the door for him.)
Ted stood and stared at the apparition in amazement, unable to believe the sight of his old friend before his eyes.
Then the vision faded, leaving Ted feeling totally bemused.
A few weeks later, Ted relieved Bob Webster at about 5.45am.
Bob, normally a level-headed signalman, looked ill at ease and asked Ted if he had heard any strange noises in the  box.
The two men exchanged experiences and found that they had heard the same noises of heavy breathing and the kick on the door.
Both agreed that there would seem to be no rational explanation, but everything pointed to the fact that Aubrey Clark was revisiting his old signal box.
Other signalmen had similar stories to tell and some refused to work the box, so frightened were they of the strange events.
One snowy morning footprints and tyre marks were imprinted in the snow even though Ted had received no visitor at the box.
By day, Claxby signal box is warm and friendly and it is difficult to believe that any mysterious events could take place there.
But Ted Hudson and other signalmen like him know that in the early hours of a winter's morning a visitation from Aubrey Clark's ghost is a real and frightening possibility.
THE HEADLESS LOVER
The gruesome story of the headless lover began early in the 1900s when Brooke End signal box controlled the up and down main lines, an up goods loop and sidings used by the pick-up trains of that period.
Not far from the railway line lived a closely knit family, Mr and Mrs Gorman and their only daughter, Marion.
Gorman worked on the Railway as a platelayer and as such, occupied a small cottage maybe 200yd away from the main line.
It was small, but adequate for the Gormans' needs and comforts, built in the Midland Railway's style of architecture having a pantile roof and very solidly constructed of red brick.
A large meadow lay in front of it and from the sash windows views of the rural countryside could be enjoyed.
Marion loved her home and its cosy atmosphere gave the shy girl great assurance.
She was a beautiful girl of average height, fine boned and blue eyed.
Her long  flaxen hair gave her an almost nordic appearance, her clear unspoilt complexion reflecting her life in the clean country air.
Marion was born in this cottage and had long become used to the passage of trains and shunting movements in the adjacent sidings.
She had few friends in the locality, preferring to go for long walks in the nearby countryside with the family dog, until, that is, Ronald Travis took up his duties in the signal box.
He was in his late twenties, of average height, had fair hair and blue eyes, was of stocky build and self sufficient.
He had proved an enthusiastic pupil when learning the  complicated tedious job of a signalman.
He did not mind the nightshifts or the tedium of the long lonely hours.
His practical disposition and dependability were appreciated by his colleagues who welcomed his cheerfulness.
Ronald was a country lad, interested in the country ways and traditions.
Marion met him one night when he called to see her father on a matter appertaining to the permanent way adjacent to the signal box.
For Marion and Ronald it was love at first sight.
They spent all their spare time together and the courtship developed rapidly.
Marion adored him and they enjoyed many happy, carefree walks together.
Mr and Mrs Gorman at first were relieved that their only child had found such a solid, trustworthy young man and in fact encouraged the relationship, until Marion began to disappear for hours and then return home without saying where she had been.
Travis would not give any explanation when asked about her whereabouts and seemed to resent her parents' questions.
One night Mr Gorman remembered that he had to visit the box to give Travis a message about the next week's duty roster.
Sighing at the thought of having to leave the warmth and comfort of the fire, he rose and lifted his coat from the hook on the kitchen door, bracing himself against the cold stormy air, and strode off into the darkness.
Approaching the signal box he mounted the steps, the hand-rail creaking as he used it for support.
All was quiet.
The silence was explained, however, as he entered the box and found Marion and Ronald in a deep embrace, their feelings for each other so apparent.
It was now obvious where Marion was spending so much of her time.
Mr Gorman felt angry.
The girl was betraying the trust that her parents had instilled into her all her young life.
He realised that Marion's reticence was to protect the secret of her love affair with Ronald Travis.
Mr Gorman lost his temper and accused Travis of luring away his daughter.
In spite of the couple's protestations, he forbade Marion to meet Travis again and firmly escorted his tearful daughter home.
From then on, Marion became morose and irritable.
Life  became difficult in the erstwhile happy home and the unfortunate girl was only allowed to go for walks in the company of her parents.
One night, after a violent row, Marion ran up to her room and locked the door.
Her parents, visibly upset, decided to allow her to calm down and not to disturb her.
Marion, in her distressed, emotional state, was sobbing in bed.
She could not sleep and, remembering that Ronald Travis would be on duty, decided to wait until her parents had gone to bed, then slip outside and go to the signal box to see her lover.
It was a dark night and she lay quietly until she was satisfied that her parents were asleep.
Then, dressing in her long white dress, she stole quietly downstairs and made her way down the path to the gate and across the meadow to the railway line.
The all-enveloping darkness made her progress difficult but in her emotional state she staggered on.
Reaching the railway fence she climbed over and started across the tracks.
In the distance she could hear a train coming and could see the yellow lights of the oil lamps in the signal box.
The oncoming train drew nearer.
She was gasping, but she knew she could beat it if she ran.
She had not much further to go and soon she would be safe in her lover's arms.
Safely over the down line, she started to cross the up line, but stumbled and fell.
With the train rapidly bearing down on her she did not stand a chance.
The vigilant driver, seeing her white-clad body almost in front of his engine, applied his brakes and slammed shut the regulator.
He and his fireman felt the terrifying impact.
The engine passed over her, the wheels severing her head from her body.
By this time Travis was on the horrible scene of the accident, the bloodstained white dress revealing a gruesome sight.
Travis raced to the Gormans' cottage and with great difficulty told the distressed couple what had happened.
The ensuing enquiries and inquest returned a verdict of accidental death and the sad interlude closed, apparently the end of a tragic love affair.
Travis was transferred to another area and the life of the signal box returned to normal.
Then, in the late 1940s a series  of incidents happened that have no logical explanation and caused distress and horror.
At dawn one spring morning a heavily loaded freight train, headed by a pre-war 2 — 8 — 0 locomotive, was running out of steam owing to a badly clinkered fire-bed as it approached Brook End signal box.
The signalman, knowing that this train had been in his section for some time and was overdue, set his points and signal from the up main to the up goods loop to allow the up passenger train, following the goods, to run past without any unnecessary delay.
As the freight train came slowly to a halt at the loop stop signal near the box, the fireman told the signalman of their problem who in turn reported the incident to the train control.
The engine driver also gave control some idea of how long it would take to clean the fire and raise sufficient steam for him to take his train forward.
Meanwhile, the train guard, George Marsh, decided to make himself a mug of tea.
Standing on the brake-van verandah, he looked down the line towards the signal box.
Suddenly he saw a white figure slowly crossing the main line towards Brooke End signal box.
She was obviously taking a risk as the up passenger train was almost due and up main signals had been switched to off.
In fact, the approaching train was already audible.
He jumped down quickly from his brake-van and ran down the line shouting a warning.
The figure, that of a young girl dressed in a white dress, appeared to stumble and fall and then, as he drew nearer, she rose to her feet and staggered towards the signal box steps.
He stopped dead in his tracks, rooted to the spot with horror.
The white-clad figure had no head and there were blood-stains on the front of her dress.
The horrific headless figure disappeared as it reached the foot of the steps.
On hearing George Marsh shout, then scream, those in the box looked out and saw momentarily the terrifying apparition seconds before it disappeared.
The driver was the first to recover his scattered wits and went down the steps to comfort Marsh who was leaning against the tender side, shaking uncontrollably, his face ashen.
He assisted Marsh up the steps to the box and, seating him in the signalman's  battered but comfortable old armchair, reported the incident to the train control, requesting medical assistance for the unfortunate guard who was obviously unable to continue his dunes.
So ended one of the most traumatic experiences ever seen on the railway system in the British Isles.
Others who have had the misfortune to witness the headless apparition wish to remain anonymous.
Their memories are so vivid and horrific that they wish to forget them.
With the modernisation of the railway system, Brooke End signal box was abandoned, its structure left to stand forlorn.
The windows had long ago been broken and the inside of the box had been completely vandalised.
Dark, scorched areas suggested that an unsuccessful attempt had been made to set fire to it.
The box seemed resigned to its fate of demolition.
When that day came, perhaps the tragic story of a love-sick young girl trying to find solace in the arms of her lover would be laid to rest forever.
THE UNSEEN PRESENCE OF GRIMSBY FISH DOCKS
This totally unexplained mystery took place in the 1950s in a siding that ran parallel to Fish Dock Road, a main arterial road leading on and off Grimsby Fish Docks.
The railway line ran between various buildings and a high wooden fence that was used for part of its length for advertisement hoardings.
Railwaymen who worked in the area had been so overcome by a feeling of evil that pervaded a particular location that they refused to work the night-shift that involved going near the place in question.
It was the custom of the train crews to make up the fish trains from empty stock located in the New Clee sidings, between Grimsby and Cleethorpes.
From there the vans would be collected by the ex-Great Central Railway Fish Dock tankers (a little outside cylinder 0 — 6 — 0 side tank locomotive of a short-wheel base design for working the tight curves on the docks) and pushed up the fish jetty for loading with fish for despatch to such places as Leicester and Banbury as part of the express fish train service offered by the railway.
One Monday night around midnight, some thirty-five vans had been brought up from New Clee sidings, pushed down Melhuish's Jetty, loaded up, and were brought back to the middle road alongside Fish Dock Road.
One of the shunters who rode on the engine then alighted, went down the train to connect up the vacuum pipes known to the railwaymen as  vacuum bags.
The night was dark and still and the middle road had an eerie, forbidding atmosphere.
The street light threw strange shadows among the hoardings.
The shunters shuddered as they went about their work.
That particular night seemed strangely different, and inexplicably the dark shadows seemed even more menacing than usual.
When the ‘bags’ had been connected and the brake was continuous through the train the engine driver would ‘blow up’the vacuum to get the required 21in, thus creating the correct pressure on the vacuum gauge.
On this occasion he could only get 5in so he told one of the shunters, George Dyson, what had happened and asked him to go back along the fish vans and find out if a bag was off.
Armed with a lamp, Dyson set off to check the connection.
‘Have you found anything?’ asked the driver.
Mr Dyson shook his head.
‘Everything's all right.
Try your pressure now,’ he said.
But the dial still only showed 5in.
‘There's still something wrong,’ said the driver.
Jack St Pierre, another shunter on the same gang, was asked to go and check the bags.
He slowly made his way along the train of fish vans.
In spite of his powerful torch, the darkness seemed to close in on him and he felt a weird, evil presence as if something would spring out from between the silent waggons and overpower him.
He shone his torch on the connections.
The light seemed to dim and was not reassuring.
About three-quarters of the way down the train Jack began to feel very frightened for the overpowering sense of impending evil became even stronger.
Yet he still could not find the offending bag.
He felt his nerve breaking and terror began to overtake his mind.
A horrible damp stifling smell then filled his lungs.
Jack could go no further and he turned and ran terrified back to the engine.
Fighting for breath he called up to the driver, ‘I can't find anything amiss,’ and then walked towards his workmates who were standing talking.
Once more the driver tried the vacuum and again could only  get 5in.
By this time, he was obviously annoyed.
‘Come here, you lot,’ he said.
‘Now, what's going on?
There must be a bag off somewhere.
How is it you can't find it?’
The men stared silently at each other, then one plucked up courage and said, ‘There's something not quite right down there,’ pointing to the line of fish vans.
The driver, now glowing with impatience, agreed volubly, ‘You're absolutely right,’ he snarled.
‘I can't get any vacuum pressure.
What's the matter with you?
Have you seen a ghost or something?’
Mr Dyson replied, ‘No, we haven't seen a ghost.
But I can't explain it, it's as if the devil himself is down there, and there's this horrible smell that chokes you and at the same time you get the feeling that something evil is lying in wait for you.
And another thing, the torch goes dim as if it's losing its power.
It's so frightening, I'm scared and I'm not going back there — I just don't know what's going on.’
His mates nodded and one said, ‘I agree with George, I've never known such a feeling of evil and I am not risking my neck for anyone.’
He switched on his torch and the powerful beam clove the darkness like a white spear.
‘See that,’ he said.
‘Nothing's wrong with the torch now, but down there it nearly went out.’
The driver, now totally exasperated, climbed down from the engine.
‘Now look, I'll come with you.
Pass me the torch, Mick.
Now we'll see what's going on.’
The men set off in fear and trepidation, singing and whistling to bolster their courage.
The driver led the way, turning around periodically to check that the others were with him.
Nearing the end of the line of vans the driver was aware to his surprise of a feeling of dread pervading the atmosphere.
He turned to find the shunters huddled together.
‘Come on, let's look for this bag,’ he said.
Unenthusiastically, the men shone their torches around the couplings and flexible connections, but each and everyone of them was aware of the overpowering feeling of evil.
Eventually the offending bag was found and reconnected by trembling hands.
Their duty done, the whole  gang ran as fast as possible back to the engine and gathered in the cab.
After they had regained their breath and composure, they all swore that they would never again frequent that evil place.
Investigation failed to produce any reason why such an evil atmosphere should pervade that area.
Now the track has gone and a road covers the scene.
Many years later, but before the tracks were removed, a tragic event happened on the line.
A well-known member of a prominent fishing company whose life had been plagued by tragedy and illness decided to commit suicide.
On the particular afternoon he decided to end his life he had been watching the marshalling of the fish vans from his office window.
He waited for the right moment, walked calmly across the road, knelt down, put his neck across the railway line and waited for a loaded van to sever his head.
The forces of evil must have been working smoothly that day because it so happened that the spot he chose was the position within yards of the epicentre of terror that had frightened the railwaymen so many years earlier.
One is left to wonder if the malevolent unseen spirit was waiting to claim its victim, having been unable to satisfy its evil appetite.
However, nothing untoward has happened at that spot since and the lines have been lifted, affording no clue as to the evil influence that lurked under the hoardings of the Fish Dock Road.
‘ARNOLD’ AND THE GREEN MORRIS MINOR
In the first premonition, Mr Reynolds saw himself standing on the footplate of No 43106 leaving Bridgnorth, smoke-box first, with some covered wagons heading for Bewdley.
As the cab began to cross the bridge, the first full-span cross-beam collapsed as a green Morris Minor car was passing underneath.
The cab was filled with steam and flame as the engine fell through the bridge.
At this point the premonition ended.
Mr Reynolds' second premonition again took place on the footplate of No 43106 leaving Bridgnorth.
He saw himself look back along the train and then remember the first premonition.
He realised the impending danger and looked up the road where he saw a Morris Minor coming down the hill.
He told the driver to stop as the bridge was going to collapse.
When he refused, Mr Reynolds climbed off the engine and watched it fall through the bridge on to the car, steam and smoke erupting from the cab as it did so.
The first wagon fell on to the wreckage and so the premonition ended.
The third and final Premonition was situated on the corner of the castle walk.
Mr Reynolds saw an engine leaving Bridgnorth and a green Morris Minor coming down the hill towards the bridge.
As the cab of the engine moved on to the bridge the engine fell through, the cab falling first, on to the car that was passing underneath.
Mr Reynolds related these premonitions solely to his wife  Ruth.
A few weeks later Mr Walker told Ruth of a premonition that he had had the previous night — it was identical to Mr Reynolds'.
The latter decided that it was time to visit the bridge and examine the suspect area.
He discovered loose rivets and serious fretting which had occurred between the main beam and the first three crossbeams on the right-hand side only.
The bridge had been cleaned and repainted two years earlier and was found to be sound.
At the time, Mr Reynolds himself had looked out of curiosity and everything seemed to be in order.
On discovering the fretting, he informed the chief civil engineer who imposed a strict speed limit on the bridge.
A new bridge was fitted some three months later during the winter.
About six months after Mr Reynolds' first premonition, he experienced unexplained noises, mainly thumping and banging.
One night he and his wife witnessed a vague aura of human form on the fire-box top of No 43106.
It lasted about a minute before fading and they both sensed a feeling of impending danger.
After the bridge was repaired, ‘Arnold’, as they named the apparition, disappeared.
Mr Reynolds believes that he was a ghost of the future, possibly of someone who was not supposed to die should the bridge collapse — in other words, the driver of No 43106, the driver of the green Morris Minor or Mr Reynolds himself.
On another occasion, Mr Reynolds had just gone to bed when he had the feeling that there was a fire on the site.
He dressed himself, borrowed a torch and went outside.
He walked along Platform 2 and noticed smoke coming from the signal box.
By the time he reached the box, the first flames had started.
Although the fire was put out m twenty minutes, about £3,000 worth of damage was done, mainly to the electrical system and interlocking mechanism.
Whether Arnold could be blamed for the fire, Mr Reynolds could not be sure, but his comings and goings certainly seemed to leave a trail of mystery and unease.
For him, Bridgnorth would always be associated with the antics of a ghost that obviously liked railway engines and would appear from time to time to warn of impending accidents.
THE MYSTERIOUS PASSENGER.
One morning, a gentleman left Euston Station, London, with some important papers which he intended to read on his journey.
The guard found him an empty compartment and locked the door.
As the train was departing, an elderly man hurriedly boarded and entered the compartment where the solitary occupant was studying his documents.
The two men eventually fell into conversation, the late-comer explaining that he was a director of the railway company and that he was interested in a new branch line that was to be opened.
He was also carrying £70,000 which he was depositing in a bank for payment for the work that had just been completed.
The latecomer said to his travelling companion, ‘By the way, I know the house that you are visiting.
The lady of it is my niece.
Tell her that I hope the next time I come to stay she won't have such a huge fire in the Blue Room.’
As the train was approaching the director's station, he rose to his feet and drew from his pocket a visiting card bearing the name Dwerringhouse which he gave to his fellow traveller.
After he had left the train, the remaining passenger noticed a cigar-case lying on the floor.
He picked it up and ran out on to the platform hoping to return it to its owner.
He managed to catch a brief glimpse of him talking to a man at the end of the platform.
The man's hair was sandy in colour and his face was distinctly visible.
However, unaccountably the two men disappeared and a porter was unable to help as he had not seen either of the two people.
The gentleman returned to his  compartment and resumed his journey, puzzled by his strange experience.
Having reached his destination, he remembered the message that he had been asked to give to his hostess: ‘I travelled down with an uncle of yours and he told me to give you the following message,’ he said.
Both the lady and her husband were obviously distressed at the message regarding the huge fire in the Blue Room.
When the ladies retired, the husband explained that the message had been very embarrassing to his wife since her uncle had disappeared with £70,000 and the police were looking for him.
It so happened that directors of the railway company who were house guests overheard this conversation and subsequently asked him if he would appear before the board and tell the story of his journey and travelling companion.
In due course the meeting took place.
As he was relating his story, he suddenly realised that sitting before him among the directors was the sandy-haired man he had seen talking to Mr Dwerringhouse.
The latter, a cashier with the company, immediately protested his innocence and said that he had been away on holiday at the time.
However, the directors insisted that the cashier's records should be examined and it soon became clear that there were discrepancies in the accounts.
The cashier eventually broke down and confessed that he had accidentally killed Mr Dwerringhouse knowing that he would be carrying £70,000.
He intended to use the cash to repay the money he had stolen from the company.
He had  waylaid Mr Dwerringhouse and hit him on the head to stun him, but in falling to the ground, the older man had hit his head on a large stone and sustained a fatal blow.
The curious episode of the cigar-case was also explained.
Owing to some essential repairs, the carriage in which Mr Dwerringhouse had travelled had been out of use from the day of his journey to his subsequent ghostly appearance.
The guard at Euston was positive that on that particular day he had locked the door of the compartment and that there was only one gentleman inside when the train left the station.
THE LOUTH-BARDNEY PHANTOM GODS TRAIN
In order to explain fully the story of the Louth-Bardney goods train it is necessary to describe the line's history and situation.
Louth in Lincolnshire, 16 miles south of Grimsby, is a pleasant little country market town.
With the formation of the East Lincolnshire Railway Company in 1848, Louth became an important junction, for in 1874, together with other branch lines, it became like the hub of a wheel, with its main line from Grimsby to Boston, Spalding and Peterborough running north and south, the branch going south-east to Sutton on Sea, Mablethorpe and Skegness, and the Louth-Bardney branch going west through the Lincolnshire Wolds towards Bardney and Lincoln.
The latter is the branch line on which the mysterious ghost train was heard.
It was planned to be an important branch, conveying iron ore from the strata at Apley and Donington, but this traffic never materialised owing to the vast amount of iron ore deposits found at Santon, near Scunthorpe.
However, the branch in its sylvan setting and meandering through the scenic beauty of the Wolds was often called the ‘Bluebell Line’.
It became a boon to the farming community, being used extensively to convey agricultural products and large amounts of sugar beet to the large sugar-beet processing factory at Bardney.
When it first opened, the service operated 8 passenger trains a day, 4 up and down and 2 daily goods, 6 days a week.
Patrick  Stirling was the locomotive engineer of the GNR.
As was common with branch lines, engines of an older and secondary nature would be used; thus, Sturrocks 0 — 6 — 0 tender engines were known to operate on the goods and sometimes the passenger trains.
Later, of course, engines of the Stirling and Ivatt vintage found their way down the single line branch.
Passenger traffic was never profitable, but it was a link between the two towns to be used by the sparse population as and when required.
In World War I the traffic increased by way of the requirements of the armed forces, as it did during World War 11.
A great deal of traffic was involved in moving ammunition and bombs for the many airfields in the vicinity.
After World War II, the motor car had a significant impact on the travelling public, and lorries and buses took a considerable amount of business from the railway, so it was inevitable that the railway management, casting a critical eye over branch line expenditure, however scenic, considered most of these rural lines as financially unviable.
In 1951, therefore, the last passenger train ran on the Louth-Bardney line.
Freight services ran until 1956 when all services ceased and the track was lifted as far as Bardney, although the Bardney-Lincoln portion remained.
Although this seemed to be the end of the Louth-Bardney line, it refused to die.
It seemed as if some supernatural force was intent on operating the branch.
At Hallington (the first station from Louth) people heard sounds of a distant train approaching the village.
It was rumoured that the ‘train' actually came into Hallington Station and blew off steam (even though the track had been lifted for some years).
Having heard the stories, the author decided to investigate them for himself together with a friend.
One night in August 1969, therefore, the two men drove to Hallington to reconnoitre the line.
They found that the track-bed was still in good condition and that the well-preserved station house was inhabited by a local shepherd.
On the subject of the ghost train, the shepherd was not prepared to make any comment.
The two friends took stock of everything in the immediate vicinity.
On  their left was a field of sheep; to their right was a grass field which appeared to be uninhabited.
It was a perfect summer's night, warm and still.
At 11.45pm the two men listened and waited in silence.
Then they heard the unexpected faint sound of a train, seemingly working hard, possibly on a short cut-off.
The sound became louder until the occasional snatch of wagon couplings and the unmistakable clank of side rods could be heard.
So fascinated, intrigued and frightened were the two men by this unusual experience, that they listened without uttering a word.
The sound seemed to come in waves, getting louder and louder, then fading away.
For what seemed an age, they felt gripped with terror and unable to move.
They were  mesmerised by the ethereal sound.
Then, as if to break the spell, the sheep dogs began to bark frenziedly and the nearby sheep stampeded as if they sensed impending danger.
The sheep eventually settled down, and the dogs’ barking receded into whimpering.
The men strained their ears for continuing sounds of the ghostly train.
It had receded on a faint wave of sound, but it was possible to imagine it working hard against the up-grade of the Withcall tunnel cutting.
Gradually, even the faintest sound died away.
The sheep became placid once again and the dogs were quiet, probably asleep.
The two friends discussed their experience on the way home.
They checked their notes.
They had not been dreaming.
They had heard a train without doubt.
What had startled the dogs whose frenzied barking had disturbed the sheep?
The visitation of the phantom train had made the dogs aware of an unusual happening.
Why had the train run again?
Was it the call of a soul in torment?
Why had the two men been favoured with a sound of the supernatural?
Of the reason for this incredible experience, there can be little doubt that it was the supernatural echoes of the train which once ran along that peaceful little branch line.
Others who visited the line subsequently to share the experience were not favoured to witness the sound of the ghostly train.
A local farmer had installed a grain-drier in the  immediate locality which may have prevented any such manifestation from being heard.
Reliable reports have been received since 1969 that the ghostly train runs along the old Louth-Bardney line, all accounts bearing witness to this remarkable phenomenon.
THE GHOSTS OF ROTHLEY STATION
Stuart Bailey, station master of Rothley on the Great Central Railway, has heard many stories of ghosts which have appeared at his station, although he himself has no first-hand experience of the supernatural.
One tale was told to him as recently as August 1983.
The story began when a young man attended a party in Mournacre Hill, a suburb of Leicester.
It was very late when he left the party, and as he was unable to obtain transport to his home in Mountsorrel, he decided to walk along the old track-bed from Belgrave to Rothley Station, this being the most direct route home.
In view of what occurred later, one may believe that the young man was intoxicated.
However, undoubtedly the night air would have had a sobering effect, especially as the walk was some 2¾ miles long.
Being the dead of night, the man was uncertain of how to leave the railway and at Rothley he walked up on to the platform.
There by the light of an adjoining street lamp he clearly saw the figure of a station master or porter wearing a flat-topped regulation hat apparently waiting for a train.
This was at about 2am on a Sunday morning and the sight of the apparition frightened him.
The young man ran across the goods yard and eventually found the gate on to the road.
On relating the story to Mr Bailey, the man asked whether a train service was running at that time of night.
The answer was negative.
Another well known and frequently reported story is that of the man and his dog at Swithland.
If one looks at a map of the  line, bridge No 352 carried the country road from Rothley plain to Swithland village, beneath the line at Swithland sidings.
The next bridge to the south, No 354, is that at Rothley Station ½ mile away.
The missing bridge is not a mystery in itself and one can see traces of the formation of the structure at the far end of Swithland cutting about ¾ mile north of the station.
It was a farm occupation bridge under the railway connecting Swithland Lane to the east of the line with fields to the west.
The bridge was filled in some twenty or thirty years ago when houses spread along this part of Swithland Lane.
Before World War II, a local man had some pens in the field on the western side of the line in which he reared pigs and poultry.
In midwinter the track beneath this bridge became a muddy morass, so at night, when he could not be seen by the signalman in Swithland box, he and his dog, who were inseparable, used to cross over the railway lines.
Inevitably, one night in the early years of the war, both he and his dog were killed by a passing train.
From then on until the closure years, both man and dog were seen on many occasions from Swithland signal box and the platform at Rothley Station.
Strange figures have also appeared at the arcaded station entrance stairs at Rothley Station, so the area seems to be favoured by visitations of ghostly phenomena.
EVENTS IN LINCOLNSHIRE SIGNALBOXES
The Noise at Night
Elsham signalbox is situated in a very remote part of the Lincolnshire countryside and thus evokes more strange happenings that baffled John Daubney when he had to take over the box as a relief signalman.
One nightshift in particular had mysterious overtones and still has not been explained.
Mr Daubney had been busy with a continuous stream of traffic.
When he was able to sit down for a brief breather, he received a telephone call from control saying that some twenty young bullocks had got loose on the railway line heading in his direction and would he keep a look out, with the thought that trains and cattle do not mix.
As it was very nearly dark, he did not relish the thought of trying to catch panic stricken young bullocks on a railway line.
He did not see any sign of the runaway animals but later on that night the local policeman called on him and he took over the task of keeping a look out.
When the constable called, he left his bicycle leaning against the signalbox wall and it screeched a little way along the wall before coming to a rest; the sound was to remain in Mr Daubney's memory for reasons that will be revealed.
The constable stayed with John Daubney for the rest of his shift and the signalman appreciated his company, but with no sign of the errant beasts and although both men peered regularly into the darkness and even went down to the lineside and checked, nothing was to be seen.
Hopefully the cattle had been rounded up and were now safe.
The next night John Daubney resumed the nightshift.
No cattle to worry about tonight he thought and settled down to the job in hand.
Everything was normal and the shift going smoothly until about 3 a.m. when the human body is at its lowest ebb (according to the medical profession) and we don't feel at our best.
John heard a noise just like Constable Hobbs' bicycle screeching down the side of the box until it met an obstacle on the wall and stopped or that is what it sounded like in the stillness of the night.
‘Good’, thought the signalman, ‘the policeman has called and it will be nice to have someone to say Hello to.’
He went to the door, opened it and looked down the steps expecting to see the burly figure of the constable emerge and climb the steps to meet him, but to John's surprise there was nobody at all.
He went round the corner of the building shining his lamp but nothing was to be seen.
‘Strange’, he thought, and started to puzzle out what the noise could have been caused by.
He resolved that the occurrence could be sorted out in daylight and that there was no point in groping about in the dark.
Once back upstairs in the box, he could not leave the mystery alone and his mind conjured up all sorts of solutions but analysing them brought no relief.
When he was relieved by the early turn man to take over the daylight duties, he mentioned the strange incident and asked him if he had any experiences to relate.
The other could think of nothing to tell to either corroborate or add to the mystery.
John later came back to the box and searched around the land round the cabin to look for explanations but no solution presented itself and the mystery remains to this day and defies rational belief.
John Daubney is no fool and has sought the solution because he, like many others, looks for reasons for unexpected noises occurring at 3 a. m. in the morning.
Black Shuck's Revenge
Places of human burial, be they cemeteries or church  graveyards or Ancient Briton, Roman or Saxon burial barrows or mounds, are usually regarded as worthy of respect and reverence.
To disturb the resting place of any person is regarded as defiling the dead and fortunately, not too many cases are recorded, but one type of archaeological exploration can quite accidentally set off a very volatile and dangerous sequence of events that, on this occasion, cost a man his life and left a whole community in a traumatic turmoil.
Ted Smith owned a smallholding in a remote village in South Lincolnshire.
He was able to live quite comfortably from the fruits of his labours but he had always wanted just a little more land.
Next to his acreage was a small field of one and a half acres with a little mound in it.
Ted felt this field would be very useful and would enable him to extend his holding just sufficient to give him in his words, ‘that bit extra’.
The trouble was that the land belonged to a family who lived in London and owned parcels of land all over the country and had so far resisted all attempts to relinquish this innocuous piece of British soil.
Ted had given up all hope of enlarging his holding and was concentrating his efforts on farming his existing soil, making a reasonable living from his multiplicity of vegetable crops, when a letter arrived one day explaining to him that if he still wanted to buy the adjoining land, the owners were interested in discussing the matter.
Ted acted quickly and in time a deal was concluded and he became the owner of one and a half acres of grassland.
After careful consideration Ted decided to deep plough the land and prepare it for cultivation.
One morning, Ted drove a tractor and plough into the field and commenced the job.
The land was hard and compacted but the plough shares carved through the earth cleanly and Ted knew his labours wouldn't be wasted.
Suddenly, Ted was aware that he was ploughing up something other than earth.
He stopped, switched the ignition off and climbed down.
Turning round he saw a litter of bones strewn among the furrows.
‘Good Lord’, he thought, ‘I've hit a graveyard!’
On examination of the bones he decided  that they were very old and the smell that exuded was particularly obnoxious.
Ted decided to stop the operation and return home to discuss the find with his wife, Maureen, whose counsel was always common sense.
Maureen was adamant.
‘Leave them alone until someone who understands them has examined the site.
Besides they may be some value or of interest to a museum, you never know.’
Ted agreed but he decided to go and discuss the matter with his pal, Jim, who was the local signalman.
Jim was very interested and liked a mystery.
He was also very curious and begged Ted to allow him to have a look round.
Their discussion was interrupted by the visit of Ted's Uncle Albert, who, at the age of 81, had wisdom to offer about most things.
He was put into the picture and was asked his opinion.
‘You have disturbed a burial site all right but what is important is that you don't disturb it further,’ he advised.
Jim was still curious.
‘What about any valuables that may be buried with the remains?
Could we get the archaeologists here for a dig?’
Uncle Albert shrugged his shoulders.
‘It's up to Ted.
It's his land but if I were you both, I wouldn't disturb the dead, very dangerous!’
Ted laughed.
‘Good Lord, what could the bones to do us?
I'm not frightened, are you Jim?,
Jim smiled.
‘It could be very interesting, I like a mystery.’
Uncle Albert sighed.
‘Well, I've warned you, don't meddle in things you don't understand.’
That night, Ted and Jim met in the local pub to discuss the situation.
Jim said, ‘How about having another look at the site?
We may uncover some valuables.
It could be a Roman or Saxon burial ground and they were buried with their treasures.
Perhaps we might uncover something of interest!’
Ted finished his drink.
‘OK, we'll have another look but don't tell anyone else or we'll have the whole village digging it up.’
The following morning, Jim was free and the two men stood looking at the bones.
‘They smell a bit, Ted,’ said Jim.
Ted felt an inexplicable shudder.
‘Something unpleasant about the whole affair don't you think?’
Jim was excited.
‘Come  on,’ he urged, ‘let's see what else we can find.’
The two men started to dig down among the scattered bones to find other signs of interest.
The work was hard and the sweat ran off their brows.
They took great care and were concentrating on a small area, trying hard not to tread on the bones.
After a lot of hard work, they found they were uncovering a more or less intact skeleton.
As they uncovered it, they found they were looking at not a human, but an animal.
Not a cow or horse but the size of a sheep or goat.
With continued care they exposed an intact skeleton.
They rested and looked and sweated.
‘What is it?’ gasped Ted.
Jim thought and gazed.
‘Well, it looks like a large dog, look at its head.’
The head was large and flattened, resembling a labrador or retriever.
‘Tell you what,’ said Jim, ‘I'll take the skull and show it to Dave, the vet.
He'll know what it could be.’
Ted agreed.
‘Come on, let's go and have a cup of tea.
Maureen was getting on to the museum about bringing an expert to have a look at the place.’
Maureen had some news.
‘I've been in touch with the museum and someone is coming over next week and in the meantime they said don't touch anything.’
Ted explained that they had uncovered more bones including the animal.
He laughed, ‘Jim's got the skull, he's going to show it to Dave, the vet.’
Maureen frowned, ‘Do you think that's wise?,
Jim giggled.
‘Course it's all right.
It won't bite me.
Anyway, I must be off.
Thanks for the tea.’
Early the next morning, Jim was on duty in the signalbox.
He had the skull in a plastic bag ready to consult Dave Smith, the local vet, when his shift ended.
During a lull in the rail traffic, he opened the bag and had a good look at the object.
It was hideous and awesome; it must have been a big animal.
The jaws were large and powerful.
Jim shuddered and put it back in the bag.
Somehow he kept thinking about the whole affair and he wasn't sure anymore about the skull; should he have moved it?
When his shift ended, Jim made his way to Dave's surgery.
Dave examined the skull and sucked his teeth.
‘Must have been something big.
I'd say it was a dog but it's very, very old and that's as much as I can tell.
I should put it back and cover it up.
No point in disturbing the dead.’
Jim went home.
He put the bag containing the skull in the shed with his bicycle.
All the same, he found himself wondering about the strange animal and, almost as ii he was under some strange influence, he could not get the events out of his mind.
That night he was unable to sleep and it was only after taking aspirin tablets that he was able to get any rest.
He was to commence night shifts and he was not looking forward to that, not with the strange thoughts and worries crowding his mind.
At lunch time he went down to the pub, hoping to meet Ted.
After two pints, he felt a bit better and Ted arrived.
He did not say much but agreed that he had had queer thoughts ad wondered whether they really were due to normal depression or the influence of the discovery.
Both men felt better for the chat and company; they had discussed Dave, the vet's opinion and Ted asked, ‘By the way, where is the skull now?,
Jim told him and Ted said, ‘I'll go and get it and put it back, then I'll cover it up until that museum chap comes.’
Jim agreed.
Later that afternoon, Jim arrived at Ted's house.
‘Did you take the bag out of the shed, Ted?’
Ted looked surprised.
‘No, I haven't had time,’ he replied.
Jim gasped.
‘Well it's gone.
Who's got it now?’
Ted looked worried.
Jim looked at his watch.
‘I shall have to go Ted, I've got a lot to do before I go on shift.
Perhaps it will turn up, it's only a skull.’
Ted smiled.
‘It can't do anyone any harm, so don't worry.’
That night, Jim was a bit happier and didn't think about the previous worries.
He was busy and time was passing quickly.
About 11 p. m. he was aware that the wind was getting up and was buffeting the wooden signalbox.
The location of the box was remote, about one and a half miles from the village, but the line was busy and the box controlled the junction, so any signalman had to have his wits about him.
He was reading the daily newspaper and enjoying a cup of tea.
The wind seemed to have dropped and everything seemed peaceful, when he was aware of a noise outside the box.
Jim thought, ‘Hello, is someone coming up to keep me company?’ and went to the door and looked out down the steps.
The night was cool and a chill breeze made itself felt.
He shivered and was about to turn and go inside, when he was aware of a shape.
He peered and suddenly he saw a large form.
He gasped.
It was a large black dog with large orb-like eyes gazing up at him with a malevolent gaze.
Then it bayed and Jim was stricken with terror.
He leapt back into the cabin and locked the door.
He sank into his chair and tried to compose himself.
He fancied he could hear the thing moving about outside and he was glad that the door was locked.
Whose dog was it?
He had never seen it before.
Luckily there was no more traffic on the line for the time being.
He smoked incessantly until dawn lit the sky and then he cautiously looked around.
He felt better.
His relief came up the steps.
‘Everything OK Jim?’
Jim replied, ‘Everything's fine.’
and went home.
When he had had his breakfast, he went to the shed, opened the door and was nearly knocked out by the overpowering smell.
‘Ugh,’ gasped Jim.
He began to tidy it up and look around for the plastic bag.
No sign and he couldn't puzzle out where it could have gone.
Then a thought.
‘Uncle Albert often came to borrow various garden tools, perhaps he's got it.
Yes, that's it.
I'll go and ask him later.’
After dinner, the sun shone and Jim cycled down to Uncle Albert's cottage, situated near the railway line, but the old man was not in.
Jim looked in the windows to see if he was around, but nobody was there.
That night, the weather worsened, the wind blew up a gale, and it poured.
Jim heard noises on the steps which he investigated — but no one was there.
Then his next train was belled and he accepted it into his section, setting the signals etc.
As the heavy diesel with its oil tank train slowly passed the box, he suddenly heard a noise outside.
He looked out and there it was, the animal, the great yellow eyes and the epitome of evil in its gaze.
He slammed the cabin door, only to hear the hurried application of train brakes.
He could see the tail light of the oil train stopped!
Something had happened.
He threw the signals to danger and belled the message on and tore down the steps, his lamp and red flag in his hand.
The guard of the oil  train was running towards him.
Jim shone his torch.
The man's face was ashen.
‘An old man,’ he gasped.
‘He threw himself under us, he must have done.’
Jim ran to the scene.
There under a wagon was the body of Uncle Albert and clutched in his hand was a plastic bag containing the splintered remains of an animal's skull…
Other Signalbox Mysteries
As previously mentioned in this book, signalboxes are the sort of railway infrastructure that, by their often remote location, are likely to have experiences of a supernatural nature and so it is no surprise that most signalmen have a tale of mystery and suspense that happened to friends of theirs.
Not often the first person, always the third person but authentic all the same.
After all, who are we to disbelieve these events which have occurred in the lonely box during a night shift when the wind wailed and buffeted the timber structure?
The noises that pervaded the silence beggar description and the signalmen are, remember, level-headed, intelligent people who are hand picked to do a responsible, onerous job.
All the same, signalmen can be a fund of unexpected tales and it is always interesting to hear their stories.
One box in Lincolnshire had the manifestations of a poltergeist or mischievous ghost apparent in the building but it was of a gentle nature and although it moved cups of tea and generally showed its mischievous attributes, it never hurt anybody and was not vicious or dangerous.
No one knew much about it except that it was always there and so accepted.
Pencils would hover in mid air and windows would open and shut, the door would open, the lights would go on and off.
The signalbox at Kirton Lindsey was the subject of an unexplained occurrence that was to baffle everyone for ever.
Footsteps were heard coming up the steps, but no one ever appeared at the top of the steps.
In the end it was accepted that this happened, but the only explanation offered was that the blasting in the nearby quarry for lime was to blame for the  movement which suggested settlement.
But that was a convenient guess and was it really the cause?
What, may we ask, caused the gate locking lever in Holton-le-Moor signalbox to ease itself out of the frame slowly but determinedly which, after thorough examination, provided no explanation as the rational cause?
Again, the explanation still defeats us for the reason why and how Claxby box, locked up and deserted, could give the 5-5-5 bell code to Market Rasen (the bell code for opening signalbox).
These events are just a few of the unexplained happenings in signalboxes.
Who are we to disbelieve them?
THE PLATELAYER'S HUT
During my researches for material to complete this book I have found that railwaymen in particular have been reluctant to allow their names to be used in a story, and have sometimes insisted that even the name of the location be changed; perhaps they fear leg pulling from their workmates!
The following tale was recalled by a retired plate-layer ganger who, as expected, has asked me to change his name for the purpose of this story.
He was certainly helpful but did also request that the name of the location be altered too.
‘It's between Louth and Willoughby but I'm not saying exactly or we'll have the whole world knowing!’
And he would not be drawn any further, so now read on.
I was told of the story by a friend who knew the old platelayer who we shall call Fred.
My friend Harry (a retired driver) fixed up a meeting at a local pub and we were able to talk and discuss the strange happenings.
Fred's story concerned a lineside hut used by the permanent way men otherwise known as platelayers and/or lengthmen.
The hut was situated in a cutting on the track-bed of the old East Lincolnshire line that ran between Grimsby and Peterborough via Boston; we are talking about the southern section of this once busy line.
What was so special about an old sleeper-built hut used by men to keep their tools and equipment in one side and take shelter from the elements in the other?
The local children used to play in the cutting and had for a long time fancied the hut as a den or HQ for their games, but the hut was always locked by a large padlock securing a hasp that was red with rust but still secured the door.
Some of the more irresponsible youths had tried to set fire to the building but somehow it did not catch and went out much to their disappointment!
The windows had been broken years ago but the railway company had boarded the frames up with wooden battens which were very effective; they did however allow a view into the building and although the children could see in they were fascinated with the place and were happy playing in the cutting.
All was uneventful until one child came home and told his mother that he had met a ‘funny old man’ in the cutting, ‘dressed in funny old clothes’.
The child was emphatic, ‘but he just went away, we looked for him but couldn't find him’.
His mother reassured him, 'people often go down there with their dogs; don't worry, I'm sure he wouldn't hurt you, but perhaps you shouldn't go down there for a week or two, David.’
A few weeks later and quite unrelated to David's experience a group of children from a neighbouring village made their way over the fields for a walk with their dogs.
They found the cutting and scrambled down the slopes of the cutting enjoying the freedom, the old hut looked interesting and they soon explored the area, that had reverted back to nature.
The flora and fauna had  re-established its claim to colonise the old trackbed.
The children found the hut door opened easily enough and cautiously they ventured in, the place smelt musty and stale but it fascinated them.
The remains of a table and chair told of more ordered times, spiders were everywhere, a mouse scuttled across the dirt floor startling the younger children who squeaked with fear.
Chattering excitedly the children tried to open the other part of the building but it was still padlocked securely, they could see a little through various cracks but there seemed to be nothing of interest in that part.
One more adventurous boy decided to explore the overgrown slope behind the hut and he was pushing his way through the  undergrowth when he caught sight of a figure approaching the hut further down the slope; the boy was close enough to see that the figure was that of a tramp wearing tattered clothing and crowned with a battered trilby hat.
When the figure looked up the boy was impressed by bright, blue eyes and a long nose but a kind expression.
Taken by surprise and fear of the other the boy lost his balance and tumbled down the grassy bank towards the stranger but to the boy's incredulous gaze the figure melted into thin air.
The other children heating the boy's cries ran to him and he told them what had happened, they searched the cutting and the area around the hut without success.
The other children pulled his leg and generally teased him about what he had seen but the child strenuously defended his story; somehow the fun had gone out of the adventure and they decided to return home.
The other boy, David, was also puzzling about his experience in the cutting and had resolved to go back and try to find out if he had been dreaming; somehow he did not feel frightened but more determined to see the tramp and make friends with him.
One night when his parents were out David returned to the scene; as expected everything was quiet not even a walker with a dog was passing through, David cautiously approached the old hut, he peered through a crack in the battens before going round to the door which to his surprise was ajar.
Very slowly he entered the hut, there was no one there, no sign of life only cobwebs and neglect.
As he turned he caught a glimpse of something go past the open door, he dashed outside in time to see the figure of the old tramp going towards the slope as if to climb up and away.
David ran after the figure that was nearly at the top, almost over the lip of the cutting, the figure then looked round to face the boy and smiled, then to David's amazement disappeared into thin air.
The boy searched around the area but the man, or whatever had been a human, had gone leaving the boy bewildered and confused.
When he arrived home his parents had returned home and  he was able to tell them what had happened; their first reaction was one of anger at his disregard of their wishes but they were interested in his story.
Afterwards the boy's father decided to consult the local policeman to ask his views about the affair.
A day or two later the policeman called and was told about the strange experiences.
‘I think I remember a tale long ago about a similar matter,’ he said.
He rubbed his chin, ‘Some years ago a platelayer named Jed Knighton opted out of the rat race and became what I suppose you'd call a tramp.
He wandered about this neck of the woods and he was quite harmless, he was fond of children.
Anyway he lived in the old hut after the railway was taken up, we didn't see much of him in the winter but when the spring came round he would appear again.
Then one year, about, well I can't remember when, we missed him.
Some of us worried and went looking for him, then one of Alf Wood's sons found him dead in the old pw hut, we think he died of a heart attack or so the doctor said.
Not a mark on him so it must have been natural causes; anyway it would seem that he comes back to his old home or sort of stamping ground.
I'd heard tales about some people having seen an old man down there but not for a long while, he wouldn't hurt anyone so your lad needn't be scared of him.’
Fred says that was the last sighting of the spirit of Jed Knighton so his soul found its peace at last.
A STRANGE EXPERIENCE AT WALTON JUNCTION
It was during the summer months of 1968 that my father first began taking me to Walton junction, Liverpool to see what must have been the very last of the steam trains thunder past at 7 o'clock.
I loved trains, but I could remember the mounting excitement that I felt, as we approached the path leading to the station, change suddenly and inexplicably to fear.
The path ran parallel to the lines and junction box northwards towards the station itself.
The fear always came when I was about halfway down the path.
There was a strange feel about the place as though somebody or something was watching.
It always seemed to mar our visits.
The eyes even seemed to watch me when, during the autumn, I often picked wild blackberries at the end of the platform.
One particular Easter, a beautiful day, I remember an overwhelming fear filling me with absolute terror as we stood outside the ticket office after returning from a journey.
It was indescribable and I intensely disliked that spot ever since.
During the damp November evenings when the gas lamp flickered in the wind, nothing would convince me that danger wasn't lurking in the eerie shadows.
During the summer of 1975 I visited the station one day when we had nothing particular to do, with two friends.
I was astonished when we began walking down  the now weed-strewn path to feel a familiar feeling of fear and expectation.
Both my friends felt that there was something ‘queer’ about the place and we left quickly.
A few weeks later we returned, this time with a third friend, a very level-headed girl.
We told her nothing of our horrible experience.
This time we settled in the deserted waiting room which was silent and cold.
After a very short time we all felt a horrible feeling of being watched and an intangible atmosphere of dread and doom.
My third friend was very scared and wanted to go at once, feeling that we were in definite danger from something.
We left as darkness was descending on that foreboding place and nothing could have made us stay or convinced us that there was not something awful waiting in the station.
Recently, I returned to Walton junction with my children to get the train to Ormskirk.
We used the same old path, and I was amazed to realise that without knowing it I had been hurrying my children along and constantly looking over my shoulder.
I was convinced something was following us, though nothing was visible.
We paused on the small bridge which led to the ticket office, I looked at the now derelict railway cottages which stood silent, lost and forlorn.
The feeling of fear had subsided somewhat and I remembered looking into the rubble-strewn backyards and thinking how sad it was that they were now in ruin, as last time I was at the station they were occupied.
Suddenly, we all heard a loud bang from the back bedroom of the second cottage, as though a door had been slammed hard.
It was a cold calm day with no wind.
We waited to see if anyone came out, maybe a cat or a dog, but everywhere was silent and still.
There was so much rubbish and broken glass littered about anyway that it would have been difficult for anyone to climb out without making a lot of noise.
So we left and resumed our journey.
The uncanny, oppressive atmosphere still hangs over that spot as it has done for over twenty years.
THE ISLE OF MAN, THE RAMSEY MYSTERY
This story involves a youth hostel in the town of Ramsey in the Isle of Man whose narrow-gauge railway has brought pleasure and fascination to many people either as holiday makers or railway enthusiasts since the 1870s.
Let Mr J. Glasscock tell the story.
I can be reasonably precise about the date and time of the occurrence, it was at the Ramsey hostel and the time was 11.30pm in late July 1967 and I think it was a Wednesday.
1967 was the year that the Isle of Man Railway reopened and I was feeling very emotional about the whole affair, with good reason, as the idea of the Isle of Man without a railway was quite unthinkable.
I did actually get over to work for them in 1968–70 and 1971, but this story I am referring to was in 1967 when I was just paying a visit and was given a bed for the night in the hostel.
There are two things to note about Ramsey Station; first of all, its extension line, the harbour branch, had closed years before, and secondly, no engine was ever kept at the station overnight because the shed water supply had been disconnected.
So I, and the only other lad in the dormitory, who was also a railway enthusiast, were surprised and stunned to hear, just as we were slipping off to sleep, the sound of wagons being shunted in the station.
These wagons had a different coupling system over in the island; the sound of I O M shunting is quite  different from mainland shunting, you don't get the clunk of the links on a loose-coupled wagon but a delayed clank as the ‘chopper’ of one drops over the buffing plate of another.
When you have listened to it many times as we had, you get to recognise the unique sound, it is absolutely unmistakable.
At first, we could only hear the wagons and we thought that it could be someone hand-shunting, but at this time of night?
Also we couldn't understand why, since there were only three trains a day each way, and only the 11.50am arrival and the 4.05pm departure were ever heavy trains.
We only knew for certain that there was something strange afoot when we heard the sounds of a train being marshalled and it started coming towards the hostel, what is more terrifying was that it was coming on a non-existent track!
Had it been a real train the sound would have faded off towards the west — away from the hostel instead, and we could now hear the engine as well; it came towards the hostel over the non-existent harbour branch and clattered to a stop, perhaps at one of the wharves.
And then we heard one final hiss of the safety valves and then silence.
There were seven people in our dormitory and I think five were awake; we all heard the mysterious sounds without any doubt but it appeared that none of the inhabitants of the other dormitories heard anything at all.
We, of course, went outside to see if we could see anything, not really expecting to; there was nothing to suggest the passage of a train, just the cool night air and the distant sound of night life, nothing to prove or disprove the eerie sounds we had heard so clearly.
Was it wishful thinking?
Could I have been dreaming?
I think not as four other unsolicited accounts verified my experience.
We had been privy to a re-enactment of the movements of a former working on the old harbour branch, and although not frightened we were all very puzzled by the strange sequence of events.
ASHTON MOSS JUNCTION
There would appear to be a considerable number of strange events concerning signal boxes and their environs more so than other areas of unexplained activities.
In spite of many attempts to allay fears and promotion of the normal working conditions by the railway authorities, signal boxes are rather emotive places and one doesn't have to have a very fertile imagination to get into the feeling of unease and expectancy.
However, a story, again entirely without explanation, concerns Ashton Moss Junction, but let Mr Ian McGill reveal the mystery.
This story concerns a location about ¾ mile west of Ashton-under-Lyme station where a freight-only line from Denton Junction on the Stockport to Stalybridge line bifurcates to join the Manchester to Huddersfield Trans Pennine route by way of west and east facing curves.
The point of bifurcation at the southernmost point of the triangle is Ashton Moss South Junction, whilst the western and eastern points of convergence with the Manchester to Huddersfield line are known as Ashton Moss North Junction and OA & GB (Oldham Ashton & Guide Bridge Junctions) respectively.
My informant (who wishes to be anonymous but nevertheless truthful) had spent a short time in his early days as a signalman at OA & GB Junction Signal box.
Whilst on duty one Saturday afternoon during the early part of 1975, he heard the sound of footsteps ascending the steps leading up to the box, then he  became aware of the figure of a man about to enter the lobby or vestibule outside the door.
Expecting the visitor to knock to gain admittance, the signalman walked towards the door to see what the visitor wanted.
However, the anticipated knock never came and opening the door of the box he found the lobby silent and totally devoid of anyone, the strange visitor had vanished without trace.
The signalman went down the steps to search for signs of the visitor but there was no one about.
A complete mystery.
The brief glimpse the signalman gained of the stranger was not sufficient to give a good description except that he was male and he appeared to be carrying a bag.
Was this the shade of a railwayman visiting his former workplace?
Could he have been a signalman who met an unfortunate death and still haunts the place of his end?
To continue:
The following Saturday afternoon, my informant was once again on duty when the light began to fade — he hated the short winter days; suddenly he heard a sound, a strange sound of movement below the box.
He went to the top of the steps and looked around, he couldn't see anyone or anything untoward; he looked out of the window and he thought he saw a figure on or around the track.
In the vicinity of a road bridge, which spanned the line near Ashton Moss South Junction, about 200 yards away to the south, the signalman at Ashton Moss North Junction box also became aware of someone out on the track whom he took to be trespassing.
After conferring, the two signalmen decided to try and apprehend the person concerned, and after making sure that the control had been told of the situation and the boxes were safe to leave they walked towards each other, approaching the trespasser from opposite directions, so keeping him in view all the time and affording him little chance of escape.
Nevertheless, on reaching the spot where they had seen a person loitering, there was no one to be seen.
I don't have to stress the danger of anyone moving about on a railway track; ignorance is no excuse for trespassing on railway property and the warning notices are always abundant, which  is the reason that the two men were so concerned, firstly for the person's safety and secondly for the risk of a collision with a train and the undoubted injuries that would result.
The two men were not concerned with ghosts, only the safe operation of the signal box and its environs.
The person they sought had disappeared into thin air; it was only then did they puzzle and wonder if the dusk had conned them into imagining that they could be mistaken.
I could understand one man imagining that he saw a person in the immediate area of the box but it is hard to believe that two level-headed signalmen could have been mistaken enough to be confused by the same phenomenon.
My informant thinks that what he saw was genuine and was certain that someone was down there, his mate in the other box was equally sure that he too saw the figure.
If any person had the authority to be in the vicinity he would be wearing a high visibility vest, as laid down in the Railway Regulations, it would be madness not to do so.
I am told that other people have had similar experiences but are not prepared to enlarge on their stories; perhaps they had seen a ghost of a long-gone railwayman who had worked in the area years ago and had come back to his earthly place of employment!
The mystery remains and perhaps will never be solved, but one thing is for sure, those two signalmen were absolutely certain of what they had seen and were unshakeable in their beliefs.
LYONSHALL STATION
The village of Lyonshall in Herefordshire near the Welsh borders was provided with a station by the Great Western Railway; this station had a somewhat chequered history and a rather inconsistent patronage.
The small railway outpost had the Indian sign on it when closure came entirely on I January 1917 in the midst of World War I. However, some five years later the GWR had a change of heart and decided to reopen the station to goods traffic on 18 September 1922.
Subsequent re-opening to passengers on 11 December 1922 heralded a new era for the station and trade seemed to have awakened to the transport needs of the community.
But again in a wartime emergency, when one would imagine that all railway stations would be needed during a war, the axe fell again on Lyonshall Station and it was closed to all traffic on I July 1940 and abandoned.
My correspondent, Mr Glasscock of Braintree, Essex, has a very strange tale to tell that even today has no logical explanation.
During the hot summer of 1959, on a particularly heavy and sultry day and following morning, I and a friend visited Lyonshall Station.
We were on a cycling holiday and me being very interested in railways generally, liked looking over old stations.
Lyonshall Station was, and I very much doubt that any trace  of it remains today, in a very dangerous condition.
The bridge had been removed but the wooden platform and building were visible from the road below; there was a roofed stairway leading to platform level, every step was either missing or rotten, so the bottom of the staircase was made completely inaccessible with barbed wire criss-crossed right up to the old roof beam.
Over the years brambles had spread in all directions and had wound round the barbed wire, so it would have taken an axe or some other sharp tool to have gained entry, one certainly couldn't have reached the top of the stairway at all.
The general condition was extremely dangerous and one could expect difficulty in trying to gain any access as the stairway was so derelict.
I remarked to my friend, ‘You'd have to wait for a long time to get a train from here,’ he smiled and we both set off for the youth hostel down the road.
I believe that it is closed now.
In the morning, though our route lay the other way, I insisted on going back to the old station for one more look.
It seemed sad to see the old place decaying, uncared for and neglected.
I was convinced that something had happened in our absence; something had indeed happened — it had rained hard during the night and early morning — which was strange for that summer when we had a period of almost drought conditions.
Anyway the steps that remained, and there weren't many of them, were still damp since the roof of the stairway was as rotten as everything else.
But so clearly visible and definitely new since the previous evening was a set of footprints, and looking around, a set of tracks, small hob-nailed boot tracks going up the staircase to the top and not coming down.
I shuddered, the very thought of anyone being so foolish baffled me, the steps were so rotten that it wouldn't have taken any weight to have snapped them and sent anyone plunging down causing a bad injury.
The prints were about my own size, 6½ and my own guess for what it is worth, since, as a cadet I did own a pair of hob-nails, is that my own almost religious love of country  railways had revealed a kind of secular stigmatic effect.
My friend was most unimpressed, he had seen the footprints but shrugged his shoulders and suggested that we move on.
However, the mystery remains and I will never forget it and will always puzzle over the mysterious footprints that defied all the obstacles, or did they?
THE SCENT OF THE ROSE
Charlotte Campbell was more than delighted to have received a reply to her letter for the position of children's nanny which she had seen advertised in The Times .
She hoped for a reply, but dared not hope too much; she imagined that the Hon Mrs Anderson-Hunt would have had many replies and perhaps ladies with experience would be far more preferable to a young comparatively inexperienced girl like her.
But in 1906 it was the accepted procedure to reply to letters and Charlotte was so excited at the invitation to visit Winstable Hall for an interview.
The Hon Mrs Anderson-Hunt had sent a crisp 10s note for her train fare and expenses, and that sum would adequately cover those.
Charlotte couldn't contain her delight.
Never having been more than ten miles from her parents, home in her nineteen years the prospect of a fifty-mile train journey seemed like an adventure and she would travel alone, but maybe she would meet some handsome young man!
She smiled at the thought; the next seven days to the interview seemed almost endless in the long hot summer of 1906.
Charlotte woke very early on 21 September, giving herself plenty of time to make the very best of herself, putting on her Sunday best dress and bonnet.
Her heart was beating much faster as she approached the railway station, she offered her 10s note to the booking clerk and received her return ticket to Wiltham which was the nearest station to Winstable Hall.
There according to her letter a trap would be waiting to convey her to the Hall.
Charlotte walked slowly onto the platform and waited for her train to pull in.
Soon a plume of smoke heralded its arrival and Charlotte was held in awe as the gleaming locomotive hauled the immaculate rake of teak coaches into the station.
The engine stopped alongside her and a young man with blond hair and a cheery smile jumped down.
‘Hello,’ he greeted.
She smiled demurely.
‘How far are you going?’
Charlotte replied that she was going to Wiltham and she had an important interview.
The young man said he would tell her when to get off and then busied himself with an oilcan among the driving wheels.
Charlotte stepped into the first compartment and sat down, the station was now a hive of activity, Charlotte leaned out of the window and watched the guard's van being loaded up with milk churns, sacks of mail, and boxes of red roses.
The other passengers had found their seats, the whistle blew, and the young fireman leaned over the door and handed Charlotte a single red rose.
Smiling, Charlotte thanked him.
‘I'm Albert,’ he smiled.
It was not a long journey and as the sun was shining it was a very pleasant one.
Eventually the train pulled into Wiltham and Albert leapt down and opened the carriage door, taking Charlotte's hand and helping her down.
‘There we are, I hope you get the post!’
Charlotte thanked him and passed through the barrier into the station yard where a uniformed coachman was waiting with a trim little gig to take her to meet the Hon Mrs Anderson-Hunt.
Charlotte did get the position of nanny and often travelled on the same train home on her days off, always in the first compartment behind the tender and always hoping that she would see Albert, which she often did and she leaned out of the window to talk to him when the train stopped in the stations.
It was over a year before Charlotte was allowed to take her charge, a little boy called Edward, home with her to meet her family on her day off.
It was a very sunny day and it was made all the more complete by Albert being on duty on the return  journey.
He had jumped down to open the carriage door for her and Charlotte and the child made to get in.
Albert was talking to them as they waited to leave, and the boy had a large rubber ball that he would insist on throwing about in the compartment.
Charlotte, her eyes on Albert who was taking her attention, asked him rather half-heartedly to desist, but the boy threw the ball out of the window.
It hit the platform fence and ran under the carriage; as quick as a flash the boy darted past Charlotte and Albert and tried to look for it under the wheels.
As Charlotte scrambled out of the carriage the boy was halfway under the carriage; almost beside herself, Charlotte and Albert tried to haul him up.
The driver had seen the green flag and had opened the regulator to ease forward, yelling at Albert to come on.
By this time Charlotte was halfway under the carriage with Albert trying to help her.
The boy had got jammed and couldn't get out.
The train eased forward, the driver unaware of the panic.
Charlotte screamed, the driver panicked, his hand still on the regulator.
Albert leapt onto the footplate, missed his footing and grabbed the regulator to stop himself falling; the train moved forward dragging the nanny and child under the wheels.
Nothing could save them, the wheels had passed over them and life had gone.
But that was not the end of this sad story, nor of the nanny and child who died so horribly.
Many people have seen Charlotte waiting for Albert, or her ghost who refuses to leave this station.
Albert was so distressed by the whole affair that he applied for another post further away from the scene of the tragedy.
But sightings of the young lady continued and the curious point was that people used to say that in the first compartment next to the tender there would often be the strong scent of roses.
After a while the station returned to normal, Charlotte hadn't been seen for some time, and Albert had been killed in World War I so all three participants in the awful tragedy had gone for ever, or had they?
Just before the outbreak of World War II a long passenger train was in the station taking water.
The driver was oiling  an axle box when he turned round to see the trim figure of a young lady with a small boy near the first compartment of the carriage next to the tender.
He made as if to talk to them when they melted before his very eyes; he couldn't believe it and as the guard approached he told him what he had seen.
The guard smiled, ‘It's Charlotte and the boy, we've seen her on many occasions.
By the way, can you smell that lovely scent of roses?’
THE FURNESS RAILWAY MYSTERY
I am very grateful to Mr R. R. Mester for the following story of strange happenings on a long abandoned stretch of railway between Goldmire Junction and Millwood Junction on the original line of the Furness Railway.
My correspondent's earliest and most vivid recollection of a haunted railway line dates from childhood memories of some sixty years ago and refers to the short length of line between Goldmire Junction and Millwood Junction on the old Furness Railway in the area of Dalton-in-Furness.
Opened in 1846 this section had been early superseded and closed and in the time of Mr Mester's childhood comprised only an overgrown formation.
There were many trees and shrubs about so visibility was rather restricted, a footpath crossed both railway and stream just below Millwood, and there was a large detached residence.
It was a creepy spot with a strong pungent smell of garlic and there was always a feeling of tension and foreboding.
Frequently and for no apparent reason, there would be a chilling burst of wind and a roar as of a passing train.
In the gloaming it was possible to glimpse passing lights identical to those of a carriage in a moving train, altogether it was an eerie happening — crossing a long-abandoned railway in the Vale of Nightshade!
Down in the Vale lay the ruins of Furness Abbey — founded by one king (Stephen) and destroyed by another king, Henry  VIII, at the Dissolution of the Monasteries.
The roar was held by some to be that of the dispossessed and not a train at all.
My fears were shared by youthful friends and even adult relatives at times seemed to ‘chivvy’ us along as if they too expected the ghost train to rush by.
Some seemed quite certain of a mystery train — one they heard that came and vanished but was never recognised.
Years later it seemed reasonable to identify the ghost train with nearby trains on well concealed tracks linking Dalton-in-Furness with Askam-in-Furness and Barrow-in-Furness respectively, but this explanation did not entirely remove the doubts and fears experienced even in retrospect.
Maybe there was a mystery train of sorts deriving from some forgotten tale in an area served early by rail linking with wild and remote sea shores.
Whatever the explanation, for some of us there was always a sense of fear in this secluded spot and that moreover linked to a train.
Perhaps it was no more than old Coppernob , Furness Railway No 3, built in 1846 and resident in those school days in its great glass case outside Barrow Central Station, taking a turn over its old hunting grounds…
THE SPIRIT ENTITY
I have called this story the Spirit Entity because it illustrates the fact that earthbound factions are still very active, and making their presence felt in so many unexpected ways.
I am indebted to my correspondent Mrs D. M. Ross for this compelling tale.
Mrs Ross was one of six senior citizens travelling between Glasgow and Paisley in a DMU; they were in the rear carriage with the brake unit in the centre.
The train braked to a shuddering halt at the Paisley signal box where it remained for the next thirty minutes whilst the driver and guard proceeded to examine the underside and topside of the train.
Eventually the guard climbed aboard and entered Mrs Ross's carriage and demanded to know who had pulled the communication cord which none of the passengers could see from their seated position.
When the guard was told that no one had moved from their seats he became very worried because he said he had to make out a report to British Rail as to the cause of the delay and he then said, ‘I'll have to put it down to person or persons unknown’.
To which one lady said, ‘That would be a complete lie, have you never heard of a Spirit Entity?’
The central position of the brake section prevented anyone moving along the train without being noticed, the guard agreed to this point.
It did not solve his problem but the poor fellow had to make out his report and he had to find some element  of evidence and so far he hadn't got much to write down.
How the poor fellow finally got his report together I do not know but I doubt that even he didn't realise that he was dealing with a supernatural force that did what it liked when it liked.
Mrs Ross tells me that she later discovered that several years earlier near Paisley signal box two trains had collided with loss of life.
My informant tells me that she feels sure that the earlier event is still ‘earthbound’ and repeated the action.
I imagine that the frustrated passengers would not be amused if they realised that the delay was caused by a restless spirit but the report of the accident can be checked in British Rail's archives.
So this strange occasion and its tragic precedent can be the work of the past or present spirit entity…
YARWELL TUNNEL
I am very grateful to Mr H. E. Caunt, the Public Relations Officer for the Nene Valley Railway in Cambridgeshire, who kindly sent me details of the strange happenings concerning Yarwell Tunnel.
During the construction of the Blisworth to Peterborough branch line of the old London & Birmingham Railway in 1845, the engineer and surveyor of the route, one Robert Stephenson, being faced with a hilly terrain near to the villages of Yarwell and Wansford decided to tunnel through as a cutting was not practicable at that time.
Hence gangs of navvies (mainly Irish) were set to work on the task of excavation and works; they lived in mud huts, huts which would only offer the most primitive shelter from the elements.
Kilns were established to manufacture the bricks used to line the tunnel (approximately one million were made), and the clay used came by barges on the nearby Nene.
Weekends were a particularly troublesome time, drunkenness and fighting was a real problem and special police had to be drafted in to take charge.
It was reported at the time that ten or more navvies met their death fighting and falling from scaffolding as this tunnel is unusually high and was built to accommodate double tracks.
The late Mr Walter Gilbey used to tell of many strange happenings during maintenance work in the tunnel; mysterious noises, agonising cries and sounds of men fighting.
Hammers  and shovels used to disappear without trace, a newly laid stretch of track was found the following morning with all the wooden keys on the tunnel side all knocked out.
Sabotage was suspected but after a thorough investigation was never proved.
On another occasion some gangers had to jump for their lives as a freight train suddenly entered the tunnel without any warning from the lookout men at either end of the tunnel.
As soon as the train had cleared the tunnel the gangers found one of the lookout men lying unconscious by the side of the track.
On reviving him the man told the head ganger that he had been struck by a blow at the back of the head yet medical evidence revealed no sign of injury, furthermore his whistle, flags, and lamp were never found.
Another strange happening concerns a one-time station master at Wansford Station who had a pet cat called Snowy which used to follow him everywhere.
One late autumn afternoon Snowy failed to turn up for his meal, so his master went out to look for him.
Unfortunately the station master was rather deaf and he failed to hear an approaching train in the inky darkness of the tunnel and he was struck down and killed.
Snowy was never seen again.
Yet on many occasions a greyish-white cat has been seen crying piteously entering the tunnel never to reappear; none of the local cats are like Snowy, being either black, black-and-white, ginger or tortoiseshell!
So Yarwell Tunnel has its mysterious and macabre secrets, sharing with some these facets and leaving an indelible memory in the mind.
BRIDGE 173
Bridge 173 was an agricultural occupation bridge spanning a deep railway cutting and was used by the local farmer to give access to both big lineside fields.
It was a very sound brick structure and had been built about 1868 but it had the notorious reputation of being called ‘Lover's Leap’, no doubt due to the fact that several suicide attempts had been made from its high parapet, most of them fatal.
One particular night, young John Armitage, a very junior passed engine cleaner had no notion of the bridge's notoriety.
He had just fired up and sat down to rest.
His mate, driver Sam Webster, gave him a smile of approval and said, ‘Good lad, young John, now put your injector on, shut it off when you've got nearly a full ‘glass’, then have a few minutes.
I'll tell you when to fire up again just before we go up the bank.’
Young John did as he was told.
This was his first mainline trip and he was grateful to Sam for his advice and also for him taking him on this trip.
The shed running foreman had asked Sam if he would take young John as there was no one available at the time.
He explained that although the lad had not been on the mainline before, he was a good, reliable and sensible lad.
Sam, without any hesitation had agreed knowing that to wait for the first available fireman would delay his train's departure.
Young John had been delighted.
He had done a reasonable amount of pilot work, firing for some of the older shunt link drivers  and had also fired on the local ‘pick-up’, but this at last was the real thing.
So far, driver Sam Webster was pleased with his young mate's performance and had noted with approval how he used his firing shovel to spread the coal systematically round the firebox and his ability to fire up through the firehole door trap without having to open the door.
With a little bit more experience and confidence, he would undoubtedly make a ‘good'un’.
Young John, seated on his cabside fireman's seat, looked interestedly about him.
Poking his head out from the cab, to get a little cooling draught, he noticed that they were about to enter a long deep cutting and marvelled at the way the cutting must have been cut through almost solid rock.
The track took a right hand curve and for the first time he saw the bridge standing high above the track.
Approaching the bridge, he had a shock.
Although it was getting dusk, he was certain that he had seen someone or something fall from the bridge.
Frozen with shock, momentarily, he recovered his scattered wits and shouted, ‘Sam, stop; someone's jumped off the bridge.’
Sam acted quickly.
As a mainline driver, his reflexes were excellent.
Smartly closing the regulator, he made a partial application of the steam brake, paused, released it, paused once again, then when he heard the wagon buffers face up, he made a full brake application.
He knew of course that he would never be able to halt the train before it reached the bridge and he had his guard's safety to think about.
If he had made a full brake application, his guard, Gerry Briggs, would have been thrown from one end of the brakevan to the other with a possible resultant injury.
As the train slowed down, Sam came over to the fireman's side and looked out and seeing nothing, suddenly realised the legend of the bridge.
He looked at young John, now white and shaken with the shock.
‘Don't worry, young John,’ he said, to comfort and reassure him.
‘You kept a good lookout.’
As the train slowed to a halt, he remembered other drivers, mostly some of the ‘old hands’, talk about Bridge 173 and how some of them joked about the ‘strange sightings’ near it.
With the train stopping about a train's length beyond the bridge, he knew that he would have to walk back and explain to Gerry and have a look.
‘Stop on the engine, John,’ he said.
‘I'll go back and have a look and see the guard.’
Walking back to the end of the train, he found the guard standing on the track beside his brakevan.
‘What's up then, Sam?’ he asked.
‘Anything wrong with the engine?’
‘No,’ Sam said.
‘My mate thought he saw something or someone fall off the bridge.’
The guard climbed up into his brakevan, to return with a can of detonators in case he had to protect the train.
‘Come on then, Sam, let's have a look.’
Reaching the bridge, they had a good look round but found nothing.
‘Bloody bridge,’ Gerry said, ‘the last time this happened was about five years ago, when Jack Thompson saw something.
Do you remember everybody laughed about it?
Come on, Sam, let's get going.
If we get a move on, we'll make the time up.
I don't think we should report it, do you?’
‘Not so likely,’ Sam agreed.
‘I'll tell young John not to say anything.’
Quickly they returned to the train and once more started off.
On the move once again, Sam told his young fireman all about the legend of the bridge.
‘Will you have to report it?’
John asked.
‘Not so bloody likely,’ Sam said.
‘If I tell anyone that we stopped to look for a ghost, they'll laugh at me, and if I was you, I wouldn't tell your mates either.
Just tell them that you know now where Bridge 173 is.’
A BARMAN'S STORY — A SEQUEL TO BRIDGE 173
It was a sunny autumn afternoon in 1963 as John and Mary Briggs were walking along a disused trackbed in the  West Country with their two Jack Russell terriers, Tina and Spot, who were enjoying their walk as much as their owners.
There was so much to sniff at and they had already found two rabbits and had aroused a flock of partridges.
When they reached the approach to what appeared to be a long deep cutting, Mary stopped.
‘Let's go back, I think we've gone far enough and it looks dark and spooky.’
Was it a woman's intuition?
The two dogs settled the matter, racing on ahead.
John looked at his watch, ‘Come on Mary, we can go on for another ten minutes and I'd like to find out what is around that bend.’
So reluctantly she followed her husband through the cutting.
Eventually they saw ahead of them the bridge standing high and spanning the valley; red crumbling brick it stood, carrying a farm road and seldom used by anyone else.
As they drew nearer John could just make out a plate on which the number 173 was discernible.
Suddenly, the dogs who were sniffing this exciting new country stopped; ears raised, hair rising on their necks, they backed slowly towards John and Mary, then they howled and turned and ran back through the cutting, leaving John and Mary puzzled and a bit frightened.
Mary shuddered ‘I don't like this place, it seems sad and depressing, don't you think  it's turned cold?’
John had to agree, he too felt a bit uneasy and scared but didn't want to show his fear to Mary.
‘OK, let's go back to the hotel, then we'll have a nice cup of tea.’
Mary smiled and kissed him.
Later that evening when they were seated comfortably in the bar Mary brought up the subject of the eerie feeling in the cutting; they agreed it had been a most disturbing experience and that there must be some explanation.
John said ‘I'll ask the barman if he knows anything about it.’
Steve, the barman, was polishing a glass as John approached the bar.
‘NoW sir, what can I get you?’ he asked.
John ordered a pint of bitter and a sweet martini.
While Steve was busying himself John asked him about the bridge and the strange feeling in the cutting.
Steve placed the drinks on the counter, ‘There we are, sir, that will be…’
After the till drawer closed, he turned and said, ‘Bridge 173 sir?
It's haunted, and I would keep well away from it.
It's bad news around here sir, and the bridge seems to attract suicides.
They used to come here, yes, to this hotel to spend their last nights before they went to that bridge to hurl themselves off, sometimes in front of a train; but now the line has gone and the track removed we don't get so many nuts coming to end their days.
Now only Alf Hurst, he farms the land either side of the cutting, uses it to get across but even Alf doesn't like it.
The wind always blows cold in that cutting and across the old bridge.’
John listened, fascinated with Steve's story.
‘Mary and I took our dogs down there this afternoon and I must admit we didn't like it, Mary was quite frightened.
We won't go again I can assure you.’
Steve nodded, ‘Very wise sir, they used to call the spot under the bridge, ‘Lover's Leap’.
It's a brooding, desolate place that.’
Mary came over to the bar, on that the two men stopped talking and smiled at her.
‘Can I have my drink, it seems as if you two will talk all night,’ she said.
‘Let's go and sit down, dear,’ she said to her husband.
She took his arm, ‘Just a minute sir,’ said Steve.
Mary took her drink to her seat and prepared to wait again.
‘One thing that might interest you, last year our manager jumped from that bridge and broke his neck…’
THE OLD LOCO SHED
The old loco shed stood gaunt, derelict and roofless, amidst the mounds of brick rubble and refuse surrounding it.
The once busy shed, now with the skeletal, unclad girders of its roof standing stark against the darkening sky, was just a ghost of its former self.
As it was soon to be finally and completely demolished, I took the first opportunity of looking round and about the old shed to see if I could find something, anything, of interest relating to the depot to add to my growing collection of ‘Railwayana’.
The loco shed had many sentimental memories for me as my late father had been a mainline driver there many years ago before the branch line, with its four stations, marshalling sidings, loco shed and workshops closed, shortly after the closure of the two adjacent collieries.
The branch line had survived for a few years as a single line until its final demise.
As I passed what had been the marshalling yard and sidings, I glanced at the rows of rusting buffer stops and rotting wooden buffer beams, and conjured up a picture of its lines of laden coal wagons waiting to be despatched and the coal empties waiting to be taken to the collieries to be filled.
It was a cold, wet, typically late autumnal afternoon as I walked along the old trackbed, avoiding the many puddles of murky rainwater on my way.
I stopped momentarily to look at the old ‘cenotaph’ or what remained of it.
The once modern coaling plant was now just a mass of huge broken lumps of concrete.
Would  there be anything collectable there, I wondered.
I decided against looking into the tumbledown wooden hut that had once housed the coal hopper controls.
The rotting wooden walkway looked too perilous to risk any injury so I continued on my way to the shed, now some seventy or eighty yards away.
I stopped about twenty yards away from the shed, appalled at the scene of utter desolation and neglect.
One of the shed's huge, wooden doors, the only survivor, hung crazily, on one rusting hinge, swaying slightly in the stiffening breeze.
Continuing on my way, I saw that the outer and inner ash pits were filled with rubble and rubbish of every kind.
What an inglorious end to what had once been a busy loco shed that had been the scene of so much activity in its heyday.
Reaching the shed, I stepped over several mounds of brick and other rubble and went inside, looking carefully at the wet streaked brick walls searching for anything that could be identifiable with the depot.
One of the rusting iron pipes fastened to the shed wall and apparently coming from what remained of the old boilerhouse inside, had a plate affixed to it, near the stump of what must have been a water stop valve.
It could be of interest, so taking a piece of cotton waste out of my pocket, I cleaned the accumulated filth off it, only to discover that on it was stamped ON-OFF.
However, as it was brass, I decided that it was collectable.
It was something at least.
Taking the roll of tools out of my stout and well travelled haversack, I unscrewed the plate with only a little difficulty and put it into the haversack.
I had got one souvenir and if not identifiable with the shed, at least I knew where it had come from.
Walking further into the shed, I paused and looked around wondering how many times my old father must have walked through it.
Then, on an impulse, I retraced my steps following the run of the old water washout pipes until I found myself in the remains of what must have been the old boilerhouse.
It was there that I made my one and only good find, not of course taking into account the brass washout pipe plate.
I saw a corner of what looked like a rusted iron plate protruding from a pile of brick rubble.
Eagerly I set about  to free it from its rubble prison.
It took me about three or four minutes to rescue it and I looked at my ‘prize’.
Cleaning the muck off it I was delighted with my discovery.
It read, ‘LNWR-BOILERHOUSE-PRIVATE’, and must have come off the boilerhouse door.
It was not too big or cumbersome to take away so I packed it up in my stout old haversack and stepping out of the ruins of the boilerhouse, returned to the shed.
It was getting dark and the wind had freshened, the rain gusting through the length of the shed so I decided that it was time to pack up and head for the nearest hospitable pub where I had been told I would be able to get a good meal of hot pie and peas.
Dad had often spoken about the Railway Hotel just across the road from what remained of the station, and how he used to play the battered old piano and have a sing-song with his pals.
Perhaps I would be able to conjure up his image while indulging myself with my pie and peas and a pint.
On my way out of the shed, I suddenly realised that I was not on my own.
There, walking down the middle of the shed in the gloom, I espied a dark blue-clad figure wearing what appeared to be what Dad used to call a ‘steamraiser,, a shiny topped peaked cap.
The figure walked slowly down the shed.
I was unable to see his face but as it was getting dark, I was not surprised.
I was just about to speak when suddenly, abruptly, the figure disappeared.
Had it been a figment of imagination, brought about with the increasing gloom, and the aura of the surrounding dereliction?
No, I knew that I had seen someone, or something.
I had never believed in ghosts but what I had seen was unaccountable.
Suddenly, I heard a loud crash near me, scaring me out of my wits.
The old shed door hanging on one rusted hinge, would swing no more and had crashed to the floor.
It was enough for me, the last straw.
I had seen and heard enough.
Already startled by the apparition, the crashing down of the big heavy door completely unnerved me.
I ran out of the shed not looking back, raced across the old marshalling yard, out of the tumbledown gateway of the station, across the road and into the brightly lit warmth  of the Railway Hotel bar.
Faces looked strangely at me as I burst abruptly into the bar room.
One old chap said, ‘What's up lad, tha’ looks as if tha's seen a ghost!’
After getting my breath, I said, ‘I think I have’.
One kindly old chap stood up and said, ‘Come on mate, sit down here, I'll get you a pint then you can tell us your story.’
As I sat down, one old boy seated next to me said, ‘Have you been w£king on the old trackbed then?’
‘Yes,’ I replied.
Another said, ‘I bet you've been into the loco shed.’
‘Yes,’ I said.
‘How did you know?’
‘Tha's not first one to get a shock there mate,’ he answered.
‘What did you see then?’
I then told them about the apparition, how I had seen someone walking down the shed and then suddenly disappearing.
The kindly old chap who gave up his seat for me brought me my pint saying ‘Drink this mate, you'll feel better when tha's supped that.’
While I gratefully sipped my pint, they told me the story.
Several people apart from myself had seen the ‘loco apparition’.
Between them, my new-found friends told me the story.
While the branch line and the loco shed was working, a driver from the shed had unfortunately failed the railway doctor with defective colour vision and as a result had been relegated to fire-lighting and steam-raising duties.
He used to come in here regularly for a pint, they said.
The chap who had been kind enough to get me my pint said, ‘I was only a young chap at the time but I remember him well.
Fred Grisenthwaite were his name.
He were never the same when he came off mainline.
It was a pity too about his accident as if he hadn't had enough bad luck.’
‘What happened then?’
I asked.
‘He were firin' up and steamin' an engine when it happened.
A tube burst and the blow back threw him back against the tender end.
He must have hit his head for it killed him.
At the time we said ‘poor old Fred, we'll never see him again.’
We haven't, but others have, including you now evidently.’
I had by now recovered my scattered senses and after finishing off my enjoyable meal of pie and peas and my second pint, I thanked my kind new-found friends and left the hospitable Railway bar to walk back down to where  my trusty old Morris Minor was parked.
It had without doubt been a day to remember and now whenever I look at my LNWR Boilerhouse Private plate, I think of poor unfortunate Fred Grisenthwaite and his tragic demise, and then recall the Railway Hotel bar room and the kind friends I met that night.
GLASGOW UNDERGROUND HAUNTING!
The Glasgow underground railway system like the London underground counterpart has some very strange and totally unexplained events.
The sceptics will scoff as usual but my informants are adamant in their accounts of the happenings.
The Glasgow system runs in a circle beneath the city centre and is narrow gauge 4ft; it serves a pressing transport need.
It also plays host to a number of strange, ghostly occurrences according to a book I belong to Glasgow by Bill Hamilton and Gordon Carsely, from which I am most obliged for the information.
The aforementioned book was written before the system closed for extensive modernisation and I have no further information (in spite of research) that any more unexplained events have occurred.
In the old days there was no physical access from the running lines to Govan car sheds and workshops, so stock was only brought out of the tunnels for repair and maintenance, which necessitated lifting the vehicles bodily off the track and up through pits into the workshops by means of a large overhead crane.
At night after close of the service it was the practice to stable the empty trains end to end on the running lines in the tunnels on each side of the shed car pits, the end doors of each vehicle opened to permit ready exit of passengers in the event of an emergency, and to allow access to the lines of  stabled trains by cleaners and others whose nocturnal duties took them into the subway tunnels.
On one occasion a team of five men went down into the tunnels for which purpose they had to pass through the line of empty stabled cars.
On reaching the last train they found a colleague talking to a middle-aged man dressed in a light-coloured rain coat and flat cap who was assumed to have been overcarried on the last train after going out of service at Capland Road Station.
The stranger was led back through the empty trains to the car shed pits where he could gain access to the street.
Looking back at regular intervals to see if the stranger was following, eventually they reached the access to the street but the guide was astonished to find the man had vanished into thin air.
The men went back and searched the trains but the man had disappeared; all the men agreed the man had been there, they had all seen him, they were all completely baffled.
Govan car sheds were reputedly haunted by a figure which was seen from time to time in a driving compartment of a car but on investigation the figure had disappeared and was nowhere to be found; the cab was empty yet strangely cold!
Cleaners working in the tunnels between Kelvinbridge and Hillhead Stations used to report hearing disembodied voices of women singing.
An accident in 1922 is believed to be the explanation for the appearance of the ‘Grey Lady’ whose ghostly form has been reported in the tunnel near Shields Road Station.
In that year a lady and a little girl (presumably the daughter) fell from an otherwise deserted station platform into the path of an oncoming train; the station master on seeing the incident attempted to rescue them both but was only able to save the girl.
Two maintenance gangs who were working one night some distance apart on a section of track noticed a mysterious light between them but despite searching the area nothing could be found to explain the phenomenon.
Finally, at around 3am one Sunday in 1967 pump man, Willie Baxter, was detailed to go through the tunnels from St Enochs to Bridge Street Station  where he was to attend to a tank located beneath the stairs.
After walking for some time, having covered about half the distance between the two stations, Willie became aware of a steady, yet rather unnerving sound just ahead as if someone was hammering the rails.
The ganger, whose section this was and who might therefore have been responsible, had passed through some ninety minutes earlier.
Willie Baxter was gripped by fear, he didn't understand it, he hated the dark tunnels, he stopped walking and the noise stopped; by now Willie was probably near the point where the tunnels passed under the River Clyde and it was said that it was possible to hear the sound of a ship's propeller whenever a vessel passed overhead.
However, Willie was certain that this could not account for the strange noise, so he continued, only to find the noise started again even louder.
That was it!
He'd had enough, he turned and ran for his life back to St Enochs and the fresh air.
Later discussing the experience with his workmates the reaction was divided, some voiced complete disbelief, some agreed as they too had had similar experiences, others just nodded agreement with Willie.
I am told that there have been further incidents since the system reopened but so far nobody has come along with any details.
My own belief is that tunnels are very emotive places and if one is susceptible to paranormal events a tunnel is just the sort of place for it to happen.
THE MYSTERY CHILDREN AT CHARFIELD
The quiet Gloucestershire village of Charfield was on the main line of the LMS, situated between Gloucester and Bristol.
The local Station served the surrounding community and carried a fair amount of passenger and freight traffic.
The village hit the headlines, however, in a tragic way when an accident and fire happened on 13 October 1928.
The driver of the 10pm LMS passenger and mail train seemingly overran a home signal at danger and plunged into the rear of the 9.15pm Oxley sidings to Bristol GWR fitted goods before finally colliding with another freight, the 4.45 Westerleigh to Gloucester empties, that was passing on the opposite line.
Interlocking would have prevented the signalman putting the signals for the express at ‘CLEAR’ yet it is strange that although both footplatemen on the express admitted not having seen the home signal on the approach to Charfield both men were equally emphatic that they had seen the proceeding distant signal and they said it was showing a green light and in the clear position.
Immediately following the accident it was discovered that the instrument in Charfield box bore this out and investigation showed that the distant arm was slightly inclined due to debris in the signal wire but not sufficient to show a green light through the spectacle plate.
It is strange therefore that the signal box instruments revealed  it as clear, the signal must have been at green, or had a heavy weight been lying across the signal wire?
Or again we ask, had the signal been tampered with?
The footplatemen had nothing to gain by lying about the position of the distant signal when they admitted not seeing the home signal at all.
The mystery therefore, remains, but it is not the only mystery attached to the Charfield disaster, indeed the one which most concerns us in the context of the strange and uncanny is the riddle of the unclaimed bodies.
Fifteen lives were lost in the accident and the ensuing fire which raged for twelve hours.
Two of the dead were children, a girl aged about eight or nine and a boy of about eleven years, they were travelling together, but otherwise unaccompanied.
It was alleged that at first the railway company denied that they had been travelling on the train at all, and it was indeed suggested that the two children were chance victims of the holocaust and they happened to be wandering by the railway at the time.
However, the evidence of the fireman who was on the footplate of the engine that was hauling the express disproved the allegations of the railway company, for he had seen them together on the train after it had arrived at Birmingham New Street Station around 2.30 when the children had waved at him.
He subsequently saw them laughing and talking with the guard before the train left Birmingham and described both youngsters as well dressed; the boy was wearing a school uniform of yellow and brown with cap to match and scarf.
Anything else the guard may have remembered is of no value for he was killed in the crash.
In the aftermath of the accident the bodies of the two children were recovered from the wreckage and laid beside the track with the other bodies of the tragedy, but their charred remains were beyond recognition and were never claimed nor was any connection established between them and the other passengers, and in consequence the two children were never identified.
Most of the victims were buried in the village churchyard of St James where the LMS erected a memorial with the names of  those laid to rest there.
The base of the memorial is inscribed with ten names and the emotive words ‘Two Unknown’.
There is even some doubt in some quarters as to whether in fact the unfortunate children were interred at Charfield, for it was said that an Army vehicle was noticed briefly at the scene of the accident, and it has been suggested that some of the remains, possibly those of the children, were removed amid the general confusion.
Someone, somewhere must have been concerned for and worried about these unfortunate children and found their absence odd; surely too, someone must have paid their fare and seen them off on their journey.
It is extremely likely, also, that someone was waiting for them at their intended destination.
THE MYSTERIES OF BLEA MOOR TUNNEL
Talk to many a railwayman about the Blea Moor Tunnel and you will find either a spontaneous reaction of a flow of stories or complete and total silence.
This bore has a very unpleasant reputation and the local people don't like going near the place at night especially as the rail traffic today has been considerably reduced.
The late Derek Cross had been through the tunnel on the footplate of an A3 Pacific and a Class 40 diesel and on both occasions he had been very pleased to see the other end of the tunnel, such is its evil, brooding, emotive reputation.
The construction of the tunnel was very difficult in the Victorian age, men were killed during the excavations, and the depth of 500ft below the surface at one point exposed numerous problems.
Situated below a hill between the valleys of the Ribble and Eden the bore marked the determination of the LMS to refuse to be beaten by obstacles that could be over-come by sheer practical means.
The acrid, choking fumes eventually found their way up through the ventilators on the top of the hill and the height of steam motive power over one hundred trains per day passed through Blea Moor Tunnel.
The tremendous build-up of soot on the tunnel roof tended to clog up the apertures of the brick ventilators so a ‘blow back’ effect was often experienced by footplate crews.
A correspondent, Mr A. W. Kewish of Barrow-in-Furness, Cumbria, tells of his experience in Blea Moor Tunnel.
Mr Kewish wishes to state that neither he nor his wife are psychic.
The  Kewishs were on a rail tour over several routes not usually used by passenger trains.
The tour was to the Worth Valley, via Blackburn, the Settle and Carlisle, Newcastle and Keighley.
What our friends did not realise was that they had to travel through Blea Moor Tunnel.
They travelled up the goods line from Blackburn waited for a clear road at Hellifield Junction, got onto the long drag and worked up to the summit.
The coaching stock was six or eight a side compartment type with sliding top lights, it was warm in the carriage by the time the tunnel was reached, so a top light was opened.
Neither Mr nor Mrs Kewish had any idea what was in Blea Moor Tunnel but they were both very frightened, their one desire was to get off the train as quickly as possible!
They were appalled by the sickly, overpowering, cloying sweet smell that pervaded the carriage, Mr Kewish described it as not dissimilar to incense!
Mrs Kewish vowed that she would never, ever travel through Blea Moor Tunnel again.
There would appear to be some untold facts about Blea Moor Tunnel as there has been much speculation but very little facts of details.
The bore has an evil reputation, whether deserved or not, and perhaps because of its lonely location the emotive nature of a one-and-a-half-mile hole through a hill.
Perhaps one day someone in the know will explain in great detail the mysteries of Blea Moor Tunnel.
THE BALCOMBE TUNNEL GHOSTS
Train spotting had hardly become an attraction for the boys of the day when the first Easter excursion thundered through Balcombe Tunnel en route to Brighton.
It was no ordinary train, but one made up of fifty-seven carriages and hauled by no less than six locomotives that ran the fifty miles from London to the ‘Daphne’ of the Metropolis, as Brighton has sometimes been called (to quote from The London Illustrated News of 7 December 1884); the journey took four and a half hours.
Probably as the snorting monsters emerged from the Black Hole of Balcombe in a cloud of smoke and steam, a merry crowd of villagers who watched from the top of the embankment gave a wary cheer and wondered what the world was coming to!
A hundred years on and the scene at Balcombe is much the same; trains faster and far more frequent are still thundering through the tunnel but without the cheering villagers to wave them on their way.
When England was at war and sentries were posted at both ends of the tunnel, one night, early in the war, German planes droned over and dropped bombs along the railway line possibly aiming to destroy the tunnel and so to cut a supply link to the Channel ports and the British armies in France.
Mr E. Myer of Guestling, Sussex, well remembers the night he was on sentry duty from midnight to 2am; several bombs fell close to the tunnel entrance and he decided to take  refuge in one of the recesses let into the tunnel walls.
After about five minutes he saw a strange sight of what he took to be three men approaching; he challenged them in the usual way and shouted, ‘Halt or I fire.’
At this the figures became somewhat vague and hazy and then they vanished.
As Mr Myer had been on duty under somewhat arduous conditions for several months he decided that his nerves were playing tricks on him and that he was having hallucinations.
The next day however, on his next tour of duty he met the foreman platelayer when he arrived for work.
The latter commented on the air raid and that he never expected to see soldiers guarding the tunnel, especially inside the tunnel for a second time, it having been guarded during World War I. The foreman told him that three soldiers had been killed near the spot that Mr Myer had been in the recess the previous night, they had apparently been run down by a train just inside the tunnel mouth.
Today the London to Brighton trains still roar through Balcombe Tunnel, the passengers completely unaware of the tragedy that will haunt the darkened bore for ever.
THE STRANGE HAPPENINGS AT INGROW TUNNEL
There are many unexplained events on the Keighley and Worth Valley line that runs from Keighley to Oxenhope five miles further up the branch.
The strange occurrence at Ingrow Tunnel has not been explained by logical reasons and so must be regarded as, maybe, a paranormal phenomenon.
Ingrow Station is at present being rebuilt by the lively society that supports the Keighley and Worth Valley Railway Company, as part of a complete refurbishment of the unique branch.
However, the strange events at Ingrow Tunnel take the shape of black smoke billowing out of the tunnel, obviously emanating from a steam locomotive, which is very possible considering the K&WVR has plenty of steam motive power.
but on the occasions that we are concerned with none of The Society's locos had been in steam so therefore cannot be blamed for the incident.
Two men, Supervisor D. Narey and his pal Arnold Illingworth, say the smell was remarkably like that of a steam engine.
They have investigated the source of the smoke and although they walked the tunnel they have found no explanation except the phenomenon seemed to stop in a recess under the Halifax Road.
Another strange point of the mystery is that the two men claimed that the smoke came out of the tunnel  mouth towards the station yet a breeze was blowing the other way.
Mr Narey ruled out smoke from nearby factories or bonfires in the Wesley Place area.
Workers from VOLSEC have spent the last year renovating the Ingrow Station and plan to replace the station buildings next year so I wonder if anything unexplained will be found then?
Railway official Graham Mitchell says the original tunnel builders were plagued with problems including part of the nearby Wesley Chapel sliding away.
‘We don't know that anyone was killed or injured near there so there shouldn't be anyone haunting it.’
THE GHOST AT BOXHILL TUNNEL
Box Hill Tunnel is quite a long tunnel.
It is in fact one and three quarter miles long, which is a lot of tunnel to maintain for any permanent way gang, whom I don't imagine relish the thought of working in the dark, damp, gloomy bore.
It was built by Isambard Kingdom Brunel in 1841 and at the time it was acclaimed as an engineering masterpiece.
To many early rail travellers, however, the gloom of the tunnel was very frightening.
They had some very funny ideas about the construction as it was some 300ft below the surface and some of the local people feared the whole land area would collapse.
Fears were also expressed by some passengers that the tunnel might collapse while they were travelling through it or that they might suffocate from the lack of air because it was one and three quarter miles long!
However, in the latter days of steam, maintenance workers while near or inside the tunnel were absolutely convinced that they heard the sound of an approaching train.
In fact some of them swore that they saw a phantom train roaring into or out of Box Hill Tunnel; of course the sceptics laughed their heads off at such a far-fetched tale but the more psychic were inclined to accept the men's story.
Certainly many gangers refused to work in, or near, Box Hill Tunnel, such was the reputation it earned.
Tunnels are so emotive and the mind can conjure up thoughts of terror and the possibility of being run down in a dark tunnel.
The mind runs riot at what might happen.
FIND THE LADY
Long train journeys are often very boring and tiresome, especially if you are on your own.
The monotony is relieved somewhat if you have the opportunity to talk to a fellow traveller who feels the same about long train journeys, then you have something in common besides moaning about the rigours of train travel.
Often people who share your compartment wish to relax and do not wish to indulge in polite conversation, they may just want to read a newspaper or magazine so we must respect their wishes.
However, our story concerns a couple, Mr and Mrs Wishart, who in the autumn of 1945 had occasion to visit relatives in Newcastle.
The Wisharts, who lived in North London, were not looking forward to the long train journey one little bit; being just after the war, the trains were run down, lacked essential maintenance and didn't keep very good time, so the Wisharts regarded the prospects of the journey with considerable misgivings.
The Wisharts had to catch the 10.30am train from King's Cross and to their amazement they found few people in the usual queue; they had bought newspapers and magazines to read on the journey and when they found an empty compartment they settled down.
The windows were fairly clean — well, you could see through them — the layer of dust on the woodwork was thinner than usual and the compartment was reasonably warm.
The train left King's Cross on time and the Wisharts began to read their newspapers, not much conversation took place as they were absorbed with their reading, an occasional smile and a feeling of companionship was enough.
An application of brakes slowed down the clickety-click of the rail joints.
Mr Wishart looked out of the window, they were running through a maze of sidings packed with every kind of rolling stock, the tall chimneys of the brick works dominating the sky line, ‘I think this is Peterborough dear,’ he remarked.
His wife consulted her watch, ‘On time too, that is good!’ she said.
The long train eased into Peterborough Station and the train announcer called ‘Peterborough’.
A few people were on the platform, the station staff busied themselves with mail bags and other items of luggage and parcels, at last the guard blew his whistle.
The Wisharts were about to settle down to their reading when the corridor door slid open and an elderly lady eased her way into the compartment; the newcomer was wearing a striking black silk dress and black hat which were very reminiscent of the Victorian age.
The lady was carrying a wicker basket measuring 2ft by 1ft; it was white and to Mrs Wishart it was typical of the lady's attire.
The lady smiled and sat down opposite the Wisharts, she carefully placed the wicker basket on the seat next to her, then folded her arms and composed herself in relaxation.
The Wisharts resumed their reading, Mrs Wishart kept glancing at the old lady — she couldn't help admiring her dress, it was so Victorian and really out of place in 1945.
The motion of the train, the clickety-click of the rail joints, had a somewhat soporific effect on Mr Wishart and he found himself nodding off.
No conversation took place between the three people on the part of the journey between Peterborough and Grantham.
Mr Wishart slept and in fact he snored but the old lady was silent, obviously completely composed.
At last the train pulled into Grantham and Mrs Wishart nudged her husband, ‘Can you get us a cup of tea, love?’ she asked.
And in a whisper, ‘Perhaps she’, looking at the old lady, ‘would like one too?’
Mr Wishart opened the carriage  door and asked a porter how long they had to wait.
Had he got time to get a cup of tea?
The porter glanced at his watch ‘If you hurry sir.’
Mr Wishart hurried off to the refreshment room, luckily got served straight away and with difficulty got back to the compartment just as the guard was blowing his whistle; the old lady took one of the paper cups of tea and murmured her thanks.
The Wisharts read the remaining news in their papers and looked out of the window, the old lady was still silent and motionless.
The Wisharts kept giving her a look but her eyes were closed and she looked very serene and still.
Eventually Durham was reached and the long train drew into the ancient city.
As the brakes came on and the flurry of activity again took in more passengers and luggage the old lady stood up and moved to the door.
Mr Wishart stood up and opened it for her, handing her the wicker basket which seemed surprisingly light; the old lady stepped off the train onto a now deserted platform.
She turned and said, ‘I wish you many happy years’.
Then as Mr Wishart was about to say ‘Thank you’, to his surprise she vanished into thin air.
Mr Wishart couldn't believe it.
He stepped down onto the platform looking around but there was nowhere she could hide, as if she would!
He darted about looking to satisfy his astonishment but the old lady had melted away.
The guard blew his whistle, Mr Wishart climbed back into the compartment and sat down.
‘Where's she gone, dear?’ asked his wife.
‘I can't understand it, she just vanished,’ he gasped.
Then he noticed the third cup with some dregs of tea remaining in it!
It hadn't been a dream, or had it?
THE REPLAY OF THE TAY BRIDGE DISASTER
On 28 December 1879 SIR Thomas Bouch's fine example of engineering, the Tay Railway Bridge — over which Queen Victoria had so graciously travelled, pausing on the other side to bestow a knighthood on the brilliant engineer — was overwhelmed by a violent storm, high winds causing the structure to collapse into the foaming river below.
Unfortunately, an engine and five coaches were on the bridge at the time and the ninety passengers were drowned.
Local people though, still maintain that every year on the anniversary of the accident, a ghost train crosses the bridge from the Edinburgh side.
Its red rear lamp trails into the darkness and finally vanishes…just as the Signalman saw the doomed train all those years ago.
The first Tay Bridge showed up the lack of expertise and foresight required for such a structure, no wind tunnels or sophisticated testing were available to the engineers in the late 1870s.
Bouch's bridge was made mainly of wrought iron and did not allow for the movement so essential in bridges of that type.
The reappearance of the ill-fated train on the anniversary of the tragedy is not taken lightly by the local inhabitants and there are many people who will vouch for the authenticity of the phenomenon.
THE LITTLE OLD GUARD
A strange apparition was witnessed by a lady about two years ago on a section of track between Barking and Upminster in Essex.
The lady was travelling on this particular journey which was subject to many delays owing to permanent way maintenance work, and the passengers were heartily fed up with the hassle.
Several times they had to step down from the train and walk along the track to the nearest station; on this particular evening the passengers were all wanting to get home and any delay was not welcome.
Our lady who kindly offered me her account of the happenings was returning home from a hospital visit.
It was around 6pm, very dark; suddenly the train began to slow down to a crawl, ‘what now?’ thought the passengers.
Then to everyone's surprise they saw on the side of the track a little old man perhaps in his seventies, wearing an old-fashioned waistcoat and jacket, standing in a brick arch-shaped embrasure looking anxiously at the train.
As we drew near he took a step forward shining his lantern with its green light above his head as if to give the driver the ‘All Clear’.
Our correspondent smiled to herself, no doubt thinking that the railway company must be short of staff if they had to bring such an old man out of his back garden to work the system.
Since that occasion my correspondent has tried to find the embrasure or refuge that the old man was standing in, without  success.
It simply isn't there, even the wall doesn't exist.
The whole scene to my informant was as clear as a bell, but on reflection it would seem as if it was part of an earlier railway system.
She is absolutely confident that she was privileged to witness a scene from the past in startling clarity that would continue to baffle her for ever.
TULSE HILL STATION
Mr Jack Hallam's excellent book Ghosts of London tells of the unexplained sounds of heavy footsteps heard by staff at night at Tulse Hill Station.
Footsteps are heard ascending the stairs to platform I passing clean through the locked barrier gates and proceeding along the platform.
The footsteps are said to be those of an unfortunate platelayer who was killed shortly after the introduction of the electric trains.
On the fateful night he ascended the stairs, passed through the barrier and greeted the porter on duty and then he walked down onto the track.
It was a blustery, windy, cold night and knowing that a down steam-hauled train was due, he stepped onto the up line instead of the safety of the trackside cess.
It is thought that the sound of the approaching steam train and the prevailing gale prevented him from being aware of the electric train's presence.
He was run down and killed, but he was so attached to his job that he still wants to keep his eye on his old work place.
Today certain people will not go on the station after dark, so the past tragedy lingers on over an entire railway complex.
CUBBAGE FROM THE PLAIN
This is a story of a misunderstanding that reduced a man to suicide, also the love affair that fell foul of the postal system and tragic circumstances, the combined forces of fate culminating in the tragedy.
The lady concerned is left completely distraught, and a restless, searching ghost that never finds peace and affection.
Mr Cubbage was an Indian, dark, and very handsome.
He had settled in Ireland many years ago and through his shrewd business ability and financial acumen he had become very wealthy.
Just after World War II he bought a large mansion ‘on the Plain' and restored it to its prior magnificent glory and settled down to enjoy his wealth.
There was only one thing he lacked and that was a wife.
Mr Cubbage must have seemed a good catch with his fine house, handsome looks and with his obvious wealth.
Could any girl resist these assets?
Mr Cubbage, however, was very circumspect in his choice of lady friends and he realised that he could be the target for any gold-digging female.
He looked around very carefully and finally met a young lady with whom he fell head-long in love.
Their mutual affection was genuine and Mr Cubbage was overjoyed at his good fortune; he entertained his young lady, who we will call Coleen, to the best things in life.
He heaped presents of jewellery, furs, motor cars, travel, expensive restaurants, days out hunting, on her; in other words Mr Cubbage  was trying to sweep the young lady clean off her pretty feet.
Mr Cubbage wanted to get married without further delay.
Coleen, however, although she loved Mr Cubbage, wanted time to think things over and would gently scold him for his haste.
Coleen listened to his amorous overtures of love never doubting his sincerity, but she still wanted to be sure and she tried to gently tell him so; she had to be sure before she said ‘yes’.
Her lover, however, was not to be put off.
He wanted an answer quickly, he wasn't used to delay of any kind and kept up the pressure, ‘Please give me your answer,’ he implored.
And he pressed his suit so forcibly yet kindly.
He loved Coleen with all the breath in his body, he would do anything to please her to be his wife.
Coleen was not going to be rushed and after a lot of thought she decided to go to stay with friends in England to think things over.
Mr Cubbage was like a cat on hot bricks, he was most distraught at Coleen's decision to go to England, and he bombarded her with letters and flowers; he could not wait for her return and for her to say the one word that would make her his wife.
Coleen however, was enjoying herself in England, she thought of Mr Cubbage a lot but thought she wouldn't commit herself just yet.
Mr Cubbage was by this time almost demented, he had to know Coleen's decision, so he wrote an impassioned letter begging her to accept his proposal of marriage.
Furthermore, he added what would be construed as an ultimatum but couched in the nicest possible terms.
He wrote his plea as follows: if he hadn't had a reply from her before noon on the last day of the week (which meant return post) he would trouble her no more.
The first delivery of post came and went on that fateful day, no letter.
Mr Cubbage, his heart heavy with disappointment and sadness, left his mansion and walked the short distance to the main Portadown to Lurgan railway line and awaited the passing of the next train.
He walked up and down the track, waiting impatiently; he had made his mind up, he was going to lie down in front of the train.
His life was meaningless  without Coleen, she had not replied to his entreaties so he would end it all.
He heard the train whistle, the engine was slowing for a signal then he heard it pick up speed again.
Mr Cubbage, now a broken, weeping figure lay down on the rail and waited for the train to end his life and his earthly troubles.
The driver of the train didn't see him until it was too late, the engine literally cut him in half, he must have died instantly.
The next part of the story is pure circumstance but the effect might have saved poor Mr Cubbage's life.
That particular day's sailings between England and Ireland were delayed owing to bad weather so the mail was accountably held up and delays caused.
It so happened that the very train that ended Mr Cubbage's life was carrying the delayed mail and in one of the mail bags was a letter from Coleen agreeing to Mr Cubbage's proposal of marriage and saying that she was coming home to her lover.
The ghost of Mr Cubbage walks the coaches of many trains searching for his beloved Coleen; he has been seen often by many people in the district, he also walks the railway tracks near the spot on which he was killed, a sobbing, totally heartbroken figure.
He is said to sink onto his knee on the track and wait for the train to end his life; the train crews used to look out for the shadowy figure and shudder.
The tragedy of the whole affair becomes so pathetic as we realise that Coleen does love him and only a delay of post cost him his life.
THE SUICIDAL STUDENT & CO
About the turn of the century, a young medical student, who was studying at Aberdeen University, ran into financial difficulties.
His father, a well-to-do fish merchant in Fraserburgh, had no idea of a student's expenses at a university like Aberdeen.
Ian Watson, the student in question was a clever young man who had worked very hard to achieve his place at the higher seat of learning; he found it very difficult to manage on the pittance that his father allowed him.
His father's idea of universities was narrow in the extreme and possibly based on his own education which had been one of strict discipline and the basic three Rs; he had left school at thirteen and had to work hard for very little reward.
Give him credit though, he had fought his way to the top and had made good.
Ian Watson was a dedicated, somewhat highly strung young man whose intelligence would have enabled him to have passed his final exams had his father realised that a reasonable allowance was so necessary.
His father obviously didn't appreciate his son's undoubted abilities.
His son's request for more money met with scorn ‘Come home and work with me, lad, don't mess about with them books, I need you here,’ his father said.
Ian was very upset by his father's intransigent attitude but he knew what he wanted to do and that was to pursue his studies by every means possible, although by now doubts were beginning to cloud his mind.
Inevitably a feeling of despair enveloped him and he began to feel quite helpless; his heart was in his studies and he knew that if he could manage financially he could achieve his academic rewards, but the insufficient amounts of money his father allowed him didn't permit any freedom to relax after his studies had ended.
He could see no way out and in his anguish he began to think of doing himself in; the method he would use would have to be quick and simple.
After some consideration he decided that he would lie on the railway line and let a train end his life; he remembered a high bridge over the railway at Kirkston of Philorth, that would do.
He decided to throw himself off the parapet of the bridge instead of lying down on the track.
He would time it just right and throw himself in front of the branch line train, he knew the train didn't go very fast but it would do…
In the early evening of the next day he dressed himself in his best suit and wore a clean shirt and a razor tight collar; he looked at himself in the mirror, yes, he looked good, almost handsome, one must die with dignity.
He had quite a long way to walk to the bridge, but there was plenty of time; he had taken the trouble to find out the train times and he had worked out at what time the train would arrive at the bridge — about 9pm — so he enjoyed his walk.
He arrived at the bridge, walked over it then back again, he looked over the parapet at the shining metals, the line curved away round a curve; he looked around, everything was quiet, the moon had come out and there was just a touch of frost in the air.
Ian climbed up onto the parapet and sat swinging his legs humming a tune; he felt quite happy now, almost cheerful, thoughts came to him, why was he thinking of suicide?
He had everything to live for really, he would manage on the money his mean father allowed him.
He began to sing softly, should he go through with his intention to end his life?
‘That's what I'm here for,’ an inner voice shouted.
‘Don't be silly, why do something stupid like hurling yourself in front of a train,’ the thoughts crowded his mind.
He looked at his pocket watch, it showed 8.55pm, not long to go now; he was in a turmoil of doubt, what should he do?
He found a cigarette, lit it and watched the smoke wreathe into the night air; he enjoyed his smoke, then climbed onto the parapet and started to walk along its broad surface.
He would walk over and back then go home, life was still sweet in spite of father's mean ways.
He could hear the muffled sound of the train as it plodded round the curves.
Ian, happier now, ran and danced on the parapet, ‘Come on train, I'm not afraid of you.’
The train rumbled nearer, Ian was still jigging about on the parapet, he could see the smoke box lamp flickering, then as the train was almost on the bridge the smoke enveloped the structure as Ian was doing his Highland jig; he suddenly lost his balance and fell down onto the smoke box frame, the force of the fall did its lethal work and killed Ian Watson.
The train braked hard at the fireman's shout, ‘There's a man on the line.’
The few passengers on the train were thrown from their seats as Walt the driver braked hard.
The driver and fireman ran up to the inert body; too late, the man was dead.
His head was at a strange angle.
They carried the body to the brake compartment and carried on their journey; others had jumped from that bridge and there would be more.
The unfortunate tragedy was a talking point in the district for several weeks but then slowly receded into the aeons of time.
Then a reminder of the tragedy came during World War I when a Polish soldier was walking over the bridge one starlit night when he saw the wraith of a man dancing on the parapet.
Then smoke obscured the bridge and a sound of escaping steam and a cry took the man out of the observer's sight.
The soldier looked over the parapet and saw to his horror the vague heap of a body; he scrambled down the bank but as he approached, the vision slowly faded, there was no one there.
This experience had such a dramatic effect on the Pole that he hanged himself some days later.
No further reports have been documented, but possibly  people who have seen a replay of the awful scene wish to remain silent not wishing to discuss the macabre subject.
In the 1920s a local man was in a terrible state of nerves and he too visited the bridge with the one thought in his mind.
Yes, he did commit suicide on that bridge but he drank from a bottle of lysol which would mean a swift but painful end.
I wonder if he is seen too?
THE HIGH WYCOMBE FOOTSTEPS
A recent story, quite unexplained, was related to me by Mr G. Leslie who is employed by British Rail in the London area.
This story concerns the sounds of footsteps walking in the ballast; no one was seen but the sounds were very convincing and one respects the account of this mystery from Mr Leslie, who certainly didn't believe in the supernatural, preferring to find a logical explanation of this sort of thing.
However, when telling his experience to a member of the High Wycombe Station staff he found that his experience was certainly not unprecedented.
Mr Leslie had been to a railway staff party in a pub called the Flint, which is situated across the road from High Wycombe Station.
Mr Leslie admits to having had a drink but he says he was by no means ‘under the influence’.
At about 11.20pm he left the party to catch his train back to his home at Beaconsfield.
As a northbound train had just left, the station was deserted.
Mr Leslie's train was to leave platform 3 on the far left-hand side of the station which is linked by a long subway.
On arriving on platform 3 somewhat early for his train, he found himself completely alone; this did not disturb him.
The night was still but a mist was descending slowly; he stood looking towards platforms 2 and I when he suddenly heard footsteps on the ballast approaching him.
As Mr Leslie had explained earlier he was completely sober and was not given  to imagination, he screwed his eyes up looking for the reason for the footsteps; he couldn't see the feet but heard them quite distinctly passing him in the ballast below.
At this point some other people arrived to catch the train and his attention turned to them for a split second and within that time the sound of the scrunching footsteps disappeared into the night.
Sometime later, after Christmas, Mr Leslie was on High Wycombe Station again and was talking to one of the station staff.
He told him of his experience and was interested to know that the phenomenon is by no means unknown and the other went on to relate another incident involving footsteps that he heard outside the office, but when he opened the door to investigate no one was there.
On another occasion he gave chase to someone running down the platform but when he reached the platform end whoever it was or wasn't had vanished.
He was certain that he was dealing with a facet of the supernatural now!
THE MYSTERY LIGHTS
Paranormal experiences never happen to some people.
That is why they can't understand other people who are able to experience supernatural events.
Research has only scratched the surface of the paranormal and supernatural phenomena, so we are left with odd cases of happenings that just materialise when least expected.
Such an occurrence happened to Mr R. J. Woodward of Ninckley and his wife and daughter when travelling home around midnight along the Watling Street (A5).
They had been visiting friends, they had enjoyed their evening and the time had gone quickly so it was rather late when they set off for home.
They had negotiated the roundabout for Lutterworth and the A427 to Coventry and were proceeding north on the A5 when Mr Woodward's attention was suddenly drawn to what he first thought were three buses stood nose to tail.
Before he could say anything Mrs Woodward exclaimed ‘Isn't it strange to see a train at this time of night?’
Mr Woodward knew the area well and there were no railways here at all; there used to be many years ago and there are still signs of the old trackbed to be seen.
Mr Woodward, being something of a railway buff, couldn't help thinking that the lights were spread out as in the old non-corridor stock, three windows to each compartment, but there was no vague outline of a locomotive, just the lights, no shape of the carriages.
The low line was closed about thirty years ago but there was never a track just where the lights were positioned; distance is deceptive especially at night, there might have been a branch line, but maybe not?
The phenomenon lasted perhaps thirty to forty-five seconds, long enough for a lasting impression to be gained but the phenomenon was very clear and distinct leaving the Woodwards very puzzled by the unexpected sight.
Mr Woodward's map of the position helps to illustrate the location of the event.
GHOSTS IN A RECORDING STUDIO
The Horizon Recording Studio are housed in what is an old Victorian railway building in Warwick Road, Coventry.
A series of strange events have happened in the building which can be traced to the ghost of an old railwayman, and more recently the spirit of an art student who unfortunately got hooked on hard drugs, which combined with drink killed him after he had attended the celebration party to launch the Horizon Recording Studio.
This young man died about ten years ago and the railwayman maybe thirty years before.
Mr Paul Craddock who is a director of Horizon has kindly sent me some details of the paranormal events that have earned the studio a certain reputation for experiences of the, shall we say, ‘unexpected’.
Certainly some famous recording artists have had some frightening moments when they have been nudged and brushed past by these two ghosts.
The young art student was about nineteen when he died; he had worked hard on the dramatic murals in the studio and then he tried mixing drugs with drink and that was fatal.
The studio was once part of a railway company property and that is where the old railwayman comes in.
He probably worked here and certainly his presence is very evident.
The strong feeling of a presence is felt, lights go on and off, doors open and shut on their own, the shadow of a man's head is sometimes seen; but on recording sessions, many unnerving things can happen, heavy breathing down the musicians' necks, brushing past people.
Footsteps are heard all over the building causing surprise and apprehension and expectancy in those visitors who have heard about the phenomena but haven't experienced it.
Strange sounds are heard live over the loud speaker monitors, some times spoiling the recordings.
A famous recording artist with the group Fleetwood Mac was really frightened by one of the duo and he swears that he will never come into the building again such was his experience.
As with most supernatural occurrences one never knows just when something is going to happen and this is the case in the studio.
A recording session can be spoilt completely by these two ghosts.
Mr Craddock thinks that the older man is dominating the art student.
The directors are probably used to the supernatural events that happen from time to time; the very fact that the building has connections with the railways has possibly something to do with the old railwayman but in what context I do not know.
THE NEWTY POND MOTORBIKE
This story concerns two young boys who came across the reoccurrence of a terrible death involving a young irresponsible lad who used to play ‘chicken’ with a motorcycle on an ungated railway crossing.
This lethal game is often called ‘last across’, the idea being to see how close you can be to a train before it hits you or you can get out of the way.
Of course, at last a train got him and killed him in a horrible way.
On one very hot night in June 1982 Dave and Tony went fishing in a rather remote area of wasteland that bordered a disused railway line.
A large pond was the boys' delight and they would travel the considerable distance to the ‘newty’ pond, as it was nicknamed, to sit in  expectation for the fish to bite.
The pond was situated in an area that necessitated walking though two dark, gloomy plantations that after dark were very spooky and the boys were always pleased to get through them.
However, boys will be boys and they enjoyed the fresh air and the sport of fishing, in fact the boys had been known to fish after dark at the newty pond which was very illegal!
But the fishing trip that hot night was something different and it was to frighten and distress the boys.
They found their usual post at the pond and set up their gear; it was hot and very humid, they were near the gated level crossing on the old trackbed.
Nothing much doing at the pond, they had set the rods up and were wandering around, looking for frogs and newts, then they returned to their rods; nothing stirred, so around 10pm they decided to call it a day.
They got their rods and landing nets together and set off for home.
All of a sudden they heard the hum of a motorcycle coming towards them and they both saw a motorcycle being ridden towards the level crossing.
It was travelling at high speed and the boys thought it was going to hit them, the rider was crouched over the bars obviously unaware of the boys.
They threw down their fishing gear and ran as the motorcycle leapt over the embankment and crashed into the deep ditch some 15ft below.
The boys heard the crash and they ran as fast as they could to get help from the police and ambulance, but when the police and ambulance got there they only found the boys' fishing tackle where they had dumped it in such haste.
The boys never went to the pond again but did hear reports from other anglers that screams and shouts came from the ditch the other side of the old trackbed, also the eerie, noisy sound of a motorcycle being ridden flat out towards the railway line.
About a year later one of the boys met an old lady who lived not far from the pond and they were discussing the strange happenings when the lady said, ‘I can tell you a bit about it,’ and she then proceeded to tell them about the crazy motorcyclist.
‘He was mad on motorbikes and he would tear around on that wasteland near the railway, bent on killing himself, I'd say.
He'd play last across with the trains, no wonder he was killed by a train, he had many near misses, he always appears on the anniversary of his death and you would see the whole incident in startling detail.’
I understand that the deep ditch that the boy and motorcycle crashed into on that fateful night is referred to as ‘deadman's ditch’, a horrific reminder of a foolhardy game that cost a young man his life.
One of the boys, now adult, tells me that even today he shivers at the thought that is etched on his brain of being chased by a ghost on a motorcycle…
DICKY O'TUNSTEAD
The legend relating to Dicky o'Tunstead caused the London North Western Railway Company many problems and succeeded in forcing this railway company to reconsider their plans for their new line between Chapel-en-le-Frith and Buxton.
Dicky o' Tunstead is a celebrated skull who lived at Tunstead Farm in Derbyshire for some three and a half centuries.
He found fame in poetry and prose, he also has the reputation of being a supernatural Robin Hood and documentary evidence of his exploits attributed to him are legion.
Suffice it to say that all attempts to evict Dicky from his rightful home have met with considerable misfortune, and disturbance of such a nature that he has quickly been restored to his home.
Tunstead Farm overlooks Coomb Reservoir between Chapel-en-le-Frith and Whaley Bridge.
The LNWR's engineers had planned to take their new line across land belonging to the farm, despite objections from the owners, and this is where Dicky became involved.
It was originally intended to make an embankment across the Coomb Valley which was to be pierced by a bridge to accommodate a roadway.
Soon after work began however, it was found that there were serious problems in making a secure, stable base for the embankment and thus progress was brought to a halt.
Eventually, however, the navvies and engineers overcame  the difficulties and the bridge was erected over the road and the foundations of the embankment were laid.
Then before work was finally complete the arch of the bridge collapsed and the embankment at either side of the bridge was thrown up thus wrecking the whole project.
A lot of time and money had been spent rebuilding the works necessary to complete the job but such were the difficulties experienced that the whole project became completely impracticable and the LNWR conceded defeat and altered the route of the line to exclude the land at Tunstead Farm.
The new work also involved the construction of a road over a quarter of a mile long but no unexpected difficulties were experienced, either with this or the realigned route of the railway.
Of course the sceptics and the doubters will sneer at the influence on the affair exercised by Dicky saying that the former route was unsuitable and geographically unstable, and they will point out that such conditions have been overcome in other parts, for example, the West Highland, the Liverpool and Manchester and the Settle and Carlisle, but then those conversant with Dicky o' Tunstead will continue to believe that it is his malign influence which kept the rails away from Tunstead Farm.
THE ‘LUCK’ OF EDENHALL
A legend concerning the London North Western Railway Company ‘Whitworth’ class locomotive named The Luck of Edenhall No 90 — what an unusual name — but then the story of how it came by the name is unusual too.
The name is derived from Eden Hall, a mansion which stands near Penrith and curiously enough within sight of the Settle and Carlisle line of the Midland Railway.
Eden Hall was the family seat of the Cumbrian family of Musgrave since the days of King Henry VI; the ‘Luck’ is an heirloom, a beautifully enamelled and engraved glass goblet with Moorish-style decorative work on its surfaces.
How it came into the Musgrave family is as follows.
The family butler went to draw water from St Cuthbert's well in the grounds of Eden Hall one day when he came across a company of fairies dancing, and in their midst was a cup of painted glass.
The butler seized the glass where upon the fairies tried to regain the cup but realising that they were no match for this mortal they finally abandoned the struggle and vanished, leaving the butler with the glass cup and according to a ballad by the German poet Uhland with this warning.
If that glass either break or fall
Farewell to the Luck of Eden Hall
Ever since that time, the fate of the Musgrave family and  the strangely beautiful glass goblet have been regarded as inextricably entwined.
The vessel is described as being about six inches tall and it has been suggested that it may have been used as a chalice, and it might have originated in Spain or Syria and been brought home to England from one of the Crusades.
But whatever the origins the fairy folk warning has never been left to chance and the ‘Luck’ still exists; it is either locked away in a strong room on the premises or according to some accounts stored safely in the custody of the Bank of England.
Eden Hall was extensively rebuilt in 1935 or thereabouts, and much of the original fabric removed at that time, today it is a girls' school.
The poet Longfellow's version of the Uhland ballad runs thus,
This Glass of Flashing Crystal Tall
Gave to my Sires, The Fountain Sprite
She wrote in it, ‘If this Glass Doth Fall
Farewell Then Luck of Eden Hall'
It is from the last line of this work that the LNWR coined the name for their locomotive.
THE SPECIAL TRAIN OF KYLE!
Some supernatural manifestations are regarded as portents of good or evil; one such occurrence was the Spectral Train of Kyle.
In the seventeenth century a famous visionary and seer, locally know as the Brahan Seer, predicted ‘That the day will come when every stream will have its bridge, balls of fire will pass rapidly up and down the Strath of Peffery, carriages without horses will cross the country from sea to sea.’
This prophecy came true when in 1870 the Dingwall & Skye Railway opened its line from Dingwall on the eastern seaboard to Strome Ferry on the west on the shores of the waters of Loch Carron.
A further twenty-seven years were to elapse before the railway reached its ultimate terminus at the Kyle of Lochalsh.
However, the imminent arrival of the railway was foreshadowed by an appearance of a spectral train whose large black locomotive was seen rushing along the lonely Highland road with headlights blazing before suddenly veering off into the hills.
It would seem that this apparition became a regular occurrence to such an extent that the coachman who operated a public conveyance until the opening of the railway to Kyle of Lochalsh would only run in daylight.