

GIVING YOURSELF STATUS
You've got to believe in luck — how else do you explain why so many people you can't stand are doing well?
Irish proverb
This chapter is concerned with the amount of status you give yourself.
It's to do with self-esteem, and belief in yourself.
Reading a chapter in a book won't give you either of these, but it may be able to offer you some explanations, understanding and suggestions for further development.
The views and experiences reflected here are those of a customer in self-development rather than a professional practitioner.
Self-development can he painful and confronting and getting results takes time.
The benefits of gaining insight, though, far outweigh the discomfort in getting there.
You can start to regard yourself as someone who has great potential for change and self-fulfilment.
It's my view that no amount of learning to use influential and assertive behaviour will get you status if you don't believe that you're worthy of it.
Of course, other people may respond differently to you and you may be boosted by the results you get.
You're unlikely to capitalise on these results, though, if you don't really believe you're worthy of them.
You'll somehow sabotage your chances of success and fulfilment, albeit unconsciously.
John had a thriving small business.
He wanted to expand, so he went into partnership with someone he'd been doing business with.
The first three years went well and the business  continued to expand.
John had high standards of customer care and quality service.
Then things started to nose-dive.
He couldn't understand what was going wrong — although the economic climate was improving, his profits were plummeting.
He started to blame himself — he must be making the wrong decisions, not treating his customers well enough, not keeping a sharp enough eye on profit margins.
This was his fault and he had to do something about it (first attempt at sabotage ).
His partner thought he was panicking and was of the opinion that things would ‘sort themselves out’.
At a meeting, John's accountants pointed out some anomalies in the records.
It became apparent that the business was haemorrhaging cash because John's partner had been spending it unwisely and indiscriminately.
There were even grounds for John taking legal action against him.
John was extremely angry, with most of the anger directed at himself.
How could he have been such a poor judge of character?
He chose not to take legal proceedings against his ex-partner and the company was put into liquidation (second attempt at sabotage ).
John started up in business again.
He still had a lot of contacts who valued his priorities of customer care and quality.
The business was established quickly and holding its own as the country plunged into recession.
John knew he could manage — he hadn't borrowed much money and he had a solid regular customer base.
He threw his energy into doing what he knew he did well — keeping the customer satisfied (sabotage attempt number three ) rather than widening his market, putting up his prices and concentrating on how to make more money.
John is repeatedly sabotaging his own chances of getting the status that he wants.
His integrity is admirable and should ensure the survival of his business.
But unless John realises that he's preventing himself getting the success he desires, through thinking that he doesn't deserve it, he'll do no more than keep cruising along.
John would be fortunate to make this perception on his own.
Your Personality And Status
What is ‘personality’?
Why are some people ‘full of themselves’ and others ‘full of self-doubt’?
These questions have preoccupied fine minds for centuries, with interest intensifying from the late nineteenth century to the present day.
Two of the greatest theorists were Sigmund Freud, born in 1856, and Carl Jung, born in 1875.
Freud is often referred to as the grandfather of psychoanalysis, and his research and theories changed the way we think about ourselves.
Though it's fashionable in some quarters to ‘knock Freud’, he remains the yardstick from which others choose to deviate.
Psychologists, analysts and therapists often hold strong fundamental allegiances to one set of theories or another, but then temper their views as they are influenced by other approaches.
There is a huge amount to be read on the subject; if it interests you further, see the Reading List on p. 203.
The galling thing about ‘what is personality?’ is that there are no concrete answers and no absolute truth.
We can only ask ourselves more questions, and the answers we supply will reflect our own psychology.
We may assert that people are essentially good and born in a ‘state of grace’ because we need to convince ourselves of these facts.
Deep down inside, our belief may be that on the whole we're a bad lot.
To make a lofty comparison, critiques of Freud are invariably written from the perspective of an analysis of his theories viewed with modern psychological hindsight on the man himself.
They will include comments like ‘Freud himself was a sincere and generous man, as well as a genius’(David Stafford Clark,What Freud Really Said ).
If, on the other hand you have an open mind, and want to understand yourself and other people, then an exciting discovery lies ahead.
Your view of yourself and your potential and direction for development depend on your definition of personality.
If you believe, for instance, that behaviour cannot be changed, and that it's ‘unnatural’ to do this, then there's no point in learning influencing or assertiveness skills.
If, in defence of your own attitudes, you don't wish to examine them and believe that they are fixed, it's not worth exposing yourself and listening to anything that might make you think differently.
In attempting to understand ‘who you are’, ask yourself the extent to which you consider your personality is determined by:
Your genes: we can see that we inherit physical characteristics from our parents; some illnesses are also genetic.
The extent to which personality is inherited is debatable.
Some recent research has suggested that alcoholism may be genetically inherited — a high proportion of alcoholics have alcoholic parents.
This could, of course, be affected by…
Your early conditioning: the latest psychological fad in America is for pregnant women to talk to their babies while still in the womb.
Apparently, if a baby kicks and is repeatedly given a response to that kick by touch, it can become highly responsive when it enters the world.
Babies given this treatment apparently talk a lot earlier than those who haven't been.
There is a great deal of evidence which indicates that experiences in early childhood are very important, and that the effects are long-lasting.
A small child develops ‘self-esteem’ via the esteem it gets from its parents or parent substitutes.
A child who is continually told it has low status is likely to grow into a low-status adult.
If you don't experience a quality like compassion as a small child, then it becomes very difficult to develop this quality in adulthood.
The incidence of child and sex abuse among people who experienced it themselves as children is horrifyingly high.
Your own will: the role that ‘free will’ plays in our psychology is much debated.
We know that cause and effect play an important part in the universe, and science shows us how this works.
Is personality purely the result of conditioning from parents, the environment and/or society?
Or are we able to exert freedom of choice regardless of what is determined by other factors?
It's a case of ‘determined’(by causes outside our control) versus ‘self-determination’ Are you able through your own will to fulfil yourself, to overcome your conditioning?
The society you live in: some commentators place a high value on our ‘social needs’ and the extent to which we adapt to live in our society.
‘Role theory’ says that where we arrive in society shapes our lives.
Our goals, values and actions are determined by society.
We know what expectations and functions society expects of us, and these give us our status within it.
Society's values are passed on to us as children via our families.
How you regard your ‘mind’: certain theories, like behaviourism, play down the importance of the human ‘mind’.
Our responses, it says, are conditioned by reward and punishment from our surrounding environment.
We behave in certain ways because the results are useful to us.
We don't do things out of choice or purpose but because we are rewarded for what we do.
‘Mind’ is confined to mechanical functioning of the brain.
Is there such a thing as ‘mind’?
What is it?
Both Freud and Jung considered that we have conscious and unconscious parts to the mind.
And they both considered that dreams reflected the workings of the unconscious mind, Freud emphasising how dreams express repressed instincts, Jung investigating symbolism within them.
In the 1950s scientific experiment appeared to confirm the existence of an ‘unconscious’, or at least a part of the brain where all experiences were stored.
Dr Wilder Penfield discovered that, by touching a specific part of the brain with a mild electric current passed through a probe, he could reactivate memories and responses to these events in his patients.
The patients were under only local anaesthetic, and so were conscious at the time and able to talk to the doctor.
The memories they described in response to the stimulus were highly specific and no longer consciously recollected; on experiencing the memory they also relived the feelings they had at the time.
To many people the idea of a controlling unconscious mind is a threatening one, which explains to some extent the suspicions directed towards psychoanalysis.
From the angle of this book the views of Alfred Adler are significant.
It has been pointed out (by Anthony Storr and Joel Kovel: see Reading List) that Adler's influence has been considerable but under-rated.
A contemporary of Freud, he differed from the master over his emphasis on sexuality as the most important motivation on personality.
He defected from Freud's psychoanalytic school and insisted that we were mainly motivated by ‘strivings for superiority’.
He later described this instinct as a ‘striving for perfection’ and an ‘upward striving’.
He believed that we all have an ‘inborn social feeling’ and an ‘inescapable characteristic of empathy’.
As children, he thought, because of our dependency on adults and physical vulnerability, we all get to experience inferiority.
Our self-esteem is dependent on their responses to us.
Adler paid less attention to the unconscious mind and more to goal-directed therapy.
His thinking has affected modern approaches  to therapy and to counselling and education.
Indeed, in some of his pronouncements Adler seems to have been ahead of his time.
Rather like today's optimistic prophets on the ‘new age’, he foresaw ‘an ideal society yet to be developed, which comprises all men; all filled by the common striving for perfection’.
FOR OPTIMISTS ONLY
In some ways it may be considered that psychology has gone too far.
People are let off heinous crimes because of a ‘psychological’ explanation.
Murderers, rapists and muggers are innocent victims of society, their parents and traumatic early experience.
As such they don't deserve punishment, rather understanding and sympathy.
It's not their fault.
‘Psychobabble’ can let them off the hook.
Anyone who studies psychology must be motivated by a streak of optimism that people have the potential to change.
Whether they believe that we change through investigation of the unconscious mind, through investigation of the relationship that forms between a therapist and client, through group experience or through changing patterns of behaviour will depend to some extent on which one of these experiences they can best identify with themselves.
It seems to me that anyone attracted to practising psychology or psychotherapy or psychiatry has not been so without some needs of their own.
Understanding brings enlightenment.
If you are attracted to knowing more about your own psychology (and other people's), or have low self-esteem or emotional problems and would like to do something about it, then you need to decide how ‘deep’ you want to go.
Here's a quick consumers' guide:
You may just want to dip into the subject via books.
In which case,Families and How to Survive Them by Robin Skynner and John Cleese is a good starting point, as are Dorothy Rowe's books.
Anthony Storr is also very readable.
Many of the older personality theorists have also written extensively on their ideas.
See the Reading List for further suggestions.
At the deepest level, if you want to explore your unconscious mind be prepared to spend time and money.
Psychoanalysts themselves undergo five sessions of analysis a week for five years  or so before they can practise.
You're likely to need to attend on a regular basis for a couple of years.
Don't expect a smooth ride; liberating that which is repressed can be quite traumatic.
The process can be painstakingly slow and the results difficult to predict and measure.
You may expect direction and advice which will not be forthcoming.
The most you may be able to say at the end of it is that you ‘gained understanding’; to some of us that may be unsatisfactorily intangible, while to others it may be of profound significance.
The schools of Freud and Jung are now much closer together than they used to be: it's been said that Jungians tend to be more ‘spiritually’ orientated.
Read A Complete Guide to Therapy by Joel Kovel before you choose.
There are many critics of psychoanalysis.
It's argued that psychoanalysts are motivated by the need to influence and control.
It's a good way of getting status.
Against Therapy by Jeffrey Masson argues this point.
In the last couple of decades what's been called the ‘human potential’ movement has gathered impetus.
This umbrella term covers a large number of different therapies, which concentrate strongly on the ‘wholeness’ of a person and their potential for good.
Carl Rodgers, who has written in a clear, direct way about his experiences, is the strongest influence and in some ways a direct descendant of Alfred Adler.
He places strong emphasis on empathy and optimism and less on the need to investigate the unconscious mind.
His theories are used in one-to-one therapy, group therapy, training and organisations.
On the whole the ‘human potential’ therapies require less of a time-and-attendance commitment than psychoanalysis, and there are more opportunities for group workshops.
A comprehensive guide and a do-it-yourself manual is The Mind Gymnasium by Dennis Postle.
Group therapy can be particularly suitable for ‘problem’ families, marital difficulties and as support for addiction or living with addiction.
Counselling can help all sorts of crises and the reactions they cause.
But be aware that anyone can call themselves a ‘counsellor’; your doctor may be able to refer you appropriately — otherwise shop around and go on recommendation.
One theory suggests that personality can be viewed as a series of concentric rings.
At the centre, deep down, we have ‘core personality’, highly resistant to change, and a part that is perhaps  reached most effectively through psychoanalysis.
One layer out from the core, made up of thoughts and feelings, we have our self-image — who we believe ourselves to be.
The final, outer, layer is our behaviour, our personality as perceived by others.
This outer layer is the most receptive and adaptable to change.
The remainder of this chapter concerns itself with these two outer layers.
A final point in this section.
Some people have the view that it's self-indulgent or self-centred to seek help for difficulties.
We should be self-sufficient, or our families or religious beliefs should provide answers.
But the traditional family and the influence of religion are in decline in Britain — indeed, the influences of family and religion may be contributing substantially to our difficulties.
Not believing in reincarnation or the after-life, it's my view that our lives are not dress rehearsals.
We are able, if we choose, to make the most of them.
To do that there may be times when we need to put trust in a professional to help solve our difficulties.
We need help to go some way towards knowing ourselves and in turn to be able to understand and help others.
LOW-STATUS LABELS
As status is a relative quality, for many of us, our conscious awareness of labelling ourselves ‘low-status’ usually depends on the people and the situation.
You may feel secure in your role within the family, but a new boss at work, for example, may mean that your assumptions about your professional status are challenged.
Secure in your status at work, becoming a parent may cause confusion — a woman may have to adjust from a professional role to a maternal one, where her own needs become relegated; a father may have to adjust to there being a new small person in the family who makes his role seem less significant.
Marriage, divorce, a new job, redundancy or sudden success may find questions like ‘am I adequate?’ or ‘do I really deserve this?’rising to the surface.
When we label ourselves ‘low-status’ the response may cover other messages, which can include:
‘I cannot change’
Human beings are often described as ‘creatures of habit’.
At its  most extreme ‘I cannot change’ can describe a sense of complete impotence —‘I am unable to make any difference to my own or anybody else's life.’
We resist change because of fear of the unknown and because change can threaten our fragile sense of identity — when my self-image is indistinct, I must hold on desperately to those parts I can see, so that they survive.
Change is threatening when you are not confident of your own resources.
As small children we may not always get the understanding we need from our parents.
We have power over our parents in that we cry out for our needs to be met, and our parents may be anxious and confused about how to do this.
They may envy us our power and dependency, which, despite appearing to be contradictory qualities, are not.
Being human, with their love, they may resent the sense of duty we stir in them.
Our parents search for strict guidelines to help heal their confused feelings towards us.
They will recollect the guidelines they were given themselves as children.
They will pass these on to us: ‘You are exceptionally important’, ‘Other people matter more than you do’, ‘If you're a good girl/boy I will love you’, ‘I will overpower you if you are naughty.’
As these guidelines are rigid, unspoken and unquestionable, many of us live our lives without investigating them.
We get more and more guidelines demonstrated, acted out and spoken by our parents: ‘Don't ask so many questions’, ‘Little girls should be seen and not heard’, ‘Little boys don't cry.’
These guidelines shape who we are, our beliefs, values and attitudes, and we are understandably terrified of letting them go, whether we react in compliance with them or against them.
Without these guidelines, who are we?
As we grow older and closer to the unanswerable questions concerning our own mortality, it's hardly surprising that most of us cling more strongly to that which we know and become set in our ways.
We become more resistant to change and often surround ourselves with friends who strongly reinforce our own self-images.
‘I cannot change’ as contrasted with ‘I choose not to change’describes a sense of hopelessness.
Hope is about the unknown and prospects, about balancing our needs for security with the dangers of freedom.
We can evaluate what those prospects are and, if we choose to, venture forth in search of the unknown.
‘I will fail’
There are pay-offs contained in this message.
If we expect failure, we needn't take risks.
When we are small we learn from our parents that risks are dangerous.
Risk involves appearing vulnerable, stupid, isolated.
Other people may attack, humiliate, avoid us.
With us all jockeying for position in the status stakes, we can't afford for this to happen.
No risks taken means no failure and no likelihood of looking stupid.
We may become timid because we're avoiding risks.
We start to notice that people look after us and protect us, especially if we're girls.
We start to feel special.
We find this role of little victim useful — nothing need be our fault or responsibility.
Our passive exterior may conceal a ferocious anger at having limited our choices, and we may direct this anger into manipulating others.
Through our families we get a sense of a collective viewpoint on society.
Life may be regarded as an austere struggle, blighted by fate, where only the rich and the lucky fare well.
That family identity is one of ‘losers’.
From an early age, you may be conditioned to have low expectations.
If you can't expect much, why bother?
Or life may be regarded as a battlefield fit for conquerors, with rich pickings for the strong.
Yes, born into a family of ‘winners’ you can achieve anything.
Anything, that is, until you seem to be slow to talk and read, particularly in contrast with that incredibly bright elder sister of yours…
Your parents describe you to their friends as ‘difficult’.
You start to be naughty.
This gets a reaction.
You matter now — you're getting attention and recognition.
Your parents ‘can't do a thing with you’.
Never mind, you have a definition — you are a ‘bad child’, which is infinitely preferable to not knowing what sort of child you are at all.
You are a rebel with an identity cause, a spectacular failure.
When some of us are small we hear a great deal of criticism, more of the negative than the positive.
We don't hear a great deal of praise.
Our own powers of evaluation develop and we get an ‘inner critic’.
We may have been bombarded by our parents with many messages like ‘You must try harder’ and ‘You're not getting it right.’
Our parents may want us to have ‘what they never had’— may want us to fulfil their own frustrated dreams.
And they may envy our potential to do this.
Our inner critic starts to become very responsive.
Like our parents, we set high goals for ourselves.
Our identity is tied up with  being someone who never achieves these goals.
We are constantly criticising ourselves and, according to our high standards, constantly under-achieving.
Like our parents, we can never be ‘good enough’ and failure is inevitable.
We need our inner critic to discriminate and to set goals and standards for ourselves.
When it gets out of control, no matter how successful we are in the eyes of other people, in our heads that critical voice will tell us that we have failed.
We are unable to love ourselves enough to allow for weakness.
All ‘successful’ people have earned that description via their ability to cope with failure
‘I'm addicted to guilt’
We experience guilt when we blame ourselves or our actions for events.
So guilt is to do with taking responsibility and expecting punishment.
Pride and guilt are closely linked.
The greater the sense of pride in who we are and what we do, the more we feel we deserve reward and praise.
And when we fail to live up to our own high expectations, the more we feel we deserve punishment and blame.
Some of us disown these qualities on a conscious level, and project them on to someone else.
When we feel guilty we make other people feel that way as a denial of our own sense of pain.
We may even do this through becoming ill, working ourselves into the ground or suppressing our own needs in order to care for others.
We become martyrs to make others feel guilty.
Guilt is an extremely powerful currency, in which many of us trade.
Bereavement is often accompanied by strong guilt feelings.
We deserve to be punished because we considered ourselves over and above the deceased.
It's somehow all our fault and we deserve punishment.
As small children, when we start to become critical and evaluative we start to challenge our parents.
We go into battle with them and they win.
They may threaten us in order to control us.
They are right and we are wrong.
We have to believe they are right because they have played such an important part in our identity and in defining the world for us.
If they are wrong, then we are without guidance and they may leave us, which would be catastrophic.
In their ‘rightness’ they leave us with a profound sense of ‘wrongness’which many of us store to considerable effect, decades later.
When we consider this dilemma for the child between ‘rightness’ and ‘wrongness’and wanting to be loved, we can start to  understand the traumatic guilt experienced by victims of child abuse.
Guilt is about ‘shoulds’ and ‘should nots’.
It can be helpful to ask yourself, when plagued with conscious guilt, whether you want to do something, rather than telling yourself that you should.
Is the punishment that you fear really likely?
Guilt can also lead us to put a brave face on everything while we overload ourselves with responsibilities and goals.
Unrealistically high expectations ensure that we maintain our addiction and keep our guilt levels high.
When we are defined early on in our lives as bad and worthless we may become addicted to guilt.
It confirms and reasserts our identity.
‘I'm in awe of authority’
In the early 1960s Stanley Milgram, a research psychologist at Yale University, carried out a series of experiments on the extent to which we obey authority.
He got a group of people to administer electric shocks to a group of victims in the belief that they were taking part in an experiment to study the effect of punishment on learning.
No shock was actually administered.
Different levers raised the voltage of the ‘shocks’ and the whole experiment was supervised by an authority figure in a white coat, who informed the ‘torturers’that they should continue even if they flagged.
The ‘torturers’ were assured that the ‘shocks’, though extremely painful, would cause no permanent damage.
Though many of the ‘torturers’ became extremely stressed during the experiment, all of them raised the voltage to levels marked ‘very strong’— over 300 volts.
At this level the ‘victim’ was to be heard pounding on the wall.
Twenty-six out of 40 of the ‘torturers’ went up to the 450-volt level.
Psychologists had predicted that only just over one in a thousand people would go this far.
When the experiment was carried out using phone instructions however, only nine out of a group of 40 obeyed totally.
Others lied.
It would seem that we are far more likely to obey unquestioningly when the authority figure is actually present.
The more status you give to a large number of authority figures, the more, relatively, you diminish your own.
As children, we are all vulnerable to the abuse of authority by parents.
As we get older, we may be abused by other authority figures — teachers, doctors, bosses.
Authority figures who abuse their power are, of course, doing so because they have received that sort of abuse themselves (and in  receiving have also learned how to give abuse) and perhaps because they perceive others as a threat: ‘I will dominate you before you have any chance of dominating me.’
Chapter Eight considers ways of dealing with people who wield authority in this way.
In allowing authority figures to wield power over us indiscriminately, we surrender our rights to choose to take responsibility.
Some people might argue that responsibility restricts freedom: they are ignoring our needs to be dependent on others and to have others dependent on us — our sense of belonging.
This involves giving others responsibility for your welfare, and in turn taking responsibility for theirs.
At worst, it lets someone else do your thinking for you.
We will avoid confrontation because of this awe of authority.
‘I will be rejected by others’
Raising your status means that you become more prominent.
Others may envy your power.
They may reject you and isolate you because you are different from them and they would like to be like you.
You may become lonely.
As we grow up we model ourselves on our parents, identifying with them and imitating them.
We also fight to separate ourselves from them, to establish a degree of self-sufficiency.
If we don't succeed in this then we may require other people to act as our parents, or we may regard others as a threat to this self-sufficiency and therefore avoid intimacy.
We may shun involvement with other people because it threatens our identity, and so we remain aloof.
We may constantly try to assert our individuality and separateness from others by inevitable disagreement, rejection of their views and immediate aggression towards them so that we stage pre-emptive strikes.
We may construct defences for our sensibility by being deliberately offensive, diminishing others and not listening to them.
We may look to others for approval and definition.
When other people criticise or praise us we pay a great deal of attention to those descriptions and whether they are true or not, start to act them out.
The opinions of others may direct us how to think and react.
We may expect other people to fear rejection in the same way that we do, and be surprised by their directness.
We may not be able to say no to those people ourselves, because we imagine that they are as susceptible and sensitive to rejection as we are.
Other people may take advantage of the sense they get that we are desperate for  approval.
Our desire to please them will take precedence over our own needs, and our self-possession will be compromised.
All of us need approval unless we choose to live in complete isolation from other people.
When we give others the power to define us, we surrender our status.
We may project the values we use ourselves on to other people — imagining that they are as critical as we are.
We may criticise them, using our own high expectations, and find that they fall short.
We may appear superior to them in adopting this thinking.
We will also, of course, imagine that they have high expectations of us.
In the search for approval, praise is everything, and when others omit to praise us we interpret this as rejection.
When we allow ourselves to be dominated by the demands and opinions of others, our own self-esteem diminishes.
We start to resent the power these people have over us.
We get envious of them, and constantly compare ourselves to them.
We are never good enough.
Insecure about our own power, we resent theirs.
The stereotypical role-playing that we see in our families and society may affect our fear of rejection.
When your most familiar role models are those of a compliant woman or the ‘strong, silent type’ of man you may find it difficult to reconcile these influences with the aggressive determination you feel as a female, or the sensitivity and intuition you experience as a man.
INCREASING YOUR STATUS
There is no quick, easy, universal solution to low self-esteem — would that there were.
If the problem becomes acute — that is, you feel inadequate most of the time — then it is best to seek professional advice.
The following list of suggestions contains exercises which are used on management development courses that I'm involved in running with other trainers.
These courses are run over several months, giving participants time to try out the suggestions over a period of time.
Which ones work most effectively depends on the individual.
We have had reports from a high percentage of attendees that their levels of self-esteem and confidence have increased considerably.
We have to balance this response with a consideration of the relationship the participants develop with the trainers, and to put some of the enthusiastic response down to a  desire to please us and to peer group pressure.
Reports of efficacy also need to be tempered with the proviso that building self-esteem is a task which requires constant vigilance against old negative messages.
Here are some approaches to building self-esteem:
Setting Time Aside
The first commitment to be made needs to be one of time.
Even if it's just ten minutes a day, allocate some time for your self-esteem programme.
It may just be a question of getting up ten minutes earlier in the morning or taking ten minutes when you get in from work to be alone and to reflect and relax.
Self-assessment
Building self-esteem is about appreciating strengths and developing them as much as it is about gaining an understanding of weaknesses.
Psychologists use personal construct theory to get people to determine their own values and beliefs.
The following exercises can help you identify the criteria you use for assessing others, and in turn how you use them on yourself:
Determining values 
Jot down on a piece of paper the names of three people whom you are close to.
Write down their good points and where they could improve.
Regard this as your opportunity to play God, and do it fairly quickly.
Compare the people with one another and identify what they have in common, and what you approve and disapprove of.
For instance:
Person A : loyal, self-opinionated, good sense of humour, out-going, sociable, generous, self-disciplined, assertive should be: better informed, less ready to champion causes indiscriminately, less obsessive
Person B : loyal, emotional, charming, self-disciplined, witty, dynamic, energetic, impulsive should be : more analytical and self-directing, less ready to please people, less sensitive to criticism 
Person C : cynical, expresses views strongly, good raconteur, humorous, careful with money, bookish, pays lots of attention to detail should be : more sensitive to others, more generous with self and others, prepared to take more risks
A is more assertive than B and C, and won't listen to other views.
B is the keenest to be liked, socially most adept, but easy to dominate.
C is the most intellectual and best informed, less impulsive than A and B, but very resistant to change.
From the above, we can extract that the person doing the exercise values strong opinions, sociability, humour, assertiveness, charm, loyalty to people, thoroughness, self-discipline and intellect as strengths; and sees loyalty to causes, lack of information and analysis, over-anxiety to please people, caution, lack of sensitivity, meanness and inflexibility as weaknesses.
From this the person can learn a lot about how they see themselves.
Much of what is approved of may match up in their self-image with how they see their strengths and qualities of which they would like more.
The qualities that are disapproved of are ones they don't think they have, or consider that they keep under control.
Omissions in values, too, are significant.
In the above example no mention is made of success, authority, compassion, ability to make money, toughness, talent or hard work.
These values, then, are not so important in how the person assesses themselves or others.
Life map 
This exercise is a review of your life so far.
On a piece of paper draw a line or pictures, or allocate areas of the page, to mark significant events in your life as far back as you can recall.
At each significant event determine whether you were
a
powerful or powerless
b
comfortable or uncomfortable
c
controlled by others or controlling others.
Does a significant pattern emerge?
Positive perspective 
List your strengths and weaknesses in two columns.
It can help to divide the list up into sections — your personality, how you function  at work, how you deal with relationships.
Then add other people's views — choose a member of your family, a friend and someone you work with.
Recall praise and criticism you've been given.
Be as specific as you can.
If the weaknesses column is overloaded, try and be a little kinder on yourself.
Take your weaknesses and translate them into positives.
For instance, ‘judgemental about people’ can translate into ‘highly discriminating’.
Here are some other translations that may prove helpful:
dour — realistic
rude — direct
ruthless — single-minded
compliant — agreeable
lazy — relaxed
hypocritical — adaptable
forgetful — creative
guilty — conscientious
aggressive — dynamic
pernickety — thorough.
This exercise shows that the way in which we view the world is completely a question of how we see things and where we're coming from.
This can be a helpful approach in discussion — someone may regard you as stubborn, whereas you see yourself as determined.
When you're criticised by others, there can be great solace in thinking quietly to yourself about the flip side of the description.
(For more on criticism see Chapter Eight.)
RETRAINING YOUR CRITIC
Your inner critic can become a useful friend.
As the triggers that motivate us may change according to circumstance, the ability to listen to your inner voice and let it direct you is a useful one.
We often ignore intuition, when it's possible that intuitive responses are our past experiences lodged in our unconscious minds.
Many of us place more value on action, decisiveness and ‘pulling ourselves together’ than we do on contemplation and reflection in solitude.
Quiet introspection can be extremely valuable, especially for people who lead busy, hectic lives and spend little time alone.
You can't trust your inner resources if you don't know them.
Some people find meditation and yoga useful for these purposes.
Examine the conditioning affecting your critic voice.
Does it have your achievements on record as well as your failures?
Is your critic in the present?
Some of us dwell too much on failure in the past, or the threat of disaster in the future, sending messages like ‘You did  this very badly last year’ or ‘Things are bound to go well in the future’.
These messages are often to do with guilt: ‘I don't deserve things to go well for me.’
They can become self-fulfilling prophecies: you go into a situation expecting to fail, even wanting to if it reinforces your self-image — and the inevitable happens.
It's sometimes worth asking that nagging little voice what is really the worst thing that can happen now ?
To re-educate your critic takes time.
One useful formula is to assess your performance in terms of 
a
what went well, how did I utilise my strengths and what results did they produce?
b
what did I learn?
c
what went badly, and what beneficial feedback does that give me for the future?
If you suspect your inner critic is being accurate in an attack, ask yourself what you can do to make amends.
Compensate in a way that is proportional to the ‘crime’.
Ask yourself how you would respond if you were the ‘victim’, and what form of compensation would be appropriate.
Assess the ‘crime’ without beating yourself up with knowledge of your past bad record.
Tackle some of your critics' repeated messages by doing the following exercise:
Should and can choose
Put down on paper some of your critic's messages, making them as specific as possible.
For instance: ‘You should lose weight’, ‘You shouldn't be so inarticulate at work’, ‘You shouldn't pursue money as a goal’, ‘You should be kinder to your mother when she phones for a long chat.’
Then look at those messages and ask yourself who in your life is supporting them.
What's in it for them in doing this?
Then evaluate realistically the outcome if you choose to follow the message, and the outcome if you choose not to follow the message, under a ‘can choose’ column.
For example it might read:
In many cases, the repercussions of not choosing to follow the message are not that extreme.
The pressure that the message exerts, by comparison, is considerable.
Say ‘So what?’ to some of these messages, and see what happens.
Directing your critic towards the specific is most useful.
Get it to analyse specific behaviour and situations rather than to censure you as a person.
It's the difference between ‘That presentation did not go well, because you mumbled’ and ‘You made a complete prat of yourself in there.’
Some people find positive visualisation and affirmation helpful.
Rather than setting unrealistically high expectations that you then fail to realise, or low expectations that become a self-fulfilling prophecy, take time out to sit and visualise a situation going well.
Affirmations are positive statements that you repeat regularly to yourself — for instance to help you with self-esteem.
So if you're on a diet, rather than focussing on deprivation you tell yourself, ‘Every day I'm getting fitter and healthier.’
Or if you feel unappreciated by others, ‘I am loved and of value to others.’
Many people say these methods work well — I'm not sure whether they effectively counter strong negative messages from early years.
As for affirmations, well, when slogging away to meet a deadline I've found that repeating, ‘You're tougher than you think’ while gulping down a large glass of gin works a treat.
GOING FOR GOALS
We need challenges in life, and excitement.
One of the biggest causes of dissatisfaction at work is insufficient challenge and stimulus, or underload.
Some of us may compensate for this by driving our cars like dervishes or creating dramas in our personal lives.
Goals need to be realistic, flexible and worked out, and should include both short- and long-term plans.
You need to give yourself incentives and rewards, as well as receiving them from other people.
On a sheet of paper, write down what you want and need professionally, personally, and in material and emotional terms.
Then assess your resources:
a
what information and knowledge do you have or can you get?
b
what skills do you have that can be utilised?
c
who can help you?
d
what thoughts and feelings do you have towards these goals?
e
what's in your way?
Where there are gaps in matching up goals to resources, what can you do about it?
Where can you get advice?
One of the best resources you can use is a good listener who will allow you to verbalise your doubts and fears aloud and who is capable of listening to you without pressing home their own agenda.
You can make this a reciprocal arrangement.
Insufficient challenge is very demotivating.
Sometimes it's necessary to leap in and find yourself doing something without procrastination.
Waiting to get motivated may be a way of avoiding fear of failure.
Work out the pros and cons of what you are considering, and if your instinct is telling you to give it a try then go ahead.
If you need to research or get further information, check that this is vital and that you're not using this as an excuse.
Is there anything practical you can do immediately?
Confront your fears by asking yourself what practical steps you would be taking if you were feeling motivated — make a list and do them.
Deep fears can be helped by tackling smaller, more immediate, ones, and the rewards of gradual progress encourage us to continue.
CHANGING DIRECTION
Low self-esteem can be exacerbated by a sense of being a square peg in a round hole.
Many of the important decisions we take in life — whom to marry, what career to follow — are taken when most of us are too young and have too little experience really to ‘know ourselves’.
Marriage guidance counselling can help you to examine the history of your relationship.
Professional career counsellors can assess your strengths and weaknesses and offer advice.
We may be hanging on to relationships which reinforce low levels of self-esteem.
We may need to confront this situation and realise that we can get greater support from people who have similar motivation to our own.
New skills can increase personal satisfaction Women in particular are susceptible to believing that improving their appearance can help them reinvent themselves.
This is unrealistic, but outward appearances do indicate to others how much we value ourselves.
Physical well-being can help create confidence.
Finally, I want to mention two approaches to developing self-awareness and increasing self-esteem: transactional analysis and assertiveness training.
I mention them briefly because among management trainers they have many aficionados; they are written about more fully elsewhere.
(See the Reading List for details.)
Transactional Analysis
This divides the personality into three parts: parent, adult and child.
These divisions establish themselves in the first five years or so of our lives.
The parent is the last to develop; this is the part of the personality that looks after us.
It divides into the critical parent, the judgemental voice in our heads, giving us instructions and punishment, how to behave and what we should do; and the nurturing parent who cares for us, and meets our needs, supports, helps and educates.
The adult is the rational, logical part of the personality.
It works out problems, makes decisions and estimates pros and cons.
The adult is concerned with thinking and objectivity.
When people  experience low self-esteem, their ‘adult’ may not be as active as it could be.
The child is the dependent part of the personality, the part that appears earliest.
Like the parent, it divides into two.
The free child is the part that feels, wants, needs and expresses intuition, emotion and creativity.
The adapted child is the part that has learnt how to adapt and fit in with other people — it learns how to please and get approval, and how to manipulate and submit.
Quite clearly, then, if a child is brought up so that it is exposed constantly to a critical parent, she or he may spend much of the time being an adapted child.
In other words, if you are brought up on a diet of do's, don'ts, should's and shouldn'ts, you will be inclined to spend a lot of time and energy earning approval.
We can use transactional analysis to identify, through their behaviour, what state people are using.
Clearly, if I speak from my critical parent state too often, patronising you and moralising at you, directing you as a child, and you retaliate in a parent state and attempt to direct me back as a child, we've got a ‘crossed transaction’.
This is when misunderstandings arise.
Transactional analysis can be a useful tool in understanding problems with communication in relationships.
Assertiveness Training
Assertiveness skills start from a basic premise — that we all have certain rights.
The bill of rights reads like this.
We all have the right:
To be treated with respect.
To have and express feelings and opinions.
To be listened to and taken seriously.
To set our own priorities.
To say no without feeling guilty.
To ask for what we want.
To ask for information from others.
To make mistakes and to be wrong.
To choose not to assert ourselves.
To let our needs be as important as those of others.
Assertive behaviour is characterised by respect for your own rights and needs, and for those of other people.
The status of both parties remains intact.
Aggressive behaviour is defined as coming from a belief that your rights are more important than other people's, and that in seeking to meet your needs you can violate those of others.
You attack other people's status.
Submissive behaviour is defined as coming from a belief that your rights and needs are less important than other people's and that others can violate them.
Your status is diminished.
Behaviour styles match these definitions.
Here are some basic assertiveness techniques:
Three-part messages :
This formula can help you express messages that make you feel uncomfortable.
It goes:
describe disclose predict
Use simple, direct language and be as specific as possible.
Like this.
describe : when you don't take down messages/call me back/ encourage me.
disclose : I feel: irritated/like I don't matter/defeated. predict : if you do this, I can work more efficiently/I know you're busy, but if you do this we'll both save time on discussions like this/I'd be better motivated if you did.
Broken record : Calm repetition.
Very useful.
For instance:Anne : I need some time off next week.
Do you think I could take Monday off, please?
Bill : Take the call for me, would you?
Anne : As I was saying, I need some time off next week…
Bill : Not now, Anne.
I'm up to my eyes in it here.
Can we talk later?
Anne : I'd like to get this settled now.
I need some time off —Bill : Yes, I heard you.
Next week — all right, Monday afternoon it is.
Now can I get on, please?
It's clear that behaviour style needs to be appropriate to assertiveness.
Irritated and aggressive behaviour can cause conflict.
Fielding and fogging In the above example Anne hears what Bill says, but doesn't allow herself to get deflected from her purpose.
She ‘fields’ what he says.
Fogging is to do with acknowledging the other person's viewpoint and then continuing with your purpose.
For instance, ‘I know you're terribly pushed, but can I ask you quickly…‘
The importance of behaviour matching up to assertive messages cannot be over-emphasised.
There will be further examples of assertiveness in the following chapter, showing how techniques can be used to influence.
Chapter Eight contains further mention of its application in dealing with high-status people and conflict.
The final chapter shows how to match your behaviour to high-status messages.
POWER OF INFLUENCE
Power is always about who does the defining and who accepts the definitions.
Dorothy Rowe, Beyond Fear
Status is about using your personal power to gain recognition from others.
Defined in the dictionary as ‘ability to do or act’, ‘power’ has numerous connotations.
We ‘power dressed’ in the 1980s, we talk of shifts in world power, people are described as having ‘powerful presence’.
The way in which we regard, seek and use power shapes our relationships, our ambitions and our successes.
Power is a redundant resource unless it is used, and influence is the use of power.
Sometimes, influential people are not the most overtly powerful.
They can be the ‘power behind the throne–, using what power they have to its fullest potential: analysing situations, forming appropriate alliances and putting messages over in a palatable way to the right audience.
This chapter examines different ways of exercising power.
It gives practical suggestions on how to develop your influencing skills, on how to become more versatile when influencing and on how to choose what tactics are best for the situation.
The skills described have widespread application — they could be used to improve communication at home, to raise money for a charitable cause or to negotiate with another company over a takeover bid, for example.
Although this chapter is concerned with how you as an individual use power, it is worth considering that the global perspective on  power is starting to change.
A country's power can be measured by its military and economic resources and the signing of arms agreements; and growth in market, rather than government, control of economies suggest that the way in which these resources are being used is changing.
For individuals there is increasing emphasis on freedom of choice.
How do people get power?
Why do some of us shy away from it and regard it as ‘bad’?
Power gives us the ability to control, to choose and to assert our independence.
It can be used to positive or negative effect on others.
We can get power through:
Knowledge and skills : information power and expert power count for a great deal in the workplace.
Professional power depends on these.
The quality and amount of information you have about a subject can mark you out as a specialist who is an invaluable source of advice for others.
Your information could be to do with other people: knowing what –heir capabilities are, what motivates them, where they have influence.
Expert skills may be related to the tangible, like bookbinding or open-heart surgery, or the more intangible, like negotiation or ability to analyse.
Knowledge and skills are a valuable source of power that we can build on and develop.
Using the carrot and the stick : we can get power through our ability to reward and punish others, to give them something or to take it away.
When we are children we first experience this use of power by our parents.
If you would like a business to help you with a charity appeal, the ‘carrot’ of good publicity may get them to do so.
The ‘stick’ of going to a rival company who would use the publicity can act as another pressure.
The carrot and stick approach is to do with reward and punishment, incentives and pressures.
Physical attributes : some people use their bodies to get power.
The body builder, wrestler, aerobics queen and Madonna use their bodies to control the responses of others: to arouse feelings of fear, jealousy, admiration and desire in others.
Physical skills and attractiveness are much admired in our society.
The way in which we clothe our bodies and accentuate our physical attributes can also build power.
When we power dressed we made our bodies look angular and more aggressive, with hard, sharp lines.
As a source of power, physical attributes may  be short-lived and superficial.
Some of us think the power they give us is worth clinging on to through plastic surgery
Money : can help us achieve things, influence others, and free us of dependency on people or situations.
Like power, money as it stands is neither a good nor a bad commodity.
It's how it's used and what people do to get it that can offend our values.
Economic independence can create choices and build your self-respect.
Some of us suffer from an aversion to talking about money — known as remuneraphobia.
We've been brought up to think that it's not nice and not polite to do so.
We may accept lower terms than we want for a job or a project, and in undervaluing ourselves we become less powerful in the eyes of others.
Title : this is positional power.
We are given a title which carries with it a job or role description that allows us to control and manage others.
Title power is overt, as opposed to active, status.
A title may reflect little of the holder's active status: in some countries the title ‘President’ is largely to do with nominal power.
Some companies farm out elderly executives to a convenient backwater where they are given a lofty title — Senior Vice President in Charge of Something Unimportant.
Forward-thinking organisations have restructured themselves so that adherence to strict hierarchy and title is less significant.
We have reverence for titles instilled in us when we are small: many of us have a slightly different response to a ‘Dr’ than we do to a ‘Ms’, ‘Mrs’or ‘Mr’.
Personality and behaviour : this is to do with abstract qualities like ‘charisma’, ‘presence’ and ‘leadership ability’.
Power that comes from who you are and how you represent yourself and behave towards others is highly contagious.
Other people will admire you and aspire to be like you.
You may act as a role model and a mentor to others.
Personal power is about knowing and valuing yourself, and trusting your inner resources.
It's about accepting and dealing with responsibility and not being overwhelmed by it.
It's to do with having a balanced overview of your strengths and weaknesses and not using these to the detriment of others or so that others are able to exploit you.
You are able to define, to make sense of people and situations while listening to others who help you with this definition.
Self-assured enough to make decisions, clarify your goals and take risks, other people's definitions, needs and opinions do not represent a threat to you.
Sounds too good to be true?
It probably is.
It's a description to aspire to.
Very few of us remain confident of our personal power in every situation and with every sort of person.
When we are insecure about our personal power, ill at ease with our individuality and allowing others to define us much of the time, we may rely heavily on other sources of power.
For instance we can tend to:
Constantly air our knowledge to others, and bore them about our skills.
Promise carrots we can't deliver, or use threats that are destructive and cruel.
Use money to buy friends and assert superiority.
Use physical attributes to intimidate and seduce others.
Use our titles and authority position, rather than our own skills, to get what we want.
We can learn to develop our personal power through identifying the resistance we have to using certain types of behaviour and learning skills that make us more adaptable.
Influence is to do with ‘non-material’ power and is not tied to positional power or title — though having this resource may offer greater opportunities for influence.
The Mother Teresas, Bob Geldofs and Martin Luther Kings of this world have had considerably more influence than the Gerald Fords and the Imelda Marcoses.
POO-POOHING POWER
We have all known powerlessness.
As babies we relied on others for food, shelter, protection and love.
We were defined by other people — our parents or parent figures.
We were dependent and scared when we thought the powerful people had left us, were not attending to our needs, or were angry and cruel to us.
We were confused and anxious when we were not understood.
When we hear the word ‘power’ some of us make strong associations with fear, deprivation and a loss of control.
If other people have it they represent a threat to our independence, to our ability to  make choices and to our sense of having control over people and situations in our own lives.
We must be reactive rather than proactive, because becoming motivated and taking initiatives involves gaining power.
We cannot see that power is a means of dealing with fear, of acting and doing in order to gain control over it; when we are powerless our fears overwhelm us.
We think that power is a limited resource, and if one person has it then another one can't.
We cannot see that power can be held in different ways, and that personal and professional relationships that work effectively are often a delicate balance see-sawing on power shifts.
We cannot visualise ourselves becoming more powerful without damaging others.
We are envious of others who have power because they represent a threat.
We transfer ‘I don't deserve it’ on to ‘They don't deserve it’, and may try to make them feel guilty.
Our social conditioning affects how we regard power.
We may have been brought up to believe that it was selfish to put our own needs before others.
Our early encounters with power may have deterred us from ever wanting to use it in a similar way; having suffered from a cold, distant father or a smothering mother, and inevitably having attributed power to these parents, we may well decide that power is a negative force and not for us.
Little girls may be brought up to see power as something exercised mainly by the men in the family, and not a quality that is sought or used much by women.
When they grow up, they may feel uncomfortable with their need for power and unsure how to exercise it.
Little boys may be brought up in families where they saw their fathers exercising power in a very macho, bluff way.
When they grow up they may think that power is about domination of others without regard to their needs, thoughts and feelings.
Personal power is limitless.
When we make good use of power we empower others — in the way that wealthy philanthropists may make good use of their money in helping others.
We appreciate our rights and value as individuals while respecting those of others.
GAINING INFLUENCE
There are several different approaches that we can use to build influence.
The suggestions that follow are based on models that are  widely used in management development and leadership training.
All models inevitably contain values of what is good and bad, right and wrong.
Some of the approaches described below may have wider appeal to your values than others.
It is likely that you are already using some of them; others may seem to be more challenging.
Try out in a familiar, low-risk situation the suggestions that you find most challenging.
It's better to get comfortable with the approach in a situation where you are confident, like a weekly meeting, than suddenly to try and implement it when you are in a more testing situation, like an important sales presentation.
You will need time to become confident with the new skills.
These suggestions are not to do with changing your personality, they are concerned with your behaviour.
When we learn anything new we go through several stages:
a
Unconscious incompetence.
b
Conscious incompetence.
c
Conscious competence.
d
Unconscious competence.
Stages (b) and (c) can feel quite uncomfortable and self-conscious; we imagine that other people are finding our new behaviour strange.
What often sounds and feels stilted to us, because we are learning it, will sound quite normal to everyone else.
When we are anxious — and we may well be anxious about trying something new — we tend to stick with the familiar and the tried and tested.
So if you have got your way some of the time by being aggressive and forceful, when you try a more considerate approach you will feel insecure.
If you have influenced others in the past by being enthusiastic and emotional, you may find it uncomfortable to start using logic.
This view could be called cynical, but my experience leads me to believe that in most situations we are preoccupied with ourselves and our own agendas.
Other people have to do something pretty dramatic for us to notice.
Putting a case more forcefully or asking for greater involvement from others is likely to get attention for your content rather than for your new style.
THE DOORS OF INFLUENCE
We are all familiar with signs on doors saying ‘Push’, ‘Pull’ and ‘Exit’.
These words conveniently describe three different approaches to influencing.
The Push approach (sometimes called the ‘cold’) describes you moving towards the people you want to influence.
The Pull approach (sometimes called the ‘warm’) describes you drawing the people you want to influence towards you.
The Exit approach describes getting away from the people you want to influence, even though this departure may be temporary.
You will want to switch from one approach to another according to how people react and circumstances change.
Before you try to influence anyone, you want to establish your purpose and your motives.
Most of our communication between one another is indirect; we conceal our motives.
Unless you have established for yourself what your motives are beforehand, you are unlikely to be able to present them in an attractive light to others.
You will need to pay attention to the first impression you make.
If you are attempting to influence people whom you do not know, you must appear to have integrity and credibility.
You will need to establish rapport quickly, so that they can trust you.
First impressions indicate to others how they should respond and communicate with us.
Once decisions are taken, our ‘audience’ then look for further evidence in what we say and do to confirm that they are right.
Chapter Nine deals with this in greater detail.
It can be more difficult to attempt to influence people who know you, because you perceive they have expectations of you.
Your knowledge about them and their likely responses gives you power.
You may have to work hard to change their conditioned response.
Approach them with a positive attitude and a strong sense that change is possible.
You could find it useful to comment on past reactions and to ask for a fresh angle: ‘When we've talked about having some staff working from home, we've always got bogged down in cost factors regarding the technology needed.
Can we start to look at it this time from the benefits to some people in terms of travel and a quiet environment?’
Bear in mind that when the chips are down, we tend to revert to what we feel comfortable with and what we think has worked effectively in the past.
In doing so, we confine our influencing ability to certain people and circumstances.
The greater our adaptability the wider our sphere of influence.
Push
This strategy can be divided into two approaches, the forceful and the logical.
The Forceful Approach You already use this approach if you:
Let others know what you want and need.
Let others know what you expect from them, and standards for assessment.
Are comfortable instructing, directing and correcting others.
Are quick to praise and criticise.
Voice your opinion frequently.
Like to bargain for what you want.
Find it easy to put pressure on others.
This approach will be useful to you if you:
Don't like talking about yourself.
Appear indecisive and submissive.
Go along with others against your true inclinations.
Can't say no.
Avoid conflict.
Compromise too readily.
You can appear weak and tentative.
This is an assertive approach to influencing.
It is a useful technique for people who are over-anxious for approval from others and who worry too much about making others angry or upset.
It's also helpful if you tend to have low expectations of yourself and of making demands on others.
There are three elements to this approach:
a
Saying what you want and need 
Some of us avoid using the word 1.
In this approach you have to.
You can't pretend that you haven't got desires and needs.
You must identify them and express them, otherwise frustration and anger build up.
Give this message to others in a brief, clear way: ‘I need to talk to you about office manning’; ‘I don't want to go away this weekend’.
Don't be tempted to justify these requests or to give reasons for them.
Use the ‘Broken Record’ technique as described on p. 52, repeating your request when you get objections.
b
Describing what you like and don't like 
Give your view of how you are feeling about the situation — what are the pros and cons.
You are expressing your personal responses, and speaking from the heart as much as from the head, so there is no need to try and paint an apparently ‘objective’ picture with appeal to the intellect.
Try ‘I'm pleased that the office manning problem is on next week's agenda — I'm worried that it needs more urgent attention’ or ‘I love it that you've asked me to go away — it's bothering me that I've got to do this report by Monday.’
State what pleases you to begin with — if you state the negative first, the other party may never hear the positive as they start to construct defences to your attack.
You can't be accused of whingeing and complaining when you make the other person aware that you can see the positive in the situation too.
c
Using the carrot and the stick 
Some of us don't realise the extent of our ‘carrot and stick’ power.
We don't use it because we haven't realised our resources.
To estimate whether you have this power ask yourself: ‘What do I have, or can do, that the other person wants and needs?
Can I take anything away from them that they want or need in exchange for what I want and need?’
You need to control the carrot and the stick, and only use them when you are prepared to put them into action.
There's little point in making promises and threats that you are not prepared, when it comes to it, to carry out.
And if you rely too heavily on rewards and punishments and use them too often, their effect becomes diminished.
You may not he able to think of incentives and pressures that you can use, just because you haven't given sufficient thought to identify what the other person wants and needs and how you can match them.
It can he useful to recap on the action you want taken after putting on pressure: ‘If I call talk about it today, then I'll be able to get on with the project — if I can't, the project is going to have to he delayed.
So I'd like to talk now.’
‘If we go away this weekend I'm not going to he relaxed — next weekend I'll be a lot more fun.’
Putting the two examples together:
1
‘I'm pleased that the office manning problem is on next week's agenda — I'm worried that it needs more urgent attention.’
(b)‘I need to talk to you about it.’
(a)‘If I can talk about it today, then I'll be able to get on with the project — if I can't, the project is going to have to be delayed.
So I'd like to talk now.’
(c)
2
‘I don't want to go away this weekend.’
(a)‘I love it that you've asked me — it's bothering me that I've got to do this report by Monday.’
(b)‘If we go away this weekend I'm not going to he relaxed — next weekend I'll be a lot more fun.’
(c)
Use this formula, and if necessary jot down on paper how you'll use the three stages and practise it aloud, so that you get comfortable with it.
As this approach is a tough, personal, confrontational one it only works when both parties have something to gain or lose.
At work, emotional needs are stronger than a lot of people realise; by letting people know that you have them, and identifying theirs, you can gain influence.
What you want and need must be viable and realistic.
Your level of control needs to be high enough so that your carrot and stick power matters and is taken seriously by others.
And because this is a strong push for influence, it doesn't work with people who are keenly aware of their position above you in a hierarchy, and who need to feel very much that they're the boss.
Using it inappropriately with someone who has very strong feelings on a subject may lead you to be regarded as insensitively self-opinionated.
Be aware, too, that behaving this assertively may get agreement from people and acquiescence but it may not get dedication and loyalty.
People will go along with what you want rather than actively supporting you.
For many people it's riskier than the next approach and there is no guarantee of results; but you will certainly have made a powerful impression on others.
The Logical Approach You already use this approach if you:
Enjoy making suggestions and proposals.
Like to persuade others.
Frequently suggest solutions to problems.
Relish debate and argument.
Use logic and reasoning a great deal.
Challenge cases that you disagree with.
Think of another angle when people disagree.
This approach will be useful to you if you:
Feel apprehensive about offering ideas to others.
Lack confidence in making a case.
Stay out of debate in meetings and discussions.
Fail to get your suggestions considered by others.
Are undermined by others arguing back.
Don't think you come over as logical and rational.
Think that your communication could be better structured.
This approach is useful for people who regard themselves as unable to analyse and rationalise.
Sometimes this label may come from a sense of being less-educated than other people, or less articulate.
It's also useful for improving performance in almost every work situation, as logical persuasion is how most of us communicate at work.
It can enable the reluctant and shy to enter into discussion with greater enthusiasm at home or at work.
There are two elements to this approach:
a
Proposing 
That is, putting forward ideas, suggestions or proposals.
You need to believe that these are sound, even if other people don't like them.
You should present them with a sense of commitment.
They should be relevant to what's going on, so to use this approach efficiently it's important to listen to others.
In group meetings, if you tend to be hesitant then get in early with your proposal.
As in the previous push approach, it pays to be concise.
For instance: ‘I think we should be getting some of our employees to work from home’ or ‘I'd like to suggest that we go home early.’
Immediately after the proposal give the…
b
Reasoning 
This is your back-up evidence designed to appeal to people's intellects.
It s Push approach to the head, rather than to the heart.
Structure, precision and control are all characteristics of logical influencing.
For that reason, it's better to stick to a small number of clearly expressed reasons.
Reasons are often better thought up beforehand, and this is an approach that benefits particularly from pre-planning.
If you tend to forget back-up reasons in the surprise of hearing yourself make a proposal or suggestion, then  use a link to remind yourself: ‘And there are two reasons for this.’
When we link reasoning to the above proposals this is what we get:
1
‘I think we should be getting some of our employees to work from home.’
(a) LA couple of reasons — the technology is now available to do this, and there could be considerable saving to the company in travel expenses and workspace.’(b)
2
‘The electrician is coming at eight tomorrow morning and we're going out to dinner late tomorrow night.’
(b) I'd like to suggest that we go home early.’
(a)
Reasoning can also be used with summarising.
‘No one has any more to say on that point, so I suggest we move on to the next one.’
For your suggestions and proposals to be taken seriously, you need to have credibility with the other people involved.
Launching into the logical approach when someone has not had time or does not have the information to assess your credibility is unwise.
The logical approach works very well when you have information or expert power.
With specialist information, facts, statistics, case histories and examples that others are unaware of, you can make a good case.
The approach also works well when alternatives can be considered and rejected through reasoning and facts.
Proposing and reasoning can appeal to our intellectual vanity.
When someone suggests something as opposed to insisting on it, we enjoy the fact that our powers of discrimination and judgement are being recognised.
That is why the suggestion ‘Why don't you try it?’ works so well as a selling technique.
However, this approach may not always be the most successful one because it is so familiar to most of us, and in a competitive situation people are able to go on reasoning until the cows come home.
If you try to appear logical and reasonable when others suspect that you have strong emotional motives, then the approach will fail.
This is a problem-solving style, which works best when strong emotions are not aroused.
Commitment to suggestions and proposals may not be as strong when emotions are not engaged.
Some of us try to propose and reason when we cannot cope with another person's emotions.
There is nothing more galling, if you care passionately about something or are feeling angry or upset, to be told to ‘Be reasonable.’
Pull
Pull strategy can be divided up into two approaches, the participative and the inspirational.
The Participative Approach You already use this approach if you:
Ask people for opinions and suggestions.
Notice and respond to other people's concerns.
Try and bring in people who are isolated.
Listen carefully to what people say and how they say it.
Pay attention to views other than your own.
Actively supply others with helpful information.
Are open with your thoughts, feelings and intentions.
This approach will be useful to you if you:
Always try to control and dominate people and situations.
Talk too much, and not let others have their say.
Find it difficult to reveal much about yourself.
Don't notice other people's problems.
Listen poorly and don't hear others.
Regard yourself as ‘not very good with people’.
Are regarded by others as ‘pushy’ or ‘a cold fish’.
If you often get nervous about making a fool of yourself, this approach will help.
If nervousness prevents you from participating in events, you may feel isolated and mistrusted by others.
This approach can also help those people who feel a sense of threat from other people's opinions and so bulldoze them first so that others are prevented from expressing their views.
It is useful for those of us who worry that hearing other opinions and listening to other people may weaken our case, or make it difficult for us to concentrate on our own determined agenda.
There are three elements to this approach:
a
Involving others 
This is to do with drawing people into a situation and asking them for their thoughts and feelings.
It's a style that revolves around asking questions: open questions requiring some substance in the answer, rather than closed questions requiring one-word answers.
Leading questions which direct people how to respond should be avoided.
Use, for example, ‘How did you think that went?’ rather than ‘That was a bit of a disaster, don't you think?’
Involving others means giving them your support and encouragement.
It's letting people know that their contribution has been appreciated, that their ideas are valued and that they can have their say, whether others agree with the content or not.
For instance– ‘Thanks very much for making that suggestion — do you want to say ally more about it?’
b
Active listening 
The psychotherapist Carl Rodgers pioneered a technique called active listening.
This demands that the listener gives the speaker their full, undivided attention, and that she or he summarises, paraphrases, clarifies and interprets rather than directing through responses.
It's an extremely difficult technique to perfect.
We want to rush in and give solutions, or reassurance when dealing with pain and confusion.
Active listening means paying attention to the tone of voice, body language and facial expression of the speaker in order to understand the thoughts and feelings behind the words.
Frieda Fromm-Reichmann, another eminent researcher, used to mirror the energy and attitude of her clients to increase rapport, a technique that proved successful.
So when the speaker was talking rapidly with a lot of energy she would listen with obvious interest, excitement and quick responses.
Using this method, you are recapping and understanding: ‘It sounds like you felt it went very well.
Do I understand you think we should enter again next year?’
c
Disclosing 
As this whole approach is to do with openness, its third part is to do with giving people information they need, with expressing your own thoughts and feelings and asking for help and advice when you need it.
It's also to do with using your own past experiences to show empathy and understanding when others  need it.
It means admitting sometimes that you are confused, frightened, angry and guilty.
Disclosure requires you to make yourself vulnerable; in having the confidence to do this you become personally powerful and gain trust from others.
They know that you are not trying to portray yourself as a know-all, that you have accepted being ‘only human’.
They are more likely to open up themselves.
Our conditioning can make us very resistant to using disclosure.
Those messages like ‘Little boys don't cry’, ‘Keep a stiff upper lip’ and ‘Maintain a brave face’make it very difficult to describe experiences where we did not feel in control and did not appear invulnerable.
If you have difficulty doing this, use your listening to ascertain what emotional response the speaker is feeling; then ask yourself whether you have a relevant emotional experience that you can offer as encouragement to help them express their response.
For instance: ‘Well, we didn't do at all well last year and I know it was my fault.
I didn't do enough planning and preparation.
Even so, I was miserable when we were second from last.’
Putting the above three together we get:Listener : How did you think that went?(a)Speaker : Not too badly — we came fourth.
It was difficult — you know, first time I'd been in charge.
Listener : Well, we didn't do at all well last year and I know it was my fault.
I didn't do enough planning and preparation.
Even so, I was still miserable when we were second from last (c).
How do you feel about this year's showing?(a)Speaker : There were forty-seven competing, so given our limited experience of the event I think we did quite well.
I was very apprehensive — there were very big seas when we started.
We really worked well together as a team, though, and I think everyone really relished the experience.
Listener : It sounds like you felt it went very well.
Do I understand that you think we should enter again next year?(b)
The value of this approach is often underestimated.
It is essential in researching and gathering information, and works very well in conjunction with any of the other approaches.
Use the forceful approach to get attention early on, and then move to this one to negotiate and to find out what rewards and pressures you can offer  before returning to the forceful approach.
‘I need to talk to you about the cleaning.
How do you think the system is working out at present?’
If the forceful approach backfires, then use the participative one to get you out of trouble and to cool the temperature: ‘My request seems to have made you angry.
How would you advise me to deal with this problem?’
In discussion, alternate the logical approach with this one.
That way you hear other people's views and can prepare argument and reason which take them into consideration.
In the approach that follows, the inspirational, you can use the participative approach to find what exactly it is that you've got in common and what it is that turns people on.
This is an essential skill in managing people, because it gets others involved and committed.
If you're overseeing work that you're not directly involved in, this approach is invaluable.
Whenever you can't do anything alone, use the participative style to gain support.
If people can contribute anything, this is the way to encourage them.
Whenever there is any exploration involved — of whether people want to buy something, are prepared to donate money, are open to negotiation, or are performing badly at something — participation is a useful tool.
When emotions are running high, this approach is the most effective.
The drawbacks of this style used alone are that it can be slow and you have less control over your objective.
When everyone is being encouraged to have their say and chipping in, you can only have decision-making by consensus and that takes a lot of time.
If you are genuinely hearing others' opinions then you must be open to influence from them, so you might have to adjust your goalposts.
The nature of your case must be such that people can feel commitment towards it.
There's no point in asking for feelings and responses on something that nobody gives two hoots about.
In direct contrast with the forceful approach, there must be low risk of the person losing anything from getting involved and committed with your suggestions.
And in direct contrast again, this approach may bring you long-term loyalty rather than compliance.
The Inspirational Approach
You already use this approach if you:
Enjoy finding things in common with others.
Search for areas of agreement in conflict.
Unite people in a shared cause.
Convey enthusiasm and optimism to others.
Get others to see positive opportunities.
Fix clear goals with expectations of success.
Motivate others and make them feel confident.
This approach will be useful to you if you:
Find it difficult to convey enthusiasm.
Usually have a sceptical attitude.
Expect things to go wrong a lot of the time.
Lack a strong sense of direction.
Would like to build or be part of a team.
Want to motivate and lead other people.
Want to build a more positive outlook.
You may not feel comfortable with this style of influencing, because you find you are tentative about expressing enthusiasm and think it might be interpreted as naivety.
Cynics — who adopt their attitude as a defence to protect themselves against their hopes being dashed — may ridicule you.
This approach is helpful if you have a tendency to compete with others and view them as a threat; it encourages greater understanding between people and appeals to shared aspirations.
Aspirations, a sense of how we can realise our potential, give us power and motivation.
To use this approach well, you need to have the confidence to be able to predict what could happen, without worrying too much if you're proved wrong and risk appearing vulnerable.
There are two elements to this approach:
a
Finding common ground 
This is to do with finding values, ideas, goals and areas that are of common interest.
It's the ‘What's in it for all of us?’ factor.
It's important that we identify what desires and needs we could have in common with one another when using this approach; if we don't know the people concerned very well, or have not considered them in this way, we need to use the participative approach described above.
Once we have identified shared interests, we can point out how they will be met.
Sometimes common ground is apparent without needing to say anything: when we're influencing others who have the same job as ourselves, or similar type of backgrounds or lifestyles, we already have a great deal in common.
To find common ground we have to be ready to disclose  information about ourselves and to point out shared interests through chit-chat: ‘I heard you went to London University.
I was there at UC and finished in 1978.
I'd be interested to know which college you went to.’
We like people who remind us of ourselves, and we understand and trust them since they reinforce our self-image.
There is a sense of us ‘all being in this together’.
The language of this approach emphasises this sense — using ‘US’, ‘we’ and ‘our’rather than‘yours’, ‘I’and ‘my’.
b
Visualising the future 
In this exciting, optimistic approach it is important to have the ability to create pictures of what could happen in the future — ideal solutions and potential achievement.
We can use our imaginations and think creatively to foresee possible outcomes.
This style uses metaphors, imagery and colourful descriptive language.
For instance, ‘We can imagine the potential we're considering.
It's like a dream in which we've been trying to get through to people and we've represented this by seeing ourselves locked inside our homes, desperately trying to get out.
But we can't.
Now we find these doors are marked ‘Push’, ‘Pull’ and ‘Exit’.
We know that we can open them, and when we use them we go into a world full of exciting possibilities.’
When we inspire, we lead and motivate.
When people are lacking direction we can use the approach to generate enthusiasm, to create a sense of team spirit, energy and sense of purpose.
It's a strong approach that's useful in selling, presenting and setting up projects.
It shows people what's in it for them.
To use it effectively, we need to be able to establish common ground and other people need to be open to direction.
We need to be sure that they respect us and trust us.
We need to be aware that this approach has a strong emotional appeal and that using it involves taking responsibility and guiding these emotions, once engaged.
In the face of opposition, this approach can establish some areas over which agreement can be reached.
As far as drawbacks to this approach are concerned, enthusiasm is highly contagious, but people who don't express it themselves may find it embarrassing.
Switch to the logical approach if this is the case and then return, once you've made an intellectual appeal, to this more direct, emotional one.
Sometimes we can find it difficult to visualise positive outcomes; if this is the case I suggest you  refer to Chapter Three, which explains that all qualities can be given an opposite, more positive, interpretation.
When we identify common ground we need to be sure that we are not making assumptions about other people's values and interests.
If you are using this style on a group, it's worth thinking about individuals' values and interests and appealing to them.
Some of us resent being regarded as ‘one of the herd’.
This approach is not always the most effective in getting definite action; though it is most effective at setting people on course and giving them purpose.
You may want another approach to get people to sign on the dotted line.
Exit
You already use this approach if you:
Delay dealing with issues until you are adequately prepared.
Allow other people time to prepare.
Stop discussion when you are overloaded.
Step back from problems and disruption and analyse what's going on.
Are good at alleviating tension between people.
You will find this approach useful if you:
Have difficulty distancing yourself from situations.
Keep going even though you need time to reconsider or reflect.
Always get involved in conflict.
Keep working even though you are feeling under par.
Respond to personal attack by getting angry or upset.
Reluctance to use this strategy can come from a feeling that you don't have a right to control, that you can't call the shots, that you are powerless.
It's different from running away; it's a conscious choice to put off dealing with something until conditions are more favourable to yourself and to other people involved.
The standing back approach Someone phones you for a price for a project.
They catch you on the hop.
You don't want to look silly and you're excited at the prospect of the work, so in the heat of the moment you suggest an unrealistically low price.
Wouldn't you have been wiser to call them back?
That in essence is the standing back approach.
You take time for yourself and others to stop and think.
We can use this approach through postponing decisions, meetings and finding solutions until we have all the necessary information and all the right people present.
If we want to influence another person and that person is working under enormous stress and is irritated by our request, we can stand back and wait until she or he is more relaxed.
In situations where tempers are getting raised, we can stand back and make everyone aware of what is happening and the effect on progress: ‘We all seem to be getting very heated about this, and we've come a long way from the main issue.
Can we think back to the original complaints about company car allocation?’
Standing back can mean changing the subject to take pressure off yourself or others.
It can be useful to refer to something you all have in common, which may restore a feeling of harmony.
Humour, too, can be a way of breaking a tense atmosphere.
You can stand back in practical terms, too — suggesting a couple of hours' break for people to clear their heads, or that you finish early in order for people to think over proposals and reconvene in the morning.
This approach is useful when you and others can gain through postponement.
It's useful when discussions have become heated and lost any sense of structure or direction.
If someone is behaving rashly and will later regret it, use this approach.
When people are tired and overloaded and cannot think clearly, take a break.
If you are being pressurised by someone, use this tactic; it's the ‘I'm just looking, thank you’ or the ‘I'll go away and think about it’response to the pushy salesperson.
It's indispensable as a negotiating tool: ‘I'll get back to you.’
There are two drawbacks — the first is that this approach is inappropriate if quick decisions have to be made.
The second drawback is that if you spend too much time standing back, commenting on what's going on, using humour and changing the subject you may end up disrupting a collective sense of purpose and fail to meet your objective.
The greater likelihood is that, when you suggest a practical stand-back of the ‘Shall we go to the pub?’ variety, you will have given voice to what a lot of other people have been thinking.
Before I stand back from this chapter, a summary.
Push, Pull and Exit are ways of looking at exerting influence.
If you haven't done so already, you may find it useful to go through the lists of ‘You already use this approach if you…’ and ‘This approach will be  useful if you…‘, ticking which ones you use most.
You should get a picture of how you currently influence and where your strengths could be developed.
Keep visualising the future, and may the power of influence be with you…
THE TACTICS OF TALK
Status signals are constantly being exchanged between us through what we see and hear.
Newspapers are full of messages that appeal to our concepts of status: profiles of high-status people in the qualities and ‘how the mighty are fallen'-type stories in the tabloids.
In August 1990 three luminaries in the City of London, Gerald Ronson, Ernest Saunders and Anthony Parnes, were jailed for insider trading in a takeover bid by Guinness.
The case aroused a great deal of comment.
When we hear of dramatic changes in the defendants’ status, from City supremos to detainees of Her Majesty, aren't our reactions caused by our notions of status?
If they deserved what they got, then they had too much.
If they didn't, then their status was not sufficiently acknowledged.
If they should have been given even more ‘porridge’, then their belief that their own status made them beyond the rule of law was insufficiently punished.
Whatever the viewpoint, we react in terms of status.
Celebrities and politicians vie for prime-time television and radio airtime in order to gain status.
And as radio and television are largely concerned with talk, these aspirants have to be able to do it to succeed in their quest.
On the airwaves the talk is packaged to appeal to and persuade the mass market — a topic that will be dealt with later.
Talk is of enormous relevance in understanding status and in developing your own powers of influence.
Every time you meet someone, they give you rank and recognition according to what you say and how you say it.
You in turn will do the same to them.
Both  parties will give rank and recognition according to individual beliefs and values.
The ‘people like us’ factor will ensure that, the greater the compatibility between what you are apparently conveying in your talk and what the other person values, the better the outcome.
Many conversations are tussles for status.
Unproductive meetings, domestic rows and uncomfortable social chit-chat can all be caused by status needs being ignored and camouflaged.
Misunderstandings arise because of what's been said and the way in which it's been interpreted.
As participants, we often do not understand what is going on in the interchange, so caught up are we with our own agendas.
People spend a lot of money ‘learning’ to talk — in presentation skills, influencing and negotiating, leadership, assertiveness and media training courses.
Conversation analysis and skills training remain largely therapeutic and academic concerns.
It is unrealistic to expect to talk fluently and persuasively in meetings and presentations and on the media if you neglect to interpret and refine your talk skills in everyday conversation.
This chapter has two main themes:
first, that much of our day-to-day conversation is built on messages and devices to do with status.
second, that through understanding how talk works we can choose to play high or low status as appropriate.
We can also identify what others are doing to play high status, and control our reactions.
To examine the tactics of talk we need first to consider…
WHAT TALK IS
Talk is shaped by language.
Some linguistic scholars believe that language shapes thought, rather than vice versa.
Certainly what we talk about and our ability to make ourselves understood is hampered or helped by the language we have at our disposal.
And different languages have words that are exclusive to them and not readily translatable: the Greek word hubris for instance, meaning god-challenging, excessive pride (a sense of super-status — back to the Guinness defendants again), or the Welsh word hiraeth , meaning  a poignant longing for the homeland.
Cultural themes and values are expressed through the scope of words.
The way in which we use language reflects the preoccupations of society and of individuals.
Take the phrase ‘the bottom line’.
In the business-orientated 1980s this phrase came into common usage.
Someone who frequently uses phrases like ‘I think’, ‘in the final analysis’ or ‘the facts are’is indicating a different bent from the speaker who uses ‘I feel’, ‘in increasing awareness’and ‘let's imagine that’.
We talk to:
Express ourselves and to make ourselves understood by others.
We use words to give voice to our thoughts and feelings and to attempt to convey them to other people.
Give and gain information.
Some talkers do this as a large part of their jobs — teachers, policemen, doctors and management consultants, for instance.
You may regard the ‘talk’ you do at work as mainly having this function; a lot of people do.
This implies that people at work operate as robots, devoid of emotional involvement with one another.
This viewpoint can be tempered by an appreciation of how we talk to…
Create, destroy, change and reinforce relationships.
Through talking we attempt to increase understanding, to express some of our needs and hopes, to influence, persuade and motivate others.
Most significantly for the theme of this book we talk to:
Conceal our desires, hide our vulnerability or confusion.
In other words we talk to maintain or elevate our apparent status.
Much of our talk is veiled and indirect.
To describe the underlying messages I've borrowed a term from script-writing, the sub-text, which describes the intentions and motivation behind the words.
(Harold Pinter's scripts in particular are fine examples of dense orchestration of sub-text.)
WHAT'S YOUR SUB TEXT?
Let's take talk at what many would consider its most mundane level: social chit-chat.
Dave meets Andy for the first time and says  ‘Nice to meet you.’
Depending on how Dave makes this greeting, it has a certain meaning.
If Dave is looking over Andy's shoulder for someone more influential to talk to, then his sub-text is ‘I'm being cursorily polite until I see someone better.’
If Dave looks interested in Andy and smiles encouragingly, his sub-text reads, ‘I'm looking forward to chatting with you.’
Behaviour and voice signals behind the verbal camouflage convey much of the meaning.
So why do we lie to this extent?
What prevents us addressing each other directly?
When you meet someone for the first time, that person can
Reject you.
Overpower you.
Accept you.
And you in turn can choose to do the same.
Now you may be thinking that these options sound very dramatic and limited in the context of social chit-chat.
You'd have a point.
There are all sorts of options for how people can respond to one another when they first meet.
The other person could flirt with you, for instance(if your luck was in)–or flatter you or encourage you.
For most of us, though– these responses are not nearly as threatening as the possibility of being rejected or overpowered.
As children, our cries for attention are acknowledged and responded to, ignored or dealt with by aggression.
As adults, too, we remain familiar to these responses when we talk to others.
We are strongly motivated by the need for love, which always carries with it the risk of rejection and withdrawal of that love.
In giving and gaining love we seek closeness and involvement with other people.
We are motivated, too, by the need to assert our individuality, to get our wants and desires fulfilled.
This puts us on a delicately balanced see-saw.
In seeking closeness our wants and desires, our need for self-expression, may be overpowered.
In seeking love, the expression of our wants and desires may cause the other person to reject us.
The nature of social chit-chat, then, and indeed of the bulk of our talk, must be tentative and indirect.
We need to pretend that the threats of being rejected and overpowered do not exist.
We do not wish to appear vulnerable; we want to look good.
We hedge about, sensing how close we can get to someone, and how much of ourselves we can risk revealing.
We want to maintain our sense of status.
Besides these needs for involvement, and independence, we have others — like sex, for one.
If we were to express this need openly and directly in social chit-chat we would risk offending others and we could expect a strong reaction in terms of them rejecting, over-powering or accepting us (in this instance their luck could be in).
In Britain, where there is a high level of indirectness in social conversation, subjects that smack of needs and beliefs — like sex, politics, religion and money — are often fastidiously avoided.
We adapt and suppress our needs in order to behave in a civilised fashion.
In superficial conversation, on the surface at least we accept the image that the other person presents.
It's impolite to challenge their integrity, the veracity of their self-expression.
We cannot leap in and say, ‘You seem nervous/alluring/self-obsessed.’
We would provoke inappropriate responses.
And, besides, we need love and approval — and the intrusive nature of these comments could well preclude that.
The more heavily disguised our needs, the less the risk of being rejected or overpowered — the more easily we can say, ‘You misunderstood me.’
When the other person is an unknown commodity and we cannot predict how they will react, the greater is our requirement for the armour of indirectness.
SMALL TALK AND SUB TEXT
‘How do you do?’,
‘Nice to meet you’, ‘Hi, how are you?’,
‘Did you have a good journey?’
‘All the best’, ‘Ciao’, ‘So long’, ‘See you, then’, ‘Do come again, soon’, ‘See you soon, I hope’, ‘Have a nice day’.
In conversation, just like in air travel, arrivals and departures can be difficult, confusing interactions.
To cover our confusion and to keep our emotional needs under control we deal with them by using stock phrases.
These cliches effectively cover our embarrassment and maintain our status.
Along with behaviour rites such as shaking hands, kissing, taking and giving of coats and getting drinks, they form rituals that make our meetings and partings easier.
Some readers may find ‘small talk’ difficult.
As small talk is so indirect, you may have a sense that it's pretentious and dishonest.
Perhaps you regard the main function of talk to be giving information directly and honestly.
You may view yourself as a ‘straight  talker’— someone who uses words sparingly and appropriately to convey significant messages.
If so, I'd like to suggest that you consider the main purpose of small talk.
Through small talk, we demonstrate that we wish to get involved with other people (and, recluses aside, we all have this need); we establish relationships, we discover similarities and differences, and we build rapport and understanding.
The beginning of conversation with strangers is all about finding something in common— or, to put it more succinctly and to use a very 1990s' word, to discover commonality.
And the words we use are a small part of the process.
You may discover early on in an interaction through words that you share common ground (that you both went to the same school, for instance).
As important, though, will be more intangible commonality: a sense of humour, a cynical attitude, an acquisitive personality.
Effective small talk often runs to a formula.
The overall direction of small talk is that it starts in the general and becomes more specific.
Then the formula is:
Make an innocuous statement.
Follow it with a question that involves the other person.
An example:Dave : There are more people than I expected here.
How come you're here?
Andy : I'm the marketing manager for the company.
And you?
Dave : I'm one of your suppliers.
Dave Smith.
I supply most of your stationery.
Andy : Then you'll have dealt with my office.
Did we just get some new recycled stuff from you?
Dave : That's right…(and so on ).
POWER PLAY IN CONVERSATION
Warning : This next section could dramatically change your approach to conversation.
‘If other people are going to talk, then conversation is simply impossible.
‘James McNeill Whistler
To build and maintain status, talking well helps.
And understanding the values of self-expression and commonality are what talking well is about.
This statement flies in the face of what many regard as high-status behaviour.
The widespread belief is that to build status you need to bulldoze everyone else — your self-expression and agenda should dominate; you operate by overpowering others.
But what happens then is that people stop telling you things.
You make decisions in an isolated, ego-gratifying manner.
Your information supplies become depleted.
You cannot capitalise on other people's good ideas.
You fail to take into consideration subordinates/ customers/clients/your nearest and dearest.
You stop getting support, and your influence is diminished.
The need for excessive control in conversation can come from a deep fear that other people's ideas are threatening.
To prevent them being expressed, you stage a pre-emptive strike.
Status is about receiving attention and recognition.
To gain attention and recognition we need to be able to attend to and recognise others.
Acquiring status is about learning to influence others and to feel in control of situations.
Security in your status comes from learning to spot the control tactics of others, to resist them and to use them yourself where appropriate.
To do this, you need to be able to understand how status games work, and what devices are used.
The following guide to the tactics of talk is divided into two sections: Talk Tactics and Control, and Talk Tactics and Commonality.
Some of the tactics used to control and involve are the same; but the sub-text — the intentions behind them — differs.
TALK TACTICS AND CONTROL
Here are twelve talk tactics that we use to gain control:
Dominating the conversation 
By talking a lot, loudly, and expressing strong opinions early on, and frequently.
If you're after domination, it's also immensely satisfying to have the last word in a conversation.
Sub-text : I am an important person who deserves to be listened to.
What I think is more important than the reactions of others.
Comment : The bane of the quiet dinner à deux you were looking forward to in your local French restaurant, and of that meeting which you hoped would reach a rapid resolution.
Remaining uninvolved in the conversation 
By contributing little, listening impassively without showing response or encouragement to the speaker to continue.
Sub-text : ‘I am evaluating you and disinclined to reveal my responses.’
Or even ‘I wish I wasn't here.’
Comment : Behaviour used by people who feel uneasy with their status, and find that this ‘low reaction’ often intimidates others.
Can be useful behaviour in negotiation.
A favourite of some chief executives.
Frequent interrupting and talking over others 
Useful overpowering tactic.
Can be motivated by enthusiasm.
Sub-text : ‘I have to convey my message, which is more important than yours (and I may not be listening to you).’
Comment : Research shows that men interrupt women far more than they do other men.
Women interrupt men to a far lesser extent.
In a typical doctor-patient exchange, a doctor will make on average six times as many interruptions as the patient.
Any doubt still that status controls conversation?
Asking a lot of questions 
Rapid-fire questions can seem like an interrogation.
Questions can be very controlling: for instance– ‘Why don't we go out?’ means that the answer has to he well reasoned out.
I hey can also really put people on the spot: ‘Shouldn't you do that?’(really a command), ‘Why has this happened?’(needing justification).
Sub-text : ‘I have the power to quiz you, and your discomfort at finding this intrusive does not matter.’
Comment : Questions can be used for overt displays of snobbery, especially in culture, travel and fashion.
‘Have you read the latest Antonia Byatt? /been to Rajastan?’ or, as someone recently asked me, ‘Do you think Jasper Conran is the new Yves St Laurent?’
Questions like this may be asked by people who assume that you have the same sort of lifestyle as they do, or who are clumsily trying to find out whether you do.
Giving advice 
‘Speak up’, ‘Don't worry’, ‘In your place I'd…
‘, ‘You could try…
‘. There is something enormously satisfying in giving another person advice, especially if they appear to take it seriously.
Relentless advice-giving can diminish the other person's status, in that it implies they need it.
When advice becomes orders, the other person's will is overpowered.
Sub-text : ‘Mother knows best.’
Comment : Lots of us do this for a living.
Interpreting and judging 
‘Men are aggressive'– ‘He's not giving you enough space’, ‘The problem is money’, ‘I know exactly how you feel’, ‘It'll never happen.’
Impossible not to do.
There, I've just done it.
We like to make sense of things, to analyse– to generalise, to see ourselves as rational problem solvers.
Sub-text : I am a skilled interpreter who makes sense of things — better than you do.
You mean what I would mean if I used those words.
Comment : Some of us would like to be psychoanalysts.
Criticising and praising 
‘What a lovely little room’, ‘I'm not that keen on the food here’, ‘You have done well'– ‘I prefer your hair that way.’
Criticism connected to choices we have made — about restaurants, films, books to read — may be interpreted as reflecting on the person who made the choice or suggestion, though this may not be the critic's intention.
Another subtle form of criticism occurs when someone else is lavishly praised and you're left to make a comparison: ‘That report Angela's done is truly excellent’(sub-text: ‘It's a shame yours wasn't’).
Sub-text : ‘My relative status compared to yours entitles me to criticise or praise you.’
Comment : Used widely throughout our lives to assert status — by parents, children, spouses, teachers, trainers and those we work with/for.
Giving sympathy 
‘Oh you poor thing, how awful for you’, ‘Don't go through that experience again alone — give us a call — we're here to help.’
If you're dealing with someone who plays ‘victim’ to get by in life, then this will be just what they're after.
And they might use the sympathy (and sense of guilt that you're better off than they are) you feel towards them to control you .
People frequently give sympathy where it's not wanted — where the other person perhaps regards themselves as strong, determined, a fighter.
Liberal doses of sympathy compromise the other person's self-image.
Sub-text : ‘I'm in a stronger position in that I can feel sorry for you, and you are vulnerable.
If I can keep you down, I stay up.’
Comment : We often react in this way when we're unsure what emotional needs the other person is expressing, and how to deal with them.
Anecdotes that bolster self-image 
‘And I said to him, ‘Push off, mate, I'm not standing for that’— and he did, pretty quickly! ',
‘I cleared out my wardrobe at the weekend — and took a stack of clothes down to Oxfam.’
Some of us constantly tell stories where we depict ourselves as having the qualities we secretly think we lack or that others need reminding of.
Sub-text : ‘I am admirable.’
Another version of this tactic is to refer everything back to yourself, to personalise every topic.
And if the topic is something that you can't personalise, then you change the direction of the conversation so that you can: ‘Back to what you were saying earlier, when that happened to me, I…
‘. If that fails, you may decide to disengage from the conversation.
Sub-text : ‘My experience is extremely significant.’
Comment : Self-deprecating stories are often funny, and get us liked by others as they indicate we don't take ourselves too seriously.
Name dropping, recalling credentials, using jargon, excluding others 
‘I said to Salman the other day’(uttered at a dinner party I attended), ‘When I was director of marketing…
‘, ‘I'm obsessing when I want to be impacting.’
Blatant attempts at suggesting status and covering up inadequacies are used all the time in the business world — to show connections and influence, establish a good track record or to create a mystique about something.
If you want to get the boss's ear it may mean excluding other people from the conversation, although they are still present.
Sub-text : ‘I need to impress.’
Comment : Watch out for salesmen who use jargon to imply superior knowledge and understanding.
Having created confusion, they can then give advice in order to control the sale.
Sending cryptic messages 
‘There will be changes in company structure in the autumn’, ‘Yes, Jane mentioned you were feeling a little under par at the meeting’, ‘Watch your back with him’ and, as told to an actor post-performance in the dressing room by a friend and rival, ‘What about you, then?’
Cryptic speech makes the most of the indirect nature of talk.
Messages are very heavily veiled so that interpretation is difficult.
When cryptic messages are used threateningly they play on fears — of being inadequate, of not having job security, of having limited knowledge and understanding.
Unwittingly, sometimes, cryptic speech is used by people who have great trouble being direct.
Talking cryptically carries the insurance policy of being able to say, ‘You misinterpreted me.’
Sub-text : ‘I have the power to predict, to warn you, to threaten you, to criticise you, but I choose to give you this message in a very subtle way.
It's up to you whether you think you're using sharp powers of interpretation or acting according to paranoia.
I am unable to expand upon this message.’
Comment : Pernicious.
Know what I mean?
Dodging and diminishing 
‘Oh, you'll be fine’, ‘You've still got that problem with Max?…
This room needs a coat of paint, don't you think?’,
‘I'll tell you a funny story about that’.
We can maintain control of conversation by avoiding other people's agendas.
For instance, if you've got a problem that you're keen to talk about and I rush in to reassure you that it's not a problem, I dodge your agenda.
I might offer a clichéd solution: ‘No use crying over spilt milk.’
If I suddenly transfer my attention to an object or some aspect of the physical environment (after all, inanimate things are much easier to deal with, aren't they — they don't have emotions) when you're revealing thoughts and feelings, then once again I've dodged your agenda.
And if I use humour to avoid your problem or make light of it, then I diminish its significance.
I command you not to take yourself so seriously.
Sarcasm and ridicule are humorous forms of criticism — the perpetrator has the get-out clause: ‘I was only joking.’
Sub-text : ‘I'm choosing the direction of this conversation.’
Comment : We avoid embarrassment, and involvement in other people's problems by dodging and diminishing.
We maintain our status by concealing our inability to help others.
DEALING WITH CONTROL TACTICS: COUNTER-STRATEGY
Transcripts of conversation reveal that involved parties switch from one control tactic to another, and that different tactics effectively counter one another.
For example:Jennifer : I think we should go with the offer.
It's the best we're going to get, and if we don't take it now we won't have another.
[Judging .]
Helen : Shouldn't we wait a couple of months?
[Giving advice through a question .]
Jennifer : No.
I know this is tough on you — I'm sorry for the pressure you're going to be under, you poor old thing.
[Sympathising .]
Helen : Oh, don't worry about little old me — I'll be all right.
[Dodging .]
Why do you want to act now?
[Questioning .]
When both parties are actively seeking control and using similar tactics, the conversation can escalate into conflict or a competition.
If Jennifer continued to ladle the sympathy on Helen– the latter might tactically have brought into the conversation something that she knows to be a vulnerable area for Jennifer.
Helen would then seize the opportunity to use the controlling tactic of sympathy on Jennifer.
For instance:Jennifer : I think the time is right.
I've trusted my instincts in the past and they've usually been right.
I'll give you lots of support —Helen : Is this a good time for you to do this, though?
So soon after the company restructure?
Jennifer : Yes, I think so, I —Helen : You don't want to get ill again.
We felt so sorry for you at the shareholders' meeting.
[Sympathy from Helen, with the sub-text: ‘Got you! ' ]
Here are some suggestions for countering control tactics:
The dominator 
Comment on what's going on.
Use talk analysis.
When strong opinions are being expressed, ask for reasons.
‘Can I have my say, please?’,
‘Can I ask you why you hold that opinion so vociferously?’,
‘I need to say something.’
Interrupt — difficult to do if you've been brought up to be polite, but necessary to learn.
Dodging through wry humour works, too: ‘I don't think the next door office have quite your entire thesis on this subject.’
The evaluator 
Ask for their opinion: ‘What do you think of what I've said so far?’
And if that is responded to cryptically ('OK'), then ask for advice.
Most of us, especially when seeking control, can't resist giving advice.
The interruptor 
Analyse again.
‘May I say my piece and then hear yours?’,
‘Can we both stop talking at once?’
Interrupt back, but more loudly, and include praise: ‘That's an excellent point you're making there and I'd like to say that…
‘. This counter-tactic works very well with most people.
You acknowledge their status and they'll be quite happy to bask in reflected glory for a while as you say your piece.
You may even convert them to an ally.
The interrogator 
Ask open questions back — that is, ones that require longer answers like questions beginning with ‘How?’(which can seem challenging).
‘How d'you come to be here today?’
If questions are used to assert superiority ('Have you been to Rajastan? ') then you can disarm the questioner by using real or feigned naivety.
‘No, where is it?’
The adviser 
State what you want.
‘I'm not asking for advice– but I want to talk through something with you.
Can I do that?’,
‘I'd be happier making up my own mind about this — thanks for your interest.’
And again analyse: ‘You're giving me a lot of advice here from your viewpoint — I need to plot my own course.’
The judge 
Ask for motives: ‘On what basis are you making that interpretation?’,
‘What are your reasons for holding that view?’
Use humour: ‘Gosh, you've got me analysed’, ‘I didn't know you'd studied psychology’, ‘My, but you are decisive.’
Let the other person know that you know they're not God.
‘So this is your opinion?’
The critic 
Ask for specific description: ‘What specifically was wrong with the report?’
Ask for motivation: ‘How come you're mentioning  the report now?’
And the cruncher for dealing with excessive criticism or praise: ‘Thank you for saying that.’
If someone is hell-bent on controlling you through criticism you stop them by agreeing with what they say ('Yes, you're quite right about the report') and then remaining quiet.
Be sure, though, that you don't use this just because a need to control and not to appear vulnerable prevents you accepting criticism in any form.
The sympathiser 
‘You can disarm people who use sympathy as a control tactic by emphasising the positive and again analysing your position.
‘Thank you for your sympathy, but that's not really what I'm after.
The situation has its plus side, you know.
I'm meeting lots of new people, and since the divorce I've thrown myself into my job.’
The cryptic commentator 
Ask gently, without appearing defensive, for further information.
Be persistent.
Better to lose face and be open about not understanding the cryptic message, than to lose sleep at night over it.
If further information is not available, establish a time when it will be.
Use the same tactic to deal with name dropping and use of jargon: ‘I don't understand who/what you're talking about.’
If you're being excluded from the conversation, concentrate on listening supportively and in an interested manner.
The braggart 
Anecdotes that bolster self-image reveal a great deal to you about the speaker.
Use that information.
Remember the anecdote about the actor who, after talking about himself at length, then says, ‘But that's enough about me, let's talk about you — what do you think of me?’
Flattery also works here — if you want to say something about yourself, suggest to the speaker that you're choosing them to confide in.
The artful dodger 
Again, analysis of the situation can help: ‘We've got away from what I wanted to discuss — can we go back to it?’
Using ‘we’ as opposed to‘I’suggests collective responsibility for dodging and diminishing.
If the dodging is being done to ignore expressed emotion, then keep expressing it: ‘Can I say again how anxious I feel about this?’
TALK TACTICS AND COMMONALITY
To talk well, we need to take and surrender control during conversation.
And finding commonality involves conquering any fear that the other person poses a threat, and allowing them ‘airtime’.
If you are someone who constantly uses control tactics, the following list will be helpful to you.
In the next section I aim to show that the tactics of finding commonality are used as much to assert status as are the tactics of control.
You may pride yourself on being a generous listener who is very interested in others, and use this pride to excuse you from using control tactics.
Perhaps the threat of being rejected or over-powered by others, and experiences in your conditioning, lead you to avoid controlling.
If you don't go up in your plane, there's no risk of being shot down.
To encourage commonality we:
Disclose a great deal 
‘Gosh, I'm so sorry I'm late, I've had a terrible journey and on top of that I've got the flu.
I'm really very sorry — I'm completely disorganised this morning.’
Disclosing things about yourself often encourages other people to open up too.
But in inappropriate situations and when talking with someone who is quite guarded, over-disclosure may be interpreted as intrusive.
Do you really answer the question, ‘How are you?’
Sub-text : ‘I'm emotionally overloaded, so I'm going to dump some on you.
I'm revealing so much about myself as I'm an example you should follow.
I'm really well adjusted so I can let it all hang out.
Why can't you?’
Comment : This can be a protective tactic and can embarrass and undermine the other person.
Talking too much 
When nervous, some of us talk too much.
We sense that during pauses assessments are being made, and we don't like this.
Some of us see proof of good relationships in endless chatter without breaks.
Others see proof of the same in little need to talk, sitting in empathetic silence together.
Apologising for ourselves 
Apologising and being self-deprecating can let you off the hook.
You're not into playing apparent high status.
People can think as badly of you as you do of yourself.
Sub-text : ‘Have no expectations of me, and then I won't let you down.
I am low-status so you can't do anything to diminish me.
I'm instructing you how to respond to me.’
Comment : Very useful device when you want to ingratiate yourself with another person who is trying hard to play high status.
But they could, of course, take it to indicate that they can trample all over you.
Reflective listening 
A counselling technique, where the listener does not pass judgement or give advice, but focuses all attention on the speaker.
The listener indicates that they're listening through non-verbal signals, mms and aahs, stretched out final syllables (‘and th-e-n’), paraphrasing and summarising.
Thoughts and feelings behind the words are interpreted.
It's a deceptively simple idea that's very difficult to put into practice.
Sub-text : ‘I am here for you, to act as a sounding board expressing empathy.
My agenda does not matter (though I maintain my status in not revealing anything about myself).
I'm acting as your analyst (and isn't this extremely generous of me as you're not paying?).
Comment : Isn't life too short to listen to some people?
Being over-polite 
A lot of us are brought up not to talk too much about ourselves, not to interrupt, not to talk about certain subjects.
At all costs we must avoid appearing to want attention and to cause controversy.
Some of us are reserved good listeners who see our prime function in conversation as encouraging the other person.
We wish to be seen as sensitive and considerate towards others.
‘Please, what were you going to say next?’
‘No, after you.’
Sub-text : ‘I'm not making myself vulnerable, I don't want to deal with the unpredictable or get close to you.’
Comment : Politeness can create distance.
If you're over-polite in conversation, your use of distance may suggest that you want to play high status by keeping the other person at bay, below you.
When the other person is less formal and more forthcoming, he or she may well feel compromised by their self-disclosure which has not been reciprocated.
They may have a sense of reduced status.
Stiff, formal politeness sometimes helps us cope with situations in which we feel awkward.
If you choose to abandon formality ('Why don't we discuss this over a drink? ') then you are  playing high status in that you're taking this decision, and allowing the other person perhaps to rise above their station.
Advising, passing judgement, criticising, praising, flattering 
Most frequently we do this to people we are close to, and to people with whom we think we've got a lot in common.
After all, we want to help them.
And it does take courage to do these things, as well as a belief that you are, of course, right.
Sub-text : ‘I'm only doing this for your own good, to be helpful.
You're just like me, I understand you.’
Comment : You may be offering closeness and commonality that's not reciprocated and is overpowering.
Telling stories that describe how you had a similar experience fall into the same camp.
When you flatter people, you acknowledge their status.
Praise can often disguise the sub-text ‘I want to be more like you, and I am envious of what you have.’
When the praise is lavish, the receiver may interpret the speaker's sub-text to be: ‘You have low self-esteem and magnanimous me will build it up.’
The intention is to patronise.
Use indirect questions 
‘Can I do anything to help?’,
‘Are you doing anything tonight?’,
‘What do you think of my hair?’,
‘How are you?’
We ask indirect questions so that we do not cause offence or impose on other people.
These questions are often opening gambits for a negotiation of some sort, even if it's just for interest and approval from one another.
We have expectations or scenarios in our heads about how they will be answered.
So for instance:Anne : Are you doing anything tonight?
Mark : Yes, I'm playing football.
Anne : Oh [feels miffed, status diminished, he's not considering her like she's considering him ].
Her imagined scenario was :Anne : Are you doing anything tonight?
Mark : No, what would you like to do?
Anne : Go to the Italian restaurant [her status and need for control acknowledged, without her needing to sound bossy or assertive ].
Sub-text : ‘I matter so much and my feelings are so important that you are able to read my mind.’
Comment : Indirect questions are used all the time by people  who need their status boosting through being given buckets of approval, or who are looking for a reason for punishing other people should they not fall in with the anticipated scenario.
Showing involvement through strong responses 
‘Wow, really exciting!’,
‘God, how utterly appalling!’,
‘You're really terrific!’
Conveying enthusiasm and reaction is done to show involvement.
But if the other party doesn't use this level of response themselves, they may regard you as insincere or phoney.
They may feel patronised.
Sub-text : ‘I need to be expressive here so that the person will like me.
This person is not very sensitive, so they need to register strong reactions.’
Comment : Can also make the other person think that you lack powers of discrimination.
Complaining 
‘Isn't it hot here?’
‘The boss is really getting to all of us, now.’
Voicing of complaints can be done by someone who assumes the status of acting as collective mouthpiece.
Sub-text : ‘Everyone else is feeling the same as me.’
Comment : Sometimes mistakenly done to create commonality by people who assume that others share their grievances.
Moaners get attention but they're not much fun to have around!
Humour 
‘Have you heard the one about…?’
Humour is known as ‘the great leveller’.
It is, provided that other people share your sense of humour and the timing is appropriate.
Sub-text : ‘Let's not get heavy here…life's a funny business.’
‘You shouldn't take it so seriously…
‘Comment : When you make other people laugh, you defend yourself against them taking you too seriously.
You're less likely to be criticised for what you really believe in.
Sending cryptic messages 
This has to be the best of the commonality tactics.
It plays heavily on indirectness– intimacy and common understanding.
Sub-text : ‘We both know what we're talking about here.’
An example:Sally : I'd better go soon.
William : Do you have to?
Have you got an early start?
Sally : No, not especially.
It's just, well…maybe I'll stay a little longer.
William : Yes, have another drink.
I usually get an alarm call…
No comment .
DEALING WITH COMMONALITY TACTICS: COUNTER-STRATEGY
Commonality tactics are frequently used unconsciously to lower the other person's status.
This occurs when the speaker fails to appreciate the differences between speaker and listener.
The speaker assumes that the listener shares the speaker's need for closeness and the view that both parties have a lot in common.
These tactics are also used a great deal to achieve the user's disguised objective.
The salesperson who shows great interest in you, for instance, and probes gently to find out about you: who listens receptively, with a lot of head nodding, so that you start nodding too, and continue to nod when the sales contract and pen are put in your hand.
Here is some counter-strategy to deal with commonality tactics.
If someone is:
Talking too much, over-disclosing 
Ask closed questions which require yes, no or one-word answers.
Shift the conversation to a less personal topic.
Apologising 
Ask them why they are apologising, or inform them that they don't need to: ‘Why are you apologising?’,
‘Please don't apologise for yourself.’
Listening reflectively 
When someone is doing this it is very difficult to gain commitment.
Ask them specifically for their advice or opinion.
Being over-polite 
Analyse what's going on.
Disclose that you are finding the proceedings formal and ask if the other person minds being more informal.
A change of environment, from board-room to bar, say, may help.
Praising, showing strong responses 
When you suspect that someone is flattering you in order to manipulate, or responding in an artificial manner, ask for specific detail.
‘What was it about the report that you found so interesting, for future reference?’
If the praise is genuine, the giver should be able to be specific.
In this instance you may be regarded as falling short in the modesty stakes, as your question may be interpreted to mean that you want even more adulation.
Your decision to use this ploy depends on whether or not you think such a misinterpretation is preferable to being conned.
Using indirect questions 
Try to get the other person to be as specific as possible.
‘Are you doing anything tonight?’ could be followed by ‘Yes, but it's not a definite commitment.
What would you like to do?’
Be forthcoming, and hope that this tactic becomes contagious.
Complaining 
When another person is complaining as a collective voice and you don't agree with their grievance, then voice your opinion.
Your silence may be taken to mean tacit agreement.
By now you should have an idea of the talk tactics that you and others use to play status.
If you are someone who is interpreted as aggressive and would like to be less so– you can increase your adaptability for different situations and people by using commonality tactics.
But if you come across as a push-over, albeit a likeable one (but not someone who commands respect), study and use the control tactics.
Specific points to concentrate on in either situation are described below.
USING TALK TACTICS
Our responses to talk tactics are dictated by how we believe we should react to others.
Some of us are far more comfortable asserting our status through control, while others will be more comfortable seeking commonality.
Which of the above tactics do you make most use of?
Under pressure, we tend to use that which is familiar and comfortable.
Some people assert their status almost exclusively  through control tactics, and find it almost impossible to ask questions that are not disguised advice or judgement.
They cannot ask another person an open question along the lines of ‘What do you think/feel about this?’
Unconsciously, they may regard those sort of questions as intrusive or threatening, in that the other person may not say what they wish to hear.
Learning to Use Commonality Tactics
If you are one of those who habitually use control tactics, you may wish to increase your adaptability with others and extend your range of influence through using commonality tactics.
And the more people you influence, the higher your status.
When you're not getting anywhere with someone, you can choose to switch streams.
Focus specifically on:
Using open questions 
Listen to answers and respond to what's been said, rather than force your own agenda.
Clarify and summarise what's been said and pick up on points in stories: ‘And then?’
Active listening 
Give others your attention and concentrate on what they're saying.
Let your body language, eye contact and facial expression show involvement and receptivity.
Remind yourself that you can evaluate what's been said, and take time to consider it.
You don't have to leap in and pass judgement or give advice immediately.
Disclosing information 
Give others nuggets of information about yourself and take them into your confidence.
This doesn't mean exposing yourself so that you become vulnerable.
But if you reveal some of your experience and history, others will trust you more readily and be more willing to open up themselves.
Learning to Use Control Tactics
If, on the other hand, you are someone who restricts themselves to using commonality tactics, you may end up as a martyr.
This is self-defeating unless you believe that being constantly quashed by the  talk tactics of others means that you'll go to heaven.
Take the lead in conversation through:
Expressing your opinions and feelings 
If others disagree, they are not necessarily attacking you as a person, only your viewpoint.
And some people misguidedly use disagreement with others as the main instrument of asserting their status.
Curbing responses that may be interpreted as compliant and acquiescing 
For instance, if you are listening to someone and you are not sure whether you agree with their content, measure your behaviour.
Instead of nodding enthusiastically, saying ‘yes’, ‘aaha’ and smiling a great deal, continue to listen attentively but use words like ‘perhaps’, ‘maybe’and ‘that's possible’to show that you are also assessing the content.
Stand up for yourself 
Appreciating and considering others does not mean that you neglect to do these things for yourself.
Use analysis of the situation you are in as your key tactic: ‘I've not been able to make my point.
Can I, please?’,
‘I want to say something without interruption.
Can I do that, please?’,
‘I have views which I would like to express.’
THE LANGUAGE OF STATUS
‘Is that Mr Davies?
Good morning, Mr Davies.
This is Dr Rees speaking.’
Through our use of titles we keep people at a distance.
Dropping off titles and surnames indicates greater familiarity.
And allowing someone to call you by your first name ('Please, call me John') has the sub-text: ‘I am higher-status than you are and so can grant you this permission.’
Some of us play God through our use of language.
We assert ‘the facts are’, ‘the case is’ and ‘the truth is’when what we really mean is ‘I interpret the facts to mean’, ‘my opinion is’or ‘I think.’
‘God-speak’ often sounds pompous and bombastic and the sub-text can suggest: ‘I'm not really confident about my thoughts and opinions, so I'll couch them as holy proclamations.’
In a sense, then, this use  of language is low-status play, though you may acquire some disciples who are sufficiently intimidated by your ‘divine intervention’.
Through implication, language can diminish or elevate the status of others.
Many women resent being addressed as ‘my dear’, feeling patronised by the sense of ownership and familiarity conveyed through the description.
Avuncular men in their fifties and sixties may not be aware that this term of endearment causes such a reaction; you could enlighten them by telling them that the form of address is out-of-date and out-of-favour these days.
A more extreme tactic is to start addressing them in similar vein — using ‘my dear’ or something worse back (at a seminar I attended, ‘baby’was suggested…but if it's your boss you're dealing with you may need to decide whether your job's worth it).
Addressing someone as ‘young man’ or ‘old boy’, shortening their name without their consent, or calling them by their surname alone, are all instances where forms of address may be used to denote the speaker's higher status.
Language is also used to create mystique.
When computer salespeople start talking about bytes and mice, beware.
They are playing on the fact that most of us do not like to appear ignorant or ill informed.
They are talking a language we probably do not understand, and which they hope will impress us and befuddle us and increase their status.
The next tactic they use is to give us advice.
They enlighten us on the mystery, we are grateful to them, we trust them and then we buy their product.
While all this is going on, the computer salesperson will repeatedly use the customer's Christian name: ‘Now, John, you see that when I do this with the mouse…
John, why don't you have a go?’
They do this to make us feel that we are significant — they are recognising the customer as an individual.
The customer is made to feel that her or his status is acknowledged.
Gentle reader, here are some counter-tactics.
Jargon is an effective form of shorthand, provided everyone understands it.
If you don't understand what someone is describing, ask what they mean.
It doesn't have to sound confrontational; contrast ‘I don't understand what you're talking about’(sub-text: ‘you are inept at talking’) with ‘I'm sorry I'm so dim [mock disclosure — and quite appropriate in my opinion, given the indirect nature of conversation], but could you explain that to me again in plain English?’(sub-text: ‘I'm not understanding you, so can you say it differently?’)
When, gentle reader, someone over-uses your name as a controlling tactic, a throwaway comment disguising an analysis of what is  going on can be most effective: ‘Gosh, it's interesting how you call me by my Christian name so much’(sub-text: ‘I've rumbled you — stop it’).
() r you can play the same game back: ‘Now, Mr X, can you tell me the price, please…and then, Mr X, the payment terms?’
Now, gentle reader, I expect at my third reference to you as ‘gentle reader’ you're starting to feel rather less than gentle towards me.
Aren't I playing high status in that I can tell you who you are?
We use adjectives to belittle or increase people's status and to create associations between their status as individuals and their attributes and possessions.
‘You're such a sweet little thing’, ‘You're a big boy’(more often thought than said aloud), ‘I got your little report’(sub-text: ‘from little you’)‘What a magnificent office’(sub-text: ‘and aren't you a magnificent person sitting in it?’).
Neil Kinnock, according to newspaper reports, has been advised to stop using ‘Hello, love’ and ‘Hi, kid’in public.
He was, it seems, especially keen on using the latter when addressing old age pensioners.
His use of language reflects his accessible, informal, spontaneous campaigning style.
It's difficult to imagine his rival for so many years, Margaret Thatcher, saying ‘Hi, kid’ to anyone.
In their two contrasting styles we return to the main theme of this chapter: boyo Neil's communicating style emphasising ‘commonality’; and the formal prime ministerial Margaret Thatcher style emphasising ‘control’.
SHYNESS AND STATUS
In a social context, it can be difficult to assert status and gain recognition if you're shy.
Your shyness may, of course, help you achieve status in other areas.
If you're striving to write a great novel or to invent a piece of computer software, the very shyness that makes you avoid social events may allow you more time and motivation to pursue your solitary goals.
For most of us, though, gaining recognition from others is to some extent dependent on our confidence in letting others know who we are and what we're about.
So shyness can be a considerable impediment to gaining status.
And shyness is something that's linked to self-assurance, already mentioned in Chapter Four.
Here's a piece of self-disclosure.
Several years ago I met someone who is now a very famous television celebrity and did a piece on the radio with them.
The item went well, and it was reported to me that the celebrity was very pleased with my contribution.
About two-and-a-half years later I walked into a small clothes shop to see the celebrity holding court.
My instant response was that he would not remember who I was (poor old little insignificant me).
Embarrassed at my ineptitude in the situation, I feigned great interest in a rack of clothes at the back of the shop.
I became aware that the celebrity was looking at me fixedly (either trying to remember who I was, in expectation of acknowledgement, or in surprise that I should cut him dead in such a manner).
I fumbled with the clothes, cringing.
It was much too late for me to acknowledge him.
I sidled out of the shop, mortified.
I had done what a lot of people do when struck with shyness — tried to detach myself from a situation because I anticipated rejection.
Many shy people find the role of the detached evaluator a useful one: it gives them a sense of power over those people who need a lot of obvious approval, yet the role doesn't demand too much of a contribution from them.
They can play at being still waters that run deep.
The limitations of this role are considerable, and such people can hardly expect others to be receptive, forthcoming and responsive towards them.
There were several repercussions following my slight incident in the clothes shop.
Since then, through third parties, two opportunities have come my way to work with that celebrity.
Neither came to fruition, and I shall never know why.
Suffice to say, the ‘clothes shop debacle’ has assumed an inflated significance in my mind.
It was a salutary lesson for me on risking rejection and on my perceived notions of status.
With hindsight, I should have said ‘Hallo’ and then, if necessary, reminded him where we'd previously met.
Another useful role for the shy person is that of the ‘good listener’.
Undoubtedly, listening well is a vital conversational skill.
But if you only listen well and make little contribution yourself, you risk suppressing your own needs and leaving the other party feeling cheated and exposed at the end of the conversation.
After all, they were generous and kept throwing the ball at you — they played the game, but you didn't play back.
Here are some suggestions for dealing with shyness:
‘Shy people are selfish’ goes the saying, implying that such people  are too preoccupied with themselves.
‘Shy people have an overgenerous view of others’ might be more accurate.
When struck by shyness, we think that other people are very interested in us and evaluating us.
In some situations, like interviews, this may be partially true.
But lots of other agendas are being ignored, like the ‘What's in it for me?’ factor.
In social situations, most of us want to enjoy ourselves through pleasant company and good food and wine.
We may want to make useful contacts with others.
Few of us (unless we are looking for this) want to become fixated with interest on another individual.
So, remember, you're not that interesting…
Very little of what's said in conversation is direct and meaningful.
There's an apocryphal story about former US President Franklin D. Roosevelt, that his opening gambit in chit-chat was often ‘My grandmother's just died.’
This was frequently received by comments like ‘How nice’ or ‘Oh, really’.
For the tongue-tied it's worth preparing some stock comments and even preparing for social chit-chat by noting interesting stories in the media.
When you first trot these out, you may find that to your ears they sound artificial and contrived.
Persevere, and they should become more natural.
Remember the formula for social talk: an innocuous statement followed by a question moving from the general to the specific.
Ask yourself ‘What are the pay-offs of being shy, and do I have a vested interest in maintaining them?’
As a shy child, you may have experienced shame and humiliation from people and situations.
In turn this may have led to you getting attention, protection and sensitivity from some people.
You may be still getting this cotton wool treatment, and may not want to relinquish it.
If you choose to do so, then prepare for what may seem like tough responses.
In his book Coping with Blushing Dr Robert Edelmann suggests replacing negative thoughts by positive ones, which takes time and considerable application.
Repeat phrases such as‘I can cope’, ‘I can think rationally’ and ‘I can manage this situation.’
Remind yourself that blushing is not the worst thing that can happen to you.
Focusing on other people helps too.
If you can choose whom to talk to, pick someone who looks as though they have something  in common with you — be it gender, age or an aura of self-effacement similar to the one you are experiencing.
Introduce yourself straightaway, smile, make direct eye contact and ask open questions which indicate your interest in the other person.
Get yourself as relaxed as possible before going into daunting situations.
Use breathing and relaxation exercises (see pp 185 and 192) to reduce physical tension.
Disclosing what's happening to you can make you feel better and, as described earlier in this chapter, it can also raise your status: ‘I feel quite tongue-tied in this company’ or ‘That comment's made me go quite red!’
If this disclosure is made light-heartedly, so much the better.
In doing this, you maintain status by showing that you are aware and not ashamed of what is going on.
And many people will value your sensitivity.
GETTING IN AND OUT OF CONVERSATION
Tactfully joining in and getting out of conversation can be difficult.
In the indirect business of conversation, it is as well to do it as skilfully as possible and without leaving others feeling awkward.
Commenting on the process of communication can again help: ‘Can I join your conversation?’,
‘Do you mind if I talk to you?’,
‘I've enjoyed talking to you.
Please excuse me — I'm off for a refill’, ‘I'm enjoying our chat, but I've just seen someone whom I need to speak to urgently.’
Avoid behaviour indicating sub-text like: ‘You're boring me rigid and I'm looking for someone more interesting to talk to.’
Other people don't need to be diminished by you in that way — and in any case it shows you're insecure about your own status.
STATUS AT WORK
What do you do?’ asks the polite guest.
You reply.
When you tell her you're an estate agent, she tries to cover her contempt.
When you tell her you're a doctor, she looks impressed.
When you tell her you're a housewife/house-husband, she patronises you.
She defines your status by what you do.
In our society, with the erosion of class barriers as we used to know them job description is an important measure of social standing.
So one of the first things many of us seek to find out about other people is what they do.
And occupational psychologists have shown that the definition of your job by others can affect your performance.
If you can find meaning and reason for what you do and a sense of useful function, then your job will seem significant.
The value that your job is given by other people can make it seem worthwhile.
It gives you status.
Why do we work?
Research into people's needs and motivation indicates that it's not just for the money — the financial aspect can be over-stressed.
Paul McCartney and Madonna, Robert Maxwell and Rupert Murdoch all have more money than they will ever need.
Yet they continue to work.
Why?
For status and self-fulfilment needs, perhaps?
In less lofty circles, pay rises do not compensate for changes in other conditions at work.
This insight came from a cab-driver:
I've been on this circuit for six months now, but I've been driving cabs for twenty-four years.
I had to leave my other company.
They brought in this computerised call system which meant I took all my calls from a computer [thumps  dashboard ]here.
Well, it really speeded things up and I was making quite a bit more, but I missed the chat.
I mean, the caller and I — well, we've got a relationship.
And it doesn't matter where I am, I can call him up.
It's social, innit?
Work's got to be social.
Money, though, is the most tangible indicator we have of the value of our work, and it is inextricably linked with status.
When employees ask for more money it is a comparative exercise.
If the management m a company get a pay rise, then it can be argued that the shop-floor workers should get one too.
If nurses' jobs are given a certain value, then ambulance workers' and hospital porters' wages may be calculated by comparing their contribution with that of the nurses.
The money we are paid is recognition for our status compared to that of other people.
Several studies have been made of people's needs and how they are satisfied by work (see Further Reading).
Individuals have different needs, and these will differ according to their situation and time of life: a young graduate may have a strong need to sense that she or he fits into an organisation, while a middle-aged employee facing redundancy may have future security as a main priority.
Our needs include:
Survival 
To ensure our physical survival we need sex, food and drink.
We need physical and psychological security, and we need money to buy these things.
The psychologist Abraham Maslow concluded that, if these basic physical and security needs are not satisfied, it is difficult for us to fulfil our higher needs.
We are motivated by our needs when they are not satisfied.
Relationships with others 
To love and to be loved, to have friendship, to feel a sense of involvement and identification, to get recognition from others, to experience dependency and independence, to feel that we ‘belong’.
Self-fulfilment 
To respect and love ourselves, to be confident and powerful, to achieve our goals, to develop ourselves so that we realise our potential, to gain insight, to use our creativity.
Like the cab driver, it can be useful to assess your particular balance  of needs and consider the extent to which they are being satisfied.
This can be an especially useful consideration if you are unhappy in a job or about to change direction.
Quite clearly, if you have a strong need for the company of others then a technical research job where you are largely left to your own devices may prove stressful — unless you do a lot of extra-curricular socialising as compensation.
You would be better off in the personnel department.
But if you are a strongly goal-orientated individual who enjoys solitary intellectual pursuits, you may have found the perfect job.
These days employers are increasingly using psychometric testing (personality tests) to try and help them fit the personality to the job (see pp 117–18).
Note : Strong needs for relationships with others can be exploited.
It's sometimes thought quite reasonable that women and the ‘do-gooding’ professions are poorly paid, as the social satisfaction of their work is so rewarding.
The same thing applies to ‘exclusive’ jobs: ‘You're so lucky to be: working in this posh Knightsbridge shop/meeting celebrity authors/the international jet-setter's PA — that you can be paid very little money for doing so.’
The kudos of the job, the implied associations and the admiration of others are felt to be more than enough compensation.
JOB TITLES AND STATUS
Over the years I've noticed ‘job-title consciousness’ increasing dramatically.
When I meet a prospective new employee they often seem more concerned with their job title than they do with their salary.
I've even had some negotiate over their job title, and once they've got that, conditions and pay don't seem to matter.
Are we really so self-important?
Managing director of an electronics company
Status at work can be divided into two aspects, as already briefly explained in Chapter One:
Overt status 
Conferred status and rank through job title, company car, number of subordinates, size of office and number of phones.
Active status 
Far less tangible, but can be based on expert knowledge, social
skills, ability to influence, contacts, personal power, and knowledge of the organisation and its politics.
When someone first joins an organisation, it's much easier for them to ascertain their new colleagues' overt status than it is to understand their active status.
And if you join an organisation where rank is clearly delineated and tightly structured, like the army, you can quickly get a sense of your place in things.
But in business these days, with a loosening up of rigid authoritarian organisation and a ‘flattening out’ of structure, it's much more difficult.
Perhaps some people's preoccupation with job titles on business cards is compensation for this.
Overt status can be a sham.
Ronald Reagan was President of the United States, but the real power lay with advisers like Caspar Weinberger, who wielded enormous behind-the-scenes influence.
In Britain, few people were aware of Sir Alan Walter's significance in shaping the government's economic policy until he fell out with the Chancellor, Nigel Lawson, who subsequently resigned.
In business, an employee near retirement age may well be given a job with a grand title in a department which has little influence in the overall scheme of things.
To be effective, overt status has to be backed up by active status.
Let's take a managerial position as an example.
A manager is given a title in the formal organisation of the company.
Within the company, even within his or her department, there will be informal groups and informal vying for status.
If the manager runs a sales team where everyone has the job title ‘sales executive’, then that manager can only manage effectively when his or her team have regard for the manager's active status over and above his or her overt status.
And within that sales team there will be an informal hierarchy and status structure, which it is important for the manager to understand.
RAISING YOUR STATUS
We may build active status at work through:
Reputation and track record 
Often people's achievements become mythologised and exaggerated.
If a manager joins a sales team from another department  where he or she enjoyed a good reputation, this v–ill go before them and influence the attitude of the team.
Our regard for reputation is often irrational.
In the way that military tactics fail by being repeated without regard to changed environment and situation, we expect people to live up to their reputation when the circumstances in which they are performing are very different.
It's wise to adapt accordingly.
Ability, knowledge and experience 
‘Expert power’ is a prized resource these days, when a large percentage of the population appear to be earning their living as ‘consultants’of one description or another.
We now live in the ‘information society’, where specialised skills and knowledge are valued.
The ideal manager is now regarded as a coach who helps others develop their skills and can act as a role model, rather than as an authoritarian figure issuing orders by virtue of his or her overt status.
Performing their job to the best of their ability, such managers set an example for others to follow.
Understanding of values 
Within organisations and even within departments there are values which take priority and create the culture.
In the book Corporate Cultures , by Terence Deal and Allen Kennedy ‘culture’ is defined as ‘the way things are done around here’.
A retail organisation, for instance, may place priority on action, customer service and teamwork.
A government department may place emphasis on careful administration and attention to detail, to research and to political manoeuvring.
Intellectual prowess may be valued in the research department, whereas persuasion may be the most valued skill in marketing.
Making contacts 
Having access to influential people and people who can give you information is helpful.
This isn't the same as being popular or impressing the bosses.
A lot of people may like you, but it can be more useful to know a smaller, selective number — like the managing director's secretary, for instance, who's been with the company twenty-five years, and who loves to chat and fill you in on the history.
In acknowledging other people's active status, by finding out about them and their personal lives through informal socialising  regardless of overt status, it's possible to learn and understand a great deal.
Using personal attributes 
In groups, there needs to be a balance of personalities.
Research into group dynamics indicates that a group of high achievers, for example, do not perform as well as a mixed-ability group.
You may gam status at work from your ability to make everyone laugh and to defuse tense atmospheres, from your informal counselling skills or your ability to see the down-side and to be eminently practical when others are dreaming.
Having an overview 
Consideration of the effects of stress in the workplace has meant that for many employers the workaholic has become bad news.
This stressed-out poor performer is motivated by the fear that he or she is highly disposable, and that if they ease up on their workload the axe will fall.
But having an overview means giving yourself time for outside interests that you can talk about and that provide recreation for your brain from work.
Having an overview also means being in the picture about your role and those of your subordinates and superiors in the company, about your company's profile in the larger comparative corporate picture, and keeping up to date with all that's new in your business or profession through professional organisations, the trade press and national newspapers.
It's said that information is power-it's also an immensely sensitive barometer to shifting status levels, whatever the weather.
Seeing beyond overt status 
People become self-important to counteract and to attack the fear that they are insignificant.
And the self-important make indiscriminate use of the symbols of overt status — the job title, large office, several secretaries — to bolster their malnourished egos.
This use may become authoritarian and overpowering for subordinates.
They'll jump to your tune, but it's unlikely that they'll hang around to hear the final Act of the opera.
It's useful to be able to see beyond other people's use of overt status, and to remember that the rank difference only applies at work.
The greatest difficulties are often to do with people who are very close in overt status and who are therefore threatening to one another.
Let's return to the example of our sales team, which now  has a manager and a chief sales executive.
The manager may be wary of the chief sales executive because he or she is the obvious choice to replace the manager, since he or she enjoys high active status with the rest of the team.
In return the chief sales executive may be wary of the manager, because he or she seeks higher overt status and the manager is blocking this.
He or she may also suspect that the manager has far greater access to a lot of useful information.
We often assume that those above us know much more than they do.
As described in Chapter Five, the manager may use cryptic messages to reinforce this impression.
People most strenuously seek to evaluate their performance by comparing themselves to others, not by using absolute standards.
In Search of Excellence, Tom Peters
In summary, here are some practical steps to raise your active status:
‘Leak’ your past successes through other people, or disclose them yourself in a suitably modest and reluctant manner, as is the British way.
Seek training and learning to increase your ability and specialist knowledge.
If your company won't pay for it, take responsibility for your own learning.
Your long-term goals may make it worth sacrificing your two weeks in Turkey for a training course.
Shop around for a recommended one, or ask the training or personnel department for advice.
View your experience as having provided adaptable skills.
The woman returner can feel inadequate when she goes back to work, forgetting that she's spent several years managing and developing human resources at home.
Find an area that interests you, which is small and highly specialised, in which you can build an ‘expert’ reputation.
A highly specialised knowledge of tax law, for instance, may stand you in much better stead than an MBA, when MBAs are becoming increasingly common.
And, of course, if your specialist skills are in a growth area so much the better.
How to find growth areas?
Read the newspapers and trade press.
Consider the importance of values in terms of culture and job.
Would you describe yourself as intellectual, practical, creative, sociable, self-motivated, conforming, individual?
Are your needs met to some extent by the culture and job?
Does your history limit you in the culture?
(In my experience non-graduates, for instance, can find it very difficult to get above a certain level in some companies.)
Keep your ear to the ground and mix with people from other departments and those who are ‘in the know’.
Go along to social events and join in extra-curricular activities.
In a new job, a few quick drinks after work can provide you with a great deal of information and understanding.
But social conditioning can make this more difficult for women.
To avoid the risk of misinterpretation, state your intention clearly: ‘John, can I buy you lunch/a drink after work?
I'd like your advice on how the company works.’
Be open and accessible.
Revealing information about yourself and your family will foster trust in others and encourage them to entrust you with their confidences.
Don't try to be infallible, god-like or always on your best behaviour: it's extremely stressful.
If you tell a good story in the pub, use this ability when appropriate to entertain at work (during presentations, for instance.
Some people, though, use humour constantly to avoid issues — see Chapter Five — and someone who does this will end up being regarded as class buffoon.)
Let people know who you are, warts and all.
Maintain an overview on your job and your personal goals, and regularly appraise progress.
Is it taking you in the right direction?
Some people leave it very late to discover that they may not be aggressive/intellectual/pragmatic enough to succeed in their particular company.
Or perhaps values have changed since they first joined.
You may not want to go further in your job — perhaps the status you have in your social and personal life may prove sufficient.
Here are some questions that may help you further define the values of your department and/or organisation:
Is the emphasis on team players or are there mavericks (non-conformists) and stars in the company?
Is the hierarchy clearly defined?
With many levels?
Are senior people accessible or remote?
Are there predominant characteristics among senior people/stars?
(They may he almost entirely male, from a certain class/background, super salespeople, conservative, outgoing etc.)
Is there much emphasis on training, and if so is it based on action ‘Learn as you do’ or the more traditional ‘Talk and chalk’?
(Some company cultures have ‘nurture’ as an important value, while others regard training as a dangerous activity which results in rapid staff turnover.)
How risky in terms of money/reputation is the job you do for the company?
How big are the risks, and how often do you take them?
Do you get results quickly and often, or do they take a long time to come through?
What expectations are placed on quantity compared to quality of work that you do?
Do you need to think big or to pay a lot of attention to detail?
Are you required to be persistent at repeating the same task many times (phoning sales prospects, for instance) or persistent in seeing a long, slow project through to the end (overseeing a two-year training programme, for instance )?
Is there much competition between people at work, or are you united in fighting external competition?
Does the organisation foster a sense of belonging and membership through organised social events, sports and recreation facilities, and ‘perks’ to employees?
What does the environment you work in say about the company and its attitude towards employees?
THE TRAPPINGS OF OVERT STATUS
She took the lift to the fifteenth floor.
The managing director's secretary led her to his office through two ante-rooms.
Her feet sank into the thick pile of the carpet.
She walked into a spacious room on  the corner of the building, with large windows on two sides providing panoramic views of the City.
His large walnut desk was at one end, at the other were plush leather chairs with an expensive glass coffee table.
There was very little clutter in the room; one bold modern painting on the wall.
The air conditioning was on high, the room cool and silent, the atmosphere controlled and  rarefied …
Size and location of office, level of distraction, quality of decor and furniture and fittings can all be signs of overt status.
In some companies rank is measured in terms of floor space, and the most sought-after offices are those with large window space.
High status is indicated through inaccessibility, human and physical barriers keeping the rank and file at a distance.
Phone calls are thoroughly screened; people have to make appointments a long time in advance.
Someone who has a lot of overt status has a great deal to do: their time and attention are very precious.
Extensive space and limited time show overt status.
Your mode of transport is important too.
The managing director may travel in a chauffeur-driven Jaguar, the pop star in a stretch limo with blacked out windows so as to preserve distance.
For many of us, though, it's more likely to be the size and model of our company car and the allocation of a reserved parking space that acts as an advert for our status.
SHIFTING STATUS
The status we en joy is relative to the group we are in.
The managing director who enjoys high status of both types will have to shift his roles and expectations when he's asked by the rest of the board to answer criticism of company performance.
The manager who is given status by her sales team largely due to her expert power will have to adjust her role when she meets informally with a group of other managers from different departments.
In either case, inability to shift status through behaviour and attitude would alienate others.
Inability to shift status when moving from workplace to home can also cause difficulties.
Since many people derive a strong sense of status from the recognition they get at work, when they stop working they need to readjust.
Relocation counsellors — occupational psychologists who are paid by companies to see their senior executives through periods  of redundancy — recognise this.
The counsellors may provide displaced executives with ‘mini-offices’— their own office space and secretarial back-up that can be used on a daily basis.
The executives, though stripped of job title status, keep some sense of territorial status.
And they are able to tell headhunters and prospective employers that they are working from a serviced office in town.
When people stop working through redundancy, retirement or maternity they need to find other ways of getting their needs fulfilled.
Hobbies, learning, the new role itself, more available time to spend with family and friends may effectively do this.
As a newcomer to a job and organisation, you may find yourself groping around to discover how status operates.
Like this fifty-year-old ex-army major now employed in industry:
When I left the army a couple of years ago, I had great difficulty coming to terms with my change in status.
In the army you know what's what, who's above you and below you, so to speak, and that status is authority-based.
In industry I found the status system much more difficult to comprehend.
It was far less overt.
In my first few months I made some real gaffes — sitting in the wrong part of the dining room, for instance, and using a commanding manner with staff who weren't used to it.
I have found much more concern with status in industry than I expected — it's just not so easy to identify for a newcomer.
When people move from the armed forces into civilian life, they often need to make considerable adjustment to the way status operates.
If you choose to dispense with conventional displays of overt status, bear in mind how conformist, conservative and resistant to change many people are.
The managing director who suddenly assumes a very friendly, familiar manner may be regarded with suspicion; the accountant who turns up to work in his track suit may be ridiculed.
Non-conformists are often regarded as mad, bad and dangerous to know.
When playing status games– remember the status quo.
Competition
There is a limited amount of overt status to go round, and it is defined by its exclusivity.
Only a small number of the company can have Jaguar cars, for instance.
This makes some people over-concerned and competitive about it.
As active status is so specific to the individual and based on experience, specialist knowledge, awareness, ability and social skills there is far less need to compete for it.
You get on and do your own thing, and respect others who do the same.
COMMUNICATING STATUS
For others to regard you as having status, you have to be able to communicate it.
Your impressive track record on paper must be matched by your ability to talk about it, otherwise you will lose credibility.
In this next section we'll examine how status games are played in interviews, meetings and presentations and on the telephone.
Much of the interaction in these situations is to do with persuasion.
An interviewer may want to persuade an interviewee to join their company; the main objective of a presentation may be to persuade your audience to buy a service you are selling.
Later on I'll consider persuasion in greater detail.
At this point it's worth mentioning that one of the best approaches to persuasion in any situation can be to ask yourself: ‘What's in it for them?’ and to consider what needs (as mentioned earlier in this chapter) you can meet.
Interviews
Interviews are fraught with status interactions because of their very nature: meetings with a purpose, and that purpose being the assessment of one person by another.
This goes for job interviews, appraisal interviews and disciplinary interviews.
Job Interviews
‘I think it's a waste of time holding interviews.
But someone's got to do it, so here I am.
Shall we start?’
Senior partner in law firm, to  young graduate on his first interview (sub-text: ‘I really don't want to be here, wasting my time talking to you’).
With the forecast demographic changes, companies are now starting to take greater care over the impression an interviewer makes.
After all, he or she is the siren who can lure the young graduate or woman returner into their particular workplace.
The role is a responsible one; an interviewer who makes a bad mistake could cost the company a lot of money.
Interviewees may be over-suspicious of the interviewer, waiting to be trapped, and they may read too much into what the interviewer says and does.
Sensing this, the unskilled or inexperienced interviewer may attempt to raise his or her overt status by playing any one of a number of roles:
The judge 
Uses behaviour that emphasises the interviewer's powers to appraise and evaluate — sitting back in the chair, head tilting backwards, hand covering mouth, perhaps, looking doubtful and not registering any reaction to what is said, or indicating that he or she appreciates that their ‘victim’ has finished an answer.
No encouragement is given to the interviewee.
The judge may ask open, vague questions, affording the interviewee plenty of rope to hang himself or herself; for instance, ‘Tell me all about yourself’, which means, of course , ‘Tell me specific information about yourself that makes you right for this job.’
The big-shot 
Resorts to ridiculous tactics like sitting the interviewee on a small, armless chair opposite a window so that he or she is blinking in a stream of sunlight.
The Obergruppenführer, meanwhile, is sitting on a large leather revolving chair behind a vast expanse of desk.
The office is filled with awards, certificates, personal and company memorabilia.
This is a corporate warrior's office, and the interviewee's going to be left in no doubt about it.
Midway through the interview the big-shot deliberately looks at his or her ostentatious watch.
The big-shot's unlikely to leave time for the interviewee to ask questions at the end.
The interrogator 
This interviewer sees himself or herself as the natural successor to Sir Robin Day.
They'll justify their behaviour by saying that the interviewee needs to perform well under pressure to do the job  (odd that most of Sir Robin's victims were politicians, though…
). They'll ask two-part questions: ‘What made you leave then, and why did you choose to move to —?’: leading questions: ‘The company was in a terrible mess then — what part do you think your department played?’; and ‘why?’ questions which require justification and can be asked ad infinitum:
‘Why did you change jobs then?’
‘I wanted more of a challenge.’
‘Why?’
‘I wasn't realising my potential.’
‘Why?’…and so on.
If this type of interviewer senses a weak spot he or she will hang on in there — mercilessly.
The creep 
The insecurity that the interviewer experiences may cause them to smile manically; to talk too much, when he or she should be able to take responsibility for pauses; to do a really hard sell on behalf of the company; to over-react with approval to the interviewee, giving them, unfairly, the impression that they've got the job.
The creep will also say things like, ‘Oh, I know just how you feel’ or ‘I hear what you say’, and by the end of the interview you'll know as much about them as they know about you.
The interviewer is expected to take control.
Insensitive interviewers are often influenced too much by their personal prejudices to an interviewee and fail to appreciate the interviewee's nervousness.
Like interviewees, interviewers can learn skills which mean they don't have to resort to overt status games (which the discriminating interviewee will sec through).
These skills include:
Helping the interviewee relax 
Through easy small talk at the beginning and by humour, giving a relaxed impression themselves.
Stopping the interviewee talking too much 
Through using eye contact and body language to indicate that it's time to move on.
Through asking closed questions requiring ‘yes’, ‘no’ or one-word answers, and by stipulating ‘I'd like to move on to…
’ Interruptions work, too.
Getting the interviewee to talk more 
Through nodding and sending encouraging listening signals.
Through slowing down the pace and using plenty of pause.
Through asking open questions requiring longer answers: ‘how’ questions are especially useful.
‘How did you think that went?’, for instance.
Stopping the interviewee waffling 
Through asking definite questions asking for concrete detail.
For example, ‘How many products did you develop there?’,
‘What percentage of your time did you spend travelling?’
Easing the interviewee's discomfort 
Through moving on to questions which invite rational, positive answers when the interviewee seems ‘thrown’ or upset.
The interviewee, on the other hand, may lower his or her status by playing the following roles:
The victim 
Uses low-status behaviour, avoids eye contact, keeps the face frozen, uses defensive body language, mumbles, speaks too quickly or too quietly, and uses too many ‘ums’ and ‘ers’.
Victims use lots of apology and paint themselves as mundane and inadequate in what they say.
To the interviewer, the victim looks like a frightened rabbit who can't wait to get back into the warren.
The victim can raise his or her status through standing and sitting tall and proud, making steady eye contact with the interviewer from the outset, taking time to answer questions and responding in a clear voice.
Unlike a real victim, the interview underdog needs to remember that he or she is also in a position to evaluate.
Your interviewer is a representative of the organisation and you are judging them as such.
If you don't like your reception, it could be their loss.
The chatterbox 
Talks incessantly to the point of forgetting what the original question was, using long, rambling sentences which go on for so long that the interviewee can't remember where they started.
When asked ‘What did you like about your last job?’ the chatterbox's reply includes a detailed description of her recent holiday in the Dordogne.
The chatterbox will keep talking about anything so long as there isn't a pause where there could be an opportunity to engage brain before mouth.
Chatterboxes need to listen, to use short, succinct sentences, to  wait and think before replying, and to check that their answers are relevant to the questions.
Rehearsing the likely interview with a friend and asking them to look out for these points can help.
The philosopher 
Doesn't like being put on the spot and adopts conceptualising and abstract thinking to counter this.
So, for instance, when asked: ‘What has been your greatest achievement?’ the philosopher's reply will start with ‘Well, it depends what you really mean by ‘greatest achievement’and the context in which you're using it.’
The reply will continue with ramblings on ‘the true meaning of ‘great’ and ‘achieve’and the likelihood of absolute truth'.
All this is done while the philosopher stares abstractedly out of the window and the interviewer dozes off.
Philosophers can come across as overbearingly pompous.
They frustrate the interviewer who wants to know specific tangible facts about the past to assess how this information could be utilised in the future.
Philosophers need to stop procrastinating and staring at their navels and answer questions like the one above with a definite answer.
For instance: ‘My greatest achievement so far has been supervising the Brillo campaign.’
The braggart 
Is very insecure and boasts — as much to tell themselves that they are important as to tell the interviewer.
The braggart turns every question into an answer that makes himself or herself look incredibly good.
So when asked about ‘greatest achievements’ the braggart will have so many that the interviewer will get earache.
Braggarts talk at the interviewer and are often so concerned and anxious about themselves that they fail to notice how the interviewer is responding.
Braggarts can help themselves by working on responding to signals that other people use, looking and listening.
In preparation for the interview, the braggart should think of all the uncomfortable, difficult questions he or she might be asked and set about preparing honest answers to them.
Controlling body language and voice so that they don't convey self-importance also helps.
Pointing out the odd negative aspect and down-side to things will also make you appear more rational.
More and more companies are now using psychometric tests as back-up to the job interview.
These can help interviewers assess  personality and give a clearer picture of the interviewee's strengths and weaknesses.
The use of these tests can seem threatening to the status of the interviewee, in the sense that hidden secrets are going to be discovered.
Three points are worth considering:
For every strength discovered in a test there is a corresponding weakness.
Good interviewers do not use these tests as a substitute for interview, merely as an additional aid.
When the tests are used fairly the interviewer will have been tested himself or herself, and use the results as an indication of, and insurance against, their own prejudices.
In most cases, quite fairly, the interviewer will give you feedback on the test.
This can be useful for self-awareness and offer guidance for skills development.
A typical test in its most basic application might help identify the extent to which you use and prefer:
a
Socialising, action, variety, experience compared to solitude, reflection, dedication to a single goal, understanding.
b
A realistic, practical approach, attention to detail and facts compared to a creative, imaginative approach, concerned with vision and potential.
c
Analysis, logic, thought processes, discussion compared to empathy, rapport, emotions, agreement.
d
Decision-making, determination, resolution, organisation compared to enquiry, toleration, open-endedness, spread of input.
It can be useful to ask yourself whether the profile that emerges is one that suits the job you are applying for.
Appraisal and Disciplinary Interviews
As an interviewee in these situations, you can maintain your status by:
Asking for clarification of any points that you do not understand.
Getting information about your strengths as well as your weaknesses.
Being absolutely clear what targets you are being set, what your performance is expected to be and how it will be assessed.
Doing a pre-interview evaluation yourself of how your past performance has matched targets, and determining your reasons for success and failure.
Asking for further training if necessary, a change in job definition or conditions, and for information about any future changes that may affect your objectives.
PERSUADING PEOPLE: MEETINGS AND PRESENTATIONS
It's said that ‘everyone sells’.
Much of the communication we do at work is concerned with building personal integrity and credibility, with getting other people to accept opinions and advice and then to act on it.
Lots of time and money is wasted through inadequate consideration and understanding of persuasion techniques.
Telephone sales teams daily insult the intelligence of thousands of potential customers, as they read at them from a prepared sales script.
In telephone and face-to-face selling standard sales pitches are used, regardless of the specific needs of the customer.
The salesperson fails to give the customer recognition as an individual, so the customer's status is diminished.
It's hardly surprising that in retaliation many people regard the pushy salesperson with contempt.
Of course, persuasion is not just confined to selling.
When we offer advice, seek support for our ideas or seek to gain commitment to a course of action we are attempting to persuade.
We do it all the time.
Step one, then, in intelligent persuasion is to acknowledge the  status of your ‘audience’ through targeting what you say and how you say it to meet the specific needs of the individuals involved: the ‘What's in it for you?’factor.
Don't assume that your ‘audience’ thinks like you do.
Familiarity with the case, product or service you are discussing may make you blinkered.
You may think that the advantages and benefits on offer are glaringly obvious — so obvious, in fact, that you don't need to express them.
Check that everyone is aware of what they are and how they are pertinent to the individuals involved.
And the most vital step in preparing to persuade is to find out as much as you can about the people you are targeting.
Political parties spend vast amounts of money finding out who their supporters and detractors are and what their views are on key issues.
Here's one method of identifying persuasion ‘triggers’(there are lots of others).
Ask yourself:
a
Whom am I attempting to persuade?
Draw up as detailed a picture as possible.
b
Can I appeal to:
Psychological needs Some of us give to charity because it appeases our guilt.
We may succumb to flattery because it makes us feel good.
A strong intellectual or emotional appeal may reinforce self-image; the appeal bolsters up my idea of myself as a rational/analytical/ thinking person or as a warm/empathetic/sensitive one.
Too one-sided a pitch, appealing exclusively to intellect or emotions, is unlikely to be effective.
Without scruple politicians use fear as a persuasion weapon, targeting psychological needs: ‘If you don't vote for us you will lose freedom of choice/risk maltreatment under the NHS/deprive your children of good education/lessen the chance of losing the roof over your head.’
In particular, fear is used to threaten security.
Insurance salespeople can use similar tactics.
Perhaps one of the reasons why politicians as a breed are such unpopular people is because of the indiscriminate use of threats to meet their own objectives.
‘It's always been done this way’ is one of the biggest hurdles to overcome when persuading others.
We are creatures of habit, and we are suspicious of change and the unknown.
So if I make the ecologically sound washing powder Ecover and I want you to buy it instead of your familiar Persil, I need to change your habit.
A most effective means of doing this is through flattery and giving you the status of an innovative thinker.
If I remind you that you are a person who is aware, receptive to new ideas and willing to give them a try, then my suggestion that you buy Ecover is likely to be well received.
Peer group pressure This influence meets psychological needs in that we most of us crave acceptability — we seek to identify with groups to make sense of our world, and we aspire to join other groups.
We live in a time when television tells us what our world is like and what lifestyles other people have and we can copy.
Most advertising applies a lot of peer group pressure: if you are the successful executive you're trying to be, you must fly British Airways rather than the red-eye.
If you're the concerned young mother, you must give your baby ‘natural’(whatever that is) food.
Peer group pressure is also effective when selling ideas.
‘Our business rivals are thinking like this, so why don't we?’,
‘All the departments who are successful in this company have used these methods, so why don't we?’,
‘If we want to be up there with the big boys then let's study and use their tactics.’
Trend prediction is now big business to help commerce and industry keep up with the latest demands created by peer group pressure.
Material gain We allow ourselves to be persuaded when we think we are going to get richer, to have a more luxurious lifestyle, to make acquisitions.
Some of us are very keen to raise our outward show of status.
Spirit of enquiry Lately, ‘teasers’ have become popular copy in advertising.
Teasers are copylines or images that do not mention the service or product, but whet your appetite to discover more.
For instance, when Billy Graham visited Britain in 1990, several weeks before he arrived there were posters all over London with the initials L.l.F.E. — what was it?
When he arrived the riddle was answered through posters announcing his presence.
In using this trigger you again reinforce status and self-image.
We have to assume that, if someone wants to explore a concept or examine an idea, he or she has an intelligent, enquiring mind.
Physical needs Politicians have been persuaded to divulge secrets through sex.
Physical gratification often plays a contributing role in the exercise of persuasion: what does the marketing manager expect in return for the expensive lunch she's buying you?
Is that fine food and wine going to affect your judgement and make you easier to persuade?
To sum up, then, when planning to persuade ask yourself the following:
Whom am I persuading, and what are their various needs and values?
How can I acknowledge their status?
Are there assumptions I can safely make about the language they understand, their level of awareness, the social and political groups they identify with?
Can I make them feel good about themselves/reinforce their self-image?
Am I comfortable using flattery, guilt and fear as persuasion triggers?
How do I appeal to their intellect (language, facts and figures, concepts), and what emotions am I stimulating?
What peer group pressure can I apply?
Am I going to play on their curiosity?
Am I offering the possibility of making money?
Meetings
Meetings provide good opportunities to practise persuasion and to raise your status among subordinates, peers and bosses.
Here are some ways of doing this:
Preparing in Advance
On a course I was running, one of the exercises was to role play a meeting on the sensitive subject of company cars.
When the exercise was explained, one of the participants piped up with ‘But we don't meet beforehand?’
In that particular company that was essential pre-meeting preparation.
You sought out your supporters, briefed  them beforehand, then went into the meeting knowing you had strength in numbers.
In some organisations, like government for instance, pre-meeting lobbying is the expected norm.
When this is the case, pre-meeting briefing of supporters to get them to ask the right questions (ones that you can answer well) and to t ring in relevant information and viewpoints is essential.
Be clear about the purpose of the meeting and the case you are to present, and that your attendance is necessary.
Your case may be strengthened by preparing written material to back up what you say.
If an agenda is being prepared, try and get your item dealt with early on.
Check that you know who else is to be present, anticipate what ‘hidden agendas– they may have and be sure that you know the level of formality.
Decisions are often reached more quickly when a chairperson is doing their role effectively and pulling strands together than when opinions are being tossed haphazardly around a group.
Checking Procedure
Meetings are often held because ‘that's the way things are done around here’.
Although meetings are not always called to decide upon definite action — the purpose may be, for instance, to do a ‘raincheck’ on the progress of a project — everyone involved should have a clear idea of the meeting's objective(s) and an active contribution to make.
Sometimes the issue may be dealt with more effectively via memos and telephone calls.
If the start is disorganised, then lead the way.
Ask whether a chairperson is necessary, what items there are for the agenda and how timing is to be arranged.
If there's no one present who's been designated as minute-taker, then avoid volunteering — especially if you were once a secretary.
The minute-taker will find it difficult to make an active vocal contribution.
Taking note of every small detail that occurs makes it impossible to take part in active discussion.
Avoid being preoccupied with procedure; once the shape of the meeting has been defined you want to move on with your contribution, while being sure that the focus remains clear.
Some people become ‘procedure police’ at meetings; they dodge joining in discussion of matters under consideration by constantly raising ‘points of order’.
This is perhaps the only way they feel they can be effective in the situation.
Checking procedure can be used tactically to support your  purpose.
If your item of concern has been placed at the end of the agenda, the probability is that time will run out and you may want to get it moved forward.
When you haven't had time to prepare, however, you may want to leave the item just where it is.
If limited time has been allocated to deal with an item, and your case is not succeeding, you can point out that time has run out as a diversionary tactic.
When you need to put pressure on someone, reminding them of time limits can increase their stress level and make them capitulate sooner rather than later.
A visit or television viewing of the House of Commons is recommended to anyone wanting to watch all these ploys and many more in action.
Getting in Early
‘I go to a meeting, have some really good points to make, but because I get paralysed about speaking out I remain silent.
Afterwards, I could kick myself.’
The quantity and quality of your contribution matter if you're to gain attention.
If you play the role of the insignificant bystander, then your status will fall.
You need to behave as though you are worthy of, and deserve, recognition.
Acknowledge people when you arrive rather than slinking into a corner.
If people are chatting before the formal start of the meeting, then get involved in conversation — it will warm you up.
Once the meeting starts, make a contribution early.
If you are new to a company, lower in overt status than the rest of the people present or simply shy, the easiest contribution to make is to ask a question.
In asking for clarification, information or advice, you ask the rest of the meeting to help you and no one can think of that as presumptuous.
Set yourself a time limit if it helps: ‘I must ask a question in the first five minutes.’
Once you've made your initial contribution it's much easier to continue.
If necessary and you're a skilled enough actor (and most of us are), invent something to clarify: ‘I'm not quite sure what item three means — can anybody explain to me please?’
The main thing is to get in early.
Concentrated Listening
In Chapter Five I described how we disguise our motives in conversation through using sub-text.
By giving concentrated attention to others you can improve your skills at identifying other people's sub-text and motives.
Concentrated listening involves focusing on tone  of voice, facial expression and body language as well as the words used.
Poor listeners often make irrelevant comments; the most influential contributions do not necessarily come from those vessels making the most noise.
You can exert considerable control in a meeting through concentrated listening and then making a relevant contribution.
You can offer analysis, interpretation, solutions and suggestions.
While you maintain involvement in terms of your behaviour, you can think about especially pertinent questions that need answering and use them to clarify or challenge.
Take time to work out who are allies in the meeting and, if you have a case to argue, who are the most influential people present.
In America, some law firms use consultants to analyse the behaviour of jury members and to choose the main ‘influencers’ among them; the attorney then pitches his or her case to those people.
Voicing Your Opinions
Don't shy away from saying what you think.
Taking a friend aside and sharing your views afterwards may be safer, but it won't raise your status.
Use short sentences to make your points clearly.
If you can see puzzled faces, ask people whether you've expressed your message clearly enough.
You may need to amplify (especially if you possess expert knowledge about something).
Express your support for others and let people know when you agree or disagree, giving reasons why.
When another person indicates support for something you have said, build on that alliance by acknowledging their contribution: ‘Bill's made a very good point there’, and, if appropriate, back them up ('and what I think is also relevant' or ‘I'd like to add to what he said by…
‘). That way you build strength in numbers.
When you're keen to push something through, summarise at regular intervals: ‘So are we at the point where we've got agreement over this?’ or ‘Can I ask if we all accept that more money is needed?’
When you are directly opposed by another person who is launching a strong attack, it can be useful to:
Write notes on what they say, suggesting that a record is being kept (this can help you think more rationally about counter-attack, but it may be distracting — in which case, a supporter could do it).
Ask for reasons and justification for what they are saying, using ‘why’ questions.
Apply gentle pressure to make them appear more extreme.
By contrast you will appear all the more reasonable.
Refuse to get diverted, and keep using the ‘broken record’ technique of repeating your case (see p. 52).
Keep your behaviour calm and reasonable, and maintain your sense of humour if possible.
‘Zooming out’ of what's going on and commenting on it, without apportioning blame, may help defuse tension: ‘Things seem to be getting a little heated at the moment.’
Remind yourself that your attacker may have poor communication skills — their aggression may be the only way they are able to express themselves.
Ignore personal attacks and criticism by thanking the opposition for their feedback and then moving on with the positive aspects of your case.
Avoid justifying or defending the criticism too much, or you will look defensive.
Many of us find this very difficult.
Keep calm, and resist the temptation to launch a personal attack back.
That is deflecting from your main purpose of persuading most of the people present to accept your case.
Compliment the opposition You are threatening them, and they may be disarmed by compliments.
For instance‘I think Bill's put his case exceptionally well’ or ‘We all know Bill is a great authority on this.’
Think about the opposition's needs when you do this.
Remember that you want to influence the group, not just win a two-way battle.
When the interchange starts to get heated, ask the rest of the meeting for their views.
Keep taking the temperature of the meeting.
And whatever the outcome, victory or defeat, leave obvious displays of gloating, anger or tears until afterwards.
When everyone is speaking at once in a meeting, keep talking in a calm, reasonable manner.
You will get through eventually.
Despite your conditioning (women tend to have greater difficulty doing this than men), interrupt if necessary and state your intention ‘Can I interrupt, please?’
Humour can work here, too: ‘Hello, hello!
Am I really so insignificant that nobody will listen to me?’
Encouraging Others
Your use of language and syntax is important.
It's easier to get your case accepted if you offer it as a collective decision: ‘Something we could consider is…
‘, ‘Shall we go for that…?’ rather than‘I think we must…’or ‘I insist we…
‘. When everyone present feels involved in the decision, their commitment to it will be much stronger.
You can maintain ‘official ownership’ of your case by summarising for the minutes ('Following my proposal the meeting agreed…') and by literally having the last word on the item: ‘So we're agreed on that.
Shall we move on?’
You can also foster a sense of ‘collectiveness’ by turning suggestions and proposals into questions.
‘I suggest we review next year's budget and make some radical changes.
What does everybody think?’
When someone's silent for a long time, ask them for an opinion.
They may be quietly simmering over something they feel very strongly about.
If someone is present who doesn't enjoy speaking or is prominent through being an outsider, on a much lower level, or even a different gender from everyone else, make sure they get included.
When this person makes a short, stilted contribution encourage the speaker through obviously listening and asking them to continue: ‘What else do you think about the proposal?’ or ‘Can 1 ask Bill to say some more about his department?’
Someone who is good at abstract thinking and conceptualising may hold up proceedings and appear to be talking in a void, away from everyone else.
Putting a practical question to them: ‘So what action should those ideas lead us to take, do you think?’ can make their contribution that much more relevant.
Sitting in the Best Position
This is largely a matter of common sense.
When the meeting has a chair who will exert strong control, put yourself clearly in his or her line of vision.
Sitting with your allies will help strengthen your sense of solidarity.
If you sit directly opposite an opponent, the sense of conflict may be heightened.
Sitting at right-angles to them (on either side of the corner of a table) or even alongside them will make for more harmony.
Seating depends on room arrangement and table size; but the more in the centre you are of any line the better your range of vision, and the better placed you are to get involved.
Stake out  plenty of territory, always a high-status activity, by spreading your papers in front of you and using expansive body language (especially if you are physically small, or female).
Keep your posture upright and relaxed; it will help you maintain a high level of energy.
In meetings people may lower their status through:
Remaining disinterested and uninvolved, thereby creating distance.
They may think this is high-status play because nobody knows what they're thinking.
The trouble is nobody ends up caring, either.
Aggression, personal attacks and criticism, behaving like a petulant child.
Not listening, and talking too much about irrelevancies.
This reveals how insecure they are and how threatened they feel by other people's opinions.
Disagreeing with everything and everyone.
This can be a method that some people use to assert themselves.
Their self-image tells them that they are ‘controversial’, so they act this out.
Presentations
These situations offer an even better opportunity to raise your status than meetings.
If things go smoothly you've got the attention of a captive audience, you exert far greater control over events than in a meeting, and you are developing skills which are invaluable in gaining prominence.
In most organisations there are few people who enjoy reputations as good presenters, even at a senior level.
And if you build a reputation as such by making internal presentations this can lead to promotion to a position where you become an ambassador, making external ones to clients, customers and new business.
Looking comfortable centre stage can be the first step to getting your name up in lights.
You can help your presentations raise your status in a number of ways:
Giving Your Audience Status
The starting point for planning your presentation should be recognition of the particular needs of your audience, along with your own needs and an analysis of how they match up.
The starting point for delivering your presentation should be physically to recognise them — that is, to look at them.
Otherwise, you may find that they are not what you had anticipated and you may need to adapt your performance.
When you look at your audience you show consideration of them and their responses.
Lack of presentation is an insult to the audience.
Let them know that you haven't prepared, and you insult them even further.
You also diminish their status when you tell them how to react: ‘I'm sorry, this is going to be boring — but here goes’ or ‘I'm going to tell you a very funny story now.’
You can also instruct them how to react through your own behaviour: shrugging your shoulders apologetically at the end of your presentation says, ‘Go on, regard me with contempt.’
You compliment your audience when you consider their capacity for discrimination.
When your audience are bombarded with lots of words on dozens of overheads which you helpfully read aloud, you're not doing this.
You're spelling everything out for them, 'cos the poor dears aren't very bright, are they?
Acknowledge your audience's status through using language they can understand, and ideas they can identify with.
To indicate that they matter ask them questions, entertain them, encourage them to respond.
When appropriate to your content, acknowledge the active status of individuals present.
So when you're talking about marketing and the marketing manager's in the audience, you could say, ‘Whoops, I'm on dangerous ground — I know John over there knows a lot more about this than I do.’
Elevate the status of your audience through assuming they know more than they do but explaining it anyway.
For example, if you're talking about marketing again, to the same audience with John the marketing manager and his department present, you could say: ‘I'm going to talk a little about the marketing concept.
All of you know something about it, I'm sure.
John and his team are more than familiar with it but it is important, so please bear with me while I spell it out.’
In this instance, John and his buddies will be happy that their ‘expert knowledge’ and status has been publicly recognised, and the bulk of the audience who know nothing about the marketing concept are flattered that someone thinks they know something about it.
Handling High Status in the Audience
I don't mind presenting to people I don't know or to the people I work with.
It's presenting to my superiors that I find really scary.
I feel like a naughty schoolkid who's standing in front of the headmaster.
Head of personnel, advertising agency
Those people who show a strong respect for authority and who expect negative criticism often dread making presentations to their superiors (see Chapter Four for more on authority and criticism).
As presenter you have to give much of your attention to your active involvement in the performance, and so your capacity for evaluation is limited.
As an audience member, you can give much of your attention to evaluation.
When you are presenting to high-status people, who have the power to promote or demote you, you can feel justifiably vulnerable and exposed.
Consider, though, the following:
The' judges' are your superiors only in terms of overt status.
That is, they have an impressive job title.
As people, they do not have higher active status than you do, unless your self-esteem level is low.
Are you able to identify where this awe comes from?
It's unlikely that your ‘judges’ are all excellent presenters.
Indeed, the probability is (one survey shows that 41 per cent of people name speaking in public as their greatest fear) that just under half of them do not enjoy presenting.
Even if they disagree with your content, dissenters will prefer your case to be put well.
It's much more fun to go into battle with someone who's fighting fit than to beat up a victim who's languishing after a bout of disastrous presentation.
It's unlikely that the rest of the audience want to witness a massacre.
Don't allow yourself to fall victim to self-fulfilling prophecy.
Dread of the event may mean that you fail to prepare and rehearse adequately.
Be as tactical as you can, expect to do your best, and rehearse in front of allies who are constructively critical.
Your behaviour is extremely important in that it conveys your attitude much more effectively and directly than the words you  use.
Use high-status non-verbal signals, voice control and appearance signals (see Chapter Nine).
Often, an audience member who is insecure about his or her status (and they may enjoy high overt status) will demonstrate the need to get that status acknowledged.
They may do this through looking disinterested or scornful, blatantly not listening, interrupting, asking difficult questions and going on the attack.
In which case, give the little child what he or she wants — attention.
Up your eye contact early in the presentation, so you make the status-player feel important.
Make them feel that their response matters to you, which is what they need.
This tactic goes against many of our instincts; when confronted with a difficult audience member, we may tend to ignore the person in the vain hope that he or she will go away.
Unfortunately, this rarely happens: the child keeps screaming until he or she gets attention.
The Head Chef Making the Hors d'Oeuvres Approach
In other words, you are leader, and you are offering your audience a ‘taster’ of what you have on offer.
Irrespective of the status of your audience, as presenter you need to lead.
You can do this through controlling the environment: ‘Can everyone see/hear me?’,
‘Do we have enough air?’; through controlling proceedings: ‘I'll be talking for ten minutes, with five minutes for questions at the end’; and through acting as guide to the presentation, by commenting on the route, ‘So that's my second point.
My final point is…‘.
Be selective about what you present.
You are whetting your audience's appetite to do business with you, to stimulate their interest and to ask questions.
Keep your content clear and direct, garnishing it with anecdotes, examples and case histories.
Make a small number of clear points.
Err towards brevity: you want to leave people wanting more, so that they ask questions.
Whatever the response to your presentation, keep control as leader during question time.
People often ask questions to bolster your status as presenter or to bolster their own status in the audience.
Your supporters will ask questions that you can answer skilfully (you may want to plant these).
Your detractors will ask challenging questions or make speeches that they try to disguise as  questions.
Remember to maintain composure in your behaviour, and to answer questions succinctly.
If someone persists in being awkward, then as leader you can choose to continue the discussion with them elsewhere and move on to another questioner.
When no one asks any questions, ask the audience for their views on what you've said.
At the end of the question period, refocus attention on yourself through repeating your main points, wishing everyone well and thanking them for their attention.
As it will be the best remembered part of your presentation, your parting shot needs to be powerful.
THE TELEPHONE
All sorts of status games are played via the telephone.
When London phone numbers were divided into 071 for inner London and 081 for outer districts, some people worried that 081 numbers would lower their ‘social standing’.
More directly, we can play high status on the phone through:
Being inaccessible.
Employing one or several people to answer calls, so that they are screened for their relevance.
Leaving the answerphone on, so that you can choose whom to speak to.
Being ‘terribly busy’.
The status sub-text here is ‘I have little time to talk to you’ or ‘I'm a person who is very much in demand.’
With such value placed on professional success these days, even very close friends may find it necessary (whether true or not) to indicate that they are ‘very busy’.
Not returning calls, or taking a long time to do so.
The status sub-text here is ‘You are not important’ or ‘You're a low priority.’
The extremely important very busy type may ask if they can call you back — and then forget to do so.
Keeping people talking on the phone.
Telephone sales people use this tactic.
They keep you talking by asking questions in order to attempt to engage your interest in whatever they are selling.
Many of us are too polite to resist their pressure and we end up sacrificing our time to their sales pitch.
Other people may keep talking at you as a means of reinforcing their relationship to you: ‘I matter to you, so you must give me plenty of airtime.’
Being over-brusque.
Status sub-text: ‘I'm too busy for anything as insignificant as exchanging pleasantries, so let's get on with it’.
Sounding bored, aggressive, self-important.
It's extraordinary how many businesses man their front lines with speaking voices that fail to give the customer or client any sense of status (see Chapter Nine).
The sub-text is often: ‘I've no desire whatsoever to be speaking on this phone to anyone.’
To counteract high-status games on the telephone:
Be persistent and polite.
Call the inaccessible first thing in the morning or last thing in the evening, when their ‘oppos’ may not be there.
If this fails, try another means of communication — a polite letter or fax — and then phone.
Ask the human barricades for advice and help.
Acknowledge their status, and they may let you know when the person you want to talk to is available.
Be aware that people have different attitudes to the phone.
Some regard it purely as a means of conveying information, while others regard it as a means of building and maintaining relationships.
Become adaptable, so that you can come to the point quickly or ease in to conversation through some social chit-chat, as appropriate.
If you're confronted on the phone by someone you'd rather not speak to, or asked to name a price or give information you're not ready to give, then always ask if you can call back later.
Succinct, direct messages (‘I have to go now, I'm sorry’) need not sound dismissive if your tone of voice is warm and relaxed.
Titles can become especially important on the phone.
For instance, calling up and asking, ‘Can I speak to Bill — um, Bill Jenkins’ may lead a PA to believe that you're a close friend of his.
Dropping off surnames indicates familiarity.
When you get through to him and say, ‘Is that Bill Jenkins?’ and he replies ‘Yes, this is Mr Jenkins’, his use of title indicates distance and formality.
He is rebuffing your familiarity.
With some people it pays to be deferential and to use a title until told otherwise.
Circumstances may be such that you find it difficult to get your  needs for status met at work.
Perhaps you work part-time, or are self-employed and work alone.
In Chapter Seven I'll consider how you can raise your visibility, whether it's at work, as an entrepreneur or in your community.