

3 days to crush revolt
Russell Jenkins
PREMIER John Major today begins a three-day battle to save his job.
Despite his unprecedented weekend telephone offensive, the Tory revolt over Maastricht was last night holding firm.
Rebel leaders say they have at least 38 Tory MPs ready to defy Mr Major in Wednesday night's crucial Euro debate.
They need only 31 to win.
If Mr Major loses the vote it will be followed on Thursday by a motion of confidence, which he would win.
By then, however, the fatal damage to the Prime Minister's credibility will have been done.
Tory MP James Cran, whose own straw poll revealed the figure of 38 rebels, said: ‘They are not prepared to move on this issue.’
His arithmetic was supported by a BBC poll which calculated 36 Tory MPs would either abstain or vote against the Prime Minister.
MPs on both sides of the Commons believe Mr Major will have to resign from Number 10 if he cannot go to the Edinburgh Summit in December as EC President with an upbeat message to fellow heads of state.
Westminster is now in for a furious bout of behind-the-scenes arm twisting as Government whips try every trick in the book to persuade the waverers back into the fold.
Lady Thatcher is scheduled to make an explosive and finely timed entry into the debate tomorrow to stiffen the sinews of the Euro-sceptics.
But Welsh Secretary David Hunt warned: ‘The consequences are very serious indeed.
‘People are playing with fire if they contemplate the Government will just be defeated on Wednesday and everything settles down the following day.
‘These are very important issues.
We have to show our confidence, not only in the Government, but also in John Major.’
Labour's decision to vote against the Government provoked a slanging match between all three major parties.
Tory Party chairman Sir Norman Fowler accused Labour of trying to exploit the issue.
‘I do not think if we had put down a motion which said we believe in motherhood and sliced bread the Labour Party would have backed us,’ he said.
Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown, who has committed his party to supporting the Government claiming he is voting ‘for Britain's future in Europe’, called Labour's action dishonest.
‘I do not intend to indulge in the disreputable and tawdry deceit of the Labour party,’ he added.
Labour's deputy leader Margaret Beckett immediately hit back, saying voters would never forgive his party for propping up Mr Major and paving the way for ‘savage’ public spending cuts.
‘No doubt when the full impact of Norman Lamont's spending cuts is revealed, the Liberals will throw up their hands in horror and then vote against.
‘That will be the height of hypocrisy.
For if they vote with John Major next Wednesday, they will have played a crucial part in giving him a fresh mandate to break his election promises.’
She added: ‘John Major is proving a disastrously weak Prime Minister.
The really principled stand is to vote against him.’
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd, speaking on BBC's The World This Weekend, said: ‘On past form a great many members are looking to make up their minds at the last moment.
I think we will win.’
The game of counting heads will continue until the Speaker divides the Commons late on Wednesday.
Elsewhere, there was more gloom for the Premier yesterday.
An NOP poll in the Independent on Sunday showed the Tories 13 points behind Labour, while a Mori poll in The Sunday Times indicated they were trailing by 10 points.
Law loophole costs £47bn in lost taxes
THE Government has lost £47 billion in tax receipts because of a legal loophole, it was revealed yesterday.
Inland Revenue estimates reportedly put the figure for one year alone, 1988, at £10 billion.
The loophole is caused by a blunder in the 1981 Finance Act, which allows businesses and individuals to register UK assets in off-shore tax haven trusts.
When those assets are sold, the owners avoid capital gains tax of 40 per cent, says a report in the specialist Business Age magazine.
Concern about the loophole has already been expressed by politicians and financial experts in the past.
But the extent of the losses had not been appreciated, says the report.
Now the Inland Revenue and Treasury officials have refused to discuss claims that they calculate the missing revenue at between £4 and £6 billion every year.
Yesterday, shadow treasury minister Harriet Harman demanded an official enquiry.
‘The Government's management is a disgrace,’ she said.
‘I want a full statement from the Chancellor on these revelations.’
Old ministers never die — they become directors.
The Labour Research Department — not connected with the Labour Party — has been investigating what happens to ministers when they lose office.
They found the favourite occupation is collecting directorships.
Ten former ministers managed to amass 27 such positions between them.
Knifeman slashes girl, 16
Tracey Kandohla
A MANIAC slashed a teenage girl's throat with a knife he had just bought at a packed car boot sale.
The 16-year-old victim, who had been browsing at stalls, fell screaming as her attacker tried to escape.
Stallholders grabbed the man and held him until police arrived.
A Scotland Yard spokesman said: ‘It was a vicious attack on a young girl.
She was slashed across the throat once by a man with a Stanley knife believed to have been bought earlier at a stall.
It was a serious wound.
‘The suspect attempted to run off but was detained by stallholders.
Others at the sale ran to a nearby hospital and returned with a doctor who treated the girl till an ambulance arrived.’
The attack happened at about 8.45am at a school in Camberwell, South-east London.
Last night the teenager was said to be serious but stable after surgery at London's King's College Hospital.
The girl from Camberwell, who police are refusing to name at her parents' request, did not know her attacker.
A 23-year-old man was being questioned at Brixton police station.
Baby charge
A MOTHER appeared in court yesterday charged with murdering her 23-month-old daughter.
Elaine Steele, 31, of Workington, Cumbria, was granted conditional bail until Friday.
Prince pushes on in rally
PRINCE Michael of Kent took to the road in a 90-year-old car yesterday for the annual RAC London to Brighton veteran car run.
The Prince — the RAC's president — had to call its breakdown service when the 1902 Panhard Levassor broke down twice with clutch trouble in Brixton, south London.
The clutch went again near Purley, Surrey.
Then, at Gatwick, the engine packed in.
But the Prince was determined to get it to the finishing line.
He called the RAC once more and arranged for the car to be taken to the edge of Brighton.
He followed in his own limousine — then drove the Panhard a few hundred yards to the finishing line.
First past the post yesterday was building consultant Dennis Nicholls, 52, from, Bletchley, Bucks, on a 1899 one-gear Romain Tricycle.
He did the 60-mile run in 2 hrs 55 mins — and was ticked off for going over the 20mph speed limit.
Spending row threatens to split Tories
Russell Jenkins
ROWS over public spending are set to explode into open warfare at an emergency Cabinet meeting this afternoon.
Premier John Major is prepared to lead an unprecedented series of bruising encounters at Number 10 to allow warring departments to agree on where the Treasury axe will fall.
Ministers will clash over how far they intend to pay for capital spending projects by freezing the pay of public sector workers like teachers, nurses and doctors, or limiting rises to two per cent.
There is also strong opposition to cuts in social security payments, training and cash to ease the introduction of the council tax.
A new procedure for the spending round was supposed to introduce greater openness in the Cabinet.
Instead, it looks like a recipe for setting ministers at each other 's throats.
The Cabinet has 10 days before Chancellor Norman Lamont sets out its economic strategy in his autumn statement in the Commons.
Last night shadow treasury minister Harriet Harman said: ‘The Government has demonstrated complete incompetence.
‘They have turned a £14 billion surplus into a massive deficit.’
Ministers will meet on the day the Oxford Economic Forecasting group warned the Chancellor against relaxing interest rates too quickly as it would ‘store up problems for the future’.
Jobs gloom
ANOTHER 400,000 jobs will go nationwide in the next 15 months, NatWest's chief economist David Kern predicted yesterday.
Interest rates would also drop to 7 per cent by Christmas.
Driver foiled IRA plot
Sarah Grady
A SPORTS car driver was hailed a hero last night after the foiled IRA plot to bomb Downing Street.
Brave Joe Daly, 20, drove through London at top speed to warn police about the terrorist attack.
His efforts gave officers the time they needed to clear Whitehall.
The drama began as Joe and his girlfriend Claire Gallagher, 19, headed for a night out in the West End on Friday.
As he sat in his red Toyota MR2 near Hyde Park Corner, cabbie Malcolm Egerton drew up beside him.
He wound down his window and shouted at Joe to get to a phone quickly.
Car salesman Joe said: ‘He screamed: ‘I've been planted with a bomb by the IRA and I'm on my way to Downing Street’.
‘I could tell from the fear on his face he was not joking.’
Joe said he ‘drove like the devil’ and found a parked police van.
Two officers radioed his warning to control.
Scotland Yard last night thanked Joe for his bravery and quick-thinking.
‘We would like to pay tribute to him,’ a spokesman said.
Fans write-off Arnie double
HUNDREDS of young fans were left disappointed after they turned up at a video store to meet Arnold Schwarzenegger and found a lookalike instead.
‘What's the point of having an Arnie autograph if it isn't him,’ said Richard Johnson, 14, of Blackley, Manchester.
John Hinde, boss of the Manchester store, said: ‘Nobody expected him to be the real thing.’
Bo is a woman of desire again
ACTRESS Bo Derek, who became a sex goddess in the movie 10, is all set to do it again.
Bo, who shot to world fame with Dudley Moore, will star with Robert Mitchum in A Woman of Desire.
In London yesterday on her way to start filming in Cape Town, South Africa, blonde Bo said: ‘The plot of the new movie is a very complicated murder mystery.’
Photofit of bogus policeman
THIS is the photofit of a bogus policeman who has attacked two women in their homes after asking to see their husbands.
Police yesterday urged women in Sussex to be on their guard as the man ‘who wants to hurt women’ may strike again.
His latest victim was punched and kicked after she demanded his warrant card.
The other was a widow.
Both were bruised and bleeding.
Parky backs spoof that went bump in the night
Nicki Pope
TV HOSTS Michael Parkinson and Sarah Greene yesterday launched a spirited defence of a Hallowe'en drama which terrified viewers believed was real.
The duo fronted Saturday night's Screen One programme Ghostwatch which featured a fictional investigation into Britain's ‘most haunted house’.
Hundreds of callers jammed the BBC switchboard for more than an hour, complaining it had not been made clear it was make believe.
Some people were so scared by the programme — which featured poltergeists, objects flying around rooms, dark figures and mysterious puddles — they phoned the police.
An unrepentant Michael Parkinson said he was delighted by the response.
‘What a jape.
That's what it was designed to do.
It obviously worked,’ he said.
The BBC said they had left viewers in no doubt that the programme was a spoof.
‘We're confident that there were enough clues,’ said a spokeswoman.
An outside broadcast team investigated the council house in Northolt, West London, where the fictional Early family had complained of paranormal experiences.
Going Live's Sarah Greene, the reporter inside the home, said she wasn't surprised by the reaction.
‘I thought it worked very well as a drama,’ she said.
Brian Inglis, a writer on the paranormal, said the spoof could have been damaging for those who had had ghostly experiences.
‘A programme like this might be all right if they had a proper documentary on the subject sometimes, but they don't,’ he said.
Many viewers were upset by a scene showing a young girl in a trance covered in blood.
John Turvey, of North London, said: ‘They really had me going.’
One TODAY reader, who refused to be named, said: ‘There was a certain part which really happened to me and I thought the programme was real.
‘My youngest daughter once spoke to me in a totally different voice.
I am a 39-year-old man weighing 11 stone and I was trying to cuddle my nine year old when she picked me up and threw me across the room.
‘My daughter, who is now 10, was watching and freaked out.’
Brigade firework hurts 5
FIVE people were hurt after a rogue rocket flew into the crowd at a firework display organised by the local fire brigade.
About 1,700 people were watching the weekend display at an 11th-century castle at Pevensey, Sussex.
The fireworks were being let off on the ramparts of the castle.
Suddenly, one of the rockets shot off in the wrong direction, dived on the crowd and exploded among them.
Four women and a seven-year-old boy were taken to hospital.
They went home after treatment for minor burns.
‘The brigade actually sets the fireworks off on the ramparts of the castle,’ fire safety officer Denis Neads said yesterday.
‘So they are well above the crowd and it is usually a lot safer than most displays.
‘But for some reason, on this occasion, one firework came down into the crowd.
‘Our lads are very upset at what happened.
‘It's tragic that this display resulted in injury — but fortunate that the injuries were minor.’
Mr Neads said that local stations were encouraged to become more involved with the community they serve.
The Pevensey station has organised a firework display for the last four years.
Mr Neads added: ‘This really does emphasise the dangers that fireworks present.
‘Even when you do everything right, there is a possibility that something can go wrong with them.’
Duke drops in on troops
THE Duke of York yesterday met front-line troops involved in the fight against terrorism.
Security was tight as he flew in to Ulster.
No details of his trip were released until he had left.
The Duke, who is Colonel-in-Chief of the Royal Irish Regiment, visited bases at Omagh and Dungannon, Co Tyrone, and Magherafelt, Co Londonderry.
He presented medals and met soldiers and their families before attending a Remembrance Service for the regiment at St Anne's Cathedral in Belfast.
Gloria faces up to ageing
RADIO Two DJ Gloria Hunniford says she's planning to have a facelift when she gets older.
‘I'm all in favour of plastic surgery,’ she says.
‘And I'm sure I'll have my eyes done one day.’
Gloria, 52, is coy about whether she has any plans to marry longtime partner Neagle Cathcart, 37.
‘I'm not panting to get married just yet but marriage is probably the best state to be in,’ she tells Take A Break magazine.
She is less keen on being a grandmother, now her daughter Caron is married.
‘I certainly don't want to be called Gran,’ she says.
Everest team stands by as Phil flies out
Stephen Farrell
THE advance party for a winter assault on Mt Everest flew to Nepal yesterday.
Falklands hero Lieutenant Colonel Philip Neame and Dr Christine A'Court, a Royal Army Medical Corps reservist, hope to be part of the first British team to reach the peak in winter.
They will be joined in Kathmandu by a TODAY reporter and photographer and 12 others, mainly Territorial Army reservists.
Only seven people have reached the summit in winter and one man died in the attempt.
Philip, who commands 10th Battalion the Parachute Regiment, came within 1,500 ft of success in 1976, but was forced to abort the mission to save two badly frost-bitten colleagues.
Along with Trooper Mal Duff, Corporal Harry Taylor and base camp manager Jim Wilkinson, Philip, 46, and Christine, 32, will ensure everything is in order for the arduous climb later this month.
They plan to reach the 29,000 ft summit on Christmas Day.
By then, the team will have marched 10 miles a day for a fortnight to reach base camp and endured temperatures of -40C and galeforce winds — with only tents for shelter.
Queen's cousin ‘broke’
Shoba Vazirani
SOCIETY party organiser Lady Elizabeth Anson, a cousin of the Queen, has had to curb her lavish lifestyle after losing millions in the Lloyd's insurance crash.
In fact, she says, she may even have to sell the six-bedroom house in West London where she runs her Party Planners business, to help cover debts.
Lady Anson, 51, who keeps her own name though married to Sir Geoffrey Shakerley,(sp OK) has a Staffordshire country retreat, Shugborough Hall.
Her brother, photographer-peer Patrick Lichfield, also lives there.
Lady Anson also runs an office at Wilmslow, Cheshire.
According to a Business Age magazine survey, she is worth over £4 million.
In a weekend interview, she dismissed that figure as ‘a joke’— but would not say how much of her fortune went in the Lloyd's ‘Names’ disaster, four years ago.
‘I have earned a comfortable living from Party Planners but I lost the bulk of my money as a Lloyd's Name,’ she said.
‘I may even have to sell the house in Ladbroke Grove to pay for the losses.’
Lady Anson still employs a chauffeur, housekeeper and personal assistant.
She insists she lives a frugal life.
‘I can't remember the last time I had a holiday although I go abroad to work.
‘I buy everything I wear during the day from Marks & Spencer.
Hardy Amies and other designers lend or give me evening wear.
‘My only extravagance is gulls' eggs.
They're in season three weeks of the year, and cost 75p each.’
Hero foils gun raid
A BRAVE police chief foiled an armed robbery on a jewellers by grabbing the raiders' shotgun.
As Chief Superintendent Chris Standen, 54, wrestled with the gunman a shot blasted into the ceiling of the shop in Bath.
Despite being hit over the head, he clung to the gun and the raiders fled empty-handed.
They made their getaway along a pavement on a stolen motorcycle.
A traffic warden who tried to stop them was knocked to the ground.
Airlines lose record £2.5bn
THE world's airlines lost a record £2.5 billion last year, according to official figures.
And the trend is expected to continue this year.
The number of passengers on international flights fell last year by 4.4 per cent, says the report by the International Air Transport Association.
However, a 43 per cent increase in international passengers by 1996 is predicted.
IATA director general Dr Gunter Eser said any move to impose ‘carbon’ taxes should be resisted.
Outfoxed
Helen Renshaw and Lucy Broadbent
Attempts to show human face of the hunt falls at the very first hurdle.
CONTROVERSY surrounding hunting has flared again with the opening of a new season.
The argument was fuelled exactly a year ago when the League Against Cruel Sports made public a video showing Prince Charles's favourite hunt, The Quorn, breaking the sport's strict code of conduct by digging out a fox and throwing it to the hounds.
The Quorn's chairman and four joint masters later resigned.
In an effort to improve its PR, the country's most prestigious hunt, pictured above this weekend, invited a journalist to ride out with them for the first time.
TODAY sent HELEN RENSHAW to hear their side of the story.
And on the day that the Hunt Saboteurs Association attended 120 of 190 outings nationwide, LUCY BROADBENT joined its members following The Quorn.
As their reports reveal, nothing much has changed…
THE HUNTERS
JUST a year ago, a journalist would have been as welcome at the opening meet of Prince Charles's favourite hunt as Saddam Hussein at a Royal garden party.
But as I rode out with the nation's most prestigious hunt, I found its members the model of politeness.
After the torrent of adverse publicity they attracted last season, the hunters were anxious to show they're not the rich savages most of the public believes them to be.
I expected to find a privileged crew, tolerating me for some positive press.
But the members were a genuinely friendly and open bunch — covering the social spectrum from plumber to proper ty developer and secretary to landowner.
And along with their stirrup cups, they were all eating humble pie.
Captain Fred Barker is Senior Master with the hunt, a man who has hunted for 44 years.
‘The terrible publicity of last year has made us more aware of our public image,’ he said.
‘And the way we carry out hunting doesn't help matters.
‘We get dressed up in all these silly clothes which set us apart from others.
I often think that if we dressed in old Barbours and flat caps we wouldn't create so much antipathy.
‘I don't deny that we have a bad image, and I am not in any way complacent about the future.
I think if we behave badly and don't put our house in order, hunting could be in an extremely dangerous position.
‘It is a whole way of life that is at stake.
But in a way what happened last season gave us a necessary jolt.
Maybe we needed to pull our socks up and we are trying to do just that.
We realise that we must not be arrogant.’
Trailing some way behind the braver riders, I didn't even get to see a fox, let alone be in at the kill.
One fox was caught, too far away for the riders to see in a day of little incident.
But there is one person who still cannot afford to be seen with The Quorn.
‘I'd find it embarrassing for Prince Charles to be out with us at the moment,’ said Captain Barker.
‘And I wouldn't want him to be associated in any way with what happened here last season.’
THE SABOTEURS
WE were spat on, sworn at and manhandled, but victory at the end of the day was ours.
Three foxes were saved from being savagely ripped apart.
The hunt only made one kill that day.
The scenes had been ugly.
Quiet country lanes became battle zones as hunts men cracked whips, hounds squealed, sabs hollered and the police grabbed at the noisiest among us.
Yet at the start of the day both sides had wished each other luck.
Cameron Evans, Secretary for the Hunt Saboteurs Association, exchanged a few words with the Master of the hunt, Fred Barker.
‘We have a mutual respect for each other.
It's in both our interests to avoid violence,’ said Cameron, who has been ‘sabbing’more than 12 years.
‘I actually like hunting.
I like the history of it, the hound breeding, the tradition.
But I object to the killing.’
We watched for the ‘first draw’, when hounds chase the fox from woods.
Cameron's knowledge of hunting and the country equals that of the hunt master.
His tools are an Ordnance Survey map, a huntsman's horn and whip.
The latter are kept well hidden.
‘I've been arrested twice for blowing the horn,’ he explained.
‘The police arrest us for breach of the peace for horn blowing, but never the huntsmen for doing the same thing.’
Sabs also crack whips and shout like the huntsmen to confuse the hounds, trained to obey those sounds.
‘We can often run off with the hounds following us,’ explained marketing manager Peter Thornton, 33.
I learned a lot more.
I discovered spit on my lapel and had abuse hurled at me by followers and supporters of the hunt and was cursed by the hunters.
But above all, I saw the sabs' devotion to the cause.
Many get up at 4am and go miles, especially to stop ‘cubbing’.
‘The hunting season may start now, but these people have been out mercilessly killing the young fox cubs for the last few months to train the hounds,’ said trainee accountant Sarah Carruthers, 19.
We scattered the pack three times, doing nothing illegal, but the police escorted us all day and one sab was threatened with arrest for shouting too loud.
‘The law's attitude is because the hunt is legal, we are not.
It comes down to power,’ said Cameron.
Dirty old towns
Ian Fletcher, Consumer Correspondent
THIRTEEN million people are plotting to escape from Britain's polluted and overcrowded towns and cities.
And four million of these say they will be definitely moving to the peace and tranquility of the country within five years, says a lifestyle survey by researchers Mintel.
Most of those who wanted to escape city life were in the 15 to 34 age group rather than those planning to retire in the near future.
The recession is partly to blame, says Mintel boss John Cunningham.
‘People want to escape.
They feel gloomy and weighed down so they think ‘Why not escape to the country’?’
Many younger people surveyed believe they would never have enough money to fulfil their dream.
If all those who wanted to move out did so ‘there would be an exodus on a massive scale which would turn cities into ghost towns and cause planning problems on a huge scale,’ said Mintel research manager Angela Hughes.
City life could be improved by turning urban wastelands into parks, and providing better underground and light railway systems to ease road traffic congestion, says the survey.
‘With many people's desires to move being delayed or not taking place because of job and housing difficulties there may well be demands to make cities more acceptable or even attractive places to live,’ said Miss Hughes.
DRINKING
Southerners tend to drink at home.
Folk in Yorkshire and the North East go to a pub to socialise.
The South-west, Wales and the North-west have more heavy drinkers.
HOLIDAYS
Holidaymakers in the south go off the beaten track.
In Yorkshire and East Anglia trippers return to the same places.
Scots go to eat and drink and Londoners take the car.
SHOPPING
Shoppers across the country will pay for quality.
Southerners buy own label products and are one-stop shoppers.
Northerners stick to brands, but hunt for bargains.
DO-IT-YOURSELF
The majority of DIY fans are in the North-east and Yorkshire.
They are 50 per cent more likely to carry out their own home improvements than Southerners.
Cindy Crawford
Model Cindy Crawford added a touch glamour to the British Music Industry Awards at London's Grosvenor House last night.
Drink-drive ‘peril’ of EC beer labels
DRIVERS' confusion over low-alcohol drinks could get worse with the single European market next year, says a report out today.
At present we have reduced-alcohol, low-alcohol, de-alcoholised and alcohol-free beers, says the Food Commission pressure group.
In Italy, a 3.5 per cent drink can be called ‘low-alcohol’.
However, in Britain the same label means the drink contains not more than 1.2 per cent alcohol.
Also in Britain, ‘alcohol-free’ has under 0.05 per cent alcohol.
In France, it can be 20 times higher.
‘The risk of drinkers inadvertently going over the limit is tragically high,’ the report says.
1,000 baby ban mums sue MoD
MORE than 1,000 ex-servicewomen are to sue the Ministry of Defence after being sacked for getting pregnant.
The soldiers, sailors and airwomen are among 5,500 women illegally forced to give up their careers to have a family, according to a European Equal Opportunities Commission ruling.
One woman is claiming £200,000 from the Ministry, which could end up paying out a total of £60 million in compensation.
Video guide to new cars
CAR buyers could soon choose their new models by watching a video at home.
Rover is planning a free video brochure showing its range on the road, with technical details, prices and shots of the interior.
‘It is an accepted fact that people associate showrooms with pressure,’ said a Rover spokesman.
‘The home videos would allow the whole family to have a good look at our cars but in the relaxing atmosphere of their own homes.’
‘I do again’
LOVEBIRDS Alan and Jennifer Tyler tied the knot again — a year to the day after they separated.
The couple, who divorced four months ago after 16 years of marriage, just ‘couldn't live apart’.
Jennifer, of Dewsbury, Yorks, said: ‘As soon as we divorced we both realised we'd made a mistake.’
‘Old boys’ take our top jobs
WOMEN are being held back from top jobs in industry by an ‘old boys' network’, according to a report published today.
An Institute of Management survey of 1,500 women managers, commissioned by BhS, revealed ‘widespread prejudice’ against them by male managers.
Among 800 men questioned, one in five said it was ‘difficult’ to work for a woman manager.
And one in three of the women said they did not get enough respect from male superiors.
‘There is a subtle way in which we are never given quite the full authority, never quite the full credit, never quite the full respect,’ said one woman working for a big firm.
The report says that the old boys' network and prejudice are the main barriers to a woman's career progress.
Nearly half the working mothers involved said parenthood harmed their careers.
Only 16 per cent of fathers said the same.
‘Old-fashioned sexist attitudes are still common,’ said Institute director general Roger Young.
‘They represent a real barrier.’
BhS executive Helena Packshaw said: ‘The results are disturbing.’
Car crashes into family
TWO women and three children were hurt when a car smashed into them as they walked to a firework display.
Jean Palmer, 35, was in intensive care with serious head injuries last night.
Her children Kim, eight, Simon, four, and Philip, 10, suffered cuts and bruises.
Friend Gwen Standen, 35, was being treated for head injuries and a broken leg after the crash, near Tunbridge Wells, Kent.
A local man has been charged with drink-driving.
Drug fury of Flake girl's grandfather
Ian Key
THE grandfather of Cadbury Flake girl Rachel Brown last night hit out at the ‘evil’ person who gave her the designer drug Ecstasy.
Former Vogue model Rachel, 25, is still receiving treatment in hospital a week after she took the drug at a 21st birthday party.
Her grandfather Billy, 80, said: ‘It's a terrible shock, she is such a beautiful girl.
‘Whoever gave this drug to Rachel is evil and must be stopped before they kill someone.’
Rachel, who was brought up by her grandparents on a Liverpool council estate, commands fees of up to £5,000 a day as one of the world's most beautiful women.
Her face has been seen on millions of TV screens in the chocolate advert, where she lies in a bath calmly eating a Flake.
‘She's the most wonderful girl in the world,’ said her grandmother Irene, 72.
‘She has no airs and graces and makes us all so proud.’
Rachel took the tablet of Ecstasy at a 21st birthday party in Liverpool.
‘It had a devastating effect on her,’ said one friend.
‘It has sent her mind into turmoil.’
Friends took her home, but they then had to chase her down the street as she fled from her flat.
The following day she still hadn't recovered and was taken to hospital.
‘She suddenly became ill and we took her home,’ said her flatmate Lee Kelly, 24, who was at the party.
‘She kept saying ‘What is happening to me’?
After we got home, she ran into the street, screaming.
‘It was pouring with rain and she only had a thin dress on.’
Liverpool's Broad Green hospital has been asked not to disclose her condition.
Cadbury is unlikely to immediately cancel the TV ad she appears in.
‘We would want to find out more about the circumstances of what happened before we take a decision on future screenings,’ said company spokesman Richard Frost.
‘After all, we are portraying a vision on the advert, and there is a difference between the person being shown and the model playing her.’
Deadly toll of Ecstasy
AT least 20 people have died after taking Ecstasy.
Rachel Brown is just one of an increasing number of users who are taken to hospital suffering dehydration, exhaustion and heart and mental problems.
Recently, six Humberside teenagers ended up in a psychiatric hospital with a form of schizophrenia after taking the drug.
They may never recover.
‘They are the most disturbed mental patients I have seen in 10 years,’ said one doctor.
Homes for high fliers spark row
AMBITIOUS plans to build 60 luxury homes each with its own aircraft hangar are being fought by villagers.
They say the Skypark development, complete with a private airfield, would shatter the peace of nearby Bratton, Shropshire, and could be a safety hazard.
Executives who could fly to work from their front door, would pay at least £250,000 for a home on the estate, the first of its kind in Britain.
Angry villagers claim Labour-controlled Wrekin council has ignored their protests by backing the scheme.
Retired RAF squadron leader Ted Cowling said: ‘I hope justice will prevail so my friends will be able to sit in their gardens and continue to enjoy the tranquility of their countryside existence.’
But a spokesman for Wrekin council, which admitted losing 600 protesters' letters, said: ‘There is nothing like it in Europe.
‘If we can increase our air contact with Europe, it could mean jobs will be created in the district.’
Protesters now hope to force a public inquiry over the plan, based on successful schemes in America.
Debts make doctors ill
MEDICAL students are falling ill because of debts which can top £8,000.
The profession is fast becoming only for the wealthy, a doctor warned.
One in five students surveyed at Bristol university had debts exceeding £5,000, says the report by Dr Kieran Smart.
Many were forced to take part-time jobs or handouts from parents to make ends meet.
Money worries and overwork led to illness.
Warning over charity cards
Only a fraction of the £375 million a year spent on charity Christmas cards reaches the good cause, a report warns.
Retailers rake in up to 400 per cent profit, says Good Housekeeping magazine.
Between 4p and £1 may go to charity on a £2 pack of cards.
Buying direct from the charity, or a charity-run shop, is the best way to make sure the money goes where you want it to.
Tragedy in 3-wheeler
A DRIVER was killed when his three-wheeler car overturned and skidded along the road, hitting an elderly woman and ramming a pub sign.
Cyril Broomfield, 70, of Hedge End, Hampshire, died at the wheel of his Reliant Rialto car.
Margaret Busby, 75, escaped with superficial injuries while she was out walking at Titchfield, near Fareham, Hampshire, at the weekend.
Nurses help stress cops
TEN nurses start work at Scotland Yard today — helping officers cope with stress.
They will counsel officers with psychological problems, assess potential health risks in stations and promote fitness and hygiene.
The nine women and one man are employed as occupational health advisers to the Metropolitan Police.
‘We want to encourage a positive attitude to individual health and fitness,’ a police spokesman said.
Stage star hurt in fall
VETERAN actress Evelyn Laye, 92, underwent surgery yesterday after falling and breaking a hip.
Britain's oldest working actress — known as ‘Boo’— was found on the bedroom floor of her London home.
In July, more than 100 stars staged a London Palladium tribute to her 77-year career.
Only last week she appeared at London's Players Theatre.
In 1929 she shot to stardom on Broadway in a Noel Coward play.
Spirit moves in NHS
Nicki Pope
DOCTORS are turning to spiritual healers to help cure patients.
Some GPs even have paid healers in their surgeries as a growing number offer healing sessions in addition to conventional medicine.
More than 40 GPs supported the National Federation of Spiritual Healers, according to Good Housekeeping magazine.
It said: ‘The medical establishment is taking healing increasingly seriously.
‘Doctors are starting to think the mind can affect the body's health and are unwilling to dismiss spiritual healing out of hand.’
Dr Michael Massey, who has a spiritual healing clinic at his practice in Bromley, south London, said: ‘Every practitioner, whether a conventional GP or witch doctor, will say 50 per cent of people get better because they believe they will be cured.
‘I think it's due to the power of the mind.
Nobody yet knows how much it can control.
‘I am a modern doctor using conventional medicine but I don't believe my system is better than any other so I'll use anything to make my patients better.’
Spiritual healing has been permitted on the NHS since 1985.
IRA cabbie celebrates
THE cab driver who was forced to carry an IRA bomb to Downing Street is recovering with a double birthday celebration.
Malcolm Egerton is 40 today and his daughter Jessica was eight yesterday.
Jessica's grandparents took her out for the day as father-of-four Mr Egerton, of Enfield, north London, recovered from Friday's ordeal.
Two armed men held a gun to his head and made him drive the bomb to the heart of Westminster after hiring the cab at his office.
Monty son meets pal Rommel
THE sons of Second World War foes Montgomery and Rommel stood together in friendship yesterday.
Viscount Montgomery and Manfred Rommel honoured those who died in the desert battles led by their fathers.
They met in Blackpool, Lancs, where the Eighth Army held its 50th annual reunion and Remembrance Day parade.
The men exchanged poppies in front of 3,000 ex-soldiers, including more than 200 Germans.
Herr Rommel said: ‘It was very touching.’
Climber dies
A LONE climber fell hundreds of feet to his death on Mount Snowdon.
The body of Edward Stone, 27, an experienced climber who lived locally, was found halfway up the peak.
IRA bombs were just a taster
BRITAIN must brace itself for an even more violent wave of IRA attacks, RUC Chief Constable Sir Hugh Annesley warned last night.
The mainland campaign had been just a foretaste of what might be coming, he said.
He predicted that despite recent police success, the Provisionals were well armed and would resort to using bigger bombs in their terror attacks.
Sir Hugh told the BBC Northern Ireland Inside Ulster programme that lives had been saved and damage prevented by the huge haul of Semtex seized last week.
It would cause disruption to the terrorists' objectives, he said.
But he warned: ‘It would be naive to think the Provisional IRA are not planning a major attack on the British mainland.’
The Provos, he claimed, had reserves of munitions and were determined to keep going, even though a debate of sorts was going on within the Republican movement.
He added: ‘Those who are intent on pursuing violence are perhaps holding the majority sway now within the IRA army council.’
The chief constable said loyalist paramilitaries now posed a ‘significant threat’ in the Irish Republic.
EC to rule on pensions
WOMEN factory workers fighting for equal pension rights had their case referred to the European Court of Justice yesterday.
The 78 women at Avdel Systems in Welwyn Garden City, Herts, said they faced losing 20 per cent of their pensions if they retired at 60.
They told a Bedford tribunal they could retire at 60 on full pension before the firm introduced a retirement age of 65 for all staff last year.
Their fight is being financed by the Equal Opportunities Commission.
Schools let pupils smoke
TEACHERS are turning a blind eye to pupils smoking at school, a report reveals today.
Only one out of 21 schools questioned by the Cancer Research Campaign had an official policy on smoking — and that did not ban pupils from lighting up.
Youngsters are turning to the habit because it makes them appear ‘cool’ in the eyes of older children.
And it seems that when they start smoking — and one in three children smoke at least one cigarette a week — teachers may be the last people to discourage them.
Half of staff questioned believed it did not matter whether they lead by example.
Hero's wife in Civvies fury
THE widow of Falklands War hero Colonel H Jones branded BBC1 drama Civvies ‘a fairy story’ yesterday.
Sara Jones, 49, said the series, written by Lynda La Plante and which shows ex-Paratroopers struggling as civilians, left her so angry she had stopped watching it.
Mrs Jones, whose husband was killed at Goose Green, said: ‘I suggest you treat the programme as a fairy story completely removed from reality.
‘I appeal to employers to look on ex-service people and see the loyal, hard-working men and women that they are.’
She was speaking at the launch of this year's Royal British Legion poppy appeal in Southampton.
Banger bomb hurts cadet
A SCHOOLBOY has undergone emergency surgery after being hit by a potentially lethal firework bomb.
Army cadet John Szkudlapski, 11, was out collecting Poppy money when a banger inside a tin can was hurled over a wall at him, leaving shrapnel in his leg.
After a two-hour operation, doctors said John, of Kirkby, Merseyside, owes his life to a padded jacket which prevented the jagged metal piercing vital organs.
Fellow cadet Mark Mcmanaman, 14, was also wounded in the hand.
John's condition is described as comfortable.
War kids at top school
FOUR refugee children from Bosnia started free lessons yesterday at an English private school.
The £1,090-a-term fees at Hulme Hall School, Manchester, are being met by school funds.
A school spokesman said: ‘We wanted to ease the suffering of the refugees.’
The new pupils, three girls and a boy aged between 12 and 14, were among 55 refugees who arrived in Stockport.
One said: ‘School now is going to be very different.’
Tougher test for refugees
A BILL clamping down on asylum-seekers was given Commons backing last night, despite Labour protests that the legislation was ‘profoundly flawed’.
The Asylum and Immigration Appeals Bill, which aims to curb bogus applications and speed up the processing of cases, has been attacked by campaigners and a mass lobby was held outside Parliament before the debate began.
The new law means refugees, including children, will be finger-printed and those refused asylum have just two days to decide whether to appeal.
‘We must strengthen our system of controlling entry and excluding people not entitled to be here,’ said Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke.
However, he promised the Government would uphold the ‘fine tradition’ of admitting those genuinely facing persecution.
‘We must say ‘no’ more finally in the cases where there is no real scope for argument and ‘yes’more quickly when ‘yes’is the right answer,’he said.
Of the 40,000 asylum applications made last year, nine out of 10 were unfounded.
Labour's shadow home secretary Tony Blair said: ‘No one condones bogus applications for asylum.
‘But weeding out false claims should not be at the expense of prejudicing genuine claims.’
Death driver cleared
A COURIER firm boss cleared of killing a motorist by reckless driving was a ‘lucky man’, the victim's husband said yesterday.
John Thompson, 42, had drunk the equivalent of 15 whiskies before crashing into mother-of-four Linda Bone's car, Hove Crown Court was told.
Mrs Bone, 41, who was changing a tyre at Faygate, West Sussex, died instantly.
Her husband Alex, 45, said: ‘Hopefully, when he is dealt with at a magistrates court later for driving with excess alcohol he will be banned for a long time.’
Thompson, of Crawley, was fined £400 and banned for six months for the lesser charge of driving without due care and attention.
Comedy king dies at 100
THE creator of legendary comedy duo Laurel and Hardy has died aged 100.
Pioneering producer Hal Roach also launched a host of other silent film stars including Harold Lloyd.
Starting out as a cowboy movie extra, he built a comedy factory.
He was still a familiar Hollywood figure in his nineties, with a home in Bel-Air, and received an honorary Academy Award in 1984.
Asked why Stan and Ollie were so popular, he once said: ‘Because there's a lack of their kind of comedy.’
Cancer scare operation for Hepburn the screen legend
Kevin Murphy and Cheryl Stonehouse
HOLLYWOOD legend Audrey Hepburn was recovering last night after emergency surgery to remove a tumour from her colon.
The 63-year-old Oscar winning actress is expected to spend a week in hospital after Sunday's operation on the tumour, which may be cancerous.
Doctors at Cedars-Sinai Medical Centre in Los Angeles had not revealed results of their tests last night.
‘Miss Hepburn is in a fair condition,’ said hospital spokesman Ron Wise.
‘She spent the night in intensive care after the operation, and then was moved to a private room where she is recovering.’
He did not know how long Miss Hepburn had been ill.
‘She seems to be recovering well and is cheerful, able to talk to her visitors,’ he added.
‘If everything continues to go well, she will stay for no more than seven days.’
The waif-like screen star, who in recent years has devoted her energies to helping the world's starving children, has just pleaded for a week of peace in Bosnia to enable food to get through to the children there.
And it is just over a month since she wept tears of frustration during an arduous visit to the dust and famine of drought-stricken Somalia.
Back in London after that trip she said: ‘Nothing could have prepared me for the agony of seeing countless dying children.
‘My impulse was to pick them up and hug them, but they are so frail I was afraid they would break.
‘I haven't slept at night since then.’
Hepburn, born in Belgium to an English father and Dutch mother, is one of the world's best known actresses.
Film roles include Breakfast At Tiffany's, Funny Face with Fred Astaire, My Fair Lady with Rex Harrison and Roman Holiday with Gregory Peck, for which she won her Oscar as Best Actress.
For the past five years she has devoted herself to the United Nations Children's Fund and became its ambassador in an effort to help the world's sick and starving children.
The still-beautiful Miss Hepburn says she is repaying a debt from World War II.
Her family survived the war in the occupied Dutch city of Arnhem, but they would have gone hungry as the Nazis retreated without the help of international aid groups.
Now she wants to repay some of that help, but that is not the only reason for her unstinting charity work.
‘It's an absolutely instinctive reaction — if a child falls you pick it up,’ she said.
‘The human obligation is to help children who are suffering.
‘The rest is luxury.’
The letter that tore Diana apart
Clive Nelson
THE full extent of Prince Philip's fury towards Princess Diana over revelations about the state of her marriage can finally be revealed today.
In a terse, hand-delivered note to Diana, the Duke of Edinburgh accused her of betraying the Royal Family.
TODAY has been told the letter went so far as to claim she had betrayed her husband, her sons and, above all, the Queen.
Prince Philip blamed her for bringing shame and ridicule on the Royal Family and ordered her to ‘help maintain the dignity of the Crown’.
The Princess was described as ‘devastated’ by the attack.
A close friend confirmed: ‘He told her in no uncertain terms that she had to consider the repercussions of her actions to the Queen.
‘He said that her next responsibility was to be loyal to her husband above all else.
‘And he ended by warning her that the stories being published were doing untold damage to the Royal Family — and she should be aware that she was to blame.’
Diana at first believed her life as a member of the Royal Family was over.
She told at least one of her oldest friends: ‘That's it.
I'm out.’
The letter was delivered to Diana's private rooms at Kensington Palace in the wake of the publication of Andrew Morton's startling book, Diana: Her True Story.
The book created a sensation in the summer when it portrayed Diana trapped in a sham marriage.
The letter asked Diana if she had co-operated with the author.
Diana was shattered by its tone and content.
But after speaking to a group of her most trusted advisers, she turned her anger into action.
She consulted her own solicitor, and wrote back to Prince Philip in the same angry terms, stressing the work she had done for the Royal Family.
The warring sides finally came face-to-face at a meeting designed to help them settle their differences.
In a carefully negotiated settlement Charles and Diana agreed they would work side by side in public as long as they could live totally separate lives.
But last night, as the couple were forced together in Korea, even that fragile arrangement appeared to be on the brink of failure.
TODAY's exclusive revelations that the couple were not sharing one bedroom at the city's Hyatt Hotel came as palace aides tried to insist Charles and Diana were closer than ever.
Up to 15 joint engagements were hastily planned for the couple during their tour.
Today they will meet Korean president Roh Tae-Woo and prime minister Hyun Soong-Jong.
The couple will also visit Gloucester Valley where 94 British soldiers were killed during the Korean war.
They have just two solo engagements.
Diana will open a display of British goods in a Korean department store while Charles talks to young businessmen.
Princess Diana has agreed to be patron to Centrepoint, the London-based charity caring for the homeless, it was announced last night.
Its aim is to provide shelters and hostels to keep vulnerable young people off the streets of the capital.
Director Nick Hardwick said the charity had been ‘much heartened’ by Diana's support in the past.
Cut our budgets and we'll resign
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
SENIOR ministers were last night threatening to quit in a massive row over public spending.
Premier John Major's crunch Cabinet meeting ended in acrimonious deadlock at 9.30 pm after four and half hours.
They meet again today in a desperate bid to sort out who gets what of next year's £244.5 billion spending cake.
And if that doesn't work there are likely to be more meetings all week.
Senior officials have made it clear that if final decisions are not made by Friday, Chancellor Norman Lamont's autumn statement on November 12 will not be ready in time.
There is enormous pressure to cut spending on social security, jobless benefits, public sector pay for five million workers, and on easing the council tax.
In the ferocious row over what takes priority, there are fears that Mr Major will be forced into another humiliating U-turn by increasing spending to more than £244.5 billion.
Only six weeks ago at the Tory Party conference he promised categorically that his spending total would not be ‘breached’.
If the total does soar to £250 billion or £260 billion there will be outcry in the City, a further run on the pound and shares would slump.
Cabinet ministers clashed at the bruising meeting as a succession of top names tried to fight cuts.
Social Security Secretary Peter Lilley wanted to halt a freeze on benefits.
Employment Secretary Gillian Shephard appealed for colleagues not to cut her training budget.
Environment Secretary Michael Howard made a last-minute plea for Pounds 2.3 billion to head off a council tax disaster.
And Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley and Education Secretary John Patten fought cuts in the pay of nurses, doctors and teachers.
Only Transport Secretary John MacGregor received good news.
He was told many of the big road and rail projects facing the axe have been reprieved.
But Downing Street made it clear that it was the Cabinet which set the £244.5 billion spending target — and it can increase that figure if it wants to.
The big problem is the financial Black Hole caused by falling tax revenue and the rising cost of unemployment and benefits.
Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke has ruled out immediate tax increases to plug that gap.
So it will have to be filled with borrowing.
The Government decided that it will need to increase its current level of borrowing from £50 million a day to £110 million.
In the long term, unless the economy recovers, they will be forced to put up taxes.
And if there are any rises in social security or unemployment benefit, they will be pegged to below inflation.
Labour were quick to take advantage of Mr Major's troubles.
Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown claimed the Government is collapsing ‘into crisis.’
TRAINING
EMPLOYMENT Secretary Gillian Shephard is furious that the money she gets to help train or retrain the unemployed may be slashed in half.
She appealed for the Cabinet not to target her comparatively tiny budget of £4 billion.
However, she is under heavy pressure to accept cuts of £2 billion.
The cash had been earmarked for a big expansion of the jobs training and retraining programme.
She believes it would be politically inept to cut such training programmes at a time when the jobless total is rising fast and will soon top three million.
Unemployment benefits come from the social security budget.
BENEFITS
SOCIAL SECURITY Secretary Peter Lilley was last night fighting a desperate battle to preserve his £70.5 billion budget.
He is under immense pressure to freeze benefit increases in the coming year for the jobless, the infirm, and pensioners.
This would save up to £3 billion at a time when the jobless total is soaring.
Every 100,000 rise in the unemployment total costs the Government another £400,000.
It is expected that once the number of people on the dole tops 3,000,000 next Spring, Mr Lilley's budget will reach £75 billion.
This means that to have a big impact, benefits would have to be cut in real terms — undercutting inflation — by up to four per cent.
HEALTH
HEALTH SECRETARY Virginia Bottomley is fighting a tough behind the scenes battle to preserve her £30 billion health budget.
She hopes to ensure NHS reforms and hospital opt outs do not run out of steam.
She is particularly worried that a freeze on public sector pay will cause outcry among doctors, nurses and hospital workers.
There is also expected to be a wave of public support for health workers especially as hospitals like those in London face closure.
Education Secretary John Patten is also fighting off a cut in teachers' pay and campaigning for his budget to push through education reforms and repair crumbling schools.
COUNCIL TAX
ENVIRONMENT Secretary Michael Howard warned fellow ministers last night that a huge cash injection is the only way to prevent the council tax turning into a Poll Tax Two disaster.
He argued that £2.3 billion is needed to soften the impact of the new tax next Spring.
It is feared that the average household tax bill could soar to Pounds 600 or £800 — depending on area — instead of the previous Pounds 400 estimate.
Worst hit will be the South, where people with high mortgages have been most affected by the recession.
Mr Howard is also fighting against big cuts in housing and inner city budgets.
Major battles to crush Euro mutiny
Russell Jenkins
PREMIER John Major will today make a desperate television appeal to Tory rebels planning to vote against Maastricht.
The Prime Minister will appear on BBC and ITV news programmes to echo Michael Heseltine's warning that a Commons defeat tomorrow will be ‘incalculably destructive’.
Labour leader John Smith tried to woo dissident Tories last night with an amendment to the crucial vote on European unity.
The wording urges a delay in the committee stage of the debate until after December's Edinburgh Euro summit.
Party chiefs hope to unite Tory rebels who want to hold up ratification with opposition MPs who see the Government motion as vote of confidence in John Major.
Mr Major had pep talks with around 20 hand-picked ‘waverers’ before last night's emergency public spending Cabinet meeting.
However, Vale of Glamorgan MP Walter Sweeney was unmoved.
‘I am still against,’ he said after talking to Mr Major.
Although some Euro-sceptics are bound to wilt under the fierce lobbying by ministers, whips and loyal back-benchers, the result was still too close to call last night.
Board of Trade President Michael Heseltine warned rebels they would be left with a lame duck administration if they did not ratify Maastricht.
‘You will have a policy vacuum at the centre of decision-making of incalculable destructiveness,’ he told them.
Paddy Ashdown has already committed the Liberal Democrats to vote with the Government.
But party insiders last night warned Mr Major should not bank on their support.
‘As Paddy put it, he wouldn't trust the Tories even at this late stage to carry the day,’ one said.
In another development, former Tory chairman Lord Parkinson told BBC1's Panorama last night that the ‘Government had lost all control’.
Death driver cleared
A COMPANY director cleared of killing a stranded motorist by reckless driving was a ‘lucky man’, the victim's husband said yesterday.
Courier firm boss John Thompson had drunk the equivalent of 15 single whiskies before crashing into Sunday School teacher Linda Bone's car, Hove Crown Court heard.
Mrs Bone, 41, who was changing a tyre on the side of the main road at Faygate, West Sussex, died instantly.
She was on her way home from a school governors' meeting when she had a puncture.
Her husband Alex, 45, who was left to care for four children aged four to 17, said after the verdict: ‘He is a lucky man.
‘Hopefully, when he is dealt with at a magistrates court later for driving with excess alcohol he will be banned for a long time.’
Thompson, 42, of Crawley, West Sussex, was convicted of the lesser charge of driving without due care and attention, fined £400 and banned for six months.
He told police he had drunk miniatures of brandy on a flight back from Dubai that day, followed by a pint of beer and a whisky.
He told the jury he had no recollection of the crash.
Christopher Smythe, defending, said hazard lights on Mrs Bone's car may have been obscured as she changed the wheel.
Housing key to economy
FOUR out of five of Britain's top firms want more investment in housing to boost the economy, it was revealed yesterday.
And nearly all the 100 companies questioned in a survey by the charity Shelter said a stable housing system was vital for long-term growth.
‘Without a stable, sustainable housing system aimed at meeting need, the business performance of this country's biggest companies is compromised,’ said Shelter director Sheila McKechnie.
Live with mummy or die with me
A SUICIDAL father asked his nine-year-old daughter to choose whether she wanted to live with mummy or die with him.
The little girl decided to stay with her father but asked to make one final phone call, Teesside crown court heard.
Her anguished voice made her mother realise something was seriously wrong and dashed to the family home in Spennymoor, County Durham.
The child was only freed from a fume-filled car when her frantic mother began knocking on the locked garage door.
The father continued the suicide attempt but he was rescued by police.
While on bail, the 44-year-old machine operator — who cannot be named for legal reasons — attacked his wife's boss believing they were having an affair.
Toby Hedworth, defending, said the man never intended the child should die and meant to release her in time.
‘This was a cry for help, a last desperate throw of the dice to woo back his wife,’ he said yesterday.
The father admitted cruelty to a child and assault.
He was sentenced to 18 months in prison, suspended for two years.
Jail hell of poll tax man
A PATIENT with heart, lung and psychiatric problems was sent to jail because he failed to pay his poll tax.
Brian Brown, 57, claims he had to share a room with a murderer, a rapist and a child molester.
He was released from his 12-day sentence after mental health charity Mind and a well-wisher paid his bill and costs, totalling £370.
Mr Brown, of Haxby, North Yorks, said: ‘I couldn't believe anyone would do this to me.
I wanted to die.
I could not stop crying.’
Ryedale councillors, who recently decided to set up of a customer-care department, have called for a report.
Lawyer in nanny sex case guilty
POT-SMOKING barrister Christopher Wren was convicted yesterday of a sex attack on his daughter's nanny.
Wren, 50, looked shocked as a jury including six women gave the verdict at Inner London Crown Court.
The 30-year-old Argentinian nanny told how Wren, of Blackheath, south London, assaulted her while his nine-year-old daughter played in the garden.
First, she said, he offered her a puff from a ‘funny cigarette’, which she refused.
Sobbing as she gave evidence, she said she found Wren ‘repulsive and disgusting’.
Wren, who denied indecent assault, told the jury: ‘We had a very flirtatious and intense relationship.’
Sentence was postponed for three weeks.
Wren's wife was not in court.
Piggott set for the off
LESTER Piggott is to be released from hospital tomorrow, a day before his 57th birthday.
The jockey is making a remarkable recovery from the injuries sustained in a fall, doctors in Florida said.
‘I could be riding within three weeks.
I'll certainly ride during the winter,’ said Piggott.
Friend Anna Ludlow, 38, spent yesterday buying presents.
BBC ‘theft’ mum suicide
A BBC accounts clerk took her life after being suspected of theft at work, a Plymouth inquest heard.
Mother-of-two Lesley Adams, 28, gassed herself in her car at her Plymouth home, hours after she was told of the allegation by her boss.
Husband Robert, 29, found his wife in the garage still clutching pictures of her family.
Verdict: Suicide.
Boot sale stab charge
A MAN appeared in court yesterday charged with the attempted murder of a teenager whose throat was slashed at a car boot sale.
Electrician Savas Tevfik, 23, of Herne Hill, south London, was remanded in custody by magistrates in Camber-well.
Frances Grimes, 16, is still in hospital with a wound stretching almost from ear to ear.
Comic turn
COMEDY actor Robin Williams will go behind the camera for the first time, directing Mrs Doubtfire.
Williams, 41, star of Hook, will also play the lead.
Trip into danger
Nicki Pope, Medical Correspondent
ECSTASY can cause bleeding in all the body's major organs.
The drug, also known as MDMA, is a cross between LSD and amphetamines.
It causes dilated pupils, increased blood pressure and heart rate, sweating and, occasionally, nausea.
Muscles become tight, especially the jaw which often clenches.
But users put up with this for a feeling of euphoria and heightened sensitivity.
The ‘high’ comes from the release of a chemical in the brain called serotonin which controls mood, sexual activity, sleep and aggression.
Katie Jeffreys of the poisons unit at Guy's Hospital, London, said: ‘It seems to break down barriers and gives people a loving feeling towards others.
‘If you take Ecstasy you seem to remain rational and your normal thought processes aren't distorted.
In higher doses it can happen.
Thought processes become distorted and you hallucinate.
With any drug breaking down emotional barriers, there is always a risk that it is going to unlock some psychological problem.’
But the drug's lethal potential lies in its ability to increase body temperature.
When temperature shoots up so dramatically, bleeding can result in all the major organs such as the heart, lungs and liver.
Ms Jeffreys said: ‘Deaths have all occurred since the rave scene began and people made it a dance drug.
‘There is a connection between taking the drug and getting hot, dehydrated and exhausted from prolonged dancing.’
Doctors believe Ecstasy may cause a chemical imbalance which acts on the part of the brain controlling temperature.
Ecstasy girl will be haunted for ever, says her ex-lover
Neville Thurlbeck and Ian Key
FLAKE girl Rachel Brown may never recover from the devastating effects of the mind-bending drug Ecstasy.
Her distraught family were given the bombshell news yesterday as the model lapsed in and out of horrific hallucinations.
Nine days after taking the drug at a friend's 21st birthday party Rachel, 25, still has vivid flashbacks which could haunt her for the rest of her life.
Grandparents Billy, 80, and 72-year-old Irene were called away from her bedside in the psychiatric unit at Liverpool's Broad Green Hospital to be told the news which could signal the end of Rachel's £5,000-a-day career.
A medical source last night admitted she was ‘very poorly, in a very bad way.’
Rachel's former fiance revealed that he thinks the health-conscious Vogue model was duped into taking the drug at the bash at Wavertree Recreation Club in Liverpool.
‘She had a really bad time.
It was horrific,’ musician Nick Yin, 29, told TODAY.
‘She just kept saying: ‘It's the end of the world.
It's all going to end.’
‘She kept repeating it over and and over again like a robot.’
Nick, who met Rachel at a disco when she was a 17-year-old schoolgirl, said: ‘Even the day after, she was still repeating over and over again that the world was going to end.
‘She had a terrified look in her eyes, and was obviously going through a very, very bad trip.
‘Her grandparents have been told to expect the worst.
They have been told she may never fully recover.
She could be having flashbacks for the rest of her life.
Apparently she had the equivalent of half a tablet.
‘She wouldn't have knowingly taken it.
She is very health-conscious and would only ever drink herbal tea even.
‘She hardly touches alcohol, and is a vegetarian.
She has never taken drugs in her life.
She always said it was a mug's game.
‘I only wish I knew who it was who gave it to her, because this person could have destroyed her career.’
Brought up on a tough council estate in Liverpool, Rachel — half English and half Indian — never knew her parents and lived with her grandparents in Speke.
Nick met Rachel in 1984 when she was a sixth former at Liverpool's Quarry Bank comprehensive.
‘She was so stunning,’ said Nick.
‘It was love at first sight.
Sometimes when you meet a beautiful woman, you know their beauty is more than skin deep, and so it was with Rachel.’
Nick broke off the engagement in 1988 to concentrate on his career as a musician in local rock bands.
‘She was very understanding when I ended the relationship, and we still remained great friends.
I pray she comes out of this with her mind in one piece.’
Colleagues at the Elite Premier model agency in London have been deeply upset by the tragedy.
‘She is a wonderful model and we are all shocked at what has happened,’ said Sophie Wood.
Dad-to-be dies after first pill
A YOUNG father-to-be died after taking Ecstasy just two weeks before the expected birth of his first child.
Lorry driver David Hampton, 24, collapsed in a club on a night out and lost his fight for life in hospital 24 hours later.
His 47-year-old father, also called David, said: ‘It is tragic that he died so close to the birth of his first child.
‘He was really looking forward to being a father and could not wait for the birth.
‘The drug pushers who sold Ecstasy to my son are simply murderers.
I would like to see the same thing happen to them.’
Mr Hampton said his son, who died on Saturday, was a healthy man, into karate and weightlifting.
‘He was not the sort of person to be involved in drugs.
I'm sure this was the first time,’ he said.
The family, from Ipswich, Suffolk, are now comforting David's widow Sheena.
A post mortem was carried out yesterday, but it is believed David died from internal bleeding.
An inquest will be held.
The joyride killers
ONE in every nine fatal road smashes involves a stolen car.
The shock figures are detailed in a report by West Yorkshire Chief Constable Peter Noades.
He revealed that more than 100 people were hurt in 81 accidents in his county in the first eight months of this year.
There were also 434 hit and runs.
‘It might be expected that a substantial proportion of these also involved stolen vehicles,’ he said.
The figures come as a 33,000-signature petition is sent to the Home Office by Carole Whittingham of Rastrick, whose 27-year-old son Stephen was killed by a stolen car.
She claims that joyride killers get away with ‘murder on the cheap’.
‘The maximum sentence for this offence is only five years, compared to 14 for theft,’ she said.
Chilling words of knife maniac: All I want is to kill a cop
Stephen Farrell
A KNIFE maniac vowed to wage war on the police then stabbed an officer to death, a court heard yesterday.
Nicholas Vernage told a friend: ‘All I want is to kill a copper’, an Old Bailey jury heard.
After wounding Sergeant Alan King, he chased him shouting: ‘He's still alive, I'm going to get him.’
Then Vernage, 26, who is accused of three murders, stabbed him again.
John Nutting, prosecuting, said that although he said nothing to detectives after his arrest, with a lock knife in his hand, they later found a chilling message daubed on his police cell wall.
‘Detective Sergeant King was killed, stabbed to death in red, boiling, unbearable blood,’ it said.
Sergeant King's widow Monica sat clutching a handkerchief in the public gallery and heard how her husband died last November of four stab wounds to the head and neck and four wounds to the chest, one of which hit his heart.
Mr Nutting said Sergeant King approached Vernage and Peter Grenfell at 1am in Walthamstow, east London.
He was suspicious because they were unloading what turned out to be stolen property at a friend's flat.
He blocked in Vernage's Cortina, with his car.
‘He was attacked by Vernage and attacked with a knife,’ said Mr Nutting.
As he collapsed a motorist stopped his car.
‘Sergeant King, seeing the approach of the car and still alive, struggled to his feet and made towards the car,’ said Mr Nutting.
Vernage then stabbed him again and Sergeant King was dead on arrival at Hospital.
Vernage and Grenfell, 29, both from Walthamstow are charged with the murder.
Both are also accused of the attempted murder of police constables John Jenkinson, 27, and Simon Castrey, 27, allegedly stabbed by Vernage while he was on the run.
Vernage is also charged with murdering financial consultant Lorna Bogle, 30, and mini-cab driver Javaid Iqbal, 37, during burglaries at their homes, last November.
‘He murdered or was prepared to murder anyone, householder or policeman, in his way,’ said Mr Nutting.
It is alleged that Grenfell admitted to detectives that hours before killing Sergeant King, Vernage told him: ‘There's going to be a war.’
Mr Nutting added: ‘Grenfell admitted that in his presence Vernage had often said ‘All I want is to kill a copper’.
‘Grenfell told the interviewing officers that Vernage once stated to him ‘Whatever police officer gets in my way they are getting it.
I will put them to sleep’.’
Evidence linked to the murders was found in Vernage's stolen green Cortina, said Mr Nutting.
Among murder souvenirs was the dead officer's police radio.
Vernage denies three murders, two attempted murders, two burglaries and one aggravated burglary.
Grenfell denies the murder of Sergeant King and the attempted murders of PCs Castrey and Jenkinson.
He admits burglary.
Both men deny alternative charges of unlawful wounding with intent and unlawful wounding of the two PCs.
The trial continues.
Sooty sweeps into new job
SOOTY has been saved from early retirement after his old bosses at Thames TV lost their franchise.
The 40-year-old bear, plus pals Sweep and Sue, will join minder Matthew Corbett to make 13 shows for Granada.
Matthew said: ‘It's a new lease of life for us.’
Sex battle Hilary to run Guides
BRITISH Gas executive Hilary Williams who won a sex discrimination case against her bosses has quit to run the Guides.
And the new job as Guides chief executive will pay her more than the £45,000 a year she got from British Gas.
Hilary, 48, of Bath, Avon, won £8,000 compensation and her old job back at an industrial tribunal earlier this year, after a 15-month battle.
She had been named regional marketing services manager and expected the job to be confirmed.
Instead, in a big company shake up, her job was advertised — and she failed the interview.
Her boss told Hilary: ‘You took it like a man, although you're the wrong shape.’
Hilary, who is single, said yesterday: ‘My leaving British Gas has nothing to do with the case.
It is simply a career move.’
Bosses cut their pay to half of what the trainee earns
TWO bosses were so determined to beat the recession they slashed their pay to half that of the firm's teenage trainee.
George Brettel, 54, and Tony Wilson, 29, have been taking home just £50 a week since January to keep their company afloat.
Trainee David Steelwell, 18, makes twice that at Logic Lord metal sheet works in Frindsbury, Kent.
George said: ‘I think this should be a lesson to directors who give themselves massive pay rises.
What is the point of sacking a young lad on £100 when a boss can take a cut?’
George and Tony used to pay themselves £350 a week after setting up the firm at the height of the last recession in 1982.
When the current recession gripped, they decided to take evasive action.
They have even given up their company cars and now tout for business in the firm's delivery van.
George said: ‘I also had a Triumph Stag I wanted to do up and put on the road next year.
But I sold that to help pay the mortgage.’
The partners have taken the pay cut until next March to see if interest rates fall and to wait for the launch of a new product.
‘We are riding the storm at the moment but things are getting worse in the recession,’ said George.
The firm has six employees and many were taking home up to £165 a week, but all have agreed to draw just £100.
David said: ‘Tony and George gave me my job and I was delighted.
I am paid £100 a week and had no idea I was earning double what the bosses are getting.’
The firm has produced a wide range of products, including components for the European satellite project.
Fire destroys stately home
Simon Trump
A CENTURIES-old stately home packed with priceless antiques was wiped out by fire yesterday.
Two thirds of Athelhampton House, near Puddletown, Dorset — owned by Lady Jenifer du Cann, wife of Tory ex-MP Sir Edward du Cann — was destroyed.
Firemen and villagers formed a chain to ferry furniture and porcelain to safety.
But they were driven back by a hail of huge roof slates.
Four firemen were slightly hurt when they were trapped under falling beams.
Major items destroyed included tapestries and carved panelling, a 12th-century four poster bed, a Queen Charlotte's harpsichord and a 200-year-old chamber organ.
Lady du Cann, 47, who lives with Sir Edward 40 miles away at Wellington, Somerset, inherited 15th-century Athelhampton from her first husband, Sir Robert Cooke.
She broke down as she surveyed the scene.
‘It is terribly distressing to watch hundreds of years of history going up in smoke,’ she said.
‘How can you put a value on something like that?
‘We'll speak to our insurers as soon as possible.’
Athelhampton, in 160 acres of deer park, is open to the public most of the year — and Lady du Cann is determined to have it open again by next year.
Dorset's deputy fire chief Neil Gaskarth said: ‘We believe the blaze started with a curtain in the attic, left too close to an electric light.
‘The structure is still very dangerous.’
Noisy gran, 90, evicted
A DEAF grandmother is being kicked out of a charity home for having her TV and radio on too loud.
Neighbours complained that 90-year-old Gladys Mills was making too much noise at her flat in Weymouth, Dorset, where she has lived for 12 years.
‘I am devastated by what is going on — I have not got much time left and I want to spend it here,’ said Gladys, who got the Queen's Medal for her work with the Women's Royal Voluntary Service.
‘I am nothing without this little flat.
It is my home and I do not want to leave it.’
Weymouth Town Charities, who administer the alms houses, refused to comment.
Two life sentences for ‘Nazi’
A ROBBER who made Nazi salutes after shooting an Asian boy and his uncle was given two life sentences yesterday.
Navid Sadiq, 15, died two days after he was shot in the head during the hold-up at his uncle Nasser Ali's shop, the Old Bailey heard.
Mr Ali, 25, was hit in the stomach and had to have his gall bladder removed.
Joseph Conroy, 27, who was high on heroin and alcohol, stood to attention with his hand in the air and shouted ‘Sieg Heil’ after firing six shots in the shop, in Southwark, south London.
When told by police how badly injured his victims were he said: ‘Good, I hope they die.’
Michael Birnbaum, prosecuting, said Conroy's victims thought the pistol was a toy.
Mr Ali hurled himself at Conroy as he fired, hitting the shopkeeper and Navid, who had been watching TV.
Mr Ali, his father and two other men managed to restrain Conroy.
Conroy, unemployed, of Peckham, south London, said he did not mean to shoot anyone, claiming his finger had jammed on the trigger.
He was found guilty of murder and attempted murder and admitted two robberies and one attempted robbery.
Judge Kenneth Richardson told him: ‘You have been convicted of a shocking murder and it is only by sheer luck that it was not two.’
Cables kill sky diver
A PARACHUTIST has died after hitting a 20,000-volt power line.
Graham Laine was found in a water-filled ditch with cables tangled around his body.
Rescuers had to wait 40 minutes while power to 780 homes at Shotton Colliery, Durham, was turned off before the body could be moved.
Witness Lily Gallon, 53, said: ‘We felt so helpless.’
Mr Laine, a father of two children, of Seaham, Durham, was an amateur jumper with the Peterlee club.
Winger in 90mph dash
A FOOTBALL star was fined yesterday for driving at 90mph through a city centre.
Aston Villa winger Dwight Yorke admitted speeding in a 50mph zone on the A38 through Birmingham.
Yorke, 21 today, was returning home from a charity event at 2am, the city's magistrates heard.
He was fined £120 with £20 costs and had three penalty points put on his licence.
‘I'm not displeased with the fine,’ he said afterwards.
‘It could have been worse.’
Rapist fooled five doctors into thinking he was mad
A RAPIST who wanted to avoid a lengthy jail sentence fooled five psychiatrists into believing he was mad, a jury heard yesterday.
Winston Thomas, 47, who became known as the Bus Stop Rapist, had raped two women and assaulted and robbed three others in a two-month reign of terror in Wood Green, north London.
After his arrest, in 1989, he was remanded to Brixton prison hospital wing.
That, the court heard, gave him the chance to study the behaviour of people who really were mentally disturbed.
When he was seen by psychiatrists, he copied the symptoms of madness.
He shook during the interviews and said he had a history of mental illness.
He claimed the TV and radio were sending him ‘special messages’.
And he said he was unable to resist orders from a drowned boyhood friend called Delroy, who was speaking to him from ‘beyond the grave’.
The psychiatrists agreed that Thomas was schizophrenic or psychotic.
Instead of a 15-year jail sentence, Mr Justice Nolan ordered him to Rampton under the Mental Health Act.
But, the Old Bailey jury heard yesterday, all the claims were lies.
Last year, Thomas asked for a Mental Health Review Tribunal — and told how he had staged his madman act.
As soon as the five psychiatrists heard he had been lying, they changed their diagnosis — and were prepared to say he had never suffered mental illness.
The tribunal had to discharge him from hospital.
He was immediately arrested and charged with tending or intending to pervert justice, which he denies.
‘If he thought he was going to walk free, he was disappointed,’ said prosecutor Anthony Longden.
Mr Longden said that Thomas lied because a mental hospital was ‘much preferable’ to jail.
He had never been treated for mental illness, and Delroy was still alive in Jamaica.
Thomas also lied to get into England, the jury heard.
He called himself Shirley Williams.
The case continues.
Police widow gets £260,000
A POLICEMAN'S widow was awarded £260,000 compensation yesterday for the death of her husband 10 years ago.
PC Paul Salmon, 28, died when his Range Rover ploughed up a bank in thick fog as he went to back-up colleagues in a car chase in Southampton.
Winchester County Court heard the money would also provide for Cindy Salmon's children, Christopher, 15, and 11-year-old Laura.
Mr Justice Judge told Mrs Salmon, of Park Gate, Hants: ‘I can't imagine what the last 10 years must have been like for you waiting for this to be sorted out.’
Hampshire police did not contest the case.
Copier cowboys face showdown
GOVERNMENT watchdogs will tomorrow be asked to get tough with photocopier cowboys.
The Office of Fair Trading will be handed a dossier of complaints, about three firms in particular, along with a demand that their consumer credit licences be revoked.
TODAY launched a campaign after customers claimed high-pressure selling techniques were used to push them into signing misleading agreements.
It has been backed by more than 40 MPs.
A spokesman said yesterday: ‘The industry is trying to say everything is rosy.
Our evidence suggests they're wrong.’
Laura Davies flying home
PLUCKY double transplant toddler Laura Davies is flying home to Britain this week.
Four-year-old Laura, above, has recovered quickly from her liver and bowel replacement in Pittsburgh and has even grown three inches while in America.
The brave youngster, from Manchester, said: ‘I'm going home to see my friends.’
I fled as twins died in barn fire
Simon Trump
BOYFRIEND David Harper choked back tears yesterday as he told how he left his lover and her twin sister to die in a midnight barn blaze.
‘It was sheer panic,’ he said.
‘I just prayed the girls had got out somehow.’
Harper, 21, went to the barn for sex with Rebecca Harper, 17, who is no relation, and was joined by her sister Emma and two friends, Bristol Crown Court heard.
The group had been drinking at a nearby pub in Uckington, Glos.
Harper said: ‘I went out with Rebecca for about three months, then I went out with Emma.
We had finished the day before.’
Harper lit hay so he could see more clearly.
Wisdom Smith told him to put it out.
He did and made love to Rebecca.
Smith and Daniel Winters took Emma to another part of the barn.
Harper said he lit more straw, put it out, then later smelled smoke.
‘I was terrified,’ he said.
The men found hay smouldering and tried to kick it out.
‘It never went through my mind that we had left Becky and Emma behind,’ he said.
Harper, of Uckington, Smith, 20, of Bishops Cleve, and Winter, 19, of Cheltenham, deny manslaughter and arson with intent.
The trial continues.
Aunt's pity saves death drive girl
A TEENAGE drink-driver who killed her boyfriend and best friend escaped jail yesterday after a plea by one victim's mother.
Ann-Marie Coombes was 16 when she crashed driving home from a pub.
Boyfriend Trevor Harvey, 32, and Coombes' best friend and cousin, Suzanne Lodge, 18, both died.
Suzanne's mother, Mrs Rosemary Lodge, 39, pleaded with a Cardiff Crown Court judge yesterday not to jail Coombes.
‘I have lost my daughter,’ she told Judge John Rutter, ‘I cannot bear to lose my niece as well.
I look upon her as my adopted daughter.
‘If Anne-Marie is freed, we can help each other come to terms with our grief.’
Coombes, now 17, of Cardiff, admitted causing two deaths by reckless driving.
The court heard that the crash happened at Pentwyn, Cardiff, after the three celebrated Coombes' first job.
Coombes, who had driven only once before, was doing 60mph.
Defence lawyer Stephen Hopkins said: ‘Miss Coombes says she will never drive again.’
She was given three years' supervision and a five-year driving ban.
‘The compassion of Mrs Lodge is something this court cannot ignore,’ said the judge.
Afterwards Mrs Lodge said: ‘I need Ann-Marie and I think she needs me.
We will survive together.
Suzanne would not have wanted her jailed.’
Her niece added: ‘My aunt has never blamed me.’
Doc fondled back patients
A DOCTOR who treated three woman for backache by fondling them was convicted of indecent assault yesterday.
Osteopath Karl Farnlucher, 69, was cleared of similar offences against two other women and will be sentenced next month.
Hugh Davies, defending, at Winchester Crown Court, said Farnlucher would have to move from his home of 16 years in Headley, Hants.
Farnlucher told the jury he was trained as a medic by the German Luftwaffe but had become a certified osteopath through an American University.
Widow maps out fortune
A MAP which cost 27p is set to be sold at auction for up to Pounds 18,000.
Experts say the 16th century drawing is the earliest hand-painted map of the Fens.
It was bought more than 50 years ago by Charles Lynn.
His wife Anna had it valued after he died aged 85 earlier this year.
Mrs Lynn, also in her eighties, of Wisbech, Cambs, said: ‘My husband always knew it was special.’
Christie's said Elizabeth I would have commissioned the map around 1581.
A spokesman said: ‘We are very excited.’
IRA blitz ‘just a taste of worse to come’
Alan Watkins
THE IRA are planning a new blitz in Britain before Christmas using even bigger bombs, Northern Ireland's police chief warned last night.
The mainland campaign had been just a foretaste of what might be coming in the next two months, said RUC Chief Constable Sir Hugh Annesley.
Intelligence reports suggest a well-equipped terror gang is already in Britain.
He predicted that despite the recent seizure of plastic explosives, the Provisionals were well armed and would resort to using bigger bombs in their attacks.
Sir Hugh, in his first major interview for 12 months, said the 15 bombs the IRA has detonated in London over the past few weeks were comparatively minor.
The attacks, all using an explosive base of fertiliser rather than Semtex, seem designed to prove the IRA's ability to infiltrate even the most protected areas.
The latest bomb exploded close to Downing Street on Friday night.
It is believed intelligence services have discovered that at least two ‘mainline bombers’ are missing from their normal haunts and may already be on the mainland.
Sir Hugh said lives had been saved and damage prevented by the seizure of 77 lb of Semtex last week.
But he warned: ‘It would be naive to think the Provisional IRA are not planning a major attack on the British mainland.’
The Provos, he claimed, had reserves of munitions and were determined to keep going.
He added: ‘Those who are intent on pursuing violence are perhaps holding the majority sway now within the IRA council.’
Palace in fury at Diana ‘plot’
Clive Nelson
THE Princess of Wales was accused last night of damaging the royal tour of Korea and putting her marriage in danger again.
Advisers closest to the Queen were furious at her behaviour in Korea — and about new revelations on her marriage by author Andrew Morton.
A new chapter of his book Diana: Her True Story discloses details of furious rows between the Princess, her husband and Prince Philip, and reveals the agreement Diana made to stay in the Royal Family after the Queen threatened her with exile.
‘She's at it again,’ a royal aide said last night.
‘She upset her hosts by her grumpy behaviour in Korea and we believe she's been talking to Morton's people again.
‘She doesn't seem to realise the damage she is doing.’
Morton's controversial final chapter is only a few thousand words long and attempts to sum up the marriage now but TODAY has discovered new revelations showing how close Diana came to walking out — and still might.
We found that:
A secret agreement was made for the marriage to continue only after the Queen held the most extraordinary royal meeting in history in her drawing room at Windsor Castle when the monarch personally saved the marriage.
Buckingham Palace holds a secret tape of phone conversations by Diana.
Diana still speaks to her friend James Gilbey.
The Queen ordered Charles to stop his friends leaking anti-Diana stories to the Press.
And the Queen criticised her son in front of Diana for his behaviour towards her and the children.
The new information is revealed as the couple continue with a royal tour of Korea.
They have hardly spoken in public and the atmosphere remains frosty on their first major engagement since their marriage was rocked by leaks.
Furious host officials last night accused Charles and Diana of putting their personal problems before their sense of duty.
Their ‘atrocious’ behaviour towards each other during the first official royal tour of the country threatens to ruin the visit, sources in Seoul said.
Diana's refusal to speak to, or even look at her husband has outraged hosts.
And Charles's stubborn attitude has only made matters worse.
‘Their personal problems should have been resolved at home,’ said an official.
Last night Buckingham Palace sources were forced to make an unprecedented denial that this trip would be the couple's last together.
Three separate well-placed sources confirmed the prince and princess would travel together next spring.
Before their joint tour to Korea, Palace officials thought the Charles and Diana storm was under control.
They thought that the tour would prove that their agreement to go their own ways within the marriage was working.
In fact it has shown just how shaky the deal is and how deep the marriage crisis has become.
‘Diana came off that plane in Korea as if she has just had a stand-up row with Charles,’ the aide said.
Friends fear Diana is still under the kind of severe emotional strain revealed last summer in Morton's best-seller Diana: Her True Story.
Palace officials travelling with the royal party refused to deny any of the claims made in the extra chapter of the book dealing with events since the original publication.
Morton wrote the new chapter after friends of Diana got in touch with him.
They told him what he had always suspected: Diana was determined to walk out of the marriage.
Morton is understood to disclose details of the most extraordinary meeting ever held by the Royal Family.
only gives brief details of the Queen's meeting with Diana but TODAY has learned that it was held in the Queen's sitting room at Windsor Castle.
Diana was ready to tell the other three people present — the Queen, the Duke of Edinburgh and Prince Charles — she wanted a divorce.
She was surprised to find the Queen in conciliatory mood.
She recognised that her son had not always been as attentive as expected towards his wife or the children and that he spent too much time with friends like Camilla Parker-Bowles.
The Queen asked for a three-month cooling off period.
Diana said she thought matters had gone too far.
It was then that the Queen dropped her bombshell.
She said Diana could have a divorce but she would have to leave the country.
It was the course of action set by the Duke of Windsor when he quit the throne to marry Wallis Simpson.
And Diana was told that her request for a divorce was almost the same as an abdication.
But the Queen added that she could not allow the mother of the heirs to the throne influencing the way the boys saw their duty — William and Harry, would have to stay in Britain.
Diana said she would never agree to Prince Charles taking them and perhaps marrying another woman.
The Queen said the children would come under her care as wards of the Crown.
According to TODAY'S investigation, the Queen said Diana might feel that it was a cruel accident of birth but the boys belonged to the country first and to their parents second.
Diana then knew that divorce was out of the question.
She would never give up the princes.
So she struck an amazing deal.
For public consumption she would allow the marriage to continue but Charles must stay at Highgrove while she lived in Kensington Palace.
The Queen agreed to some of Diana's demands but insisted that she accompany Charles to Korea.
After this agreement, the Queen relaxed about the crisis.
Morton is also thought to confirm revelations that the Mediterranean cruise that Diana and Charles took with their boys this summer was a sham.
While other newspapers were wrongly calling it a second honeymoon, TODAY revealed that virtually the only time the couple acknowledged each other was when Diana intercepted a phone call from Charles to Mrs Parker-Bowles and a screaming row erupted.
Royal aides have also been stunned to hear that Morton's new chapter allegedly includes a blow-by-blow account of how Charles's friends tried to blacken Diana's name.
The outraged princess reportedly even accused her husband of being a coward.
‘You should ring the newspapers yourself not get your friends to do it,’ she told him.
She did not expect Diana to tell her friends or for Morton to be given any more secret details about the royals.
Royal aides were stunned to be told yesterday of what Morton is apparently saying in the new chapter.
In addition, Morton apparently gives details of the existence of a second tape recording of Diana making phone calls., it can be revealed today.
The tape is held by Buckingham Palace.
In the new chapter, Morton is believed to tell how the Palace confronted Diana with the tape.
John Major's part in the controversy is also about to be revealed.
He instructed royal aides, like Sir Robert Fellowes, the Queen's closest adviser, that they had to rally around the Queen.
Morton concludes the marriage will survive.
‘If Diana had shown some warmth towards Charles, just a smile even, the new Morton revelations would have meant very little,’ a royal watcher said last night.
‘Diana has created all these headlines once again with her attitude.’
Britain faces cold shoulder
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
BRITAIN'S special relationship with America will be damaged by Bill Clinton's victory.
Premier John Major could clash with him on five big issues.
The ailing US economy would be the first hurdle, with resentment that foreign firms have destroyed American employment prospects.
Mr Clinton has pledged to protect workers, which could lead to a trade war potentially costing tens of thousands of jobs in Britain, especially if the EC will not cut farm subsidies.
Mr Clinton is also keen to close tax loopholes for foreign companies.
Defence cuts could also be a stumbling block.
Mr Bush had already backed the axing of troops in Europe from 219,000 to 150,000.
Mr Clinton wants this chopped even further to 100,000 bringing a loss of US earnings in the UK.
Mr Clinton has also threatened to intervene in Northern Ireland by sending a peace envoy.
Foreign policy will come under close scrutiny.
It is feared he will concentrate on domestic policy, when Mr Major, who must overcome the embarrassment of backing Mr Bush, believes the US has a greater role than ever to play on the world stage.
‘No’ to tax on Queen
Paul Wilenius
THE Queen will not pay tax despite public demands, Chancellor Norman Lamont announced last night.
Mr Lamont's stand means the Royal Family, including the Duke and Duchess of York will continue to escape the attentions of the inland revenue.
The Queen reportedly earns more than £6 million a year from her £6.5 billion assets.
On those figures, the decision not to tax her will cost the Treasury £2.5 million annually.
The decision was quietly revealed in a Commons written reply.
Critics claimed he was hoping it would be ignored amid the furore of the US presidential elections.
Labour MPs were incensed the Government had ignored surveys showing the majority of Britons want royals to pay tax.
Swansea West MP Alan Williams asked why a billionaire should pay no tax ‘when her subjects on miniscule incomes’ did.
‘The Palace and the Government make a serious error of judgment if they think people will tolerate this unquantified privilege.’
Queen Victoria paid income tax, but the practice was steadily eroded until it was abolished by George VI, the Queen's father.
Hartnell goes to the wall
THE fashion house that designed the Queen's wedding dress and coronation robe has gone into receivership.
Directors for Norman Hartnell, the Mayfair designer for the Royal family for more than 40 years, yesterday admitted the house had fallen victim to the recession.
Just a few months ago the Queen Mother wore a Hartnell creation to the wedding of Lady Helen Windsor.
Orders already on the books will be met while the Isle of Man-based receivers assess the state of the business.
A third of the staff have already been made redundant and directors said the future of the remaining 20 was still unclear.
Manny Silverman, head of the consortium that rescued the firm from receivers five years ago with a £6m deal, said yesterday: ‘It has been a hell of a day.
It is very sad.’
Troubles had been piling up in recent months as the owners struggled to restore the house's reputation.
Norman Hartnell, who began the business in 1923 with his sister, designed the majority of the Queen's wardrobes for state occasions and foreign tours until his death in 1979.
Since then the Queen has used the house's designers less and less.
Gulf War ‘souvenirs’ killed two
TWO Gulf War soldiers died after picking up unexploded bombs in the desert, a coroner heard yesterday.
Private Jason McFadden, 19, of the Royal Corps of Transport, was killed after failing to recognise his ‘souvenir’.
In a separate incident a bomblet killed another Corps member, Lance Corporal Terry Hill, 26, who thought it was a lead weight.
Oxford coroner Nicholas Gardiner recorded verdicts of death on active service.
‘There seems to be some doubt as to what warnings were given,’ he said.
‘But it seems to me such an object would be recognised by any soldier.’
Blaze trap kills girl, 2
A TODDLER died and three other children were badly hurt in a house blaze.
Shona Smith, two, was trapped in a bedroom with two other youngsters at Mayhill, Swansea.
The children had been watching TV and the noise had drowned out the sound of the fire raging downstairs.
Dot death toll drops
COT deaths in England and Wales have fallen for the third consecutive year, Government figures revealed yesterday.
Sudden Infant Death Syndrome claimed 1,593 babies in 1988 but this fell to 1,008 last year with the mortality rate dropped from 2.30 per thousand to just 1.44.
Mr Souness
A report on September 29 stated Graeme Souness deserted Liverpool FC and allowed his players to fly to Cyprus alone for a key European Cup match in order to accompany his girlfriend, Karen Levy, to her matrimonial court hearing.
In fact, Mr Souness was summonsed to attend the court hearing in Manchester on the day his team flew to Cyprus.
We accept Mr Souness did not desert his team.
We apologise to Mr Souness and are happy to clarify the point.
I said goodbye to my dead girl then hugged niece who killed her
Simon Trump
A GRIEVING mother wept over the body of her daughter, then gave a loving hug to the niece who killed her.
‘I just put my arms around her and squeezed her so tight I thought I'd break her ribs,’ said Rosemary Lodge, whose 18-year-old daughter Suzanne died when a car driven by Ann-Marie Coombes crashed.
Rosemary told yesterday how she comforted Ann-Marie after having to identify Suzanne's body.
And she said forgiving her 16-year-old niece was easy.
‘I told her not to worry and that we'd pull through together,’ said Rosemary of Pentwyn, Cardiff.
Ann-Marie, 16, who was drunk when she took the wheel after a night out at a pub, had been inseparable from her cousin.
‘Suzanne and Ann-Marie had done everything together all their lives,’ Rosemary said.
‘One has gone to a better place without the other and that's hard for the living who are left behind.
That's why I could never hold Ann-Marie responsible for what's happened.
She needs me.
‘I know Suzanne wouldn't have wanted me to blame her or be angry either.’
Rosemary, 39, insisted that Ann-Marie should visit her as soon as she came out of hospital.
‘As soon as she walked through the door all the memories came flooding back and she burst into tears,’ Rosemary said.
‘I gave her another of my crushing cuddles.
‘We sat on the sofa clinging on to one another until we stopped sobbing but I knew it was not over for her.’
Ann-Marie is now beginning to come to terms with the night their celebration for both landing new jobs turned to tragedy.
‘It was Rosemary who really pulled me through,’ Ann-Marie said yesterday.
‘We talked and cried and talked and cried then we slowly began to laugh together.’
Now she spends more time at her aunt's house than at her own home nearby, as she did when she grew up with Suzanne.
‘She used to say she was coming for a day and stay a week,’ Rosemary said.
It was Rosemary's compassion that saved Ann-Marie from jail on Monday when she appeared at Cardiff Crown Court.
After the court heart she clipped a kerb at 60mph and hit a tree, killing boyfriend Trevor Harvey, 32, and Suzanne instantly, Rosemary appealed to the judge for leniency.
Ann-Marie was given three years' supervision and and banned from driving for five years.
Rosemary said yesterday: ‘They were all adults in that car and any one of them could have stopped that train of events with one word.
‘It was just a tragic accident.
‘I lost a daughter and God knows I'm going to hold on to my niece as if she was my own instead.’
The two have already planned a Christmas together, both fully aware the happiness of earlier years can never be recaptured.
This year, and for years to come, they will walk hand-in-hand to lay a wreath at Suzanne's grave.
Maxwell's widow in home deal
ROBERT Maxwell's widow may be allowed to live in the family mansion at Oxford until the turn of the century, it was revealed yesterday.
Receivers are investigating reports that a secret deal clinched in the 1970s allows Mrs Elisabeth Maxwell, 71, to stay in residence at Headington Hill Hall until 1999.
The crooked tycoon who plunged overboard from his yacht a year ago assigned his wife a sub-lease which allows her to live in part of the Victorian mansion regardless of the impending sale of the 15 acre estate.
The lease of Headington Hill Hall was put up for sale along with 32 other properties in January by receivers, Grant Thornton, and has attracted several bids.
Dog attacks serial rapist
A WOMAN attacked by a suspected serial rapist was saved when her dog bit him.
The 22-year-old was exercising her alsatian and a mongrel in Laindon, Essex, when the man grabbed her from behind and held a knife to her face.
The alsatian bit his arm before he shook it loose and ran off.
Police said he could have been the rapist who has attacked several women over 18 months, including a girl of 15.
Top Tory's theft shame
A FORMER member of the Tory right-wing Monday Club has admitted stealing more than £100,000.
Gregory Lauder-Frost, 50, stole cheques worth £111,000 as payroll manager at London's Charing Cross Hospital, Knightsbridge Crown Court heard yesterday.
Lauder-Frost, of Pimlico, was bailed.
Bogus jobs line threat
DIAL-A-JOB firms advertising bogus vacancies could soon be outlawed.
Many are just sharks, keeping the enquirer on the line at premium rates, says the Telephone Information watchdog ICSTIS.
Complaints have increased five-fold in two years.
Jag boss speeding rap
THE president of Jaguar France is to appear in court charged with speeding in his new 220mph Jaguar XJ 220.
Christian Vilaseca, 57 — who lives in Paris and heads imports of Jaguars into France — was stopped on the M6 in Lancashire by a police Range Rover after allegedly travelling at 105mph.
The dark blue £415,000 car was stopped between Preston and Lancaster on Sunday as Mr Vilaseca was heading for a holiday in Scotland.
So far about 35 of the exclusive cars have been delivered by Jaguar, though few are expected to be seen on the road.
Among customers are singer Elton John and the world's richest man, the Sultan of Brunei.
Mr Vilaseca's case is due to be heard by Preston magistrates on December 15.
They said we stole our son, but he's ours now
Richard Creasy
A TOP fashion designer has won back the son she was accused of stealing.
Cuddling Alex, Mary Demetriou said her £10,000, two-year legal battle had been worth it.
Then she warned other couples about the dangers of adopting a child from abroad.
Mary's ordeal included a 4am raid on her home by Scotland Yard and social workers convinced she had kidnapped Alex and smuggled him into England from Cyprus.
Days later tests revealed Alex was severely mentally handicapped.
This week a High Court judge awarded Mary and husband Andreas full custody of their beloved son.
‘We have been to hell and back but the love of this little boy has kept us going,’ said Mary, 35, yesterday.
‘Our experience should be a warning to all couples thinking of doing what we did.
We were sure we had done nothing wrong.’
The couple's troubles began in 1990 after 14 years of childless marriage.
They went to Limassol, Cyprus, where businessman Andreas had friends, and met respected gynaecologist Dr Dimitris Hadjipapas.
He arranged for them to adopt a dark-haired boy at birth.
Mary said: ‘Within 20 minutes of his birth he was given to me in a blanket, still covered in blood.
I gave him his first bath.
‘From that first moment I felt like his mother.
I was elated, excited, in another world.
It was everything I had ever wanted.’
The couple were told that Alex's natural mother was an unmarried rape victim who merely wanted a secure home for the child who would otherwise be condemned to an institution.
Just £1,200 was needed for her caesarean delivery.
‘We couldn't believe our luck,’ said Mary.
‘The situation seemed perfect.
‘We realised we were cutting through a bit of red tape but everything seemed to be in the baby's best interests.’
The doctor didn't tell the couple the mother was mentally retarded.
Then under his guidance, the Demetrious signed the birth certificate as the baby's parents.
‘We realise now we made a mistake but everyone in Cyprus assured us it was a formality,’ said Mary.
Eight months after she returned to her home in Langley Vale, near Ep som, Surrey, the dream was shattered.
Mary became worried Alex was not progressing well and took him for tests.
As she spent a night at his cotside in London's Great Ormond Street Hospital, 40-year-old Andreas phoned.
Eight policemen and welfare workers had raided their home — even searching dustbins for Alex.
Cypriot authorities had been told he had been smuggled from the country.
His natural mother had been traced and Dr Hadjipapas had been arrested.
Interpol had tracked the Demetrious.
‘Within four days of the police raid the Great Ormond Street doctors confirmed that Alex was mentally handicapped,’ said Mary, whose knitwear designs earned her British fashion awards.
‘Can you imagine how we felt?
Our home had been turned upside down, our little boy, who we now loved so much, was diagnosed as retarded and Andreas was told he would be jailed for up to seven years in Cyprus.
‘It was the lowest point of my life.
I was absolutely devastated because we thought we had done nothing wrong.
‘I had to come to terms with the fact that I could lose my baby at any time to a foster mother.
‘I now knew he was handicapped but that made me even more determined to keep him.’
Alex was made a ward of court but lived with the Demetrious.
The nightmare ended when a High Court judge agreed to award permanent custody to them.
The award was unopposed by welfare officers in Cyprus or Britain.
‘Almost everyone in the court was in tears — even the legal teams who have been with us for two years,’ said Mary.
‘We have been through hell.
And we still don't know why this doctor advised us as he did or what his motive was.
‘But at the end of it all we still have our little star.
‘We know we have taken on a lifetime's commitment but I love this boy.
To me he is the most beautiful child in the world.
‘He has been worth every penny we have spent and every tear we have shed.
And at last he is mine.’
Andrex ad wipes floor with rivals
A LITTLE lad on the loo, a playful puppy and a roll of toilet tissue have created one of the most successful advertisements of the year.
Andrex cleaned up yesterday in a survey to find the best remembered TV commercial.
The report, by Marketing Magazine, found 79 per cent of viewers able to link Andrex with the child stranded as his pet steals the toilet roll.
British Gas, on 76 per cent recall, came second with its scenes of celebrities ‘in control’ as they flicked their fingers to reveal a blue flame.
Coal wagons crush miner
A MINER killed when he was crushed between two coal wagons was forced back down the pits to save his pension.
Former surface supervisor Brian Young, 49, father of two grown-up children, died after becoming trapped underground at Littleton Colliery, Staffs, on Monday.
Friend Graham Hart said: ‘Brian had to go back down to make sure he got his full redundancy payment.’
Sweet memory
CADBURY is to continue screening its Flake TV advert featuring former Vogue model Rachel Brown, still ‘poorly’ in hospital after taking the drug Ecstasy at a party.
Julia Somerville
Three months after having surgery on a brain tumour, Julia Somerville is welcomed back to ITN with a kiss from fellow newsreader Trevor McDonald.
Her short hair and weight loss were the only clues to her ordeal.
Euro boss hits PM's chances of survival
Russell Jenkins and Eben Black
JOHN MAJOR'S hope of a Commons victory on the Maastricht Treaty rested on the votes of as few as four rebel MPs last night.
As Tory High Command warned tonight's knife-edge vote could be uncomfortably close, the Premier was dealt a huge blow by the EC's German vice-president Martin Bangemann.
Mr Bangemann delivered a damning speech in Berlin in which he declared that the treaty is just a staging post on the road to a European superstate.
His bombshell landed smack in the middle of the Prime Minister's ‘charm offensive’.
It came as he met a further batch of 20 Tory loyalists, sceptics and ditherers in his private office.
And it blew massive holes in Mr Major's argument that Maastricht means fewer powers for the European Commission — and no common foreign or defence policy.
‘More and more decisions can only be taken at European level,’ Mr Bangemann said.
‘Demarcation between Community and national powers, in line with the principle of subsidiarity, is only possible within the framework of European union.
‘The Maastricht Treaty is an important milestone along this road.
‘In it, the goal of a federal European state is spelled out for the first time.’
The Prime Minister has pinned his hopes on ‘subsidiarity’— the idea that all important decisions should be taken by individual nations.
And today, his future is in the balance, as Government whips deliver their verdict to No 10 — that the vote is ‘too close to call’.
Senior Tory backbenchers were last night boasting the Government had done enough to stave off the humiliation of a defeat in the Commons.
But Bangemann's speech handed powerful ammunition to the rebels.
They immediately seized on it as evidence that Mr Major was not telling the whole truth about Europe.
‘Our vote is rock solid,’ said leading Euro sceptic Michael Spicer, who insisted 36 rebels would vote against the Government.
‘I think it is quite likely we will win.’
He predicted there would be ‘masses of abstentions’ meaning certain defeat for the Government.
Another prominent rebel said: ‘We are not going to stand on our heads, and give in.’
A Downing Street source said: ‘We contacted the Commission for clarification.
‘They said Herr Bangemann's speech was entirely a personal view.
‘In fact, it contradicts some statements made by the Commission.’
Secret package to boost economy
JOHN Major and Norman Lamont have come up with a multi-billion pound recovery package for the economy — without consulting the Cabinet.
The mini-budget, to be tacked on to next week's Autumn Statement, will raise cash through borrowing, private money for new building, and up to £5 billion from council house sales.
There could also be tax help for home buyers and businesses.
‘It is agreed in outline,’ said a senior Government official last night.
The Cabinet will be presented with the package to rubber stamp this week.
It also became clear it could take two or three days of fierce ministerial talks to sort out the division of the £244.5 billion public spending cake.
Mr Major has been stung by reports that Bank of England Governor Robin Leigh Pemberton said there was a vacuum in Government policy.
There was more gloom as house prices slumped by 2.7 per cent in last month.
Gold and cash reserves fell by around £2 billion as a result of the sterling crisis.
Bangemann is labelled a silly sausage
THE Prime Minister's most hated enemy inside the Brussels bureaucracy once branded the great British ‘banger’ unhealthy.
EC vice president Martin Bangemann also tried to get rid of prawn cocktail-flavoured crisps.
Bangemann — who boasted of passing through immigration checks to enter Britain by flashing his library ticket — is a personal ‘bete noire’ of Mr Major.
The Premier has complained to friends of ‘middle-aged, pot-bellied’ commissioners poking their noses in.
Hurd's pledge to Denmark
DENMARK will be able to vote on a revised Maastricht Treaty, Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd promised yesterday.
Britain will use its presidency to get other EC heads to agree to exempting Denmark from a single currency and a European ‘army’, he told Danish Foreign Minister Uffe Ellemann-Jensen.
The Danes will vote on what is hoped to be a revised treaty early next year.
‘Party must do its duty’
LADY Thatcher launched another attack on the treaty yesterday.
In a foreword to Euro rebel Michael Spicer's book A Treaty Too Far she said: ‘The first duty of the Conservative Party is to uphold the constitution.
The treaty would change it fundamentally.’
In London Lord Tebbit delivered a similar message.
Referring to Bangemann's speech he said: ‘Spot on Martin.
Right first time.’
All bets off
BOOKIES have refused to give odds on the outcome of today's Maastricht debate.
They believe MPs could make a killing as they will know the likely outcome before the vote.
Graham Sharpe of William Hill said: ‘Whips know from a head count who is going to win.’
Charlie set for £2m pools win
PENSIONER Charlie Hill was celebrating a £180 fruit-machine win yesterday when he heard he had scooped another £2 million-plus on the pools.
Charlie, 72, former British Nuclear Fuels worker, of Bispham, Blackpool, Lancs, could be Britain's biggest treble-chance winner.
He got all Saturday's eight score-draws.
Last night he was heading for London with wife Mona, to collect his Littlewoods cheque.
A friend said: ‘Charlie's always winning.’
Blitz on getaway cabbies
Cheryl Stonehouse
CABBIES earning big tips helping to ferry stolen property away from break-ins were targeted yesterday in a series of police raids.
During a 17-month-long crackdown on burglary across London detectives have been told that many thieves use the drivers for shifting hi-fis, televisions and videos.
‘Some burglars have hidden stolen property in the hedge of the house they have broken into,’ said Detective Inspector Jon Shatford, who led the 150 officers carrying out the raids in Operation Bumblebee.
‘They have then waited there for a minicab to arrive and take them and their bounty away.
‘This should be a lesson that drivers who carry burglars will carry the can.’
Some criminals had admitted sharing stolen goods with drivers as payment, he said.
Officers on Operation Bumblebee have already arrested and charged 3,640 people in connection with house break-ins.
In the biggest blitz yet on burglars and their accomplices, 10 men were arrested in raids on 22 firms and police recovered a stolen video, mobile phone and credit cards.
More than 50 Department of Social Security officers went with the police to minicab headquarters across north and east London and several people were questioned about benefit fraud.
The immigration status of two of the arrested suspects was also being investigated last night.
The radios and transmitter of one firm were seized after it was discovered its cars were operating without a Department of Transport licence, and officers uncovered a total of 56 traffic offences.
‘We have repeatedly warned people that if they assist burglars in disposing of stolen property, they risk being put out of business,’ said Mr Shatford.
‘They are not innocent onlookers and are just as guilty of peddling misery as the burglars.’
Stun gun torture of rape victim
A SALESMAN who raped his ex-girlfriend and tortured her with an electric stun gun was behind bars last night.
The 38-year-old man, who was not named to protect his victim, was found guilty of drugging the 21-year-old from Hillingdon, west London, kidnapping and twice raping her.
He was remanded in custody so psychiatric reports could be prepared.
The Old Bailey was told he was ‘desperately in love and wanted to get back at the woman’ for ending their relationship.
Lady Helen Windsor and husband Tim trade Porsche
Lady Helen Windsor and her husband Tim have traded in their Porsche for this £27,500 family-sized Range Rover.
GP blunder tot faces a life of pain
Ian Key
THE toddler who swallowed acid in a GP's surgery could suffer for years, doctors have warned.
John Storey, two, was rushed to hospital critically ill with stomach and throat burns and for several days doctors fought to save his life.
He is back home with mother Christine now but she yesterday said: ‘The medical advice is that he is not out of the woods yet.’
Mrs Storey, 20, has been told John could suffer long-term effects on is internal organs.
She was speaking after York magistrates heard how she took John and his two younger sisters to the surgery near her home in the city in September.
He played on a toy wooden horse in the waiting room and Dr Alison Atkinson warned him when she spotted him trying a surgery door.
Minutes later, when the doctor was answering an emergency phone call, John wandered into one of the examination rooms and drank carbolic acid from a bottle on a trolley.
A patient found him screaming and clutching the bottle.
He had white stains round his mouth and chin.
Dr Atkinson took John to hospital in her own car.
He was treated in intensive care at York District Hospital and transferred to St James's Hospital, Leeds.
Dr John Bromley, senior partner at the practice, in Monkgate, York, admitted failing to prevent John being exposed to a hazardous substance and was fined £750 under the Health and Safety Act.
The conviction could be even more serious for Dr Bromley, 48, who was not even in the surgery at the time.
He seems certain to face a General Medical Council disciplinary hearing, and his practice is being sued.
Mrs Storey said it was her ‘absolute duty’ as a mother to claim damages for John's suffering.
‘The acid burnt my son's mouth, throat and gullet,’ she said.
‘For a time he was fighting for his life and we thought we might lose him.
‘I am pleased and thankful that the medical practice have sought to accept their responsibility for the oversight as soon as possible.’
Malcolm Fortune, defending said the practice extended its sympathy to the family.
With this writ we thee serve
NEWLYWEDS Angela and Chris White were hauled into court for Pounds 500 yesterday — by the bride's parents.
It was round two in a battle which broke out after their wedding last May.
Angela and Chris, both 28, thought the bride's parents, Norman and Gladys Smith, were paying for a buffet lunch, and both families would share the reception costs.
That would let the Smiths in for a total of £836.
But when they didn't pay up the bridegroom's mother, Cara White, whose firm handled the catering, sued the Smiths, of Cranwell, Lincs.
And two days after the case was adjourned at Grantham County Court, Chris and Angela got a summons of their own.
The bride's parents were claiming back a £490 wedding day ‘loan’ which the young couple say was a gift.
After that case was also adjourned, Chris, from Grantham, Lincs, said: ‘I hope everyone who gave us presents doesn't do the same.
If we have to return the kettles and toasters, we'll have nothing left.’
Airman finds his grave
A FORMER fighter pilot found his own grave on a pilgrimage to a war cemetery.
The memorial was for fliers killed in a German raid in Poland.
But Max Kazmierczak, now 78, of Nottingham, had left days earlier.
Barn sex romp boys cleared of killing twins
Simon Trump
TWO young men accused of leaving twin teenage sisters to die in a blazing barn walked free from court yesterday.
A judge directed Wisdom Smith and Daniel Winter be cleared of manslaughter and arson after the hayloft sex romp turned to tragedy.
The defence claimed there was no case to answer because neither had started the fire, but the trial of a third defendant, 21-year-old David Harper, will continue.
The decision eight days into the trial was met with shouts of joy from relatives in the public gallery.
Smith, 20, from Cheltenham, Glos, and Winter, 19, from nearby Bishops Cleeve, broke down in tears in the dock at Bristol Crown Court.
Winter's father said afterwards: ‘We've been through 20 months of sheer hell.
‘I've got my son back at last and I'm glad it's all over.
‘Now we just want to get on with our lives.’
The jury had been told how Emma and Becky Harper, 17, agreed to a sex session in the barn after going for a drink at a pub in the village of Uckington, Glos.
Paul Chadd, prosecuting, claimed Harper, who is not related to the twins, set fire to straw bales to provide light.
He then threw them on to the ground in the tinder-dry hay loft without putting them out properly, it is alleged.
Flames swept through the wooden building and the boys, who at first tried to fight the blaze, fled in terror as it spread.
Firemen found the charred remains of the two sisters as they sifted through the debris.
Yesterday Mr Justice Auld also ordered the jury to clear Harper, of Uckington, on the arson charge.
‘There is simply not enough evidence for a jury to be invited to consider a charge of manslaughter against Smith and Winter,’ he said.
‘The prosecution needed to prove that each defendant did, or was party to, a reckless act.
‘In my view the only candidate before you for such an act is Harper in lighting a tuft of hay.
‘There is no evidence of Smith or Winter lighting a tuft or encouraging or aiding Harper to do so.
‘I therefore direct you to return verdicts of not guilty against Smith and Winter.
‘Any reasonable jury who returned a not guilty verdict on the manslaughter charge would do the same on the arson charge.
‘Therefore I direct you to find all three men not guilty of arson as well.
‘The arson charge does not add anything to the prosecution case against Harper, so you need only concentrate on the manslaughter charge against him.’
The prosecution and defence have begun summing up and the trial is expected to end today.
£10,000 pray day
A GAMBLER who made a 1,000-to-one bet that Christ would not return to Earth by October is to sue bookie William Hill for not paying up.
Andrew Amos, 56, from Streatham, south London, hoped for £10,000 from his £10 stake, but Hills claim it was a mistake.
‘If it was a mistake it is their fault,’ said Andrew.
£1m cost of low bridge
TRAINS were stuck at a new bridge after a planning blunder meant it was too low for them to get under.
The error, on a bridge in Cheshire on the A41 took £1 million to fix.
It was one of many ‘errors and omissions’ pushing up the cost of road works according to the government's National Audit Office.
Car crime down
TV adverts and better security devices helped reduce the number of cars broken into or stolen between April and June this year to 372,081, a fall of 2.6 per cent on last year.
Good Lord, he's loaded
PRISON chaplain Reverend Alan Carefull lived up to his name — and died a millionaire.
The vicar who seemed as poor as a church mouse gave no clue to his wealth as he chatted happily to convicted robbers.
Not even his close friends knew of his secret investments as he led the life of a threadbare clergyman.
But Mr Carefull, 76, of Helhoughton, Norfolk, used his cash to make more than a few prayers come true by helping others.
It was only after his death in a car crash that details of his fortune were revealed.
The assistant chaplain of Norwich prison, who drove around in an old Maestro, carefully invested cash inherited from his father's shipping business.
But he made sure he lived only on his own salary.
Executor and friend Geoffrey Woolsey-Brown said: ‘He kept it all very much under his hat.
‘He used his money to help others — but he never made a song and dance about it.’
Mr Carefull left most of his money — more than £750,000 — to a religious charity he established 18 months before his death.
Rocking into the jailhouse
A PRISONER on the run was arrested after winning a karaoke contest — by singing Elvis Presley's Jailhouse Rock.
Philip McGreavey was recognised by a member of his audience in a pub.
McGreavey, 30, of Blackpool, Lancashire was yesterday jailed for 15 months for stealing £3,600 from a safe.
Virus on ward
STAFF at the Queen Alexandra Hospital in Portsmouth, Hants, were forced to close a ward yesterday after traces of the potentially lethal MRSA virus were found.
Spirited Sarah
WHAT a gullible lot we are.
The Radio Times stressed that Ghostwatch with Mike Parkinson on Saturday was a drama yet people took it for real.
Instead of carping we should congratulate Sarah Greene (right) on her fine acting debut.
And the actress playing the studio expert was fantastic.
T Hall, London NW1
Diana's pact of peace
by Clive Nelson
THE Prince and Princess of Wales have made a pact to cover up their differences in public because of complaints about their recent behaviour.
The couple's new attitude was clearly visible yesterday as they continued their tour of Korea.
Diana turned on the charm as she visited some of the country's poorest children and smiled delightedly during a visit to the ballet.
And Charles seemed relaxed as he made a series of routine visits to business and environmental seminars.
Their decision came during a meeting late on Tuesday when the couple realised the tour had got off to a bad start.
There was increasing anger that the trip was being turned into a war between them.
‘I think you'll find it will be all happiness and light from now on,’ said a royal aide.
Boredom offensive fails to charm
by David Seymour
THE Charm Offensive was over.
It was time for the deadly follow-up — the Offensive Offensive in which John Major would savage his opponents, even if they were sitting on the benches behind him.
Which most of them were.
But it didn't come.
Instead he gave us the Boredom Offensive.
Or, rather, Inoffensive.
It is a new tactic he is making his own.
The idea is to grind his victims down by boring them to death.
Mr Major has worked out the best way to do this is to read out lists.
Lists of statistics, lists of countries, lists of businesses.
So that is what he did in the Commons yesterday as he launched the Maastricht debate, not realising the only relevant list was the one to starboard as his Government had been holed below the waterline.
The Prime Minister did manage to produce a couple of good lines.
Well, good by his standards.
He described the Labour motion as the ‘Josephine amendment — not tonight’ and said that their policy was ‘Lord give me Europe, but not yet.’
As those were the best lines, you can imagine what the rest were like.
Mr Major finished to a sea of waving order papers behind him.
Actually, not exactly a sea — more a lake, since around a third of Tory MPs did not join in.
Then up got John Smith to unveil the Labour leadership's new tactic.
It was to bore his own side as well as his opponents.
He had lists of his own, though not nearly as many as Mr Major.
Mr Smith will need to find a few more if he is to become Prime Minister.
Then, just when the so-called great debate was falling off the Bored-o-meter scale, the Whole House was thrilled by the Case of the Report That Never Was.
The plot is complicated even by Agatha Christie standards, but putting it as simply as possible, Mr Smith said a report had never been produced, Mr Major interrupted to say it was in the Commons library, the Labour MP Tam Dalyell said what was there was not a report at all and Tristan Garel-Jones, the Euro Minister, said it sort of was.
That may not sound like the most exciting plot you have ever heard but every MP in the Commons seemed to think it was better than Indiana Jones, The Terminator and Alien rolled into one.
They jeered, cheered, pointed and screamed.
What were they on that the rest of the nation wasn't?
Then, like the story of the King's New Clothes, the Tory MP Geoffrey Dickens gave the game away.
‘I am having difficulty knowing what today's debate is about,’ he said.
Join the club, Geoffrey.
Warning on energy
TEN coal-fired power stations will close with the loss of 3,000 jobs unless plans to shut 31 pits are reversed, a union leader warned yesterday.
‘Under this Government's energy madness we are heading towards disaster,’ said Cliff Dawber, of the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union.
He said Britain needed an integrated energy policy.
TSB to axe 440 jobs
THE Trustee Savings Bank is to axe 440 jobs, it was claimed yesterday.
Managers, clerical and computer staff could be redundant before Christmas, said the Banking, Insurance and Finance Union.
‘These job cuts are totally indefensible and will also damage customer service,’ said BIFU's Jennifer Cole.
Hospital deaths scandal
THREE gravely ill patients died after being refused admission to a cash-starved intensive care unit.
Only five out of seven beds in the unit were being used to save money.
Bosses at Sunderland General Hospital denied being to blame — even though a report says the deaths were ‘an outcome’ of being refused admission.
Dr David Tregoning, who led the probe, said: ‘Patients were refused admission to the unit but it is difficult to attribute the deaths to that directly.
‘Last year, there were 50 occasions when demand for beds exceeded the number available.’
The report goes on to brand caring for patients with inadequate nursing staff as ‘inherently unsafe’.
It immediately provoked a furious reaction from staff and unions.
Fifty nurses plan a protest when the report is put before Sunderland Health Authority today.
CoHSE official Dave McNicholas, an intensive care staff nurse, said: ‘This is a scandal and it's not just our unit that's affected by shortages but units across the country.
‘The patients were never given the opportunity of the unit's expertise and facilities.’
Hospital spokesman Graham Howard admitted: ‘They were refused because there was no room for them.
‘The patients may have died even if they had been admitted.’
The Authority will consider whether to implement recommendations that another bed be brought into use.
Patsy Kensit
PATSY Kensit, above, flew into Heathrow yesterday after signing to play a bank robber in a Hollywood movie.
She was on the run as soon as she won the lead role in Bitter Harvest — back to her pop star husband Jim Kerr and two-month-old son James.
‘I've missed both of them terribly,’ she said.
‘All I want to do is hurry home and cuddle them.’
Two ‘sacked for £450,000 cash fiddle’
TWO company directors spent at least £450,000 of their firm's money to fund jetset lifestyles, an industrial tribunal was told yesterday.
Kevin Timms, 38, and Graham Cooke, 35, who each earned £27,500-a-year, took overseas holidays and refurbished their homes on the company's expense, it was claimed.
They had unlimited access to company cheques and used £109,561 to set up their own property firm.
The pair helped themselves to £22,000 mortgage pensions with funds from City investment company Bishop Skinner Financial Services, it was said.
But they were caught out when accounts assistant Anne Riley, disgruntled at being sacked, told chairman Douglas Bishop of their alleged antics.
He told the hearing in Chelsea, west London, auditors first thought £34,500 was missing but later realised it was a small fortune.
Mr Bishop said: ‘I didn't believe it to begin with.’
Mr Timms resigned but Mr Cooke denied he had been dishonest and stayed for two years until he was fired in August last year.
Mr Bishop said Mr Cooke, of Thames Ditton, Surrey, had used £28,964 for his own benefit.
‘We had to repay £135,980 to clients and reimburse £44,000 interest,’ said Mr Bishop.
‘Inquiries are still continuing.’
Mr. Cooke, who was with the firm five years, claims unfair dismissal.
The hearing continues.
Job lies of bogus Sir Humphrey
by Simon Trump
A SMOOTH conman has been jailed for conning his way into a £40,000 a year job with the Government.
Bankrupt swindler Neil Smith landed a marketing post with the Welsh Development Agency with a forged CV and bogus references.
He also falsified his qualifications, including a Master of Business Administration diploma from the Madison Business School in the United States, and claimed to have been a Laker Airways manager and an executive with the failed Polly Peck international conglomerate.
Cardiff Crown Court heard yesterday that Smith, 46, failed to land the job of marketing director for North America with the WDA.
But he so impressed bosses they asked him to apply for the more senior post of general marketing director.
He sailed through five interviews and was offered the job subject to two references.
Smith, who has already served three sentences for dishonesty, supplied the names and addresses of junior Home Office minister Peter Lloyd and a Polly Peck director.
Both addresses were fictitious and the letters sent back were Smith's forgeries.
Greg Bull, defending, said: ‘The fact that he was a good marketing man can be seen by the way he sold himself.‘
Mr Bull said since Smith was released from prison in April 1990, after laundering stolen cheques, he had been unable to get a job until he managed to fool the WDA.
Married Smith, from Walsall, West Midlands, admitted seven charges of deception and theft, and was jailed for two years.
Judge John Rutter said: ‘Only a custodial sentence can be justified.’
The court was told Smith's crooked past came to light when a separate civil court action began.
After the hearing a WDA spokesman said: ‘Our own internal systems uncovered this deception within three months and Mr Smith was immediately sacked.’
Baby twins found dead
THE bodies of newly-born twin girls have been found in a derelict house.
Police immediately launched an appeal for the mother of the sisters to come forward.
They say she will need medical help and counselling to overcome the tragedy.
Detective Chief Inspector Tony Crowther yesterday said the twins' bodies had lain in an outside toilet ‘days rather than weeks’.
‘The bodies were found by two young men who were in the area by chance,’ he said.
‘It was an extremely unpleasant experience for them.’
Mr Crowther added: ‘The mother will need help.
Anyone who has any information should contact us straight away.’
Officers were yesterday carrying out house-to-house inquiries near the building in Hanley, Stoke.
A forensic team was hunting for clues.
Post mortem examinations were carried out to discover if the girls had been still born or died later.
It is the second time in a year the body of a baby has been found in the street.
Earlier, a mother admitted concealing the birth of a child and was placed on probation.
‘The houses should either be knocked down or renovated because this is not good,’ said resident Ray Smith.
Bus stop agony
A MOTHER and her two children were mown down by joyriders as they waited at a bus stop.
Gloria Lang, 46, was last night seriously ill in hospital after being hit by the stolen Nova car with four teenage boys inside.
She was hurled into the air and landed on the other side of a 10ft hedge.
Son Jonathon, nine, and daughter Judith, 15, suffered head injuries and shock after the accident outside their home at Bridgend, Mid Glamorgan.
The joyriders abandoned the car nearby.
The family were going on an early morning shopping trip to buy a surprise for their father Dennis's 54th birthday.
‘It is a miracle they are still alive after being thrown into the air,’ he said.
‘Gloria is in a terrible state.
The doctors are doing everything for her.’
A police spokesman said: ‘The family were seriously injured but the youths did nothing to help.’
Paul Gadd
SINGER Paul Gadd is celebrating 20 years as…
Gary Glitter.
‘I'm feeling like an ancient monument but I think there is a lot left,’ said the 48-year-old pop veteran who had a string of hits in the Seventies including Leader Of The Gang and Do You Wanna Touch.
Gary is celebrating with a new single Through The Years, a greatest hits album and tour.
Lucky Lucky Lucky
Paul Wilenius, Eben Black and Russell Jenkins
For 319 Against 316
THE Prime Minister scored the luckiest escape of a lifetime last night with a knife-edge victory over the ‘enemy within’ of his own party.
John Major's grim face clearly showed he was resigned to defeat — and political oblivion — as he awaited the result of the crucial vote on the Maastricht Treaty.
Chief Whip Richard Ryder anxiously counted the numbers of MPs trooping back from the lobbies.
Then Mr Major burst into a broad grin of relief as the voting was announced after one of the most historic days in Parliament: 319 for the Government, 316 against.
A perilously thin majority of just three.
A visibly overcome Mr Major said simply: ‘We won.’
More than 200 jubilant Tories cheered and waved their order papers.
Michael Heseltine, the Board of Trade President, joyfully grasped Mr Major's arm and a beaming Chancellor Norman Lamont leaped to his feet to join in the celebration.
Junior ministers sitting behind wildly slapped Mr Major on the back.
Others unashamedly hugged each other as they realised the Government was off the hook, if only for the moment.
European Minister Tristan Garel-Jones embraced Mr Ryder as though his team had just scored the winning goal in a Wembley Cup Final.
Mr Major's bacon was saved by 19 Liberal Democrat votes.
If Paddy Ashdown had ordered his troops to oppose Mr Major the result would have been 300 votes to 335 against the Government — the most crushing defeat for a Prime Minister in modern times.
Early today the Government was facing accusations of fighting a dirty and unethical campaign to get Tory MPs to vote for Mr Major.
Lord Tebbit claimed on TV that an official from Tory Central Office in London had gone to a constituency to campaign directly against one MP.
‘When I was chairman of the party, that man would have been sacked,’ Lord Tebbit said.
Rebel MPs told of threats to their futures if they did not back the Government.
One Tory MP was seen coming out of the Whips' office in tears before last night's vote.
He said he was threatened that his career was finished if he voted against the Government.
The MP was one who switched sides at the last minute to vote in favour of the treaty.
After he survived the vote, Mr Major went to the Whips' office to thank them for their help.
The verdict came as an immense relief for Mr Major, who put his job on the line over the Maastricht Treaty.
He had survived the most testing day of his political career — but he faces difficult times ahead in pushing through further negotiation on the treaty, which will bring ever closer ties with Europe.
Of the Tory Euro-rebels, 26 put principle before party and voted against the Government.
Eight did not vote.
The fierce revolt by Tory backbenchers will go on, and they still threaten guerrilla warfare when the Maastricht Bill is debated line by line in the Commons.
Tory Euro-sceptics have already put down hundreds of amendments to the Bill, which could produce a similar confidence vote like last night's day after day.
Mr Ashdown was accused by Labour last night of propping up the Government.
‘Paddy Ashdown has given the kiss-of-life to an ailing Prime Minister,’ said Labour front-bencher John Prescott.
Shadow Environment Secretary Jack Straw added bitterly: ‘The only thing the Liberals have been true to is their colours — yellow.’
Labour's bid to delay further debate on the Bill ratifying the treaty was defeated by 319 votes to 313, a Government majority of only six.
The critical vote was to follow, and no one was making any confident forecasts.
All that was needed for defeat was for a couple of Liberal Democrats to switch sides.
But the Prime Minister's luck held.
Angry Labour MPs jeered and pointed accusingly at the Liberal Democrats as the Speaker read out the count.
As he left the Commons Mr Major was patted on the back by former Prime Minister Sir Edward Heath.
Sir Edward said: ‘I have never seen anything like it.’
He said that Lady Thatcher was privately asking Tory MPs to oppose the Government, and said that Lord Tebbit was openly pleading with MPs to defeat the Bill.
On Lord Tebbit he said: ‘I saw him in the members lobby trying to persuade new members to vote against the Government, and that is appalling.
It never happened in my time.’
Leading Tory Euro-rebel Michael Spicer said: ‘At the end of the day it became an issue of confidence.
‘John Smith's speech turned it into a matter of confidence and the whole issue became confused.
‘Clearly the Government was also successful in confusing the issue.
There is no doubt the parliamentary party as a majority is very anxious about Maastricht and this reflects the feeling in the country itself.
‘It has been a very tough night, but we have come out carrying our arms.’
But Mr Heseltine, showing clear signs of relief, declared: ‘We won, didn't we?’
Another leading rebel Bill Cash looked disappointed but vowed that the fight will continue.
‘It was very close,’ he said, and added ominously: ‘We now move on to the committee stage.’
Major loyalist John Watts said: ‘We are back from the brink.’
European Movement leader Hugh Dykes said: ‘I am very delighted with the outcome.
It gives us the mandate to go ahead, as soon as possible.’
The victory means that the embattled Mr Major has re-asserted his shattered authority in the Tory Party, and has saved the Maastricht Treaty from defeat.
European leaders have been watching the turmoil over Europe in the Tory Party with increasing alarm.
If the Tory Euro-rebels had defeated the Government the whole treaty would have collapsed.
Mr Major now hopes to rebuild his damaged Premiership with a dash for growth, and an all-out effort to bring about economic recovery.
He needs to work furiously to rebuild his reputation and authority, shattered by a humiliating series of U-turns and political defeats which have all but torn asunder his party and even his Cabinet.
Tories have been battling with each other in the Commons, on TV, in the newspapers and on the floor of the Tory Party conference with a ferocity never seen this century.
Mr Major is by no means out of the woods, and must fight to defend his leadership at a crisis Cabinet meeting to be called early today.
The overwhelming impression left after the debate is of a Tory Party spilt from top to toe over Europe, and a Prime Minister unable to heal the rift.
In the Commons Mr Major bluntly warned that killing the Maastricht Treaty would be a ‘fatal cocktail’ for jobs and prosperity.
It would leave Britain ‘scowling in frustration’ on the sidelines of the Community.
The strained but defiant Premier pleaded with Tory Euro-rebels not to vote against the Government.
And he angrily denounced the Labour Party amendment demanding a delay in bringing back the Bill as a ‘fraud’.
Mr Major said Opposition leader John Smith's message was like Napoleon's: ‘Not tonight Josephine, we'll debate it at some other time’.
Labour leader John Smith ferociously attacked Mr Major and said the motion was being used to get support for a ‘discredited Prime Minister and a discredited Government.’
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd said: ‘The survival of the Conservative Government is not at stake.
‘What is at stake is the survival of a credible European policy.’
Mr Hurd said Mr Smith's speech had been on a motion of no confidence he had not tabled: ‘And why hasn't he?
Because he hopes to lure some of my Conservative colleagues into the division lobby with him.
‘But his speech showed clearly the trap, and on the whole when traps are set in sight of the victim they don't usually catch it.’
‘I say, I say’— quotes from a momentous day in Parliament
I DON'T relish the prospect of being skinned alive on Parliament Green if the Prime Minister was to win by one vote and I had abstained.
Labour Europhile MP Andrew Faulds
HE has the precise opposite of the Midas Touch — from Black Wednesday to the pits closure fiasco, to mysteries of whatever the Government's new economic policy is, his baleful presence courts disaster.
Labour leader John Smith on Major
YOU have chickened out.
Run rabbit, run rabbit, run, run, run.
Angry Labour MPs to Tory backbencher Michael Carttiss, a former Euro rebel explaining why he voted for the Government WE will remain Germans.
Britons.
Italians an German chancellor Helmut Kohl
NOT tonight Josephine.
We'll debate it at some other time.
John Major comparing Labour leader John Smith to Napoleon
IT'S the economy we should be bashing our brains about.
Downing Street insider
The survival of the Government is not at stake.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd
TURKEYS do not vote for Christmas.
Paddy Ashdown
The 26 Tory rebels who tried to bring down the government
THESE are the Tories who voted against the Government's motion last night:
John Biffen (Shropshire North), Sir Richard Body (Holland with Boston), Nicholas Budgen (Wolverhampton South-West), John Butcher (Coventry South-West).
John Carlisle (Luton North), William Cash (Stafford), Dr Michael Clark (Rochford), James Cran (Beverley).
Iain Duncan-Smith (Chingford), Christopher Gill (Ludlow), Teresa Gorman (Billericay), Toby Jessel (Twickenham), Roger Knapman (Stroud).
Barry Legg (Milton Keynes South-West), Michael Lord (Suffolk Central).
Tony Marlow (Northampton North), David Porter (Waveney), Richard Shepherd (Aldridge-Brownhills).
Sir Trevor Skeet (Bedfordshire North), Michael Spicer (Worcestershire South), Sir Peter Tapsell (Lindsey East).
Sir Teddy Taylor (Southend East), Bill Walker (Tayside North), John Wilkinson (Ruislip-Northwood).
Ann Winterton (Congleton) and her husband Nicholas Winterton (Macclesfield).
Fergie gets gun guard
THE Duchess of York has had her armed police bodyguards restored after fears she could become an IRA target.
Fergie lost her armed protection when she and Prince Andrew split up.
But increased security accompanied her on a private visit to the Midlands yesterday for a meeting of the Motor Neurone Disease Association.
A senior police source said: ‘Certain events in London recently have given cause for concern.’
Mother held after girl is plucked from river
Cheryl Stonehouse
A GIRL was critically ill last night after her mother walked away as she fell into the River Thames.
Two officers on a police patrol launch stationed just across the river at Westminster Pier saved the youngster's life.
Hours later, the child's mother was being questioned after being arrested near Heathrow Airport.
The girl, thought to be aged about five, had stopped breathing when she was pulled from the water on the South Bank near the old GLC build-ing steps.
PC Bill Cotton gave her the kiss of life as soon as she was pulled on deck.
Colleague Ron McDonald steered them to shore.
He helped them to a waiting car and drove to nearby St Thomas's Hospital.
Intensive care staff described her condition as critical last night.
‘It took skill to manoeuvre the vessel so close to the shore and the girl,’ said Inspector Peter Steenhuis, of Thames River Police.
‘Both officers did a fantastic job.
If they had not got there when they did, the child would be dead.’
An hour later, the woman who was seen with the child was arrested at Heathrow where she had argued with a cabbie after refusing to pay her fare.
The unemployed 21-year-old from Sydenham, London, was being questioned by detectives at Kennington.
‘It is still not clear how the child came to be in the river,’ a police spokesman said last night.
‘We have a number of differing accounts from the people who were there at the time.
Our investigations are continuing.’
Escape from the Bailey
A DEFENDANT on trial for a horrifying knife murder was on the run last night after walking out of the Old Bailey.
Police were hunting 47-year-old Clive Wells who disappeared among crowds of City workers on their way home.
He had been in the ‘custody’ of psychiatric nurses but after his trial was adjourned for the day, he gave them the slip.
‘Anyone accused of murder is regarded as a danger to the public and there should have been more control here,’ said a senior City police officer.
Jobless Wells had been on trial since Monday charged with murdering 64-year-old Vincent McGuire, his neighbour at a council-run hostel in central London's Covent Garden last December.
The court heard that Wells allegedly plunged a knife into Mr McGuire's neck, severing an artery then left him to die.
He was said to have returned to his own room to finish a card game of patience before reporting finding the body.
An investigation into how he managed to escape so easily is now underway.
Axe for 999 computer
THE plug has finally been pulled on the London Ambulance Service computer that may have been responsible for up to 20 deaths last week.
Worried managers made the decision after the computer crashed for the second time in 10 days.
The LAS admitted yesterday there had been one case of a 25-minute delay in sending an ambulance.
There was outrage last week when unions revealed people died when the new computer system crashed on its launch day.
Open up plea to sex clinics
WOMEN wanting birth control advice face problems finding a clinic open all hours.
Half of clinics open just once a week to women seeking contraceptive advice, a Family Planning Association survey revealed yesterday.
And just two per cent open at weekends — the most convenient time for teenagers and workers.
FPA director Doreen Massey said: ‘GPs and clinics must work together to reach this huge area of need.’
Top Of The Pops gets chop
Kevin Murphy
TOP Of The Pops is to be axed after 28 years because youngsters are switching off in droves.
‘It's clear from viewing figures that it's finished,’ said a BBC spokesman.
‘Young people just don't like it any more.’
Viewing figures have dropped from 15 million in the Seventies to six million.
The show will be replaced by another music-based show in February.
The decision to kill it off comes four months after BBC 1 controller Jonathan Powell admitted it was a ‘pale version of its old self’.
Miming was banned last year at the same time Radio One DJs were re-placed by unknowns.
Three of them were sacked last month, leaving Mark Franklin and Tony Dorie as hosts.
Former presenter David Hamilton last night blamed Top Of The Pops' demise on the ‘bunch of nobodies’ who host the show.
‘It's no longer an event,’ he added.
‘In the old days the presenters were stars in their own right.
The charts were very important and records sold a lot.’
Top Of The Pops started on January 1, 1964, with Jimmy Savile in charge and The Beatles at Number One with I Want To Hold Your Hand.
Stars who appeared through the years included the Rolling Stones, Elton John, Rod Stewart and Madonna.
But former presenters are not mourning its passing.
‘Top Of The Pops has been an institution like The Archers.
But kids today don't buy singles.
They buy computer games,’ said Simon Bates.
‘Pop is no longer as important and fewer people watch TV.’
Alan ‘Fluff’ Freeman said: ‘It was quite good but it could never be the same — we were like kids with a new toy.’
Mike Smith said the show believed it ‘was God's gift to entertainment’.
‘That was a myth as has now been proved,’ he added.
Kenny Everett said: ‘I stopped watching 10 years ago because it was hideously irritating.
‘They have it in stereo now but rubbish in stereo is still rubbish.’
Tony Blackburn said: ‘Today kids watch 24-hour satellite pop shows.
They don't wait for 30 minutes once a week.’
TV comedy Hi-De-Hi, is being revived by the BBC after four years.
Elton signs up for £26m
ELTON JOHN and his long-time lyricist, Bernie Taupin, have signed a £26 million record deal with music publishers Time Warner.
The deal is the largest cash advance in music publishing history, and gives the company the sole rights to market John's catalogue of music from 1974 to the present as well as material from his next six albums.
John Major will fly to Washington next month
PREMIER John Major will fly to Washington next month in an attempt to maintain the ‘special relationship’ between Britain and the US.
But there will be a chill in the relationship following the Tories' undercover support for George Bush.
Mr Major tried to break the ice yesterday, saying: ‘I sent a message of congratulations on his stunning victory.’
Bill Clinton namesake celebrates
BILL CLINTON celebrated victory in his normal way — with two pints in the Crown in Southport, Hants.
This was not, however, the President-elect, but one of his many British namesakes, a 70-year-old retired sales manager.
Bill said: ‘My only worry is if his former lover, the Penthouse model Gennifer Flowers, turns up on my doorstep.
A woman her age would kill me.’
Oxford University message to Bill Clinton
OXFORD University congratulated old boy Clinton with a mixture of pleasure and pomp.
Dons at University College — where the president-elect was a Rhodes Scholar in 1968–69 — sent a proud and affectionate message:
‘The master, Professor John Albery, and fellows of University College are delighted at the election of a University man to the presidency of the United States.’
Tamara Kennerley congratulates Bill Clinton
CHESHIRE housewife Tamara Kennerley, a girlfriend of Clinton when he was at Oxford, was among the first to offer her congratulations.
Tamara, 45, said: ‘I am absolutely delighted at the result.
I am sure he will make a fine president.’
Wall tills cash clash
A BANK accused a man of using his hole-in-the-wall cash card to defraud it of hundreds of pounds — even though he did not know his personal number.
Vincent Lee, of Manchester, said the number was still sealed inside its original envelope.
His experience will be highlighted tonight in a probe into cash machines by ITV's This Week programme.
Other shock cases include Hector MacNeal, an underwriter from London, who discovered that he had been accidentally withdrawing cash from someone else's account.
Nine clients of Merseyside solicitor Dennis Whalley are suing banks and building societies over disputed withdrawals.
Mr Whalley said the action could result in a multi-million pound claim by up to 250,000 people.
Stock broke belt
Christian Gysin
A DEBT disaster has struck the stockbroker town of Guildford with 500 people owing a total of more than £20 million.
‘Five years ago, it was rare for someone to ask for help,’ a debt expert said last night.
‘Now, it's not unusual for someone to come in off the street and tell us they owe a million.’
The Surrey town — with a population of around 124,000 — has been ravaged by the recession.
The Citizen's Advice Bureau says more than 150 people have applied to be made bankrupt in three months.
The town, called the Golden Ford when founded by the Saxons in the sixth century, was originally a site where treasures were buried in ancient graves.
But its modern image as the ultimate safe stockbroker belt has been shattered as firms go to the wall and homes are repossessed.
‘We are dealing daily with people who cannot cope with their financial problems,’ said Christine Snowball, a CAB debt adviser.
‘People are coming to us with horror stories of simple debts that have mushroomed into thousands of pounds.
‘Some have taken loans to pay off loans.
It's a deepening spiral.
‘Others have re-mortgaged their homes to save their small businesses only to admit defeat and opt for bankruptcy.’
In nearby Camberley, the only fish and chip shop has gone bust after rents and business rates since 1990.
‘The company lost £100,000 coming here,’ said Halusi Halil, managing director of the firm running the Merry Fisherman.
‘When we set up again, it will be as far away from Camberley as possible.’
A few miles away, one of the country's leading sand processing firms, Linatex Ltd, has been forced to make 19 more workers redundant.
The company's workforce has been almost halved to 102 in three years.
Just down the road at Shalford, electrical contractor Schupke collapsed with debts of £100,000 and the loss of 21 jobs.
The debts were accumulated by the knock-on effects of the recession, explained chairman and managing director Keith Winser.
‘The end came when a main contractor went into liquidation.
‘We didn't get £28,000 which with 14 other bad debts amounted to £100,000,’ he said.
Mrs Snowball was appointed Guildford's first debt adviser five years ago.
‘There are five of us now and we open five and a half days a week to deal with debt problems,’ she said.
More than 20 per cent of inquiries relate to debt.
The debt total has doubled from £10 million six months ago.
The days of being able to pay off small amounts are gone, Mrs Snowball said.
Many people can't afford to pay anything so opt for bankruptcy, which ultimately means losing their homes.
‘Most of our day is spent helping people fill in bankruptcy forms,’ Mrs Snowball added.
Drunk rail guard fined
A BRITISH Rail guard booted two mums and their children off a train in a drunken temper, a court heard yesterday.
Gordon Knowles, 56, of Dudley, West Midlands, was three times over the drink-drive limit when he thought the children were preventing the train's doors from closing and ordered them off, Birmingham magistrates heard.
The women complained to the station master — and Knowles was taken off at the next station.
Karen Silk, defending, said: ‘He was only at work because he had been asked to do an extra shift.
‘He lost his temper when he assumed the children had been responsible for the doors being open.’
Knowles, who was sacked after 14 years with BR, was fined £150 plus £30 costs after admitting being drunk at work.
Buy to save baby's sight
A BLIND baby's parents plan to sell their house to pay for a £15,000 operation in the US to restore his sight.
Eight-month-old Adam Bennett has a rare eye condition causing detached retinas.
Parents Carol, 28, and Shaun Bennett, 30, of Wombwell, Barnsley, said: ‘Adam's sight must come first.’
Money or hip
A BURGLAR told an 86-year-old woman lying in her Hull, Humberside, flat with a broken hip: ‘No money, no help.’
He fled with just an ornament.
She was not found for 16 hours.
Most courageous man I have had the privilege of meeting
James Murray
A JUDGE awarded £147,000 yesterday to a hero fireman left a nervous wreck by the Kings Cross fire disaster and told him: ‘You are the most courageous man I have had the privilege of meeting.’
Paul Hale's devotion to duty went beyond what could have been expected of anyone, said Mr Justice Otton.
Mr Hale won three awards, including the Queen's Commendation for Brave Conduct, after he made six journeys into the blazing inferno to help save lives.
He still suffered nightmares about dead bodies almost five years after the November 1987 tragedy, the High Court heard.
His senior officer Colin Townsley was one of the 31 people who died.
And the trauma had caused personality changes which made him irritable and difficult to live with.
He had become depressed, suffered headaches, horrific dreams and his sleep was often disturbed.
In his nightmares he had visions of the dead as skeletons and saw the disfigured shape of Mr Townsley at his desk.
Mr Hale told the court his ordeal left him ‘ratty, unbearable and not caring about anybody’.
Before the incident he had been a cheerful, confident man full of life.
He had a full life with his wife and three children.
But things had got so bad that his wife considered leaving him and his children avoided him, the judge said.
He had had to give up fighting blazes and now worked in the fire prevention service — although he may be forced to quit the post.
The court heard that Mr Hale's crew was one of the first to arrive at the underground station after the fire broke out.
As people started running out, Mr Hale, 44, of Minster on Sea, Sheerness, Kent, ran in carrying a hose.
He heard a cry from a man at the bottom of the stairs who seemed to have had his face burned off, and he helped him out to safety.
Mr Hale then ran back in and started to crawl on his stomach under the intense heat, climbing over debris which included dead bodies.
When he reached the ticket hall the heat was so fierce the water from his hose turned to steam before it reached the fire.
A blast of air knocked him over but he managed to crawl through a tunnel under Euston Road.
He was so tired he had to be hauled to safety by members of the public.
After getting some oxygen, he then went back in for a third time.
He returned three more times, even after hearing of Mr Townsley's death, and personally recovered six bodies.
One, which caused him great distress, was that of a child.
He wrapped the remains with those of a woman, believed to be the child's mother.
Mercifully he suffered only minor burns to his wrists and neck, the judge said.
Doctors said his main injuries were psychological and the ‘shattering experience’ has left him with post traumatic stress syndrome.
It was unlikely he would ever recover fully.
Although promoted this year to the rank of station officer he felt, as his whole life had been fire fighting, that this new post was second best, said Mr Justice Otton.
He has been off sick for the last six weeks and may never return to the job.
His wife, Jeanette, 46, had been forced to give up her job.
The award was made against London Underground, who admitted liability but disputed the amount of damages.
They were also ordered to pay legal costs.
After the hearing, Mr Hale said in a statement: ‘I am pleased it is all over.
It has taken a long time to get justice but the compensation will give financial security to my family and give us sufficient breathing space to try and rebuild our lives.
‘I am grateful for the support given to me by the London Fire Brigade and I would also like to thank the Fire Brigades Union.’
His solicitor Andrew Dismore criticised London Underground for making them fight to the end.
‘The company has been very unsympathetic,’ he said.
‘Mr Hale and his wife were put through the ordeal of having to give evidence.’
Neil Garrie, head of corporate affairs for London Underground, said it was unavoidable having to contest the claim.
Sins of the road
SPEEDING is the worst motoring sin, driving instructors decided yesterday.
Following too close to another vehicle came second in a report by the Automobile Association.
Other sins which made the top ten included running red lights, crossing hands on the steering wheel, lack of concentration and insufficient use of the rearview mirror.
Motorists were also criticised for using a carphone while driving, driving with one hand, bad lane discipline and being inconsiderate to pedestrians.
Bouncing baby
A BABY bounced back to life after a car smashed into his pram.
Doctors say 14-month-old Michael Gater survived being flung 25ft across a road because he passed out.
Although he broke his collar bone and fractured his skull, he was saved from fatal injuries because his body was limp and simply bounced when it hit the tarmac.
Michael was yesterday allowed to return to his home in Wavertree, Liverpool.
His mother Yvonne said: ‘It is a miracle he wasn't killed given the distance he was flung.
He's back to his usual happy self now.’
Book now at McDonald's
BURGER chain McDonald's is in hot water for encouraging children to read more by offering free meals.
Top readers at Cippenham Middle School at Slough, Berks can win Pounds 10 food vouchers.
But a community health spokeswoman said: ‘It hardly goes with our healthier eating in schools promotion.’
Lecture strike
LECTURERS at new universities and colleges of higher education disrupted lectures yesterday with a one-day strike.
They want equal pay to traditional universities.
Jackpot Charlie
JACKPOT pools winner Charlie Hill toasted his £2 million windfall yesterday and promised: ‘It won't change me.’
Champagne Charlie, as his friends now call him, scooped Pounds 2,008,137.60 for a 54p 8 from 10 stake.
The win is the sixth biggest paid out by Littlewoods.
The size of the jackpot stunned 68-year-old Charlie, of Blackpool, Lancs.
He said: ‘I checked and re-checked and still didn't believe it.
I won't have to worry about the bills now.’
It was not his first win.
Fifteen years ago, he won £6,000 — and last year he collected £3.60.
Charlie intends to buy a bungalow in Blackpool, where he met and married wife Mona 26 years ago.
He will also treat his family, including two stepsons and five grandchildren.
Mona said her husband had always been lucky.
‘We haven't bought a Christmas turkey for years — he always wins one.’
The blockbuster cheque was handed over by actor George Cole, Minder's Arthur Daley, in a car showroom in London's Mayfair.
Banks told to pay up
Ian Fletcher
BANKS and building societies were yesterday accused of ‘monumental incompetence’ in the way they treat customers.
The scathing attack from consumer watchdogs comes only months after the introduction of a strict code of practice designed to improve services.
Customers are being urged to demand compensation for blunders at the same rate as the charges on their accounts.
‘The recession has not dimmed the banks' high-handed, bungling attitude to customer relations,’ said Dr John Beishon, of the Consumers' Association.
‘With a few exceptions, banks and building societies are still providing a service of monumental incompetence.’
The report says that one in 10 customers were charged incorrectly by their bank or building society, one in five had wrangles over standing orders and one in seven had money incorrectly removed from their accounts.
The Association warned that rectifying mistakes could be frustrating.
It said customers should claim compensation for expenses and time spent complaining.
Ticket to rile
BE good to your secretary or you could end up in the worst seats on business flights and be booked into lousy hotels.
Bosses were warned yesterday that secretaries have the power to banish them to the back of aircraft or even give them a poor hire car.
A survey found that many employers left nearly all travel arrangements to their secretaries who rarely got any thanks.
I've 2 million reasons for feeling so lonely
Adrian Lee
THE woman who became Britain's first £2 million pools winner last night told how her windfall had failed to make her happy.
‘I still feel so lonely sometimes,’ she confessed.
Rodi Woodcock, who picked up her win exactly a year ago, warned yesterday's £2 million winner Charlie Hill: ‘Money won't buy you happiness.’
Twice-widowed Rodi, 52, still gets up at 7.30am every day to drive to her full-time job in a laboratory.
She spends no more on clothes than 12 months ago and still fills in her pools coupon every week.
Despite the huge win Rodi hasn't moved out of her modest detached home in south London.
Most of her fortune has been carefully invested.
The only luxuries she has had are a holiday in America, a new car and a few home improvements.
‘I said the money would not change me as a person and it hasn't,’ she said.
‘To my two sons I am still just the old crow.
The best thing about it is the feeling of security.’
Rodi's second husband Gordon, 64, died two months before she picked up the cheque from Bergerac star John Nettles.
‘I still miss him terribly and feel very lonely sometimes — that is my biggest regret,’ she said.
‘Generally I am a happy and optimistic person and enjoy life.
It's not the money that makes me happy.
‘You need stability, that's why I keep my job and work hard at it.’
She told twins Andrew and Michael, 24, they must make their own way in life.
Both gained good jobs after leaving university.
‘I am very proud of them for that,’ she added.
Baker gang alert
THE Great Bread Basket Racket is costing the bakery industry around £6 million a year.
The number of plastic trays stolen from outside shops has risen to two million a year as thieves find more uses for them — dog and cat baskets, shelving, car boot sales and plant holders.
Angry bakers who believe organised gangs are responsible yesterday called for a crackdown on the thefts.
No cheers for UK pubs
PUBS are dirty, smelly and unfriendly, according to the 1993 Good Pub Guide published yesterday.
Reports of bad service and rude staff are alarmingly high, says the guide after following-up 1,000 complaints from readers who visited 567 pubs outside London.
Drinkers also complained about the poor state of pub toilets and ‘down at heel’ gardens.
Pub food was ‘obviously frozen then reheated’ and over-priced.
Maxwell pension protest
MORE than 1,000 Maxwell pensioners lobbied Parliament yesterday on the eve of the first anniversary of their old boss's death.
They want the Government to do more to reclaim the millions plundered by the tycoon.
Tragedy of Lloyd's name
LLOYD'S Name Margaret Jones, 55, who stood to lose £200,000, has been found dead in her fume-filled car near her home at Parkhill, South Wales.
Her husband said she had suffered ‘three years of worry’.
140mph M-Way chase
TWO joyriders in a stolen Porsche led police on a crazed 140mph motorway chase yesterday.
A helicopter tracked the car as it weaved in and out of traffic near Bristol.
Two officers were hurt when their patrol car ran into the back of the supercar.
The couple, who dumped the car and fled, were being hunted last night.
Flake girl's pals quizzed on Ecstasy
Neville Thurlbeck
TWO friends of Cadbury's Flake model Rachel Brown last night denied they supplied her with the deadly drug Ecstasy.
Rachel's former fiance Nick Yin, 29, and friend Lee Kelly, 24, were arrested by police yesterday and held for eight hours.
They were freed on police bail pending further inquiries.
Rachel has been lapsing in and out of horrific hallucinations at Liverpool's Broad Green hospital since she took half a tablet of Ecstasy at a party 11 days ago.
Speaking exclusively to TODAY, Lee said: ‘There is no way we had anything to do with giving Rachel this drug.
‘We are her close friends and it is the last thing we would do.
We both know how health-conscious Rachel is.’
‘The police have no evidence to charge us.
They said they arrested us because Rachel had told her grandparents it was us who gave her the drug.
‘But Rachel is in a very bad way and is obviously unsure of what happened.’
A team of police officers swooped on the men's home in Penny Lane at 9am yesterday and arrested them after breaking down the front door.
A spokesman for Liverpool police said: ‘Two men were arrested and released on police bail pending further police inquiries.’
Cash card torture
A GANG of five teenagers stole a 20-year-old woman's cash card and then tortured her to give them the pin number.
When they could not get money from the machine they beat her with sticks.
The girl, who was pounced on while waiting for a train at Mexborough, South Yorkshire, was treated in hospital for head wounds.
Queen's ‘get well’ letter to Piggott
Tim Miles
RACING legend Lester Piggott was moved to tears in his hospital bed by a get-well message from the Queen.
The veteran jockey's normally-stony face crumbled as he read the letter wishing him a ‘speedy recovery’ after his fall in America's Breeders' Cup.
For Lester, 57 today, it was the best birthday present he could have wished for.
It meant he had finally been accepted back into the Royal fold after being stripped of his OBE when he was jailed for tax evasion.
Lester rode many horses owned by the Queen and Queen Mother in his 40-year career.
A nursing supervisor said: ‘He had tears in his eyes.
Everyone in the room was very moved.
‘This guy's pretty tough, but he was overcome.’
The message was delivered to his private room at Hollywood Memorial Hospital by the British consul in Miami, Philip Grice.
‘Lester was most touched when I delivered the personal message,’ Mr Grice said last night.
‘He got a pen and paper and told me: ‘I have to reply immediately to the Queen thanking her’.
‘His response was sent to the British Embassy in Washington and faxed to Buckingham Palace.’
The 11-times champion jockey was being visited by his TV presenter daughter Tracy and friend Anna Ludlow when he read the message.
His only visible injury was a black eye, although his broken collarbone was tightly bandaged.
An hour later, Tracy and Miss Ludlow helped him secretly slip away from the hospital to spend two days in a secluded Miami retreat soaking up the sun before returning to Newmarket.
‘He was worried about being photographed with Miss Ludlow,’ a nurse said.
‘It's not something he wanted to appear in the papers.’
Lester was given his OBE in 1975.
The Queen was forced to strip him of it 13 years later.
The letter telling him of his disgrace was delivered to him in prison.
Killer dog escapes
AN ALSATIAN which ate three sheep was being hunted by police yesterday amid fears that it could attack a child.
The killings in Bentley, Hants, came after the dog ran away from home in nearby Fleet.
Icke joins in M-way demo
DAVID Icke, right, joined protesters who halted work on a controversial road yesterday.
Former BBC sports presenter and Green Party speaker Icke, 40, who claimed to be the son of God, was protesting against extending the M3 at Twyford Down, Hants.
Burning with shame
POLICE called firefighters after seeing an orange glow in the sky.
But the ‘blaze’ seen by Leicestershire cops turned out to be amber lights shining through steam at a factory near Grantham, Lincs.
Award for Julie parents
THE parents of murdered British safari girl Julie Ward, left, have been honoured for their campaign to bring her killers to justice.
Hotelier John Ward and his wife Janet, from Brockley, Suffolk, received an award from the Ross McWhirter Foundation at a ceremony in London.
Blitz on sex video nasties
A SCHOOL technician pirated anything from video nasties to computer games.
Martin Ellis, 26, was known as The Edit Man and peddled his videos, featuring human torture and sick sex, at film fairs, markets and by mail order.
Trading standards officers swooped on his flat in Mossley Hill, Liverpool, in January and seized illegally produced computer games, videos and equipment for copying.
The raid was part of a national operation to smash a ring of video dealers and included operations in Leicester, South Wales, Cornwall, the West Midlands, Northants and Cheshire.
Ellis admitted to 22 charges under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act at Liverpool Magistrates Court yesterday.
The case was adjourned until next month for reports.
Big howler
RADIO Cleveland broadcast a warning that fireworks can frighten pets — accompanied by realistic sound effects that drove animals mad.
Parents' fury as sex romp barn fire boyfriend cleared
Simon Trump
THE parents of twin girls who died in a barn fire yesterday condemned the decision to clear their boyfriend of killing them.
Distraught Vicky and Stephen Harper were in court to see 21-year-old David Harper — who dated both sisters — walk free.
The couple were too distressed to talk about daughters Becky and Emma, but issued a statement.
‘We have waited 22 months for justice to be done and are appalled at the verdict,’ it read.
‘The circumstances of our daughters deaths are still unclear.
We now face a life sentence of misery and uncertainty but we will never rest until we know what happened that night.
‘Emma and Becky's lives were ended just before their 18th birthday when they would have begun to make a contribution to the world through the caring professions they had chosen to work in.
‘During their short lives the twins brought much happiness to people both through their singing with Christ Church choir and their work, Becky with the elderly and Emma with children.’
The Harpers had attended every day of the Bristol Crown Court trial to hear how the girls died in a late-night blaze in a hay-filled barn at Uckington, near Cheltenham, Glos.
It was claimed their daughters were taken to the barn for sex after a pub night out with Harper and his friends, Wisdom Smith and Daniel Winter, both 19.
They died because matches were struck recklessly, said Paul Chadd, prosecuting, at Bristol Crown Court.
The men fled and did nothing to help save the girls, he added.
Carpenter Harper, admitted lighting hay to see but insisted he thought he'd put it out.
He remained on trial after jobless Smith and student Winter were cleared of involvement on Tuesday.
He refused to comment as he was bundled from court with his girlfriend into a waiting car.
But Smith said: ‘It's a burden that's going to be on my shoulders for life.’
Harper, of Uckington, Winter, of Cheltenham, and Smith, of Bishop's Cleeve, all denied charges of manslaughter and arson.
Why didn't they get out?
THE girls had little chance of escape once the blaze took hold.
But police are still baffled why they didn't get out sooner.
Becky stood a good chance of saving herself but it's believed she may have perished trying to help Emma, higher up on bales.
The Harpers became worried when their daughters did not return to the family home in Cheltenham and reported them missing 24 hours later.
Their charred remains had already been found.
Firemen sifting through the ashes had heard the click of bangles.
Pulling back hay, they found the charred arm of one twin, still adorned with 35 bracelets.
She was so badly burned she had to be identified by a palm print left at home.
Last night tributes poured in for Emma who had nine GCSE passes and Becky who had 11.
£60,000 gym win
A FITNESS trainer whose career was ruined after a weight-training machine collapsed on her right knee won £59,906 damages yesterday.
Rosemary Roche, 35, of Gillingham, Kent, endured five years of pain and for a while could only walk with a stick, said Deputy High Court Judge Morrison.
She has not been able to get any type of work since, despite applying for eight jobs a week.
‘Sport was the love of my life and having to give it up has left a void,’ said Rosemary.
Damages were awarded against Gillingham Council.
Birds Eye food con
FOOD giant Birds Eye was yesterday found guilty of misleading the public over the soya content of its frozen meat.
The firm, part of the Unilever Group, was fined £4,400 with Pounds 15,000 costs by Telford magistrates in Shropshire.
The company denied seven charges brought by Shropshire County Council's trading standards department over the labelling of some of its beef and chicken burgers.
Michael Kalisher, for Birds Eye, said there was no way the company had deliberately flouted the law.
Hunt for car boot rapist
Geraint Jones
A MASKED man kidnapped and raped a 20-year-old woman at gunpoint after locking her boyfriend in a car boot.
He attacked the couple as they cuddled in their car at a remote beauty spot.
Brandishing a handgun, he forced the 23-year-old boyfriend into the boot, where he bound and gagged him before dragging the terrified woman into his own vehicle.
Then he drove for 45 minutes to a deserted spot and raped her before dumping his sobbing victim in the village of Cheriton, near Winchester, Hants — 10 miles from where he first struck.
Despite her ordeal the woman could only think of her boyfriend, but by the time police arrived to free him, he had wriggled free and managed to open the boot from the inside.
The hooded attacker pounced at 11.30pm on Tuesday as the young lovers smooched inside their car at the Farley Mount beauty spot near Winchester.
The man leading the hunt for the attacker, Detective Superintendent Peter Long, said: ‘This was a particularly vicious attack on an innocent young girl.
‘Both the girl and her boyfriend are extremely upset and in a state of severe shock.
‘The girl was very distressed and took some time to tell us exactly what had happened.
‘At the moment she does not even know where she was raped.’
She is being comforted by relatives and a woman police constable specially trained to help victims of serious sexual assaults.
So far she has been unable to give police a description of her attacker.
Last night trained officers were trying to coax details of the ordeal out of the victim in an attempt to build a picture of the rapist.
One detective said: ‘The girl is absolutely distraught and has found it very difficult to remember much about her attacker.
‘She is still in a state of shock, which is not surprising, it was a terrible ordeal.’
The beauty spot is a regular haunt for young couples and detectives are appealing for witnesses to the attack to come forward.
Mighty mouth
SINEAD O'Connor has a fine voice.
Instead of quitting the music business she should have learned to use it for singing rather than mouthing off at every opportunity.
She is a victim of the long-held fallacy that our pop stars have the right, knowledge and experience to comment on world affairs.
D Brown, Cardiff
Janet takes first dose of new drug
CANCER drug campaigner Janet Murray has had the first tablets which may give her a chance of a normal life.
Janet, 33, suffering from a brain tumour, has just finished a course of the drug Temozolomide.
TODAY launched a campaign to raise £50,000 to boost supplies of the drug, which has a 50 per cent success rate, after Janet revealed a critical shortage.
Now 35 other desperately ill people will get Temozolomide because the extra cash is being used to make more of the drug.
Janet said last night: ‘I am feeling fine.
I'm very hopeful that it will do some good.’
Fire pay up 4.9 per cent FIREFIGHTERS were awarded an above-inflation 4.9 per cent pay rise yesterday.
The award, adding £30 million to local authorities' wage bills, boosts a qualified firefighter's pay £15 to £305 a week from November.
A spokesman for the local authority employers said the rise was ‘significantly lower’ than those for teachers, police, the Armed Forces and nurses.
Animal tests ban is a con
A BAN on animal tests for beauty products was agreed by the EC yesterday — with a big get-out clause.
Consumer ministers decided experiments must stop from 1998, but firms can ignore the ruling if it gives rivals an advantage over them.
Two million people signed a petition demanding tests be banned.
‘This is a cruel deception,’ an animal rights spokesman said.
Sacked doc job victory
A HOSPITAL consultant who claimed she was sacked after speaking out against nursing shortages won her appeal against dismissal yesterday.
Dr Helen Zeitlin, 44, of Bidford on Avon, Warwicks, was made redundant in March 1991 on the grounds that Alexandra Hospital had too many blood specialists.
She complained to the Health Secretary, Virginia Bottomley.
Dummy run
BRITAIN bombed the Germans again yesterday — accidentally.
A dummy bomb fell from a Royal Air Force plane, slightly injuring one man at a peace demonstration on a practice range at Nordhorn, Lower Saxony.
Wedding feud, Round 2
By Rob Perkins
NEWLYWEDS Angela and Chris White were hauled into court for £500 yesterday — by the bride's parents.
It was Round Two in a bitter Battle of the Bills which broke out after the couple's wedding last May.
Angela and Chris, both 28, thought the bride's parents, Norman and Gladys Smith, were paying for the lunchtime buffet, and both families would share the cost of the evening reception.
That would let the Smiths in for a total of £836.
But when the bridal pair returned home to Grantham, Lincs, from their Kenya honeymoon, they discovered that Angela's parents had not parted with a penny.
So far, so embarrassing.
But then the bridegroom's mother, Cara White, whose catering firm handled the receptions, sued the Smiths for the £836.
And two days after the case was adjourned at Grantham County Court, Chris and Angela got a summons of their own.
The bride's parents were claiming back a £490 wedding day ‘loan’— plus interest and costs — which the young couple say was a gift.
After that case was also adjourned yesterday, Chris, a health and safety training officer, said: ‘There was never any mention of a loan.
Norman took me outside and said, ‘Here is the money we want to give you.’
‘We used it to pay for car hire, the hall, flowers and drinks.
I just hope everyone who gave us presents doesn't do the same.
‘If we have to give back the kettles and toasters, we'll have nothing left.’
Angela said: ‘We have made it clear more than once that this matter could be sorted out if they would just sit down and talk, family to family.
‘This sort of thing just should not end up in court.
‘It's upsetting, but we are in the right and they are in the wrong.’
The Smiths, of Cranwell, Lincs, were saying nothing.
Typist slip nets £37m
By Ian Key
A TYPIST'S fumbling fingers won her city £37.5 million in grants.
The government cash was intended to put new life into Birmingham's crime-ridden slums.
Guiding factors were crime, unemployment, housing and social security figures.
And in the city's claim for a grant, figures for the Newtown and Ladywood districts were given as a shocking 514.61 crimes for every 1,000 people living there.
The real figure was 154.61 — just above the city average.
But the mistake went all the way to Whitehall.
And in July, Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine announced the grant for the Newtown area based on the incorrect figure.
Birmingham Community Affairs Director Bruce Epps had to admit: ‘There was a typographical error.’
But Birmingham won't be asked to hand back the money.
‘Crime levels did come under consideration, but were a very small factor in the decision,’ an Environment spokesman said.
New crisis looms for Major over strong arm Tory Whips
By Paul Wilenius and Eben Black
PREMIER John Major's hopes for an end to his troubles were blown away within hours of the three-vote victory over Europe.
The Tory Party was still torn apart last night by the Maastricht vote as the tactics used by the loyalist MPs against the rebels were branded as scandalous and bringing the Commons into disrepute.
They were accused of reducing new MPs to tears, using foul language to women rebels and threatening to have others de-selected.
Tory MP Teresa Gorman gives an exclusive insight into the dirty tricks in a special article for TODAY on Page 7.
She says she was called Judas, a scab, and sexually harassed in the House.
Other MPs also go on the record on Page 2 to give TODAY an astonishing list of threats that caused some to buckle under.
TODAY's investigation proves that Mr Major would have been beaten without the strong-arm tactics.
We have called for an inquiry by Speaker Betty Boothroyd.
Meanwhile, Mr Major's handling of the whole Maastricht issue was branded a total shambles last night.
He had to buy off some of Wednesday night's rebels by promising them that the Maastricht Treaty would not come before the Commons again until after Denmark held another referendum in May.
This stunned his fellow European leaders who had earlier hailed his victory as an instant step ahead for a more united Europe.
The Danes were surprised, too.
They said they had no plans for another referendum in May.
It might take much longer.
Mr Major now faces accusations that he forced the Maastricht motion through the House for no urgent reason.
His credibility as EC President is at an all-time low just when he needs to tackle yet another crisis.
A trade war is looming between Europe and America after the collapse of talks in Washington.
Jacques Delors, European Commissioner, sparked the crisis when he prevented his Agricultural Commissioner Ray MacSharry signing an agreement.
MacSharry then quit.
Chegwin: My drink hell
TELEVISION presenter Keith Chegwin opened his heart in front of the cameras yesterday and admitted ‘I am an alcoholic’.
Close to tears, the 34-year-old told viewers that going public was one of the most difficult things he'd ever had to do.
‘I turned round one day and admitted I had a problem,’ he said.
The Palace confesses
By Clive Nelson in Seoul
BUCKINGHAM Palace has admitted for the first time that Princess Diana's marriage is in trouble.
The official recognition means the Roy al Family has finally accepted the inevitable — that Diana and Charles will lead separate lives within their marriage.
The unprecedented admission about the state of the royal marriage yesterday, on the last day of their Korean tour, was what the Princess of Wales has waited since June 7 to hear.
That was the date sensational revelations about her unhappy life with Charles were first published in Andrew Morton's book Diana: Her True Story.
Now Diana will feel she need no longer go on living a lie trapped in a sham relationship.
In a series of briefings yesterday, sources agreed the royal marriage was less than perfect.
But they insisted Charles and Diana were attempting to overcome their problems.
The biggest shock came when one official attempted to attack journalists for the ‘negative coverage’ the couple's joint tour had received.
After complaining they had focused too much on the warring Wales' angle, the official was challenged: ‘Surely you cannot say that this is a happy marriage?’
The reply was simple: ‘No.
I cannot.’
In a second briefing, another aide attacked Morton's best selling book for adding to the pressure on the royal couple.
The source insisted: ‘A lot of things in that book are not true.
There is a lot which is wrong.
‘But if you deny one story, the rest become true.’
A third aide travelling with the royal household insisted all was not lost between Charles and Diana.
‘All is not happy in their marriage,’ the aide confirmed, adding that those closest to the couple were ‘still hopeful’for them.
The series of hints came at the end of an extraordinary visit to South Korea.
The trip, planned to boost trade with Britain and acknowledge Seoul's move towards democracy, was totally overshadowed by rumours over the state of the royal marriage.
Last night's developments came just 24 hours after TODAY revealed how Diana had agreed a secret pact with Charles to bury the hatchet for the sake of appearances.
They were forced into a crisis meeting late on Tuesday after increasing criticism of the way they had allowed their private problems to overshadow their public duties.
Their Korean hosts were said to be upset at the way they barely acknowledged each other in public except for a few surly and petulant exchanges.
Sources close to the couple said yesterday's admission of the problems coupled with the pact meant that they would not separate — at least for the moment.
One said: ‘There are difficulties but our feeling is that they are not insurmountable.
Any dialogue between them is a step in the right direction.’
But there will no chance of more dialogue for some time.
Diana was due back in Britain early today while Charles continued his Far East tour.
His plane arrived in Hong Kong last night.
Earlier, their last day in Korea featured a visit to the famous Pulguk-sa Buddhist temple, where couples flock in their thousands to celebrate their love.
There was no contact between them as they toured the magnificent sixth-century shrine.
Four Buddhist priests prayed for the royal couple during their visit but they left still looking like complete strangers.
An interpreter said later: ‘The prayers were for the Royal Family and the prince and princess themselves.
‘It wished them health and happiness together.’
£1 billion unfrozen for council tax payers
By Eben Black
JOHN Major is ready to unlock £1 billion from the sale of council houses to ease the plight of council tax payers, it emerged last night.
But child benefit is to be frozen for the first time in two years.
The desperate moves emerged after a fraught Cabinet meeting to thrash out public spending plans.
It will mean a £50 cut per household on average council tax bills.
Ministers are worried the new charge, which comes into force in April, will be as hated as the poll tax and cause revolt among backbenchers and voters.
Government officials are admitting for the first time families in mid-value houses of £66,000 — £88,000 are likely to face bills of £600 not £400 as hoped.
Town Halls will take the extra £1 billion out of the £9 billion in their coffers from the sale of council houses.
It is another U-turn by Mr Major after Tories attacked Labour's plans to unfreeze the cash if elected.
The money had been frozen because, under Government accounting rules, it technically plunges Britain further into debt.
Environment Secretary Michael Howard's victory means an increase in the public sector borrowing requirement, already heading for more than £32 billion for next year.
Child benefit will be frozen at £9.65 for the first child and £7.80 for others when Chancellor Norman Lamont unveils next year's spending package.
Dirty tricks of the Tory whipping boys
By Nick Craven and Christian Gysin
DESPERATE Tory Whips used every dirty trick in the book against MPs planning to rebel over the Maastricht vote, it emerged last night.
They were accused of threatening MPs, bullying one to such an extent he was reduced to tears, and bringing pressure to bear on constituency officials to try to persuade their man to change his mind.
There were even suggestions that some MPs had been taken to one side and the name of their girlfriends ‘mentioned in a threatening manner’.
Tory rebel Bill Walker said: ‘The implication was obvious.
Vote for us or it will be very embarrassing for you.’
Some MPs warned that the bullying by the Whips' Office — the worst in 20 years — had opened wounds in the party that may never heal.
One member spoke of ‘fat, ugly whips sidling up to people and making threats’.
Another backbencher was told his place on a Foreign Office organised trip would be withdrawn if he defied the Government.
Mr Walker, MP for Tayside North, said the methods were repulsive.
‘I certainly don't want to give the impression that everyone who changed their mind is an adulterer.
‘But I find it quite deplorable that anyone should sink to such depths.
It's hardly a good example of man management and motivation.
‘The Whips were politeness itself with me, but several key people in my local association were approached, largely on the telephone.
‘They used real Armageddon talk, and warned that the Prime Minister would be brought down and that there would be a General Election if the Government lost the vote.
I find that kind of back-door pressure disgraceful and it caused great concern to many people in my local association.
‘There were also leaks to the Scottish newspapers spreading the rumour that I would lose the chairmanship of the Scottish Affairs Committee if I defied the Whips.
It was a totally unacceptable way to go on.’
Ruislip Northwood member John Wilkinson accused the whips of ‘intimidation, blackmail and blandishments’.
Another would-be Tory rebel, Walter Sweeney, who has an ultra-slim majority of 19 — Britain's smallest — accused Central Office of ‘hitting below the belt’ when they forced him to abstain in the vote.
The Vale of Glamorgan member said he came under fierce pressure from the constituency party and the Whips' office.
Mr Sweeney, a new MP, said: ‘A deputy Central Office agent for Wales visited my constituency and attended an executive meeting the night before the vote.
‘He advised them that my stated intention to vote against would put the Prime Minister's future at risk.
There then ensued a discussion as to what to do.’
Mr Sweeney said it was decided by a vote that he should be told the meeting wanted him to reconsider his decision.
But Anthony Arnold, chairman of the Vale of Glamorgan Conservative Association, said the visit by the Central Office agent had been arranged weeks in advance.
‘He certainly did not put pressure on us,’ he said.
Wolverhampton South-west MP Nicholas Budgen said a Whip rang his local association chairman, Roseanne Williams, to ask her to put ‘extra pressure’ on the rebel.
Mr Budgen said: ‘The Government's actions have been disgraceful, describing Maastricht as an issue of confidence in private and denying it in public.
‘No one will forget last night.
The pressure applied was the worst I have seen for 20 years.
‘This will rebound on the Government and their difficulties have only just started.’
Nicholas Winterton, MP for Macclesfield, a thorn in the Whips' side, attacked their ‘thumbscrew’ tactics.
‘It was unacceptable, unethical and immoral that such unfortunate pressure should be brought upon colleagues, especially young members,’ he said.
MP Michael Clark would not confirm he had been threatened with the withdrawal of a Government trip to Canada if he did not vote with the Tories.
The threat was apparently rescinded after the Whips feared their actions may be exposed.
Mr Clark voted against the Government.
But it may all not have been necessary.
Downing Street admitted last night that the Maastricht Treaty may not finish going though the House for a year.
The crunch third, and last, reading will not be until after the second Danish referendum next May.
Now there are mounting fears the Government and Tory chiefs will take horrific revenge on the 26 Tory Euro rebels who defied the Whips.
Mr Major only has a slim 21-strong majority, and with 26 rebels already known as The Unforgiven, he can never be sure of getting a controversial measure through the Commons.
Billericay MP Teresa Gorman told TODAY: ‘I fear they will try to undermine rebels in the future.
‘They will work on the weakest, and try to force them into line.’
The number of voters dissatisfied with Mr Major rocketed from 52.1 per cent to 67 per cent last month, according to a Gallup poll for the Daily Telegraph last night.
Back on song
TOP Of The Pops — facing the axe after 28 years — has been saved.
BBC entertainment chief Jim Moir announced yesterday the programme will run until at least April 1994.
‘It is Britain's most popular music show by far,’ he said.
Boost as car sales increase
SALES of new cars rose by more than eight per cent last month.
The increase, to 109,373 from 101,107 last October, came as a welcome boost to the struggling industry.
The figures — from the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders — takes this year's new car sales total to 1,406,796, just 1.8 per cent down on 1991.
Prices of Vauxhall's new cars and light vehicles will rise by an average of 3.25 per cent from November 29, the firm said yesterday.
£17m drug find
A BRITON was arrested near Rome yesterday after more than three tons of cannabis, worth £17 million, was found on his yacht.
Jonathan Pack, 31, of Ipswich, Suffolk, had been under surveillance for weeks, said Italian police.
Chipps down for rivals
BEEFCAKE dance group the Chippendales are coming under even closer scrutiny than usual — by civil servants.
The all-male strip troupe are being checked out by the Office of Fair Trading after a rival group complained about unfair practices.
Angry performers in Adonis: Men From Hollywood claim the Chippendales ban theatres where they perform from booking other similar acts for up to 12 months.
Adonis co-manager Rick Sands said: ‘We've been left with no choice but to take action.
They are paranoid about other acts and terrified of any competition, especially us.’
A spokeswoman for the Chippendales said: ‘We don't deal with the theatres direct but I have no knowledge of this at all.’
Lynn Fidler, for the Office of Fair Trading, confirmed it was investigating.
‘We have received a complaint.
The claim is that the Chippendales are abusing their dominant position,’ she said.
‘If it is proved correct, they could could be reported to the Monopolies Commission.’
I'm Keith Chegwin and I'm an alcoholic
By Liz Moore
TELEVISION celebrity Keith Chegwin mustered all his courage yesterday and told the world: ‘I'm an alcoholic’.
The once boyish, bubbly children's presenter admitted his addiction live on television in front of 2.5 million viewers.
Looking haggard, drawn, and almost close to tears, Keith, 34, said: ‘Oh God, this is the most difficult interview I've ever done in the whole of my life.
‘There's probably people out there watching who know what I'm going through.
I'm an alcoholic — that's it and I can't ever, ever drink.
‘It's a disease and people will turn around and say you can have controlled drinking and do this and that.
But for me I can't.
I can never ever touch another drink.
I just have to have one and I'm back on it.’
It was the first time that the chubby presenter, the ravages of drink clear in the dark bags under his eyes, had ever gone so far and admitted in public his total dependence.
In the past Keith, who has spent periods drying out in a clinic, has said his problems were related to overwork, stress and too much drinking.
Never before had he gone so far and labelled himself an alcoholic.
During yesterday's emotion-charged appearance on Granada's This Morning show, Keith — a self-confessed workaholic who hasn't had a holiday for eight years — told how he was terrified by his situation and the impact it might have on his career.
‘It frightens the life out of me because I fear I'll never work again.
I'm still in the early days of my recovery and that worries me.
‘I've got panto and I want to do it because I've got to pay the mortgage.
I'm just frightened because I could so easily pick up a drink.
It's a bloody pain in the backside.
‘I was in a hotel last night and I would have loved to sit in the bar and have a drink.
But I can't.
If I have one drink then I'm gone.
‘It wouldn't be a couple of gin and tonics, it would be two bottles.’
Keith told chatshow hosts Judy Finnigan and Richard Madeley how his problems started with overwork and drinking to try and relax.
‘I couldn't sleep and drink was a way of winding down.
It snowballed from then on.
I would have a drink, and another.
‘I said to myself this can't go on, you have to admit it to yourself you have a problem.
Nobody can tell you.
‘I turned round one day and admitted I had a problem and booked myself into a clinic.’
His revelation touched a nerve among viewers, many of whom phoned in to say how his courage had helped them admit their own problem for the first time.
Keith also revealed that his estranged wife, TV presenter Maggie Philbin, had given him brilliant support throughout his personal crisis.
He told viewers he longed get back with Maggie, 36, and repair their broken marriage.
‘I'd love to.
She's such a lovely woman.’
I'm Maggie and I'm proud of him
ESTRANGED wife Maggie Philbin was watching as Keith Chegwin made his TV confession.
‘It was very emotional,’ 37-year-old Maggie said after the show.
‘I feel so proud of Keith for what he has done, because it is not easy.
‘Only Keith knows whether he will continue to succeed and never fall back.
I can't say.
‘It's one thing Keith finds so frightening — an awful responsibility.
You can't pay anyone to do it for you.
‘No-one can take the responsibility away from you.
You're the one who makes that decision.’
It was in the summer of last year that Keith took the crucial step of admitting privately that he was an alcoholic.
‘I and a few close friends knew,’ Maggie said.
‘But we kept quiet until he felt able to speak about it.
‘With something like this you have to feel it's the right moment for you to talk about it.
‘It had to be Keith's decision.
He's the one who carries the responsibility for not drinking, not the doctors, not me.
‘He knew if he had said he was an alcoholic there would be an enormous amount of interest and he had to gauge when he could cope with that.’
Maggie learned of the TV confession plan last weekend, after she and Keith had taken their four-year-old daughter, Rose, for a swimming lesson.
‘I was delighted he decided to do it,’ Maggie said.
‘It's brilliant to get things out in the open.
‘Hopefully, it will help to remove the awful stigma that gets in the way of people seeking treatment.’
Can the couple get together again?
‘It's a question I can't answer,’ she said.
‘A question I refuse to be drawn on.
An impossible question.’
‘Princess of Porn’ is found dead at her home
By Cheryl Stonehouse
THE daughter of porn king Paul Raymond has died of a suspected heart attack, less than a month after splitting from her husband.
Debbie Raymond, who seemed to be winning a battle against breast cancer following a double mastectomy, was found dead at her home.
Raymond, the 36-year-old self-styled Princess of Porn, was one of the richest women in Britain, with a personal fortune estimated at £40 million.
A pipe-smoker, she was editor-in-chief of her father's eight soft-porn magazines, including Men Only and Model Directory, and was in line to inherit his £80 million publishing, property and entertainment empire.
Friends said last night 65-year-old Raymond was stricken with grief.
‘She was such a strong personality,’ said one.
‘She had been battling against cancer and had refused to let the illness get her down.
‘She was a very brave girl and everyone who knew her admired her spirit.
‘It has devastated everyone in the organisation.
She was still taking medication after her breast cancer operation but she seemed to be on top form and very bubbly and full of plans for the future.
‘She was very, very close to her father.
They had a special relationship, stronger even than the normal father-daughter relationship.
‘They lived for each other, they leaned on each other , they helped each other , they worked for each other .
Her death will be an impossible burden on Paul.’
She separated from her husband John James a month ago, just nine months after the birth of their daughter India Rose.
He still works for her father's organisation.
Her other daughter, six-year-old Fawn, is the child of rock producer and former 10CC star Duncan MacKay.
Her body was discovered by her boyfriend at her home in Swiss Cottage, north west London, and it is believed she died during the night.
Her brother Howard said: ‘We believe she might have suffered a heart attack, despite her age.’
Debbie Raymond was familiar with her father's business from the earliest age.
While still a baby, she often slept in a cot at his erotic theatre and she grew up in Soho.
She was expelled from school for being a ‘bad influence’, joined a heavy metal band and at one stage worked as a Bunny Girl for her father's biggest rival, Playboy chief Hugh Heffner.
At 19 she went into the family firm and worked her way through the ranks to become the most vehement defender of her father and his girlie magazines.
Paul Raymond's aide Carl Snitcher said last night: ‘We think Debbie died during the night.
We don't know yet exactly what happened but we believe it was a heart attack.
‘She has been taking medication but we don't know yet whether that had anything to do with it.
‘There is no suggestion of suicide or anything like that.
‘No-one here can believe she is dead, she was so bubbly.’
500 jobs go as BBC and ITV cut costs
THE BBC and Yorkshire TV are axing almost 500 jobs.
At the BBC, 149 post-production technical staff and 40 people in the costume department will go.
There may be even more job losses because each department is now run as a business with its own staff budget.
‘We will simply be more cost efficient,’ said a spokeswoman.
‘We want to free as much money for programmes as we can.’
Leeds-based Yorkshire TV, is axing 300 jobs — more than a quarter of its staff.
Manchester-based Granada, maker of Coronation Street and World In Action, is also expected to announce cuts soon.
Trapped by toxic cloud
THOUSANDS of people were ordered to stay in their homes for three hours yesterday when toxic smoke was released in a chemical plant fire.
The cloud contained particles of hydrochloric acid but initial fears that it contained a chemical used in mustard gas were later denied by bosses at the ICI works in Lostock, Cheshire.
Pupils sent home to beg
A HARD-UP primary school has sent pupils home with begging bowls — yoghurt pots for collecting coins.
The cash is needed for books and pens at the 180-pupil St Vincent's school at Altrincham, Greater Manchester.
‘It's a voluntary collection to provide basic items the council are unable to supply,’ said head Damien Carr.
Boy cleared of rape bid
A SCHOOLBOY was yesterday cleared of attempting to rape a policewoman and indecently assaulting her.
The 15-year-old, who cannot be named, claimed he was acting out a seduction scene in Home And Away when he asked her: ‘Do you want sex?’
But she over-reacted and dragged him to a south London police station.
This is home Laura
By Olga Craig and Andrew Russell
DELIGHTED transplant girl Laura Davies burst into song to celebrate a journey her parents feared she might never make yesterday.
‘Show me the way to go home’ bawled the four-year-old as she flew back to Britain five months after Pittsburgh surgeons saved her life with a 16-hour liver and bowel swop.
And TODAY really did show her the way home by persuading Captain Nick Fletcher to let her sit in the cockpit with him.
After touching down in Manchester, Laura's family wept as she dashed to her two-year-old brother and pushed a teddy into his arms.
‘I'm going home to play in my playhouse with Louis and look after him,’ she yelled.
For her parents Fran and Les, it was the day they had been waiting for.
‘All we ever wanted was for for Laura to get back to health and be able to go out and play with Louis,’ said Fran who is expecting her third child.
‘It is hard to put into words how I feel now.’
Laura is only the ninth child in the world to survive the double transplant.
Daily doses of the pioneering FK506 medicine stop her body rejecting its new organs.
Until she returns to Pittsburgh for a check-up next summer, her parents hope she can live a normal life, including starting school.
‘A year ago she was a skinny thing with no life in her,’ said Les, 42.
‘Now look at her.
It brings a lump to my throat.
We are so proud of her.’
The Davies admit they will never be able to truly thank the American doctors — or the people who helped raise £350,000 to pay for the transplant finally made possible by a £150,000 gift from King Fahd of Saudi Arabia.
‘Laura has never had a proper Christmas,’ said 26-year-old Fran, back home in Eccles.
‘This year it'll be the family Christmas I suppose everyone takes for granted.
‘That's what the Pittsburgh surgeons have given us.
That and an awful lot more.’
Sex is a real headache
SEX really is a headache for some people.
Lovers reported five to 15 minutes of intense pain during and after sex, doctors have revealed in the British Medical Journal.
Danish researchers have studied the mysterious affliction benign coital headache for 14 years.
But so far they have not found a cause or a cure.
Not a job to sniff at
FIVE hundred jobs are up for grabs — but applicants must be prepared to spend time off sick.
Researchers at the University of Wales College, Cardiff, will pay volunteers to take medication and keep a diary of their illness in their search for a cure for the common cold.
River baby on the road to recovery
TWO police officers who plucked a drowning two-year-old girl out of the River Thames told yesterday of how they thought the youngster had died.
PCs Bill Cotton and Ken McDonnell were on the scene just minutes after a woman hurled the toddler into the river.
PC Cotton, 55, a London river policeman for 19 years, said: ‘When we saw her in the water she looked like a doll.
‘She was floating face down and I thought she was dead.’
The officer gave her the kiss of life for five minutes before she showed signs of life.
Yesterday her condition had improved.
A woman was arrested later at Heathrow airport.
Eyes have it with new sight cure
SURGEONS are to start testing a technique which could cure short-sightedness in just 15 minutes.
The procedure, already tried out in America, involves implanting a minute plastic ring into the cornea.
Doctors at the Bristol Eye Hospital will start using the implant on volunteer patients soon.
Move to halve female cancer
DOCTORS aim to cut the number of women dying from cervical cancer by half this decade.
Following a critical report about screening, the Imperial Cancer Research Fund plans to tighten up the programme to catch victims earlier — saving up to 1,000 women a year.
Ties that bind us to mother
MOST men can thank their mothers for showing them how to knot a tie.
Fewer than half knew the name of the knot they used.
Just a quarter knew how to do up a bow tie.
Mr Average had up to 30 ties but wore only four regularly, said the Guild of Tie Makers.
No Marks for M & S say mums
By Ian Fletcher, Consumer Correspondent
BRITAIN'S top store chain has been voted the country's least parent-friendly shop.
High Street giant Marks & Spencer came last in a poll to find public places with the best facilities for mothers and toddlers.
Mothers complained about lack of space for buggies, heavy doors which were difficult to open, sweets near the check-out, no baby changing rooms, no toilets, unfriendly staff and small lifts.
Also on the baby hit-list were cut-price Kwiksave as the worst supermarket chain, Debenhams as worst store, Wimpy the worst restaurant and the now-defunct Dan-Air as worst airline.
The findings are from the Daily Telegraph Parent Friendly awards in support of the Tommy's Campaign to raise funds for better health care for babies.
More than 36,000 parents nominated shops, pubs and restaurants.
Sainsbury's, the Early Learning Centre toy shop and John Lewis stores topped the poll.
McDonald's came out as the most parent-friendly restaurant, with Forte as the best hotel chain.
Best airport was Gatwick and top airline was British Airways.
The best ferry award was shared by P & O and Sealink Stena.
But the place voted tops for outstanding facilities and philosophy of parent-friendliness was Swedish furniture store IKEA.
A spokeswoman for Marks & Spencer said: ‘We are carrying out a number of initiatives to improve the situation.’
Competition organiser Michele Marcus said: ‘An overwhelming number of parents nominated M & S as the least friendly retailer.
‘If you ask the staff if you can use the toilets in an emergency they're quite likely to say ‘There's a McDonald's down the road, why don't you try there?’’
Julie Dart killing: Man for trial
TOOLMAKER Michael Sams, 51, was sent for trial yesterday, accused of kidnap and murder.
Sams, of Sutton-on-Trent, Notts, was committed by Birmingham magistrates on charges of kidnapping and murdering Julie Dart, 18, and kidnapping estate agent Stephanie Slater, 25.
My heart bleeds for you, says Betty Maxwell, but I'm broke too
By Matthew Benns
CROOKED tycoon Robert Maxwell's widow wishes she could help the pensioners her husband robbed but says she has no spare money.
Betty Maxwell, 72, said: ‘My heart absolutely bleeds for those people of my age who are now suffering hardship.
‘Personally I can do nothing because I have no money myself at all.’
It was the first time she had expressed any sympathy for the Daily Mirror pensioners.
But the French-born widow does personally own a chateau believed to be worth £3 million and has found £900,000 for the legal fees of her sons Ian and Kevin.
In her first major television interview since Maxwell's death a year ago yesterday, Betty also emphatically rejected claims from Home Office pathologist Dr Iain West that her husband committed suicide.
She said there was no way her husband of 46 years would have killed himself by jumping off his luxury yacht.
Yesterday the administrators of Maxwell's private estate, estimated to be worth £8 million, revealed they had recovered only a quarter of that amount.
In the next couple of months Maxwell's wine collection and the contents of the family home, Headington Hill Hall in Oxford, will be auctioned by Sotheby's.
As she sorted through the family heirlooms in the 29-bedroom Victorian mansion in preparation, Betty said: ‘I don't want to be there when people are prying into my private belongings.
‘Somebody printed that I am one of the richest women in England.
If that was true, would I approve an auction of my personal belongings, jewellery, dishes, everything and just stand aside helpless?’ she asked during the joint Fox and Sky News interview in New York.
‘The things I brought from my family, everything is going to the creditors.
‘I need to find a job and support myself.
Otherwise what would I eat?’
Since Maxwell's death off the Canary Islands Betty has seen her sons charged with criminal offences and her husband's empire split up and sold.
The Maxwell name has been reviled by 20,000 pensioners outraged that £400 million had been pillaged from their pension funds.
Today the pensioners still do not know if they are to get any of their money but the lawyers and accountants sorting out Maxwell's affairs have so far run up a bill in excess of £30 million.
The fired foreign editor of the Daily Mirror, Nick Davies, launched his biography of Maxwell yesterday by fuelling speculation Maxwell had committed suicide.
On ITV's This Morning show he said Maxwell, upset over comments made about The European newspaper, had looked out over Holborn from his apartment and said: ‘I don't know why I don't end it all.’
He claimed the 20-stone tycoon treated his wife appallingly.
‘She would be in the room and he would dismiss her with a flick of the hand as though she were a servant.’
Davies added that at least three people knew the location of Maxwell's missing millions, which he estimated at £100 million.
But in her interview with Sky News, to be screened tonight, Betty Maxwell denied both charges.
‘If they want to keep on looking for pots of gold, an Eldorado in Liechtenstein, they are welcome.
I can't help them.
‘I don't trust anyone.
I was very naive but the last year has taught me a lot.
‘I've no idea whether my husband was a crook.
I find it very hard to explain his behaviour during the last month of his life.
He was acting very strangely, different from the way he ever acted before.
‘There are things I try to understand, for example the pension funds.
It sounds to me illegal to even try to touch somebody's future.’
But even now Betty Maxwell refuses to blame her husband.
‘The scandal lies in that the pension funds have loopholes,’ she said.
Former Maxwell director Larry Trachtenberg failed in his High Court bid yesterday to remain anonymous over proceedings brought by the Serious Fraud Office.
He had claimed his case would be prejudiced if it became known he was refusing to answer questions about Maxwell companies.
But reporting restrictions on naming him were lifted.
Together with Maxwell's sons and Robert Bunn, a finance director of Maxwell companies, he faces charges of fraud and theft.
Fur flies over libel payout
AN animal charity backed by the stars was last night on the verge of collapse after losing a libel case.
Lynx, which campaigns against the fur industry, was ordered to pay £40,000 damages to a mink farmer.
But the costs of the month-long case could reach £250,000.
Linda McCartney, Elton John, Peter Gabriel and George Michael are now supporting an emergency fund-raising campaign.
Lynx was sued after claims about conditions at a mink farm in Halifax, West Yorks, run by Ukrainian-born Leo Sawrij.
But in Leeds High Court, a vet denied the mink endured unnecessary suffering.
Lynx founding director Mark Glover said: ‘If this is justice, God help the animals.
We simply do not have the sums of money being asked.’
He said the charity was considering appealing.
DJ turned off for being rude
HUNDREDS of fans phoned a radio station yesterday to demand the reinstatement of a DJ sacked for telling a woman to shut up.
Tony Snell was escorted from the Radio City premises in Liverpool after the breakfast show bust-up.
The incident followed long-running jibes between Snell and listeners about the industrial town of Ellesmere Port, Cheshire.
One caller accused him of labelling it a hell-hole.
Snell, who has been at the station for nine years, said: ‘This woman really wound me up.
She kept talking over me so I told her to shut her face and cut her off.
‘I have been told to cool off.’
More than 600 fans rang the station to demand Snell's return.
‘This has only confirmed that Tony's show was very popular,’ said a spokeswoman last night.
As far as she knew there were no calls condemning the DJ's behaviour.
But it was too early to say whether fans would sway any decision on his future.
‘He overstepped the mark and we had no option but to suspend him,’ she said.
Barking up wrong tree
HORRIFIED families who thought toxic waste was being dumped near their homes were told: ‘Don't worry, it's only 190,000 plastic Andrex dogs.’
The alarm was raised when container lorries arrived at the rubbish tip in Redlynch, Wiltshire, to unload hundreds of mysterious plastic sacks.
Health chiefs called in to investigate were astonished to find piles of plastic puppies, all modelled on the loveable star of the famous Andrex TV adverts.
A spokesman for Wiltshire County Council explained: ‘The dogs were made in Taiwan for an Andrex promotion but when the shipment arrived at Southampton the company decided they were sub-standard.
‘Andrex refused to pay the import duty so the container company had to find a way of dumping 190,000 unwanted plastic dogs.’
All the 10-inch high dogs have now been given a decent burial at the village's Pound Bottom rubbish dump.
My hell with sexist boss
A BOSS yesterday admitted making sexist remarks to his secretary for a laugh.
Sharon Cann was forced to quit her job because of the daily torrent of abuse from John Wilson, an industrial tribunal heard.
Married Mr Wilson, 53, admitted asking newly-wed Mrs Cann if she wore underwear, making jibes about her sex life and saying women should only get jobs if they wore low-cut tops and tight skirts.
‘As far as I'm concerned these sort of things are said in every office,’ said Mr Wilson.
‘I enjoy a joke and everything I said was light hearted.
I had no idea it was upsetting her.’
Mrs Cann, 25, who quit her job at the Unilift forklift company in Rumney, Cardiff, after two years, said: ‘I couldn't take it any more.
I enjoy office banter but this was ridiculous.
I often left in tears.’
Her husband worked away from home a lot, the Cardiff hearing heard.
‘Mr Wilson was always asking if I was having an affair,’ she said.
Mrs Cann, of Llanrumney, Cardiff, claims sexual discrimination.
The hearing continues.
Cliff parachutist drowns
A PARASCENDER drowned last night after being blown into the sea during a flight from cliffs.
The man got trapped under his parachute when it hit the water at Holywell Bay, Newquay, Cornwall.
Windsurfers got him ashore, but attempts to revive him failed.
Pit demo miner in gun siege
By Ian Key
A MINER armed with a pistol staged a nine-hour protest sit-in yesterday at a pit threatened with closure.
Father-of-three Russell Telford, 29, forced the pit-cage operator to let him into the lift.
But operator Peter Moran, 40, stopped the cage 25ft down and raised the alarm.
Armed police were called to Markham Main, near Doncaster, South Yorkshire, where 730 men are due to lose their jobs.
Union official Steve Taylor began trying to negotiate.
Mr Telford, of Wheatley, Doncaster, could hear appeals to give himself up — but his replies were drowned by the noise of air rushing down the shaft.
Later a microphone was lowered to him.
Mr Telford, who took redundancy from Markham Main four years ago, was out of work until he got a job at Rossington colliery, Doncaster.
But when British Coal announced new shutdowns, he was out of work again.
During hours of talks, Mr Telford demanded the release of a statement in which he explained he was staging an independent protest at pit closures.
He had chosen November 5 as a traditional day of civil disturbance.
When the statement had been issued, Mr Telford allowed his pistol to be hauled up on a rope.
Then he returned to the surface and was arrested.
It was not known last night if he would be charged.
His mother Brenda Telford, said: ‘My lad was pushed over the edge.
All he wants is to work.’
Chase man stabbed
A MAN was stabbed in the stomach yesterday after chasing two suspected car thieves.
The victim was attacked after spotting the men acting suspiciously at 3.25am outside his house in Bracknell, Berks.
He staggered home and raised the alarm.
He was treated at the Royal Berkshire Hospital and later released.
Nigel Lawson sells home
NIGEL Lawson, who as Chancellor presided over the property boom and bust, has finally sold his home after two years on the market.
after two years on the market-after reducing the price by 25 per cent and waiting nearly two years.
He put the Old Rectory at Stoney Stanton, Blaby, Leicestershire, on the market for £325,000 in 1990 but it sold for £239,000 — a 25 per cent drop.
Dave Stewart
MUSICIAN Dave Stewart owes his £70 million fortune to school bullies.
‘I nearly had a nervous breakdown when I was 13,’ the 36-year-old former Eurythmic revealed yesterday.
‘One good thing to come out of it was that it inspired me to play guitar and turned me into the person I am.’
I'm my Dad youth is given loan
BANK staff failed to spot the age difference when 26-year-old Kenneth Wilby posed as his father.
Wilby was interviewed by an assistant his own age before being granted a £2,500 loan in the name of his father William, 49.
He Wilby, of Barnsley, South Yorks, provided the bank with his father's pay slips as proof of identity, magistrates in Barnsley, South Yorks, were told yesterday.
John Dobbin, defending, said the interviewer ‘should have expected someone the age of her own father’.
Instead, Wilby left the Midland Bank in Barnsley with a £2,500 cheque account, which he used to buy a car.
The fraud was uncovered when William Wilby received a letter saying he was overdrawn on an account he knew nothing about.
Wilby, a divorced father-of-three, from Barnsley, admitted obtaining money by deception and was given a 180-hour community service order.
Train hits getaway van
A TRAIN carrying 16 people smashed into a thief's getaway van abandoned on a level-crossing.
No one was hurt in the crash, which caused thousands of pounds damage to the train and destroyed the Ford Transit.
Police found stolen property nearby, between Darlington and Bishop Auckland, Co Durham.
The track was shut for 10 hours.
A man was being questioned last night.
Bad diet of TV
TV COMPANIES have been attacked for targeting children with ads for fatty and sugary foods.
The National Consumer Council said that during peak Saturday morning viewing the same sweetened cereal was advertised eight times in four hours.
It wants guidelines on the frequency of such commercials, and questioned whether the ads should be directed at children at all.
Lost in a jog
FOUR Russian dancers holidaying at Cobham Hall in Kent got lost on a jog and ended up 50 miles away.
The 15-year-olds were offered a lift, but the only English word they knew was Cobham.
And the only place the driver knew with that name was in Surrey.
Police, alerted to four Russians running around trying to find a stately hall, rounded them up and solved the mystery with the help of an interpreter.
Bunglers of the Bailey
By Stephen Farrell
A MURDER suspect used the Old Bailey's £1 million high-tech security system to help him escape.
As he stepped into the court's exit cubicle and a door locked automatically behind him, paranoid schizophrenic Clive Wells cheekily waved goodbye to the three psychiatric nurses guarding him.
The nurses watched helpless as the time-delay system — designed to stop prisoners escaping — allowed him into the lobby and on to freedom.
Judge Henry Pownall was yesterday told the 47-year-old was still on the run.
He was forced to abandon Wells's murder trial which began on Monday.
Wells is accused of horrifically stabbing 65-year-old Joseph Maguire, his neighbour in a London hostel.
Michael Sayers, prosecuting, told the judge: ‘There is little point in calling the defendant.’
He explained Wells was placed into the care of three nurses from a secure unit at Friern Barnet hospital in North London.
They allowed him through the security system first, leaving them trapped behind the time-lock doors as he made good his escape.
‘He turned and waved goodbye to the three men.
They were powerless to go after him.
They had to wait to go through the time lock machine.
By the time they had gone through he had disappeared.’
Mr Sayers added: ‘Very sensibly the public have been warned that he is extremely dangerous and should not be approached.’
The judge was then told by defence lawyer Rock Tansey that Wells's mental condition would seriously deteriorate if he does not receive his medication.
He said Wells's escape would prejudice the juries.
Two juries had been sworn in — one to decide if Wells's mental condition made him unfit to stand trial for murder.
The other to try the facts of the murder.
The judge discharged both juries.
A senior officer said afterwards: ‘The facts behind the escape are farcical.
If it was not so serious it would be laughable.
‘One nurse should have gone into the security system first.
Then he would not have been able to escape.
I am astonished by their incompetence.’
It later emerged that Wells escaped being recaptured.
He jumped on a bus outside the Old Bailey and injured himself when he fell off in North London.
He was taken to Homerton Hospital for treatment but while waiting in the casualty department he heard a news flash about his escape and fled.
Sales boost for car industry
SALES of new cars rose by more than eight per cent last month.
The increase, to 109,373 from 101,107 last October, was the highest monthly rise since April and came as a welcome boost to the struggling industry.
The figures — from the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders — takes this year's new car sales total to 1,406,796, just 1.8 per cent down on 1991.
Prices of Vauxhall's new cars and light vehicles will rise by an average of 3.25 per cent from November 29.
The firm blamed the Sterling devaluation for the price rise.
Lou Macari
SOCCER boss Lou Macari, above, was cleared yesterday of running an illegal betting shop.
The Stoke City manager, 43, was accused of operating a shop in Swindon, Wilts, without a permit after his partner walked out.
But Devizes magistrates decided Roy Heaney gave Mr Macari a verbal undertaking that his licence could be used.
Joyriders run down wheelchair mother
JOYRIDERS mowed down and killed a disabled woman in her invalid carriage yesterday.
Mrs Olwyn Jones, 61, was on her way to visit her daughter in Walsall, West Midlands, when the stolen Austin Maestro crashed into her three-wheel carriage.
Three youths scrambled out of the car and ran off, leaving her dying in the road.
‘She took the full impact of the car,’ said police superintendent Roger Dixon.
‘She stood no chance.
Her injuries were terrible.’
Mrs Jones, a mother of four, had heart trouble and could hardly walk.
‘She was a frail old woman,’ her son Christopher, 25, said yesterday.
‘Her carriage was the only way she could get out.’
Within an hour of the crash, neighbours on the Yew Tree council estate had rounded up a youth suspected of being involved.
Two other youths walked into the local police station later.
Neighbour Mrs Gloria Hunt, 49, said: ‘We all used to wave as Olwyn rode past.
‘People here are very angry.
I'm amazed someone hasn't already lynched the kids we think responsible.’
Three youths were being questioned by police last night.
Divorce me from mum
By Ian Key
AN 11-year-old who dreams of being ‘a little girl, not a little mother’ wants to divorce her parents.
Bubbly schoolgirl Claire says she's had enough of the Cinderella lifestyle forced on her by her natural mother and wants to live with her former foster parents.
Day after day, Claire had to dress her baby sister, feed her and even change her nappies.
Eventually she wrote to a social worker and, under the new Children's Act, is seeking to divorce her parents.
When she was two, Claire was taken from her family home in Leeds, West Yorkshire, after allegedly being physically abused by her father.
After three years fostered to a kindly couple who treated her as their own, she went back to live with her mother.
She was brought up with her brother, now 14, and younger sisters now aged nine, three and nine months.
She continued to visit her former foster parents and even went on holiday to Spain with them.
But things at home became more and more difficult.
Instead of spending her time growing up, she was often left to look after her brother and sisters, particularly the baby.
‘She was feeding it, changing it and dressing it,’ said her solicitor Alistair Babbington yesterday.
‘It was intolerable.
Her mother was putting all the responsibility on her.’
Child law expert Mr Babbington said: ‘She is a bright girl and knew exactly what she wanted.
‘She wanted to be doing things like playing on her home computer rather than looking after the rest of the family.
‘As far as I'm concerned, her mother exploited her.’
When the case went to court Claire's solicitor was granted an order allowing her to live with her foster parents until a full hearing.
For legal reasons neither the girl's identity nor that of her mother or foster parents can be revealed.
Claire's mother, in her late 20s, will contest the case when it gets to court later this year.
She said: ‘It's a nightmare.
You don't go through pregnancy to find that 11 years later your child wants to divorce its parents.’
Her solicitor, James Littlehales said: ‘She's very very distressed and finds it very difficult to understand how her daughter could do such a thing.
‘It's a sad and unusual case for all concerned but the mother is determined to fight tooth and nail.’
The date for the final court hearing will be decided next week.
Trapped in a frozen body
A MAN paralysed by a rare disease told yesterday of his three years trapped in his frozen body.
Norman Dale, 50, was struck down as he tried to pick up a cup of tea.
‘That was the last thing I did for more than three years,’ said Norman, who was a coppersmith at GEC in Manchester.
‘After that I was just lying down in a hospital bed.’
But yesterday he celebrated as he was allowed back to his Manchester home for the first time.
Still partially paralysed by the brain disease Guillain-Barre syndrome, he can only speak with the aid of an artificial voice box.
He praised his wife Wyn who visited him every day and held his hand as he was treated in three different hospitals.
‘I would never have made it home if it wasn't for Wyn, she's been fantastic,’ said Norman.
Wyn, who welcomed her husband home with giant banners and a party, said: ‘All his mental faculties are there and his mind is as lively as ever.’
Schoolgirl's dead baby in a locker
THE body of a new-born baby was found yesterday in a locker at a girls' grammar school.
It had been hidden by the mother, a 16-year-old pupil who kept her pregnancy secret even from her parents.
Police were called to Highsted Girls' Grammar School at Sittingbourne, Kent.
The girl was given a medical.
‘She had convinced herself it wasn't happening,’ headmistress Mrs Jill Lambert said.
Club bars sex change Angelina
FITNESS enthusiast Angelina Arnott was turned away from a women's health club because she used to be a man.
Sex change Angelina, 35, was told she would embarrass other women if she joined keep-fit classes in Birmingham.
She now wants to sue the owners over the ‘humiliating’ ordeal.
But a club spokesman said: ‘Several people complained about her coming to the club so we had to do something.
She is well known in this area.’
Nino Firetto
TV presenter Nino Firetto told yesterday how he saved an old man from two car-kicking thugs.
Nino, 35, of ITV's The Big E, hooted to stop the thugs attacking the man's car at Richmond, west London.
So they kicked Nino's car and caused £600 damage.
A man has been remanded on damage charges.
Dr Robert Jones
DR Robert Jones, who was repeatedly quizzed after the murder of his wife Diane in 1983, yesterday began an appeal against the General Medical Council's decision to suspend him over an alleged improper examination of a patient in Coggeshall, Essex.
The Privy Council hearing continues.
Freephone, courtesy of the police
BT customers got free telephone calls for six months because the police were paying their bills.
Thames Valley Police forked out thousands of pounds on line rentals and calls for 60 customers after giving the company out-of-date records.
The former police houses had been sold to the public but no one told BT.
Householders in Reading, Aldershot and Oxford will have to pay up as BT reimburses the police.
A company spokesman said: ‘We're trying to sort it out.’
Major turns again
By Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
PREMIER John Major executed yet another U-turn over Europe yesterday — and faced a new row with rebel backbenchers.
He went back on the last-minute promise to them to delay the ratification of the Maastricht Treaty.
His pledge to wait until after a new Danish referendum won over just enough wavering Tories for a Government victory in Wednesday's Commons debate.
But it also triggered outrage in Europe that there would be no British decision for another year.
Embattled Mr Major did manage to avert an immediate world trade war.
He forced EC chief Jacques Delors, who had blocked a deal between the US and Europe, into a climbdown.
The suggestion that the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh have been anything but supportive and sympathetic is untrue and particularly hurtful — Statement by the Princess of Wales
By Charles Rae
IT WAS just a 53-word statement.
But the repercussions shook the Royal Family to the core yesterday.
Princess Diana — only hours back from her ill-fated tour to Korea with her husband — suddenly contacted the Press Association news agency.
Her message was short and to the point.
It said: ‘The Princess of Wales would like to single out from the recent wave of misleading reports about the Royal Family assertions in some newspapers this week directed specifically against the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh.
‘The suggestion that they have been anything other than sympathetic and supportive is untrue and particularly hurtful.’
The Palace was quick to add that Prince Charles ‘warmly endorsed’ the statement.
However, the sudden intervention of the princess herself in the speculation about her marriage raised more questions than it answered.
Royal authors and experts were today asking: Why did Diana break her silence?
The words and their phrasing left no doubt that the princess had been placed under considerable pressure to speak out publicly for the first time since her marriage to Prince Charles.
Yet several points emerged from her statement.
FIRST: Palace chiefs are known to be particularly upset after it was reported the Queen ordered the princess to accompany Prince Charles on the tour of Korea.
Royal sources believe Diana was forced to make the statement in an attempt to apologise to their Korean hosts that the visit had made headlines because of continued strife in the couple's marriage.
SECOND: It is also known the Palace is furious over new revelations in Andrew Morton's updated book Diana: Her True Story.
The book reveals an the exchange of acrimonious letters between Diana and her father-in-law.
However, the book does not make it clear where the information about the existence of the letters came from.
The Palace believes that information could only have come from the princess's office.
THIRD: The statement adds to speculation about the state of the couple's marriage.
It pointedly says that the Queen and Duke of Edinburgh had been supportive and sympathetic to the couple.
While it remains unclear what they were offering support about, it is certain they were helping the couple through their continuing marriage crisis.
Diana was obviously under considerable strain throughout the Korean tour, looking grumpy and unhappy to be with her husband.
Only when she was undertaking solo engagements did she appear to come alive.
The pressure on her increased when half-way through the tour she learned the child of one of her closest friends had died suddenly.
She will today attend the funeral of the 11-month-old son of one of her closest friends, former flatmate Laura Londsdale.
Baby Louis was found dead at the family's home in Wantage, Oxon, on Tuesday.
Diana issued yesterday's surprise statement knowing that she would be making a public appearance with senior members of the Royal Family at the Remembrance Day service tomorrow.
First reaction from royal observers was amazement that she should have gone public at this stage.
One said: ‘By saying what she has said, one can only draw the conclusion that she turned to the Queen and the Duke because her marriage is in trouble and she is desperately unhappy.
‘If she had wanted to scotch the rumours completely she could have said the reports that her marriage is in difficulties are untrue.
‘Instead she has, in effect, admitted that the problems have obviously been a major topic of conversation at the highest level.’
Andrew Morton has always claimed his book was written with the help of Diana's friends — not the princess herself.
But he reveals that at a crisis meeting at Balmoral a deal was discussed between Charles, Diana, the Queen and Prince Philip.
The Queen, says Morton, ‘convinced’— not ordered — Diana that she should visit Korea with her husband.
In that way, she argued, speculation about the marriage would be dampened rather than intensified.
And in an interview with ITN last night Morton said he had made it ‘quite clear’ in the new chapter of his book that the Queen had been sympathetic towards Diana.
He assumed that after the letter from the Duke of Edinburgh, the princess and her father-in-law had subsequently ‘patched up their differences.’
But after the extensive reports this week the Queen's plan was left in ruins.
Friends of Morton said: ‘We are convinced the princess has come under unbelievable pressure to issue this statement.
‘The Palace at the highest level is very angry at the damage done to the Korean trip and the wrong impression given that the Queen ordered Diana to go.’
Royal expert Margaret Holder said: ‘This is a vague and crazy statement.
All it does is answer nothing and demands answers to a whole host of other questions.
‘It seems to be another public relations blunder by Buckingham Palace.
‘And the most stark example of it all is the phrase that the Queen and Prince Philip had been sympathetic and supportive.
‘One can only believe they had been sympathetic and supportive over Diana's marriage problems.
‘The other point which is missing from the statement is that she does not deny that her marriage to Prince Charles is in trouble.’
The Korean tour was a public relations disaster with the highlight clearly being the apparent failure of the prince and princess to acknowledge each other 's presence in public.
But the Palace indicated yesterday that the high profile visit to a country which enjoys close trading links with the UK and in which 57,000 British troops fought against communists in the early 1950s had achieved its aim of strengthening relations.
Senior sources at the Palace were playing down any talk of it being a disaster, pointing to more sympathetic coverage in South Korean newspapers.
The Korean trip was the ideal opportunity for Diana and Charles to put on a united front and quash the speculation over their marriage.
Reporters and photographers faithfully recorded the images presented to them — of a couple who smiled and carried out their duties professionally, but barely exchanged a word, a touch or glance.
As newspapers claimed the princess was undertaking the visit against her will, a Palace spokesman said: ‘We have no intention of dignifying any of this speculation going on at the moment by making any comment.’
Then a senior Palace aide on the trip admitted in an exchange with journalists that the marriage was in difficulty.
The main facts of Morton's book have never been disputed.
Royal watchers said it was significant that Diana had not mentioned Morton by name, nor had she referred to the main allegations in his book.
‘This is a girl who has been crying out for help,’ one aide said.
‘That's what Morton was saying.
Now the princess is claiming much of that help came from the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh.
‘Her friends will be surprised that the Duke has been coupled in this way with the Queen.
‘But they have always said that the Queen has remained very friendly and helpful to Diana through her illness and her marriage problems.
‘Apparently you can say anything you like about Charles and Diana and their marriage but criticise the Queen or the Duke in anyway and denials start to run.’
The claim that Diana had to be ordered to go to Korea particularly upset the Korean hosts.
Sources close to the princess were also upset by stories that she had suffered another bout of bulimia nervosa, the binge-eating disorder.
They said the claims were untrue.
But no one newspaper was singled out for criticism over coverage of the tour.
Anguish of princess at friend's cot death
PRINCESS Diana will today attend the funeral of the baby son of one of her closest friends.
Laura Lonsdale, who is also one of Princess Diana's occasional Ladies-in-Waiting and a former flatmate, discovered her only son Louis, aged 11 months, had died on Tuesday morning at her country home in Kinston Lisle, near Wantage.
She is believed to have discovered his body when she walked into his bedroom at around 7.30am as usual.
Doctors believe Louis died from Cot Death Syndrome, which claimed the life of TV presenter Anne Diamond's son last year.
The news was broken to Diana late on Tuesday night, more than 24 hours into her controversial tour of South Korea with Prince Charles.
A spokesman said: ‘She was obviously deeply upset but still felt able to continue with her duties the following day.’
Within hours of the news Diana was on the telephone trying to comfort her heartbroken friend, married to former Royal Navy lieutenant James Lonsdale, 34.
They have two daughters, Leonora aged six, who is Diana's god-daughter and Rosanna, aged three.
A close friend revealed yesterday the princess leant her support to Laura in an ‘intimate’ conversation.
The friend said: ‘That call out of the blue meant so much to Laura.
‘She appreciates how busy Diana is but this shows just how loyal she is to her friends.
‘When you consider the difficulties Diana has it speaks volumes that all she could think about was someone else.
‘Diana's few kinds words meant so much to Laura at probably the most difficult time in her life.’
Service
The family announced the death in The Times.
The poignant message in the deaths column read: LONSDALE — Louis, on November 3rd 1992, tragically in his cot aged 11 months.
Darling little boy of Jamie and Laura, beloved brother of Leonora and Rosanna.
The funeral service today at the church of St John the Baptist on the edge of the Lonsdale estate is just a week before Louis was due to celebrate his first birthday.
Princess Diana and Laura have been firm friends since their early teens.
Laura, 31, went to school with Diana and when the Princess moved into her flat in Cadogan Place, in London, Laura was one of her first flatmates.
Sharing the flat with them were Anne Bolton, who married and moved to Australia, Carolyn Pride, who later married brewer William Bartholomew and Virginia Pitman, who married Henry Clarke in the City.
In the evenings they would mix with a lively group of well placed young men who would act as escorts for trips to the cinema, theatre and to trendy restaurants.
But over the years Laura has always been one of Diana's closest confidantes.
She turned up when Laura was married in 1984 and she stood at the back of the church because she did not want to detract from the bride's big day.
Laura's twin brother, Sunday Times journalist Geordie Greig, flew back from America yesterday to comfort the family and handle inquiries.
Standing on the doorstep of the family's Georgian mansion house, Mr Greig said: ‘Louis brought great joy and happiness to our family and all those who knew him.
‘He was deeply loved and will be greatly missed.
‘Jamie and Laura are obviously devastated.
They're very upset and don't want to talk at the moment.
‘It was just a very tragic cot death, completely inexplicable or understandable.
‘Princess Diana has sent her condolences.’
Back down or get out, Major warns Delors
By Eben Black, Political Correspondent
JACQUES Delors received a head-banging yesterday from his limousine and Premier John Major.
The President of the EC Commission was given a tongue-lashing from Mr Major and told to drop his objections to a world trade deal or be sacked.
And, on his way to meet the Prime Minister, Mr Delors bumped his head on the car waiting for him at Heathrow.
It was a fitting symbol of how Mr Delors, accused of blocking a pact between Europe and the US, has been humiliated.
After his lunchtime lecture from a furious Mr Major, he agreed a joint statement calling for talks to re-start immediately.
The Premier's success in his role as President of the European Community came as America prepared to carry out threats of trade sanctions on EC imports.
The US authorities are planning to slap 200 per cent tariffs on EC wine and other products — plunging the two sides into a bitter trade war.
Getting negotiations on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade — the Gatt talks — back on the road is a timely boost to Mr Major's flagging reputation.
A successful conclusion would boost the world economy by £200 billion.
Mr Delors, who harbours ambitions of succeeding President Mitterrand as French head of state, was under fire from all sides in Europe yesterday for his role in the breakdown of the Chicago talks.
EC negotiator Ray MacSharry quit, claiming the Frenchman vetoed an accord just before it was to be signed on Tuesday.
The row centres on subsidies to French farmers — whose votes are vital if Delors hopes to make it to the French Presidency.
Mr Delors yesterday tried to deny scuppering the agreement.
‘I have always expressed my solidarity with my colleagues,’ he said.
Mr MacSharry added: ‘As far as I am concerned an agreement could be signed in five minutes.’
Tory HQ jobs threat
By Cheryl Stonehouse
UP to 40 jobs look set to be axed at the cash-strapped Tory Central Office.
The 165 staff have also been told to use buses instead of taxis and cut down on phone calls to clear a £15 million overdraft.
Party chairman Sir Norman Fowler is also said to be considering renting out part of the building in Westminster.
Donations to party coffers are drying up as bankruptcies rise and businesses cut back on unnecessary expense, depriving the Tories of their traditional support.
‘It's just good housekeeping,’ said a spokeswoman last night.
‘Like every other organisation we're having to cut costs.’
The party still owes advertising agency Saatchi & Saatchi £3 million for its election campaign work.
Hopes rise for 1% cut in base rates
A FURTHER one per cent drop in interest rates is expected to be announced by Chancellor Norman Lamont before his Autumn Statement on Thursday.
The cut to seven per cent forms part of John Major's growth package designed to propel Britain out of recession.
One firm crashes every 18 minutes
A TOTAL of 76 firms a day — one every 18 minutes — is going to the wall, a new business survey reveals.
The report by the British Chambers of Commerce dashes hopes of an early upturn in the economy.
More than 7,000 firms went under in the three months to September — the highest number since the recession began.
What shape is a Eurocumber?
A CUCUMBER isn't a cucumber — and won't count towards the EC cucumber crop — unless it's the correct colour (green) and has the right amount of curve, according to European Commission rules.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd yesterday cited the cucumber clause as an example of the ‘Euro-lunacy’ which afflicts Brussels.
TV presenters off the air after bust-up
TWO of BSkyB's senior presenters were off air last night after a spectacular bust-up.
Martial arts expert Scott Chisholm and Chris Mann were on leave following Wednesday night's row at the west London studios.
New Zealander Chisholm has is expected to be off work for two weeks.
Mann, 34, was treated in the Whittington Hospital near his Highgate, north London home after the clash.
The hospital confirmed he spent 40 minutes having his injuries examined.
He refused to comment on reports of the clash.
‘I am taking four days off to spend with my wife and young baby,’ he said.
Chisholm's wife said last night he was ‘working off steam’ at his local gymnasium.
An internal inquiry is expected.
Disgraced tycoon held
FALLEN tycoon Asil Nadir was arrested in London yesterday during a police inquiry into missing company funds.
The former chairman of collapsed trading group Polly Peck is already on £3.5 million bail after being charged with theft and false accounting by the Serious Fraud Office last December.
Nadir, 50, was released without charge.
Rapist attacks woman in car
A SMARTLY dressed man dragged a woman off the street into his car and raped her, police said last night.
The 44-year-old victim was attacked from behind after she parked her car in Marylebone, West London, and walked away.
‘After the rape he pushed her out and drove off,’ said a Scotland Yard spokesman.
Hell hath no fury..
OTHER spurned wives have taken public revenge on their husbands.
Newsreader Sandy Gall woke one morning to find his golf clubs, suits and a case of expensive wine on his mistress's doorstep.
His wife Eleanor snapped in the summer of 1991 over his affair with widow Georgina Gillan but all bitterness is now forgotten and they are together again.
Friends of Eleanor, 52, said: ‘Eleanor had known about Sandy's friendship for two years but she decided enough was enough.’
In May Lady Sarah Moon got revenge on her husband with wine as well.
She delivered cases of her husband's vintage collection to the doorsteps of neighbours in Berkshire early one morning.
She also slashed the sleeves of his £1,000 Savile Row suits and splashed five litres of white paint over his prized BMW.
At the time Lady Moon, 54, said: ‘It was all so easy and it gave me a hell of a buzz, better than drugs.
‘My reaction was to hit him where it hurts, you are not with some for 27 years without knowing that.’
Scorned girlfriend Kathryn George Harries, 29, wreaked her revenge at the home of her 75-year-old lover after suspecting him of being unfaithful.
Her three-hour wrecking spree included ripping up carpets and rugs, throwing raw eggs at the wall, cutting his entire wardrobe to ribbons and destroying his four-poster bed.
She was given a six month jail sentence.
Jilted wife takes ram-raid revenge on husband's Merc
By Liz Moore
THE estranged wife of a cheating council boss told last night how she took his £22,000 Mercedes and rammed it into the front doors of the town hall where he works.
Mother-of-two Elaine Friend's patience snapped when she discovered her husband's affair with a housing officer in Gosport, Hants.
In the dead of night Elaine, 28, drove the sparkling H-reg car from outside the home of her husband's lover, through a pedestrian precinct and into the town hall's glass-fronted main entrance.
‘The noise was astronomical,’ she said.
‘It sounded like a ram-raid.
‘I backed the car out and drove past the police station.
The car sounded horrific but it still worked.’
Elaine then dumped the battered car near a golf course and walked home.
She planned to say nothing about her ram-raid revenge — but contacted police to confess when they appealed for witnesses.
‘They were fantastic and said they understood.
‘I felt sick and ashamed but I was happy to face what I had done.’
Elaine and Michael, 50, married after a whirlwind romance in July 1991.
‘I was living in a council flat with two young children and I went to see the housing boss, which was him, to ask for a bigger place.
‘He rang me up that same evening and asked me out for a drink.’
Four days later he proposed.
The couple and Elaine's children James, six, and Francesca, three, moved in to a £100,000 home near Gosport.
Mr Friend, now the £50,000-a-year council chief executive, showered her with luxuries including a new car and a horse.
But the pressure soon began to tell and a year after their marriage three-times wed Mr Friend left.
He moved into a flat 100 yards away and remained a frequent visitor.
But Elaine's temper flared when she spotted Mr Friend in his Merc with a woman — and later saw his car outside her house late at night.
‘I shouldn't say it but revenge is sweet,’ she said.
‘And if I have to pay up for the Mercedes at £1 a week for the rest of my life then that's what I will do.’
Mr Friend said: ‘The matter is in the hands of the police.’
Police confirmed they were investigating.
Man held over 1975 sex murder
A MAN was arrested yesterday over the murder of schoolgirl Lesley Molseed 17 years ago.
Police reopened the file on the 1975 killing after Stephan Kiszko was cleared of the crime by the Court of Appeal after serving 16 years of a life sentence.
The divorced man was arrested yesterday as he left Armley jail, near Leeds, after serving six years over the kidnapping of a young Midlands girl.
He is one of several questioned since Mr Kiszko was freed.
Eleven-year-old Lesley vanished at Rochdale, Greater Manchester and was found three days later stabbed to death.
Maggie might..
ALCOHOLIC Keith Chegwin and his estranged wife Maggie Philbin yesterday refused to say if they were getting back together.
But the couple did not rule out the possibility after 34-year-old Cheggers' TV confession of his illness on Thursday.
Tomorrow's World presenter Maggie, 36, said: ‘One thing we have learned from alcoholism is that you never know what's going to happen.’
Brightman's jealous beau
THE on-stage chemistry between Sarah Brightman and her latest leading man Jason Connery led to a warning phone call from her boyfriend.
Jason told Granada TV's This Morning that the unnamed man was worried about love scenes in the play Trelawney Of The Wells.
He said: ‘He phoned me and asked ‘What is going on with you and Sarah?’.
I denied anything was, then he told me ‘Just be careful’.’
Street treat
CORONATION Street fans are to get a Christmas box of nostalgia, tracking the lives of favourite characters.
The show will be hosted by Judy Finnigan.
Lovejoy's love goes for a song
A BID for chart success by Lovejoy star Ian McShane has been inspired by his wife's battle against breast cancer.
He is releasing an album of love songs, From Both Sides Now, on Monday to mark the happiest moments of his 12-year marriage to actress Gwen Humble.
Ian, 49, told friends: ‘It may sound sloppy but the two of us will be able to sit down at home and have a jolly good cuddle listening to this.’
American Gwen is hoping for the all-clear in the New Year after chemotherapy.
Producer of Killing Fields dies
FILM producer Mark Rosenberg, who made Oscar winner The Killing Fields, had a heart attack and died yesterday.
He was 44.
Rosenberg was filming Flesh And Bone, in Stanton, Texas, for Warner Brothers with Spring Creek Productions, a company he started with his wife Paula Weinstein.
In 1985 Rosenberg entered a partnership with Sydney Pollack and their productions included Presumed Innocent, The Fabulous Baker Boys and Bright Lights, Big City.
The Killing Fields, made in 1984, was nominated for six Academy Awards and picked up honours for best supporting actor, photography and editing.
Child divorce court probe
A TEENAGER who wants to ‘divorce’ her parents was made a ward of court yesterday.
High Court Judge Sir Stephen Brown ordered an investigation into the 14-year-old's best interests.
The youngster, from Ilford, east London, moved in with her 18-year-old boyfriend's family in Guildford, Surrey in the summer.
The girl did not like her father and was upset when her divorced parents got back together.
Inquiry into 999 blunders
THE breakdown of the London ambulance computer is to be officially investigated, Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley told MPs yesterday.
The probe was aimed at restoring public confidence in the service, she said.
The move follows the breakdown of the 999 system which, it is claimed, led to a number of deaths.
The three-month inquiry will be led by Don Page, chief executive of the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service.
Screen test conman jailed
A HEARTLESS cheat who ripped off dozens of young screen hopefuls by charging £45 for bogus film auditions was yesterday jailed for 2.5 years.
Clive Rigarlsford, 32, advertised for children and adults to apply for parts in two non existent films.
They found only an empty shop when they turned up at Star Cast Promotions, Inner London Crown Court heard.
Rigarlsford, of Bromley, South east London, admitted fraud.
Out of line
POLICEMAN Brian Yinger has been suspended and ordered to take psychiatric tests because he writes the figure seven with a line through the downstroke.
‘It was confusing for the typist,’ said police chief Robert Deziel of Dearborn, Michigan.
Jilted Gulf hero ‘went berserk’
GULF War hero Paul Butler, who saw two pals killed in the American ‘friendly fire’ attack, went berserk when he heard his wife had left him for another man.
Royal Fusilier Butler, 23, wrecked a flat in Bolton, Greater Manchester, where his wife Joanne, 24, and six-week-old daughter Amanda lived with Alan Murphy, 28.
Murphy threw boiling water over him, but was punched to the floor, Manchester Crown Court heard yesterday.
The soldier shoved a thunderflash in Murphy's mouth.
Murphy pulled it out but Butler pushed another one in, but didn't set it off.
Butler, of Averton, near Manchester, admitted aggravated burglary.
He was jailed for two years.
Teenagers get pounding in their pockets
TEENAGERS are having to bear their share of the slump through pocket-money cuts.
Their cash has fallen from an average £4.20 a week last year to £4, a survey reveals today.
The pay cuts were highlighted by researchers for for the Halifax Building Society who quizzed 4,000 youngsters aged 12 to 16.
Worst-hit is the South east, with an average £3.80 — £1.40 down.
London parents pay best with an average £4.80.
Second best is Scotland at £4.50.
Fixed home loans
HOMEBUYERS can set their mortgage rate into the next century under a new scheme launched by a building society yesterday.
For a limited time the Abbey National is offering 8.65 per cent— 9.4 per cent APR — fixed until the year 2000.
Drug session killed £80m porn heiress
By Christian Gysin and Tracey Kandohla
PORN heiress Debbie Raymond is thought to have been killed by a cocktail of drinks and drugs, it emerged last night.
The body of the 36-year-old multi millionairess was found on Thursday by boyfriend Ainsley Tree at his north London home.
Debbie had spent the evening snorting cocaine and drinking, say police.
She was taken to the Royal Free Hospital in Hampstead but was dead on arrival.
‘We won't know for a couple of days but everything points to her having used large amounts of cocaine,’ a senior detective told TODAY.
‘We are also waiting for results which could confirm that a fair amount of alcohol was taken.’
Mr Tree was quizzed by detectives trying to discover how much of the drug she had taken.
Debbie's tycoon father Paul Raymond, 67, is trying to come to terms with his daughter's death.
‘I'm a tough, tough guy but I've been crying my eyes out all day,’ he said.
‘I'm absolutely distraught.
‘She had all the money in the world, a beautiful house, beautiful kids, beautiful cars.
She had everything.
‘It is the most awful thing that could ever happen to me.
I am too upset to talk.’
Debbie, editor-in-chief of porn magazines including Men Only, was being groomed to take over her father's £80 million publishing and property business, including the Raymond Revuebar in London's Soho.
Expelled from public school for drinking and smoking, she joined her father's empire 10 years ago after failing in showbusiness as a singer.
Her personal fortune was recently estimated at £37 million.
She split from husband John James four weeks ago.
He helped her in a two-year battle against cancer and to come to terms with her double mastectomy.
Mr James, who also works for the Raymond organisation, spent the day with their 10-month-old daughter India Rose and step-daughter Fawn, Debbie's daughter with former 10cc musician Duncan Mackay.
He drove to his former 16th century cottage home in Chobham, Surrey, after hearing of his wife's death.
He was joined there later by Debbie's father and they strolled around the beautiful gardens together.
‘Her death is a terrible waste,’ Mr James told TODAY.
Tony Smith, 43, Debbie's personal assistant and housekeeper for four years, said: ‘We are all absolutely devastated.’
Ken's a monster
KENNETH Branagh is to star in a remake of Mary Shelley's classic horror tale Frankenstein.
Branagh will play Victor Frankenstein and direct the £25 million Tri-Star film which, will be filmed in England next year.
Golf boys hit hole in one double
TWO young golf partners hit holes-in-one at the same hole on the same round.
Tony Hilton, 12, was still celebrating his first ace, on the 171-yard 12th hole at their home course in Lewes, Sussex, when Stuart Ede, 13, did the same.
James Winder, 17, the third member of the group, said: ‘We were all staggered.
I only wish I could have hit the third.’
Martin Moore, secretary of Lewes Golf Club, added: ‘This must be a unique double.’
The boys were too young to buy the traditional drinks in the clubhouse afterwards.
Soccer team arrested in win rave-up
AN ENTIRE village football team was arrested when victory celebrations got out of hand.
Eleven players and two supporters from Bradford Abbas, Dorset, went on the town after their 5–0 away win in a morning game against Weymouth's Waverley club.
In mid-afternoon, police were called to Legends seafront bar.
All 13 in the Bradford group were arrested and questioned.
Two men will appear in court.
Nessiephant
NESSIE the Loch Ness monster is no reptile — it could be an elephant.
That's the latest theory, put up by Bristol hospital radiologist Dr Paul Goddard.
Head-and-neck photos of Nessie, he says, look remarkably like pictures of African elephants swimming with just their trunks above water.
Norman just said ‘I've got a headache’.
. they were the last words he spoke for 2 and a half years
By Andrew Russell
DEVOTED wife Wyn Dale told yesterday how she waved her husband off to work then spent more than three years fighting to bring him home.
Half-way through his night shift, coppersmith Norman was paralysed by a rare disease.
Within hours he was unable to move, speak or breathe without a hospital ventilator.
Norman, 47, was to stay like that for the next two-and-a-half years.
‘He was a prisoner in his own body,’ Wyn said, ‘but I knew that there was a man in there trying to battle his way out,’said Wyn.
Every day she visited his bedside to chat and search for signs of response in his lifeless body.
Norman could hear but was unable to move a muscle.
Dedicated Wyn has now astounded doctors by bringing Norman to live back at home for the first time in three-and-a-half years.
He can move his head and hands and talk through a voice box fitted over his vocal cords.
And he is sleeping in his own bed in his own home after an amazing 1,270 days and nights in hospital.
Yesterday, speaking with the help of his voice box, wheelchair-bound Norman paid an emotional tribute to his courageous wife.
‘I know that if Wyn had not been as strong as she has, then I would not be here today.’
he said.
‘That fateful day he set off for work and their lives changed forever is etched on Wyn's memory.
‘He kissed me on the cheek and I waved him off at the door and watched TV before going to bed.
‘The phone went at 3am and I rushed to the hospital.
‘Norman said he had collapsed and kept saying ‘I've got a headache, a terrible headache.’
Those were the last words I heard him say for over two years.
‘His body was going rigid just like it was set in concrete.
He started to try to say that he could not breathe and was put on a ventilator.’
Wyn watched her lively, wise-cracking husband deteriorate day by day.
‘He could not move at all, not even a blink,’ she said.
‘He was looking at me with his eyes just flickering with fear.
It was heartbreaking.’
Doctors diagnosed Guillain Barre syndrome, a malfunction of the body's immune system following a viral attack.
They feared he was one of the three per cent of victims who would die.
But Wyn willed her husband to live.
‘He had to keep fighting from the inside, almost get his body born again,’ she said.
‘It was very tough.
He would get depressed and sometimes you could see a tear in the corner of his eye.
He was just trapped in there with apparently no way out.’
His little grand-daughter Francesca, born a month after he was struck down, was gently laid on the bed next to him so he could feel her against him.
After five months, Wyn noticed the first almost imperceptible signs of life.
‘I was looking at him like I had done a million times and suddenly I saw his shoulder twitch slightly,’ she said.
‘It was marvellous after all that time watching and waiting.
It was only little in itself but it was the start of the recovery.
‘Then a muscle on his face began to twitch.
It gave us hope.’
Wyn devised a laborious system of communication where she held up letters and Norman would nod for ‘yes’ and shake his head for ‘no’.
Although painfully slow, it meant he could construct small sentences.
Norman said: ‘I could hear everyone and every so often I would try to speak out of force of habit, but nothing came out.’
Workmates at GEC in Manchester had at first joked when he said he was unable to stand after kneeling to pick something up.
‘The lads just told me I should put more water in my whisky,’ he said.
‘But within half and hour I could not move at all and I went to hospital.
‘Luckily an anaesthetist recognised the symptoms and suspected Guillain Barre syndrome and set up a ventilator.
Without him I would have died.’
After lengthy stays in Manchester Royal Infirmary and Trafford General Hospital, Wyn learned of a specialist unit at St Thomas's Hospital in London.
For the past 18 months Norman has had intense physiotherapy and speech therapy to maximise the use of muscles he can move.
All the time Wyn lived next to him in a nurses' home, helping every day on the long haul to some form of recovery.
She also persuaded her local council to help adapt their Manchester semi so that Norman could eventually come home.
‘Now he is back and we feel fantastic,’ she said.
‘We hope we can build some sort of normal life again.’
Norman added: ‘I have got to keep fighting as no one knows what the future holds.
‘I keep telling my daughter that it was probably the cost of her wedding which brought it all on.’
Wyn smiles at the quip.
‘You see, he has still not lost his sense of humour.’
Fox wife jeered in court
A WIFE accused of having her husband killed as he fed a family of fox cubs was jeered by his relatives when she appeared before magistrates yesterday.
Sandra Wignall, 47, of Addlestone, Surrey, unemployed chauffeur Terry Bewley, 41, of Ruislip, Middlesex, and Harold Moult, 42, of Hockley, West Midlands, were charged with conspiracy to murder 55-year-old Robert Wignall.
They were remanded in custody at Chertsey, Surrey.
One onlooker had to be restrained by police as Mrs Wignall was led away.
Mr Wignall's two daughters and son from a previous marriage were in the crowd.
We'll pass on Paddy
COMPUTER expert Paddy Spooner has been banned from a country club's quiz nights because he is too clever.
Pictures of him have been circulated to staff at Shorefield Country Park, near Lymington, Hants, with the warning: Do not let him compete.
Paddy, 26, who played for the Hare And Hounds, at Sway, said: ‘It's totally ridiculous.’
Bus smash pupils hurt
A TOTAL of 38 children were taken to hospital after their school bus crashed with a lorry yesterday.
The refrigerated meat lorry collided with the coach in Dagnell, Bucks.
The lorry driver suffered serious leg and neck injuries.
The children, all from the John F Kennedy School in Hemel Hempstead, were treated for minor injuries, cuts and shock.
Girl student fall mystery
STUDENT Lalita Ahuja, 19, plunged 100ft to her death just an hour after registering at university, an inquest heard.
Her father Dr Annad Sheel Ahuja, of Bolton, Lancs, said: ‘I left her in a perfectly good state.’
Coroner James Turnbull ruled that there was not enough evidence to prove suicide.
Verdict: Open
Bolt horror
SURGEONS removed an eight-inch crossbow bolt embedded in a teenager's head yesterday.
The 18-year-old was shot at close range outside a post office in Exeter, Devon.
He staggered to hospital and was last night in a stable condition.
Police are questioning two men.
I'll die if you take my 84 dogs away
By John Hawkins
A PENSIONER who kept 84 dogs in her house told a court yesterday she had no reason to live if her ‘bairns’ were taken away.
The pets, including pekineses, chihuahuas, poodles and terriers, shared Rowena Cass's bedroom and two other rooms at her Georgian semi.
‘They are the love of my life, the only thing I live for,’ 73-year-old Mrs Cass told magistrates at Wakefield, West Yorkshire.
She has even named them in her will.
She and Kenneth Pearman, 42, who she described as her son although they are not related, have pleaded not guilty to causing unnecessary suffering to 80 dogs.
Mrs Cass, of Wakefield, said she spent half her £92 weekly pension on food for the dogs, and had run up a huge gas bill to heat their individual home-made hutches.
She also owed about £700 in vet bills, but to save money she looked after their ears, eyes and claws herself.
They were fed, cleaned out and exercised at least twice a day.
Ian Drummond, prosecuting for the RSPCA, told the court the house was in a horrendous state.
Many of the dogs had infected teeth and ears and overgrown claws.
Some were seriously ill.
When an RSPCA inspector had asked Mrs Cass how many dogs she had she replied: ‘I haven't a clue, I think about 90.’
Inspectors took away 47 for treatment and seven had to be put down.
However, Kennel Club member Mrs Cass said she was ‘coping marvellously’ with the remaining 37.
‘They are loved and well looked after.’
She no longer kept them in cages but allowed them the run of the house and garden.
Mrs Cass, who was in a wheelchair in court and had breaks to be given oxygen, said she had suffered four heart attacks since the RSPCA became involved with her dogs.
Since then, Pearman had taken over most of their care.
‘I love dogs and did my best for them,’ he told the court.
‘People bring dogs to Mrs Cass and she never turns them away.’
Mrs Cass said she had bought many of her pets but had taken some abandoned by their owners and had found others running wild in the street.
‘I know all their names and every bark and whine,’ she said.
The case continues.
Brain bug girl sent home to die
MENINGITIS killed a woman of 20 just hours after she was discharged from hospital.
Vanessa Atkinson, 20, died in intensive care 10 hours after she had been treated and sent back to work after complaining of leg pains.
Last night the Victoria Hospital, Blackpool, Lancs, said the doctor who examined her leg could not have known Vanessa had meningitis, which attacks the lining of the brain.
Her father David, of nearby Lytham, said: ‘You do not think someone could die from a disease in just 10 hours.’
Madonna, sex and me — by rape thug
A STREET busker who told a jury he shared Madonna's views on sex was convicted yesterday of raping a 19-year-old girl he seized at a bus stop.
Steven Karim, 25, of Manor Park, London, was obsessed with rape, and believed women enjoyed it, the Old Bailey heard.
Asked if sex was his lifeline, he said: ‘That's what Madonna says, and I happen to agree with her.’
Karim was remanded for reports.
Dreamward on Thames
LOOKING every inch the futuristic floating hotel she is, the £160 million cruise liner Dreamward is guided by tug through the Thames barrier.
At 41,000 tons, the brand new Norwegian vessel is the largest of her type to sail up river as far as Greenwich.
The French-built 624ft Dreamward supports a two-storey casino, shopping arcade and conference centre, but still has a shallow enough draught to take her to the nought degrees longitude line in south east London.
She stopped off in Britain yesterday on her way to Florida, from where she will take up to 1,250 passengers, pampered by 500 crew, on her maiden cruise to the Caribbean.
Laura bears up to her jet-lag
LAURA DAVIES breezed through her jet-lag yesterday in the same spirit that saw her through her liver and bowel transplant.
While her parents slept late at their home in Eccles, Greater Manchester, after flying home from America with her, Laura was up at dawn playing with her teddies.
Taking the four-year-old to visit relatives, aunt Lesley Burns said: ‘You can't keep Laura down.
She's amazing.’
How I pulled driver from his blazing cab
A FIREMAN told yesterday how he plunged into the blazing wreckage of a motorway pileup to save a trapped lorry driver.
‘The cab was so full of smoke, I couldn't see into it,’ Paul Sharples said.
‘I thought, ‘Either he'll cook, or I'll have to go in and get him’.’
The lorry and a Rover car had collided in thick fog on the M61 near Bolton, Greater Manchester.
A man and woman in the car died as it was crushed under the lorry.
Then the Rover burst into flames.
Fire sub-officer Paul, 33, knew nothing could be done for the car couple, but he realised the lorryman had not got out.
‘I threw the door back,’ he said.
‘He was jammed against the steering wheel.
He was semi-conscious, saying, ‘My legs, my legs’.
‘I forced his legs free, wrapped him round me and dragged him out through the flames.
I'd lost my helmet getting into the cab — and didn't realise I wasn't wearing protective gloves until I noticed soot on my hands.’
Paul, 33, station commander at Horwich, near Bolton, added: ‘Anybody would do the same.
I was just doing my job.’
Rescued lorryman Peter Newsome, 38, from Drighlington, West Yorks, is comfortable in hospital.
The couple who died have not been named.
Lost love led Blandford on heroin trail
By Kevin Murphy
THE wayward Marquess of Blandford last night claimed it was a lost love which led him into drug addiction.
And he blamed another girl for getting him into the drugs scene.
He said he took heroin for the first time when he was on the rebound from a broken relationship.
‘It was an emotional prop,’ he confessed to Paula Yates on Channel 4's Big Breakfast this morning.
‘It was the result of a breakdown in a relationship which caused both parties a lot of hurt and pain.’
He started going out with the girl who introduced him to drugs in the early 1980s.
‘I suppose being at an emotional low I did actually take heroin there for the first time,’ he said.
At one time, the marquess was said to have been spending £1,200 a week on drugs.
Now he earns £75 a week as a filing clerk, lives with a cousin and attends Narcotics Anonymous meetings.
He is separated from wife Becky and their baby son.
‘I see my little boy every weekend.
If he gets in as much trouble as I did, I will be very understanding,’ he said.
The heir to Blenheim Palace once broke into a chemist's looking for drugs.
He spent a Christmas behind bars after being found with cocaine, got a three-month jail sentence for breaking a probation order and a two-year suspended sentence for possessing cocaine.
Leslie signs himself out of his coma
GAME show host Leslie Crowther is fully conscious again, five weeks after the car crash that put him in a coma.
Leslie, 59, star of TV's The Price is Right, can once more write his name.
But a tracheotomy throat operation which helped to save his life may have changed his distinctive voice forever.
Leslie, who lives at Corston, near Bath, Avon, has not spoken since the Rolls-Royce crash that put him in Bristol's Frenchay Hospital.
In the tracheotomy, surgeons put a tube into Leslie's throat, to supply his brain with oxygen and ease his breathing.
He also still has to be fed by tube, because of difficulty in swallowing.
‘It's a matter of time before you can tell if the voice box is affected,’ says expert Rita Rees, who runs Frenchay's Headway House brain-injury recovery unit.
‘Leslie might not have the voice he had before, which could be difficult, in his business.’
She added: ‘The fact that he can write is a good sign.
It shows he knows who he is.
‘It's all coming back.
‘But it's an uphill fight after a head injury.
‘Nobody wakes up, Hollywood style, and says, ‘Here I am’.
‘It's a very slow, hard progression.’
Freddie's death ‘is end of road for supergroup’
SUPERGROUP Queen will never tour again following the death of lead singer Freddie Mercury from Aids.
The bad news for fans was revealed by guitarist Brian May, who said the group no longer made sense without its vocalist.
Speaking on the anniversary of the outrageous star's death he said: ‘My personal feeling is that we should never go out and try and be Queen again.’
Three die in knife frenzy
A KILLER stabbed three generations of a family to death then started three fires in their home.
Police the found the bodies in the house at Smethwick, Birmingham, after an explosion.
They had been stabbed 70 times.
The dead were Gurmej Kaur Bahia, 60, her daughter Surinder Kaur Dhandwar, 28, and grandson Avtar Singh Dhandwar, four.
Last night a 21-year-old woman was helping police.
Woman vicar death threat
HATE-mail threats to decapitate a leading activist for women priests are being treated seriously by police.
The Reverend Nerissa Jones, a deacon at St Botolph's, Aldgate, East London, said detectives thought the stream of letters was from a disturbed clergyman.
A BBC survey showed more than two-thirds of churchgoers back women's ordination.
The Church of England General Synod votes on the issue on Wednesday.
Gang murders party hostess
A GANG of 10 men bludgeoned a mother-of-three to death with pickaxe handles and baseball bats after she was warned to stop throwing wild parties.
Some sat on Donna Wilson as others beat her in her Belfast flat.
Three men visiting Ms Wilson were also attacked.
One suffered broken limbs.
Loyalist paramilitaries had accused Ms Wilson, 30, of allowing sex and drugs at the parties.
Police said the scene was ‘unbelievable, with blood everywhere.’
The IRA slaughtered a girl's pet sheep and stuffed a bomb into it aimed for her father, a part-time soldier.
But the bomb exploded prematurely at Newtonstewart, Co Tyrone, and no one was hurt.
Shoppers hang on for bargains
BRITONS are becoming a nation of tactical shoppers, only reaching for their wallets when they see a bargain.
Consumers are prepared to wait for sales and even go for cheaper versions of what they would buy in better times, says a survey published yesterday.
But they still look for quality and are put off stores that repeatedly slash prices.
‘Nearly half of those interviewed said they did not trust retailers who were always cutting their prices,’ said the report by retail analysts Verdict Research.
‘There is no doubt that people are shopping more tactically these days.
‘Well over one third of those questioned in our survey said that they waited for the sales to make major purchases.
‘They have strict limits on their spending money and they want to pay fair prices for high quality products.
‘Retailers will have to work much harder to persuade shoppers to part with their money.’
Bedtime rotters
By Ian Fletcher, Consumer Correspondent
BEDTIME drinks aimed at lulling children to sleep may be rotting their teeth.
Health officials say the drinks are nearly half sugar.
The two newly-marketed drinks at the centre of the row are Farley's Bedtimers and Boots' Chocolate Fudge Bedtime Drink.
Colourful adverts for the Farley's drink in magazines show a child snuggling down to sleep with a cup slipping from his hand, and the slogan: ‘Five minutes ago he was demolishing the house.’
But senior dental officer Sue Fuller said: ‘There could not be a worse time than bedtime or before a day time nap to give sugar-loaded drinks like these.
‘Even if you woke the child up again to clean his or her teeth, some of the sugar is bound to be retained in the crevices on or between the teeth.
It is such a shame.
Mothers no doubt think they are doing the very best for their children, getting them off to a good night's sleep.
‘In fact, using these drinks would do a lot of damage.’
Bedtimers is made by Crookes Healthcare Ltd, part of the Boots organisation.
Analysis shows it is made up of 43 per cent sugar.
The Chocolate Fudge drink has a very similar sugar content, according to health chiefs in the North West, which has the worst rates of tooth decay in Britain.
‘These drinks are a danger to children's teeth and could cause enormous damage,’ said a spokeswoman for the regional health authority.
Manufacturers called the criticism alarmist and claimed much of the sugar came from the milk content.
Boots said there was a message on the product about children cleaning their teeth after eating or drinking.
But half the sugar in the drink came from the milk and was not thought to cause tooth decay.
A Crookes spokeswoman said: ‘Bedtimers was launched after research showed that a third of parents gave their children adult hot chocolate drinks.
‘Bedtimers has a slightly lower sugar content than adult drinks.
‘The 43 per cent sugar is mostly lactose — from the milk.
The figures for added sugar are very low.’
Troubleshooter shot down
By Rob Perkins
ITN's Nicholson in secret mission to adopt war orphan
By Sarah Grady
TV newsman Michael Nicholson is making plans to adopt the orphan girl he smuggled out of war-torn Bosnia three months ago.
Two weeks ago he secretly flew back to Sarajevo to speak to 10-year-old Natasha Mihaljcic's only surviving relative.
He says he was delighted with the aunt's response and now he and his wife Diana are preparing the papers for an adoption.
‘Natasha's aunt is absolutely happy for her to stay with us and is desperately trying to get some information about her for me.
‘We have made it our duty to find out as much as we can about Natasha, so that if it comes to a point where we want to adopt her, we will have the documentation ready.’
The Nicholsons do know that Natasha's young mother dumped her illegitimate daughter in an orphanage when she was just a month old.
She came back to collect her when she was three but after finding out the toddler was being beaten and burnt, social workers intervened and Natasha was taken back to the safety of the orphanage.
Nicholson is angry at a magazine article which claimed the orphanage wanted Natasha back.
‘It's a load of nonsense,’ he said.
‘The orphanage is now closed.’
The couple are determined to do what they can for their young guest but they admit it could be difficult.
Under Bosnian law it is illegal to adopt a child over the age of five but the Nicholsons are hoping that, with the aunt's blessing, this obstacle can be overcome.
‘Until we can get something definite sorted out, we are having to play it by ear.’
If the adoption goes ahead, it will be a fairy tale ending for the little girl whose winning smile and sunny personality stole the heart of a hardbitten war reporter.
ITN's Nicholson forged her name on his passport to get her out of her homeland and away from the trauma of war.
Even his wife was surprised when she heard of her new guest in a telephone call from the airport.
Today she speaks proudly of Natasha and describes how she is settling in to her new surroundings in Haslemere, Surrey.
‘She has made lots of friends and is joining all the activities such as swimming galas and the Brownies,’ said Mrs Nicholson.
‘Last month we had a 10th birthday party for her and she invited nine friends, which she seemed to enjoy very much.
‘Her English is coming along well.
She's a little bundle of life and certainly manages to make herself understood.
‘She keeps us on our toes.
‘I'm happy that she seems to be leading a normal life and we want to keep it that way.’
Natasha has taken to her new family which includes two brothers Tom, 20, and William, 19.
British immigration officials have extended Natasha's visa until February 1993 and have said that it will be renewed automatically for a certain period of time after that.
Just look at my car
Rob Perkins
A DRINK-DRIVER who killed two young girls stumbled from his wrecked BMW and said: ‘Look at the state of my car.’
The broken bodies of seven-year-old Deanne Harlow and her pal Nadine Groom, eight, lay crushed in the twisted metal.
But disgusted onlookers claimed the motorist was more concerned about his X-registered, silver car.
The two girls died when the car ploughed into them from behind as they skipped along a pavement.
They were flung into the air as the car smashed through a concrete wall before coming to rest on its side in a garden at Darlaston, West Midlands.
Horrified householder Jack Allen, 66, said: ‘This young chap was just staring at his car with glazed eyes.
I could not believe all he was worried about was his BMW when there were two children lying dead in my garden.’
Yesterday flowers had been placed at the spot where the young schoolfriends died and a simple wooden cross bore the message ‘To Deanne and Nadine with love.’
Nadine had been invited to stay the night at Deanne's home and the girls were walking there with Deanne's mother Sharon and her boyfriend when tragedy struck.
Sharon, 30, screamed hysterically, ‘My baby, my baby’, as she saw the girls flung into the air.
Nadine was killed instantly and Deanne died in hospital four hours later.
Police said the driver, who lives nearby with his grandmother, had failed a roadside breath test.
Feeling on the close-knit estate was running so high that officers took the grandmother away for her own safety.
Nadine's mother Geraldine, 28, told how the two young friends had been inseparable.
‘The first I heard was when Sharon came on the phone crying ‘Our girls are dead, our girls are dead’.
I just panicked,’ she said.
Geraldine rushed to the scene to find ambulancemen still fighting furiously to save Deanne's life.
She said: ‘I feel totally numb.
‘Words cannot express how I feel about this man.
I don't know the driver and I would rather not know him.
‘These pointless deaths just do not seem to stop.’
Sharon's boyfriend Matthew Stanton, 21, was walking with her just behind the happy, giggling girls at the time of the accident early on Saturday evening.
He said: ‘I was only a few yards away when the car came round the bend and hit the kerb.
‘It mounted the pavement and hit both of them.
They had no chance of avoiding it.
The car pushed them through the garden wall and they were flung into the air and landed in the next garden.
‘A few seconds earlier the girls had been skipping and laughing.’
The girls were taken to Walsall Manor Hospital where doctors began their desperate battle to save little Deanne.
The driver was taken to the same hospital, but later moved to Wolverhampton for his own protection as angry relatives and friends of the girls' families gathered in corridors.
Police confirmed the driver refused to take a further breath-test in hospital after failing a roadside test.
Inspector Nigel Rock said: ‘It is absolutely horrific and the whole thing will have been particularly painful for the mother who was walking behind.
‘We will be maintaining a presence in the area as feelings are running very high against the driver.’
A 20-year-old man was charged last night with causing death by dangerous driving, failing to supply a specimen of blood or urine and having no insurance or MOT.
He will appear before Walsall magistrates later today.
Cabinet split over interest rate cuts
Eben Black, Political Correspondent
PREMIER John Major is at the centre of a Cabinet battle over interest rate cuts, it was revealed last night.
Ministers are split into two camps with Michael Heseltine calling for caution and Environment Secretary Michael Howard urging a two per cent drop to six per cent.
The war will rage until Chancellor Norman Lamont spells out his plans for economic recovery on Thursday in the traditional autumn statement.
Inflation figures due out on Friday should show inflation down slightly from 3.6 per cent in September, leaving Mr Lamont room for a substantial cut.
However, there are fears that the chancellor will not dare go as far as his critics wish and instead stick to a one per cent cut.
Meanwhile, Mr Heseltine is arguing inflation is still the real danger — and warning more spending power in the economy could just suck in imports as in the past.
‘I have been in politics a bit longer than some of my colleagues,’ he said on BBC TV's On the Record yesterday.
‘I have seen these things happen before.’
Business leaders, building society chiefs and the construction industry are also demanding an interest cut.
They say that without the introduction of a full-scale growth incentive public confidence will remain at rock bottom with no increase in spending.
Until that comes the housing market will stay stagnant, stopping a boost in confidence and jobs.
A spokesman for the Halifax building society said: ‘We need to break this cycle of depression.’
Fight is on to save 40,000 aero jobs
Eben Black, Political Correspondent
A FINAL attempt to save 40,000 jobs in Britain's troubled aero industry will be launched by Premier John Major this week.
He will use a crunch summit with German Chancellor Helmut Kohl to try to win a deal securing the future of the high-tech Euro-fighter designed for Nato forces.
The superplane — to be partly built in Britain — is under threat after the Germans signalled they would pull out on grounds of cost.
el2 With shutdowns and redundancies already hitting British Aerospace, Mr Major is determined to pull out all the stops to save the £22 billion project.
At the very least, he is hoping for a stay of execution to keep the project rolling — and jobs safe — for at least a year.
The Germans will be put under pressure by a succession of ministers at the meeting on Wednesday.
‘The attack will come on all fronts,’ said one insider.
Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind and Board of Trade President Michael Heseltine will also hammer home the plane's importance for Britain.
German defence chiefs say the programme, which also includes Spain and Italy, is too expensive and no longer needed.
But Mr Major is prepared to offer cost cuts.
Reductions of 30 per cent have already been worked out and it understood another 10 per cent can be offered.
Contractors BAe has already announced the closure of its plant in Hatfield, Herts.
If the European Fighter Aircraft fails to go ahead, the Government will have to brace itself for a further jobs bombshell.
Mario-mania
Kevin Murphy
A FAT little plumber called Mario caused chaos yesterday as thousands of youngsters converged on an exhibition of the latest high-tech games.
The computer craze started by the Nintendo character reached fever pitch as more than 15,000 people waited for up to three hours to get into London's Earls Court.
Inside, the hall was close to bursting as 10,000 addicts queued 15-deep around games, including the latest craze — Virtual Reality — at the Future Entertainment Show, the biggest to hit Britain.
Tempers frayed in the stifling atmosphere of blaring speakers and flashing lights.
A number of youngsters fainted in the crush and had to be treated by St John Ambulance volunteers.
The 100 manufacturers, eager to cash in on the huge Christmas sales of computer games, rubbed their hands with delight as people went on a recession-busting spending spree.
The best-selling Super Mario game already has annual sales of around £2.7 million.
The sequel, in which the plumber is joined by his twin brother to fight hammer-wielding turtles and ferocious plants, means makers Nintendo have one of the most successful toys ever.
They expect to have sold 22 million games by the end of the year.
Dozens of extra staff were drafted in yesterday — the final day — and an extra car park was opened.
Huge queues formed despite radio appeals by the organisers for enthusiasts to stay away unless they had tickets.
Doors were shut 45 minutes after the show opened.
One fan Daniel Hale, 16, of Long Levens, Gloucester, said: ‘It was chaos.’
Daniel, who spent £75 on new games and equipment, added: ‘We had to wait for ages but it was worth it.’
His pal, Oliver Callaghan, 15, also from Long Levens, said: ‘Things got out of hand, but it's been fantastic.’
One fan who didn't mind the crush was student Allan Brett who scooped £10,000 after winning the National Computer Games Championships.
Allan, 17, of Nottingham, beat seven other finalists, including runner-up 27-year-old Tony Eaton, of Stafford, who walked away with Pounds 4,000.
On Saturday mini-riots broke out around the centre as thousands of youngsters were locked out, leaving them to buy tickets from touts.
Children who came hoping to try out the latest Streetfighter games nearly ended up in street fights themselves.
Emma Marsden and Eddie Hasleden, both 17, of Harrogate, North Yorks, were caught in the crush.
‘One girl was crying and we were holding our heads up to get air,’ said Emma.
Security man Graham Thornton watched the scenes astonished.
‘I had no idea computer games were so popular,’ he said.
The show stoppers
The top 10 packages youngsters queued to try out at the show were:
1 Streetfighter 2 (Nintendo): Battle against martial arts experts.
2 Sonic the Hedgehog 2 (SEGA): Fitter and faster sequel to the rival of Nintendo's Mario Bros.
3 Lemmings 2 (Psygnosis): Save the animals from themselves.
4 Lotus Turbo Challenge (Gremlin Graphics): Puts the player in a racing car of the future.
5 Nigel Mansell's World Championship (Gremlin Graphics): Ultra-realistic car race simulation.
6 James Bond, The Duel (Domark): Act out 007's film adventures.
7 Road Rash 2.
(Electronic Arts): Car race game.
The player has to smash up opponents.
8 Formula One Grand Prix(Microprose): Another car race game.
9 Star Wars (Ubi Soft): Film spin-off.
10 WWF Wrestle Mania (Acclaim Entertainment): Hulk Hogan and pals in fight simulation romp.
Fantasy alert
COMPUTER addicts who spend hours trapped in an electronic fantasy world run the risk of damaging their health, warn psychologists.
The obsession, which affects more boys than girls, can be as bad as the eating disorder anorexia, said Dr Dorothy Rowe.
Youngsters suffer headaches, fatigue and lose the ability to socially interact after many hours playing the solitary games.
‘The computer's appeal is that the teenager has control,’ she said.
‘Parents control so much of a 14-year-old's life, the computer gives the child the opportunity to take control for himself.’
Another worry is the violence in many games.
‘The danger is children think in terms of violence,’ said psychologist Tricia Kreitman.
‘Instead of negotiating a child will look at confrontation — but in real life you can't just zap people.’
Leslie's all write
TV personality Leslie Crowther, 59, has recovered from his car crash coma well enough to write his own name at Bristol's Frenchay Hospital.
But doctors warn The Price Is Right star may not sound the same when he starts speaking again.
They had to perform a tracheotomy throat operation to aid his breathing.
Killer burns 3 victims, Smethwick, Birmingham
THREE members of a family were stabbed to death in their home.
The killer then started fires near the bodies of the mother, daughter and grandson to cover up the crime.
The victims had been knifed more than 70 times.
Police made the discovery at Smethwick, Birmingham, after neighbours heard an explosion.
Gurmej Kaur Bahia, 60, Surinder Kaur Dhandwar, 28, and four-year-old Avtar Singh Dhandwar were found lying together in the blood-stained kitchen.
A post mortem revealed Mrs Bahia had been stabbed 16 times, Mrs Dhandwar 46 times and Avtar had 11 knife wounds.
‘This was a horrendous offence,’ said Detective Superintendent Mick Williams.
‘All three put up a struggle to fight off the attacker.
We have recovered a number of weapons but we are still not sure which is the murder weapon.
‘We are sure the fire was started to try to cover up the murders.
‘Mrs Bahia's body was burned beyond recognition and it was only during the post mortem that a pathologist found the wounds.’
Last night a 21-year-old woman was being questioned by police.
Woman vicar death threat
HATE-mail threats to decapitate a leading activist for women priests are being treated seriously by police.
The Reverend Nerissa Jones, a deacon at St Botolph's, Aldgate, East London, said detectives thought the stream of letters was from a disturbed clergyman.
A BBC survey showed more than two-thirds of churchgoers back women's ordination.
The Church of England General Synod votes on the issue on Wednesday.
Dan Air flies into history
BRITISH Airways completed its takeover of struggling Dan Air yesterday, after paying the asking price of just £1.
The deal was cleared for take-off by British and European regulators, despite protests from BA's rivals.
The airline will run 13 former Dan Air short-haul routes from Gatwick, using 450 of its existing flight and cabin crew.
Another 1,600 jobs remain in the balance.
Diana: The royal rift gets wider
Charles Rae and Clive Nelson
THE gulf between the Prince and Princess of Wales looked wider than ever yesterday as they spent Remembrance Sunday 6,000 miles apart.
Diana, who was at the Cenotaph ceremony in London, has refused to go with her husband to a charity pop concert on Monday to watch one of her favourite stars, Phil Collins.
She decided not to see Phil and his band Genesis even though he's a friend who played at her 30th birthday party in the Savoy Hotel and she has no engagements that evening.
The snub comes after Diana arranged to be out of the country next Saturday so she doesn't have to spend time with Charles on his 44th birthday.
The princess will begin a three day visit to France on Friday.
The trip was only organised two weeks ago and is now seen as a clear case of retaliation against the prince.
Charles, who laid wreaths in Hong Kong yesterday, played polo on her birthday in July.
He spent just 100 minutes with her before heading back to Highgrove.
In France, the princess will carry out a variety of visits which will cover her interests, the disabled, Aids, cancer victims and a visit to the Royal Academy of Music as well as a dinner with France's President Mitterrand and his wife.
A Royal source said: ‘There was a gap in her diary and she asked for it to be filled.
‘She knew quite well it was his birthday.
The children will not be back from their boarding school and it would have looked very odd if they had been in the same country and not together on his birthday.
‘There is no doubt this is a case of retaliation from the princess.’
When she returns from her ‘French Leave’ Diana will go back to Kensington Palace while Charles goes to the Prince's Trust pop concert performed by Genesis.
The charity's aim is to help Britain's unemployed youngsters set up their own businesses and find jobs.
The birthday princess was serenaded by Phil the year she turned down the offer of a party from Charles.
A Prince's Trust source said: ‘Both the prince and princess were asked if they wished to attend but Charles is the only royal who will be there.
‘We had expected her to come as well but we have now been told it is highly unlikely.’
Diana has already decided, it is understood, that she will not spend the traditional Christmas break with the Royal Family at Sandringham.
Instead she is planning to spend the holidays with her brother the new Earl Spencer at the family home in Althorp, Northants.
But she will, it is believed, take sons William, 10 and Harry, eight, to Sandringham for the traditional opening of presents on Christmas Eve.
She is also expected to join other royals at the church service on Christmas Day.
But then it is believed Diana and her children will be back on the huge Althorp Estate.
Royal watcher Margaret Holder said: ‘It looks like it is going to be an unhappy time for the Queen and everyone else.
‘It has already been said that the Duchess of York will only make a fleeting visit with princesses Beatrice and Eugenie so it looks like that the two royal outlaws will now just be bringing the children to tea.’
And Harold Brookes Baker, editor of Burke's Peerage said: ‘It is perfectly clear that Charles and Diana are less and less comfortable in each other 's company.
‘No one believes there is any romance left.
‘It only proves what I have been saying for some time that this was nothing more than an arranged marriage.
‘But they must try to get themselves sorted out to the extent they have at least a working relationship.
‘There is nothing wrong in them having a working relationship that does not involve closeness of any other kind.
I do not believe there will be any other joint tours until they come to grips with the problem.’
As the news of Diana's snubs emerged, Royal author Andrew Morton claimed she was on the verge of leaving the Royal Family.
In a new chapter of his book Diana: Her True Story, Morton says friends of Diana told him she was destroyed by intense coverage of her taped phone call with James Gilbey.
The anguished princess, says Morton, told one friend: ‘If this is the price of public life then it is a price I am no longer willing to pay.’
That friend said Diana had never sounded more depressed or hopelessly forlorn.
One of her inner circle added: ‘Even if they have not managed to kill the goose that had laid the golden eggs for the media, they have certainly succeeded in wounding her.’
It was during this time that Diana found the Queen to be an ally.
Morton also claims that the princess attended a family meeting at Windsor Castle to discuss the state of her marriage.
He says she was greeted by ‘long faces’ and a blanket refusal to consider the idea of a separation in any form before the prince and princess tried for a period to resolve their differences.
But nothing had prepared her for the angry letter she received from the Duke of Edinburgh, says Morton.
It prompted Diana to speak to a lawyer and write to her father-in-law spelling out the way she felt she had been treated by her husband, the Royal Family and their courtiers.
Morton also reveals details of the ill fated family holiday in Greece where Diana had little contact with Charles, eating with her sons rather than adults.
The princess's sadness was there for all to see and one guest remarked when they returned: ‘The marriage is all over bar the statement.’
Breaking with family routine
Liz Moore
IT'S hardly Princess Diana's idea of a jolly family Christmas when the royals get together at the Queen's Sandringham estate.
Festivities at the 274-room Norfolk mansion stick to a rigid tradition and timetable.
Despite the tinsel and crackers, the turkey and presents, the Queen's Christmas is certainly no children's romp.
The Queen loves her rituals.
All immediate family report on Christmas Eve, for lunchtime drinks.
At 1.15 sharp, a snack — with the children kept well away.
Next: walks and outdoor pursuits.
At 6pm, all parade in the ballroom for the presents — a Christmas Eve tradition brought from Denmark.
The gifts, set out on trestle tables, are not exotic or expensive.
They are mainly books, toiletries, puzzles, woolly jumpers and scarves.
The children's gifts are handed out by Prince Philip from underneath Sandringham's 15ft Christmas tree.
At 7pm, it's time to change for dinner at 8.15 prompt.
Then there are charades, cards and midnight mass at Sandringham church.
Christmas Day is stockings for the children, breakfast, church and lunch served by liveried footmen and uniformed maids, with the children at a separate table.
There is then just time for a breath of fresh air in Sandringham's grounds before everyone gathers to watch the Queen's 3pm TV broadcast.
The rest of the afternoon is free until teatime when there is a cake-cutting ceremony held for Princess Alexandra and Princess Alice, who both celebrate their birthday on Christmas Day.
From Boxing Day on there is shooting, hunting, riding and more walking, none of it much to Diana's taste.
For her, Christmas is a time when the children are at the sparkling forefront of it all — the way it used to be in her own childhood, as Diana Spencer, at Althorp House in Northamptonshire.
After Diana's marriage to Charles, her father, Earl Spencer, always created a festival of fun for his grandchildren a few days early.
He bought wonderful gifts for his family from Harrods in London.
Dressed as Father Christmas, he delivered the presents on a pony-drawn sleigh.
There were clowns, too, and magicians, and jugglers on stilts.
A far, far cry from stilted Sandringham.
This year, after yet another Norfolk Christmas, Diana is pushing for a change.
Once the main event is over, she is expected to take sons William, 10, and Harry, eight, off to Althorp.
For the first time, brother Charles and wife, Victoria, have the mansion to themselves, with Kitty, two, and baby twins Katya and Eliza.
It will be fun.
And Diana wants her boys to share it.
A new charge for the light brigade
Charles Rae
THE Queen has put one of her footmen on permanent ‘light’ duties in a bid to beat the taxman's purge on perks for royal staff.
His new job is to make sure lights and electrical appliances are switched off.
Hard-up royal retainers, who earn around £8,500 a year, have been told the free electricity used in their grace and favour homes will be taxed in a new crackdown.
The move comes a week after Norman Lamont announced that the Queen will not pay tax.
John Parsons, deputy Treasurer to the Queen, has written to staff to warn them of the new tax regulation.
He told them: ‘Sooner or later everyone is likely to have to pay tax on this benefit.
‘I am sorry that at some stage you will find yourself having to meet this additional burden.’
One royal worker said: ‘None of us can believe it.
It looks like they cannot make the Queen pay tax so they are coming after us instead.
‘We have been told it will help us all in the long run, but it just means we will all be worse off — unless of course you are on the throne.’
Beware of baby's ‘bedtime rotters’
Ian Fletcher, Consumer Correspondent
BEDTIME drinks aimed at lulling children to sleep may be rotting their teeth.
Two new products, Farley's Bedtimers and Boots' Chocolate Fudge Bedtime Drink, are nearly half sugar, say health officials.
Colourful magazine adverts for the Farley's drink show a child snuggling down to sleep with a cup slipping from his hand, and the slogan: ‘Five minutes ago he was demolishing the house.’
But senior dental officer Sue Fuller said: ‘There could not be a worse time than bedtime to give sugar-loaded drinks like these.
‘Even if you woke the child up to clean his or her teeth, some sugar is bound to be retained on or between the teeth.’
Bedtimers, made by Crookes Healthcare, part of the Boots organisation, is 43 per cent sugar.
The Chocolate Fudge drink has a similar sugar content, say health chiefs in the North West, which has the worst tooth decay record in Britain.
Manufacturers called the criticism alarmist, claiming much of the sugar came from the milk content.
A Crookes spokeswoman said: ‘Bedtimers was launched after research showed a third of parents gave children adult hot chocolate drinks.
Bedtimers has a slightly lower sugar content than adult drinks.’
Queen will never tour again
QUEEN will never tour again, admits guitarist Brian May.
He said the group no longer made sense without its flamboyant lead singer Freddie Mercury, who lost his battle with Aids last year.
‘My feeling is that we should never go out and try to be Queen again,’ said Brian, above, speaking on the anniversary of Mercury's death.
Rapist is linked to 6 attacks
A HOODED man who raped a 19-year-old student is thought to be responsible for at least six other sex attacks over the past two years.
The attacker, wearing a balaclava and yellow cagoule, is believed to be a fitness fanatic who mingles with others running on Woodhouse Moor near Leeds University.
Police warned that the man — aged between 18 and 30 — could strike again and advised women not to go out on the moor alone after dark.
Extra officers are patrolling the area.
EC puts £6 a week on shopping bills
Ian Fletcher, Consumer Correspondent
SHOPPERS face an unhappy new year as food prices jump 14 per cent after Christmas.
Poorer families, already finding it difficult to afford healthy meals, will be hardest hit.
The one-off increase will be triggered by the tumbling value of the pound on farm prices just as Britain enters the single European market.
Shoppers will have to find an extra £1 for every £7 currently spent and £6 will be added to the average weekly bill of £45.
‘We knew that there would be an increase in prices but our Sterling crisis has made the rise far more dramatic than we feared,’ said Jill Johnstone of the National Consumer Council.
‘This is all part of the craziness of the Common Agricultural Policy which ensures a yo-yo effect on prices.
‘It seems that the farmers will be benefiting at the expense of the consumers.
‘For many people who are already struggling it will be impossible to find the extra money.’
Only last week the NCC reported that the price of food meant low income families were unable to get a healthy, balanced diet.
They also said less well-off consumers without cars are losing as superstores move out of town.
The Food and Drink Federation predicts that the cost of a 250g butter pack will rise by 10p, a ½lb pack of beefburgers 4p and a litre of squash by 5p.
A spokesman for the Federation said: ‘We had hoped that the price increases could be phased in.
‘Unfortunately it now appears that farm prices will be adjusted overnight when the single market comes into being on January 1, 1993.’
Food industry sources described the prediction as ‘alarmist’ and insisted only part of the increase in the farmgate prices would be passed on to the customer.
BRITONS are becoming a nation of tactical shoppers, prepared to wait for sale bargains, say analysts Verdict Research.
But they still look for quality and are put off stores that repeatedly slash prices.
I'll fight for my dogs
A PENSIONER who said she would die if her 84 dogs were taken away yesterday pledged to fight a two-year ban on keeping animals.
Rowena Cass, 73, who kept her ‘bairns’ in three rooms at home, will appeal against a court ruling to hand over her remaining 37 dogs.
‘I have come through five heart attacks for my dogs and will carry on fighting,’ she said.
Mrs Cass, of Wakefield, West Yorks, was convicted of causing suffering to 80 pedigree dogs, including pekineses and poodles.
A member of the Kennel Club, she kept most of the animals in small cages in two bedrooms.
The RSPCA said conditions were horrendous.
Inspectors took away 47 dogs for treatment and seven had to be put down.
The other 37 dogs will now stay with Mrs Cass until the appeal is heard — possibly in the New Year.
How I'd run Britain plc
Eben Black, Political Correspondent
TYCOON Richard Branson told yesterday how he would run the country — after a poll showed he was tops to pull Britain out of the slump.
The 42-year-old millionaire would slash interest rates to three per cent and set up a board of go-ahead businessmen to help industry.
He would make rock star Phil Collins Minister for Arts.
The Virgin airline boss also pledged to appoint Body Shop founder Anita Roddick as Environment Secretary because of her track record on Green issues.
He set out his plans exclusively to TODAY after a BBC poll showed him ahead of the competition to take over as President of the Board of Trade.
The key job, currently held by Michael Heseltine, would put him at the forefront of the drive to get the country back on course.
‘There needs to be new enterprise in Britain,’ he said.
A National Development Bank run by successful businessmen would be top of his agenda.
‘We are letting too many companies go bust.
Every one that goes down takes others with it.’
Interest rates have been killing off Britain over the years, he said.
And he advised Premier John Major: ‘Once you have accepted the slump in the pound you might as well bring them down more.’
Under Mr Branson, Britain would be run under a ‘small is beautiful’ rule.
‘The big monopoly companies should be broken up — like British Airways,’ said the tycoon who is battling with BA chairman Lord King over US flights.
In the Gallup poll — to be shown tonight on BBC's Behind The Headlines — 31 per cent of voters backed Mr Branson to head the Department of Trade and Industry.
Labour's Robin Cook got 23 per cent while Michael Heseltine only scored 20 per cent of the vote.
And Prince Charles is the man to take over the Department of the Environment, according to voters.
The survey also showed one in five wanted former ICI boss Sir John Harvey-Jones as Premier instead of John Major.
And if they have to be ruled by politicians, voters prefer Labour leader John Smith.
Lighter victims win £13m
THREE children badly burned when a cigarette lighter exploded have won £13 million damages.
William and Debbie Balthis, now both nine, and their six-year-old brother David were burned over a third of their bodies in the accident four years ago.
They had been playing with the Bic lighter in a bedroom at their grandparents' home.
Their mother Carol found them in the burning room after hearing their screams.
The children's lawyer, Terrill Corley, told a jury in Creek County, Oklahoma, Bic lighters sometimes failed to extinguish and exploded because of butane gas overheating.
Mr Corley said: ‘The typical scenario is not necessarily an explosion.
‘A person lights his cigarette, sticks the lighter in his pocket and, before they know it, there's a fire.
‘Adults are usually able to put it out.’
A spokeswoman for Bic said the company would appeal.
It claimed matches and more than 30 lighters were found in the house in places accessible to the children.
The spokeswoman said: ‘We believe there was overwhelming proof that Bic was not at fault.
‘This accident was the result of the failure of the children's parents and grandparents to keep lighters and matches away from children.’
Rolling pin flattens thief
PINT-SIZED Denise Gilliland sent a would-be car thief packing with a crack over the head from her trusty rolling pin.
Plucky Denise, just 5ft 2in tall, caught the crook outside her home in Poole, Dorset, in the early hours of the morning.
‘I was just angry someone had invaded our privacy,’ said the 32-year-old mother-of-six.
Wall collapse kills teenager
A SCHOOLBOY was killed when a wall collapsed on him at the weekend.
Andrew Risdon, 14, was walking with friends at Whitstone Primary School, near Bude, Cornwall, when the wall suddenly toppled.
He was buried under bricks, and died of head injuries.
A Health and Safety Executive official visited the school later.
Study aims to beat diabetes
A NEW research project is giving hope to the thousands of people who risk developing diabetes.
The study is aimed at the victims of maturity diabetes, which affects 600,000 people in Britain, and will try to find ways of preventing or delaying the disease.
Scientists in Exeter, Devon, will monitor 50 volunteers aged between 30 and 65 for a year.
All we got for our honeymoon was a cockroach reception
Adrian Lee
A HONEYMOON couple hoping for the holiday of their lives instead ended up spending two weeks in a tiny cockroach infested apartment.
Brian and Deborah Curley had expected champagne and flowers when they arrived at the four star hotel on the island of Tenerife after a perfect wedding.
Instead, because of a booking blunder, they were left to carry their own bags to the Paradise Court room — which had just two single beds and a table — in the middle of the night.
‘When we opened the door Deborah just wanted to go home, she was very upset,’ said Brian.
‘We were so fed up we didn't even push the beds together for our wedding night.
It certainly wasn't what I planned.’
When they demanded a move next morning they were told there was nowhere else.
And when they complained the apartment, in the resort of Playa de las Americas, was full of cockroaches they were handed a can of insect spray.
‘We tried to make the best of it but it was so bad that was impossible,’ said Brian.
‘The wedding had gone beautifully but our honeymoon was ruined.
‘We had no fridge, cooker, cutlery or crockery so we had to eat out all the time.
It ended up costing a fortune.’
After a week Deborah phoned her mother in tears.
Now the couple, from Barrow-in-Furness, Cumbria, are planning to take holiday firm Airtours to court.
‘It was supposed to be perfect but it was a total nightmare,’ said Brian, 24, who booked the £666 honeymoon a year in advance.
‘It wasn't a last minute job.
The hotel looked lovely in the brochure and I couldn't believe it when we arrived.
‘They gave us a key for the apartment and left us to it.
I'd ordered champagne and flowers because a honeymoon is once in a lifetime but we ended up carrying our own luggage in pitch darkness across a car park and up a huge flight of stairs.
‘It was so dark I fell and cut my elbow.’
They even tried to arrange an earlier flight home — but were told they would have to stay.
‘It should have been the best holiday of our lives but it was terrible,’ said Deborah, also 24.
Other holidaymakers in the same block had similar problems.
Chef Gail Simpson, 21, from Earls Court, London, and three pals had no cooker, fridge or cutlery and bare wires hung from walls.
Sheets and towels were only changed after a week when she complained to their rep.
‘It had to be seen to be believed,’ she said.
They were moved to different accommodation but claimed it was little better.
Last night Airtours admitted there had been problems with the apartments and apologised.
Budlet grows into the part
WITH those golden curls and blue, blue eyes, he just couldn't miss.
Now two-year-old James Riley will become a TV star overnight as toddler Oscar Larkin in The Darling Buds of May.
James got the part after his mother, Beverley, 33, heard that Yorkshire TV were seeking a replacement for the first Oscar, Ross Marriott.
She sent in a photo.
The day it arrived, James was called to see the producer — and got the job on the spot.
He makes his debut as Ma and Pa Larkin's Darling Budlet in the show's Christmas special.
And he will be seen in the new Darling Buds series next spring.
‘They said he was just what they were looking for,’ Beverley said yesterday at home in Alwoodley, Leeds.
‘During the last few weeks we have been to Kent for the filming.
He loved it.’
The new star was a bit shy meeting his screen Ma and Pa, David Jason and Pam Ferris.
‘But they were wonderful with him,’ Beverley said.
‘Revenge’ holiday camp fire
A DISGRUNTLED yellowcoat may have started a holiday camp blaze which put two members of staff in hospital yesterday.
Firemen rescued the two staff who had passed out after breathing in smoke in the staff accommodation block.
The blaze was started in the early hours and fire investigators and staff spent yesterday sifting through the damage.
Fires had been started in four separate areas within the block at the Sinah Warren Holiday Camp on Hayling Island, Hants, a police spokesman revealed
He said: ‘The possibility that a former member of staff could be responsible for starting these fires will be one line of enquiry.’
Lesley quiz man held
A JUDGE gave police investigating the murder of schoolgirl Lesley Molseed 17 years ago the go-ahead to hold a man being questioned for a further 36 hours.
The suspect, 48, being quizzed in Bradford, was arrested on Friday.
PM tribute to Dubcek
PRIME Minister John Major yesterday paid tribute to the former Czech leader Alexander Dubcek, who died aged 70.
Mr Dubcek led the Prague Spring political thaw in 1968 but was overthrown by a Russian invasion.
Cabinet cover-up charge on arms to Iraq
Paul Wilenius
THE true scandal of the arms-for-Iraq case was revealed yesterday.
Senior ministers knew all along that British firms were supplying arms-making machinery to Saddam Hussein just before the Gulf War, a court heard.
Three company bosses walked free from the Old Bailey trial — which has cost the taxpayer £3 million — as ministers were attacked for ‘withholding the truth’.
Lawyers claimed they had tried to suppress official papers showing the extent of the arms selling operation.
Four cabinet members were facing questions last night about their part in the fiasco.
They are President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine, Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind, Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke and Foreign Office Minister Tristan Garel Jones.
Labour Shadow Defence Secretary Dr David Clark demanded an independent inquiry into the trial fiasco.
‘It is absolutely staggering that while the Ministry of Defence was deploying soldiers in the Gulf, the Department of Trade and Industry was allowing British companies to supply equipment that could be used for munitions to the enemy,’ he said.
‘It is an absurd situation that the Government allows military equipment to be exported to a country when we end up sending our own troops to fight that country's aggression.’
‘Diana hit by smears’
PRINCESS Diana was the target of a smear campaign by close friends and staff of Prince Charles, author Andrew Morton claimed yesterday.
He said they joined forces, against the wishes of the Prince, to suggest Diana was mad or mentally unstable following publication of his explosive book Diana: Her True Story.
‘The Prince had decided the couple should keep a dignified silence, but other members of the Highgrove set decided that wasn't good enough,’ he said.
Mr Morton, speaking after the launch in America of an updated version of his book, said: ‘A campaign began to build up against Diana that she was mad and mentally unstable, that she was somehow bending reality, didn't tell the truth and that she was in some way responsible for this book.’
In the new chapter Morton says that campaign led to friends briefing the media on an almost daily basis.
When the Princess discovered what was going on she had one terse meeting with her husband and told him: ‘Why don't you save yourself a phone call and ring the papers direct?’
The friends, says Morton, took it upon themselves to portray him as a deeply wounded and betrayed husband whose character precluded him from answering back.
Diana, they decided, would be painted as a sick woman with only a tenuous grasp of reality.
Newspapers, he adds in the chapter, were told by the Prince's friends that Diana was a ‘meglomaniac.’
The campaign took a more sinister turn with the release of the Dianagate phone tape conversation between the Princess and friend James Gilbey.
Morton said on television: ‘When the tape recordings hit the national newspapers, it was the final straw for Diana.
She came within hours of packing her bags.’
Diana has refused to attend a Gala Welsh night organised by her husband's own charity, it was revealed yesterday.
Charles will turn up on his own on December 13 to watch a host of top stars take part in a ‘An evening with Dylan Thomas’ in aid of the Prince's Trust.
She will stay at home, even though she has no engagements that night.
Yesterday, the couple were apart as Diana lunched at the Brazilian embassy, with her close friend Lucia Flecha de Lima, wife of the ambassador to London.
The Prince, arriving back from his trip to Hong Kong, went straight to Highgrove.
At Last!
Christian Gysin
A YOUNG handbag snatcher was jailed for five years yesterday as a judge signalled the fight back against street crime.
First-time mugger Michael Watson slumped in the dock in disbelief as Judge Brian Pryor told him thugs were making Britain's streets ‘places of fear’.
There was a stunned silence as fair-haired Watson's three elderly victims watched him being led away to start his surprise sentence.
Pressure groups last night backed the judge's crackdown.
A spokesman said: ‘At last we have seen some action.
Attacks on our old people are simply not on.
Maybe this will act as a deterrent.’
Jailing 28-year-old Watson, Judge Pryor said: ‘People, women particularly, but even men, are frightened to walk in public places.
‘It is not only the economic loss of the things they have stolen from them but the fear, which in some cases leads to long-term psychological consequences which, if the victim is elderly, may never go away.’
From the public gallery, the three pensioners he had attacked nodded their agreement.
The charity Age Concern welcomed the tough sentence.
‘We regularly come into contact with elderly people whose lives have been ruined by such cowardly attacks,’ said a spokesman.
‘Such senseless and mean acts of crime against old people can change their personality overnight.
‘Old people are particularly vulnerable members of our society.
They find it difficult to defend themselves from such attacks.
‘Very often the amounts of money taken from the elderly in muggings is minimal.
But such attacks cause lasting harm.’
The tough sentence was also welcomed by a spokeswoman for the Victim's Helpline.
‘If someone has gone through the trauma of a crime like this the last thing they want to see is a court handing out a light sentence,’ she said.
‘This sort of thing is happening more and more because the criminals think they can get away with it.
Hopefully a five-year sentence will act as a deterrent to others.’
The court heard how Watson attacked Colin Connolly, 66, and his wife, Kate, 64, on the stairway of their flats in Walworth, South-East London, in April.
He punched Mr Connolly in the ear, sending him reeling, before snatching the handbag of his ‘distraught and terrified’ wife.
By coincidence, Mr Connolly was looking out of his window four weeks later and spotted Watson preparing to attack another pensioner.
Police were called but arrived too late to stop him mugging 60-year-old Rose McDevitt, who was knocked to the floor and robbed of her handbag as she waited for the lift.
He was arrested three weeks later in possession of a giro cheque which had been stolen from another woman mugged in nearby Old Kent Road.
Watson, of Walworth, was convicted of robbing the Connollys and Mrs McDevitt after pleading not guilty at a previous hearing.
His denial of robbing the last victim — Mary Cannon — was accepted by the court.
He pleaded guilty to a charge of stealing the giro.
He is considering an appeal against his five-year sentence, it was revealed last night.
SCARED TO WALK THE STREETS
ONE of Michael Watson's victims told last night of the moment she and her husband were attacked yards from their front door.
‘When the judge sentenced him to five years I felt like shouting out ‘thank you’,’ said Kate Connolly.
‘As he was taken away I muttered ‘good’ under my breath.
We can start living a normal life again now.’
The couple were walking home at midnight in February when Watson struck.
‘We had been to the pub and as we walked along a well-lit walkway this man came towards us.
We were both in shock.
It was all over so quickly — he never said a word.’
The attack left them with a fear of going out at night.
Even in daylight, Mrs Connolly added, they look over their shoulders.
‘We viewed everyone with suspicion.
‘Even now we don't go out much in the evenings.
‘He put us through hell for £20 cash, some Marks and Spencer vouchers and my cheque book.
‘He stole our front door keys and we had to have all the locks changed at our home.’
LONER'S EASY PICKINGS
JOBLESS Watson roamed the streets late at night looking for victims.
Local officers didn't immediately associate him with violent crime.
‘He looked a bit scruffy and trudged about.
Sometimes he had a bit too much to drink but that isn't particularly unusual,’ said a spokesman.
‘We noted him down and watched him.’
Scaffolder Watson's last job was on the Channel Tunnel.
He had a few convictions for petty crimes when he was out of work but had got away with fines in the past.
‘We are pretty certain Watson just mugged because they were there and he saw the chance of easy pickings without much danger of violence being offered back to him,’ said a policeman.
‘It happens hundreds of times a day in this city and mostly they get away.
‘There was a little celebration at the sentence but sadly there is every chance that someone else will take his place in this area.’
END FACELESS ESTATE OF FEAR
NO ONE goes out at night on the notorious Heygate Estate in South East London — they are all too afraid.
Fear stalks every dark stairwell and walkway.
This is only two miles from the bustling West End — but there is a world of difference.
Along Heygate Street last night there wasn't a pedestrian in sight and cars drove through as fast as they could.
This is the face of mean Nineties Britain, multi-storey car parks and flats flanking a wide, featureless expanse of road with orange streetlamps brightening the gloom.
It is a street where the householders are too afraid to open their doors.
Father Alphie Brennan is one man battling to keep the community spirit alive, on the Heygate Estate but even he admits people are afraid.
‘There have been quite a number of ladies who have been mugged around here,’ he said.
‘People on the estate are afraid to go out in the dark and even too afraid to open their doors.’
THE VITAL PUBLIC TIP-OFF
WATSON was trapped by a member of the public who tipped off police about his activities.
Detective Constable Peter Yolland, who is based at Carter Street police station in South-east London, arrested the mugger.
Last night he told TODAY: ‘We were able to trace Watson after a member of the public contacted us and gave us information which suggested he was responsible for these attacks.
‘We can only stress that such information from the public is vital if we are to bring people like Watson to trial.
‘We rely on help from the public — and in this case it was essential.
‘We would have caught him eventually but this time it was thankfully a case of sooner rather than later.’
Watson was described as a ‘bit of a loner’ by another officer
He would often prowl darkened housing estates searching for potential victims, said the colleague.
Hard-line taken by Judge Pryor
HARD-hitting Judge Brian Pryor, QC, has been involved in high-profile cases before.
He sentenced teenager Mark Acklom to four years youth custody after he posed as a City stockbroker in a £466,000 mortgage fraud.
The 61-year-old judge was kinder to sex party hostess Cynthia Paine after a jury cleared her of controlling prostitutes five years ago.
Judge Pryor granted her costs out of central funds and ordered a refund of the £5,000 she had put towards her defence.
A Circuit Judge since 1986, he married his wife Jane 37 years ago.
They have one son and two daughters.
He lists his only recreation in this year's Who's Who as gardening.
Shoppers save for rainy day
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
JOB loss fears are forcing millions of consumers to save for a rainy day rather than borrow, it was revealed yesterday.
Anxiety about the state of the economy and the turmoil which followed Britain's departure from the ERM led to families paying off more outstanding debt last month.
Concern about jobs is now the main consideration for families, according to figures from the Central Statistical Office.
Consumers paid back £60 million more than they borrowed in September, on top of the net repayment of £36 million in August.
The bulk of September's settlement was a cut in the money owed to credit card firms.
There were signs that consumers were borrowing more money for big projects.
But the three-monthly figures pre-date the effect of Black Wednesday in September.
The City is braced for far worse figures to come in the coming months, unless the Government recovery package produces a startling turn round in optimism.
Chancellor Norman Lamont hopes a further one or two point cut in interest rates will boost confidence and in turn the economy this week.
Ministers are pinning their hopes on a big spending Christmas this year to give the High Street and struggling businesses a boost.
They may draw some comfort from a survey revealing recession-hit parents are still prepared to spend out on youngsters.
One in four is preparing to pay between £50 and £100 on Christmas presents for each child, according to research group Nielsen.
Major U-turn on tax bills
MILLIONS of workers face paying bigger national insurance contributions.
Chancellor Norman Lamont is expected to announce an increase in charges from nine per cent to 10.4 per cent.
For those earning £21,000 or more a year, nearly £300 a year extra.
During the election campaign Premier John Major promised tax cuts, but Treasury chiefs refused yesterday to rule out the backdoor tax rise.
The increase would raise £2 billion to cope with runaway public spending and a big drop in revenue from income and company tax and VAT.
Ford unions in strike poll
WORKERS at car giant Ford are to be balloted on industrial action after unions warned more than 300 jobs could go.
The vote will include a strike option but an immediate walkout is unlikely.
‘We certainly won't walk our members into a major problem,’ said Transport Workers' Union deputy general secretary Jack Adams yesterday.
Ford wants to shed more than 1,400 jobs through voluntary redundancy, but Mr Adams said there were unlikely to be enough volunteers.
After the breakdown of talks in London he said he expected most of the cuts to fall on Merseyside's Halewood plant.
A Ford spokesman said he believed industrial action was a long way off.
Tory HQ gets troubleshooter
A STAFF clear-out is being planned at Tory HQ by new troubleshooter, director general Paul Judge.
The 43-year-old millionaire's appointment is certain to send morale tumbling at the Smith Square headquarters.
There have already been a string of job cuts.
Sir Norman Fowler said the appointment was ‘a further step forward in our managerial reforms’.
Fury over MPs' pay
MPs planning to award themselves a four per cent pay rise sparked outrage yesterday.
Business chiefs demanded they set an example and take a pay cut.
Public sector workers' pay will be frozen in the Autumn Statement on Thursday.
The Confederation of British Industry yesterday said MPs' pay must also be pegged.
Support for vote inquiry
MPS have backed TODAY'S call for an inquiry into allegations of intimidation during last week's Maastricht vote.
Labour backbencher David Winnick highlighted our coverage of the vote as he urged Speaker Betty Boothroyd to investigate the allegations first made by Tory MP Teresa Gorman in TODAY that she was bullied and jostled.
GATT talks to resume
BRITAIN swept aside French protests last night and ordered the restart of the GATT trade talks.
EC's foreign ministers, with Britain in the chair, told EC president Jacques Delors a disastrous world trade war must be avoided at all costs.
The safety of millions of jobs mattered more than his concerns about subsidies to French farmers, he was told.
At least one Maxwell has the cash to fly Concorde
Neville Thurlbeck
THE jet-setting daughter of crooked publisher Robert Maxwell is showing few signs of curtailing her lavish lifestyle despite the plight of thousands of pensioners who were mercilessly robbed by her father.
Ghislaine Maxwell thought nothing of blowing £2,500 on a no-expense-spared trip to the States at the weekend.
That is the size of the average pension for former Mirror Group employees for an entire year.
But as she lapped up the five-star treatment on the champagne Concorde flight, angry pensioners were facing a bleak future.
Accountants are still wading through Maxwell's complicated business dealings to see if pension funds can still keep paying out after being plundered by the greedy tycoon.
Ghislaine, 30, booked the £2,515 flight from Heathrow Airport last Wednesday through a New York travel agent and paid by credit card.
With her was New York estate agent Jeffrey Epstein, who has been seen several times with Ghislaine.
During the 3 hour 15 minute flight they were offered champagne, the finest liqueurs and a choice of dishes from a menu prepared by a cordon bleu chef.
Ghislaine collects £80,000 a year from a trust fund set up by her father, who died after falling off his yacht named after her last November.
She owns a £350,000 home in London's fashionable Knightsbridge and rents £300-a-week flat over looking New York's Central Park.
Nicknamed The Shopper by friends, she went on a recent shopping spree for antiques and furniture.
The chairman of the Association of Mirror Pensioners, Tony Boram, said last night: ‘The price of that £2,500 ticket is a huge sum to Mirror pensioners.
‘She ought to have bought an ordinary ticket and donated the rest to the pension fund.
‘She has never done or said anything which could help out these pensioners who will be greatly angered by this flamboyant display of wealth.’
Wheels of fortune
WORLD champion motor racing driver Nigel Mansell will earn nearly £10 million this year, putting him fourth on the list of the world's highest-paid sportsmen.
But the British ace was easily beaten for the number one spot by Chicago Bulls basketball star Michael Jordan, who will earn £24 million, according to America's Forbes' magazine.
Heavyweight champion Evander Holyfield, who led the list last year, finished second with £18.5 million.
Mike Tyson, the 1991 runner-up, now in prison for rape, was off the list.
Brazilian formula one driver Ayrton Senna was third, with £14.5 million, while Mansell's Williams team mate Ricardo Patrese could only manage 16th place on a modest £5 million.
The biggest-earning tennis player was Andre Agassi, who finished sixth with £7.3 million, followed by ninth-placed Jim Courier on Pounds 6 million.
British golfer Nick Faldo was 27th with £4 million.
Schoolboy's stab ordeal
A SCHOOLBOY watched as his mother was stabbed to death by his father, a court was told yesterday.
Daniel Horbury, 10, dialled 999 and the operator recorded Caroline Horbury, 47, pleading for mercy.
‘Mrs Horbury begged her husband not to stab her,’ Cardiff Crown Court heard.
Horbury, 55, of Manhilad, Gwent, denies murder.
The trial continues.
I'm zil waiting
Geraint Jones
THE world of international politics has seen many nimble U-turns.
Alas, Boris Yeltsin's official chauffeur has not.
While his boss, on his first official visit to Britain as Russian President, was cooling his heels at No 10 by John Major, his driver was left to introduce his 20ft long, 7ft wide Zil limousine to London's narrow streets.
The huge hand-built limo, flown in especially from Moscow's wide thoroughfares, found Downing Street a handful.
First the driver, wrestling with a 40ft turning circle and no power steering, tried a three-point turn, then a fourth, then a fifth.
When the sixth failed, various members of Mr Yeltsin's entourage gesticulated wildly as the limo, with a 7.7 litre V8 engine as big as that on a London bus, lurched backwards and forwards.
Success was not achieved without considerable risk to an old street lamp and the Downing Street red carpet.
But after an eight-point turn, much nervous energy and a little help from the British constabulary, the car completed the about-turn and was ready to receive its master waiting inside No 10.
The boot was on the other foot however when the President's wife Naina kept Norma Major waiting 25 minutes for a lunch date at the Savoy.
After breakfast at the Hyde Park Hotel, Mrs Yeltsin visited Kensington Palace — London home of the Prince and Princess of Wales.
She was so impressed she apparently forgot about her appointment with Mrs Major, who was waiting patiently in the Savoy powder room.
One thoughtful member of the hotel staff even provided her with a tray of crisps.
At 12.45pm, a profusely apologetic Mrs Yeltsin arrived in a black Daimler car as Mrs Major came scurrying up the hotel steps to meet her.
Less than a mile away, locked in all-day talks with Mr Major, Mr Yeltsin was promised an official trip to Moscow by the Prime Minister after his plea for a royal visit was turned down.
Palace officials believe the Queen would be too much at risk in Moscow as super-inflation and rocketing unemployment lead to growing unrest in the unstable republic.
The snub came against a background of smiles as the two leaders signed the first treaty between Britain and Russia since 1766.
It includes economic aid and trade and defence agreements in line with the long-term aim of integrating Russia into the EC.
Welcoming Mr Yeltsin, Mr Major warned Russia's journey to freedom would not be easy.
‘The path ahead is very difficult and the transition will take years to achieve,’ he said.
Later in a speech at an official dinner in Greenwich honouring the Russian leader, Mr Major added: ‘The end of the Cold War means the end of confrontation.’
Mr Yeltsin said: ‘Until very recently, we were regarding each other as political enemies.’
The importance of the visit to Mr Yeltsin was emphasised as he arrived at Heathrow.
Ninety minutes after he landed with an entourage of 38, a larger party of 60 officials and ministers flew in.
The Russian leader threw the carefully arranged welcome into chaos when he slipped past the RAF guard of honour to give a brief interview in his own language to Russian reporters.
Mr Yeltsin flies out of Heathrow for Budapest today after talks with Labour leader John Smith, lunch at Buckingham Palace and speeches to both houses of Parliament.
Suite dreams
BORIS Yeltsin's £1,762-a-night royal suite is a far cry from the poverty of his home country.
The luxurious rooms at London's Hyde Park hotel are known to be a favourite among superstars from around the world.
Luciano Pavarotti rested there after his famous Hyde Park concert, actor Richard Gere is a regular at the hotel and Madonna stopped there when she recently visited London.
The Yeltsins will be greeted by undreamt-of luxury, including 18th century chandeliers, Regency dining tables, two enormous bedrooms and two bathrooms.
The walls are covered with silk drapes and there are panoramic views over London.
The bill for just one night could feed and clothe an average Russian family for many months.
Naina's a partner with style
Geraint Jones
SMILING and polished, Naina Yeltsin yesterday showed the face of a true ‘presidential partner’.
Hillary Clinton she's not, but there was no trace of the frumpy babushka, below, from 1989.
Well-dressed and outgoing, Naina made the most of her trip, starting with breakfast at the Hyde Park Hotel.
There was a tour of the Prince and Princess of Wales's London home, Kensington Palace, before lunch at the Savoy.
Later, when schoolboy Alex Choudury, nine, presented Naina with a painting, her spontaneous kiss on his cheek was repeated for the cameras.
True, there were no Raisa Gorbachev-style furs, but this First Lady fits her new clothes well.
Battle over Dr Finlay town vicar
FED-UP churchgoers in a town where a new TV series of Doctor Finlay's Casebook is being filmed want their vicar sacked.
A second petition to oust Rev Ann Fraser, 42, came after she refused to lead Remembrance Day prayers at Auchtermuchty, Fife.
Dr Alexander Muir resigned at the weekend after 33 years as a church elder — the seventh to go since Mrs Fraser took over two years ago.
Nine choristers have also left.
‘She has brought us nothing but misery,’ said Dr Muir.
Major in Euro clash with Mitterrand
Eben Black, Political Correspondent
PREMIER John Major clashed bitterly with France's President Mitterrand last night over Europe.
The row was sparked as the French head of state went on national TV to declare any attempt to delay signing up to the Maastricht Treaty by Mr Major would be ‘unacceptable’.
But Downing Street hit back immediately with a stinging rebuke, plunging Anglo-French relations to a new low.
‘The timing of the Maastricht legislation is a matter for the British Government,’ a No 10 source declared last night.
The two nations are already at loggerheads over the failure of trade talks between the EC and the Americans.
According to senior Government sources, relations with the French are now so bad Mr Major and Mr Mitterrand do not talk to each other.
Any messages are relayed through the Germans or the Italians.
The row blew up after Britain clashed with other EC nations after a crucial summit in Brussels.
Mr Major came under fire over his pledge to Euro-rebels in the Commons he will not ratify the controversial Maastricht Treaty until next year.
When Maastricht was agreed 11 months ago, all countries pledged to ratify it before the end of this year.
Denmark — which rejected the Treaty after a referendum in June — was given special dispensation to wait until 1993.
At last night's summit Denmark was also heavily criticised after it demanded further opt-outs before it will sign the agreement.
Along with the Danes, the Government then hit back by warning the EC that Britain will stall any further moves to union unless their demands are met.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd told fellow ministers: ‘A treaty which is somewhat delayed is better than no treaty at all.’
Beattie is called up
MAUREEN Lipman is set to scoop another acting award for her role as Beattie, the Jewish momma in the BT ads.
She is being considered as a best actress nominee for the first British Academy of Film and Television Arts advertising awards.
Elton John is being considered for the best actor nomination for his Coca-Cola advert.
Comedians Vic Reeves, Russ Abbot and John Cleese are also in the running for nominations, to be chosen on Monday.
The winners will be announced later this month at a dinner hosted by David Frost at London's Royal Albert Hall.
Gazumping makes a comeback
BARGAIN hunters trying to snap up repossessed homes are being ‘gazumped’ by cash-rich developers, says the industry watchdog.
The last-minute outbidding by opportunist builders is costing ordinary buyers a small fortune in lost fees.
The depressed property market helped swell complaints to Ombudsman for Corporate Estate Agents, David Quayle, by half, said his annual report yesterday.
He warned: ‘Buyers should not let greed rule their emotions.
‘There is no guarantee of success until contracts are exchanged.’
Snookered by tax man
SNOOKER star Kirk Stevens was declared bankrupt by the tax man at London's High Court yesterday.
The former cocaine user, who slumped from fourth to 59th in the world, now lives in his native Canada.
Stevens, 33, who earned just £11,325 from snooker last year, takes a break from his lumber yard job next week for the UK Championship in Preston.
‘Ex-husband killed groom’
A BRIDE saw her groom stabbed to death by her ex-husband, a jury heard yesterday.
Amanda West, 30, was injured in the attack at her home in Manchester.
Robert Williams, 29, denies murdering Phillip West, 28.
He admits manslaughter and wounding.
The case continues at the city's crown court.
Poison cure for wrinkles
A DEADLY poison which causes botulism can make people look younger.
Injections of Clostridium botulinum into patients' faces reduce wrinkling, researchers at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Centre in New York have found.
The 10 to 15 minute treatment which costs £450 lasts for six months.
We are a gran again
FORMER premier Baroness Thatcher was celebrating last night after her son Mark told her she was to become a grandmother again.
Millionaire businessman Mark, 39, and his Texan wife Diane are expecting a baby in the spring.
Their first child, Michael, was born in March 1989.
Brookside star nabs art thugs
BROOKSIDE actor Dean Sullivan — villain Jimmy Corkhill in the TV soap — grabbed three art gallery vandals after they tried to wreck a £500 painting.
Dean, better known for his own brushes with the law in the Channel 4 show, chased the thugs and made a citizen's arrest when they smashed the picture's glass frame at a private viewing.
Helped by the gallery owner and a passer-by, he frog-marched the two men and a woman to a police station in Toxteth, Liverpool.
‘I heard glass breaking and saw three people heading for the door,’ said 37-year-old Dean, a modern art lover.
‘I managed to grab them and said ‘I'm making a citizen's arrest’.’
Martin Ainscough, owner of Merkmal Gallery, said: ‘We were lucky Dean was around.’
What did these four know of Iraq arms cover-up?
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
FOUR Government ministers face questions in the Commons after the arms-for-Iraq trial collapsed yesterday.
They are Board of Trade President Michael Heseltine, Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind, Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke and Foreign Office Minister Tristan Garel-Jones.
They were accused of ‘withholding the truth’ last night as Paul Henderson, Trevor Abraham and Peter Allen celebrated with champagne after being cleared of selling military equipment to Saddam.
They had been accused of deceiving the Department of Trade and Industry by claiming machine tools destined for Iraq had peaceful purposes when they were specifically designed to make fuses for shells.
The trial collapsed after former Defence Minister Alan Clark admitted in court the Government knew firms were supplying machinery to Iraq and breaking an arms embargo.
Government sources denied there were any deliberate attempts at a cover-up.
Alan Moses QC, prosecuting, told the Old Bailey that after evidence from Mr Clark which was ‘not consistent’ with his earlier statements, there was no longer a case to answer.
Mr Henderson, 54, Mr Allen, 47, and Mr Abraham, 46,— ex-directors of Coventry-based Matrix Churchill — said Mr Clark was not alone in carrying out Government policy.
‘He gave the right advice to the industry and we followed that advice,’ said Mr Henderson.
‘I believe Alan Clark was implementing Government policy.’
The Department of Trade and Industry was not acting alone either, he said.
Geoffrey Robertson, QC for Mr Henderson, told the judge after the acquittals: ‘The prosecution was brought by one hand of the Government which did not know what the other hand was doing.’
The court heard that Mr Henderson risked his life by passing to MI6 details of the Iraqi arms dealing network.
‘I did it to help my country,’ Mr Henderson told a press conference later.
‘I never felt I was at any risk and in terms of being brave I never even considered it.’
He had lost everything and had been made a ‘scapegoat’ by the Government, said his solicitors.
But he felt a ‘twinge of disappointment’ that the trial had not continued so more of the truth could have emerged.
‘Right now I am extremely relieved,’ he said.
Mr Henderson's lawyers are considering civil action against Customs and Excise.
The spectacular collapse of the trial sparked a furious row in the Commons last night.
Labour shadow defence secretary Dr David Clark demanded a full independent inquiry.
‘It is an absurd situation that the Government allows military equipment to be exported to a country when we end up sending our own troops to fight that country's aggression,’ he said.
Robin Cook, shadow trade and industry secretary, said: ‘Michael Heseltine must now tell us how much the DTI knew about weapon deals with Saddam and why they connived at arms exports instead of controlling them.’
Labour's Doug Hoyle said it had ‘lifted the cloak of secrecy on the arms that went to Iraq’.
Dennis Skinner said it appeared that the Government ‘was engaged in undercover activity’.
Tsarina to the manor returns..
A BRITISH woman is waiting to hear how she can reclaim a family estate deep inside the former Soviet Union.
Valya Schooling has been told by Ukraine government officials that she can become owner of the 6,000-acre property confiscated from her family after the Russian Revolution.
‘I am very, very excited about it.
It's like a dream come true,’ said Mrs Schooling yesterday at her home in Duns, Berwickshire.
Highway out as Tom cruises in
ITV last night finally brought down the curtain on Highway — the early evening Sunday ‘God slot’.
It will be replaced by adventure movies starring Hollywood idols including Tom Cruise.
Also in ITV's winter package of programmes announced yesterday include Jilly Cooper's new lust-in-the-saddle mini-series Riders and a controversial documentary series The Good Sex Guide hosted by Making Out star Margi Clarke.
Doctor Finlay is making a comeback after 26 years and switching to ITV with the coveted role of the Scottish medic going to actor David Rintoul.
Familiar favourites such as Morse with John Thaw, Heartbeat with Nick Berry, Poirot, Minder, Maigret, Taggart, Sherlock Holmes, The Chief, Medics and The Good Guys are returning.
The Darling Buds of May with David Jason and Catherine Zeta Jones is also re-surfacing for a third series.
Taxman, 68 robbed bank to pay debts
A RETIRED tax man turned to crime in a bid to pay off his debts.
Frederick Cowen, 68, escaped with £1,500 after terrifying staff at a north London bank with a fake gun.
The manager chased Cowen, who is arthritic, and handed him over to police.
The Old Bailey was told: ‘His only previous conviction is for parking on a double yellow line.’
Cowen, of Holloway, north London, admitted robbery and was remanded for reports.
Night-time clamp fear
A SECRETARY spent a night sitting in her car after discovering at 2am it had been clamped.
Diane Bailey, 21, had to call her father Cliff after National Clamps of Preston failed to respond to her calls.
He waited with her for eight hours at the Northampton car park.
Mr Bailey, of Sywell, Northants, said: ‘Anything could have happened.’
National Clamps said it had since sacked an operator.
Hammer revenge on love cheat soccer ace
Andrew Russell
SOCCER player Mickey Thomas was attacked with a hammer and screwdriver as he made love to a married woman in his car, a court heard yesterday.
His two attackers threatened to cut off the former Manchester United and Chelsea midfielder's private parts during the vicious revenge attack in a country lane.
When Thomas screamed ‘Stop, you are killing me’, his lover's husband is said to have replied ‘That is what we are trying to do.’
The former Welsh international, who now plays for Wrexham, was caught in a clinch with 29-year-old Erica Dean, the wife of his former brother-in-law Geoffrey Dean.
Dean, 32, and accomplice Mark Gorevan, 26, are accused of the attack in a deserted field near Prestatyn, North Wales, which left Thomas, 38, bruised and left with cuts on his back, buttocks and thighs.
David Middleweek, defending, told yesterday's committal hearing that Erica Dean and both men would deny intending to cause grievous bodily harm.
Thomas's superficial injuries could be seen as ‘fair retribution for an adulterer cheating with someone else's wife’, he added.
Lita Dowell, prosecuting, said Thomas had been having an affair with Mrs Dean for four months before the attack in August.
He picked her up in his car after Mrs Dean said she had some news from his ex-wife Debbie, Geoffrey Dean's sister and a former beauty queen.
Three or four minutes after they had pulled into a field, Thomas saw a shape near the door.
A hand reached in and grabbed him by the hair.
‘This person then started punching Mr Thomas in the face and the attacker shouted to Mrs Dean ‘Run Erica, run’,’ said Miss Dowell.
Thomas saw the attacker was her husband Geoffrey.
He felt hammer blows to his arm before Dean tried to stab him with a screwdriver.
‘Gorevan then threatened to cut off Thomas's ear, his penis, and break his legs,’ said Miss Dowell.
The men eventually ran off, leaving Thomas of Mochdre, near Colwyn Bay, to be picked up by a passing motorist.
Dean and Mrs Dean, and Gorevan, all from Rhyl, North Wales, were originally charged with attempted murder but the charge was reduced yesterday.
The defence asked for reporting restriction to be lifted.
The defendants were committed for trial.
Bail for Dean and Gorevan was refused but extended for Mrs Dean.
Elton's Aids charity
ROCK star Elton John is starting his own Aids charity.
Elton, 45, has given £500,000 to Aids organisations in Britain alone, in the last three years.
Now he wants a bigger say in how the money he gives is spent.
He will be a director of the new charity — called the Elton John Aids Foundation — which will sponsor research with money from royalties on his singles, charity events and company gifts.
The foundation will also help people with Aids or the HIV virus.
‘This is a terrible disease,’ he said in London yesterday.
‘I have lost many friends, and know of many people either HIV positive or with full-blown Aids — not only men, but also women and children.
‘I want to do whatever I can to help fight it.’
Elton has been giving away royalties from singles including his hit, Sacrifice and his duet with George Michael, Please Don't Let the Sun Go Down On Me.
D-Day for death doc
A DOCTOR convicted of attempted murder after giving a dying patient an overdose will know within days if he is to be struck off.
Hospital consultant Nigel Cox, 47, was given a suspended sentence at Winchester Crown Court in September, faces a General Medical Council hearing on Monday.
Dr Cox, of Winchester, was convicted after Lilian Boyes, 70, died in hospital.
BMW ‘deaths driver’ held for own safety
A MOTORIST accused of killing two young girls was remanded in custody yesterday for his own safety.
Janson Cartwright, 20, was charged with causing the death of Nadine Groom, eight, and Deanne Harlow, seven.
Cartwright, from the same housing estate where the girls lived, was also accused of failing to supply a blood specimen and driving his BMW uninsured.
Police ringed the court at Darlaston, Walsall, West Midlands, as prosecutor Nelson Jerram asked magistrates not to free Cartwright on bail.
‘Feelings are running high in the area,’ he said.
Cartwright was remanded in custody for seven days.
The two-minute hearing passed without trouble.
Victims of the rare bird trade
A SMUGGLING racket is killing thousands of exotic birds each year, say undercover investigators.
Spies working for the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds found that Tanzanian traders routinely forge export papers to the UK, despite tough laws in their own country.
An RSPB spokesman called on Prime Minister John Major to bring in regulations to curb imports into the EC.
£790,000 for ward blunder
A PATIENT who went to hospital with a minor complaint and ended up brain-damaged and helpless was awarded nearly £800,000 damages yesterday.
Publican Richard Earl, 45, went into hospital at Devizes, Wilts, in 1979, because of dizziness.
While there, he fell and broke his skull — at a time when he should have been supervised, a judge at Winchester, Hants, heard.
Bobbie's wild goose chase
POLICE were called by a terrified householder who heard raiders smash into his house through the patio door.
But when officers got there, the only evidence of the culprits was goose feathers.
The confused birds crash-landed into the house at Hockley, near Rayleigh, Essex, mistaking the reflection off the glass for a patch of water.
Drug runner dies
DRUG smuggler Lily Ehirobo died yesterday after 111 badly wrapped packets of cocaine worth £50,000 burst in her stomach.
Ehirobo, 38, had been arrested at Heathrow airport after flying from Brussels.
She died in hospital at Ashford, Surrey.
Three cocaine smugglers have died in just over a month after swallowing their contraband to beat searches.
Two others, including a British man aged 23, were still seriously ill yesterday.
Schools turn away poor little rich kids
Richard Creasy
STATE schools are being forced to turn away children whose parents can no longer afford to pay for private education.
Hard-up families in the stockbroker belt are begging state schools to bail them out as the recession bites deeper.
But so many once-wealthy children are leaving the private sector that there is no room for them all at the most popular schools.
The George Abbott secondary school at Guildford is among those having to turn away pupils.
Headmaster Geoffrey Wilson blamed the problem on worried parents facing salary cuts.
‘Because of the recession we are experiencing an upsurge in admissions from the private sector,’ he said.
Another Guildford head, Michael Marchant of the Howard of Effingham Secondary School, said that in the last academic year 14 pupils had switched to his school from the private sector — twice as many as in the previous year.
Tim Young, head of the town's £5,400-a-year Royal Grammar School, admitted that during the summer five boys were taken out of his school for financial reasons.
A record number of parents were getting aid through scholarships and more than 100 were being helped under the Government's assisted places scheme.
Public schools have raised their fees by an average 7.5 per cent this year, the smallest increase for a decade.
But the rise has left thousands of parents struggling to pay.
Don Caskie, chairman of the Independent Schools' Bursars' Association, said: ‘Parents have taken a terrible hammering.
They have lost jobs or their businesses have gone under and schools are very conscious of this.’
Many private schools were offering easy payment terms and accepting credit cards.
Others had introduced new scholarship awards, he said.
But the Department of Education stressed there were 1.5 million spare places in the state system.
‘There should not be any great difficulty getting places in state schools but the situation varies from area to area,’ a spokesman said.
Children fit for nothing
MANY children are so unfit they are unable to do even basic exercises, a study revealed yesterday.
Youngsters aged between seven and 11 found running, jumping and throwing too difficult.
Children from well-off families would rather play computer games than go outside.
Even those from poorer backgrounds — traditionally fitter — find exercise boring.
Chris Blackshaw, who studied children at seven junior schools in Peterborough, Cambs, now wants an overhaul of PE lessons.
‘These children should be the sports stars of tomorrow,’ he said.
‘The majority of PE in schools is very basic with no enthusiasm introduced into it.
‘The blame is on society, not on teachers.’
Youngsters in the city are now being encouraged to take up more sports like short tennis to keep them interested.
Fitness rates in the test schools have already been raised and the project is to be extended to the city's 50 other primary and special schools.
A spokesman for the Sports Council, which helped fund the study, said they were alarmed by the findings.
‘We are very aware of the need for more exercise by both adults and youngsters,’ he said.
Labour of love lands $¼m bill
Ian Key
NEW mum Alison Lenton is home from America with two unusual souvenirs — baby Alexander and the $250,000 bill her insurance company paid for his unexpected arrival.
Alexander was born nearly four months early while Alison and husband took what they thought would be a final child-free holiday in Florida.
They were at DisneyWorld, on the last day of their American trip when Alison, 30, went into labour.
She was flown by helicopter to hospital in Orlando.
After a 10-hour labour, Alexander was born, weighing 1lb 9oz.
He was given only a 50–50 chance of surviving.
For the next 92 days, the baby needed constant attention.
Richard, 32, deputy manager of a sports centre, returned home to Leeds, while Alison rented an apartment near the hospital.
And all the time the bills were piling up.
Medical care, over Pounds 3,000.
Room at Arnold Palmer Hospital, £550 a day.
Helicopter fee and rent of Alison's apartment.
Luckily, the Lentons had paid £25 each for medical insurance, which covered the lot.
‘I never thought for a moment he wouldn't pull through,’ said Alison.
It was three months before she and her baby could fly home.
Alexander, now 17 weeks old, still weighs only 4lb 11oz — and is an American citizen.
Alison, a personnel director, said: ‘The doctor on call happened to be the unit director, which didn't come cheap.
‘It's a ridiculous amount, but Alexander is worth every penny.’
Ready Plan Insurance manager Steve King said: ‘This claim is one of the biggest I've heard of.
‘Thankfully, it has turned out all right for mother and baby.’
‘Sack cheating town hall boss’
A LOVE-CHEAT council chief yesterday faced calls for his sacking after his wife rammed a town hall with his H-reg Mercedes in protest at his affair.
Michael Friend can no longer command respect and should be dismissed from his £30,000 chief executive post, according to Tories at Gosport, Hants.
His wife Elaine, 29, drove the £22,000 car through glass front doors after learning of her husband's affair with principal housing officer Kim Carron.
Tory leader Tony Briggs said: ‘It has brought the council into disrepute and his own judgment must be called into question.’
But Peter Chegwyn, leader of the ruling Liberal Democrats, said: ‘We have total confidence in him.’
Cheers as cruel farmer is jailed
ANIMAL rights workers cheered yesterday as the man branded Britain's cruel lest farmer was sentenced to three months' jail.
But they jeered when Colin French's lawyer appealed and he was bailed.
Magistrates at Buckingham, Bucks, heard how French, 56, defied a 15-year ban on keeping animals imposed last year after more than 400 starving ewes and 25 cattle skeletons were found at Brook Farm near Winslow, Bucks.
Dozens of animals were so weak they had to be shot on the spot.
At that hearing RSPCA Chief Inspector Douglas Davidson described the farm as a ‘concentration camp, a Belsen for animals’.
PC Pounder no match for champ
BREATHLESS PC Les Pounder was always going to come off second best when he set off in pursuit of a pub fight suspect.
His quarry was world 800 metres champion David Sharpe, a court heard yesterday.
‘With the best will in the world the police officer was unlikely to catch him,’ said Michael Coulthard, prosecuting.
The athlete was only caught when another officer joined the chase in a patrol car.
Sharpe, 25, was accused of beating up car mechanic David Patterson.
The victim was left with a bloody nose, fat lip and bruising after being pinned against a back alley wall and repeatedly punched.
As Mr Patterson, 22, pointed out his attackers to police Sharpe took to his heels.
‘Sharpe was only about 15 yards away when I moved towards him and he started running,’ PC Pounder told magistrates at Hebburn, Tyne and Wear.
‘I didn't manage to make up any ground on him whatsoever.’
Sharpe, of Jarrow, denied assault causing actual bodily harm outside The Venue pub in South Shields in July.
He also denied doing a runner.
‘I was just jogging,’ he said.
‘I stopped when a police car pulled up because I thought it was stupid to go on running.’
Earlier that night he and a friend of Mr Patterson were thrown off the premises for fighting because Sharpe allegedly spilt beer over the other man's girlfriend.
But when Mr Patterson followed them outside he was immediately attacked by Sharpe and chef Michael White, 26, of Hebburn.
‘Sharpe hit me and I felt the pain in my nose and mouth,’ said Mr Patterson.
‘There was blood pouring down my face.’
Pub manager Dave Bruce broke up the fight and said both Sharpe and his friend were punching Mr Patterson.
Sharpe said White had done all the punching but he was found guilty and fined £100, ordered to pay £50 compensation, with £138 costs.
Schoolboy hero defies gunmen
A BOY of 10 has been hailed a hero by police after his family were terrorised in their beds by a gang of masked gunmen.
The raiders, armed with a sawn-off shotgun, made off with thousands of pounds, leaving Darren and his parents bound and gagged at their flat above Mapplewell ex-servicemen's club near Barnsley, South Yorkshire.
The gang threatened to return within 30 minutes if the police were called, but defiant Darren wriggled free and triggered a burglar alarm.
‘Threats were made that the men would return and Darren showed a lot of courage to free himself.
He is a very brave lad,’ said a police spokesman.
Sir sacked for slapping pupil
SCIENCE teacher Robert Harrison was sacked for slapping a schoolboy who allegedly put red-hot forceps in his hand.
The 14-year-old boy had heated the forceps on a Bunsen burner in the lab at Beaumont School, St Albans, Herts, an industrial tribunal was told yesterday.
The teacher claimed that the boy put the forceps in his hand, but the pupil said Mr Harrison had picked them up from a desk.
Mr Harrison, 59, of Welwyn Garden City, a science master for 30 years, claims unfair dismissal, which Hertfordshire County Council denies.
The Bedford tribunal was told he had been warned previously about slapping pupils.
The hearing continues.
£60m paid off as we save for rainy day
By Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
JOB loss fears are forcing millions of consumers to save for a rainy day rather than borrow, it was revealed yesterday.
Continuing anxiety about the state of the economy forced families to pay off more outstanding debt last month.
The fear factor was heightened by the turmoil which followed Britain's ejection from the European Exchange Rate Mechanism system.
Concern about jobs is now the Number One consideration for British families, according to the latest official figures from the Central Statistical Office.
Consumers paid back £60 million more than they borrowed in September, on top of the net repayment of £36 million in August.
The bulk of September's settlement was a cut in the money owed to credit card firms.
The payback on Visa and Access is growing as people try to keep running debts down to a minimum.
This payback was even more than City experts had expected.
They predicted a repayment figure of around £50 million, on the back of Black Wednesday on September 16.
There are some signs that consumers are ready to borrow more money for big projects.
Latest figures show a growth of £332 million in the three months to September 30 from the exceptionally low figure of £155 million in the previous quarter.
But these three monthly figures pre-date the effect of Black Wednesday.
The City is braced for far worse figures to come in the coming months, unless the Government recovery package produces a startling turn round in optimism.
Chancellor Norman Lamont hopes that a further cut in interest rates from eight per cent to either seven or six per cent will boost confidence and in turn the economy this week.
Ministers are pinning their hopes on a big spending Christmas this year to give the nation's High Streets and struggling businesses a boost.
They may draw some comfort from a survey revealing recession-hit parents are still prepared to spend out on youngsters.
One in four were prepared to pay between £50 and £100 on a Christmas present for each child.
Almost one in six said that they would spend more than £100, according to the study by market research group Nielsen.
There was disappointing news for advertisers spending heavily on pre-Christmas promotions, with only six per cent of parents saying they were influenced.
Children themselves held the greatest sway, and more than 60 per cent of mothers and father were influenced by their offspring.
‘It is peer pressure which has the greatest weight when it comes to children deciding which toys they most want,’ said Nielsen marketing director Colin Buckingham.
‘Television is reckoned by parents to be the next most important influence.’
U-turn on tax bills
MILLIONS of people face paying bigger national insurance contributions after Chancellor Norman Lamont's Autumn Statement on Thursday.
He is likely to put up charges from nine per cent to 10.4 per cent.
For those earning £21,000 or more a year, that would mean nearly £300 a year extra.
During the election campaign Premier John Major promised tax cuts ‘year on year’.
But Treasury chiefs refused yesterday to rule out the backdoor tax rise.
The increase would give the Treasury an extra £2 billion to cope with runaway public spending and a big drop in revenue from income and company tax and VAT.
Mr Lamont will sugar the bitter pill with another one per cent drop in interest rates and tax help for struggling businesses — and even first-time home-buyers.
But the public is not likely to view the Autumn Statement as the big boost to the economy which Mr Major and his senior ministers have been signalling.
There is even worse news to come.
Though Mr Major went on record again and again during the election campaign to forecast a steady drop in taxes over four or five years, Ministers admit privately that the bill must go up, not down, in the spring Budget.
This will involve either freezing income tax allowances or putting up VAT.
Unless the public tax bills goes up, the Treasury will have to borrow at least £40 billion next year, just to stay afloat.
Tory HQ staff face jobs axe
A STAFF clear-out is being planned at Tory HQ by a newly appointed troubleshooter, director general Paul Judge.
The 43-year-old millionaire has been brought in to shake up Central Office.
His appointment is certain to send morale tumbling at the Smith Square headquarters.
There have already been a string of job cuts and more are certain to follow around Christmas time to cut the party's £10 million overdraft.
Mr Judge is currently chairman of Food From Britain, a pressure group aimed at promoting the UK's producers and farmers.
Party chairman Sir Norman Fowler, who announced the appointment, said it was ‘a further step forward in our managerial reforms’.
John Major has refused to make his own staff changes in the Cabinet.
He issued a ‘your jobs are safe’ message to his ministers following demands for sackings from backbenchers.
Right-wingers led by John Carlisle are demanding the axe for Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley and Citizen's Charter Secretary William Waldegrave, saying they are too Left-wing.
‘There will be no reshuffle,’ one senior source said.
Ford unions to vote on strike action
WORKERS at car giant Ford are to be balloted on industrial action after unions warned more than 300 jobs could go.
The vote will include the option of a strike but an immediate walkout is unlikely.
‘We certainly won't walk our members into a major problem,’ said Transport Workers' Union deputy general secretary Jack Adams yesterday.
Ford wants to shed more than 1,400 jobs through voluntary redundancy, but Mr Adams said there were unlikely to be enough volunteers.
He said he expected most of the cuts to fall on Merseyside's Halewood plant.
His warning came after the breakdown of talks in London.
Ford personnel director John Hougham said he believed industrial action was still a long way off.
Night-time clamp ordeal
A SECRETARY spent a night sitting in her car after discovering at 2am that wheel clampers had immobilised it.
Diane Bailey, 21, had to call her father Cliff after National Clamps of Preston failed respond to her calls.
He waited with her for eight hours at the Northampton car park.
Mr Bailey, of Sywell, Northants, said: ‘Diane was stranded.
Anything could have happened to her.’
National Clamps said it had sacked an operator over the incident.
Big spender's fraud spree
A TEENAGER began a £135,000 credit fraud spree to keep up with the yuppie lifestyle of his workmates, a court was told yesterday.
Mark Richardson obtained expensive cars and booked Caribbean holidays.
Richardson, 22, of Clevedon, Avon, admitted 33 fraud charges and asked for 48 others to be considered by Gloucester Crown Court.
He was jailed for 2 years.
Family's hammer revenge on love cheat soccer ace
By Andrew Russell
SOCCER player Mickey Thomas was attacked with a hammer and screwdriver as he made love with a married woman in his car, a court heard yesterday.
His two attackers threatened to cut off the former Manchester United and Chelsea midfielder's private parts during the vicious revenge attack in a lonely country lane.
When Thomas screamed ‘Stop you are killing me’, the husband of his lover is said to have replied ‘That is what we are trying to do.’
The former Welsh international was caught in a clinch with 29-year-old Erica Dean, the wife of his former brother-in-law Geoffrey Dean.
Dean, 32, and accomplice Mark Gorevan, 26, are accused of the attack in a deserted field near Prestatyn, North Wales, which left Thomas, 38, bruised and left with cuts on his back, buttocks and thighs.
David Middleweek, defending, told yesterday's committal hearing that Erica Dean and both men would deny intending to cause grievous bodily harm.
Thomas's superficial injuries could be seen as ‘fair retribution for an adulterer cheating with someone else's wife’, he added.
Lita Dowell, prosecuting, said that Thomas had been having an affair with Mrs Dean for four months before the attack in August.
He picked her up in his car after Mrs Dean told him she had some news from his ex-wife Debbie, Geoffrey Dean's sister and a former beauty queen.
Three or four minutes after they had pulled into a field, Thomas saw a shape near the door.
A hand reached in and grabbed him by the hair.
‘This person then started punching Mr Thomas in the face and the attacker shouted to Mrs Dean ‘Run Erica, run’,’ said Miss Dowell.
Thomas saw the attacker was her husband Geoffrey.
He felt hammer blows to his arm before Dean tried to stab him with a screwdriver.
‘Gorevan then threatened to cut off Thomas's ear, his penis, and break his legs,’ said Miss Dowell.
The men eventually ran off, leaving Thomas of Mochdre, near Colwyn Bay, to be picked up by a passing motorist.
Dean and Mrs Dean, and Gorevan, all from Rhyl, North Wales, were originally charged with attempted murder but the charge was reduced yesterday.
The defence asked for reporting restriction to be lifted.
The defendants were committed for trial at Mold Crown Court.
Bail for Dean and Gorevan was refused but extended for Mrs Dean.
Transplant girl's fight
TRANSPLANT patient Lisa Strange, 12, was fighting for her life yesterday after being given a new heart and lungs.
Lisa, of Reading, Berks, picked up an infection after her nine-hour transplant last week at Harefield, Middlesex.
Her parents, Keith and Michelle, are at her bedside.
Beatles sue Sgt Pepper
THE Beatles are locked in a High Court battle over the rights to the cover of their album Sergeant Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band.
The world-famous photo of the Beatles surrounded by a collage of celebrities is currently held by the son of Sixties photographer Michael Cooper.
Apple Corps, acting for the three surviving Beatles, is suing Adam Cooper, 29, for breach of copyright.
But Mr Cooper claims the picture belonged to his father who committed suicide in 1973.
Mum's labour of love lands $250,000 bill
By Ian Key
NEW mum Alison Lenton is home from America with two unusual souvenirs — baby Alexander and the $250,000 bill her insurance company paid for his unexpected arrival.
Alexander was born nearly four months early while Alison and husband took what they thought would be a final child-free holiday in to Florida.
They were at DisneyWorld, on the last day of their American trip when Alison, 30, suddenly went into labour.
She was flown by helicopter to hospital in Orlando.
After a 10-hour labour, Alexander was born, weighing 1lb 9oz.
He was given only a 50–50 chance of surviving.
For the next 92 days, baby Alexander needed constant attention.
Richard, 32, deputy manager of a sports centre, returned home to Leeds.
Alison rented an apartment near the hospital.
And all the time the bills were piling up.
Medical care, over £3,000.
Room at Arnold Palmer Hospital, £550 a day.
Helicopter fee, rent of Alison's apartment.
Luckily, the Lentons had paid £25 each for medical insurance, which covered the lot.
‘I never thought for a moment he wouldn't pull through,’ said Alison.
It was three months before she and her baby could fly home.
Alexander, now 17 weeks old, still weighs only 4lb 11oz — and is an American citizen.
Alison, a personnel director said: ‘The doctor on call happened to be the unit director, which didn't come cheap.
It's a ridiculous amount, but Alexander is worth every penny.’
Ready Plan Insurance manager Steve King said: ‘This claim is one of the biggest I've heard of.
Thankfully, it has turned out all right for mother and baby.’
Murder charge
A BRITISH businessman has been charged with murder in Thailand after his partner was stabbed to death at a beach resort.
Joseph McCracken, from Mountain Ash, Mid-Glamorgan, could face execution if convicted of killing Morgan Oliver.
They were setting up an introduction agency for Thai women and British men.
Becky's still haunted by dog attack
IT'S a year since three-year-old Becky Palk was savaged by two dogs.
A year of physical pain, and deep psychological anguish.
Becky, now four, still suffers constant nightmares, is moody, and attacks her eight-year-old sister, Emma, for no reason.
She lost two thirds of her blood and was close to death after her grandparents' two 10-stone great danes suddenly turned on her.
She suffered horrendous injuries to her scalp and legs.
Now, after countless operations, she is able to walk again, but has bad balance and often falls, especially if she tries to run.
Becky, of Shanklin, on the Isle of Wight, will need at least one more operation in January to cover up the remaining bald patches on her head.
The worst scars — on her legs — will probably be there for life.
‘She's a lot better physically now, but I'm not so sure about mentally,’ said her mother Karen Temple-Smith.
‘I don't think the scars have healed on the inside.
I'm sure it will take a long time.’
The strain of looking after Becky has also taken its toll.
Her father, Nigel, left home three months ago.
Karen was forced to give up her job to look after her daughter and the family is now heavily in debt, with the prospect of a bleak Christmas.
Social services have stopped paying a £30 attendance allowance for Becky to go to Southampton once every two months for treatment.
But there is one glimmer of hope for Becky, who has just started school.
She is beginning to pull through her ordeal.
. with a little help from her new friends who are proving very protective towards the brave youngster.
New Welsh war threat to families
By Simon Trump
WELSH extremists have threatened to firebomb five English families out of their homes for being ‘racist colonists’.
The terror group Sons of Glendower sent warning letters to the BBC in Bangor, Gwynedd, setting a deadline of March 1 — St David's Day — for the families to get out of Wales.
As police mounted round-the-clock guards on properties last night, one of those named vowed not to back down.
‘I'm not going to be forced into anything by these loonies,’ said shopkeeper Ray Sutton.
Mr Sutton, 51, who moved to Llangybi, near Lampeter, from Kent seven years ago, believes he is a target because he refuses to place advertisements solely in Welsh in his shop window.
He received his own personal letter, telling him: ‘You are an English colonist.
You are a racist.’
In recent months the fanatics had scaled down their 20-year campaign against English-owned property, but last week launched attacks on five homes.
In their latest letters, the group, named after a 14th century rebel prince, threaten: ‘We must cut the cancer of the Englishmen out.’
Twin fights back to life
PREMATURE baby Leah Roberts has won her fight for life.
Twin sister Leanne died 24 hours after being born and Leah, who weighed 1lb 5oz, underwent heart surgery and suffered pneumonia.
But after an amazing recovery the four-month-old is now 5lbs.
‘She is just determined to survive,’ said mother Gillian, 34, of Hereford.
Army probes male rape claim
DEFENCE department detectives are investigating an attack on a man who claims to have been raped by a gang of drunken soldiers.
The 30-year-old victim, who has not been named, told police he had been abducted, beaten and gang raped by the soldiers from the Fifth Airborne Division.
He said he was was sexually assaulted near Army barracks by troops he met outside a chip shop in Aldershot, Hants after attending a Remembrance Day parade on Saturday morning.
After the attack he was dumped outside the barracks before making his way to the Royal Cambridge Military Hospital in the town where he was treated for severe bruising to his head and body.
Ministry of Defence police were called in to interview 15 members of the Nine Squadron Royal Engineers and Brigadier Cedric Delves, commanding the Fifth Airborne Division, was summoned by the General Officer Commanding the Army's South District.
But Detective Chief Inspector Joe Nixon, leading the police investigation, denied 15 soldiers had been involved in the attack.
He said the victim ‘suggested that three or four men were involved.’
Mr Nixon said: ‘We are at the beginning of our investigations.’
6 die for vengeance
A GUNMAN slaughtered six people in cold blood because he had been evicted.
Among Lynwood Drake's victims was his 80-year-old landlord, who had thrown him out of his California home.
Drake, 43, shot himself after being cornered.
Police said the killings were motivated by revenge.
Boy survives 25,000 volt booby trap
By Richard Creasy
A SCHOOLBOY miraculously survived a 25,000-volt electric shock after vandals booby-trapped a railway bridge.
Stunned police hunting the maniacs who rigged up the deadly device said the 13-year-old should have been killed instantly.
But lucky Craig Harris escaped with bruises and minor burns after being thrown into the air as he accidently touched a live wire attached to overhead power cables.
He was crossing a railway bridge used by hundreds of other youngsters on their way to school at Witham, Essex, when the current blasted through his body.
‘I was just tapping my hand along the bridge parapet when my eyes went orange.
The next thing I remember was getting up and falling down again because my feet were numb,’ he said.
A schoolfriend helped the youngster back to his feet and used a drinking straw to push the live wire from the side of the bridge.
Craig's mother Sue Harris said: ‘Children use that bridge all the time to get to and from school.
I can't believe anyone would be stupid enough to trail a wire on to power cables and then leave it lying around for someone to touch.’
British Transport Police last night branded the culprits as ‘sick, wicked and extremely irresponsible’.
‘Most people who make even the slightest contact with a wire carrying 25,000 volts die.
This was an unbelievably callous act,’ said a spokesman.
‘This lad was very, very lucky.
People who dangle wires or ropes on to power lines to see what happens are playing with fire.’
BR electrical engineers searched the area for the suspect wire but it is believed to have melted under the force of the current.
Hands off, France told
PREMIER John Major has told French President Francois Mitterrand to mind his own business.
In a furious letter he told him not to interfere in Britain's moves to ratify the Maastricht Treaty.
The stern message followed Mr Mitterrand's remarks on French TV that British delay over Maastricht was ‘unacceptable’.
But Mr Major told the Commons yesterday: ‘The passage of the Maastricht Bill is a matter for the British Parliament and for the British Government.’
He believes Mr Mitterrand is using Tory disarray over the treaty to cover up his own reluctance to reach a Gatt world trade deal.
‘The damage of there not being a Gatt round is too profound to contemplate.
It is the crucial immediate issue,’ he warned.
Tennis girl, 14 ‘raped by her mother's lover’
A PROMISING tennis player of 14 was raped by her mother's boyfriend who had offered to be her coach, a court heard yesterday.
The 28-year-old cab driver attacked her in a clearing after she went to join Queen's Club in west London, Mark Dennis, prosecuting, told the Old Bailey.
Mr Dennis said the man put his hand over the girl's face and mouth and threatened to throw her in a river if she screamed.
Earlier he had driven her to two tennis clubs to discuss membership.
After visiting Queen's the man took her for a walk near Twickenham Bridge where he attacked her.
The girl arrived in Britain with her family from Monaco in June when they faced financial ruin after the BCCI bank collapse.
The man denies rape.
The trial continues.
Brother of ‘Aids timebomb’ dies
THE brother of ‘Aids romeo’ Roy Cornes has died from the virus, a week after his family celebrated Christmas in his honour.
Garry Cornes, 26, a haemophiliac, was diagnosed as HIV positive in 1985 after he was given infected blood products.
His brother Roy, who is also a haemophiliac, was accused earlier this year of deliberately infecting women with the virus.
Roy said yesterday: ‘Garry was in such pain.
I loved him too much to want to see him suffer.’
Doctor's tragic X-ray blunder
AN X-ray doctor failed to spot a three-inch piece of glass lodged in a patient's chest.
Dr Edward Kandiyali thought Stanley Kitchen, who had tried to commit suicide, was lying on the shard when he saw the X-ray photo at Hull Royal Infirmary.
It was only discovered at a post mortem when Mr Kitchen, of Beverley, near Hull, died weeks later after complaining of chest pains.
A Hull inquest was told the glass punctured his lung.
The hearing continues.
Killer goes on the run with violent robber
A NATIONWIDE hunt was launched yesterday for a killer who escaped from jail with a man serving 11 years for robbery.
Murderer Steven Mynott, 29, and Phillip Ayres, 25, fled the day after improvements to a 17ft security fence were approved by the Prison Department.
The two removed the metal windows of their cells and are understood to have scaled the fence with a scaffolding pole.
Both men were described by Devon and Cornwall police as extremely violent.
Mynott was jailed for life in 1980 for murdering a 54-year-old man near his home in Hemel Hempstead, Herts.
Ayres, from Cardiff, was sentenced to 11 years for robbery in 1990.
Road checks have been set up, and police dogs are being used in the hunt.
A dozen inmates have escaped or absconded from medium-security Channings Wood Jail, near Newton Abbott, Devon, in the past year.
Sir Jim's job cuts sadness
FIX-IT star Sir Jimmy Savile spoke last night of his sadness over job cuts at his favourite hospital.
Forty nurses and 30 other staff will lose their jobs at Stoke Mandeville hospital near Aylesbury, Bucks.
The hospital's famous spinal injuries unit will not be affected.
Sir Jimmy, 66, a long-time fundraiser for the hospital, said: ‘It is always sad that anybody should lose their job.’
Unions are to fight the moves announced in a £1 million cost-cutting package.
Set a pace
COMEDIANS Hale and Pace are joining an Ulster to London walk for meningitis research.
Students' easy life
STUDENTS are lazy, drink too much and take drugs, according to a survey.
Almost a third admitted doing no work in an average day and more than half said they had used soft drugs.
Nearly half said they were in debt.
‘Students are only human, they're not a lot different from other people of their age,’ said Durham University spokesman Keith Seacroft.
‘It wasn't exactly an in-depth survey, just a bit of fun.’
Now we give our jobs to the Germans
Paul Wilenius
A MULTI-MILLION pound building project aimed at boosting British jobs has been handed to the Germans.
Five hundred posts which would have been either created or protected here will now go overseas.
The go-ahead for the prestigious Jubilee Line Tube extension, which will create 12,000 badly-needed jobs, is expected to be announced by Chancellor Norman Lamont tomorrow.
But TODAY can reveal the contract for signals controlling the track to London's Docklands has been given to a firm called Alcatel, which has manufacturing bases in Germany and Canada.
The contract is a kick in the teeth for British workers at Westinghouse Signal, which expected to clinch the £100 million deal.
Alcatel hijacked the contract by undercutting Westinghouse at the last minute.
It is understood the British rival was never offered the opportunity to improve its bid.
Millions of public sector staff including nurses and civil servants will be forced out of a pay rise next year to keep the £1.8 billion Jubilee scheme going.
Troubled Premier John Major now faces huge protests from disgruntled workers if the cash goes towards creating jobs overseas.
London Underground insisted last night that the bulk of the jobs would be British.
But it regularly boasts of buying abroad to cut costs.
In a report about its latest Central line trains it boasts: ‘The doors come from Canada, aluminium body extrusions from France and the bogies are built in Japan.’
Alcatel spokesman John Highhams confirmed last night his company had been promised the contract if the project was given the green light in the Chancellor's Autumn statement.
‘It will ensure jobs in Germany and some in Canada.
It is a good contract for us.
It will run for a couple of years,’ he said.
The Westinghouse Signal company, based in Chippenham, Wiltshire, refused to comment on the contract last night, saying: ‘This issue is sensitive.’
The decision will appal many MPs who want to see Government money spent on reviving British industry — not overseas competition.
A £300 million contract to build rolling stock has been won by GEC-Alsthom.
Although the company has a plant in London, it is expected some of the work will go to the company's French factories.
London Underground admitted last night that it was buying more and more from overseas.
It said it had to advertise its contracts throughout Europe under new EC rules which come into force in 1993.
An internal company magazine called London Lines proudly flaunts its international approach.
‘Although assembled at British Rail Engineering, many of the major components are made elsewhere,’ says the article.
‘Elsewhere on the Underground, many of the Otis escalators are built in Germany, and even the sleepers come from France and Australia, albeit via a UK agent.
‘Much of the same applies to buses.
Gone are the days of AEC.
‘Today's buses often bear names like Volvo, Scania, Mercedes-Benz, Renault, Daf, and Iveco — foreign every one.’
A London Underground spokesman admitted last night: ‘Several thousand people will get work overseas through this contract.
‘But this is a major project and it is hoped that most of the 12,000 people it puts in work will be in Britain.’
He added: ‘This project needs every encouragement possible.’
Yet it now looks inevitable that MPs and unions will be demanding the big spending schemes aimed at putting Britain back to work do exactly that.
Mr Lamont is expected to announce a one or two per cent cut in interest rates tomorrow, combined with a package of measures to help boost industry.
The deal, spearheaded by the Jubilee project, is an important part of Mr Major's ‘dash for growth’.
Now his strategy for recovery looks set to become another huge embarrassment.
Millionaire Michael Heseltine told British bosses yesterday: ‘You are paying your workers too much.’
With inflation under four per cent and unemployment heading for three million, there was no justification for big increases, the Board of Trade President told the Confederation of British Industry.
He pledged more help for British companies to export their goods and take advantage of the falling value of the pound abroad.
But he warned businessmen they must work harder to make British industry more competitive.
‘If we are to compete with the world's best 10 we have to ensure that our productivity matches theirs.
‘For decades we have been gradually slipping behind.
We must reverse this cycle of decline.’
My wife Camilla is not having affair with Prince Charles
THE husband of Camilla Parker Bowles revealed last night: She is not Prince Charles's lover.
Brigadier Andrew Parker Bowles broke his silence following newspaper reports which suggested that Charles and Camilla had been secretly meeting for more than 10 years and that there was evidence of a ‘passionate intimacy’.
The brigadier, director of the Royal Army Veterinary Corps, said: ‘It is not true.
It is what I said last time, it's fiction.’
The brigadier made his statement within hours of the latest series of allegations concerning the friendship between Camilla and the Prince, 44 next weekend.
Diana is said to have been upset and angered by phone calls between Camilla and Charles.
And the princess's closest friends claim that the friendship has done much harm to the royal marriage.
Mr Parker Bowles, 52, said he had not personally read the latest newspaper reports but added: ‘I have been told about it.’
Of claims that the relationship was one of passionate intimacy, the brigadier said: ‘They have been suggesting that for some time.
It is not true.’
Asked if he had been in touch with his 43-year-old wife, who is absent from their country home in Chippenham, Wilts, the brigadier said: ‘Of course I have.’
He refused to comment further and told waiting reporters: ‘You are wasting your time.
You know I do not talk.’
After making the statement outside his flat in Kensington, West London, the brigadier, casually dressed in waterproof trousers and a sweat shirt, drove off in his Peugeot 405 refusing further comment.
Friends of the brigadier said last night it was significant that he had last made not one, but two, positive denials of the relationship.
In the past he has always refused to deny the relationship ‘on the record’ and Camilla has also maintained a dignified silence.
Major ducks arms-for-Iraq bombshell
Russell Jenkins
THE arms-to-Iraq affair threatened to blow up in John Major's face yesterday.
As a full judicial inquiry was announced in the Commons, the Government was savaged for ‘covering up its collusion and connivance’ in shipping machine tools for weapons to Saddam Hussein.
Fresh controversy was raging in Westminster last night over Mr Major's exact knowledge of the affair.
When he was Chancellor in the Thatcher Cabinet, he wrote to Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown that the machine tools exported by Matrix Churchill were ‘not lethal.’
There were strong pointers from Downing Street that former junior defence minister Alan Clark could face prosecution for perjury.
Attorney-general Sir Nicholas Lyell had a torrid reception yesterday as he told the Commons that the inquiry chief, Lord Justice Sir Richard Scott, had been given a wide-ranging brief.
Three Matrix Churchill executives, Paul Henderson, Trevor Abraham and Peter Allen, were cleared on Monday of illegal export charges after ‘inconsistent’ evidence from Mr Clark.
The Old Bailey judge ordered the release of documents kept secret by public interest immunity certificates signed by four ministers — Michael Heseltine, Kenneth Clarke, Malcolm Rifkind and Tristan Garel-Jones.
Henderson had been working for British secret services for 20 years, it was revealed last night.
He was said to have given MI6 information on Saddam's Supergun and details of nuclear and chemical capabilities in Iraq.
Mr Henderson kept his amazing double life secret from his wife Esther and two children David, 27, and Suzanne, 25, until it was blown apart by the Customs decision to prosecute him.
He had more than 20 meetings with his MI6 controller.
The service's interest began with his trade with Russia, then moved on to the Iran-Iraq war and the build-up to the Gulf crisis.
Home Secretary Mr Clarke and Sir Nicholas attended an emergency meeting with the Prime Minister yesterday where they decided to ‘limit the damage’ with the inquiry.
Lord Justice Scott can only invite witnesses to attend.
But Sir Nicholas promised every minister would attend if called.
‘If anybody thought not to attend they would be unlikely to remain ministers for long,’ he said after hurriedly consulting Mr Major.
Sir Nicholas told MPs it will be up to the judge whether he sits in public.
His report will be published unless it is contrary to public interest.
Allegations that ministers who signed immunity certificates were engaged in a cover-up ‘were a complete misunderstanding of the truth’ said Sir Nicholas.
Shadow trade spokesman Robin Cook accused the Government of deceiving the Commons.
Lady Thatcher, junior minister John Redwood, and Mr Major had each given misleading statements at different times.
‘The Government is badly mistaken if it thinks it can take the heat off itself with an inquiry meeting in private,’ he said.
‘Today's statement should have been made by Michael Heseltine, not a law officer.
This is a political scandal, not a legal failure.’
Labour leader John Smith said there was concern that equipment was supplied which could have been used against British personnel and that the truth about a secret change in policy appeared to have been concealed from the public.
A SECOND prosecution against a firm accused of supplying machine tools to Iraq in breach of an export ban was expected to be dropped today.
Keith Bailey, 57, chairman of BSA tools of Birmingham, was arrested at the same time as the Matrix Churchill bosses.
35 banks to close
ONE of Britain's big banks is to axe dozens of branches with the loss of 300 jobs.
The National Westminster will close a third of its 90 branches in the West End of London as part of its five-year plan to shed 15,000 staff.
A NatWest spokesman said the jobs would be lost through natural wastage.
4m homes are to get water meters.
. by order
WATER meters are to be compulsorily installed in nearly four million homes over the next 20 years, it was announced yesterday.
Anglian Water, which covers East Anglia, with Britain's fastest growing population and lowest rainfall, said it was taking the action to help preserve water stocks.
The company, which had a profits of about £100 million last year, insists it will not mean larger bills for households with normal consumption.
The average bill in the region is currently £224 a year.
The massive programme will begin with 1.6 million homes in 1994.
Managing director Alan Smith said the region was heading for a water shortage in the next 25 years.
He added: ‘Customers will have to make a choice about how much water they spray on the grass.’
Water watchdog Ofwat welcomed the metering move as ‘sensible action’.
A spokeswoman said: ‘Anglian is acting on the basis that there is a shortage of water.’
But the Low Pay Unit said metering would lead to difficulties for people on limited income.
Director Chris Pond said: ‘People will be faced with difficult choices, such as whether to use water for baths, or save it for cooking or to water the flower pots.’
Boom time for crime
THEFT has become the fastest growing business with more than £2 billion worth of goods stolen every year, it was revealed yesterday.
Now more than 20 million households are facing yet another 20 per cent rise in their insurance premiums.
Car insurance will also cost more to cover the cost of payouts.
The new wave of theft means more than £3,800 worth of goods are pinched every minute.
The sheer scale of the crime wave was uncovered by the Labour Party from official figures.
Work for all.
.(even for us)
THE fate of London's Docklands is tied almost entirely with the Jubilee Line extension.
Without the line it is feared the Canary Wharf project, the biggest in Europe, would collapse.
Private firms are expected to stump up £400 million of the Pounds 1.8 billion cost of the 10-mile route.
Almost £1.4 billion will be underwritten by the taxpayer but more than 2,500 manufacturing jobs would be created nationwide within the first six months, shown in the graphic above.
Underground chief Denis Tunnicliffe forecast that 5,000 construction jobs would be available by next Easter.
There would also be a further 7,000 jobs in building supply, sub-contracting and engineering firms.
The order won by Alcatel is only one of the key contracts.
Another major firm to benefit would be Anglo-French engineering company GEC-Alsthom, which has won the £300 million rolling stock order.
Christiani Neilsen and O'Rourke has been given the £60 million contract to build the line's biggest station at Canary Wharf, creating another 2,000 jobs.
The Jubilee Line is vital to Docklands construction firms as 40 per cent of the offices already built are still vacant.
The news Diana wanted to hear
Clive Nelson
THEY were the words Diana had waited desperately to hear.
Brigadier Andrew Parker Bowles could no longer stand by silently while the rumours of Prince Charles's close relationship with his wife Camilla persisted.
‘It is not true…it is fiction,’ he announced on the steps of his flat in London's South Kensington.
It was the first time he had acknowledged sensational claims about his wife, Camilla, and Prince Charles.
The message was a public one, but the person it mattered most to was Diana.
Friends say she first became concerned about Charles's ‘special friendship’ with Camilla before their marriage 11 years ago.
The Parker Bowles's lived just 20 minutes from Highgrove, Charles and Diana's Gloucestershire home, and the princess feared Camilla and her husband were too close for comfort.
‘Diana's insecurities about Camilla have developed through the years,’ a friend revealed.
As her fears bordered upon obsession, she began deliberately re-dialling telephone numbers Charles had called.
Repeatedly she found he had rung the private, ex-directory line at Camilla's home Middlewich House.
After a series of dramatic confrontations, Diana was convinced that Charles's friendship with Camilla had ended.
She was told — and believed — that the woman Charles once called ‘my old soak’(because she absorbed all his worries) no longer tended to his demands.
Camilla's days of acting as an unofficial hostess at Highgrove parties, while Diana was in Kensington, had come to an end, she was told.
But her fears were to be reawakened during the summer of 1990.
When the couple went on their ill-fated ‘second honeymoon’ cruise round the Mediterranean her worst fears were confirmed.
An unsuspecting crew member intercepted a call destined for the prince and passed it on to Diana.
She was heartbroken to hear the voice of Camilla.
Diana took her revenge when royal writer Morton prepared his best seller.
The sensational book included the revelations that Charles and Camilla used the nicknames Fred and Gladys and regularly communicated.
Yet far from ruining the reputation of Camilla, the claims seemed only to enhance her standing within royal circles.
On June 7, Camilla accepted an invitation to watch the polo at Windsor and was taken to one side by the Queen.
She was advised to ‘keep a low profile’ in future but was never reprimanded for her conduct.
And, a month ago, she appeared at the El Alamein service at Westminster Abbey.
Looking drawn and haggard, she dived back into the crowd as she was recognised by photographers.
Last night that desire for anonymity was blown once again— this time, by her ever-loyal husband.
Letter that told of troubled times
Charles Rae
PRINCESS Diana and Prince Charles have admitted in writing their marriage is in trouble.
The couple authorised a letter confirming that they are going through a ‘difficult time’.
An aide sent the letter to divorced mother-of-three Mary Hopkins, 49, after she wrote to the Princess giving advice on their marital problems.
The reply, posted from the Prince of Wales' Office at St James's Palace — and confirmed as genuine by Buckingham Palace — bears the plumed crest of the Prince of Wales.
It reads: ‘Their Royal Highnesses have been deeply touched by many sympathetic and thoughtful letters.
These kind letters have been appreciated by the Prince and Princess at this difficult time.’
The typed letter is unsigned, but that is not unusual.
Mrs Hopkins, who lives in Walsall, met the princess as she visited a hospital in West Bromwich, West Midlands.
She barged past police, threw her arms around Diana's neck and kissed her on the cheek.
Mrs Hopkins told her: ‘I wrote to you — we're all praying for you.’
The princess replied: ‘Thank you very much.’
Mrs Hopkins, who has daughters Tracey, 28, Lorraine, 26 and Claire, 18, divorced 18 years ago.
She said: ‘I wrote I could not understand that with someone as beautiful as her, the prince had to look elsewhere.’
Sunshine Ray returns to EC as Delors backs down
SUNSHINE Ray MacSharry was smiling again last night after getting his EC job back.
In a humiliating climbdown, EC president Jacques Delors was forced to reinstate Mr MacSharry to avert a rebellion among fellow commissioners today.
Mr Delors summoned the Irish Agriculture Commissioner to Brussels to call a truce.
The two men had not spoken since Mr MacSharry resigned last week over the stalemate in the Gatt trade talks with the Americans.
He claimed Commission president Jacques Delors was interfering and putting French domestic interests first to further his own political career.
Mr Delor called Mr MacSharry, Martin Bangemann, the German Commissioner responsible for the single market and Frans Andriessen, his chief Gatt negotiator, to his office for the showdown.
As he left the talks Mr MacSharry said: ‘We have had a meeting between the four commissioners and I will be taking part in the negotiations.’
He will now take part in today's crucial meeting to agree the next moves in the Gatt talks.
In a separate row Premier John Major told France's President Mitterrand to mind his own business.
In a letter he told him not to interfere in Britain's moves to ratify the Maastricht Treaty.
The message followed Mr Mitterrand's remarks on French TV over the British delay.
Mr Major told the Commons yesterday: ‘The passage of the Maastricht Bill is a matter for the British Parliament and the Government.’
Private schools to snub tests
PRIVATE schools may abandon new Government tests for 14-year-olds.
The mini-exams in English, science and maths were a ‘blunt instrument’ which will reveal little about abilities and waste teaching time, said Joan Jefferson, Girls' Schools Association president-elect.
President Elizabeth Diggory told the GSA's annual conference in Bristol: ‘Some schools are seriously thinking about using their own tests instead.’
Education minster Baroness Blatch said next summer's exams would be straightforward to administer and mark.
‘We are only requiring children to be tested four times in their educational life,’ she added.
Ski holiday prices take a tumble
SKIING holidays will be cheaper than ever this year with some prices tumbling as low as £99 for a week.
Holiday giant Thomson yesterday unveiled thousands of special deals which will slash up to £70 off the price of ski holidays from Thursday.
The cuts were sparked by a fall in bookings because skiers are worried about high prices in European resorts.
The reductions are now likely to lead to similar cuts from rival travel firms.
‘Far from abandoning skiing this winter — skiers will be able to get to the best resorts,’ said a Thomson spokesman.
IRA plans Christmas bomb blitz
THE IRA said yesterday it was planning a Christmas bombing campaign centred on London.
Speaking in a Belfast safe house a hooded IRA member claimed it had enough explosives and terrorists in place for a major offensive.
‘We are in a position, when it suits us, to increase the pressure,’ he said.
‘Rest assured that will occur.
‘Our supply routes and our infrastructure are intact.
We have lost volunteers but that has not weakened our position.’
Downing Street, Scotland Yard and the Northern Ireland Office refused to comment.
Spiro death drug probe
AN autopsy yesterday failed to solve the mystery MI6 spy Ian Spiro's death.
Spiro, who also worked for the CIA, is believed to have killed himself after murdering wife Gail, 41, and children Sarah, 16, Adam, 14 and Deanna, 11, at their California home.
The San Diego coroner's office said further tests would now be carried out to see if the death was drug-induced.
Spiro's wife, Gail, was yesterday remembered as ‘lovely’ in the village where she grew up.
As Gail Brunskill, she lived in the village of St Bees in Cumbria before moving to Whitehaven.
Gail's former Girl Guide leader Irene Patterson said: ‘She was a lovely, lively girl.
It's a tragedy.’
Gail became a trainee nurse at West Cumberland Hospital.
Her mother, Marjorie, of Bassenthwaite, is flying to America.
Mortgage boss quizzed over missing millions
A FINANCIAL expert who jetted off to South Africa with alleged debts of £4 million was being quizzed by police last night.
Jake Reynolds was arrested in the seaside town of Cromer Norfolk after his lawyer confirmed reports that he was back in the country.
Rhodesian-born Reynolds had operated as a financial services tied agent for Guardian Royal Exchange until February 1991.
When he disappeared over 200 investors in his mortgage business Centrust claimed they were left £8 million out of pocket.
A warrant for his arrest was issued by Norwich County Court in August when he failed to turn up to his own bankruptcy hearing.
His solicitor Ben Pearson said last night: ‘He is coming back to face the music.’
Checkland quits BBC post early
BBC Director-General Sir Michael Checkland is to quit at Christmas, two months earlier than planned.
Sir Michael, 56, last month launched a biting attack on BBC chairman Duke Hussey, claiming he was too old for the job at 69.
‘I've concluded I should hand over to my deputy John Birt,’ Sir Michael said yesterday.
‘I have suggested and agreed this arrangement with the chairman today.’
Mr Hussey said: ‘He worked with determination and enthusiasm.’
Lloyd Webber's a hit with tourists
MILLIONAIRE composer Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber is top of the pops with tourist chiefs.
He has won the English Tourist Board's top award for providing ‘enchanting attractions’ which pull in millions of foreign visitors.
The creator of hit musicals Phantom Of The Opera and Cats was praised by board chief William Davis.
‘Sir Andrew has done much to enhance England's profile,’ he said.
Dad, have you killed my mum?
Simon Trump
JURORS wept yesterday as a 10-year-old boy calmly relived the night he witnessed his mother's killing.
Daniel Horbury gave his evidence via a videolink from an office just yards from the courtroom to avoid seeing his father Peter, who is on trial.
With only an usher for company, he showed no outward signs of distress as he said: ‘I had been in bed for five minutes waiting for my mummy.
She was doing her teeth in the bathroom.
‘My dad went into the bathroom.
He was saying ‘Do you still love me?’
He was really cross — very, very cross.
The door was closed.
‘I heard a wallop and went into the bathroom.
She was being strangled and I pulled him off.
His hands were on her neck and he was squeezing.
He pushed me out of the room.
The door slammed shut and he bolted it.
I shouted that I was going to call the police.’
The hushed court had earlier listened to a dramatic seven-minute recording of Daniel's 999 call, part of which is shown on the left.
Daniel told Cardiff Crown Court his father walked past him on the stairs after getting a knife from the kitchen.
‘I tried to grab his leg but he just carried on,’ he said.
‘I heard her dying screams.
I saw the knife in my mum's neck.
I tried to give her the kiss of life.
Then I looked at her and she was dead.
I pulled the knife out slightly but I knew she was dead.’
Police officers who arrived at the couple's country home at Mamhilad, Pontypool, found Caroline Horbury lying in a pool of blood.
Daniel told the court he loved both his parents and he was very happy living with them.
‘My mother would help me with my schoolwork and I would help her with the housework,’ he said.
‘I miss her.
My dad thought she was having an affair but this was not true.
My mum was really upset because he was accusing her of having an affair with another man.
It wasn't true.
She stayed in every night.’
John Rees, prosecuting, said Horbury, 55, had accused his 47-year-old wife of sleeping with a handyman.
Horbury was on drugs for high-blood pressure which had made him impotent and claims his wife admitted adultery, Mr Rees said.
Builder Anthony Lawrence had put an extension on their home, but denied having an affair.
‘I called her Mrs Horbury, she called me Mr Lawrence,’ he said.
‘She treated me like a workman and I treated her as the owner.’
Horbury denies murder.
The trial continues.
A TAPE of a 999 call by Daniel Horbury, 10, begins with his frightened voice pleading for police, then an ambulance.
DANIEL to operator: ‘My mum and dad are fighting.
Put me through to the police.’
OPERATOR: ‘What is your number?’
Daniel replies with his home telephone number.
He is put through to PC Michael Brown in the control room at Gwent Police HQ.
DANIEL: ‘My mum and dad are fighting.
I don't know what is going on.’
PC BROWN: ‘What is your address?’
DANIEL: ‘There is a terrible row…
White Crest, Mamhilad, Pontypool.
It is near the Horseshoe, it is near there.
They are fighting.’
DANIEL screams: ‘Come here, come here soon, help.
They are killing each other.’
PC BROWN: ‘Listen to me.
The police are on their way.
They are on their way.’
DANIEL: ‘Please help, you've got to.’
He then leaves the telephone for 20 seconds before returning.
He asks: ‘Can you get the emergency service, an ambulance to come?’
OPERATOR: ‘Calm down.
We will tell them now.’
DANIEL: ‘My mum and dad are fighting.
They are killing themselves.’
AMBULANCE CONTROLLER: ‘Where are you?’
DANIEL screams: ‘My parents are distressed.
Come quickly.’
OPERATOR: ‘They are on their way.’
DANIEL: ‘I'm frightened to death.
They are fighting.
I hope my mum is not going to die.
She's…’
DANIEL to his father: ‘Dad have you killed her?
You have done enough to me and my mum.
You are not going to do any more.
Have you killed her?’
PETER HORBURY takes the telephone receiver and the operator tells him the police and ambulance are on their way.
He says: ‘Yes, that's okay.’
The voice of his wife Caroline was then electronically enhanced so that her voice could also be heard on the tape.
CAROLINE: ‘Please, please don't stab me.
Please…’
DANIEL: ‘Have you killed her?’
PETER HORBURY: ‘No.’
DANIEL: ‘You better not have.’
Jailed mugger got just deserts, says his family
MUGGER Michael Watson, jailed for five years after attacking three elderly women, has been disowned by his parents.
Just hours after Watson, 28, began his sentence, his father Ernie said at home in Sunderland: ‘He deserved all he got.
‘We got a letter from him saying he was due in court for burglary — but he didn't mention anything about elderly women.’
His mother Elsie said: ‘We've got three other children.
They're our only family now — he has only brought us shame.’
Watson, who turned to crime after moving to London, slumped in the dock of Inner London Crown Court as Judge Brian Pryor handed out the sentence on Monday.
One of Watson's victims yesterday said he had no sympathy for his attacker.
Colin Connolly, 66, was punched and his wife's handbag, with £65 cash, was snatched.
‘I'm not surprised by his parents' reaction.
He has made us nervous wrecks,’ he said.
‘We only go out if friends call.’
Film crew run into road war
A FILM crew making a documentary about the end of the Second World War were threatened with a shotgun when they asked a man to move a parked car.
They fled after calling at a house where the vehicle was blocking a narrow country lane.
The three BBC men had innocently blundered into a private war over access.
A 59-year-old man was arrested after a seven-hour siege in Ramsbury, Wilts.
Police seized a shotgun and ammunition.
‘The crew are shocked but unhurt,’ a BBC spokesman said.
Nightcaps on doctor's orders
DOCTORS are turning to drink to help elderly patients sleep.
Professor Oliver James is prescribing a nightcap rather than sleeping tablets at Freeman Hospital, Newcastle.
‘We don't force it down throats, but alcohol in moderation is everyone's friend, particularly the elderly,’ the professor said.
‘Sleeping tablets are bad for old people.’
Patient John Lyon, 74, who has a daily dose of half a pint of Guinness, said: ‘It's a great idea and takes the tension out of staying in hospital.’
Silence in dock costs £15,000
A ROBBERY trial was halted yesterday because five defendants could not hear a word of evidence in their bullet-proof dock.
A workman called to dismantle the floor-to-ceiling glass screen at Southwark Crown Court, London, refused to touch it.
The Cleveland firm which installed the panelling for a drugs trial could not take it down until today at the earliest.
Each piece of glass is worth £1,000.
The day's lost court time will cost £15,000.
Adjourning the trial, Judge Victor Watts said: ‘It would cheaper to smash it down.’
Icke's seeking a heavenly profit
SELF-STYLED prophet David Icke, who said money won't matter in the future, has pulled out of his broadcasting comeback in a cash dispute.
Isle of Wight radio said the former TV presenter agreed to host a two-week show for nothing, but then demanded £1,000.
‘We are a small station.
There is no way we could afford that sort of money,’ said boss Linda Couch.
Fore!
Golfer takes a swing at dog walker
Simon Trump
IT really was not the sort of behaviour expected at one of England's oldest golf clubs.
An argument over a lost ball ended in a clear breach of etiquette — a club across the back.
David Branch, Peter Evans and David Miller had just teed off at the 15th hole in a competition.
Fellow member David Morgan was walking alongside the course with his wife and their dog, Jay.
Suddenly, the black and white collie raced on to the fairway at the Royal North Devon Golf Club, Westward Ho!
Moments later, he returned.
And — like all good dogs — dropped the present at his master's feet.
‘Look, I've found a golf ball,’ smiled Mr Morgan, a bank manager's assistant, as Mr Evans marched over.
‘It's mine and we just saw the dog walking off with it,’ the golfer replied.
Clearly upset at such a slight on Jay's character Mr Morgan retorted: ‘If you are taking that attitude you are not having the ball back.’
A struggle ensued and Branch stepped in.
He grabbed a club and lashed out at Mr Morgan.
Mr Morgan crumpled to the ground with a fractured rib, collapsed lung and bruising.
The three players walked off to the next tee.
Mr Morgan was forced to spend four days in hospital recovering from his injuries.
Branch, 45, from Bideford, admitted causing grievous bodily harm and was given a year's conditional discharge by town magistrates yesterday.
He told detectives: ‘It was an instinctive movement.
‘I didn't mean to cause him any harm.
‘I thought my friend was going to get a hiding.
‘I just wanted to break them up.’
He was also ordered to pay Mr Morgan £600 compensation and Pounds 45 costs.
An earlier disciplinary hearing at the 106-year-old golf club suspended Branch for six months.
Both Mr Evans and Mr Morgan were suspended for three months.
Swim with added zip
COSTUMES don't have to be a dull black with your swimming badges sewn on to be fast through the water, as Vicki Walberg showed in London yesterday.
The model wore the new zip-front Jellyfish cossie from sportswear firm Speedo as part of a preview of what the nifty water babe will be wearing next year.
The design, which comes in several colours, should sell for about £25.
Just the right price to give added zip through the water.
Fish are too easy to catch
ANGLERS are heading for court because fish are too easy to catch.
Members of the Savernake Fly Fishers club say the River Kennet in Wiltshire is teeming with trout because so many have escaped from a nearby fish farm.
Now they are claiming £10,000 damages against Church Fish Farm for taking all the fun out of their favourite pastime.
Swindon county court will hear the case next month.
The Anglers Co-operative Association, which is backing the case, said it was a national problem.
‘It is not just that the unwanted presence of rainbow trout can ruin the sport but there is also the environmental impact of these strangers,’ said a spokesman.
The action against the Marlborough-based farm is being defended.
It's this way to Moscow, Your Majesty
Matthew Benns
RUSSIAN president Boris Yeltsin invited the Queen to visit his country yesterday.
He ended a bitter divide that has lasted 75 years when he made the offer over lunch at Buckingham Palace.
‘She, with great dignity, accepted my invitation and she said that we won't wait for too long before she comes to Russia on an official visit,’ he said later at London's Hyde Park Hotel.
‘We sat next to each other during two hours and all the time we talked.
‘I must say that our discussion was such that it was as if we have known each other for many, many years.’
Buckingham Palace confirmed the Queen had accepted President Yeltsin's invitation in principle.
It is unlikely however that a state visit will take place in the near future.
The Queen will consult senior ministers who are expected to recommend that the trip should be put off until the political and economic situation, turbulent since the collapse of communism, has settled down.
The invitation, in front of Mr Yeltsin's wife, Naina, the Duke of Edinburgh and the Duke of York, is seen as a boost to relations between the Royal Family and Russia.
A similar invitation was issued by former Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev in 1989 but was never taken up.
Following his invitation the Princess Royal visited as a guest of the Soviet Government in 1990.
It was a far cry from her first visit in 1973 as a member of the British three-day eventing team.
In her book Riding Through My Life she revealed that the KGB had then made several ham-fisted attempts to spy on her.
She arrived at her hotel to find a ‘fearsome’ woman guarding her door.
‘She bore a striking resemblance to the notorious James Bond character Rosa Klebb,’ Anne wrote.
She said the KGB minder in her own squad followed her everywhere but claimed not to speak any English.
However, he always managed to get the team to wherever they wanted to go despite the problem.
‘Which led us to believe that our man did indeed speak English.
That was not altogether surprising given that, as a KGB officer who had been posted to London for six years, it would be astonishing if he had not.’
Prince Edward also paid an unofficial three-day visit to Russia as patron of the National Youth Theatre.
Murders were final straw
FRIENDLY relations between our own Royal Family and the Russians ended in 1917 with the bloody Bolshevik revolution.
Czar Nicholas II and his entire family, all cousins of our own royals, were murdered.
The Russian royals were shot, bayonetted and their bodies dumped in acid.
Although relations between Russia and Britain had traditionally been fraught with problems since the Crimean War, the deaths caused great distress at Buckingham Palace.
The Queen's grandfather, George V, was a first cousin of Czar Nicholas II.
The relationship stemmed from Czar Nicholas's aunt, Princess Alexandra of Denmark, who married Queen Victoria's son, the then Prince of Wales.
As Edward VII, he took a major step in healing any rift between the two countries when he met the Czar during a trip to Russia in 1908 in an attempt to win his support against the German Kaiser.
It was the first and last visit by a British reigning monarch to Russia.
Nine years later the Czar was dead.
Commons bid to curb bail bandits
A TORY MP launched his Commons bid yesterday to crack down on bail bandits.
The move by Michael Stephen comes in the wake of a TODAY campaign.
Mr Stephen tabled an amendment to existing bail laws to plug a loophole which allowed defendants released on bail to commit further offences.
He wants prosecutors to be given powers to appeal where bail has been granted by magistrates contrary to police wishes.
People who committed crimes in the past 10 years while on bail would have to provide good reasons why they should be released.
TODAY's campaign highlighted cases such as that of Andrew Hagans.
He was jailed for life for murdering 23-year-old Anna McGurk two weeks after being on bail charged with rape.
Mr Stephen, MP for Shoreham, Kent, said: ‘Our constituents are seriously concerned about offences which are being committed by people who have been arrested and then released on bail by magistrates.’
He said the largest number of such cases were burglaries and car thefts, with the same group of people committing the same type of offence ‘again and again.’
But the problem existed even at the most serious levels.
‘It is the very first duty of any government to protect its citizens, not only from external attack but also from internal attack by criminals within our country,’ he said.
Children see mother fall to her death
A MOTHER fell to her death in front of her three children after getting locked out of their flat, an inquest heard yesterday.
Bernadette Pollock, 32, climbed a drainpipe on to a window ledge after losing her keys.
But she lost her footing and plunged 25ft onto concrete paving.
Her children Paula, 10, John, eight, and Roxanne, four, tried to help her and alerted neighbours in Southwark, south London.
Mrs Pollock died in hospital the next day from multiple injuries.
Her husband John, 32, told the Southwark hearing: ‘She climbed along the bathroom window ledge because the window was open.’
Afterwards Mr Pollock, a hod carrier, said: ‘It will be with the children for the rest of their lives.
They were so close to their mother.’
Verdict: Accident
Shelter scare tactics upset home-owners
HOMELESS charity Shelter apologised yesterday for sending out mock repossession notices to 32,000 families.
A gimmick highlighting the plight of people losing their homes backfired when more than 100 complaints flooded into the charity and the Advertising Standards Authority.
The advertising watchdog body upheld the complaints saying the notices could cause ‘grave distress’.
Shelter said: ‘We were taken back by the response.
It was, though, successful in raising money.
The appeal raised £100,000.’
Bone marrow sister is sick
A GIRL was in hospital yesterday four weeks after giving bone marrow to try to save her brother's life.
Charlene Mann, four, is to undergo tests after complaining of leg pains.
Her mother Angela Chapman, 29, said: ‘She's got fluid on the pelvis.
We don't know whether she will need an operation.’
A spokeswoman for the hospital near Charlene's home in Leeds said she was improving.
Charlene's nine-week-old brother Jordan died last month, 10 days after the transplant, from a condition which affected his immune system.
Racer raided
RACING driver Derek Bell had trophies and mementoes worth Pounds 10,000 stolen from his home.
Five times Le Mans winner Bell, 51, was out shopping when the burglars struck in Pagham, West Sussex.
Sacked for swearing on the helpline
TRANSPORT helpline clerk Bill Goulding was sacked after swearing at a caller and hurling his phone headset out of a window, an industrial tribunal heard yesterday.
Mr Goulding, 30, allegedly told a woman who phoned London Transport's bus and Tube information service at Victoria: ‘Stop being so ***** paranoid and **** off.’
He had just returned to his £12,000-a-year job after five months off with depression, the London tribunal heard.
‘Swearing is almost unheard of,’ operations manager Simon Thomas said.
Mr Goulding, of Truro, Cornwall, claims unfair dismissal.
The hearing continues.
Pensioner grew dope
DOPE grower Ronald Jenkins was fined yesterday for cultivating cannabis at the age of 71.
Pensioner Jenkins, of Grangetown, Cardiff, grew the drug on the balcony of his towerblock flat.
He was fined £25 after telling Cardiff magistrates he had regularly used the drug for nearly 50 years.
A police spokesman said: ‘It makes a change from teenagers at raves.’
Sweet baby drinks to go
TWO bedtime drinks for babies, criticised by dentists for their tooth-rotting sugar content, have been dropped by the Boots chain.
Supplies of Boots Chocolate Fudge Bedtime Drink will run out this month, a spokesman said.
The Chocolate Malt Bedtime Drink had already been scrapped.
‘Boots has considered withdrawing these products for some time,’ the spokesman added.
Key to chaos
THE grand opening of a town shopping centre hit a snag.
Nobody could find the key.
Eventually staff at the Victoria Gardens centre, Harrogate, West Yorkshire, got a back door unlocked.
And Mayor Barbara Hillier declared the centre open.
Soccer fans burned down rivals' stand
A GANG of football fans burned down their arch rivals' ground after watching their team lose, a court was told yesterday.
The nine Bristol City supporters started a fire at Bristol Rovers' club after their team was beaten by West Bromwich Albion.
More than 50 firemen fought the blaze, which gutted the grandstand, causing £400,000 damage.
Martin Picton, prosecuting, said: ‘Four days before the two rival teams were to play each other at Bath, 12 City fans went by van to see West Bromwich Albion.
‘When they returned to Bristol just before midnight three of the party left.
‘The other nine drove towards Bath, bought a petrol can, petrol and spray paint.’
Residents saw a number of men walk towards Rovers' Twerton Park ground in Bath just before the fire was discovered, Winchester Crown Court heard.
The petrol can and paint cannister were later found among the debris.
‘It is not possible to say who did what in the ground,’ said Mr Picton.
Seven men, all from Bristol, admitted conspiracy to commit arson.
An eighth admitted assisting an offender.
Charges against another man were withdrawn.
The case was adjourned until December 4 for reports.
Lesley murder suspect freed
A MAN being questioned about the 1975 killing of schoolgirl Lesley Molseed was yesterday released on police bail.
The 48-year-old suspect had been held since Friday.
A report is being sent to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Stefan Kiszko was cleared of murdering the 11-year-old by the Appeal Court in February this year.
Lesley's body was found on moorland near Halifax, West Yorks.
Joyriders nab classic car
THE owner of the first E-Type Jaguar ever built was reunited with his car yesterday after it was stolen by joyriders.
The £35,000 classic was found abandoned on wasteland without a scratch.
The owner had put up a £1,000 reward after the red car was stolen from his garage in Warwick.
Career girls kiss but they never tell
Liz Moore and Dennis Newson
ALMOST half of British women cheat on their partners, a survey claims.
At least 44 per cent admit straying into another man's bed, the majority of them thirtysomething career women.
The report explodes the myth that men are the bed-hopping rogues while the little woman waits at home.
Out of 300 women, both married and single, interviewed for the survey about four out of five of those who had strayed never confessed to their infidelity.
Nearly a third said they would be unfaithful if they thought they could get away with it.
But women's views of infidelity do not just involve having sex with someone else.
Kissing or touching another man in a sexual way or even just going out for a drink without telling a partner is regarded by most as being unfaithful.
Of the women who admitted to New Woman magazine that they had slept with another man about 80 per cent said they'd done it because they were unhappy in their current relationship.
More than half did it just for the thrill of sex with someone new.
Only a quarter said they did it for love and just over one in six admitted it was a drunken fling.
Women who want a satisfying lover should go to Switzerland.
About 10,000 adults in 20 European countries were polled on how satisfied they were with their love life.
The Swiss romped home with an 83 per cent satisfaction rate.
‘It's a case of still waters running deep,’ said Swiss diplomat Eric Imm.
Britons were bottom of the list:
1 Swiss
2 Swedes
3 Finns
4 Spaniards
5 Portuguese
6 Danes
7 Luxemburgers
8 Dutch, Irish and Greeks
9 Italians
10 Britons, Germans, French
Wife stole for love
A HOSPITAL worker stole £18,000 to keep her policeman husband in designer clothes and pay for his Porsche sports car.
Sabrina France, 37, lavished gifts on Detective Constable Michael France by stealing from a Bupa hospital where she was business office manager.
The couple, who divorced last June, had parted several times.
France's lawyer James Ramsden told Chelmsford Crown Court: ‘She was trying to buy the love and affection of her husband.’
After an abortion and faced with mounting debts, France began paying cheques intended for consultants into her own account.
France of Brentwood, Essex, admitted theft and was sentenced to six months' jail, suspended for two years.
All but £2,000 of the stolen money has been repaid.
Bernard Matthews get his CBE
TURKEY king Bernard Matthews collected his CBE from the Queen yesterday.
But she failed to recognise the businessman who has become one of Norfolk's most famous sons, the county where she has her Sandringham estate.
Mr Matthews, 62, said the Queen asked which part of the poultry industry he was in.
‘I said turkeys.
She said ‘Where do you come from?’ and I replied Norfolk.
Then she said ‘Ah, a lot of turkeys come from Norfolk’.’
Mr Matthews, one of around 130 people at the Buckingham Palace investiture, added: ‘It's a bootiful occasion.’
Bottom falls out of the lottery donkey
ORGANISERS of an unusual village lottery felt an ass when their donkey wouldn't deposit a dropping.
Expectant crowds lined a fenced-off area divided into 1,000 yard-square plots.
They all hoped Zebedee would leave his calling card in the painted square they had picked for £1.
They were prepared to wait — after all, the winner would collect Pounds 500.
But Zebedee seemed shy — hardly surprising with nearly 800 ticket holders watching.
The council park committee members kept their fingers crossed but they weren't too worried.
Zebedee had been pumped with Epsom Salts laxative to make sure he performed somewhere.
But he had already performed in the horse box on the way to the fete — and there was no way he was going to do it again.
Finally, when it was too gloomy to see the beast, organisers at Manston, Kent, were forced to abandon the competition.
The winner had to be drawn in a raffle, picked out by the local policeman.
Parish councillor Rex Goodban said yesterday: ‘The donkey pranced around the field and was quite frisky but nothing happened.
We waited for an hour and a quarter but then it got dark.
I think any similar event in future will have to be part of a summer fete.
That way we can put the donkey in a field at about 11am and leave him for about six hours while people have other entertainment.’
Council clerk Audrey Twyman said: ‘He had a lovely time, doing everything but what we wanted him to do.
‘We put Zebedee back in the horse box and he went off in disgrace back to a local farm.’
Despite his failure, the donkey, which spends summers walking along nearby Ramsgate beach, raised a £200 profit.
The money will be spent on new trees and more parking space in the village park.
The winners were a couple from nearby Sandwich.
Let patients choose the time to die
PEOPLE should carry ‘switch-me-off’ cards to help doctors decide whether to keep them alive if there is no hope of recovery, the British Medical Association said yesterday.
The card would allow people to set out their wish to decline life-prolonging treatment, while able to express a view.
The High Court is due to consider the case tomorrow of Hillsborough disaster victim Tony Bland, 21.
Parents and doctors want to switch off the system which has kept him alive since the 1989, but fear the legal implications.
‘We want to know what patients want in the dying process,’ a BMA spokesman said.
We want sex with porridge
FOUR thousand prisoners say sex would be the biggest improvement to life inside.
Conjugal visits came top of demands in a survey of Britain's jails.
The biggest complaint was prison food, with just one in eight prisoners saying it was good.
One in four claimed warders assaulted inmates.
One in five were scared of other prisoners.
Brother ‘spun web of lies to cover killing’
Rob Perkins
JEALOUS Jason Osborne bludgeoned his sleeping brother to death with a mallet in a row over girls, a court heard yesterday.
Osborne cleaned the bedroom before dragging 18-year-old Dean into the bathroom.
He wrapped the body in a pair of curtains, then phoned his parents to say Dean had left home for good, Birmingham Crown Court was told.
He removed the stereo from his brother's car, to make it look as if it had been stolen, before pushing it into a water-filled quarry.
He even borrowed money from his father for petrol to join friends in the search for the brother he knew was already dead.
Dean's body lay for four months in a lane 12 miles from the family home in Elmesthorpe, Leicestershire.
It was found by a man walking his dog.
In that time, Osborne assured his parents Christopher and Jennifer that friends had seen Dean, said David Crigman, QC, prosecuting.
Joanne Morse, 18, had been seeing Osborne weeks before the killing.
‘But she had gone with Dean to a party after a family wedding.
The defendant was there too which led to a row,’ said Mr Crigman.
‘His mother told him on the morning of the killing that Joanne had phoned Dean the night before.
‘That led to the murder,’ Mr Crigman added.
Joanne and Melissa Gunn, 17, both went out with Osborne, 20, before falling for his brother in the summer of 1991.
Days after Dean disappeared, Osborne told Joanne he was going to look for him.
‘He seemed very worried and asked me if I wanted to go with him,’ she said.
In a statement, the boys' father said he told them: ‘Do not let women come between you.
You are brothers.
We are family.’
Osborne broke down and confessed to the killing when a picture of the curtains in which Dean's body was wrapped was flashed on TV.
He told his parents it was an accident.
‘They had clashed on the stairs and argued over a girl,’ said Mr Crigman.
‘He lashed out just once, Dean fell and struck his head against the bannister.’
Osborne denies manslaughter.
The trial continues today.
Driver's M-way ordeal
MOTORIST Peter Beer battled for eight hours to free himself from his crashed car while vehicles roared past on a motorway yards above.
Peter, 58, catapulted over a barrier and into a ditch when he lost control of his Rover on the M5.
The car rolled on to its roof, trapping him.
Peter desperately tried to scramble from the wreckage, fearing the car would burst into flames.
He eventually squeezed through a 12-inch gap in his shattered rear windscreen, and crawled up the bank in agony to raise the alarm.
‘I'm lucky to be alive.
The doors wouldn't budge.
I had to wait till dawn to see what I was doing,’ said Peter, of Taunton, Somerset, who suffered minor injuries.
Ian gives up the ghost
DRIVER Ian Sharpe reported knocking over a girl and was told by police: ‘That's a ghoul.’
Ian, 54, was heading home in Maidstone, Kent, when the apparition just stepped out.
Police said other motorists had reported seeing the ghost of Judith Lingham, who died with two friends on nearby Blue Bell Hill.
Royal scoundrel's perfect crime
Bob Graham
What court was told about £1.8m gems raid and the best man to Di's brother.
A CLOSE friend of Princess Diana's brother plotted a daring £1.8 million insurance swindle, a court heard yesterday.
Darius Guppy — who was best man at the 1989 wedding of Viscount Althorp, now Earl Spencer — set up a superbly-planned operation culminating in a bogus jewel robbery at a New York hotel, it was claimed.
He and business associate Benedict Marsh, both 28, allegedly got a friend to help by tying them up in their room.
When police arrived they found two Englishmen who seemed to be shocked victims of an armed hold-up, said James Curtis, prosecuting.
And, he told Snaresbrook Crown Court, East London, the police were completely fooled by the double act.
‘You can imagine just how difficult that might be, to deceive New York State Police,’ said Mr Curtis.
‘The Crown say it was a brilliant performance.’
The plan worked so well that insurers Lloyd's paid out the £1.8 million claim.
Guppy and Marsh, it was alleged, even went back to New York by Concorde on a quick trip to pick up the ‘stolen’ jewels, to sell them.
Within a few weeks of the payout, Mr Curtis claimed, £1 million had vanished from their Inca Gemstones company, and been partly used for ‘unlawful or improper purposes,’ hidden from shareholders.
To cover their tracks, Guppy and Marsh carried out stock swaps between Inca and another company in Switzerland.
But eventually the pair made the mistake of trying to sell the gems they had claimed were stolen.
The ‘perfect crime’ began to go wrong, he added, only when Customs investigators checked Inca's books — and a Lloyd's syndicate sued for fraud.
Guppy of Ladbroke Grove, West London, and Marsh, of Lambeth, South London deny conspiracy, theft and false accounts charges.
Two other men said to have helped them are giving Crown evidence.
The dock of a criminal court was a long way from the line ups Guppy is used to.
When the heir to the Spencer earldom got married three years ago, Guppy was his best man.
Smooth, dark and handsome in morning dress and blue cravat, he took his place in the wedding pictures with one of the grandest families in the land at Althorp, Northants.
Princess Diana was there to celebrate the marriage of brother Charles, Viscount Althorp, to Victoria Lockwood.
A smiling Prince Charles was in the happy high-society group, too.
And of course the bridegroom's father, the Earl.
Later, when Guppy married Patricia Holder, the viscount — now Earl Spencer — was his Best Man.
Old Etonian Guppy and business associate Marsh face a different kind of appearance now.
Guppy allegedly boasted of having carried out the perfect crime, the court heard.
‘The whole enterprise was particularly bold in concept, well researched, meticulously executed,’ Mr Curtis told the jury.
The two ‘extremely brilliant young men’ formed their own jewel-trading company — helped by the government's Business Expansion Scheme — in 1988, soon after leaving Oxford University.
But, claimed the prosecution, Inca Gemstones was a cover for a swindle switching from Bombay to Bangkok, Geneva, London and South America before the big sting, in New York.
Even as Guppy stood alongside Viscount Althorp in St Mary's Church, at Great Brinton, near Althorp, the plan for that perfect crime was allegedly under way.
Guppy and Marsh, son of a multi-millionaire advertising executive, each had £15,000 shares in Inca.
But, the court heard, the firm had only an accommodation address, in Jermyn Street, in London's West End.
Guppy and Marsh turned to another old university chum, Indian-born merchant banker Isham Chandra Dutta, to help their scheme.
His task was to set up a dummy gems firm in Bombay.
Guppy flew to India twice, pretending to be a genuine dealer.
But, Mr Curtis said: ‘It was purely reconnaissance.’
In a string of bogus transactions, paperwork flowed between Bombay, Geneva and London.
And then, on March 2, 1990, in Room 1207 of the Halloran House Hotel — now the Marriott — on New York's Lexington Avenue, the team triggered The Sting.
To stage a convincing robbery, they needed a robber.
And, the jury heard, they found one.
For £10,000, another ex-university pal, Peter Risdon, agreed to play that role.
Guppy and Marsh had insured a consignment of gems for £1.8 million.
On February 25, Guppy flew to New York.
Two days later, Marsh followed, with the jewels.
They arranged to be met at New York airport by armed security guards, who carried their load to a safe-deposit vault.
Over the next few days, said Mr Curtis, Guppy and Marsh called on many Fifth Avenue gem dealers, including Tiffany's.
‘The impression they created was of two young men, very smart, well-spoken, trading high-value stones for far too much money,’ Mr Curtis told the jury.
But, he claimed, this was all a facade.
They wanted to be able to tell their insurers, Lloyd's of London, they'd tried to sell the stones.
By now, ‘gunman’ Risdon had checked in with his new Smith & Wesson .22 calibre hand gun at a nearby hotel.
Still, they kept to their immaculate planning, the jury heard.
To make sure there were no hiccups, the three men hired a car, drove out of town and tested the gun, using a pillow bought from Bloomingdale's store in New York as a silencer.
Next, Risdon was ordered to buy rope and scissors — and report for the ‘robbery’ on March 2 at the ringleaders' hotel.
‘When Risdon arrived, Guppy and Marsh were in thoroughly high spirits,’ Mr Curtis said.
‘They were drinking from a bottle of champagne delivered to their room.
‘They acted out the robbery in full so that when it came to describing it to everyone, to police, and to insurance investigators, they would be able to describe it in perfect detail.’
There was a discussion about whether Guppy should be punched in the face.
He decided against it.
‘Before leaving, Risdon tied up both men, left them face down in the bathroom, and fired a gun into the mattress,’ claimed Mr Curtis.
‘He also left the wall safe in the bathroom open.
That was where they had kept their precious stones.’
Marsh freed himself, and called the police.
‘When they arrived, they found Guppy crying,’ Mr Curtis went on.
‘The pair pretended to have been robbed of precious stones, by strangers, at gunpoint.’
Mr Curtis said: ‘These two young men were smart, well-spoken, English — and convincing.’
Later, Guppy phoned Risdon from a call-box.
‘He was very delighted with everything,’ said Mr Curtis.
He allegedly made the perfect crime boast at his club in the St James area of the West End, when he paid Risdon.
But, it was claimed, that was not the end of the affair.
Guppy and Marsh, having lodged their bogus insurance claim, flew back to New York on Concorde.
As a loss adjuster tried to contact them, they were collecting the ‘stolen’ jewels from a safe.
Then they were sued.
The case continues.
Typewriter was ‘key to swindle’
A TYPEWRITER ribbon helped uncover Darius Guppy's swindle, the court was told.
The ribbon proved six invoices from the jewellery-trading company, supposedly from India, had in fact been typed in London.
Customs men probing the affairs of Inca Gemstones found the ribbon at the firm's offices.
‘Suffice to say that six of those invoices, supposedly coming from Rasiklal in Bombay, had apparently been typed on an Inca typewriter in England,’ said prosecutor James Curtis.
Prosecution witness Isham Chandra Dutta said he agreed to set up a dummy gems company in Bombay, for a £20,000 fee, which included a mail message centre with false letterheads and invoices.
He sent some invoices to Guppy and handed others to him during a meeting with him and Marsh in Geneva in December 1989.
Dutta opened a Swiss bank account in the front company's name, into which Guppy transferred almost £500,000, he said.
Farm soap's steamy ad is too mucky
SOAP opera Emmerdale Farm has been told to tone down its adverts after using a steamy picture to try to win over younger viewers.
An ad for the Yorkshire TV soap in girls magazine More! featured a teenage couple locked in a passionate embrace.
The boy was naked and the girl wearing just skimpy underwear.
A slogan above said ominously: ‘My mother killed my last boyfriend.’
The picture sparked off a complaint to the Advertising Standards Authority which upheld the objection saying the ad was ‘sexually explicit’.
An ASA spokesman said: ‘The Authority considered that the explicit presentation was unrepresentative of the content of the programme, and in this respect considered the advert to be both misleading and gratuitous in its use of nudity to attract attention.’
Samurai killer jailed for life
A MAN who hacked his father-in-law to death with a Samurai sword in a row over drugs was yesterday jailed for life.
Moses Brazil, 25, ran up to Sydney Hilden, 46, screaming ‘I will kill you’, the Old Bailey heard.
The two men had got into an argument after Brazil said he was going to start dealing in drugs from his home on the Thistlebrook Caravan Park in Abbey Wood, south London.
Mum snatches foster baby
A WOMAN accused of cruelty to her baby daughter has vanished with the child.
Eight-month-old Emily Buckton was staying with foster parents in Hull when she was taken by her mother, Debbie Rhodes, 25.
Police said last night they were ‘very concerned’ for the pair.
Detective Chief Inspector Terry Lamb, who is leading the nationwide hunt, said: ‘We appeal for the mother to contact us.’
Anti-fur group fights for life
ANTI-FUR trade campaigners launched a £50,000 appeal yesterday after losing a libel case in which it described a mink farm as a ‘hell hole’.
The pressure group Lynx has just 14 days to raise money for an appeal against £40,000 damages.
Spokesman Mark Glover said: ‘We have been supported by Linda McCartney, Elton John and others in the past and hope they'll support us now.’
Comrade Archer
THE Russians are to get lessons in how a free market economy works — from their first radio soap opera.
The BBC World Service starts broadcasting a series about 10 characters living in a Moscow apartment block — loosely based on The Archers — from Sunday.
Trade talks back on
By Eben Black
THE immediate threat of a world trade war was lifted yesterday when Jacques Delors gave the go-ahead for new talks with the US.
The European Commission agreed in Brussels that negotiations on GATT — the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade — will resume, probably next week.
It was a personal triumph for Premier John Major, who had been pressing Commission president Mr Delors to re-open talks before the US carried out its threat to impose huge extra duty on EC goods.
Top EC negotiator Ray MacSharry, back in charge after walking out accusing Mr Delors of thinking only of the French, predicted last night an agreement could be reached within days.
After discussions in Oxfordshire with German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, Mr Major said he was ‘delighted’ at the EC decision.
‘I have no doubt that a very valuable prize is within our grasp,’ he said.
‘What the world economic situation calls for is calm discussion — not sabre-rattling.’
Agreement on GATT will mean an estimated Pounds 200 billion boost to world trade.
Without it, continued recession and job losses could threaten the whole of Europe, Mr Major said.
Mr Kohl insisted a trade war across the Atlantic would be ‘idiotic’.
But he warned that French worries over farm subsidies must still be considered.
The turning point came last week when Mr Major, as EC President, called Mr Delors to Downing Street for urgent talks.
He warned him to get negotiations going — or face losing his job.
Try a spell at school
SPELLING everyday words is beyond the grasp of millions of Britons, a survey revealed yesterday.
Only one in six adults scored full marks in a test of six familiar words.
One person in 10 failed to spell any word correctly according to the Gallup survey of 1,000 adults.
Now parents are being advised to go back to the classroom and sit alongside their youngsters in video-based spelling lessons.
The findings were revealed at the London launch of two new videos, backed by the Adult Literacy and Basic Skills Unit.
At least four out of 10 women got five or more words right, compared to three out of 10 men.
But the survey showed that it was difficult to judge whether standards of spelling were going up or down.
Alan Wells, director of the unit, said the survey highlighted a ‘sad state of affairs’ with more than four million adults estimated to be struggling to read and write properly.
He said many schools in the Seventies seemed to believe good spelling could be picked up, not taught.
But teaching spelling is now be back in fashion.
TV presenter Carol Vorderman, who created the videos, said: ‘Spelling and good grammar have both become increasingly important for schoolchildren preparing to apply for jobs — and the same applies to adults in the present job market.’
WHICH ONE?
THESE are the words which caused problems.
Which are correct?
a Neccesary
b Necessary
c Neccesary
a Accommodation
b Acommodation
c Accomodation
a Sincerly
b Sincerley
c Sincerely
a Bussiness
b Businness
c Business
a Heiht
b Height
c Hieght
a Separate
b Seperate
c Separrate
ANS: b, a, c, c, b, a
Here's a really smart way to budget, Norman
By Cheryl Stonehouse
THE businesswoman who spoke out for thousands of Britain's entrepreneurs when she accused the Tories of betraying them, yesterday told Norman Lamont what he should be saying today.
The Chancellor's Autumn Statement will be too late to help Elizabeth Smart herself — the fencing business her father began 30 years ago is now in receivership.
But she wants an immediate cut in interest rates to help others.
‘The only route to survival for those who have managed to hang on so far is to make their borrowing cheaper, substantially cheaper,’ she said.
‘We need a bold cut of three per cent now.
‘Not one per cent here and a half per cent there, but a cut which will give small businesses an immediate boost and spread confidence throughout the economy.
‘The Government keeps talking about growth, and now they must actually do something.’
Mrs Smart, 41, hit the headlines in TODAY when, after a lifetime of supporting the Conservatives, high interest rates and falling orders destroyed two generations of hard work.
Describing herself as ‘Absolutely Disgusted of Tunbridge Wells’ she represented a new breed of recession victims living deep in the Tory heartlands who feel their party has betrayed them.
Now claiming dole with her husband Max, she wants to see massive investment in major community projects, such as hospital and school building and road improvements throughout the country.
Those are the kind of works which will have long-term benefits for everyone and will create knock-on employment, she said.
Her final wish goes against the most fundamental principle of Conservative policy for more than a decade and one which she once fervently supported — taxes must rise.
‘It's an awful thing to say, but the revenue to pull us out of this recession has to come from somewhere,’ she said.
‘So many business have gone bust and so many people have been made redundant.
As benefit payments have gone up, phenomenal amounts of tax and national insurance revenue from employees and employers have vanished.
‘What other option is there?
And what difference will it make to a government which has made more U-turns than a snake?’
But she doubts whether the Chancellor will offer any long-term solutions.
‘They can't think further ahead than four years, can they?
Because they know that next time they'll be out on their ears.’
Make or break for Lamont
By Eben Black, Political Correspondent
CHANCELLOR Norman Lamont's political career is on a tightrope today as he presents his ‘recovery plan’ to the Commons.
Tory backbenchers are looking for strong measures to boost the economy and hope a one per cent cut in interest rates will cushion predicted cutbacks in public spending.
Other hoped-for measures include tax breaks for industry to encourage investment and more cash for building projects.
Labour leader John Smith yesterday accused Premier John Major of turning Britain into a Third World country, instead of competing with European neighbours.
‘That way Britain will soon only be able to pay Third World wages,’ he said.
Family die in suicide pact
A COUPLE and their teenage daughter were found gassed in their car yesterday in what is believed to be a suicide pact.
A policeman on patrol discovered the bodies at a remote beauty spot near Charterhouse, Somerset.
He found tubes running from the exhaust of the A-reg Volvo into the car.
Last night police were trying to trace relatives of the family, who are thought to have lived in Bristol.
Bank's £8,500 blunder
A BANK is suing a former customer who spent £8,500 they put into his account by mistake.
Alfie Hall, 44, telephoned and wrote to Lloyds Bank asking them to check the mystery money.
When they assured him the deposits were in order, he assumed it was a payment due from a former employer.
So he spent the cash on his home and family.
Now the bank is demanding not only the cash but £230 interest on it as well.
‘I did more than any citizen could reasonably be expected to do.
‘I phoned and wrote about it — but they were adamant it was okay.
‘They won't even tell me where the money really has come from.
Presumably it was some other customer's.’
Alfie has now changed from his local Lloyds in Cardiff to nearby Barclays.
I was asked to lie over royal gems swindle
EARL Spencer's best friend asked a university pal to lie to cover up a £1.8 million insurance swindle, a court was told yesterday.
Ishan Dutta said Darius Guppy, best man to Princess Diana's brother Charles three years ago, phoned him in Bombay after a civil action was launched to recover the insurance money.
Guppy and Benedict Marsh are alleged to have defrauded Lloyd's of London of £1.8 million after a fake jewel robbery in New York.
Dutta said jewel merchant Guppy asked him to pose as the owner of an Indian company.
‘He wished to make it clear for the purposes of this case that there had been a genuine company in Bombay called Rasiklal & Sons,’ Dutta told Snaresbrook Crown Court.
‘What was required of me was an affidavit from India swearing that I was Samir Mehta and owned Rasiklal & Sons.
My answer was neither yes or no and nothing came of it.’
Guppy and Marsh, both former directors of Inca Gemstones Ltd, deny conspiracy to defraud, steal and commit false accounting.
The jury has heard that the 28-year-old Londoners paid a friend Pounds 10,000 to act out the robbery in a New York hotel room in March 1990.
They used bogus invoices to fool Lloyd's into thinking the gems had been bought from the Indian company, said James Curtis, prosecuting.
The pair then plundered their own firm of more than £1.2 million of the insurance pay-out.
Dutta, 28, told the jury he received £20,000 for setting up the front company of Rasiklal & Sons and providing letterheads and invoices.
He later signed some bogus invoices at a meeting with Guppy and Marsh in Switzerland.
Dutta said Guppy also asked him to set up an account in Geneva which he used to channel nearly £500,000 following the fake robbery and insurance payout.
Guppy later told him to close the account because of worries about possible criminal action.
The trial continues.
Pete delivers letter of law
A POSTMAN rammed his Fiat Panda into a getaway car after spotting burglars cutting into a stolen safe containing £3,000.
He dialled 999 on his mobile phone then grappled with one of the thieves before the three men escaped empty-handed in another car.
It was the the third crime foiled by Peter Smith, 29, of Oldfield Park, Avon.
He caught a youth breaking into a car and also won a Post Office award for fighting off two men trying to break into his van.
Now he wants to become a special constable.
‘We would not recommend anyone to take on three people, but we are very grateful for what he did,’ said a police spokesman.
Runaway danger man is recaptured
A PSYCHIATRIC patient who escaped while on trial for murder was recaptured yesterday.
Schizophrenic Clive Wells was appearing at the Old Bailey accused of killing a 63-year-old man when he gave specialist nurses the slip.
The ‘extremely dangerous’ man was caught in east London.
Jury watch Spitfire pilot's death plunge
A VIDEO of a Spitfire plunging to the ground in flames when a stunt went wrong was shown to an inquest jury yesterday.
Pilot David Moore, 47, of Downend Horsley, Glos, was flying too low to pull out of a loop in front of horrified crowds, the South Manchester coroner heard.
Verdict: accident.
Patient dies as doctors try to save her looks
By Simon Trump
A YOUNG nurse died because doctors tried to save her good looks, an inquest heard.
Alison Edwards suffered three deep cuts in her face when she accidentally fell through a shop window.
But doctors decided not to patch up her wounds in casualty for fear of scarring her for life.
Instead, 20-year-old Alison was transferred by ambulance to a specialist plastic surgery unit 60 miles away.
Within minutes of going under the anaesthetic at St Lawrence Hospital, in Chepstow, Gwent, her heart stopped.
Alison was resuscitated but never came out of her coma and died four days later.
Dr Dawn Booker said she could have stitched Alison's face herself at Neath General Hospital, West Glamorgan.
‘But it would not have been a good cosmetic result.
She may have been scarred for life,’ she said.
‘In view of the fact she was a young girl and the lacerations were right across the cheek I decided she needed plastic surgery.’
Alison, from Aberdulais, West Glamorgan, was walking to a restaurant with her boyfriend when she tripped over a kerb and fell headlong into the Georgian-style leaded windows of a shop.
Two of the cuts on her cheek were so deep that doctors could see her bone.
The inquest in Cardiff heard doctors failed to spot Alison had also broken her collar bone.
Anaesthetist Dr Gouri Shankar said the fracture would not have affected his decision to go ahead with the surgery.
‘After about 10 minutes her heart beat slowed then stopped,’ he said.
The hearing continues.
Drivers' unlucky 13th
IT'S Friday the 13th tomorrow — and you are more likely to have car problems than on any other day.
Researchers for National Breakdown said calls for help were 20 per cent higher on Friday December 13 last year than any other Friday that month.
‘Statistics seem to point to the fact that Friday 13th is definitely unlucky’, said a spokesman.
Payout for tragic son
TODDLER Gerrard Smith, whose father died in a car crash 10 days before he was born, was awarded a share of £325,000 damages yesterday.
Gerrard, two, and his sister Mattie, four, will each get £12,500, to be invested for their future.
Their mother, dental nurse Jacqueline, 32, gets the rest.
Their father — also named Gerrard — died three days after his car and others crashed at Blidworth, Notts.
Three months earlier, he had been promoted to the £25,000-a-year job of sales and marketing manager for a shop-fitting group, a High Court judge was told.
‘It is a tragic story,’ said the family's lawyer, Robin de Wilde.
‘Everyone knew him for his very bright, friendly personality.
‘He was devoted to his little girl and looking forward to the birth of his son.’
Motorist Elaine Aggett, of Newark, Notts, denied liability but agreed to settle.
Cut price by design
By Ian Fletcher, Consumer Correspondent
FASHION lovers will soon be able to snap up top label clothes at bargain prices as revolutionary new superstores take on the High Street giants.
The huge warehouse centres, already a major success in the US, will sell high-quality clothes, including some designer brands, for less than half the price charged by leading chain stores.
Surplus stock sold at bargain prices under the one roof is expected to entice customers away from traditional High Street names such as Debenhams, Marks & Spencer and House of Fraser.
Retail analysts predict that recession-hit customers will flock to the centres which will stock more than 150 famous names.
‘Developers are scouring the country for ideal sites for these new clothes superstores,’ said a retail expert yesterday.
‘In difficult times people want value for money but do not want to give up their favourite designer label brands.
‘Discounting will be the name of the game in the 1990s as people become increasingly cost-conscious as well as fashion-conscious.
‘These stores will give them the best of both worlds and could prove a major rival to the big store chains.’
Developers are expected to begin work on 10 planned warehouses next year at various sites throughout the country.
They will be based in sprawling premises and surrounded by a range of leisure facilities and fast food outlets.
The warehouses will be welcomed by the manufacturers of top name labels which have been hardest-hit in the fashion trade as buyers are forced to buy cheaper products.
The British launch has been sparked by the success of the developments in the US where there are already 300 outlets with another 300 set to open soon.
2,000 jobs axed as naval base is closed
Matthew Benns
THE Government is expected to announce the closure of Portland naval base in Dorset today with the loss of almost 2,000 jobs.
Around 1,400 civilian workers at the training station for naval recruits will be told the news at 3.30pm, and a statement is expected in the Commons shortly after.
Another 500 are set to go at Portsmouth naval base, Hants, and the knock-on effect will cost 3,000 jobs in both communities.
Flag Officer Sea Training is expected to be moved to Devonport in Devon but Portland's Royal Navy air station will remain untouched.
Union spokesman Richard Price said: ‘People here have not got the result yet, but they are in no doubt what will happen.
This is a tragedy for our community.’
The threat to Portland comes less than two years after it gained a reprieve.
The base had been in line for the axe under the Options for Change review of the Services but was saved because the cost of relocation exceeded the saving.
TGWU national secretary Jack Dromey warned the unions would resist any attempt to close the base and call for an independent inquiry.
Girl of 11 divorces her mum
Simon Trump
A GIRL aged 11 has become the first child in Britain to be given a legal divorce from her mother.
The determined schoolgirl took her case all the way to a county court judge because she didn't like living with her new stepfather.
Now hundreds of other unhappy youngsters will be encouraged to demand that the courts grant them a similar divorce, the girl's solicitor warned yesterday.
The child, who cannot be named for legal reasons, was staying with her grandparents in south Devon.
Her distraught mother wanted her daughter to return home.
Instead, off her own bat, the girl went to see a solicitor in Newton Abbott, Devon.
He gave her specialist child custody advice and helped her win legal aid for her court battle.
At a private hearing in Torquay, a judge granted a residence order which allows her to continue living with her grandparents.
The girl's mother opposed the application but it is understood her husband did not.
Solicitor Philip Kidd yesterday praised the girl's resolve.
‘She was the prime mover in this and has shown great determination.
She was not afraid to go before a judge,’ he said.
Children of any age can now ask a judge to decide where they should live under the new Children's Act.
But they must prove they understand the consequences.
‘The benefit now is that a child can institute proceedings without having to wait for somebody else to do it, ' said Mr Kidd.
Some girls of 11 were extremely grown up, he said.
‘Clearly the older the child is, the more likely it is to understand the instructions it is giving and the effect those instructions will have upon their future.
‘There could be literally a multitude of quite proper reasons why a child decided it no longer wanted to live with its parents.’
But he said the courts would not proceed solely on a childish whim.
‘My children might say that they don't want to live with me because I send them to bed early.
That would not be a valid reason.
‘There have to be considerably greater concerns to displace what is in reality the right of a parent to have their child living with them.’
He added: ‘It happens more often than people realise that children do not want to live with their parents.
The more children know about this, the more cases there will be.’
CASE ONE
A GIRL aged 14 has already won a temporary court order allowing her to move out of the family home in Guildford, Surrey.
Earlier this year she persuaded a judge to let her stay with her boyfriend's family because she did not get on with her father, who had recently been reconciled with his wife.
A full hearing on the case will be heard in the High Court tomorrow.
CASE TWO
ANOTHER girl aged 11 has also won legal aid to fight for her right to live with foster parents.
She claims she has been exploited, emotionally abused and denied a proper childhood by her natural mother in London.
She told teachers she was weighed down by the responsibilities of looking after her three younger sisters, including a nine-month-old baby.
Camilla who?
A PENSIVE Prince Charles ventures a wry smile yesterday, staying silent about his friendship with Camilla Parker Bowles.
?
Princess Diana, meanwhile, was spending much of the day with a man who knows some of her most intimate secrets.
Leap in poll tax dodgers
NEARLY one in 10 poll tax payers is refusing to pay up.
In just three months, nearly 3 million summonses for non-payment were issued, new figures reveal.
The situation is likely to get worse.
Poll tax dodgers know the system will be scrapped in April and replaced by the Council Tax.
Summonses between July and September shot up 37 per cent to 2,928,259.
Orders for payment after a summons jumped by nearly half to 2,355,174.
Book Sales Limited
BOOK Sales Limited have pointed out that last week's report stating Mitch Mitchell, drummer in the Jimi Hendrix band The Experience, had won his libel action against Book Sales Limited was wrong.
In fact the jury found in favour of Book Sales Limited.
Mitchell's claim was dismissed with costs — estimated at £50,000 — which will have to be paid by him.
We apologise to Book Sales Limited for the mistake.
Refugee ban
A CHARITY behind a Bosnian refugee rescue mission accused the Home Office of ‘inhuman’ treatment in halting a convoy.
New visa requirements mean 206 people, including a desperately ill girl, won't be allowed in.
Secret memo exposes Iraqi arms cover-up
Graham Brough
THE GOVERNMENT told British firms to go on exporting to Iraq, even though it knew parts were being used to build up Saddam's war machine.
The trade should only be stopped if the public found out about it, recommended a Foreign Office document obtained by TODAY.
It also urged firms to make sure they completed and exported orders quickly in case they were found out or the UN introduced further sanctions against Iraq.
The astonishing document is dated January 1988, two years before Britain entered the Gulf War.
By then Saddam's regime was known throughout the world for its brutality and aggression.
There was even an excuse for ministers, suggested by a Whitehall official, in case the trade was unearthed by the press.
It said: ‘If it becomes known that UK companies have supplied equipment for manufacture of munitions we could truthfully say that when the licences were issued we had no reason to believe that this civilian equipment was for other than general industrial purposes.’
A note at the bottom of one document signed by a department official said: ‘These tools will be banned by the UN arms embargo when it comes into force.
‘I accept the recommendation that the licences should not be revoked, but if it becomes public knowledge that the tools are to be used to make munitions, deliveries would have to stop at once.
‘Once the UN arms embargo is adopted they will probably have to stop.
‘The companies should be warned of the falling guillotine and urged to produce and ship as fast as they can.’
Parts exported by the firm at the heart of the arms-for-Iraq scandal were used in Saddam's bid for a nuclear arsenal, a weapons experts confirmed last night.
Professor Anthony Cordesman, a key adviser to President Bush, said: ‘Parts made by Matrix Churchill and sent to Iraq contributed towards attempts by Baghdad to build a nuclear weapon.’
Britain's role in furthering Saddam's ambitions was well known among secret services, he added.
Intelligence reports available at the time spelt out clearly that one of the Iraqi directors of the firm was involved in Saddam's race for the bomb.
Dr Safa Al-Habobi — a director of Matrix Churchill — was actively involved in the attempt to acquire gas centrifuge technology for the enrichment of uranium.
Dr Al-Habobi, who wore the uniform of a brigadier at Ba-ath Party headquarters in the Iraqi capital, was known by British and American intelligence throughout the late Eighties as instrumental in the race for the bomb.
And while the British Government was turning a blind eye to the export of machine tools from Matrix Churchill, Dr Al-Habobi was happy to report his success to Saddam Hussein.
Professor Cordesman said the role of Britain was small compared to Germany, Austria, Italy and Switzerland.
On Monday the case against three executives from Midlands-based Matrix Churchill on sanctions busting charges collapsed because of inconsistent evidence from former Defence Minister Alan Clark.
But last night, his angry wife accused the Government of using him as a scapegoat.
Jane Clark, 50, said: ‘I can no longer stand idly by and let him take the blame.’
Mr Clark admitted at the Old Bailey he encouraged British firms to sell sanction-busting military equipment to Iraq.
But he insisted the decision was endorsed by the Cabinet of the time.
At the family home of Saltwood Castle, near Folkestone, Kent, Mrs Clark added: ‘Members of the Government decided to let Alan carry the can.
They thought, ‘Why not pick on Clark, he'll take the blame’.’
Mrs Clark was particularly disdainful of Board of Trade President Michael Heseltine.
He tried to stop documents, which revealed Government involvement, coming into the open, it was revealed.
Mr Clark, 64, said he feared the equipment might be used against his son, Andrew, who served in the Gulf War.
He said: ‘It was the most nerve-wracking time of my life.’
Mr Clark refused to say if he would appear before the judicial review.
Tell us the truth, Mr Major
Russell Jenkins
PREMIER John Major was under increasing pressure yesterday to spell out how much he knew about the Iraqgate scandal.
He was challenged to come clean over personal assurances he gave in December 1990 that ministers were obeying a ban on selling defence equipment to Saddam Hussein.
Those assurances had been demolished by the revelations thrown up in the collapse of the Matrix Churchill trial, said Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown.
He added: ‘Was Mr Major aware of the breaches of the guidelines?
‘If he was, then that undermines the integrity of the Government.
If he was not, that is a strike right at the heart of the competence of the Government.’
Labour's trade and industry spokesman Robin Cook accused senior ministers of suppressing documents which would have acquitted the three Matrix Churchill executives of sanctions busting.
Earlier, the President of the Board of Trade, Michael Heseltine, said he consulted Attorney-General Sir Nicholas Lyell before signing the secrecy order on the documents — to make sure that his action would not threaten the liberty of the businessmen.
Mr Cook described Mr Heseltine's excuses as ‘breathtaking’.
He also released a secret document dated October 1990 showing that the Defence Ministry was worried about the amount of high-tech products being exported to Iraq.
Its security status was printed on the top as ‘UK Unclassified’ but an official had crossed this out and written ‘Restricted’.
The aim of the paper was, it said, to draw the minister's attention to the way ‘UK Ltd’ was helping Iraq ‘often unwillingly but sometimes not’to set up a major indigenous arms industry.
It was one of 500, he said and asked: ‘Why did ministers conspire to conceal these documents?
They knew they would blow the lid on the hundreds of millions of pounds of defence equipment which they had allowed to go to Iraq.
‘Let me warn ministers, in case they try another way of wriggling out of it, that I have the documents.
I know how damning they are.’
The Prime Minister had tried to staunch the crisis by calling a full judicial inquiry into whether government ministers allowed businessmen to breach arms sales guidelines.
But there are no signs that the Opposition will allow the scandal to fade away.
George demands Sony split
POP star George Michael demanded a divorce from his record company yesterday.
Michael, who has launched High Court proceedings in a bid to end a contract with Sony, said: ‘Divorce is the only conclusion.
‘This arranged marriage to Sony doesn't work.
We do not speak the same language.’
The 15-year contract for seven albums, worth about £50 million, runs until 2003.
But Michael, 29, whose hits include Careless Whisper and Faith, threatened to stop singing because Sony has the right to reject his work.
Michael was signed to CBS Records before it was taken over by Sony.
A Sony spokesman said: ‘Our contract with George is valid and legally binding.
We will vigorously defend it.’
Let's face it, make-up is old hat
IF you want to look the part in the nineties, don't wear make-up.
Bleached hair, false eyelashes and fake nails are old-hat, according to the latest health and beauty survey.
More than half of women questioned by Gallup said they never wore make-up, and nine out of 10 claimed they've never owned a padded bra.
Almost a quarter chose fresh-faced model Yasmin Le Bon as the perfect example of the stunning natural look.
Even clothes must pass the ‘natural’ test.
Silk was favoured by nearly 50 per cent of women.
Solo seadog
OLD salt Sydney Barnes, 83, turned up for a naval reunion and found he was the only one there.
The Royal Navy treated the ex-coxswain from Rainham, Essex, to a trip to Caen in HMS Bulldog.
Cher loves her toyboys but not her ex-husbands
Alan Jackson
SULTRY superstar Cher told yesterday how she has remained close to all her lovers except her two former husbands.
‘I've loved all the men I've been with and have kept on good terms with them except my ex-husbands, they're my least favourite of all,’ she said.
The singer and actress admits that conducting any romance has become almost impossible due to the jibes about her taste in younger men.
She said: ‘To have the person you're with reduced to just another toyboy headline is demeaning.’
It is motherhood not man-eating that is now uppermost in the 46-year-old Oscar-winner's mind.
‘I would love another child but I have to be aware of the possibility that I'm not going to be able to have one of my own,’ she said.
‘That's why adoption appeals.
What I'd like is to adopt a multi-racial child.
In fact, I'd love a whole bunch.’
Although in Britain to launch a new retrospective of her astonishing recording career, Greatest Hits 1965–1992, Cher is looking firmly to the future.
She said: ‘I just want to make sure that, when I commit to it, I have enough time.
A child takes an awful lot of work, and I'd want to make sure I was through the bulk of my career stuff.
‘I'm not quite at that point yet, so it's something I'm projecting for maybe three or four years ahead.’
Maternal instincts are nothing new to Cher.
Daughter Chastity, from her marriage to former singing partner Sonny Bono, is now 23, while son Elijah, from a second trip down the aisle with rock musician Gregg Allman, is 17.
Pregnant
Ideally, she would love to become pregnant again herself but admits to another stumbling block, apart from age — there is no man in her life.
Rumours flared that her relationship with 32-year-old Bon Jovi guitarist Richie Sambora was on again when the two were seen embracing after his band's surprise London gig last week.
But Cher insists they are just good friends.
‘He and I are always spending time together but we are not romantically inclined,’ she said.
Her on-off romance with 27-year-old Rob Camilleti, who she met serving pizzas, is also definitely over.
For now, Cher is content to hang out with her girlfriends.
Chief among them are her sister Georganne and actress Michelle Pfeiffer, a best pal since their hit movie The Witches Of Eastwick.
‘She's great and I'd trust her with anything,’ said Cher.
The singer's new single Oh No, Not My Baby is climbing the charts and the album should hit No 1 this Sunday.
She also plans a sequel to the million-selling Cher Fitness: A New Attitude video next year and is working hard to fulfil one outstanding ambition — directing a Hollywood movie.
With her career, like herself, in better shape than ever, could Cher really give it up to look after kids?
‘It's not a question of doing nothing but of dividing your time,’ she said.
‘I have this idea of running a foster home, I think I could make a good job.
‘The best times I've ever had were with my kids.
I like children a lot, in fact, more than most adults.’
Stars hit by pirate tape scam
PIRATED copies of star-name music tapes are flooding the market and costing the industry millions of pounds.
Hit albums are selling for a quarter of the price in high street stores, according to an investigation by trade magazine Music Week which is urging people not to buy them.
The latest albums of Madonna, REM and Sade which have a retail price of £8.99 are going for as little as £2.
Music Week editor Steve Redmond: ‘These products are shoddily produced, sold without guarantee and inextricably linked with organised crime.
The industry is facing its toughest Christmas for a decade and the public is being exploited.’
Assault rap for Marky
RAPPER Marky Mark is being sued for kicking a man in the face and breaking his jaw.
Robert Crehan claims he was held down as the body building star repeatedly kicked him.
But Mark Wahlberg, brother of New Kids On The Block star Donny, denies the attack, which allegedly happened in Boston on August 30.
He says another man, Derek McCall, 20, was solely responsible.
Carla fears for her son
COMEDY writer Carla Lane last night said she feared for her son's safety after threats from Welsh extremists.
Carl Hollins and eight others received letters telling them to leave Wales by March 1.
Mr Hollins helped his family turn their small island off north Wales into a wildlife sanctuary.
Carla, who writes TV's Bread, said: ‘Carl has young children.
It's a grave anxiety.’
Mike's the anon poet
COMIC Mike Harding has had more than 30 poems published after submitting them under an assumed name.
Mike called himself Michael O'Neill when he sent the poems to Peterloo Poets.
The company, based in Calstock, Cornwall, has turned the poems into a 64-page volume entitled Daddy Edgar's Pools.
Mike, 47, said: ‘I did not want to be accepted on my fame as a comic.’
Home-in-one
GOLFER Sandy Lyle has spent £500,000 on a dream home.
The 34-year-old ex-British Open champion has bought a former hotel at Dolphinton, Strathclyde, which he plans to convert into a luxury mansion.
Major saves 40,000 Euro Fighter jobs
Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
GERMAN moves to shoot down 40,000 British jobs were halted by Prime Minister John Major yesterday.
In four hours of tough talks the Premier persuaded Chancellor Helmut Kohl to back the European Fighter Aircraft and secure the future of the EC's aerospace industry.
The breakthrough came during an Armistice Day summit at Winston Churchill's wartime HQ at Ditchley Park, Oxfordshire.
There are thousands of jobs in British Aerospace, Rolls Royce, Ferranti, GEC and other companies dependent on the £22 billion EFA programme.
More than £5 billion has so far been committed by Britain, Germany, Italy and Spain.
They would not have come up with the rest of the cash for at least another year.
By then it is expected that all sides will have an agreement to keep the EFA flying.
The British and the Germans will get the bulk of the work, but the Italians and the Spanish will also be involved.
Britain has worked out measures to cut costs by a fifth, by producing a lighter aircraft with fewer hi-tech flight systems.
‘We have the basis for for going ahead with such a new fighter aircraft,’ Mr Major said last night.
It was the threat of the Americans coming in to replace all aircraft manufacturing for Europe which finally persuaded the Germans they should not back out.
Confirming his desire for the survival of a European aerospace industry, Mr Kohl said: ‘We wish to have a common European solution.’
The leaders also made peace over the Gatt talks, Britain's delay in ratifying Maastricht and the row surrounding the pound's withdrawal from the ERM.
Chancellor Kohl agreed it was good news that the world trade talks were back on, though he stopped short of openly criticising France for undermining them.
Yesterday's news follows revelations that German and Canadian workers will make the signals for London's Jubilee Line Tube extension.
As revealed exclusively in TODAY, yesterday, the £100 million contract was awarded to multinational Alcatel after it undercut British firm Westinghouse.
MPs demanded last night that the Department of Trade and Industry explain how 500 British jobs were allowed to slip away.
Be Smart, Norman
THE businesswoman who spoke out for thousands of Britain's entrepreneurs when she accused the Tories of betraying them, yesterday told Norman Lamont what he should be saying today.
The Chancellor's Autumn Statement will be too late to help Elizabeth Smart herself — the fencing business her father began 30 years ago is now in receivership.
But she wants an immediate cut in interest rates to help others.
‘The only route to survival for those who have managed to hang on so far is to make their borrowing cheaper, substantially cheaper,’ she said.
‘We need a bold cut of three per cent now.’
Mrs Smart, 41, hit the headlines in TODAY when, describing herself as ‘Absolutely Disgusted of Tunbridge Wells’, she blamed the Tories of betrayal after a lifetime of her support.
High interest rates and falling orders had destroyed two generations of hard work, she said.
She also wants to see investment in building schools and hospitals, to create jobs, and a rise in taxes.
‘It's an awful thing to say, but the revenue to pull us out of this recession has to come from somewhere,’ she said.
Jilted lover shoots himself in Mercedes
A JILTED lover put a pistol to his head and pulled the trigger in front of his horrified ex-girlfriend yesterday.
Michael Smith was found slumped over the wheel of his blood-spattered Mercedes with a torn up photograph of Andria Horton on the seat beside him.
Shocked Andria raised the alarm then jumped in her own car and drove to a local beauty spot in Runnymede, Surrey.
Police spent three hours persuading her to leave the car before taking her for counselling at a police station.
Mr Smith, who had left his wife to live with Andria in Slough, was waiting outside her firm as she arrived for work.
She got in the car to talk to him but, as the couple rowed, shot himself.
Tesco kidnap gang guilty
A GANG that terrorised a supermarket boss by threatening his family was found guilty of robbery yesterday.
Tesco manager Bernard Andrews handed over £55,000 to the men who threatened to castrate his teenage sons.
The jury at Chelmsford Crown Court is still considering seven other charges against homeless John Calton, 39, Robert Moore, 23, of Southminster, and Sean Wain, 23, of Burnham-on-Crouch, Essex.
‘Gem swindlers asked me to lie’
EARL Spencer's best friend asked a university pal to lie to cover up a £1.8 million insurance swindle, a court was told yesterday.
Ishan Dutta said Darius Guppy, best man to Princess Diana's brother Charles in 1989, phoned him in Bombay and asked him to pose as the owner of an Indian jewel company.
Guppy and Benedict Marsh deny fraud.
The trial at London's Snaresbrook Crown Court continues.
Tycoon's girl pleads poverty
THE daughter of City tycoon James Ogilvy asked magistrates for leniency yesterday saying she was broke.
Princess Alexandra's niece, Emma Louise Ogilvy, 30, pleaded guilty by letter to not having a TV licence.
The freelance photographer, of Kennington, London, told Westminster court: ‘I am finding it hard to pay the bills.
Some weeks I earn nothing.’
She was given an absolute discharge and ordered to pay Pounds 40 costs.
World stage
THE 1993 Earth Summit is to be held in Manchester.
The prestigious event, at which leading scientists discuss global environment, took place for the first time this year, in Rio de Janeiro.
Delighted civic leaders said the decision would boost the city's bid to host the 2000 Olympic Games.
Councillor Graham Stringer said: ‘It's great news.’
Women of God
Cheryl Stonehouse
1,400 ready to become priests as they win a historic vote FOURTEEN hundred women who want to be Anglican priests got the green light yesterday when the church's ruling body voted for women to be ordained.
The vote in the General Synod, 384 to 169, was a surprise to both sides, who had been saying the result would be too close to predict.
It marks the end of a 400-year tradition — and years of campaigning.
But even as the reformers celebrated, the result signalled further bitter division in the church.
More than 1,000 priests had threatened to resign if the change went through.
And one prominent Church of England member, Social Security Minister Ann Widdecombe, 45, immediately announced that she had quit, and might become a Catholic instead.
‘I think it is appalling,’ she said.
‘There will be grievous division, which I do not see resolving itself.’
Outside Westminster Abbey, men and women from all over the country whooped and wept with joy at the decision, which for the first time lets women rise higher than the limited role of deacon.
‘I am 40, and fervently want to be ordained,’ said a tearful Deacon Veronica Hydon, of All Saints, Poplar, east London.
‘If it hadn't gone through this time, I would have had no time left in my life to enter the ministry I so dearly want to join.
‘It would have been another 17 or 18 years before we could have had this vote again and I would have lost my chance.’
Philip Crowe, principal of the Salisbury and Wells Theological College, who yesterday gave an impassioned plea for women's ordination on Radio 4's Thought For The Day, said: ‘This is absolutely marvellous.
‘I knew it was on a knife-edge but this is the right outcome, I am absolutely sure of that.’
It will be 21 months before the first women are ordained.
The decision at Church House has to be approved by Parliament and there is a further 12-month wait.
Other supporters of the move expressed joy at the outcome and concern for those who felt disappointed by it.
‘My over-riding concern at this moment is to give sensitive and practical pastoral support to all those caused distress and hurt by the decision,’ said the Bishop of Southwell in Notts, the Rt Rev Patrick Harris.
The Bishop of Norwich, the Rt Rev Peter Nott, said: ‘The vote will bring joy to women deacons.’
Dr George Carey, the Archbishop of Canterbury, now faces the toughest test of his leadership in holding the church together.
But Women Against the Ordination of Women said: ‘We do not believe the Synod or Parliament has authority to make such a change in the ministry which the Church of England has inherited from the ancient Church.’
They said members would be unable to accept any women who might be ordained as priests.
In Rome, the Vatican deplored the vote as ‘a grave new obstacle’ to church reconciliation.
GPs hit back at violence
Nicki Pope, Medical Correspondent
VIOLENT patients should lose their rights to see a doctor, GPs urged yesterday.
The call came as a survey revealed two out of three GPs had been attacked, threatened or abused on home visits — most by the patients they were treating.
One in eight had been physically attacked.
Of 1,000 GPs questioned by the Doctor newspaper, three out of four said the culprits had been patients or members of their families.
Almost four out of five family doctors thought violent patients should lose the right to see a GP and be barred from registering with any doctor.
Nearly all GPs wanted to be able to take violent patients off lists immediately.
Doctor editor Helena Sturridge said: ‘GPs have had enough of being punch bags and are no longer willing to remain lumbered with patients who attack them.’
Dr Eric Rose, a member of the British Medical Association's GP committee, said: ‘GPs will allow for mentally ill violent patients.
‘But people violent without excuse should forfeit their right to see a doctor.’
Sybil Myerson, of London's Royal Free Hospital, who has studied violence against GPs, said: ‘Living in fear of attack is a terrible stress and one which GPs could do without.’
Mercy driver hit-and-run
A BRITISH lorry driver is fighting for his life after a hit-and-run accident while on a mercy mission to Romania.
Alan Charleson, 52, of Southport, Merseyside, was mowed down by a Romanian car as he stopped on the Hungarian border.
He was flown back to Britain by air ambulance and his condition last night was described as critical.
Bond's real life Q dies
THE inventor who inspired the creation of James Bond's gadget genius, Q, has died aged 89.
Charles Fraser-Smith worked with 007 writer Ian Fleming during the second world war.
Among his inventions were flexible saws hidden in shoe laces for special agents.
Mr Fraser-Smith, who lived in Devon, leaves a wife and two children.
Why Roy Castle wouldn't shake Thatcher's hand
Nicki Pope, Medical Correspondent
BRAVE entertainer Roy Castle publicly snubbed Lady Thatcher yesterday because of her involvement with a cigarette firm.
Lung cancer victim Roy could not bring himself to shake the hand of the former Prime Minister, who is said to earn £550,000 as a consultant for US tobacco giant Philip Morris.
He was due to be congratulated by Lady Thatcher after receiving a People of the Year award.
But Roy, 60, who believes his illness was caused by passive smoking, walked away as she shook the hands of the other winners, including Olympic gold medallist Linford Christie and Speaker of the House Betty Boothroyd.
He said afterwards: ‘I left the line-up when I realised I had to stand and shake her hand.
It would have been double standards.
I really don't know if she noticed.
I think she's impervious to that kind of thing.
‘I just feel so concerned for the young people of the world.
‘I've been through it and I don't want them to have to go through it because it can be stopped.
‘If Mrs Thatcher is working with Philip Morris then I cannot shake her hand.
They make Marlboro cigarettes and she is their adviser.
‘Young people in the Third World are being told it's wonderful to smoke and they don't know the problems it's causing.’
Mrs Thatcher did not comment on the snub and her spokeswoman refused to comment on her association with Philip Morris.
‘We are under instruction not to confirm or deny anything,’ she said.
It is believed that Lady Thatcher is considering advising Philip Morris on only its non-tobacco interests after public outcry.
David Pollock, director of anti-smoking pressure group ASH, said he was delighted with Roy's protest.
‘It draws attention to this disgraceful situation,’ he added.
‘A high proportion of amputations causing disabilities are a result of smoking.’
Roy, of Gerrards Cross, Bucks, received his award for being one of the ‘best entertainers in the world’.
Doctors believe chemo- and radiotherapy treatment has beaten his cancer.
Forgive me, killer begs'
A MAN who stabbed his wife to death in front of their young son begged for the boy's forgiveness in court yesterday.
Peter Horbury made his plea after telling how he killed wife Caroline as Daniel, 10, tried to stop him.
Horbury, 55, said: ‘I'm sure Daniel will never forgive me for what I've done but I hope he does.’
Cardiff Crown Court heard how the boy made a desperate 999 call as his mother screamed for help.
Horbury, who denies murder, told the jury about a series of rows after he returned home to Mamhilad, Pontypool, from London.
He said: ‘I accused her of being unfaithful.
The situation degenerated quickly.
‘I stabbed Caroline, I cannot tell you how many times.
The next thing I recall is hearing Daniel's screams and going looking for him.
I felt shock.’
The hearing continues.
Demi Moore
GHOST star Demi Moore has splashed out £1.5 million for the role of an opera-loving coroner.
Demi, above, bought the rights to Patricia Cornwall's book, Cruel And Unusual, so she could take the role of Dr Kay Scarpetta.
Justice for a killer is four more years
Bob Graham
FATAL attraction killer Susan Christie got her wish for justice yesterday — when her five-year jail term was increased to nine.
The woman soldier, who slit the throat of her officer lover's beautiful wife, had insisted her sentence was too soft.
Now she will have to spend another three years behind bars instead of walking free in 11 months' time.
The historic decision came after Attorney-General Sir Nicholas Lyell referred the case back to Court of Appeal on the grounds that the sentence was ‘unduly lenient’.
The court in Belfast ruled that Christie was more responsible for her actions when she killed Penny McAllister with a sharpened butcher's knife than was originally thought.
Christie sat in the dock yesterday gently nodding as if she agreed with the judges' decision to increase her sentence by 80 per cent.
After the case in June she told her father Robert that her sentence was far too soft.
Mr Christie, in an exclusive interview with TODAY, said at the time: ‘When I saw Sue in prison, almost the first thing she said to me was that the sentence was wrong.’
Mr Christie said his daughter spoke of ‘her strong sense of justice’ and how her sentence was ‘far too lenient.’
Christie herself confessed she expected to get 10 years.
She believed it would have been the suitable punishment for killing Mrs MacAllister as the two walked together in a remote forest in March last year.
Christie, a private in the Ulster Defence Regiment, nearly decapitated her victim in the attack — a desperate bid to hang on to the affections of dashing Royal Signals officer Captain Duncan McAllister.
The two had enjoyed a eight-month affair, but McAllister's tour of duty in Ulster was ending.
Christie slashed her own thighs with the knife and told police they had been attacked by a mystery man.
She was cleared of murder but found guilty of manslaughter on the grounds of diminished responsibility.
The degree of her responsibility was the key to the Appeal Court's decision yesterday.
Ulster's Lord Chief Justice Hutton said Christie had carefully planned the murder and had made sustained efforts to evade being caught, showing that her ‘residual mental responsibility was very considerable.’.
He knocked one year off a full 10-year term to take account of the strain on Christie of a second hearing.
Penny McAllister's parents welcomed the decision but insisted the verdict should have been murder and the sentence life.
‘Our daughter would have been 29 years old when this person will be walking the streets again,’ said 51-year-old Norman Squire at his home in Arundel, West Sussex.
‘I do think that public concern over the leniency of the original sentence has been assuaged and in that sense I suppose some justice has been done.’
Mrs Squire added: ‘It is still going to be very dark for us.
There are periods when we feel totally inconsolable.
‘But we have a son and we feel Penny would have expected us to get on with our lives.’
Under Ulster's prison laws Christie will not now be released until the end of 1995 at the earliest.
Now you can feel safer
Isla Whitcroft
THE right to apply for lenient sentences to be over-ruled has made the public feel safer, the Attorney-General told TODAY.
‘The law did sometimes make an ass of itself,’ said Sir Nicholas Lyell.
‘This safety net ensures if something does go astray with sentencing, we don't suffer in silence.’
The law was changed in 1989 after public outrage when a judge gave a burglar who broke into a vicarage and raped the vicar's daughter a higher sentence for the burglary than the rape.
Sir Nicholas carries the burden of resurrecting faith in the legal system.
‘The buck stops with me.
I am the person on whom all hopes are pinned,’ he said.
‘Sometimes entire communities are torn apart by a crime.
The families sit through a trial and feel short-changed by the sentence handed down.’
Since the law was altered, 63 sentences have been reviewed by the Court of Appeal.
Of those, 50 were increased, one lowered and 12 unchanged.
Sir Nicholas hopes the need for appeals will gradually reduce.
‘What we are after is consistency,’ he said.
‘When a judge is unduly lenient it shakes the public's faith in the legal system.’
His powers are strictly limited.
Reviews only apply to murder, rape, incest, buggery, robbery, armed robbery and death by reckless driving.
And the Attorney-General can only act if there is a complaint about sentence within 28 days of the verdict and can only refer it for review on grounds of leniency.
CASE ONE
THE law giving the Attorney-General the right to refer lenient sentences to the Court of Appeal was introduced in February 1989.
The first case to be subject to the new legislation was that of a depraved father who sexually abused and terrorised his two young daughters.
Original sentence: Three years.
On appeal: Six years.
CASE TWO
PETER Sumner, 19, was convicted of causing death by reckless driving after losing control on a bend and colliding with an oncoming car.
He was over the drink-drive limit and had a previous conviction for careless driving.
Original sentence: Two years' probation and three-year driving ban.
On appeal: 15 months in prison.
CASE THREE
THE same day as dealing with the Sumner case, the Court of Appeal ruled on Mark Hill-Trevor who lost control of his car at high speed.
A woman died and a passenger was injured so badly he will be paraplegic for the rest of his life.
Original sentence: Three-year driving ban and a fine.
On appeal: 21 months' youth custody.
CASE FOUR
DARREN Major, 22, took part in an armed robbery on a betting shop.
The manager was shot in the leg and badly beaten up.
Major's partner in crime was later stabbed to death during another raid.
Major, who had a string of previous convictions, stood trial for the bookies' robbery.
Original sentence: Three years.
On appeal: Seven years.
CASE FIVE
STEPHEN Jones indecently assaulted a 10-year-old girl in a Cardiff park after offering to show her a birds' nest.
He attempted to rape another girl, but her friends came to the rescue by kicking and punching Jones until he left her alone.
He claimed he had been glue-sniffing which made him sexually aroused.
Original sentence: Four years.
On appeal: Seven years.
CASE SIX
IN March this year, the Court of Appeal judges were asked to rule on the case of former public schoolboy Ryan Gormley.
He had been sentenced after going on a two-month crime spree.
His most serious offence in that time was taking part in a robbery while armed with a crossbow.
Original sentence: Probation.
On appeal: One year in young offenders' institution.
Hijackers go too slow for a getaway
TWO kidnapped men were rescued when motorway police stopped a getaway van for going too slowly.
Hijackers who had stolen a load of leather jackets attracted attention by driving at 40mph on the M2 near Sittingbourne, Kent.
They tried to escape by speeding off but were caught.
The kidnap victims were found handcuffed together in the back of the van.
Two men were being questioned yesterday.
Nudes at ten
Jane Moore
THE TV time barrier that controls sex and violence on our screens should be moved to 10pm, broadcasting watchdogs said yesterday.
The present limit for adult viewing is 9pm — but they fear that children as young as 12 are still viewing after that.
‘There is a strong argument for moving the watershed to 10pm to bring us more in line with Europe,’ said Lord Rees-Mogg, chairman of the Broadcasting Standards Council.
‘In France and Italy it is 10.30, in Germany it is 11pm.’
He singled out Melvyn Bragg's controversial BBC drama series A Time to Dance, in which a violent rape scene was shown shortly after 9pm.
Lord Rees-Mogg said: ‘People complained because of the scheduling and not the content of the scene.
You don't need to have kindergarten standards after 8pm, but you shouldn't have fully adult standards until 10pm.
‘One needs to recognise that seven to eight-year-olds are watching up to about 8pm and 12-year-olds until 10pm.’
Lord Rees-Mogg was launching his Council's research study, Sex and Sexuality in Broadcasting.
The survey monitored a week's evening viewing on all four channels.
It noted 57 scenes of sexual activity and 65 of nudity.
Research showed 54 per cent of viewers thought the right amount of sex was shown and 41 per cent thought there was too much.
Two thirds thought there was too much violence and six in 10 felt there was too much swearing.
Eight in 10 people, agreed ‘people who don't like watching sex can always switch off’.
Melvyn Bragg's wife Cate Haste, who wrote an essay on sexual standards for the report, said: ‘I don't think the watershed should be made later.
‘People have a mature and sensible attitude to sex these days — they are not so hysterical about it.
What I do object to is violence on TV.’
In the survey, imaginary scenes were described to viewers, to find how they would react to seeing them.
Researchers also wanted to discover how much viewers' attitudes are affected by the context in which a sexy scene turns up on the home screen — and the timing.
PASSIONATE CLINCH ON SOFA
TAKE ONE: TV version of a respected author's novel, to be shown late in the evening.
A woman is having an affair with a longtime friend.
They peel off each other 's clothes by the living-room fire.
He lies on the sofa, she climbs on to him.
As they achieve a mutual climax, the camera stays on them.
This was found unacceptable by 57 per cent, quite acceptable by 35 per cent and very acceptable by 7 per cent .
Nearly three-quarters of those questioned said the late timing and author's reputation made it acceptable.
But many people felt that the camera should not have stayed fixed on the couple as they reached climax.
SEDUCED IN SCHOOL SHOWER
TAKE TWO: Dramatised documentary about a boys' school, to be shown late evening.
Young boy in the showers alone.
Older boy comes in, sees him and decides to take advantage.
Slowly, he corners the frightened younger boy, talks reassuringly as he kisses and caresses him.
As the embrace becomes stronger, the scene fades.
We next see the boy on his bed, crying.
Over half — 57 per cent— strongly rejected the scene because the boy was seduced against his will.
A quarter said it was ‘not very acceptable’.
Of those rejecting the scene, three-quarters said they would ban it.
Redeeming features: it was a documentary and on late.
LUSTY WIFE AND HER TOYBOY
TAKE THREE: In early-evening soap serial, a main female character is committing adultery with her next-door neighbour.
She is a glamorous 40-year-old, he has only just left school.
They go into the bedroom in a passionate embrace.
The door closes.
They are next seen in bed, having made love.
Nearly two people in every five questioned thought that this scene would be acceptable to show, mainly because it was not over-explicit.
Some found it unacceptable because it would be on early in the evening, because it was a soap serial — and because the woman was committing adultery with a much younger man.
New leaves for the InterCity line
UNHAPPY rail passengers' dreams are about to come true with the right sort of leaves on the line.
Tired travellers could be in for a treat as InterCity tries to bury the unhappy image of the infamous ‘BR cuppa’.
It is introducing a new ‘premium’ tea on Britain's high speed trains — and hoping it will bring an end to all the jokes about stewed tea.
The launch will bring a rare toast from millions of rail passengers hit by winter delays caused by leaves on the line.
The new brew is made from a specially developed teabag version of Brooke Bond Choicest Blend.
It is being served in new plastic cups designed to help keep the flavour.
‘In the past, it's been a music hall joke, the curly sandwich and the BR cuppa,’ said InterCity spokesman David Potter.
£320,000 for a wood hut
A DENTAL surgeon who lives in a wooden hut has been lumped into the luxury council tax bracket.
Bob English's one-room chalet in The Ship pub car park at Swanwick, Hants, has been valued at £320,000 — instead of its true value of £10,000.
He will appeal.
Racists target students
TERRIFIED black and Asian students are being bussed into college after a spate of vicious racial attacks.
Extra security staff and floodlights have also been provided to protect art students at Southwark College, south-east London.
Several students and staff have been attacked.
In the worst case, a black student standing at the bus stop with his pregnant girlfriend was shot twice with an air gun.
The college caretaker was shot in the eye as he went to help.
Principal Stuart Evans said staff and students were determined not to be forced out.
‘One student told me, ‘The day we leave this place is a victory for racism’,’ he said.
Education Committee chairman John McTernan said: ‘We have to take a stand against racism.
It is a cancer sweeping across Europe.’
Rail victims win payout
PASSENGERS hurt in last December's Severn Tunnel train crash will each receive up to £20,000 compensation.
Eighty people are claiming damages after the smash between an Intercity and a Sprinter.
The worst are still suffering serious psychological and physical effects.
Interim payments of between £1,000 and £2,500 have already been made.
Twins joy for gran
A GRANDMOTHER has given birth to test-tube twins.
Former bodybuilder Mary Shearing, 53, who has three children from a previous marriage, said: ‘This is the dream of my life fulfilled.’
Husband Don was at the births.
Amy Leigh and Kelly Ann were stable in a Los Angeles hospital yesterday after arriving 12 weeks early on Tuesday.
The last embrace
Adrian Lee
A DESPERATE couple lovingly clasped their handicapped daughter to them and ended their lives after their pleas for help went unanswered.
The tragic mother and father reached the end of their tether after devoting their lives to caring for their daughter.
Dreading that nobody would look after her when they died, the couple drove the 25-year-old girl to a beauty spot and rigged up a device to fill the car with deadly exhaust fumes.
A police officer found the 48-year-old mother and her daughter locked in devoted embrace on the back seat.
The 52-year-old husband was slumped over the steering wheel of the Volvo.
A suicide note revealed they were desperate after years of caring for the seriously handicapped daughter.
They said they loved her dearly — but their pleas for help from social services had been ignored.
And years of financial demands of giving their only child round-the-clock care from birth had worn them down.
So they finally ended their lives together at the isolated Cheddar Gorge beauty spot in the Mendip Hills, in Somerset.
The three bodies were found yesterday lunchtime at a car park, at Charterhouse, near the famous Cheddar Caves.
Last night a detective investigating the tragedy said: ‘It is one of the most distressing cases I have ever come across.
It was clear from the note this couple loved their daughter very much — but it seems they had just reached the end of their tether.’
Police said bad weather meant the popular area was deserted and the car may have been parked there overnight.
Officers make regular inspections to check for stolen vehicles.
The suicide had clearly been well planned — an elaborate device had been set up to pump fumes from the exhaust to the car through a hose.
Last night a spokesman for Bristol Social Services confirmed his department had been asked to investigate by the police.
‘We will be looking into exactly what has happened,’ he said.
The names of the family will be released today after relatives are informed.
Superthief jets home
THE mastermind behind the Knightsbridge safe deposit box robbery was flown back to Italy yesterday to complete his 22-year sentence.
Valerio Viccei, 37, who is thought to have got away with £26 million from the daring robbery, was flown from Heathrow to Rome where he faces questioning over 50 unsolved crimes.
Viccei, who had boasted of escaping within two years, was wearing a T-shirt with the message: ‘I love Knightsbridge’.
Designer bargains in store
FASHION lovers will soon be able to snap up top label clothes at bargain prices as new superstores take on High Street giants.
The huge warehouse centres, already a hit in the US, will sell high-quality clothes, including some designer brands, for less than half the price charged by leading chain stores.
Surplus stock sold at bargain prices is expected to entice customers away from stores such as Debenhams, Marks & Spencer and House of Fraser.
Retail analysts predict that recession-hit customers will flock to the centres.
‘Developers are scouring the country for ideal sites for these new clothes superstores,’ said a retail expert yesterday.
‘In difficult times people want value for money but do not want to give up their favourite designer label brands.
‘Discounting will be the name of the game in the Nineties as people become increasingly cost-conscious as well as fashion conscious.’
Developers are expected to begin work on 10 planned warehouses next year.
Diana springs surprise on royal doctor
Charles Rae
ROYAL baby doctor Sir George Pinker arrived for a quiet lunch yesterday — to find Princess Diana and 1,000 other people had turned up to honour him.
Sir George, 68, who has delivered nine royal babies including Diana's two sons, Prince William, 10, and eight-year-old Prince Harry, was ‘stunned and amazed’.
He turned up thinking he was about to meet 10 people, but was instead led into a surprise party in a banqueting room at London's Grosvenor Hotel.
The party, which raised £250,000, was organised by the mother and baby research charity Birthright and kept secret for months.
Guests included royal mothers Queen Noor of Jordan, Queen Anne Marie of the Hellenes, the Duchess of Kent and Princess Michael of Kent, and doctors and nurses who have worked with Sir George.
Vivian Parry, spokeswoman for Birthright — whose patron is Princess Diana — said: ‘Everyone was sworn to secrecy.
‘It was a marvellous afternoon with a huge turnout of people, most of whom were his patients at one time or another.’
The Duchess of York says her work for the Motor Neurone Disease Association saved her sanity after she was pictured topless on holiday with financial advisor John Bryan.
‘They really got me through it,’ Fergie tells Sue Carpenter on ITV's This Morning today.
Merry husband of Windsor
PRINCE Charles yesterday revealed his three favourite Shakespeare plays — The Merry Wives Of Windsor, The Taming Of The Shrew and All's Well That Ends Well.
The Windsor whose marriage has caused more intrigue than most poked fun at the speculation with his light-hearted remarks as president of the Court of Governors of the Royal Shakespeare Theatre.
Looking relaxed as he arrived in Stratford-on-Avon, the prince appeared unconcerned at the reported anguish surrounding his friendship with Camilla Parker Bowles.
He told his audience: ‘It is a particular pleasure to be here, because I have tried very hard during the last eight or nine months to come to Stratford whenever I can.
‘It has been one of the great enjoyments of my life recently.’
Girl, 13, dies in school fall
Adrian Lee
A SCHOOLGIRL died in front of her classmates yesterday after she slipped and banged her head.
Ranetta Sen, 13, was running along a corridor to her next class when she crashed into a wall and fell to the floor.
An air ambulance was on the scene within a few minutes, but Ranetta, whose mother arrived shortly afterwards, was already dead.
Pupils at Park High School in Stanmore, north London, wept during an assembly called to break the news.
Headmaster Tony Barnes said: ‘Everyone is terribly shocked.
‘We don't know yet exactly what happened but she was seen to slip and bang her head.
The corridor wasn't crowded.
‘She was running like any lively pupil.
It appears to be just a tragic accident.’
Last month the school was the subject of an ITV documentary series called Park High, due to be repeated from tomorrow.
Killed by kindness
Simon Trump
A YOUNG nurse died because doctors tried to save her good looks, an inquest heard yesterday.
Alison Edwards suffered three deep cuts in her face when she accidentally fell through a shop window.
But doctors decided not to patch up her wounds in casualty for fear of scarring her for life.
Instead, 20-year-old Alison was transferred by ambulance to a specialist plastic surgery unit 60 miles away.
Within minutes of going under the anaesthetic at St Lawrence Hospital, in Chepstow, Gwent, her heart stopped.
Alison was resuscitated but never came out of her coma and died four days later.
Dr Dawn Booker said she could have stitched Alison's face herself at Neath General Hospital, West Glamorgan.
‘But it would not have been a good cosmetic result.
She may have been scarred for life,’ she said.
‘In view of the fact she was a young girl and the lacerations were right across the cheek I decided she needed plastic surgery.’
Alison, from Aberdulais, West Glamorgan, was walking to a restaurant with her boyfriend when she tripped over a kerb and fell headlong into the Georgian-style leaded windows of a shop.
Two of the cuts on her cheek were so deep that doctors could see her bone.
The inquest in Cardiff heard doctors failed to spot Alison had also broken her collar bone.
Anaesthetist Dr Gouri Shankar said the fracture would not have affected his decision to go ahead with the surgery.
Alison's heart probably slowed because of the anaesthetic together with pressure on a nerve from a tube going into her throat.
Dr Shankar admitted he did not give Alison a drug to counteract the possible effect on her heart.
He said it was common practise but he took a decision not to.
‘After about 10 minutes her heart beat slowed then stopped,’ he said.
The hearing continues.
Grandfather carried out 1,000 rapes
A GRANDFATHER who raped three schoolgirls more than 1,000 times was jailed for 12 years yesterday.
The 53-year-old railway worker abused his stepdaughter and two step-granddaughters in a 12-year reign of terror.
The stepdaughter, now 21, bore him a child at 16 as a result of being raped.
The man, from Harlesden, north London, was found guilty at the Old Bailey of eight specimen charges of rape.
Tesco kidnap gang jailed for 65 years
AN ‘evil and wicked’ gang of three armed robbers who terrorised two families were jailed for 65 years yesterday.
They burst into the homes of a Tesco manager and a bank executive and forced them to hand over £96,000.
Hostages were handcuffed with pillowcases put over their heads.
Store boss James Andrews was warned his sons would be castrated if he did not get the ransom.
Judge Peter Greenwood said: ‘The cruelty you showed was without mercy and you can expect little from me.’
Royal love tape claim
A RECORDING of an intimate phone call allegedly between Prince Charles and old flame Camilla Parker Bowles was made public last night.
In the recording the prince is alleged to have told her: ‘I adore you.
.. I'm so proud of you.’
Norman's rough ride
By Paul Wilenius and Eben Black
THE Chancellor mapped out yesterday what he hopes is Britain's road to recovery, but signalled a rough ride ahead for five million of the lowest paid workers.
Nurses, teachers and others at the bottom end of the wage scale will get rises of no more that 1½ per cent— a virtual freeze.
In a bid to lift the country out of recession Norman Lamont announced boosts for the car industry, housing, the health service and schools.
He cheered Tory backbenchers, but they predicted that the Chancellor could also face a rough ride unless the plan works.
Mr Lamont, in his Autumn Statement, slashed interest rates by another one per cent to seven per cent, giving help to industry and the housing market.
He unveiled a radical £750 million package to buy up 20,000 empty houses for the use of homeless families.
The Chancellor also announced a £4 billion recovery package which includes tax cuts on business investment and extra help for exporters.
He scrapped the special car tax, cutting £400 off the cost of an average car.
A relieved Premier John Major will today declare Norman Lamont's Mini-Budget a ‘turning point’ for Britain.
Union chiefs and angry workers are already threatening a bitter Winter of Discontent, furious that they are being asked to pay the price for economic recovery.
Even the promise of a pay freeze for Ministers was not enough to take the heat out of the effective pay cut for millions.
Although Mr Lamont announced that he has met his target of limiting spending to £244.5 billion this has been done by plundering Pounds 4 billion from the Government reserves and extra borrowing.
The Chancellor announced that public borrowing has shot up by £9 billion from £28 billion to £37 billion.
But it will get even worse next year as borrowing is expected to soar to an astonishing £44 billion.
National insurance payments were frozen, and all benefits will go up 3.6 per cent in line with inflation.
One building society chief said the last time interest rates were at this level, Virginia Wade won at Wimbledon and Jim Callaghan was the Labour Prime Minister.
Now the housing industry hopes that the reduced rates — which go as low as 6.25 per cent for first-time buyers — will do the trick and revive the deeply troubled market.
The Royals trade places
THE Prince and Princess of Wales tried to steal one another 's thunder yesterday as they swapped traditional roles.
Charles took on Diana's mantle speaking on terminal illness, while she prepared to tread the world stage.
It's Friday the 13th for us
By Simon Pipe
CHANCELLOR Norman Lamont delivered his Autumn statement yesterday but it was meaningless for the people of of Portland, Dorset.
At 4pm Rear Admiral John Tolhurst had already announced to demoralised workers at the Portland Navy base that it was too close.
For them Friday the 13th had come a day early.
The closure, part of £570 million in defence cuts, will rip the heart out of the island economy and that of neighbouring Weymouth and it will cost thousands of jobs.
Restaurant owner Andrew Parris said: ‘We bought the business with a loan because our bank manager said the Navy base would never close.
We'd like our money back now.’
Businessman Ron Smith, who owns a printing and publishing firm, said of Mr Lamont's bold talking: ‘It's all technical claptrap.
The only thing that rang a bell for Portland was when they announced the defence cuts — and they all cheered.’
Town councillor Fred Morris said: ‘They could not give us hope.
‘It doesn't mean a damn thing when he says we have low interest rates.
If you have no money in your pocket it doesn't matter what the rates are.
‘Interest cuts aren't going to cure the problem created on our island.
They are not going to say a thing that can help Portland in any way whatsoever.
‘The situation is going to get worse and worse here.
All they are concerned with is keeping their own jobs.’
Mr Harvey Edgar, a disabled pensioner, said: ‘The only thing the politicians have said about this island today is that they are pulling another bit away from us — a very large bit.’
The knock-on effect will hurt virtually every one of the 15,000 islanders.
Nearly every job on the island relies on the navy in some way.
Mr Parris claims his restaurant Slingers will be hard hit because people will no longer have the money to spend on dining out.
‘Thomas Hardy called this island the isle of slingers in his books because of the way we used to defend ourselves with slings and stones.
I reckon we need to get the slings out again.’
Lowly paid foot the bill
SHADOW Chancellor Gordon Brown taunted Norman Lamont that the Government had been forced kicking and screaming into stealing Labour's economic clothes.
The Chancellor had totally failed to come up with an industrial strategy to move Britain out of recession, Mr Brown said.
He accused the Chancellor of forcing the lowly paid to be the ‘scapegoats’ of his economic failures.
And he warned that unemployment will continue to rise, the balance of payments deficit to worsen, health service waiting lists to grow and lowly paid workers to face greater poverty.
‘Don't pay ministers’
LIBERAL Democrat spokesman Alan Beith said the Chancellor should link his colleagues' salaries to economic recovery.
‘Instead of a pay freeze for Ministers, it would have made sense to put them on performance-related pay, so that if this statement doesn't work, they don't get paid at all,’ he said.
Cash released by the abolition of car tax would not match the loss of spending power for low-paid public sector workers, he argued.
The total effect was unlikely to be anything like the boost needed to lift the economy.
Major's top brass lead the way with pay freeze
By Eben Black, Political Correspondent
THE Premier and his Ministers will have their pay frozen from April as part of the Government's austerity drive.
And MPs will be asked to vote themselves out of any increase on their £30,854-a-year salaries.
The crackdown on Government wages came as Chancellor Norman Lamont announced that five million public sector workers will get no more than 1.5 per cent.
Mr Major — salary £76,234 — hopes that with Ministers taking a lead in the bid to keep down wages the nation can be persuaded to swallow the bitter pill.
A Cabinet Minister will still earn £63,047 — more than Pounds 5,000 a month.
Ministers of State get £51,042 and junior Ministers £44,611.
Labour MPs will be challenged by the Tories not to vote against the zero increase in their pay when it comes before the Commons before April, but they are already cushioned by a 39 per cent increase in allowances they voted themselves earlier this year.
The Cabinet pay cut in real terms — allowing for inflation — came as Mr Lamont spelled out the measures he believes will drag Britain out of slump.
As he unveiled his ‘go for growth’ agenda and unemployment rose again in new figures, he was forced to admit the nation is deep in gloom.
‘This year's Autumn Statement has been drawn up against a background of continuing recession at home and renewed weakness abroad,’ the Chancellor said.
‘It is not surprising therefore that here in Britain the recovery that nearly all forecasters expected at the time of the Budget in March has still not become established.
‘The housing market remains depressed and confidence has taken a severe blow from the turmoil in the foreign exchange markets that led to sterling's suspension from the ERM.’
He spent the next 40 minutes telling MPs how he plans to reverse the appalling situation.
He pledged: ‘The Government has no intention of engineering a short-lived boom that would lead swiftly to higher inflation and higher interest rates.
‘Our objective is sustainable, long-term growth.’
In a ground-breaking ‘mini-budget’, he unveiled the Government's long-awaited package for recovery, designed to ease the nation over the hump of recession.
‘This will be aimed at sectors of the economy which have been hit hardest by the recession, helping to rebuild confidence and so foster recovery,’ the Chancellor claimed.
‘The best way to increase the long run growth rate in the economy is to make markets work better.
‘So we will be pressing ahead with our policies on privatisation, deregulation, cutting out waste and keeping the tax burden on companies and individuals as low as we can.
‘We must also fight for the interests of British business in world markets and provide them with the best environment in which they can compete and succeed.’
Mr Lamont added: ‘Low inflation, tight control of public spending, open markets, competition — these are the principles of the Government's strategy and they provide the right framework for economic growth.
‘I do not believe governments can spend their way out of recession.
It is individuals and companies in the private sector which are the engine of economic growth.’
As Tory backbenchers cheered, the Chancellor said: ‘British business now has the opportunity it has been looking for — to bring the country out of recession, to increase sales, expand production and invest for the future.
‘Industry can seize the new opportunities, safe in the knowledge the Government will play its full part.
‘We have new spending plans which protect the poorest in society and offer hope, help and opportunity by switching resources to programmes that support the long-term prosperity of the country.
‘We have the lowest interest rates in the EC.
We have a carefully targeted set of measures to lift confidence and get the country back to work.
‘This is a clear and comprehensive strategy.
It is a strategy for growth.’
Mr Lamont set an inflation target of between one and four per cent, excluding mortgage costs, with the aim to keep the figure at the lower end of the scale.
For the first time — before announcing a further base rate cut to seven per cent— he admitted millions of mortgage payers and business people suffered needlessly with too-high interest rates earlier this year.
‘Policy was tighter than was needed to deliver our inflation objective,’ Mr Lamont conceded.
He predicted the economy will start to grow again next year by one per cent, after contracting by one per cent this year — bringing us back to 1991 levels by 1993.
But the Chancellor, warning of the ‘hard choices’ he had to make, declared: ‘Above all, public spending must be kept under firm control.’
Despite his pledge, he had to tell the nation it will be £37 billion in debt by April, compared to his Budget forecast of £28 billion.
‘Borrowing is bound to rise in a recession,’ he said.
‘It would be damaging to seek to prevent it doing so.’
There was good news for the country's 25 million earners as Mr Lamont confounded the pundits to announce there will be no hike in national insurance contributions from nine per cent.
The starting point — £46 a week — and the cut-off level — Pounds 23,000 a year — will simply be increased in line with inflation from April.
After a bruising public spending round, he said the Government was within its target of £244.5 billion for next year, up 4.5 per cent allowing for inflation.
Despite that, all social security benefits — including pensions and child payments — will rise in line with the inflation rate.
The virtual pay freeze for five million public employees will free £1.5 billion — to be used for better services for the public, he said.
Education too gets £1.5 billion more than last year, while the NHS is to get three per cent more after inflation, or £1.9 billion in cash.
Mr Lamont said major building projects like roads will see a ‘significant increase’ with record spending of £2.1 billion, creating jobs in the hard-pressed construction industry.
Jobs crisis hits South
UNEMPLOYMENT is rising in the South East twice as fast as anywhere else in Britain, figures showed yesterday.
Of 24,200 workers thrown on the dole last month, more than half were from the once prosperous region.
Nearly 2.9 million people are now out of work in the UK.
That is the highest for five and a half years and is on course to reach three million around Christmas or early in the New Year.
Employment Minister Michael Forsyth said: ‘The Government must aim at getting Britain back to work’.
Tesco kidnap gang get 65 years
By Christian Gysin
AN evil gang who kidnapped two families to force the managers of a bank and supermarket to hand over £96,000 were jailed for a total of 65 years yesterday.
Ex-Paratrooper John Calton and builders Sean Wain and Robert Moore burst into the two homes wearing balaclavas and brandishing a sawn-off shotgun.
They handcuffed their terrified victims and put pillowcases over their heads.
Two teenage boys were threatened with castration to force their Tesco manager father to take cash from his store safe.
Sentencing the trio, Judge Peter Greenwood said: ‘It is rare, fortunately, to have men in front of me who are not only wicked but also evil.
‘The cruelty you showed when kidnapping decent people was without mercy and you can expect little from me.’
The gang were convicted of robbing Barclays Bank in Kelvedon, Essex, in 1989 and the Tesco superstore at Copdock, near Ipswich, Suffolk, in 1991.
They were also all found guilty of illegally possessing firearms.
Gang leader Calton, 39, of no fixed address, was jailed for 25 years.
An Army report once described him as having no regard for human life.
Wain, 23, of Burnham-on-Crouch, Essex, and Moore, 23, of Southminster, Essex, both received 20 years.
Chelmsford Crown Court heard how Tesco manager James Andrews, 44, was forced to hand over £55,000 after being taken hostage with his wife Edna and sons James, 15, and Matthew, 17.
The family's ordeal began when the men burst into their Colchester bungalow.
Schoolboy James was hit in the mouth as he struggled with the raiders.
The family were held at gunpoint overnight.
Mrs Andrews and the boys were then driven to isolated woods 30 miles away while a frantic Mr Andrews, who was told his sons would be castrated if he failed to co-operate, delivered the ransom.
Yesterday Mr Andrews, 44, said: ‘It will never go away.
It is just a case of time will heal.
We have got to get on with our lives.’
Fellow victim, Barclays executive Simon Culling, 27, said: ‘It was a time of overwhelming fear.
We have been unable to carry on with our lives until now.’
He and his mother and stepfather were also held at gunpoint at home in Coggeshall all night as the raiders watched videos and cooked themselves meals.
Mr Culling was forced to drive to his bank and hand over the cash.
His younger brother Philip was tied up and locked in the boot of a car for three hours while the gang made their getaway.
On Wednesday, the jury acquitted the three of two bank robberies in London, in January 1990 and January 1991, in which the families of managers were also terrorised.
Wain's father Robert, 48, of Southend on Sea was cleared of handling and conspiracy charges.
Charles ‘love tape’
By Alan Watkins
DETAILS of a private phone call in which Prince Charles and Camilla Parker Bowles are alleged to speak of their love for each other was made public last night.
The tape, said to have been recorded in December 1989 — two weeks before the so-called Dianagate recording of a conversation between the Princess and her friend James Gilbey — has not been denied by Buckingham Palace.
During the conversation, the Prince and Camilla tell each other: ‘I love you,’ it is claimed.
In another section of the tape, Prince Charles, who is 44 tomorrow, says: ‘I adore you…
I'm so proud of you.’
Earlier this week, when other parts of the tape were made public, Camilla's husband Brigadier Andrew Parker Bowles described the allegations as ‘fiction’.
The existence of the tape has been known for months and a copy of it was made available to a newspaper many weeks ago.
It is claimed that during the hour-long phone call Prince Charles and Camilla exchange affectionate remarks as they try to find a ‘safe’ house to meet.
The latest disclosures will re-open controversy over the royal couple and Diana's belief that the friendship between the Prince and Camilla, who have known each other for more than 10 years, has undermined her marriage.
It is not known who taped the conversation or how.
In an extract published earlier this week, Camilla is said to tell Charles: ‘I love you, darling.’
He responds: ‘'Night darling…love you too.’
The publication of the tape is likely to cause further concern to Diana who has already told friends that she believed that at least some of her private calls were being monitored and recorded.
She is said to have confronted the Queen's private secretary Sir Robert Fellowes to tell him: ‘If I discover my calls are being bugged, I'm off.’
Camilla, 45, has always refused to discuss her friendship with the Prince.
Monica leads the actresses in model takeover
By Alison Veness
THE reign of the supermodel is over as they become the losers in a takeover led by Dracula actress Monica Bellucci.
Hailed as the next Sophia Loren, the dark-eyed Italian is set to take the fashion world by storm as she steps out in the latest clothes by rainwear company Four Seasons.
Supermodels such as Linda Evangelista — used to commanding at least £10,000 just to get out of bed — Naomi Campbell and Claudia Schiffer, who have dominated the world of glamour for so long, will face tough competition as designer labels clamour to sign up actresses Michelle Pfeiffer, Geena Davis and Kim Basinger.
‘People can't relate to the supermodels anymore,’ said Four Seasons advertising executive Glyn Hayes.
‘They're fed up with not only their ‘perfect’ bodies but their astronomical fees.
‘People in the business have had enough with the ‘I won't get out of bed for less than £10,000’ attitude.
‘With actresses you're getting more than a face — a character and a personality as well.’
As supermodels price themselves out of the market, actresses are open to negotiation — a far better investment, says Glyn.
Even high street chains like Hennes who have consistently used the top models since 1989 have not ruled out the possibility of change.
Actresses are also creeping on to the catwalk, offering their services in exchange for a couple of outfits.
Madonna has done it, followed by Isabella Adjani and comedienne Sandra Bernhardt.
Monica is due to hit the big screen in January with the release of Dracula.
But meanwhile, her new role as fashion supremo is something she can really get her teeth into.
Cooking for one
THE Prince and Princess of Wales do have something in common— they both love leek and noodle casserole.
A group of schoolchildren, aged four to nine, wrote to European leaders and royals asking for secrets to successful cookery for a recipe book.
Charles and Diana sent back the bland and unadventurous vegetarian dish, a taste of the lacklustre state of the royal marriage.
The children, from Whitley Bay, Tyne and Wear, were shocked by German Chancellor Helmut Kohl's choice of stuffed pig's belly.
They voted Premier John Major top, with his popular recipe for spicey chicken in chilli powder and Tabasco.
Oh no!
It's the 12 Des of Christmas
CROONER Des O'Connor is expecting to have the last laugh on his critics by soaring to the top of the Christmas hit parade.
Des, whose singing is the butt of dozens of jokes, is releasing both a single and a 12-track album in time for the big buying season.
Advance orders are said to be pouring in for the LP Portrait and single Blue Days.
Songs on the album include Patsy Cline's Crazy and Gloria Estefan's Anything For You.
Columbia Records said: ‘All 12 songs are favourites of Des.’
Trading places
By Clive Nelson
PRINCE Charles and Princess Diana traded places yesterday in a growing battle for supremacy between their publicity advisers.
A speech by the prince about caring for the terminally ill sounded so close to his wife's concerns she could have written it herself.
Diana, meanwhile, finalised preparations for a visit to Paris in a role favoured by her husband as statesman and ambassador.
One of the prince's aides said: ‘If you believe there is a publicity war between them, then the gloves are well and truly off.’
The prince spoke for 15 minutes about caring for the terminally ill, then extended his visit to a London conference to talk privately with health service staff.
Charles even touched on Diana's favourite subject — helping Aids victims.
He said: ‘I should like to congratulate those organisations who have chosen to extend their help to sufferers from Aids and motor neurone disease.’
One senior courtier said later: ‘There is no doubt that this is an issue which concerns the Prince of Wales but it is beginning to look a little cynical.
‘It looks like he's trying to out-do her in her field while she moves into his.
They really are trying to steal the thunder from each other.’
Diana, who will meet President Mitterrand during her three-day trip, will miss Charles's 44th birthday tomorrow.
One close aide said last night: ‘The days of straightforward visits to sick children are behind her now.
‘She wants a higher, more serious profile.
‘Missing her husband's birthday is the last thing on her mind.’
Sky's boost to British film industry
SKY announced a multi-million pound boost for the British film industry yesterday with a major new mini-series.
Spread Eagle is being written by best-selling author Ken Follett.
Michael Caine, Jane Seymour and Edward Fox are already tipped as possible stars.
Gary Davey, deputy managing director of Sky, part-owned by New International, publishers of TODAY, said: ‘It's a top quality series.’
British Film Commissioner Sidney Samuelson said: ‘This is a great day for the British film industry.
Carey plea for peace over women priests
THE Archbishop of Canterbury began a peace mission within the Church of England yesterday to prevent civil war over the ordination of women priests.
Following Wednesday's General Synod vote in favour, Dr George Carey said he understood the anguish felt by opponents of the move.
‘They are desolate.
I appreciate that greatly and my heart goes out to them,’ he said on BBC Radio 4's Today programme.
‘I want to say, ‘Please don't go elsewhere.
Let's listen to the difficulties you may have and let's find a way of resolving them together’.’
Shortly after he spoke, the first of what could become a flood of disgruntled clergy announced he was leaving the Church of England.
The Rev Martin Flatman, vicar of St John's Church, Cowley, Oxford, plans to become a Roman Catholic priest when the ordination of women comes into effect in 1994.
The Bishop of Sheffield, the Rt Rev David Lunn, continued to hint he may resign.
‘As things stand at present, it would be very difficult for a Bishop opposed to the new legislation to continue in office when that legislation comes into effect,’ he said.
Opponents in Parliament, which has to vote on the measure, vowed to fight it tooth and nail.
Social security minister Ann Widdecombe, who plans to leave the Church, said it would cause people to quit ‘in droves’.
Dr Carey also faces opposition from the Vatican, which said the decision was ‘a grave obstacle’ to reconciliation between the churches.
Brother killer jailed for life
JEALOUS Jason Osborne was yesterday jailed for life for bludgeoning his brother to death.
Osborne used a mallet to smash the skull of his sleeping brother, Dean, after they had rowed over girlfriends Melissa Gunn and Joanne Morse.
Osborne's parents Jennifer, 40, and Christopher, 43, wept as the jury convicted him of murder at Birmingham Crown Court.
Osborne, a 20-year-old crane driver of Leicester, was recommended to serve at least 10 years.
Detective Superintendent Bob Scott said: ‘The family suffered the tragedy of being involved with both victim and perpetrator.’
Drug may have saved coma girl
A NURSE died after an anaesthetist failed to give her a drug to ease pressure on her heart, an inquest heard yesterday.
Alison Edwards, 20, of West Glamorgan, fell into a coma after her heart stopped as doctors tried to repair her slashed face.
Anaesthetist Dr Gouri Shankar, of St Lawrence Hospital in Gwent, said many doctors ignored the drug company's recommendations to counteract the anaesthetic's side-effects with drugs.
Cardiff coroner Dr Lawrence Addicott said: ‘It is said this is common practice.
This should be reviewed.’
Verdict: Misadventure
Heads call for the three Rs
HEAD teachers are demanding a slimmed-down national curriculum so children can concentrate on basic skills.
They say reading and writing tuition is being squeezed out by other subjects.
Standards will not rise until changes are made for five to 14-year-olds, warns the National Association of Head Teachers and the Secondary Heads Association.
The call comes as the National Curriculum Council undertakes a review on what schools are required to teach by law.
Knifewoman hijacks cabbie
A TAXI driver was hijacked by a knife-wielding woman who threatened to kill him yesterday.
Colin Moorfields, 41, was forced to drive for two hours after the 28-year-old, armed with a 6in knife, said: ‘Mess up and I will slit your throat and then mine.
‘I've got nothing to lose.
Get me to London.’
But the quick-thinking cabbie, who picked up the woman from a pub in Exeter, Devon, alerted a cashier when the hijacker ordered him to stop at a motorway service station for cigarettes.
Colin, of Exeter, later saw a police car following, pulled on to the hard shoulder and jumped out.
A woman was arrested.
Tragedy of family that cared
By Neville Thurlbeck
THE tragic events that led to a couple gassing themselves and their mentally handicapped daughter emerged last night.
Jeffery and Sheila Parfitt blamed social services for failing to help when the burden of care overwhelmed them.
Daughter Helen, 25, needed constant attention after whooping cough left her with a mental age of just two.
Mr and Mrs Parfitt gave up their jobs to look after her every need.
Mr Parfitt was in constant pain after severely injuring his back in a laboratory accident 22 years ago.
After a series of cancer scares involving his wife, the couple began worrying about Helen's future after their deaths.
Desperate and afraid, they formed a suicide pact.
On Wednesday, a policeman found Mr Parfitt, 49, slumped over the wheel of his car near Cheddar Gorge in Somerset.
Mrs Parfitt, 47, and Helen were still cuddling each other in the back seat.
A hosepipe, attached to the exhaust, led into the car.
A note blaming social services chiefs for ignoring their plea for help was on the dashboard.
The couple's remaining daughter, Lynn, a 22-year-old freelance photographer, was last night being comforted by relatives.
Mr Parfitt's brother, Phil, confirmed that his wife had been worried by cancer scares — but had been given the all-clear.
‘She was a devoted mother and an ideal wife,’ he said.
‘We are shell-shocked.’
Mr Parfitt always blamed ‘the system’ for failing them.
In 1972, he paid for Helen to go to America for treatment to teach her to crawl and use her hands.
‘We realised very early on that there was something very wrong with Helen,’ he said at the time.
‘But none of the hospitals we went to in this country did a single thing to help us.
The only people to help us were the Salvation Army with their playgroups.’
Amy Oxley, a neighbour of the family in Bristol, said last night that Mr Parfitt was a ‘wonderful man, who felt very deeply about his family’.
‘I saw him quite recently and he was in a lot of pain, lying on the floor.
Despite this he was teaching Helen a little rhyme.’
Avon County Council said yesterday that it had done everything possible to help the family.
‘Helen Parfitt was profoundly disabled and received day care for several years,’ a spokesman said.
‘She also had short periods of respite care to give the parents a break from time to time.
‘The family was regularly offered help but these offers were not always taken up.
‘The door was often open to them, but they chose not to walk through it.’
The Parfitts' suicide pact is a tragic reminder of the forgotten plight of Britain's carers.
Agony aunt Claire Rayner said last night: ‘People are often despairing — especially in the cases of offspring whose ageing parents fear they will not be properly looked after when they have gone.
‘It is shocking and disgraceful that this could happen.
We are meant to be one of the caring nations in the world, for God's sake.’
‘Wife's taunts led to 999 killing’
THE millionaire who stabbed his wife as his son dialled 999, told yesterday how she taunted him that the boy was another man's child.
Peter Horbury, 55, told Cardiff Crown Court: ‘She was taking Daniel away.
She said Daniel was not mine anyway.’
Horbury, of Pontypool, Gwent, admitted he drank half a bottle of whisky that night.
He said: ‘I went berserk — I ran to grab the knife.’
Police taped 10-year-old Daniel's harrowing call as he heard his mother Caroline killed.
He found her with the knife in her neck.
Horbury denies murder on grounds of provocation.
The trial continues.
Fly me to the moon
By Philip Eden, Today weatherman
A PASSENGER jet coming in to land at Heathrow is silhouetted against a full moon shining bright.
It is a stunning image made possible by a freak set of weather conditions.
A polar airstream has swept across the country on strong north-westerly winds.
The cold, clear air direct from Iceland and Greenland has low moisture-levels, virtually no pollution and little haze.
By day you can see for miles, and at night the moon shines brightly out of cloudless skies.
The moon is also higher in the sky during the winter months.
Just for the record, the picture was taken with a Nikon F4, fitted with a 600mm lens and a x2 converter, on a tripod.
The camera was set at 1/250th of a second, on an F8 aperture.
The film was Fuji 400ASA.
Let Tony die with dignity
By Olga Craig
THE father of Hillsborough coma victim Tony Bland pleaded yesterday: Let my son die with dignity.
For nearly four years Tony has lain in a coma, sustained by a feeding tube but trapped in what one doctor described as a ‘living death’.
His father Allan told the High Court: ‘Whatever differences we have had as a family we are all of a mind that we would like what is best for Tony.
‘And that is the feeding tube being removed and him being allowed to die with dignity.’
Tony suffered severe brain damage in April 1989 when he was crushed with dozens of other Liverpool fans in the Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield.
Since then he has been cared for at the Airedale General Hospital.
Doctors say he is not conscious and will never improve.
In a historic test case his parents Allan and Barbara, along with Airedale Regional Health Authority, are seeking a change in the law that would allow them to disconnect the feeding tube and let Tony die.
Mr Bland, of Keighly, West Yorkshire, said: ‘I feel that the tube should be removed.
I can't see any point treatment being continued.
I can see no advantage at all.
‘We have watched him for three and a half years and see nothing.
We have tried everything and there's no response whatsoever.
‘We talk to him, play music to him and touch him.’
He described his son as sensitive, willing and affable.
‘After it happened we found he was well liked.’
As Mr Bland spoke his wife looked nervous and strained, anxiously twisting a handkerchief in her hands.
The three-day test case has far-reaching significance for the medical staff involved.
They fear they could lay themselves open to prosecution for murder or manslaughter — or in some cases a civil action for damages — if they disconnect a feeding tube without court permission.
Robert Francis QC, counsel for the Airedale NHS Trust, said Tony's condition was that of a persistent vegetative state ‘little more than a living death’.
‘Three-and-a-half years have past without any sign of recovery.
His family have attended him at all times with considerable devotion.’
He explained that by July of 1989 Tony's doctor, James Howe discussed the situation with Mr and Mrs Bland.
‘They stated that they did not want him to exist in this fashion.’
But when the Blands' doctor approached the Sheffield Coroner about disconnecting the tube he said such action would be unlawful.
Tony was now ‘in a bit of state’ and needed constant attention.
‘One wonders, had he been able to have a say, whether he would have wished to inflict this level of strain on those around him.
His standard of life is of a minimal nature,’ said Mr Francis.
If the feeding tube were withdrawn Tony would not survive for more than two weeks.
‘He would suffer no discomfort because he is incapable of suffering.
‘He will simply fade away.’
To a hushed court Dr Howe described what he would do if the court granted the application.
He would personally assume responsibility for disconnecting food and water supplies and would not give Tony antibiotics if he developed any more infections.
He would continue to be cared for by nurses.
Dr Howe added: ‘He is not conscious and so he cannot suffer.’
If feeding and antibiotics continued to be administered Tony could be expected to live for a few more years.
The method of allowing Tony's death was criticised by Dr Keith Andrews, from Putney Royal Hospital, who appeared as witness for the Official Solicitor, a Government official who presented the other side of the case.
‘It would take time starving to death and it's not a dignified way of dying,’ he said.
‘Tony would demonstrate symptoms that would not be pleasant to look at.’
Judge Stephen Brown halted proceedings after the lunch recess to tell the court that an extremely distressed television viewer had telephoned his clerk after seeing a film clip of Tony on the BBC lunchtime news.
‘The viewer pointed out that in the film Tony seemed to show responses.
He said he was quite prepared to come to court with the film,’ the judge said.
‘This case is obviously one of great public concern.’
The case continues.
Farmer shoots McCartney deer
A FARMER has killed 12 deer owned by rock star Paul McCartney and his wife Linda after they strayed on to his land.
Jeremy Gibbs said he would blast more deer if they continued to eat his crops.
The deer wander from the 120-acre sanctuary which nature-loving Paul and Linda set up near Mr Gibb's estate at Haddon End in Somerset.
He said he wrote to the former Beatle about the problem but had not had a reply.
‘They were a nuisance and had to be dealt with,’ said Mr Gibbs wife Sarah.
750,000 think work is a pain
INJURIES at work led to 750,000 days off in one year, a report revealed yesterday.
There were 9,319 non-fatal accidents involving machinery, said the Health and Safety Executive.
The food, drink and tobacco industry reported the greatest number of machine injuries with 940 between 1990 and 1991.
Timber and wooden furniture industries reported 206 machine injuries, with many resulting in amputations.
TV gladiator saves his mum
TV Gladiator Wolf revived his elderly mother after she collapsed yesterday.
He gave her mouth-to-mouth resuscitation when she twice stopped breathing and turned blue.
‘I've never been so frightened in my life,’ said the muscle-bound star of ITV's action show.
Wolf, 40, shares a home in Sevenoaks, Kent, with Moira, 78, who was taken to Bromley Hospital, Kent, suffering from angina.
She was recovering last night.
What the law says
THE family and the trust seek a declaration that it would be lawful to stop the feeding that is keeping Tony alive.
The purpose of the application is to allow him to die through natural causes which, it was thought, would take two weeks at most.
Decisions of similar weight have to be taken ‘day in, day out’ in many hospitals.
The other side of the coin was spelt out by James Munby QC for the Official Solicitor.
He said if a doctor starved Tony he would be committing homicide.
He added: ‘It's no answer to say ‘I took those steps only to save the patient from dreadful suffering’.
The law says you shall not do it.’
Shopper's car stolen as she checks engine
THIEVES knocked a woman to the ground and drove off in her car as she checked under the bonnet for an engine fault.
The two men struck after spotting that the 25-year-old woman had left the keys in the ignition.
She had stopped in a busy street in Cardiff city centre after a shopping trip, and left the engine running after hearing a strange noise.
The white Peugeot 309 was later found abandoned on a housing estate four miles outside Cardiff.
A police spokesman said: ‘It was a particularly nasty crime, picking on a woman in distress.
‘This pair are real cowards and the poor lady was left in tears.
‘She saw her car driven off in front of her eyes.’
Both attackers are described as aged between 18 and 20 and both wearing black Naf-Naf style jackets.
Clark ‘to blame for weapons scandal’
By Russell Jenkins
PREMIER John Major tried to pass the buck in the Iraqgate scandal yesterday by blaming former defence procurement minister Alan Clark.
The Prime Minister told MPs he had been misled by Mr Clark over the sanctions-busting sales of arms-building equipment to dictator Saddam Hussein.
Mr Clark, 64, who stood down at the last election, had assured him that he had not advised companies to conceal military use when preparing export licence applications.
Such claims were ‘totally false’.
The minister, whose evidence led to the collapse of the Matrix Churchill court case this week, took the same position in writing.
It was not until his testimony at the trial of three executives accused of breaking embargoes that there was any reason to doubt his word, said Mr Major.
The Prime Minister added: ‘Every Parliamentary answer I have given or letter I despatched has been based on the position I understood it to be.’
Mr Major, who was Chancellor at the time the embargo was imposed, turned on his critics, telling Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown he had ‘misunderstood the position’.
‘He wrongly claimed I misled him by concealing knowledge of the Matrix Churchill case when I explained the Government's policy.
That is not the case,’ he said.
‘I made it clear I could not comment in case I prejudiced proceedings.’
Mr Ashdown said Mr Major should have been aware of a Government paper detailing the extent of the trade when, in December 1990, he flatly denied any illicit trading.
The minute was sent to members of a Whitehall committee which included Chancellor Major.
Yesterday, Mr Major battled to distance himself from the scandal which has already engulfed four Cabinet colleagues.
Trade President Michael Heseltine, Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke, Foreign Minister Tristan Garel-Jones and Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind signed papers to suppress documents which would have helped the Matrix Churchill defence.
Mr Major said: ‘They signed such documents on the advice of the Attorney General.’
The Attorney General, Sir Nicholas Lyell QC, said yesterday he had, with counsel, advised ministers in the Matrix Churchill case that they were legally required to claim public interest immunity on behalf of the Crown.
He said in a letter to The Times that ministers had to leave it up to the court whether or not the documents should be disclosed.
Away from the Commons, a former export manager of Coventry-based Matrix Churchill claimed details of his firm's trade had reached the Prime Minister.
A secret service contact told Mark Gutteridge that Margaret Thatcher would have seen the information.
Mr Gutteridge said: ‘Once he did tell me, after we did a report, it would land on the PM's desk.’
Another alleged sanction-busting case was dropped by the prosecution yesterday.
Birmingham-based BSA Tools boss Keith Bailey, 57, claimed outside court that the Government had given a clear message it wanted to trade with Saddam's regime.
Let us go, Saddam
TWO Britons being held in Iraq have written to Saddam Hussein begging to be released.
Paul Ride and Michael Wainwright made their plea while waiting for news of appeals to Iraq's Supreme Court.
A lower court has already dismissed their cases.
Michael's sister Susan Priestley, 39, said last night: ‘We were told after the last appeal that this one wasn't likely to succeed but we live in hope.’
Mr Ride, 33, from London, was given seven years and Yorkshireman Mr Wainwright, 42, ten years for illegally entering Iraq.
Ram raid on home
BURGLARS smashed their way into a family home by driving through the patio windows.
The ram-raiders careered across the lawn of the house in Wrekenton, Tyne and Wear.
They reversed away without stealing anything after being scared by an alarm but caused £750 damage.
Police in Northumbria believe it is the first such attack on a house.
Quit cigs for baby
WOMEN have a better chance of conceiving if they stop smoking, researchers said yesterday.
Those who smoke could be cutting their fertility by up to a third.
The researchers studied levels of cotinine — a product of nicotine — in women undergoing assisted conception.
Their report in The Lancet said: ‘Infertile women should stop or at least reduce smoking.’
Happy ending to a tail
EVERY dog has its day — and it came yesterday.
First, vets fiercely condemned the practice of docking tails — the most famous examples of which are the Queen's corgis.
Then, in Hong Kong, Chris Patten and family were reunited with their beloved terrier whose disappearance caused a diplomatic incident.
The Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons described docking as ‘an unjustified mutilation’ unless carried out for medical reasons.
It warned that vets performing the operation routinely would face an allegation of ‘disgraceful conduct’ which could result in them being struck off.
‘This is not a total ban,’ said a spokesman.
‘That must be for the Government.’
The college will now push for a ban on cosmetic docking.
It was forced to look at the issue again by the introduction of new legislation.
From July it will be illegal for anyone other than a vet to carry out the operation.
Most docking is currently done by breeders who argue that it is painless, improves hygiene in long-haired varieties, and removes the risk of dogs injuring their tails later on.
As well as corgis, the most popular docked breeds are boxers, dobermans, old English sheepdogs and rottweilers.
Last month the Princess Royal publicly defended the practice at the annual congress of the British Veterinary Association in Harrogate, North Yorkshire.
‘My own experience of working dogs suggests it is sound preventative treatment,’ she said.
As vets hammered out their new policy at a stormy meeting in London, one famous dog was happy just to be back with her owners at the home of Governor Patten.
Soda the Norfolk terrier was discovered by joggers in the colony's Aberdeen Country Park.
She disappeared last weekend, sparking a joke from Australia's Foreign Minister Gareth Evans that she had ended up on the dinner table of Chinese dictator Deng Xiaoping.
Mr Evans apologised, saying his comments had been taken out of context.
Last gift to proud parents from brave girl who knew she was going to die
By Ian Key
BRAVE student Anna Hearld wanted to give her proud parents something to remember her by.
Although already gravely ill, she posed for this graduation picture just days before losing her battle against cancer.
Anna, 23, knew she would be too sick to attend the official ceremony to receive her BA (hons) in business administration.
So the special picture was arranged after her degree was unofficially confirmed.
Anna who had renal cancer, died just hours after she learned officially that she had graduated from Northumbria University.
Her father Bob, a teacher, said: ‘It is a very special photo and we will treasure it for ever.’
Anna, of Flaxby, near Knaresborough, North Yorks, first became ill at Christmas two years ago.
Soon after, tests revealed the worst — she had cancer.
Then, in February last year, she had to have a kidney removed.
Despite having to spend several periods in hospital, Anna was determined not to let her illness affect her life.
‘She was doing so until the illness took over almost completely,’ said Bob.
‘It has just been a long battle for us all.
‘Renal cancer is very difficult to treat.
Chemotherapy does not work with it and it rapidly spreads through the system.
‘Anna sat her finals in the summer and was leading as normal a life as possible until recently when the disease began to get much worse.
‘She started to grow very short of breath then and the decline was more and more rapid until she could not walk or move around.
‘But she was very brave and amazed the doctors by doing things when they thought she should have been dead long ago.’
Paper fined £60,000
PUBLISHERS of a Sunday newspaper and two journalists were fined £60,000 yesterday for disclosing details of secret jury deliberations in the Blue Arrow fraud trial.
Lord Justice Beldam and Mr Justice Tudor Evans fined Associated Newspapers £30,000 to deter others from committing a ‘deliberate and serious breach of the law’.
Stewart Steven, then Mail on Sunday editor, was fined £20,000 and the paper's City editor Clive Wolman £10,000 for ‘dangerous and serious encroachment on the jury's functions and its confidentiality in its deliberations’.
The judges took only 80 minutes to decide the level of fines after ruling the journalists had breached the strict provisions of the 1981 Contempt of Court Act.
An article which appeared in the paper contained comments by three jurors on what occurred when they retired to consider their verdict in one of the most complex trials in British legal history.
Golden oldies
FIVE condoms were sold for more than £80,000 yesterday even though they were well past their sell-by date.
The condoms, sold at London auctioneers Christie's, dated from the 19th century.
The pick of the bunch was printed with an erotic scene, complete with a vital silk drawstring.
Creature comforts of George the kid
THE RSPCA was called in to investigate when George the kid goat was seen watching TV from the comfort of his armchair.
George proved the perfect host when the inspector called.
An RSPCA officer visited the house in Llandudno, Gwynedd, and George proved the perfect host.
‘He took his box of mints over to the inspector and offered him one,’ said owner Audrie Stallard, 65, of Llandudno, Gwynedd.
The officer couldn't stop laughing.
Mrs Stallard nursed George back to health after he was found injured on the nearby headland of Great Orme.
The inspector concluded that he wouldn't survive back in the wild.
So the good life goes on for George.
He takes a nap on a bed and guzzles four pints of milk a day.
But he's not completely house trained yet.
‘George strips the wallpaper, takes the covers off books and spreads his hay all over the floor in one of our rooms,’ said Mrs Stallard.
‘He's got party tricks like shaking hands, and when we walk him to the shops on a lead he loves being cuddled by children and old people.
‘Sometimes he'll just lie on the settee and refuse to get off.
‘We've had him since he was three days old.
It seems he was attacked by a dog or a fox.
We had to bottle feed him.
‘He's so popular that when he was castrated people sent get well cards.’
Families put cash in bank
SAVING for a rainy day and paying off debts is now a top priority for families.
The average household spent £259 a week last year, an increase of 4.8 per cent since 1990.
But, after taking inflation into account, that is a decrease in real terms.
At the same time, income has risen by eight per cent, showing more people are banking their cash.
The figures were revealed in a major survey which also discovered that just one in 10 homes now consists of the traditional image of mum and dad and two children.
The number of single adult households has doubled in the past 30 years.
The Government Family Spending survey found people are splashing out less on food and clothing and more on homes.
Food and housing are still the two biggest bills but spending on eating has dropped from 33 per cent of the weekly budget in 1957 to just under 18 per cent.
We are also paying less for clothes but housing and motoring have doubled in cost.
Chunnel walkers
FIVE students walked from France to Britain after breaching security in the Channel Tunnel.
The Frenchmen claimed they were making a film for tunnel owner Eurotunnel but were detained after crossing into the British sector.
A security official said: ‘They made the crossing for a bet.’
Cruel con on widow
A BOGUS policeman and a girl robbed an 85-year-old widow in a cruel hoax.
The man, claiming to be a detective, told Nellie Fleetwood the girl had tried to con her way into her Sheffield home.
But as Mrs Fleetwood watched for a police car the pair stole £120 and fled.
Soccer ace Pat tackles a mugger
SOCCER ace Pat Nevin pitched in to help when a mugger tried to steal a fan's camera.
He chased the thief along the street in Reggio Emilia, Italy, tripped him up and grabbed it back.
The Tranmere Rovers winger and Scottish international was in Italy for the club's tie with AC Reggiana.
‘I did what anyone would have done to prevent a theft and I am glad no one was hurt,’ he said.
Leslie Crowther
DOCTORS played TV host Leslie Crowther his favourite classical music tapes yesterday to help him recover from a coma.
The Price Is Right host Leslie, 59, above, can hear but is still unable to speak following an operation to remove two blood clots from his brain after a road crash.
‘He has a deep love for classical music,’ said a friend.
Let-off for 200,000 drink-drivers is blocked
By Mike Taylor
A LEGAL loophole that threatened to quash the convictions of up to 200,000 drink-drivers was closed yesterday.
Three High Court judges rejected appeals by six motorists who claimed that the standard charge sheet was badly worded and therefore invalid in law.
The appeal hinged on an earlier ruling that magistrates were right to throw out the case of a man accused of failing to provide samples because the sheet was ‘bad for duplicity’.
The sheet had not specified whether the driver was being investigated for ‘driving or attempting to drive’ or ‘being in charge of a vehicle’, which carried a lower maximum penalty.
Lord Justice Watkins, Mr Justice Macpherson and Mr Justice Roch yesterday said the ruling was wrong.
The decision was a victory for the Director of Public Prosecutions Barbara Mills, whose department faced an administrative headache if the appeal floodgates had remained open.
The charge sheet — used for 20 years in cases of failing to provide breath, blood or urine samples — has been changed since the earlier decision.
If the test case had been successful, 200,000 motorists guilty of failing to supply samples would have had the chance to appeal.
But Lord Justice Watkins said the sheet was not ‘bad for duplicity or uncertainty’.
The offence was a one-off which did not affect convictions before or since, he added.
Even if the court agreed with the earlier ruling it would have refused to allow five of the six appeals because they were brought outside legal time limits.
Tom Thumb ready to sail
LONE yachtsman Tom McNally launched his mission yesterday to sail the Atlantic in a boat six inches shorter than him.
Tom, 49, from Liverpool, flew to the Portuguese capital Lisbon where he aims to follow Columbus's voyage to the West Indies in the smallest craft ever — just 5ft 5in.
£65-a-second BT in tele-con
BT was condemned for its high pressure sales techniques on the day its profits slipped to just £65 a second.
Trading standards officers were called in to investigate the way the company peddled its ‘call waiting’ service.
Under the system customers can be alerted, while they are using the phone, that another caller is trying to get through to them.
A BT letter told customers they were getting the system free for a three-month trial.
The letter did not say that they would continue to be charged for the service, unless they wrote and asked for it to be stopped.
‘It is sharp practice,’ said Liverpool councillor Chris Curry, who alerted trading standards officers when he received complaints about the BT letter.
He added: ‘I am concerned at the whole idea of trying to whip up custom with a free deal which automatically converts into a pay-as-you-go service charged on your phone bill — unless you contract out.
‘Many people could be paying these fees without even knowing it.’
Chief trading standards officer Peter Mawdsley confirmed the scheme was under review.
BT, which yesterday announced a six-month pre-tax profit of over Pounds 1 billion, admitted the sales ploy was ‘an error’.
Its profits were 36 per cent down on the figure for the same period last year, thanks mainly to a huge voluntary redundancy scheme under which 28,000 staff left.
The company is planning to axe 15,000 more jobs in the next two years.
Boy ‘made to eat spiders’
A CRUEL stepfather forced his wife's son to eat dead spider sandwiches, a court heard yesterday.
Once, he even put a live spider on a piece of tape and forced it into the terrified 11-year-old's mouth.
The boy, now 16, and his younger brother and sister were subjected to four years of abuse, Guilford Crown Court was told.
The couple systematically bullied and humiliated the children, often for fun, said Sonia Woodley, prosecuting.
It began when the man moved in to the home at Hersham, Surrey.
Both boys were fed just bread and water.
The eldest was made to use a toothbrush after it had been put in the toilet.
‘They went far beyond what is acceptable,’ said Miss Woodley.
The children have since been taken into care.
The stepfather denies 24 charges of cruelty and two of causing actual bodily harm.
His wife denies 20 cruelty charges.
Older women sparkle
OLDER women have more sparkle, health and elegance, a poll said yesterday.
Although Princess Diana was top, The Queen Mother, Lady Thatcher, Barbara Cartland and Joanna Lumley were close behind.
Yasmin le Bon and Catherine Zeta Jones were also in the top 10 for Greenbank Drinks Company, Cleveland.
The Ice Cream junkies
By Nicki Pope
WHEN a teenager talks about popping in to the travel agents, parents should realise they may be intending to buy something more mind-bending than a cheap break.
And when they start on about ‘beam me up Scottie’ they hope it will really take them out of this world.
For these seemingly innocent catchphrases take on a new meaning in the unofficial dictionary of drug dealing, a chief police officer revealed yesterday.
Scotland Yard Commander David Stockley has produced a handbook to help parents, teachers and social workers decode street language.
A travel agent is a dealer and ‘beam me up’ refers to a mix of cocaine.
A casual drug user has an ice cream habit and a champ is someone who refuses to reveal their supplier.
Hamburgers and disco biscuits are undercover terms for the rave drug Ecstasy, while royalty is cocaine and poor quality drugs are dismissed as flea powder.
The code was designed to prevent outsiders from guessing what was going on.
‘Parents should realise that young people may use these terms to communicate with fellow users and hide their involvement with drugs,’ said Mr Stockley, former head of the National Drugs Intelligence Unit.
The problem was getting worse in Britain as they became cheaper, he warned.
‘Drug abuse is a a crisis we can no longer ignore,’ he said.
‘It has surfaced in our schools, places of entertainment and the workplace.
‘On our housing estates, drugs have taken hold to breed their own subculture, devastating families and involving even the very young.’
NAMES ON THE STREET
Bananas amyl nitrate
Big Brown Ones Ecstasy
Buddha grass cannabis
Californian sunshine LSD
Disco biscuits Ecstasy
Flea powder poor quality
Girl cocaine
Mary cannabis
Sputnik opium and cannabis
Beeb rapped for playing Ecstasy song
BROADCASTING watchdogs backed complaints against the BBC yesterday after it played a song which promoted use of the killer drug Ecstasy.
The Shamen's Eberneezer Goode, a former number one, provoked a storm of protest after it was played on Radio One's Jakki Brambles Show and BBC1's Top of the Pops.
The Broadcasting Standards Council upheld audience complaints.
It said: ‘The words of the song are sufficiently clear to a large number of the audience.’
A BBC spokesman said: ‘The song contains warnings against abuse, unlike previous songs of the same kind.’
Spy ‘haunted by his past’
SPY Ian Spiro killed his family and himself because his work in the Middle East returned to ‘haunt’ him, it was claimed yesterday.
Mrs Spiro's brother Ken Quarton said Mr Spiro, 46, received threats before the shootings in California last week.
‘He said, ‘Something has come back to haunt me — read the book by Terry Waite’,’ Mr Quarton said.
Joyriders in M25 mayhem
JOYRIDERS were chased by police at 100mph through a motorway's contraflow system during the rush hour yesterday.
A stolen Volkswagen Golf ploughed through cones on to the M25's hard shoulder.
Three police cars were damaged in the 28-mile chase between Sevenoaks, Kent, and Godstone, Surrey.
Three men were arrested.
Raided?
Not on my telly
A BURGLARY victim whose home has been raided 14 times in three years has screwed her TV to the floor.
Heather Mayne has had four videos, jewellery and clothes taken from the washing line at her home in Cleethorpes, Humberside.
Trapped by hunch in a million
By Christian Gysin
THE ruthless kidnap gang jailed yesterday for a total of 65 years were trapped by a hunch in a million.
One clue stood out as Detective Sergeant Graham Bull painstakingly sifted through notes about suspect John ‘the German’ Calton.
Calton liked mountaineering.
Within hours Bull told Detective Superintendent Malcolm Hargreaves the hunt had to concentrate on north Wales.
There, Bull was sure, they would find their man.
Essex officers were desperate to catch Calton.
Two families had been taken hostage to force the managers of a bank and supermarket to hand over £96,000.
Welsh police were told to search every mountain resort and hotel for Calton's distinctive Daihatsu four-wheel drive car.
Bull and his colleague, Detective Constable Tim Wills, drove at high speed towards north Wales.
As they headed west, three Welsh officers saw the vehicle at a hotel in Capel Curig, Snowdonia.
Bull and Wills were just eight minutes from the spot and arrived as officers swooped on Calton.
Told he was being arrested, he just smirked: ‘You guys have been watching too much TV.’
Police, however, still needed to track down Calton's two main accomplices.
They found a ‘little black book’ in his anorak and Detective Sergeant Deirdre Noelle cracked its coded sequence of figures in 14 minutes to reveal the phone numbers of accomplices Sean Wain and Robert Moore.
They were arrested two days later.
Last night Mr Hargreaves told TODAY: ‘It was the most exciting, adrenalin-charged seven days of my life.
But for the quick thinking of the two officers — the first with his hunch about north Wales, the second with her code breaking — we might have lost the whole team.’
Calton, who also used the alias Hans Schultz, had nearly escaped.
The man responsible for two of the cruellest kidnappings in British criminal history seemed the perfect neighbour.
He worked as an engineer with a construction company and lived quietly with girlfriend Lorna Burns in Eltham, south London.
She knew nothing of his life of crime.
When her sister rang to say he fitted the description of a wanted man given on BBC TV's Crimewatch UK, he told her: ‘Don't be silly’.
However, he left the next day, calling later to ask Lorna to meet him nearby with £500 cash so he could go away for a few days.
Armed officers acting on a tip-off found Lorna alone at their home and the guesswork started.
Sentencing the gang at Chelmsford Crown Court, Judge Peter Greenwood said: ‘It is rare, fortunately, I have men in front of me who are not only wicked but also evil.
‘The cruelty you showed when kidnapping decent people was without mercy and you can expect little from me.’
The gang were convicted of robbing Barclays Bank in Kelvedon, Essex, in 1989 and the Tesco superstore at Copdock, near Ipswich, Suffolk, in 1991.
They were also all found guilty of illegally possessing firearms.
Gang leader Calton, 39, of no fixed address, was jailed 25 years.
An Army report once said he had no regard for human life.
Wain, 23, of Burnham-on-Crouch, Essex, and Moore, 23, of Southminster, Essex, both received 20 years.
The jury earlier acquitted the three of two bank robberies in London, in which the families of managers were also terrorised.
Wain's father Robert, 48, of Southend on Sea, was cleared of handling and conspiracy charges.
Family's terror ordeal
TESCO manager James Andrews was forced to hand over £55,000 after being taken hostage with his wife Edna and sons James, 15, and Matthew, 17.
The family's ordeal began when the men burst into their Colchester bungalow, wearing balaclavas and brandishing sawn-off shotguns.
Schoolboy James was hit in the mouth as he struggled with the raiders.
The terrified family were handcuffed, had pillows pulled over their heads and were held at gunpoint overnight.
Mrs Andrews and the boys were then driven to isolated woods 30 miles away.
Meanwhile, a frantic Mr Andrews, who was told his sons would be castrated if he failed to co-operate, delivered the ransom.
Mr Andrews, 44, said yesterday: ‘It will never go away.
It is just a case of time will heal.
We have got to get on with our lives.’
The fear is still with us
BARCLAYS Bank executive Simon Culling was subjected to a horrifying ordeal at gunpoint after the gang burst in to his home.
The 27-year-old, his mother, Ann, and stepfather, Keith, were kept prisoner all night and had pillowcases pulled over their heads at their house in Coggeshall, Essex, as the thugs watched videos and cooked themselves meals.
The raiders then handcuffed Ann and Keith together and Mr Culling was forced to drive to his bank and hand over the cash.
His younger brother Philip was tied up and locked in the boot of a car for three hours to stop the family raising the alarm while the thugs made their getaway.
Mr Culling said: ‘It still seems now as if it the whole thing happened yesterday.
It was a time of overwhelming fear.
‘We have been unable to carry on with our lives until now.’
Para who fell to crime
JOHN Calton was a highly trained paratrooper who turned to a life of crime when he left the Army.
He worked undercover in Germany and Northern Ireland, but a lieutenant provided a devastating insight when he filed a final report on Carlton, 37.
‘He's a very keen student and works very hard,’ said the officer.
‘But he has no regard for human life and will be better suited as a terrorist than a soldier.’
Another officer said of him: ‘I think we were just glad he was on our side.
We wouldn't have wanted him to be on anyone else's.’
Calton left the Army in the late Seventies but he was nothing like the characters from the award-winning TV drama Civvies.
He quickly carried out a series of bizarre bank raids, claiming he was wired up as a ‘human bomb’.
He was eventually arrested and jailed for six years in 1983.
But as a model prisoner he was back on the streets within three years after remission for good behaviour.
He then hatched his plots to kidnap families and wreak havoc on their lives.
After his arrest he threatened officers by drawing his finger across his neck to suggest he would one day kill them.
A senior police officer said: ‘He's an odd character.
He made it very clear he would like to kill police officers.
He also appeared to have an intense hatred of black people for no reason.
‘In a way he was also very stupid.
He blew a lot of his money on gambling, even slot machines, and buying cars before he got bored with them and sold them off for a fraction of the price he paid for them.’
Calton's accomplices Sean Wain and Robert Moore were described by police as little rats.
An officer said: ‘They were an odd choice for Calton to recruit.’
Guppy ‘set up gold scam’
EARL Spencer's best man Darius Guppy was accused yesterday of masterminding a gold smuggling racket.
The best friend of Princess Diana's brother was said to have arranged for bullion to be secretly exported to India.
Convicted fraudster Ishan Dutta claimed that gem merchant Guppy had suggested flying the gold to Jersey to beat British tax laws.
The ingots would then be exchanged for hard currency on the Indian black market.
Dutta, who was at Oxford with Guppy, said the gold would be sold for rupees then exchanged for sterling that would be ‘repatriated’ to Geneva.
The allegation came on the third day of an insurance fraud trial at Snaresbrook Crown Court.
Guppy, 28, of Ladbroke Grove, London, and Benedict Marsh, a fellow director of Inca Gemstones, 28, of Bermondsey, London, are accused of a £1.8 million fraud on Lloyd's of London.
They are said to have faked an armed robbery in New York in which insured jewellery was ‘stolen’.
Ship captain attacked by angry lion
A CAPTAIN had his finger bitten off by a lion on board ship.
The big cat, which was part of the cargo, attacked Captain Gene Cameron, 51, in a German port.
Capt Cameron, from Florida, stayed with his Sealand container ship until its next port of call at Felixstowe, Suffolk, and is now recovering in Ipswich Hospital.
Sealand spokesman Rob Walker said: ‘Luckily the only injuries were to his finger.’
Prisoners make real break for it
TWO prisoners bungled an escape bid after running either side of a lamp-post — while handcuffed.
The force of the impact was so hard that both prisoners broke their arm.
Micheal O'Shea, 20, and Richard John, 17, ran off in agony and leapt on a train in Reading, Berks.
But they were soon rounded up at nearby Maidenhead railway station.
‘They were fairly easy to spot,’ said police.
‘There is a rumour on the prison grapevine that if you run either side of a lamp-post you can break a pair of handcuffs.
‘What happened to these two chaps proves the rumour is not true.’
The two men, who had escaped from a coach taking them to the magistrates' court in Reading, were taken to hospital to have their broken arms set in plaster.
Another man who ran off at the same time, Stephen O'Mara, was yesterday still on the run.
Detective Inspector Andy Steel, of Thames Valley Police, said: ‘It is just a matter of time before we find him.’
Craig McLachlan going bald
TV soap hunk Craig McLachlan is going bald, he revealed yesterday.
The former Neighbours star, above, told TV presenter Paula Yates he was losing his blonde curls.
Craig, who joked he had built up his body with steroids, said: ‘I may be big but I am losing my hair.’
Our recipes for success
By Ian Key
THE Prince and Princess of Wales do have something in common— they both love leek and noodle casserole.
They sent their favourite recipe to a group of schoolchildren.
The pupils, aged four to nine, wrote to European leaders and royals asking for secrets to successful cookery for a recipe book.
The Wales's bland and unadventurous vegetarian dish, reflects their lacklustre marriage.
The project also shows Europe is still divided when it comes to food.
The children were shocked by German Chancellor Helmut Kohl's choice of stuffed pig's belly.
Crammed with sausage, potatoes, eggs, bread and ham, the pig's innards are simmered in salt water for three hours.
Prime Minister John Major's favourite dish is in complete contrast to his grey, uninteresting image.
He likes chicken in red-hot chilli powder and tabasco sauce.
And for once, the troubled premier is on to a winner.
Brenda Lambert, headteacher at South Wellfield First School, Whitley Bay, Tyne and Wear, said: ‘We made up some of the recipes and John Major's has come out on top.
‘He wrote back to the children with his recipe, saying it was a big favourite with his family.
It is really tasty.
‘But he didn't say who did the cooking at Number 10.’
One recipe the children didn't try was the German leader's.
‘It sounds like a kind of German haggis,’ said Mrs Lambert.
‘The idea of stuffing everything into a pig's stomach put me right off.’
The pupils, didn't even bother to make up Charles and Diana's passionless platter.
Other leaders decided to keep their culinary favourites to themselves.
Neither the Queen nor French President Francois Mitterrand revealed their favourite recipes.
Former French premier Edith Cresson did oblige however.
She wrote to say that she likes apple tart.
Ambassadors from all over Europe provided the school with 40 traditional recipes for their European Cook Book.
‘We were doing a project on environment and quality of life in Europe,’ said Mrs Lambert.
‘The children decided to find out more about what our Euro neighbours like to eat.
‘Children in each class wrote to important people in each country.
‘We were amazed at the number of leaders who took the time to think about it and send back replies.’
PALATINAR PIG'S BELLY
Ingredients: One fresh pig's stomach, 1lb boiled ham, 1lb pork belly, 1lb potatoes, 2lb sausage meat stuffing, bread rolls, 4–6 eggs, salt, pepper, nutmeg.
Method: Stuff stomach, tie end and soak in salt water.
Simmer three hours in salt water, drain, slice and serve with cabbage soaked in wine.
LEEK AND NOODLE CASSEROLE
Ingredients: 12 oz of wholemeal noodles, 4–5 leeks, oil, vegetable stock and curry powder, grated cheese and single cream.
Method: Place leeks and noodles in alternate layers in casserole dish.
Cover with grated cheese and single cream and bake for 20 minutes until golden brown.
SPICY CHICKEN
Ingredients: Chicken pieces, 1 tsp of salt, paprika, sugar, chilli powder, 2 tsps of Worcester sauce and Tabasco sauce, black pepper, oregano, 2 oz butter, 1 onion, ¼ pt ketchup, flour.
Method: Rub meat in flour, paprika and seasoning, brown, put in dish.
Soften onion, add ingredients, pour on chicken, bake.
Lover's hate calls
A JEALOUS lover sent fire engines and ambulances to the home of a woman she accused of meddling in her relationship.
Katryna Holmes, 20, of Huntington, North Yorks, conducted a five-month campaign of hoax calls against Maxine James, York magistrates were told yesterday.
Mrs James, of York, had been concerned about her brother-in-law Richard James's relationship with Holmes, magistrates heard.
She was arrested twice, on the second occasion after she was spotted at York railway station near a phone box where a hoax 999 call had just been made.
She also set two rubbish bins alight to bring out the fire brigade.
She admitted destroying property by fire and making hoax telephone calls and was conditionally discharged for one year.
20,000 houses sold in one day at a glance
Ian Fletcher, Consumer Correspondent
THE stagnant property industry last night welcomed the Chancellor's £750 million decision to buy up 20,000 empty repossessed homes.
And a welcome wave of cuts in mortgage rates followed in the wake of the Chancellor's announcement of a one per cent reduction in interest rates.
Mr Lamont said housing and construction had faced particular difficulties in the last two years.
He would make available an extra £750 million to be used before the end of this financial year to buy up empty properties in the owner-occupied sector.
Mr Lamont said this measure should reduce ‘overhang’ of empty properties by more than 20,000 over the next few months.
‘It will also increase available stock of subsidised housing by a similar amount and make a real contribution towards housing families in need,’ he said.
Britain's biggest building society gave the extra £750 million an instant vote of thanks in the bid to kick-start the struggling housing market.
Jim Birrell, chief executive of the Halifax said: ‘The availability of extra Housing Corporation Funds is welcome and we will be happy to talk to housing corporations about extra finance so that they can spread their £750 million over as many houses as possible.
‘We did ask for extra help for first-time buyers through the tax relief system and we are disappointed that this has not been given.
Nevertheless, we welcome the additional Housing Corporation allocation.
‘The seven per cent bank base rate is very good news for the housing market and it is what we have been calling for.
‘We shall certainly be reducing our mortgage rates and will announce our new rate shortly.’
Abbey National, Britain's second-largest mortgage lender, which proposed a similar scheme, responded immediately by cutting home loans by 0.75 per cent.
The rate for loans of less than £60,000 drops to 8.5 per cent from 9.25.
For loans of more than £60,000 the new rate is 8.3 per cent— down from 9.05 — and for loans above Pounds 100,000 the rate is 8.1, from 8.85.
The lower rates apply immediately for new applicants, who will be receiving the lowest standard rates from Abbey National in 20 year.
Existing customers must wait until December 23.
Gareth Jones, Abbey National's director of retail operations, said: ‘This cut is very good news for home owners.
‘The majority of Abbey National's 1.3 million mortgage customers will be paying their lowest mortgage rate ever by Christmas.’
How much you'll pay
How monthly repayments will be affected on a typical repayment mortgage: Loan Old payment Now Saving
30,000 213.32 202.59 £10.73
40,000 288.44 272.58 £15.86
50,000 375.00 354.01 £20.99
60,000 454.53 428.58 £25.95
70,000 539.71 508.66 £31.05
80,000 624.90 588.73 £36.17
100,000 782.78 736.71 £46.07
Nurses have to settle for 1.5%
By Eben Black, Political Correspondent
CHANCELLOR Norman Lamont expects Britain's five million public sector workers to follow his own lead in keeping pay rises down.
Nurses, teachers, the police and local authority employees will be among those asked to make do with a 1.5 per cent increase in 1993.
With inflation running at 3.6 per cent, that means they are being asked to accept an effective pay cut of 2.1 per cent .
A police constable earning £364.09 per week will get an extra £5.46, a nurse earning £215.38 will get £3.23 more and a dustman earning £140.57 will get £2.11.
Top public sector earners such as judges, senior officials and forces top brass will get a 2.9 per cent rise but only because it was negotiated last year as part of a phased increase for 1992.
They will get nothing for 1993.
The Government also wants private firms to curtail wage rises, currently running at around six per cent.
Union leaders erupted in fury last night over the proposed pay restraints.
Alan Jinkinson, the General Secretary of Britain's biggest public services union, Nalgo, said: ‘Singling out public sector workers to pay for his mistakes is discriminatory and unfair.
Cutting their pay will do nothing to induce a recovery.
‘Mr Lamont earns more in a month than many of our members earn in a year.’
Rodney Bickerstaffe, general secretary of the National Union of Public Employees, said hospital workers, school meals staff and other low-paid workers would be ‘deeply resentful’ at the pay curb.
One union leader estimated last night that the measure would take more than £2 billion out of public sector workers' pockets, would worsen the recession and cost even more jobs.
‘By any measure, it is economic illiteracy,’ said Bill Brett, general secretary of the Institution of Professionals, Managers and Specialists.
‘It also means dishonouring all four civil service pay agreements which the Government renegotiated and signed only this year.’
TUC General Secretary Norman Willis said: ‘Five million public sector workers are being told they must pay the price of the Government's incompetence.
‘Even with the measures the Government has been forced to take today unemployment will keep on rising.’
The TUC's public services committee will hold a special meeting next Tuesday to decide how to react to the tight pay ceiling.
Employers, however, have welcomed the 1.5% pay curb, which they have long called for.
‘The tight control of public sector pay is important,’ said Howard Davies, director general of the Confederation of British Industry.
Health service pick-me-up THE Health Service expects to treat 2.5 per cent more patients as a result of the £1 billion spending boost.
Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley said another 190,000 hospital patients would be treated, and a further million by community nurses.
The increase in real terms is three per cent more than original plans for 1992–93.
Of the new money, £800 million will go to trusts, other hospitals and community units.
The number of health centres and GPs would also continue to expand with an extra £270 million.
The British Medical Association said services were still at risk.
Nalgo said it estimated that 100,000 jobs will be lost in local government and the health service in the next financial year.
Increase for welfare benefits
ALL major social security benefits are to go up by 3.6 per cent in line with inflation from next April.
There will be extra help for carers, guardians and war pensioners.
Pensions will increase by £1.95 a week to £56.10 for a single person and £3.10 a week to £89.80 for couples.
Unemployment benefit for a single person goes up from £43.10 to £44.65 a week while the rate for couples rises from £69.10 to £72.20.
Family credit will also rise by the same rate.
Child benefit goes up to £10 a week for the first child and Pounds 8.10 for each subsequent child.
One parent benefit will rise to Pounds 6.05.
Spending on social security will rise to £79.8 billion next year.
Now we borrow £100m a day
BRITAIN is borrowing £100 million a day to keep the nation's finances alive.
The Chancellor revealed yesterday that public borrowing has ballooned to £37 billion, and is growing fast.
This is £9 billion more than the Government forecast only six months ago.
Increased benefits alone are to cost £2.5 billion.
And the debt burden will be even heavier next year — at least £44 billion.
PEOPLE with more than £2,213 a year of disposable income will no longer qualify for legal aid.
The previous limit was £3,060.
£9.5bn to boost education
EDUCATION spending is to rise by £523 million, an increase of 6 per cent, bringing the total to £9.5 billion.
Education Secretary John Patten says the Government wants to boost the number of students in further education by 222,000 over the next three years.
Spending for 1994–5 and 1995–96 will total £10.1 billion and £10.4 billion.
Mr Patten says the new money would help meet National education and training targets and lift Britain towards the top of international league tables in staying-on rates for 16 to 19-year-olds.
Spending on grant-maintained school buildings will top £500 million over the next three years, while overall capital spending should be maintained in real terms.
Plot to destroy Prince Charles
By Clive Nelson, Royal Court Correspondent
A PLOT has been launched to destroy the credibility of the Prince of Wales.
That is the view of senior officials at Buckingham Palace and the royal author closest to Prince Charles following publication of an alleged phone call between the prince and his close friend Camilla Parker Bowles.
In the call, Charles is said to declare his love for Camilla and she replies by saying: ‘I love you, too.’
Last night Penny Junor, author of the definitive biography of Prince Charles, said people were out to wreck the Royal Family.
‘Charles has made some very powerful enemies because of his outspoken views on many public subjects,’ she said.
‘The fact that these tapes and stories keep reappearing at regular intervals suggests that someone is behind this attempt to hurt him.
‘That is the only possible explanation for the steady supply to newspapers and authors of this information that can only put more pressure on the prince and the Royal Family.
‘The telling fact here is that the Charles and Camilla phone call is said to have taken place just two weeks before the call between Diana and her friend James Gilbey was taped.’
Whether the tape is a real recording of the voices of Prince Charles and Camilla Parker Bowles or not, its existence points to a concerted effort to damage Prince Charles.
Members of the security sources believe that if the new tape is genuine, then the phone call made by Prince Charles must have been deliberately bugged.
One senior source said: ‘It is possible to believe that the Diana recording was made by a radio ham who just happened to pick it up.
‘But to suggest that coincidentally this recording, made just a fortnight earlier, was also picked up in the same way does stretch one's credibility.’
Author Penny Junor — widely regarded as the royal writer closest to the prince — said the latest allegations were deliberately damaging to the Royal Family.
She said: ‘If the tape is real — and I am not convinced that it is — it is without doubt damaging to the monarchy.
‘It is unreasonable for us to accept that it is commonplace for people like our Cabinet Ministers to have affairs, and yet to consider that someone like the Prince of Wales is unfit for the job.’
Andrew Morton, the royal writer whose best-seller Diana: Her True Story first lifted the lid on the marriage problems of the warring Waleses, last night supported the conspiracy theory.
He said: ‘Whether this new tape is fake or not, then it shows that a conspiracy is operating to discredit the Royal Family and Diana and Charles in particular.
‘Can it be just a coincidence that this tape is alleged to have been recorded just two weeks before the Diana tape?’
He added: ‘Until it is shown that the tape is genuine, we have to remain sceptical.
‘If it is real, it justifies the comments Diana's friends made to me and reported in my book.
‘It will prove that the Princess of Wales was justified in being concerned about the relationship between her husband and Camilla Parker Bowles.’
Just four sentences from the prince have been made public — in which he uses the word ‘love’ four times.
He tells Camilla: ‘I adore you.’
And, before drifting off to sleep, adds: ‘Your great achievement is to love me.’
Charles is reported to have spoken with Camilla on December 15, 1989, while staying in Cheshire with Lord Cholmondeley, at Cholmondeley Castle.
Prince Charles, who is 44 today, spent yesterday in Cornwall on Duchy of Cornwall business.
While his wife is on an official visit to Paris, he will spend his birthday at Highgrove, his Gloucestershire home.
Sons William, 10, and eight-year-old Harry will be at boarding school in Wokingham and will not see their father.
Last night pressure was mounting on Buckingham Palace to officially confirm or deny the claims.
Constitutional expert Harold Brooks-Baker, of Burke's Peerage, said: ‘I feel that Buckingham Palace should be prepared to deny some of these stories which are potentially threatening to the monarchy.’
Many of those close to Camilla, including writer Jilly Cooper, insisted the tape must be a hoax.
Jilly told TODAY: ‘It's obviously made up.
We could make another one up now.
Let's pretend we're having an affair.
You can be Prince Philip — who do you want me to be?’
In Paris yesterday Diana charmed officials and crowds.
Mayor Lionel Assouad said: ‘She seemed very happy and not to have a care in the world.’
London bombing alert as PC shot
By Matthew Benns
A POLICEMAN shot twice in the back early today may have disturbed an IRA bomb plot, senior officers believe.
The constable was wounded after stopping a high-sided van in Stoke Newington, north London.
Anti-terrorist squad officers immediately sealed off the area to search for possible bombs.
The attack, at 1am, came as London prepared for the annual Lord Mayor's parade, which Princess Anne is due to attend.
The policeman and a colleague stopped the van ‘for no other reason than it was moving in the early hours of the morning,’ a detective at the scene said.
The two occupants, both in their 40s, jumped from the cab and ran away.
The policeman gave chase but one of the suspects turned and shot him twice in the back w He was rushed to Homerton Hospital where he was said to be in a serious condition early today.
One man, believed to be Irish, was arrested.
Police sealed off the busy A10 high street van for possible booby-trap bombs.
Local residents were evacuated in case there needed to be a controlled explosion.
Police recovered a red pullover and handgun from the scene.
One witness, a taxi-driver, said: ‘The police car stopped the van right in front of ou ‘The policeman ran after him, but as he turned the corner he was shot twice in the back.
‘We ran out and he was just lying there on the ground.
We didn't touch him, what can you do in that kind of situation?’
A Scotland Yard spokesman said: ‘There were two suspects.
One person has been arrested.’
Singing for Will
ENGLAND'S rugby side will be allowed to sing the National Anthem at Twickenham today after all.
Will Carling's team was to have played the South African Springboks without first singing God Save The Queen.
But yesterday the Rugby Football Union changed its mind after protests by fans and MPs.
England's most capped player, Rory Underwood, said: ‘Everyone is very pleased.’
Rugby officials in Pretoria had requested no anthems at the game because the ANC claims South Africa's Die Stem symbolises apartheid.
It will remain off the song sheet.
South African President F W de Klerk ducked out of the row when he arrived for a three-day visit to Britain.
‘I am not here to become involved in a controversy,’ he said.
Mr de Klerk will meet John Major this morning before they travel to Twickenham.
Winner plea for adult TV
FILM director Michael Winner has attacked calls to move the TV sex and violence watershed from 9pm to 10pm.
Winner, famous for his Deathwish movies, hit out at Broadcasting Standards Council boss Lord Rees-Mogg.
‘It's ridiculous the whole nation should be slowed down to the mind of a 12-year-old,’ he said yesterday.
Dial tone enraged
A GRUMBLERS' hotline is to be set up as part of the Government's Citizen's Charter campaign.
The free 0800 Charterline will let callers air grievances about public services.
A trial starts early next year.
If it is a hit, it will go nationwide, Charter minister William Waldegrave told the Commons yesterday.
Turning point on road to recovery
By Russell Jenkins
JOHN Major yesterday hailed his Chancellor's mini-budget as a ‘turning point’ in his Government's fortunes.
Then he admitted as he shovelled manure at a tree-planting ceremoney in his Huntingdon constituency: ‘It occurs to me I've been up to my neck in this stuff for the last month.’
Mr Major described Norman Lamont's Autumn Statement as a springboard for confidence.
‘The Chancellor has had to face very difficult economic circumstances both abroad, which affects us, and at home,’ he said.
‘He has done so with great courage.
He has now produced the right package to put this country back on course.’
Mr Lamont's formula of low interest rates, business incentives coupled with tight public spending and a pay squeeze forms the corner stone of the Government's new economic policy.
However, Mr Major insisted: ‘Our economic objective has not changed in the slightest.
‘It was two years ago, and is now, to produce non-inflationary growth in this country and to put people back into profit, back into jobs and back into prosperity in this country.
‘But the circumstances have changed so we have to change the method by which we achieve that same objective.
That is what the Chancellor has done.’
In the City, investors were ‘generally in favour’ of Mr Lamont's mini-budget.
They felt the Government had finally produced a coherent economic policy.
President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine said Mr Lamont had done a ‘magnificent job’.
But Mr Major and his Government are not yet out of the woods.
The Chancellor's policies are not expected to bear fruit until the spring.
Britain's jobless total will top three million around Christmas and carry on rising into the New Year.
A new set of bleak economic figures released yesterday by the CBI showed factory output fell by 0.4 per cent last month.
Companies also anticipate little immediate scope for increased profits.
Chancellor needs some Smart ideas
BUSINESSWOMAN Elizabeth Smart predicted yesterday that the Chancellor's Autumn Statement would do nothing to save thousands of small firms.
‘A cut of one per cent in the interest rate will not filter through to them,’ said Mrs Smart.
‘Small firms in particular needed a bold statement and a bold cut.’
A lifelong Tory, she launched a campaign against Conservative economic policy last summer.
She had been forced, largely by high interest rates, to close the Kent fencing business her father took over 30 years ago.
Brits top Anti-Euro league
SUPPORT for the Maastricht Treaty is lower in Britain than anywhere else in Europe with 62 per cent of Britons saying they would vote against signing.
The survey by the Brussels Commission found 28 per cent of people in the UK want the EC scrapped.
Inflation is lowest for four years
INFLATION remained unchanged at 3.6 per cent last month, according to figures issued yesterday.
The underlying rate, which excludes mortgages, fell 0.2 per cent to 3.8 per cent— the lowest for four years.
John Major, whose declared policy is to keep inflation between one and four per cent next year, said the figures were a boost for the economy.
Shadow chancellor Gordon Brown said the reality was falling output and more redundancies.
‘The Government has already conceded that inflation will be higher next year,’ he added.
747 safety checks after air disaster
By Adrian Lee
AIRLINES are stepping up safety checks on Boeing 747s following last month's Amsterdam air crash.
British Airways, which has 53 jumbos, and Virgin, which has eight, said last night they would replace fuse pins on engine mountings more often.
Crash investigators believe fractured pins may have been responsible for the El Al cargo jet crash.
Swissair cancelled two flights to America yesterday because it found a damaged engine-mount bolt.
The airline immediately ordered a retest of its five 747s only two weeks after they passed a check following the crash.
They said the part was not on the Boeing checklist, even though it has been widely blamed for the crash, which killed at least 43 people.
There is concern that cracks in some 747 fuse pins could spread much more quickly than was previously realised.
Boeing has issued a warning to airlines to check the pins after 3,000 take-offs, while before the crash they recommended checks only after more than 5,000.
BA has already replaced pins on 24 aircraft which had reached 3,000 take-offs.
A spokesman said: ‘The advice from Boeing is that the pins should be checked for wear after 3,000 cycles but we decided we will replace them as a matter of routine when they reach that figure.’
Virgin has already replaced pins on three of its jets and said it would take the same stance as BA.
The pins are designed to give way under pressure, allowing damaged engines to fall free and avoid wrecking the aircraft.
It is thought one pin may have failed on the El Al flight, causing an engine to tear free of its mountings and hit the second engine as it fell.
Guppy ‘hired soldier heavy’
AN ex-soldier was used as a heavy to help persuade an Indian bullion dealer to pay money owed to Earl Spencer's best man, a court was told yesterday.
Darius Guppy, the best friend of Princess Diana's brother, told his partner Ishan Dutta that Peter Hall would act as a minder on a trip to India.
Convicted fraudster Dutta, 28, said.
‘I got my share and Mr Guppy got his share’.
Guppy, 28, of, Ladbroke Grove, London has denied fraud charges.
The trial at Snaresbrook Crown Court continues.
M1 jet disaster victims get £1m
By Deric Henderson
PAYOUTS of up to £1 million each are on the way for survivors of the M1 air crash.
Forty-seven passengers died when a British Midland Airways Boeing 737 trying a forced landing hit an embankment at Kegworth, Leics, in 1989.
It had been feared compensation would be less than £100,000 each, under the Carriage By Air Act.
An attempt to get claims dealt with in America, where much higher amounts could be paid, failed.
But yesterday it was revealed that lawyers for the survivors, victims' families, the airline, Boeing and three companies that made the engines have agreed payments will not be restricted.
It will also not be necessary to prove fault.
If agreement cannot be reached on individual cases, they will have the right to get a court ruling.
Interim payments ranging from £5,000 to £70,000 have already been made.
Many final settlements will be far bigger.
The disaster on the London-Belfast flight happened after one of the Boeing's two engines began to break up and the crew mistakenly shut down the other one.
Major ‘knew of Iraqi weapons deal in 1989’
By Graham Brough
PREMIER John Major knew the Iraq arms embargo was being breached three years ago but still denied it, Labour claimed yesterday.
Shadow trade secretary Robin Cook said classified documents provided ‘conclusive evidence’ that Mr Major, then foreign secretary, was aware of sanction busting in 1989.
‘We have been asked to produce a smoking gun.
These documents provide a smoking howitzer,’ he said.
The Whitehall documents leaked by Mr Cook show arms embargo-breaking to Saddam was known at ministerial level.
The Foreign Office tried to stop trade with Iraq but backed down after pressure from the Department of Trade and Industry.
William Waldegrave, a minister of state under Mr Major, wrote to trade minister Lord Trefgarne after accepting advice from officials that export licences for Matrix Churchill lathe equipment should be refused.
Trefgarne wrote back on October 5 1989, claiming the guidelines had to be ‘reconsidered’.
A year later Mr Major denied knowledge of the deal.
New hope in fight against Alzheimer's
AN important step in the fight against Alzheimer's disease was revealed yesterday.
British scientists have found how to diagnose the disease, which causes loss of memory, personality change and dementia.
The scientists, at Oxford's Radcliffe Infirmary, found that part of the brain is smaller in an Alzheimer victim.
They can detect this by a simple scan.
‘This is exciting,’ said researcher Dr Kim Jobst.
‘To develop treatments, we need early diagnosis.’
Nazi row
AN alleged organiser for the neo-Nazi British National Party has been suspended from his job as an unemployment benefit officer.
Simon Chadwick faced union protests in Sheffield, South Yorks.
Train fall
A COMMUTER was badly injured yesterday after he awoke and leapt from a moving train in a tunnel near Chatham, Kent, thinking it was in a station.
Police are trying to identify him.
Chatline rapist
By James Murray
SEX talk on sordid chatlines drove a sailor to rape a terrified schoolgirl, leaving her an emotional wreck.
American Kevin Wightman, 24, spent £400 on sleazy 0898 numbers.
The explicit lines gave him a twisted perception of British women, a court heard yesterday.
Wightman pounced as the girl walked alone late at night on the eve of her 17th birthday.
She was dragged into a garden and raped.
Prosecutor Joanna Korner said: ‘He told a senior officer he ruined his life for 10 minutes of joy.’
As Wightman, who admitted rape, was taken away to begin a seven-year jail sentence his victim screamed: ‘You bastard.
I hope you rot in hell.’
The Old Bailey heard her life was in ruins after the attack during her GCSE exams.
‘She is unable to go out alone, even in daylight.
She cannot concentrate on her exams,’ said Miss Korner.
The girl noticed Wightman while waiting with her boyfriend for the last train.
The rapist got into the same carriage and followed her from Hillingdon station, Middx.
She heard steps and saw Wightman, who ran across the road and grabbed her.
After the rape he dragged her to an alley but she broke free.
Computer operator Wightman, based in Marylebone, was picked out at an identity parade.
‘This happened because of sexual inadequacy and those appalling chatlines,’ he told the court.
He felt overwhelmed by the apparent promiscuity of young women on the chatlines, it was said.
Wightman, whose wife and young daughter live in America, was abused as a child, the court was told.
The rape led to new calls for an end to chatlines.
Labour MP Terry Lewis said: ‘How many more women must suffer?’
Wario on the warpath
YOU'VE heard of Mario.
Now it's time to meet Wario — the latest challenger to the world famous Nintendo hero.
He's set to cause pandemonium at toyshops when the new Super Mario Land 2 game is launched next week.
Nintendo are confident that Mario's latest Game Boy adventure will continue their success after Super Mario Land sold an amazing 25 million copies worldwide.
In the new adventure Mario finds the citizens of Mario Land brainwashed by the evil Wario.
Fatal Attraction killing captain's marching orders
By Lisa Reynolds
THE unfaithful Army captain whose wife was the victim of a Fatal Attraction-style killing has been asked to quit.
Captain Duncan McAllister of the Royal Signals has been ordered to resign from his post because his affair with soldier Susan Christie broke Queen's Regulations.
He now has 28 days to leave, or launch an appeal against the decision.
Last night, as the cheating captain's career lay in ruins, a senior officer in Ulster said: ‘He has lost everything — the wife he loved and his glittering Army career.
It's tragic.’
An MoD spokesman said: ‘Captain McAllister has been required to resign his commission following an administrative report.
‘This report considered all aspects of the captain's position.’
Earlier this week Belfast Appeal Court increased his ex-lover's sentence from five to nine years for killing his wife.
Christie, 24, a former private in the Ulster Defence Regiment, had been found guilty of manslaughter.
French noisy frogs invade
LOUD French frogs are disturbing the sleep of English home owners.
A Wildlife Trust survey has found the immigrants in ponds in south-west London.
A trust officer said: ‘There is no mistaking their croak.
The native English frog has a croak which is almost quiet and apologetic in comparison.’
Five die as vans collide head-on
By James Murray
FIVE men were killed and two seriously injured when two vans smashed head-on yesterday.
An engine from one of the vans was found more than 120 feet from the crash site.
The accident happened in frosty conditions shortly before 8am on the A985 near Dunfermline in Fife.
One van is believed to have lost control while overtaking and smashed into the other.
Firemen cut victims from the wreckage and a medical team from Dunfermline and West Fife Hospital treated the injured at the scene.
One ambulanceman compared the carnage to an air crash.
Two of the dead men, friends David Thomson and Alan Johnston, lived just doors away from each other in Bonnybridge.
Another neighbour, John Wells, is fighting for his life.
The other dead man from the blue transit was Thomas Donn, of Cambusbarns, and the injured passenger is James Gall, of Camelon.
The other dead men are David Russell, 22, of Lochgelly, and Graham Spence, 39, of Crosshill, who were travelling together in a white transit.
The AA had earlier warned drivers to beware as there was a layer of frost on the road, making conditions treacherous.
A TOP sportswoman was awarded £230,981 damages in the High Court yesterday after being knocked down by a motorcycle.
‘Her injuries have devastated her life,’ said Judge Kenneth Zucker QC.
Tracey Morton, 29, had to undergo five brain operations when she was thrown into the air and carried down the road by the motorbike in High Holborn, London, in August 1988.
Before the accident Tracey, of Adlington, Lancs, had been a keen swimmer, waterskier and windsurfer.
She had represented Britain in horseriding competitions.
‘The zest and sparkle and the real opportunity has been taken out of her life,’ said the judge.
Cruel blinding
A BUILDER was blinded in his right eye by two thugs who stamped repeatedly on his head.
The 30-year-old victim also had a fractured skull and cheekbone and a broken jaw after the attack in Leeds in which his snooker cue was stolen.
Social worker ‘steals heart’ of boy thief
A SOCIAL worker urged a boy of 14 to steal a car so they could carry on an affair, a court heard yesterday.
Michaela Corkhill, 26, spent a night in police cells after being arrested with her lover and two other boys by officers looking for car thieves.
Teesside juvenile court heard their affair began within weeks of the boy's arrival at a centre for problem youngsters at Aycliffe, Co Durham.
The boy regularly absconded for passionate weekends.
Care tutor Miss Corkhill, of Darlington, was suspended and resigned earlier this week.
The boy admitted five charges of joyriding and absconding while on bail.
He was remanded on bail for reports.
Blaze hero is attacked with sword
A MAN brandishing a Samurai sword attacked firefighters called to a house blaze yesterday.
Fireman John Peck grabbed the blade and wrestled it off the attacker as he lunged at colleagues.
The sword cut through his protective gloves but he escaped injury.
‘He was very courageous,’ said firemen Brian Woodgate.
A neighbour made the 999 call to a smoke-filled flat in Brighton, East Sussex, after her own smoke alarm went off.
A man was arrested.
Girl drops divorce
By Ian Key
A GIRL aged 11 yesterday dropped her bid to divorce her mother.
She withdrew because her case has been taken over by the local authority, her solicitor Alistair Babbington said.
A judge has decided the youngster should remain with her former foster parents until the case can be heard in full next year.
She wanted to live with the foster parents she lived with at the age of two.
The girl was one of the first in the country to use new powers granted to minors under the Children's Act to apply to the courts for permission to live where they wanted to.
She had already obtained a legal separation from her mother, claiming she was being used as a nursemaid for the baby in the family.
The youngster was living with her former foster parents when she applied to the courts for the divorce.
A full care hearing about the girl, from Rotherwell, Leeds,— who cannot be named for legal reasons — will be heard on February 23, Leeds County Court decided.
Head evacuates girl boarders in rave siege fear
DAUGHTERS of the rich and famous had to be evacuated from their boarding school yesterday after the headmistress discovered it was to be the site of a massive rave party.
Thousands of youngsters are tonight expected to invade the grounds of the £7,000-a-year Cobham Hall School near Gravesend, Kent.
Only headmistress Rosalind McCarthy, a teacher and the school's caretaker are staying on with police to guard the former stately home.
Detectives say thousands of £15 tickets have been sold for the illegal rave, each one accompanied by a map leading partygoers straight to 16th century Cobham Hall.
Two performances by the Russian Ballet troupe — halfway through a series of shows — at the school, have been cancelled.
Mrs McCarthy said: ‘I am absolutely furious.
I have had to send the girls home because anything could happen and their safety is paramount.
‘We expect thousands of people will turn up for this rave, which has been organised and advertised without the school's knowledge.
We are horrified that this can happen.’
Police yesterday put out warnings on local radio stations telling ticket holders that officers will do everything in their power to stop the rave.
Mrs McCarthy said: ‘Police protection this weekend will be at the highest level, particularly in view of the historic importance of the Cobham Hall buildings and grounds.’
The exclusive school attracts the daughters of politicians, showbiz stars and top businessmen.
Last term the daughter of the world's wealthiest man, the Sultan of Brunei, was in the sixth form.
Bull that made love to a Volvo
AN amorous bull stopped traffic yesterday when he seduced three cows, a Volvo and an Allegro on a busy road.
The bull and cows were being herded along the road at Calne, Wilts, when he suddenly ran wild with lust.
‘It was hilarious,’ said police sergeant Kevin Bowland.
‘The drivers must have had a shock.
This huge bull just walked up and got on with it.’
‘If you help coma boy die it's murder’
By Olga Craig
DISCONNECTING the feeding tube which keeps Hillsborough coma victim Tony Bland alive would amount to murder, the High Court was told yesterday.
‘If the tube is cut then what the doctors are doing is cutting the thread of life,’ James Munby QC, representing the Official Solicitor told the court yesterday.
‘An act that causes death can never be lawful.
If accompanied by an intention to cause death it's not just criminal but murder.’
Mr Munby was summing up on day two of a historic test case that will decide the fate of Tony, who has been in a coma for three and a half years.
Tony, 22, suffered brain damage when he was crushed at Sheffield Wednesday's football ground in the tragedy that killed 95 people.
He has been in a persistent vegetative state at Airedale General Hospital near Keighley, Yorkshire, ever since.
Airedale Regional Health Authority, with the backing of Tony's parents Allan and Barbara, say his feeding tube should be severed and he be allowed to die with dignity.
‘Tony Bland is not dying, therefore one cannot justify the withholding of treatment,’ said Mr Munby.
‘There is all the difference in the world between withholding medical treatment that's either painful or futile and deliberately withholding food.
Food, like air, is a basic necessity of human existence.’
He said there is no prospect of Tony Bland improving, but with treatment, he would probably live for a number of years.
But Anthony Lester QC, appointed by the Attorney General to offer an independent legal opinion, told the court Tony's best interest would be served if the tube was severed.
Judge Sir Stephen Brown said Tony's condition was extremely distressing.
‘For Tony Bland I suppose his parents would say his life is over,’ he said.
He will deliver his judgement on Thursday.
The end of the line
A STOWAWAY who jumped ship was caught when he tried to call relatives in North Africa from a motorway phone.
Algerian Karim Ederesi, 20, didn't know the emergency phone had connected him with police.
Within minutes he had been picked up by a patrol car on the M5 in Gloucestershire.
He had just escaped from a ship at Sharpness docks.
Salesman beats spy
A TOP salesman sacked for shirking after his boss had him tailed by a private eye won £11,000 compensation yesterday.
Edward Nundy, 55, of Southend, Essex, was allegedly seen at his boat when he should have been working for Car Buyer magazine.
The £35,000-a-year ad rep told a London tribunal the detective misinterpreted his movements.
Whizkid's dad gets 5 years
THE father of a child genius was jailed for five years yesterday after a bungled insurance fraud.
Mark Harries burned down his fancy dress hire shop in a bid to swindle £340,000 after he ran up more than £160,000 debts.
His son James, 14, had appeared on the Oprah Winfrey and Terry Wogan TV shows, described as a junior Lovejoy because of his ability to find valuable antiques in jumble sales.
James wrote a book, Rags to Riches, giving advice on how to succeed in business.
Swansea Crown Court heard how Harries, 47, tried to stage an alibi by starting an argument in a restaurant.
He left a box of matches and rags outside his Cardiff shop to make the fire look like a Halloween prank.
But a witness saw him outside the premises.
He was sentenced after being convicted last month of arson, deception and incitement to commit forgery.
Sack threat halts trial
A JUDGE was forced to scrap a lengthy criminal trial after a woman juror claimed she had been threatened with the sack.
Thousands of pounds in costs were wasted when the woman said she would lose her job if she sat on the jury for the six-week conspiracy trial at Stafford Crown Court.
Judge Michael Mander has now ordered an inquiry because her bosses could be guilty of contempt of court.
‘It is impossible that she can give her full concentration to this case if she is sitting under that sort of threat,’ he said.
Joyride victim fights for life
SCHOOLBOY Carl Leadbetter was fighting for his life yesterday after being mown down by joyriders.
The thugs fled in another car leaving Carl, 11, in the road in Wednesbury, West Midlands.
His friend Dean Blakemore, 12, leapt to safety.
Carl's parents Lorraine and David, of nearby Hateley Heath, were at his bedside in Sandwell District General Hospital, where he was on a life support machine.
Mrs Leadbetter said: ‘It's just so senseless.’
Detectives were questioning three youths all aged 18.
Ex-pupil wins £8,000 after school thrashing
By James Murray
A FORMER public school boy yesterday won £8,000 damages for a caning he received nine years ago.
Matthew Prince was given £2,000 for each of the four whacks he received aged 15 at Brighton College, Sussex.
He claimed the punishment and the law that allowed it was an ‘inhuman and degrading’ breach of the European convention on human rights.
Matthew planned to take the Government to the European Court of Human rights after his family's civil action against the school failed.
But Education Department lawyers made the out-of-court settlement and agreed to pay his £12,000 costs.
Anti-caning campaigners accused the Government of dodging an embarrassing judgment.
‘The caning this boy received would be treated as child abuse in any other context,’ said Peter Newell of End Physical Punishment of Children.
Matthew, now in his 20s, was caned for bullying by the then headmaster, William Blackshaw.
‘There was excruciating pain in my bottom,’ he told Worthing County Court in 1986, when his parents tried to sue Mr Blackshaw.
Police had refused to take action.
‘My legs were very weak and I found it difficult to walk,’ he said.
The punishment left six-inch weals and heavy bruises but the judge ruled that his parents had over-reacted.
Mr Blackshaw last night described yesterday's deal as ‘thoroughly wet’.
Corporal punishment was banned in state schools five years ago.
It is allowed in private schools for pupils whose fees are solely paid by parents.
Friday 13th keeps Joe out of court
TV star Joe Longthorne failed to turn up in court yesterday because it was Friday the 13th.
The superstitious 35-year-old singer and impressionist was remanded on bail in his absence charged with affray.
He was arrested after an incident at a restaurant in Torquay, Devon.
Friend Dave Green, 16, said outside court: ‘Being a gipsy, Joe is incredibly superstitious.
He won't do anything on Friday 13.’
Torbay magistrates also bailed Longthorne's nephew Keith Holliday on four charges arising from the same incident.
Thumb sewn back
SHOCKED Colin Creasey saved a kitchen fitter's severed thumb by keeping it in a pack of frozen peas.
He raced home in Verwood, Dorset, when Norman Cruddas rang to say: ‘I've lost my thumb in your garden.’
Surgeons at Odstock Hospital, Wilts, sewed the thumb on.
Hands up, this comb is loaded
THE bandit produced a weapon and demanded money — but the building society staff just giggled.
They could see the ‘gun’ was a plastic comb.
Raider Terence Joseph, 27, ran off, but was caught after TV's Crime Monthly showed him on security film.
Joseph, of Bow, east London, was given probation at the Old Bailey yesterday for attempted robbery.
Firebug saved budgie and blew up his family
A HUSBAND saved his budgie before blowing up his home with his wife and her family of TV addicts inside.
Wilfred Harte, 65, was enraged because they were always watching TV and running up big electricity bills, the Old Bailey heard.
He finally snapped when his wife Hayrieye, 62, returned to his flat early in the morning with other relatives and stayed up watching TV until 5am, said Neil Saunders, prosecuting.
Harte carefully removed his bird and put the cage on the balcony.
He then sprinkled five litres of petrol in rooms and dropped a match.
The vapour exploded and a huge fireball ripped through the maisonette.
Harte's hair and clothing were scorched but he managed to stagger from his home leaving his relatives trapped inside.
His 22-year-old step grandchild Madjit was forced to jump from the first floor with his pyjamas ablaze.
Madjit's wife and two other members of her family had to smash a glass partition to escape the blaze.
‘He clearly knew he was going to set fire to the flat.
He put the budgie outside so whoever else was injured the budgie would not be,’ said Mr Saunders.
‘It's a miracle no one was killed.’
Harte, of Walworth, London, denied arson with intent to endanger life but admitted reckless arson.
Jailing him for three and a half years Judge Richard Lowry described his behaviour as a dreadful crime.
The day they gave me back my hand
By John Lisners
THE policeman whose hand was sewn back on after it was horrifically severed by a Samurai sword has spoken publicly for the first time of his ordeal.
As he celebrates his return home from hospital, Sergeant Rob Window talks exclusively to TODAY about the tragedy and the dramatic 11-hour operation to save his hand.
The courageous 39-year-old detective enjoyed a tearful reunion with his family after leaving hospital on Friday.
Recovering from the October 26 attack, Rob's greatest wish is to stay in the Metropolitan force.
But he fears that may not be possible.
‘Promises have been made but I'm a realist,’ he said.
‘The Met can only support so many people on light duties.’
Camilla: I vow to give him up
Clive Nelson, Court Correspondent
CAMILLA Parker Bowles has vowed not to see Prince Charles to save her husband further pain.
She made the promise in remorse for his suffering over revelations of their close friendship.
Camilla is ‘full of admiration’ for the way Brigadier Andrew Parker Bowles has leapt to her defence.
And she will do anything to avoid another royal scandal — even if it means not seeing Charles while speculation persists.
One friend said: ‘She will not risk hurting Andrew.
Camilla feels that he has been hurt enough.
He has suffered more than anyone through all of this.
‘He has been a tower of strength to her and she is full of admiration for him.
‘If it means she must not see Charles, that is a price she is willing to pay.’
Brigadier Parker Bowles, an old friend of the Prince, has twice defended his wife's reputation.
Last week — when the text of a sensational phone call alleged to have involved Charles and Camilla was made public — he issued an unprecedented statement supporting her.
The friend added: ‘It's terribly sad that, despite his best efforts, the speculation has intensified rather than diminished.
Although he has been bitterly hurt by the allegations, 52-year-old Brigadier Parker Bowles has struggled to maintain life as normal.
Yesterday, as he spent the day at Cheltenham Races, those closest to the Parker Bowles family insisted 44-year-old Camilla would not formally deny the claims unless Buckingham Palace authorised a statement.
One insider explained: ‘The palace would have to act first.
Camilla has had 20 years of friendship with Prince Charles and she is not prepared to do anything else which could put that at risk.
‘Her dearest wish is for all of this to blow over and life to return to normal.’
An additional reason for the closeness between Charles and Camilla was that he is godfather to her son, Tom.
The friend said: ‘Many people appear to have forgotten that.
Charles has taken vows before God making him responsible for the Christian upbringing of the child.
‘He takes those vows seriously.
The importance of that should not be under-estimated.’
The Parker Bowles family have consulted lawyers over some of the claims.
Rumours are circulating among the ‘Highgrove Set’— the circle of Gloucestershire landowners who mix with the royals — that Charles and Camilla may have met briefly at a hunt a week ago.
Charles raced to the Duke of Beaufort's Hunt, close to Highgrove, just five hours after returning to Britain after his Korean and Hong Kong tour.
Local gossips suggested that Camilla may have also been there.
But hunt joint master Captain Ian Farquhar told TODAY he had not seen Camilla there.
He said: ‘Last Monday was the first time Prince Charles joined us this year.
I think he had an enjoyable but wet day.
‘I did not see Camilla but I can't see everyone there.
I'm at the front of the hunt and I've got lots of other things to keep my eye on.’
In Lille last night, Diana was radiant as she met former Beatle Paul McCartney and his wife Linda before a performance of his Liverpool Oratoria.
After the concert she had to wait for four minutes before McCartney could rejoin her…while he accepted a standing ovation.
While visiting France the princess has been ‘amused and smiling’ about a sensational tape recording of a phone call said to have been between Charles and Camilla during which he said: ‘I love you.
I adore you.’
The call was apparently made two weeks before Diana was taped in a phone call with her close friend James Gilbey.
She has confided to friends that she is ‘totally unconcerned’ by the recording of the conversation between her husband and Camilla.
The princess told them: ‘I have come to terms with this relationship a long time ago.
It does not bother me now at all.
It is all ancient history and I am not upset whatsoever’.
Diana arranged her weekend in France just three weeks ago — knowing she would be away from Charles as he celebrated his 44th birthday last Saturday.
He celebrated by going out hunting, while she was clearly determined to enjoy herself.
After a lavish dinner with Paris high-society celebrities, including former supermodel Ines de la Fressange and actress Jane Birkin, she went sightseeing with her sister, Lady Sarah McCorquodale.
The two-hour trip, complete with bodyguards and close aides, was conducted in secrecy.
The princess decided she wanted to see Paris by night…from the well-known spots where lovers sit for hours on end.
On her visit Diana took France by storm and she has shown the world how happy she is carrying out official engagements on her own — in contrast to the Korean trip which she shared with her husband and which exposed their coldness towards each other when they spent most days unsmiling and glum.
A source close to the princess said: ‘All she is concerned about is her future life, which she is working out.
‘Once upon a time she would have been jealous about the constant reference to Charles and Camilla but no longer.
‘The disclosure of the tape of the call between the prince and Mrs Parker Bowles is the final proof which has brought out into the open the close relationship between them.
‘All Diana now wants is to live her own life with some understanding from others.’
Canary Wharf bombers foiled
By John Jones
A PLOT to blow up Britain's tallest tower was foiled last night when suspicious security guards caught terrorists dumping a van loaded with explosives.
The guards were threatened with a gun before the two IRA bombers fled.
Europe's biggest office development at London's Canary Wharf was evacuated as bomb disposal experts moved in.
They blew the doors off the van in a controlled explosion before ordering an immediate evacuation over a square mile area in east London.
Experts then moved in to defuse the ‘large explosive device.’
A detective at the scene said: ‘This would have been a spectacular coup for the IRA.
With the tower made of glass and steel, the explosion would have been bound to cause severe injuries.’
The two guards spotted the blue Ford Transit van pull up 20 yards from the 800ft tall Canary Tower, the showpiece of the development, at about 8pm.
When they went to investigate two men confronted them.
One produced a gun before they got into a yellow Ford Escort and drove off.
They were last night being hunted by Terrorist Squad officers after the car was found abandoned about two miles away in Bethnal Green.
Police in the capital had been on the alert following the shooting of PC Ray Hall early on Saturday morning after he discovered a lorry bomb in north London.
The Terrorist Squad believed it had been intended for the Lord Mayor's Parade later that day.
They were convinced the IRA would have a contingency plan with a second major target.
The evacuation meant the Daily Telegraph newspaper, which is based in Canary Tower, was forced to print hundreds of thousands of copies with a blank front page save for a three-paragraph statement.
Yesterday it was revealed that PC Hall escaped death by a whisker when he was shot at point-blank range.
The first bullet bounced off his skull, leaving the 38-year-old father of two virtually unscathed.
The second hit him in the back then travelled upwards for about eight inches before bursting out of his chest.
‘He must be the luckiest man alive.
Schools go under the spotlight
STATE school exam results tables will be made public for the first time this week in the biggest Government publishing exercise since ration books.
Three million booklets will show parents how England's 4,600 secondary schools compare.
Education Secretary John Patten believes the £1.4 million venture will raise standards by encouraging parents to demand more from schools.
Critics fear it will spark damaging competition between schools.
Arsonist lights up
A CONVICTED arsonist set fire to a top security hospital after staff allowed him to carry a lighter.
The man was one of several patients at Ashworth Hospital in Merseyside allowed the privilege.
Staff managed to put out the blaze before firemen arrived.
‘Giving an arsonist a lighter is beyond a joke,’ said police.
Church united
THE Archbishop of Canterbury said he would be amazed if there was any large scale defection from the Church of England after last week's decision to ordain women.
Dr George Carey held out an olive branch to opponents by saying clergy opposed to women priests would not be barred from becoming bishops.
Tories call greedy banks to account
By Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
HIGH street banks and building societies were last night accused of putting the nation's economic recovery at risk.
Millions of customers are still paying huge interest rates, despite Chancellor Norman Lamont's three per cent cut in rates over the past seven weeks.
As the banks, building societies and credit companies try to boost profits, many have been slow to pass on the reductions — and some have not done so at all.
Now furious MP John Townend, chairman of the powerful Tory Party finance committee, will today write to the bosses of all the major banking groups, demanding action.
He wants them to scrap the minimum lending rates which are used to keep interest rates high, even though the bank base rates have fallen.
‘They have minimum interest rates which mean some people are paying four per cent more than they should,’ he said yesterday.
‘I am most worried about this tactic.
‘If the banks do not pass on the whole of the cut in rates then that is a waste of the Government's time in trying to stimulate the economy.’
Some customers — including small businesses and homeowners already struggling to survive throughout the recession — are paying 10 per cent or more, even though bank rates have hit seven per cent.
And credit card customers are paying huge fees of up to 30 per cent a year.
‘It is astronomical and far too high,’ said Mr Townend.
‘The Midland has already abolished the minimum lending rate and now the others should follow.
Unless they do something it will hold up economic recovery.’
Senior ministers are determined that the major lenders will pass on the cuts to customers as soon as possible.
They say building societies and banks have been keeping their home loan rates too high for too long.
Mortgage rates are still at around 9.25 per cent, which is now 2.25 per cent above the bank base rate.
Ministers now fear it could be months before consumers feel the benefit.
‘We do expect these interest rate cuts to be passed on as quickly as possible.
Although it is a commercial decision for the banks we can see no reason for the delay,’ said one.
Ministers are expected to take up the fight in the next few days and urge the banks that, at a time of national economic crisis, they must do their bit.
Mr Lamont is expected to tell building society chiefs to reduce interest rates.
The Chancellor is due to meet them today over his plan to spend Pounds 750 million buying up 20,000 empty homes.
The building societies are also under pressure to spend more money buying up empty properties and handing them over for rental.
It is hoped they will stump up the money needed to take over 10,000 properties in an effort to revive the collapsing housing market.
But property analysts believe such a move will have little impact until up to 50,000 empty homes are taken off the market.
Troops in mercy mission
BRITISH troops were last night preparing to evacuate up to 2,000 war refugees trapped in a Bosnian village.
Members of the Cheshire Regiment were ready to enter Karaula, where 45 people had been wounded by Serbian shelling, said a spokesman for the United Nations protection force.
‘The British need guarantees of a ceasefire before going in,’ he added.
‘We have had reports of shelling.
‘This is a violation of the ceasefire agreement.’
Euro-jet takes off
BRITAIN is expected to reach a compromise deal on building a cut-price European fighter aircraft with Germany, Italy and Spain.
Germany pulled out of the joint project in July, but finance minister Theo Waigel has said he favours a scaled-down version of the plane costing £36 million to avoid job losses in times of recession.
Job misery for south
JOB losses in the South East will go on rising faster than for the rest of Britain, a leading economist warned yesterday.
NatWest Bank expert David Kern said the South East had suffered more than any other region.
Unemployment in the area would rise to 11.7 per cent of the workforce, he predicted.
Ship scare
REPORTS that foreign ships fired live shells near a fishing port are to be investigated by the MoD.
The four frigates, believed to be German or Dutch, carried out firing exercises off Folkestone, Kent.
They were ordered to leave.
‘We are studying reports from the coastguard and a local fisherman,’ said a MoD spokesman.
‘Papers prove Major knew of arms-to-Iraq’
By Paul Wilenius
JOHN Major will today be linked directly to the Iraqgate arms scandal, Labour said yesterday.
Shadow Trade Secretary Robin Cook threatened to release confidential papers which he claims show Mr Major as Foreign Secretary knew of the arms-to-Saddam policy.
‘There are documents which lock John Major into this issue,’ insisted Mr Cook.
This latest twist came as pressure mounted for Mark Thatcher and even Baroness Thatcher to be called to the Scott inquiry.
Lady Thatcher was in charge while the policy of selling weapons equipment to Saddam was changed.
Mr Major returned to No 10 last night still insisting he knew nothing.
Downing Street said Mr Major was not aware of sanctions busting but admitted that his foreign office deputy William Waldegrave was fully informed.
‘The only defence is that John Major was not told.
But I suspect he knew,’ said Mr Cook.
Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown demanded an emergency Commons debate on the affair.
But he said the Government was unlikely to co-operate.
‘This means we will have to consider whatever parliamentary opportunities are available to us,’ he said.
‘The whole Government seems involved.
We cannot afford to wait longer for the answers to our questions.’
Leader of the House Tony Newton said the row was a plot to damage Mr Major.
Exports in death
NEARLY 80,000 Europeans are killed every year from accidents involving faulty goods, a consumer conference was told.
The Product Safety Enforcement Forum of Europe (Prosafe) was also told that another 14 million are seriously injured as the first steps towards an Interpol-style consumer European protection agency were made yesterday.
Prosafe chairman Mike Dewry said: ‘These figures highlight the need for enforcement agencies to act together.’
More than 70 delegates at the Edinburgh conference were told about the dumping of unsafe products on emerging eastern European democracies.
In one case faulty pushchairs, from Germany, were sent as humanitarian aid to eastern Europe.
When the danger was discovered they were re-exported to Finland.
Mr Dewry said: ‘We have a company in the UK that makes cosmetics with a high content of lead and mercury.
It is illegal here, yet it's in demand in India, and there's not a thing we can do about it.’
Last bid to stop world trade war
BRITAIN will try to force France to cut farm subsidies today in a bid to avoid a crippling world trade war.
Agriculture Secretary John Gummer will have a tough job at the crunch meeting in Brussels.
France is bitterly opposed to cuts.
Officials leaked papers yesterday showing that British, not French, farmers would be hardest hit by subsidy reductions demanded by America.
Up to 40 per cent of British arable land would be left idle if the Gatt deal is agreed, the French claimed.
Mr Gummer insisted agreement is in sight.
‘We want to save the world from a ruinous trade war,’ he said.
EC Agriculture Secretary Ray MacSharry hopes to finalise the deal in Washington on Wednesday.
Army raid
SECURITY guards were handcuffed and locked in a lavatory during a raid on the National Army Museum yesterday.
By the time the alarm was raised the three raiders, one of them armed with a handgun, had fled the museum in Chelsea, London.
Last night it was not yet known if anything had been stolen.
Tragic race
A SPORTING bishop gave racing's first National Hunt Sunday meeting his full blessing yesterday.
The Bishop of Gloucester, the Rt Rev Peter Ball, said he was not concerned about the reaction from the church.
A horse died of a heart attack in one of the races at the Cheltenham meeting.
Lamont hints at Budget tax gloom for all
By Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
CHANCELLOR Norman Lamont refused point-blank to rule out tax increases yesterday.
The Government has clearly abandoned its election promise of tax cuts ‘year on year’.
Rises in petrol and road tax, a leap in duties on drink and tobacco and the freezing of income tax allowances are probably on the agenda for next spring's Budget.
VAT may be extended to cover children's clothes, food, books, and newspapers.
The prospect of tax increases will take the shine off John Major's speech at the Lord Mayor's Banquet tonight.
He will declare that the economy has reached a ‘turning point’, but latest polls show confidence in him and his Chancellor at an all-time low.
During the election Mr Major promised regular annual cuts in tax but yesterday Mr Lamont refused to repeat that pledge.
He told the BBC's On The Record that difficult decisions had to be made in the Budget.
‘I will make my judgment about the overall balance of taxation in the economy at that time,’ he insisted.
He said his remarks on a rise in tax ‘neither rules it in or rules it out’.
Mr Lamont declared the Tories stuck to their election pledges but he faces immense pressure to balance the books.
The amount of tax coming in every year has dropped by £30 billion, with companies going to the wall and millions of people losing their jobs and claiming dole.
As a result Government borrowing is soaring — to £37 billion this year, and £44 billion next year.
Analyst Michael Saunders of Salomon Brothers expects the next year's figure to reach £50 billion.
The only way to avert this would be hefty tax increases.
Mr Lamont claimed his Autumn Statement meant the framework for growth was in place and had been well received by businesses.
‘They have said that this is what they wanted.
They believe this gives them a great opportunity and I am sure they are right.’
But he admitted: ‘I believe that unemployment will go on rising for some time yet, but what is certain is that the measures I have taken will assist the employment situation.’
He must also be hoping the measures will save his political neck.
It is felt that if the economy does not improve soon he will be reshuffled out of the Treasury by the Prime Minister.
But he will not go voluntarily and said: ‘I have no intention of making way.
‘I believe that I should soldier on with my policies.
‘It has been a very rough time indeed.
It would be astonishing if I wasn't much-criticised.’
Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown said: ‘I challenge the Mr Lamont to deny that 250,000 jobs are at risk as the shortcomings in the Autumn Statement mean a winter of rising unemployment.
‘I challenge him to deny that John Major promised, not only no tax increases, but that there would be tax cuts year on year.
‘It is clear that the investment-led recovery that the Government wants will require the full national recovery programme that Labour is proposing.’
Tory MPs on the brink of rebellion over Council Tax
UP TO 50 anxious Tory backbenchers are ready to defy the Government over the coming Council Tax.
They are prepared to force ministers to pump more money into keeping bills down.
New figures show that many millions of homes in London and the South East face crippling bills of £800 or more for the new tax.
Some Tory backbenchers are terrified that if these bills are not brought down, they will lose their seats and the Government will be thrown out of office.
People in the south are suffering the highest rise in unemployment, biggest rise in repossessions, and highest levels of debt.
Now they will face bigger council tax bills than anyone else in the country.
‘They are precision-bombing those worst hit by the recession,’ said Tory MP Sir Rhodes Boyson.
Environment Secretary Michael Howard hopes to take the heat out of the revolt by revealing that the average council tax bill across the country will be around £575.
This is almost the same as the average poll tax bill of £564.
But it masks the heavy impact on the South.
Most of the homes in the South fall into the higher E to H council tax bands, ranging from £88,000 to £320,000 plus.
According to the new figures, this means most council tax bills in the south will be £700 to £1,150, with the overwhelming majority above £800 and millions paying £900.
Bills of this size will have a devastating impact on families still struggling to fight their way out of the recession.
If you think times are bad, wait till next year
MORE than four out of five Britons feel they are financially worse off than they were a year ago.
And most people think things will get worse, according to a new survey.
The dismal picture of Britain was revealed by a Harris poll for Granada's World In Action programme last night.
It shows almost half the people are spending less on clothes for themselves, three out of 10 spend less on food, about a quarter find it hard to pay regular bills on time, and 43 per cent plan to spend less this Christmas.
A Harris Research spokesman said: ‘These are the most pessimistic figures I have seen.’
Miracle of shot PC
By Adrian Lee
THE policeman shot by an IRA gunman after stopping a van loaded with explosives came a whisker away from death, it was revealed yesterday.
One of the two bullets that hit officer Ray Hall travelled eight inches through his body without hitting vital organs, said surgical registrar Steve Watson.
‘He must be the luckiest man alive.
If the bullet had taken a slightly different path the results would have been catastrophic,’ said Mr Watson of Homerton Hospital.
The policeman instinctively turned away and that probably saved his life.
The bullet, fired at point-blank range, hit him in the middle of the back and travelled upwards and out of his body.
‘It went through his chest without appearing to do any serious damage,’ added Mr Watson.
The first bullet bounced off his skull, leaving him virtually unscathed.
PC Hall, a 38-year-old father of two, was well enough yesterday to complain about hospital food which he refused to eat.
Nurse Eileen Farragher said: ‘Physically he'll be okay to go back to work in a few weeks — but mentally he's still shocked.’
His quick actions almost certainly prevented a massive bomb attack in London.
Revenge killing fear
SECURITY chiefs fear a wave of revenge killings after a third victim of a betting shop gun and grenade attack died in hospital.
Pensioner John Lovett, an ex-soldier, died as loyalist terrorists the Ulster Freedom Fighters admitted to the weekend murders in Belfast.
A 20-year-old RUC officer was shot dead by the IRA yesterday.
Gas leak in store kills workman
SHOPPERS strode by the body of a store workman yesterday, unaware that he was dead.
The victim was slumped over a freezer where he had been searching for a gas leak.
Shoppers at the Gateway supermarket in Hinckley, Leicester, thought he was still at work and ignored him.
When he was eventually discovered 50 shoppers and staff were evacuated while firemen stopped the leak.
Fire officer Stewart Reeve said the engineer was working on the freezer when he was overcome by gas.
‘He'd been slumped over the freezer for some minutes before anyone realised anything was wrong,’ he said.
Terminator's secret agony
MUSCLEMAN Arnold Schwarzenegger has secretly fought crippling pain with acupuncture and herbal medicine.
Years of pumping iron have taken their toll on the 45-year-old's body.
Celebrity doctor Mark Holmes said The Terminator had many ripped muscles and would probably get arthritis.
‘He's paying the price for working his body so hard.’
Salon gets in Bet's hair
BET will be toppled from her throne as Queen of Coronation Street when a plush hair salon run by a new character opens in Britain's best-known thoroughfare.
The salon will become a magnet for gossip and the focus of of the soap's strongest story lines in what Granada TV say will be the biggest shake-up of Street life in five years.
Two die in triangle stabbing
A STRANGE wife-next-door love triangle ended yesterday in murder and suicide.
Four-times-wed Carol Whittington, 45, was found stabbed to death at the home of her third husband, Peter Sayles, 39.
He was also dead, with his throat slashed.
Mrs Whittington and fourth husband, Eric, a council worker lived just three doors from Mr Sayles, at Totley, Sheffield.
Neighbour Pat Hughes said yesterday: ‘It was a bizarre situation.
Peter and Carol had lived in the same row of houses for 16 years.
‘He watched her marry and divorce twice, before becoming her third husband, three years ago.
‘The marriage only lasted a few weeks, but he and Carol remained friends.
‘He was obsessed with her.
Something must have made him boil over.’
Police said: ‘We are treating the deaths as murder and suicide.’
EC red tape strands 10
TEN pupils were forced to hitch a 100-mile lift after being ordered off a mini-bus because of EC red tape.
The children from Leeds were accompanying 14 French pupils, aged 11 to 18, on an exchange visit, were turfed off the bus at a shopping complex in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear.
A Department of Transport inspector said the French bus could not carry British passengers as it was a ‘closed door tour’.
The youngsters got a lift back with chemical workers on a day trip.
Transplant hopes dashed
THE hopes of a little girl who made a desperate nationwide plea for a heart-lung donor to save her mother have been dashed.
Cheryl Wragg, 34, was airlifted 150 miles for the operation, just weeks after 10-year-old Adele's appeal, only to be told at the last minute the lungs were unsuitable.
Cheryl, of Firth Park, Sheffield, South Yorkshire, was born with a serious heart condition and needs the transplant to save her life.
‘When I telephoned Adele, she was very upset and cried,’ said Cheryl.
School expels drug nannies
By Shoba Vazirani
TWO girls have been thrown out of a top nanny school for taking drugs.
The pupils, both 19, were expelled from the £2,600-a-term Norland Nursery Training College, which grooms students for jobs with the world's wealthiest families.
They admitted using Ecstasy and were ordered to leave immediately or be handed over to police.
Three more girls will be told to go this morning.
They were all in their second year at the college which is celebrating its centenary.
Norland's principal Louise Davis last night confirmed that two girls had been expelled.
She said: ‘They admitted having Ecstasy which had been bought at rave parties.
The college cannot condone any behaviour that involves illicit drugs because of the nature of the students' work with children.
‘The girls were told to withdraw from the training college.
Their parents are aware of the situation.’
Norland College, a Georgian building set in 150-acre Denford Park near Hungerford, Berkshire, prides itself on a reputation for excellence.
Girls are distinctively dressed in a starched uniform of fawn dresses, brown coats and bowler-style hats.
Training involves a two-year residential course which leads to the Nursery Nursing Examination Board diploma, followed by nine months' probation with a family.
Once they graduate, the girls can expect anything up to 15 offers of work.
Past pupils have looked after the children of the aristocracy and European royals.
A Norlander's basic salary may not be high — just £100 a week — but perks often include travel, a car, lavish surroundings and a great deal of responsibility.
This is the second time the college has been involved in a drugs scandal.
Several months ago, another student was asked to leave after being found with cocaine.
The latest incident came to light when pupils were overheard discussing the expulsions at the Rising Sun pub in nearby Newbury.
Landlord Adrian Magee told Today: ‘There's a big drugs problem in the area and most publicans are desperately concerned about it.
‘Many of the Norlanders come into my pub and are basically good girls.’
£20,000 to beat bullies
A BOY aged nine has been sent by his local council to a Pounds 20,000-a-year public school to escape playground bullies.
Ryan Edwards suffered daily beatings from thugs because he was so bright.
During his 18-month ordeal Ryan regularly went home covered in cigarette burns and bruises.
His mother Alison, 34, got so fed up with seeing her son in tears she kept him away from Penrhys Junior School in Rhondda, Mid Glamorgan.
Now the county council is paying £19,550 a year to send Ryan to Marchant School, 100 miles away in Wincanton, Somerset.
The family live on the notorious Penrhys estate, nicknamed Alcatraz by locals who say anyone who moves there never gets out.
Mrs Edwards said: ‘Ryan became a target for the thugs.
They even stubbed cigarettes out on his back.
‘He couldn't go out the front door to play without being mugged.’
A council spokesman said: ‘It was in Ryan's best interests to move him.’
WPC death probe
POLICE are investigating the private life of a policewoman found dead in her car.
The body of Rachel Balderson, 27, was discovered yesterday by a walker in Laughton Woods, a courting spot near Gainsborough, Lincs.
Foul play is not suspected.
Keep him from our son
By Simon Trump
A MOTHER stabbed to death by her jealous husband made a secret will stating that he must never be allowed to care for their son.
Caroline Horbury, whose millionaire husband Peter has just begun a life sentence for murder, said if she died first 11-year-old Daniel should live with her sister.
Daniel, who dialled 999 as his mother struggled for her life, will be a given a new start, cut off from 55-year-old Horbury.
‘Caroline made it clear that if she died before her husband then we would be made guardians,’ said her sister Meriel Rosser.
‘It is another sign that they didn't have a normal marriage.’
The £400,000 home near Pontypool, Gwent, where the murder took place, and the family's London flat will be auctioned and the proceeds put into trust.
A £20,000 Alfa Romeo sports car, planned as a 17th birthday present for Daniel, will also be sold so there are no links with his father.
Cardiff Crown Court, where the verdict was returned on Saturday, heard Horbury was impotent after taking a course of blood pressure tablets.
It left him in a jealous rage and he wrongly accused his 47-year-old wife of having an affair.
The court heard a harrowing 999 tape of the boy, then 10, as he tried in vain to stop the killing.
Mrs Rosser said: ‘If Daniel asks what happened in court we will tell him.
‘But he says he never wants to see his father.
He wants to dismiss this from his mind.’
Big slump in drunks
THE recession has cut dramatically the number of alcohol-related crimes.
In some areas public order and drunkenness offences are down by more than a third.
Improved policing and longer pub opening hours are also thought to have helped.
In Liverpool drink-related crime is down 22 per cent and in the Thames Valley it has dropped 13 per cent so far this year.
In Wakefield, West Yorks, similar offences have fallen by 36 per cent.
Inspector Neville Oughtibridge, of Wakefield police, said: ‘The job of policing the town centre has been made easier because there's just not the amount of money around there used to be.
‘People don't seem to be drinking as much and are consequently acting more sensibly.’
Beer sales in pubs are also down.
A Brewers Society spokesman said: ‘Like any industry we are not recession proof.’
£2 tests help beat cancer
By Nicki Pope, Medical Correspondent
AN instant testing kit for cancer will end patients' agonisingly long wait for vital results.
Breast, lung, colon and gut cancers will be detected earlier than ever before thanks to the invention, allowing treatment to start more quickly.
The test costs less than £2 and cuts diagnosis time from 24 hours to just 90 minutes.
Belfast-based makers Biosyn, which launched the kit this week, say it will soon be in use in hospitals.
It is now working on a while-you-wait version for GPs to make spot checks in their surgeries.
Medics will also use the kit to ensure all cancerous cells have been removed during tumour surgery.
The test kit is 20 per cent cheaper than the current method of confirming cancer and also saves on staff time.
A blood sample is all that is needed.
This is placed on chemically treated plastic strips which react with cancer cells, turning a fluorescent green.
Doctors will be able to use the kit for regular screening for lung and gastric cancers, which account for 70 per cent of cancers treated in the western world.
Pigeon plea by TV Carla
TV comedy writer Carla Lane has stepped in to save 50 pigeons from a council executioner.
The birds, at Ryde on the Isle of Wight, were to be trapped and their necks wrung because of complaints by traders.
But bird lover Carla, 58, creator of Bread and Butterflies, said: ‘I'll take them into my Sussex sanctuary.
‘I already have 500 pigeons so they will be in good company.’
BR blitz on fare cheats
BRITISH Rail is launching a crackdown on fare dodgers in a bid to save millions of pounds.
Barrier staff from more than 600 Network SouthEast stations are to be retrained as ticket inspectors, to enforce new £10 on-the-spot fines.
They will blitz stations including Waterloo to catch travellers trying to get a free ride.
‘This is a determined effort to stop fraudulent travel,’ said a spokesman.
Couple talk glazing rep into defeat
By Ian Key
CUSTOMERS who spent four hours haggling with a double glazing salesman may sue after beating him at his own game.
The couple already had several quotes for new windows when the rep arrived at their home and were determined to get a better deal.
Joe Drury's original offer was for £5,000.
Four hours later he had been beaten down to £2,900.
But his bosses were horrified by the estimate and cancelled the deal.
Now engineer Jaafer Sheblee, 34, plans to go to court to make Thornton Swish stick to the contract.
His wife Jackie, 30, said: ‘It was the salesman who came up with the price and they have signed a contract.
Now they should stick to it.
‘The salesman was there four hours, he knew what he was doing, what the job involved and how much he was offering to do it for.’
Thornton Swish is now offering to double-glaze the seven windows and french doors at the house in Chester-le-Street, County Durham, for £3,900.
Mrs Sheblee said: ‘We kept ringing for explanations but they refused to discuss it other than to say it would cost another £1,000.
‘The quote was a few hundred under the other offers we had, that's why we accepted it.
‘Our solicitor believes it is a binding contract and we will be pursuing the matter through the courts.’
According to Cleveland trading standards officer John Richardson their case may not be watertight.
‘Morally, they should honour the deal unless the survey uncovers a problem,’ he said.
‘Legally, however, the firm has the right to change the price.’
Steve Lawton, a director of the Cleveland-based firm, said: ‘All agreements are subject to a full survey including a price check.
‘I think Mr Sheblee is being unreasonable in not accepting the revised price.’
Embarrassed salesman Mr Drury, 34, said: ‘I have taken a lot of stick at work over this.
I made a mistake.
It had been a long day.’
Coach deaths quiz
A CAR driver faces charges after three women died and 23 people were injured in a weekend coach crash.
The accident happened as 30 students from London's International Language School were returning from Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwicks.
Their coach hit a bridge at 60mph on the M40 near Tetsworth, Oxon, after driver Peter Wright swerved to avoid an overtaking Citroen car.
Mr Wright, 35, of Hillingdon, west London, had to have both legs amputated.
He was critically ill in an Oxford hospital yesterday.
A man and two women were seriously ill with crush injuries.
The dead, all from Thailand, were in their late teens and early twenties.
It took firemen nearly two hours to cut eight passengers free.
One passenger said: ‘We were covered with glass.
There were bodies everywhere.
I could hear people groaning and calling for help.’
The car driver, in his thirties, escaped with a bruised knee.
Police said: ‘He has been reported with a view to prosecution.’
Mid-life crisis at thirty
THIRTY something men are suffering mid-life crises, says a psychologist.
They may have achieved their aims and want to change their lives, Dr Rebecca Prenge told She magazine.
To most that means a new career or an affair.
‘It's not the appropriate solution but they feel they're taking a positive step,’ she said.
Leonora's £250,000
THE hospital where five-year-old Leonora Knatchbull died of cancer will get £250,000 today.
Her parents, Lord and Lady Romsey, will hand over a cheque from the Leonora Knatchbull Research Fellowship, for child cancer research at London's St Bartholomew's Hospital.
Piggott is racing back
A BRUISED but defiant Lester Piggott flew back to Britain yesterday after his horrific fall at a US race meeting a fortnight ago.
The 57-year-old champion jockey said he was ‘in good shape’.
3 wheeling
RELIANT devotee Joe Edwards, 77, of Dudley, West Midlands, has clocked up 250,000 miles over 33 years in the cars.
Blowing £150,000 on street
A SNOWSTORM of money threw a city street into chaos yesterday when more than £150,000 fell off the back of an armoured car.
Traffic screeched to a stop and dozens of people dashed to grab handfuls of notes swirling in the wind.
The free-for-all began when the back door of a Wells Fargo van flew open as it hit a bump in the road in Queens, New York.
Two bags of paper money hurtled on to the road and burst open.
Police managed to seize back £500 from the roadside.
The Wells Fargo crew, helped by some onlookers, got back another Pounds 1,250.
But the rest of the money — 300,000 dollars, in unmarked notes — had vanished.
One onlooker joked: ‘I know this is the Land of Opportunity.
But this is crazy.’
‘It was like those people hadn't eaten for days,’ a Wells Fargo spokesman said later.
‘It was like throwing a piece of meat to sharks.
People were just grabbing money from each other.
‘We are still searching for the money, but most of it was blown away.
‘It was so windy out there.’
A New York police spokesman said: ‘An investigation is being carried out into the disappearance of the money.
A limited investigation.’
Posse hunts pony thugs
A CITIZENS' patrol group is being launched by police to trap a sick gang who have poured acid over three horses.
They are setting up the Horsewatch operation in Hampshire to protect the animals after a pony was attacked with a fence post.
So far this year 21 horses have been slashed or mutilated.
Some have had to be put down.
Slump brings spying boom
THE recession has sparked a boom in electronic bugs as firms resort to dirty tricks to keep ahead of their rivals.
Corporate spies are now spending £50 million a year on eavesdropping devices.
‘Companies are using every trick in the book to stay one step in front of their competitors,’ said Paul Carratu of corporate investigators Carratu International.
Ghost haunts ward angels
TWO exorcists were called in to a drive a ghost from a hospital ward after frightened nurses refused to work there.
Staff at Merseyside's Whiston Hospital said temperature dropped to icy cold whenever the ghost of a former patient, known as The Grey Lady, was spotted.
A priest and the hospital chaplain said prayers and blessed the ward.
I'll be at my desk if you phone
A young would-be tycoon used his posh private school as an office for his money-making schemes.
Smooth-talking Sunil Abeyewickreme, 17, fooled nightclub managers into believing he was a successful businessman.
He hired the exclusive venues for parties and made cash by selling tickets.
But the A-level student, who wants to be a doctor, ran into trouble when one event bombed and he began to slip into debt, owing hundreds of pounds.
His scam was discovered when a club manager rang the boy's company Sky As A Kite and found he had dialled the head of sixth form at the prestigious Leeds Grammar School, West Yorks.
Mister Craig's and Digby's clubs in Leeds, owned by European Leisure, threatened legal action to get their money back.
But, after speaking to Sunil's tutor, they have agreed to the Leeds boy paying his debts off in weekly instalments.
A European Leisure spokesman said: ‘He is a very enterprising lad.
He has five-star ideas but only one star for approach and organisation.’
Peter Jolly, deputy head of the £1,250-a-term school, said: ‘We view this matter seriously and the boy will be disciplined.
He has let the whole school down.’
Sunil's family knew nothing about his club deals.
Father finds son at last A FATHER has tracked down the love child he never saw — after 34 years.
Ex-RAF pilot Ricky Warrington-Smith, 62, came back from New Zealand to find son Martin.
Ricky, who emigrated in 1975, wants to leave £100,000 to Martin, born at Scarborough, North Yorks.
Martin, of Stockton-on-Tees, said yesterday: ‘It was marvellous to meet.’
Hepatitis B needle risk
NEARLY 1,000 people will be tested for Hepatitis B after visiting an acupuncture centre where three people contracted the killer virus.
A health official believes the virus was spread through infected needles at Hampton Osteopathic Clinic in Surrey.
An acupuncturist at the clinic was found to be carrying the virus, which infects the liver.
New clothes are hot stuff
THE hottest new line in fashion is likely to get a warm reception when it hits stores at Christmas.
Orders are already pouring in for the American-made scarves and bandanas that heat up when a liquid-filled pad is microwaved is placed into a pouch.
‘They will be in British shops within a month,’ said a spokesman for International Marketing Partners.