

GMTV viewers increase
TROUBLED morning television station GMTV finally had something to smile about last night when it was revealed it gained an extra million viewers over the last two weeks.
Figures show more than 12.8 million people watched its weekday programme between February 15 and 19 and figures are continuing to show a steady rise.
‘It is really terrific news and it has done wonders for morale with everybody very upbeat,’ said a spokesman.
The station had a shaky launch in January losing two million viewers in its early weeks and the increases are put down to a revamped style and change of presenters.
GMTV took over the morning franchise from TV-am and last month brought in LWT's chief executive Greg Dyke as chairman to spearhead its fight for more viewers.
He introduced Roland Rat a decade ago to rescue TV-am.
Society travels for next concert
BRAINTREE Choral Society forsakes its home town for Coggeshall's St Peter's Church when it presents its spring concert on Saturday, March 27, conducted by Professor Chris Green.
An English Requiem is centred around one of the finest works to have been written in the past ten years.
John Rutter's Requiem will be performed with instrumental soloists from the region, and the programme also includes three other choral works from different periods, starting with a motet by Bach, a brief choral song by Faure and music by Rachmaninov.
Tickets have gone on sale this week for the concert and can be bought from the Braintree Town Hall Centre, telephone (0376) 552080.
Dreaming of first night nerves
By David Henshall
That's your music.
You're on, she says with a soft kiss and a quiet, urgent shove.
‘Break a leg!’
Quickly, I thread my way through the semi-darkness high backstage, and turn to give her a reassuring wave.
She is standing in a solitary shaft of heavenly light, her smile willing me to win.
But, strangely, her face is changing and an edge of doubt is creeping in.What the heck is Cyd Charisse doing here?
And, where has the other girl gone.
I am getting worried because I can't remember — and, what is more, they are no longer playing my music.Panic stations.
In about 20 seconds, to thunderous applause, I am to step out on to the huge sweeping stairs, each one lit with a different colour for my famous Georges Guetary pastiche from An American In Paris, Stairway to Paradise.
But the orchestra is playing a medley from Fiddler on the Roof, the audience is clapping impatiently in time and, horror or horrors, I can see now there are no stairs — just a long slide circling down to the stage 60 feet away.
‘What's going on,’ I scream into the blackness behind me.
There is an immediate hubbub and a distant voice calls, ‘Trouble with the electrics, mate.
Bloody steps won't turn into place.’
I turn round and there is my father in his shirtsleeves carrying an enormous spanner.
‘Don't worry, boy,’ he says with a small grin, ‘we'll fix it in a jiff.’
Oh, thank God he's here.
All will be well.
The orchestra is now playing songs from Chu Chin Chow and the audience is joining in.The years of practise, of developing my special technique, are just about to pay off.
I can't claim it is original because I stole the idea from Dan Dailey in Mother Wore Tights, although it is possible I do it better than him now.
Marble stairs are best, but metal or tough plastic works almost as well.
The secret is to hit the edge of the top one with the steel-tipped back edge of your heels and travel all the way down just skimming each stair the same way.
Too slow and you stop.
Too fast and you lose your balance going round the bend.Around 12 miles an hour is about right, controlled by relaxed knees.
Then, with sound like a rippling machine gun, arms outstretched and a face-splitting smile, you speed spectacularly towards the audience, a different light flashing magically as your heels lightly clip each step.The effect is stunning, like somebody racing at you on an escalator only much, much better.
It is a skill I have honed on a host of beautiful staircases and, before tonight's professional debut, my most singular success has been at a large hotel in Sloane Street where we just chose Miss London.The marble stairs to the entrance hall are just too perfect to ignore, with only a couple of people chatting on the right halfway down.I take the left hand course and soar down and round the gentle curve in nothing short of majestic style, allowing myself the luxury of a smile and a brief wave to the startled pair as I rattle by.
The editor's look suggests displeasure, but I am too elated to worry and with a skip I whirl into the revolving doors and out laughing into the night.But now, what a fiasco!
The sweat is running over my carefully-applied make-up, my mouth is dry with anxiety.
The great moment seems to be slipping away.
What about the stairs?
I call desperately into the darkness again.
‘They're knackered, luvey,’ says Dickie Attenborough, appearing at my side.
‘Your dad's still at it, but we can't wait any longer.
You'll have to slide down.’
‘But that will ruin the whole act,’ I protest.
‘Step-skippin' is what me and Dan Dailey do best.’
‘It's that or nothing, duckie.
You can do it,’ says Sir Richard, urging me towards the entrance.
Suddenly, Stairway to Paradise is echoing through the theatre and I am stepping into the spotlight sliding faster and faster.
It's so exhilarating, but how am I going to stop…?
‘Hot chocolate,’ says another insistent voice again.
‘Get it down you and perhaps we can both get some sleep.
You've been bumbling and mumbling for hours.
Interesting dream?
‘Just a case of first-night nerves,’ I mutter, unlocking my legs and grasping at the steaming mug.Ruthie Henshall opens tonight in Crazy For You at the Prince Edward Theatre, London.
With sound like a rippling machine gun you speed towards the audience
Gallery wins extra time
THE MINORIES Gallery in Colchester has won a temporary reprieve and will re-open this spring.
A series of exhibitions will be mounted at the centre while arts bosses search for a permanent gallery for the area.
A new trust has been formed with more than £100,000 in its coffers to spend on visual arts, it was announced yesterday.
The funding bodies are: Essex County Council which has pledged to chip in £38,000, Colchester Borough Council, which has promised £33,000 and the Eastern Arts Board which is donating £45,000.
Essex County Council is currently carrying out a feasibility study to try to pinpoint a permanent arts complex for the northern part of the county.
Chairman of Essex County Council's Education Committee, Ian Abbey, said: ‘The trust's aim will be to make art accessible to everyone and provide an important education facility for our young people.’
Suspense and seduction
By Andrew Clarke
ALAN J PAKULA'S new thriller Consenting Adults has had a rough ride from national critics.
Unfortunately Hollywood Pictures, part of the ever-expanding Disney Corporation, has decided not to stage regional previews.
I can't tell you whether the national critics are being unnecessarily difficult or whether it is truly deserving of some of the harshest write-ups to be given to a film this year.
On the face of it the film has a lot going for it — Pakula as director, and a cast including the frequently brilliant Kevin Kline, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, Kevin Spacey, Rebecca Miller and Forest Whitaker.
The story is designed to be a modern-day film noir.
Kevin Kline and Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio play Richard and Priscilla Parker, the perfect couple.
Married since college, they run a highly successful advertising business and appear to have the perfect marriage.
Then Eddy and Kay Otis move next door.
Intrigued by their free and easy life style, the Parker's find their long held values being easily manipulated.
Eddy dangles a very tempting adulterous carrot in front of Richard and suggests a convivial evening of wife swapping.
Unable to resist Richard agrees.
However, Eddy is not the nice guy he seems.
He has set up his neighbour to take the rap for a very nasty murder.
Although he protests his innocence he finds that clearing his name is not as easy as he thought.
Consenting Adults , certificate 15, is showing at the Ipswich and Colchester Odeons.
Diverse skills of Kevin Kline
ONE of the great omissions at this year's Oscars was the lack of a nomination for Kevin Kline's dazzling performance as Douglas Fairbanks in Richard Attenborough's Chaplin .
He must have been a strong contender for the Best Supporting Actor Oscar but then again, the history of the academy awards is littered with the words ‘if only…’
Kevin Kline still maintains his reputation for being one of Hollywood's most versatile and most elusive of actors.
He manages to combine stage and film career and lurch from high comedy to heart-wrenching drama.
He became an actor by default.
The seeds of a dramatic career were first sown while he was at the University of Indiana studying music.
‘I had every intention of becoming a pianist or conductor but in a great flash of realisation I decided that I would only ever be a mediocre musician and went off to study drama.’
His first film break came in 1980 when he starred in the movie version of his great Broadway success The Pirates of Penzance .
He followed this up a couple of years later with Sophie's Choice opposite Meryl Streep.
Diverse roles in A Fish Called Wanda and Cry Freedom have kept him from being pigeon-holed by casting directors.
Music still plays a large part in his life and one of the great thrills of filming Consenting Adults was the opportunity to jam with Atlanta blues musicians.
Kline keeps a very tight lid on his own private life.
‘The more anonymous I am as an actor the easier it is to make you believe I'm someone else.’
He has been so successful at keeping his private life private that it took six months for the world's gossip columns to find out that he married his long-term girlfriend Phoebe Cates, star of the Gremlins films.
However, his attempts to deflect attention away from his private life has rather backfired because on one occasion to distract a rather persistent journalist he assured him that he was ‘heavily into drugs and loved having sex with Chihuahuas.’
Now that quote is flung back at him with every interview he gives.
So who is the real Kevin Kline?
‘I'm a real hypersensitive, hypochondriac.
My usual state of mind is ‘what am I dying of this week.’
Kevin Kline plays Richard Parker and Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio his wife Priscilla in Consenting Adults
Concert provides feast of contrast
Colchester Chamber Orchestra, St Botolph's Church, conductor Christopher Phelps, Mozart Symphony No 25; Kodaly Dances from Galanta; Brahms Piano Concerto No 2, soloist Jonathan Plowright
CHRISTOPHER PHELPS kicked off an outstanding night's music with an accurate, delicately played Mozart Symphony.
Composed by a 17-year-old, the work was underplayed at times with a few unfortunate slips from the horns adding to a certain lack of direction.
The Kodaly, by contrast, opened a new view of the orchestra.
The difficulty of the music forced a more concentrated performance, which paid wonderful dividends in excitement and intensity.
A beautifully open and controlled solo from Andrew Coy (clarinet) led on to an expansive string sound and a rollicking dance.
The balance throughout was excellent, the brass carefully put in their place, aiding the very crisp percussion.
The contrasts were beautifully controlled, moving from high climax through floating melody to humorous dance.
The Brahms gave way to something completely new.
It is no mean feat to perform such a large work, but Christopher Phelps had the orchestra just where he wanted them.
With the billed soloist indisposed, Jonathan Plowright put wonderful control and vitality into the work.
Jonathan demonstrated near infallible technique and communication.
A slightly cold start gave way to wonderful contrasts of feeling.
The unity of soloist and orchestra and the conductor's sensitive modification of orchestral texture made for an excellent performance of a stunning concerto.ROBIN NEWTON.
Concert club in cash crisis after council stops grant
A MUSIC club which puts on classical music concerts is facing an uncertain future due to the withdrawal of its grant from Braintree District Council.
Braintree Concerts Music Club has been in existence for 22 years, but is looking for new ways to promote itself following the decision by the district council to withdraw its grant.
The club's chairman, George Marchant, said at the weekend that the Braintree District Arts Council had offered to share any financial losses with the district council for concerts in April and May this year.
This means that concerts on April 30 and May 28 will go ahead.
However after that the future is uncertain.
Mr Marchant said: ‘It is very simple.
The council just has not got the money.’
He said the grant was about £1,300.
He added: ‘It reflects the lamentable state of affairs nationally.’
Mr Marchant said nationally arts cost very little but was one of the first things to be cut.
‘It is very sad really,’ he added.
‘We will be trying to make attempts to obtain substantial sponsorship.’
The concerts are held in Causeway House, Braintree, and attract 50 to 60 people.
Mr Marchant said one way ahead would be to run the concerts on a subscription basis, with members paying in advance to attend the concerts.
Non-members could buy tickets on the door and the ticket money would be used to offset the cost of future concerts.
He said the financial cutback meant there would be fewer concerts in a season.
The April 30 concert is a joint promotion with Colchester New Music.
Performed by the Kingfisher String Quartet, it includes work by local composers Bryan Barnes, Eric Hudes, Peter Carr and Bernard Darrell.
The May 28 concert is by Braintree Concerts Music Club secretary Susan Lee, on piano, with David Kirby on clarinet.
As a child Susan used to turn the pages for pianists at the club's concerts, and went on to get a music degree.
Glee as ‘supersoap' slips away
Sun sets on a bad week for the BBC
IT HAS been a bad week for the BBC.
The future of new director general John Birt is in question because of his taxation arrangements.
And the future of the ‘supersoap’Eldorado , on which so many glittering careers were staked, in no longer in doubt.
‘Endorado!’ crowed the front page of the Daily Star on Saturday.
‘The El's over’ gloated The Sun .
There was a general tone of ill-concealed glee in the reporting of this most spectacular flop in the corporation's history.
The cost of the ‘soap that went down the plughole’ as the Daily Star described it, was variously estimated at between £10 million and £20 million.
Either way, it's a shocking lot of money for something which never began to live up to its pre-launch hype.
Eldorado was supposed to be a new breed of Euro-soap aimed at the single Euro-market, promising ‘sun, sex and sangria’— and more bikinis than Baywatch .
It was supposed to give viewers an all-year-round holiday feeling.
As such it was badly out of touch with the recessionary mood of the Nineties.
It failed from the start to live up to expectations in terms of sales abroad.
Are other countries' programme buyers more in touch with their audience than ours?
Or were they simply concerned at the number of rules that were being broken by the programme's makers?
Eldorado was never tested with a pilot programme, remarkably, considering the scale of investment involved in developing the 25-acre set.
And why, when so many talented actors and actresses are always out of work, did the series creators choose a number of unknowns with no acting experience?
Despite the high profile launch, just a few months later the audience of Eldorado was only 2.4 million people, ‘fewer than Gardeners World ,’ as the Daily Express pointed out.
Was it too much expecting people to watch three times a week?
More people watched Crossroads four times a week, and the Australian soaps attract better ratings five times a week.
Marcus Berkman, TV critic to the Daily Mail , believes that: ‘In the end, there was only one real problem with Eldorado : It was a terrible idea.’
That certainly is the most convincing explanation for the continuing unpopularity of the series, despite the highly publicised firing of its most infamously wooden characters, and the emergency transplant of EastEnders scriptwriters.
What was really wrong with Eldorado was that nobody really cared much about what happened to the characters.
They failed to catch the popular imagination in the way the inhabitants of Coronation Street, Albert Square and Ramsay Street have done.
And perhaps that has something to do with the very nature of an ex-patriate community.
The essence of ‘soap’(or ‘continuing drama’ as its creators prefer to call it) is a tight-knit microcosm, whether the village of Ambridge, the police stations of Dock Green, Z Cars and all their descendants, the hospitals of Emergency Ward 10 and Casualty , the motel of Crossroads , or a single street — see above, plus Brookside Close.
The very international nature of Eldorado fractured the sense of community vital to the genre.
And while British viewers don't have to live in Salford or Walthamstow to relate to the problems faced by characters in Coronation Street or EastEnders , few have the terms of reference to identify with the mythical world of Eldorado .
The really interesting question is what will take its place in this vital prime time slot.
Please, not a return of Terry Wogan.
Surely there is enough home-grown talent to find a programme (or two, or three) set closer to home (which will reduce production costs dramatically) and which doesn't make such patronising assumptions about viewer-appeal.
One thing Eldorado has proved is that there is no easy formula for high ratings.
There is no ‘mass audience’ of uncritical couch potatoes ready to be fobbed off with any old rubbish.
Even if John Birt is forced to resign, he will be remembered fondly in some quarters for his role in killing off this golden turkey.
Perhaps if corporation executives paid as much attention to programme budgets as they appear to do to their own tax returns, viewers would get better value for their licence money.
And if Mr. Birt does find himself out of a job, he could always try his luck as a timeshare salesman.
There's this picturesque white elephant development on the Costa del Sol, apparently going for a song.
Liz Kallend, BBC publicity officer for Eldorado surveys the empty set in the pouring Andalucian rain
BBC chiefs rally round Birt as pressure grows
Best man for the job, says board's letter of support
THE BBC's Board of Management is rallying round beleaguered director general John Birt amid a stream of calls for him to resign over revelations about his special tax arrangements.
In a letter of ‘unanimous support’ published in The Times today board members say he is the best person to lead the corporation.
‘The controversy surrounding the employment arrangements of John Birt has obscured the major issue in British broadcasting — the future of the BBC beyond 1996 when its current charter expires,’ says the letter.
‘The broadcasting environment will change dramatically in the next few years as new channels and broadcasters emerge in the commercial sector.
‘The BBC must therefore have a clear vision if it is to retain its role as the cornerstone of British broadcasting and continue to command respect and admiration in Britain and throughout the world.
‘In January John Birt laid out that vision of a wide range of high quality programmes, greater efficiency and accountability with value for money for licence payers.
‘We, the ten members of the board of management, believe that John Birt is the best person to lead the BBC and he has our unanimous support.’
Their strong support came after a top BBC manager also backed Mr Birt, while admitting he and the corporation and Mr Birt were damaged by the row over his tax deal — which enabled him to be treated as self-employed and his pay to go to his private company.
Will Wyatt, managing director of network television, said Mr Birt should not lose his job over the dispute and insisted he had the full support of his senior colleagues.
Nevertheless Mr Wyatt — a key member of the board of management responsible for the day-to-day running of the BBC — conceded on Radio 4's the World This Weekend that Mr Birt's battered reputation would need time to recover.
‘John knows he's been damaged by it.
He will need the support of his colleagues — which he'll get — to get over this but we believe it is get-overable,’ he said.
Birt — damaged
American link for Anglia TV
ANGLIA Television yesterday announced a partnership with New York based Home Box Office, making it one of Britain's leading producers and commissioners of drama and entertainment.
Anglia and HBO, the programme division of Time-Warner, will establish three separate groups to produce TV films for America and drama and entertainment for Europe, and handle distribution.
This will give Anglia a major stake in a top Hollywood television production company.
Mr David McCall, Anglia's chief executive, said the partnership would ‘provide substantial funding to expand into new programme areas including comedy, co-production and co-financing with independent producers.’
Under the agreement, a new company, Anglia Television Entertainment, will be formed, with Anglia holding 51 pc and HBO 49 pc.
Major productions scheduled for screening in Britain later this year include Jilly Cooper's best selling novel Riders and former Professionals star Martin Shaw in The Chief , a tough new police drama.
Anglia TV chairman Sir Peter Gibbings, left, and Glen Whitehead, of Home Box Office of New York, toast their companies' partnership pact yesterday
BBC chairman flies in as Birt row deepens
BBC chairman Marmaduke Hussey returned to Britain yesterday to face a deepening row over the way the corporation is being run.
Critics within the BBC hierarchy claim Mr Hussey, his vice-chairman Lord Barnett and director-general John Birt have not consulted the main board of governors in major policy decisions.
Several senior broadcasters, including Sir David Attenborough, Sir Paul Fox and former BBC managing director Bill Cotton, have indicated they might not attend a farewell dinner tomorrow for former director-general Sir Michael Checkland because of the row.
It began two weeks ago with revelations about the tax arrangements of Mr Birt, who was employed as a freelance consultant via his own firm in the £140,000-a-year job.
He claims the tax advantages totalled only £810, but his wife was also a paid secretary and a director of his company.
The row deepened with revelations that the BBC board was not told of the tax arrangement and was not aware that the director-general job had not been advertised before Mr Birt was appointed.
The corporation appears split into two camps, with strong support for either Mr Birt or Mr Hussey.
Feelings within the BBC are that somebody has to go and that the 69-year-old Mr Hussey is likely to be the one.
As the debate intensifies over the BBC's Charter — virtually its right to broadcast — which is up for renewal in 1996, a younger chairman is needed to take the corporation into the next century, critics say, but Mr Hussey was tightlipped as he flew in from Hong Kong.
The BBC's board of management and senior staff have publicly supported Mr Birt through letters to The Times newspaper.
The board meets on Thursday for the first time since the row began and Mr Hussey, Mr Birt and Lord Barnett will be asked to explain the situation.
Meanwhile, National Union of Journalists members at the BBC are demanding the dismissal of both Mr Birt and Mr Hussey.
BBC director general John Birt — at the centre of a row over policy decisions
Students celebrate Chaucer
ENGLISH literature students gathered to celebrate the works of one of Britain's most celebrated writers — Geoffrey Chaucer.
Also there to entertain and educate the 150 sixth-formers was The Chaucer Man, alias Trevor Eaton.
The event took place at the Harwich School, but students from Tendring High School, Clacton County High School, Colbayns School at Clacton and Brightlingsea's Colne High School, also joined in.
Jane Dow, head of English at Harwich School, said students were thoroughly entertained.
Chamber music for travellers
COMMUTERS on the platforms of Ipswich station will be serenaded on Thursday when top orchestral musicians from around the country take part in a ‘mass busk’.
British Rail has allowed several mainline stations to be used as venues for the event, to raise money for the charity Buskaid, which aims to take classical music to the children of South African townships.
Ten London stations will echo to the gentle strains of chamber music, along with Ipswich, Glasgow, Leeds, York, Newcastle and shopping precincts in Bolton and Wells.
This year the event also goes international with similar performances in Amsterdam and Recklinghausen in Germany.
Last year the charity raised £6,000.
Music day gets deeply dippy start
HERITAGE Secretary Peter Brooke yesterday joined pop group Right Said Fred to launch this year's National Music Day.
At the Hard Rock Cafe, London, Mr Brooke admitted he did not know the full repertoire of the band, famous for hits like I'm Too Sexy and Deeply Dippy .
Two members of the band posed with a laughing Mr Brooke, who said: ‘I know them considerably better than I did 15 minutes ago,’— but he declined to offer a rendition of any of their songs.
Now in its second year, National Music Day was born after a conversation between the then Arts Minister Tim Renton and Rolling Stone Mick Jagger.
Last year more than 1,500 events took place across the country.
This year, aided by grants from the Music Union, the Arts Council, and £60,000 from the National Heritage Department, even more are planned on June 26 and 27.
Jenny's painting in London exhibition
A WILDLIFE painting by Jenny Alderton can be seen at The Society of Women Artists' annual exhibition at Westminster Central Hall, London.
Jenny, who lives in Colchester, has more of her latest work on show at the Abberton Reservoir Wildfowl and Visitor Centre on Sunday.
Olwen Jones' new watercolours and etchings will be on display at Printworks Gallery, Colchester, from Saturday.
Armed only with a sketchbook, Olwen travels all over the country in search of botanical gardens and interesting conservatories.
New trust to boost painting and arts in Essex
ARTS provision in north-east Essex entered a new era yesterday with the first meeting of a trust to promote painting and sculpture in the area.
The trust was born out of the demise of the Minories art gallery in Colchester which closed in September when the Eastern Arts Board and Essex county and Colchester borough councils withdrew funding.
The three organisations have pledged a total of £116,000 this year to a new trust which will have representatives of the three groups on its board.
The trust's strategy may include putting paintings and sculpture in public places to be enjoyed by people not used to going to art galleries.
Another idea is increased use of the gallery in Trinity Street, Colchester.
The trustees of the Minories, however, still believe the gallery has a role to play in hosting exhibitions organised by the trust.
This week 14 paintings were put up for auction in London so the gallery could clear its debts and provide grants for artists, particularly students, in the region.
Three of the paintings — John Nash's ‘The Garden in Winter’, Roger Fry's ‘Willy Lott's Cottage at Flatford’, and ‘Harvester, Suffolk’ by Harry Becker — were withdrawn from the sale after Colchester council agreed to buy them.
Altogether the sale raised £86,192 — £16,192 more than expected.
Reverse head out
PINKY and Perky are making their big comeback after a 20-year absence from the nation's television screens.
The puppet pigs with the squeaky voices who captured the imagination of a generation of youngsters are appearing in a new ITV children's series on puppetry.
Each week, on The Pig Attraction , the porcine duo, seen left with creators Jan and Vlasta Dalibor, will sing a version of a 1990s song in their own inimitable fashion.
The ten-part series, which starts on May 6 and made by HTV, will feature many of television's favourite puppets, including Basil Brush, Sooty and Sweep and the characters from Gerry Anderson's cult Thunderbirds and Stingray shows.
Colour and contrasts in exhibits demand attention of viewer
Exploring the Third Dimension.
Town Hall Centre, Braintree, until March 23.
SCULPTURE and reliefs turn the rather drab civic grandeur of this room into a powerhouse of (mainly extrovert) art.
At least that is how such works as the large reliefs by Nichola Burrell come across.
Made from bits of waste wood, garishly painted, these are grotesque insights into Colchester Port activity.
Impactive colour also radiates from the papier mache dishes by Sugs Shelton and similarly modelled pop sculpture of groups of ordinary domestic items by Jon Atkinson.
A number of artists attempt to fight off the challenge of this abrasive colour, not unsuccessfully.
Keith Albarn works in applewood, oak, cherry and fruitwood to produce free-standing carvings of certain gracefulness, some soaring, others squat and brooding, all abstract.
Ian Worsley continues in similar but more ‘realistic’ fashion.
A nice piece of marquetry as a one-off looks strangely ill at ease amid the clamour.
Both free-standing and relief work in ceramic by Steve Downey is exceptional in craftsmanship, while Tim Holding invites us to pick the bones from Unstable Equilibrium , hanging weightily on the wall.
Jill Desborough's figures appear to be looking with disdain at what is going on around them as they prepare to walk off the set.
Maggie Butcher's Cockerel seems to be losing its tail feathers in surprise.
Town and Country , a surrealist spatial work by Michael Goodey, requires a complete side room to suggest the strangulation of the urban by the rural.
There is more pop surrealism by Anne Schwegmann-Fielding and clocks and candlesticks by Adrian Taylor are based on styles of the last 150 years.
There is nothing fuddy-duddy about this show.
You do not have a minute's peace.
Concert celebrates 50 years of making music
Colchester Choral Society's 50th Anniversary Concert, The Charter Hall, Colchester
FIFTY years of making music was celebrated in style on Sunday by the Colchester Choral Society and the Colchester  Sinfonia , enthusiastically conducted by Ian Ray.
Both Ian Ray and Dr W. H. Swinburne, the choir's founder, received presentations during the evening.
It was good to celebrate Colchester making music with a nationally-known Colchester composer, Alan Bullard.
A Song To St Helena was sung with clarity of diction and musical conviction.
Orchestra and choir ex-changed phrase and emotion with alacrity.
Stylishly orchestrated percussion punctuated Colchester's destruction and shimmering strings and glittering luminous choral writing its rebirth.
Wrapping
As Ian Caddy declaimed ‘Richard, By the Grace of God’ 20th Century music and Anglo-Saxon emotion came together.
The final ethereal prayer and solo duet were beautifully sung.
The first-half of the concert concluded with Eine Kleine Nacht Musik .
This performance needed more pace, a lighter touch throughout from the orchestra and much greater clarity from the first violins.
It was a lollipop still in its wrapping.
Haydn's Nelson Mass allowed the choir to relax and enjoy singing.
Disciplined training was evident, except perhaps in the Sanctus.
Success
Et Incarnatus Est showed the choir at its lyrical best.
Diction was often good and the intonation of the choir held up well in a difficult acoustic.
The solo quartet was not always well balanced, but individually the two female voices were particularly striking.
I am sure we would all wish the choir another 50 successful years.
Peter Newton 
Honoured Morse is tight-lipped as new show flags
Actor John Thaw outside Buckingham Palace yesterday after he collected his CBE from the Queen
ACTOR John Thaw was in a defiant mood yesterday over plummeting viewing figures for his new TV show as he collected an honour from Buckingham Palace.
He said the Queen commented on how different his role was as a genial Englishman abroad in A Year in Provence after Inspector Morse.
But after he collected a CBE he declined to be drawn into detailed discussion about the new BBC show which began with a healthy 13 million viewers three weeks ago, but is now believed to have dropped to around eight million and has been panned by the critics.
Mr Thaw said: ‘Obviously I would like more people to watch it, but I don't give a damn what the press say about it.’
Asked for further comment, he said: ‘I don't want to talk about this.’
But the veteran actor, who shot to stardom with his portrayal of irascible Oxford detective Inspector Morse later admitted he was delighted with the award.
Asked how Morse might have reacted to it, he said: ‘I think he would have been rather chuffed like I am.
He might not admit it but he would be.’
Radio broadcaster Jimmy Young was also at the Palace collecting a CBE before rushing off to prepare for his Budget special programme on Radio 2 later.
Leeds United skipper and inspirational midfield dynamo Gordon Strachan collected an OBE for his services to football.
Film actor Richard Todd also received an OBE.
Mr Todd, 73, who is currently on tour with a new play, said: ‘It is for good conduct and long service as far as I am concerned.’
Also receiving OBEs were ITN cameraman Nigel Thomson, twice wounded while working last year, who was at the investiture with his wife ITN newsreader Carol Barnes, and former England cricket manager Micky Stewart.
Recruits wanted to help organise arts exhibitions
ARTS enthusiasts are to get the chance to organise an important programme of exhibitions in Colchester.
A new trust set up to organise arts provision in north-east Essex wants to recruit a volunteer team to take control of the practical arrangements behind forthcoming exhibitions.
On Monday the first few members of the trust met to get it underway.
Colchester And District Visual Arts Trust (CADVAT) was set up when the Minories art gallery closed after Eastern Arts Board and Colchester borough and Essex county councils withdrew funding.
The three groups have agreed to give the new trust £116,000 this year and have each nominated members for the trust's board.
They are Essex county councillor Jeremy Lucas, Colchester borough councillor Hilary Davis, and Keith Albarn, the head of Colchester Institute's school of art and design.
Acting chairman Derek Round, the former chief executive of Colchester and East Essex Co-operative Society, said: ‘We are planning to appoint a mix of hands-on people with vision and commitment who have knowledge and expertise in all aspects of visual arts, including education as well as skills in marketing and business-related subjects.
‘We have agreed to run an open selection process to ensure that the panel is representative of our community and balanced in every way.’
All posts including those on the trust board are unpaid.
Anyone interested in becoming a member of the executive panel can write for details and an application form to Arts Development Services, Colchester Borough Council, PO Box 331, Town Hall, Colchester CO1 1GL.