

MP bids to stop Sunday sales ban
Church trade restriction ‘nonsense’
CHELMSFORD MP Simon Burns is seeking to prevent a ban being imposed on cathedrals and churches selling guidebooks to visitors on Sundays.
A private member's Bill which would reform the law on Sunday trading is currently being promoted in the Commons by Labour back-bencher Ray Powell.
It is supported by the Keep Sunday Special campaign but falls far short of the deregulation called for by many large stores currently opening on Sundays in breach of existing laws.
Mr Burns is supporting the Bill and, as one of the MPs involved in its detailed consideration at the committee stage, has opposed a number of amendments which would remove proposed restrictions.
However, at the committee's latest meeting he supported two amendments dealing with the status of church shops and newsagents.
At present, the Bill only allows churches and cathedrals to sell bibles, other religious books and recordings of religious music on Sundays.
Newsagents wishing to open for the sale of Sunday newspapers will have to register every five years in order to be exempted from the new law.
Both amendments were defeated, but Mr Burns said each matter would receive further consideration if the Bill progressed and he hoped the two issues could be resolved then.
‘We do not want to create a loophole in the law to allow churches to run a supermarket-type shop on their premises,’ said Mr Burns.
‘However, the law must not be seen to be an ass.
‘I do believe that in addition to selling religious materials like bibles, Chelmsford cathedral and other churches should be allowed to sell guidebooks to the cathedral, postcards of the cathedral and other ancillary items on a Sunday.
‘It would be an absurd nonsense for Chelmsford cathedral not to be allowed to sell these items to visitors to the cathedral.’
Mr Burns said newsagents — at present able to trade freely on Sundays — would face a costly and bureaucratic nightmare if they had to register every five years.
‘It is frankly ridiculous that the new Bill should be more restriction than the original 1950 Act,’ he said.
Priest to take up post at Vatican
A PARISH priest is leaving north Suffolk to take up an appointment at The Vatican.
Father Richard Yeo, a Benedictine monk whose parish covers a large area of north Suffolk and south Norfolk is leaving Bungay after seven years.
‘This is a sad announcement for me to make,’ he told his parishioners.
He will be working as an administrator in the Congregation for Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life.
Father Richard, who holds several administrative posts within the Benedictine order as well as being a parish priest, is a trained lawyer.
He will be succeeded at Bungay in the autumn by Father Edward Crouzet, currently Catholic Chaplain at the University of Bristol.