

Cuba's churches demand access to national media
In preparation for Cuba's fourth Party Congress on 10 October, the Ecumenical Council of Cuba has submitted a document asking permission for churches and religious organisations to have much greater access to the mass media.
Since 1962 they have had very few opportunities to express their opinions in the national press, and even less on radio and television.
They have been allowed, however, to publish their own newsletters and bulletins, but their circulation has been strictly limited.
Against this dearth of local information, Cuba has nevertheless been receiving religious broadcasts and publications from outside the country, but these are frequently alien to the Cuban people's own expression of the Christian faith.
In its submission to the Party Congress, the Ecumenical Council is stressing the need for religious publications and radio and television programmes which are sensitive to Cuban society and culture.
As a first step, it is requesting permission to publish a national magazine which would be distributed by the State.
It is also asking for air-time on radio and television, and for access to national and provincial newspapers and magazines.
The Ecumenical Council of Cuba, Calle 6, No 273, Entre 11 y 13, Vedado, La Habana 4, Cuba.
Tel (3) 7404.
Pravda goes independent
The staff of Pravda, the leading Soviet newspaper, declared themselves independent of the Communist Party and published their first non-partisan issue on 31 August.
Previously the official newspaper of the Central Committee of the Communist Party, it was closed on 24 August by President Boris Yeltsin who accused Pravda staff of supporting the recent coup attempt.
The staff denied the charge and declared themselves independent of any political party or movement.
Women's self-help groups, such as this one in Mozambique, will play an important part in a new network which aims to serve communicators in Africa's Portuguese- and Spanish-speaking countries.
In Portuguese- and Spanish-speaking Africa
New Media network formed
Communicators in Africa's Portuguese- and Spanish-speaking countries now have unprecedented opportunities to work together following the creation of a six-country network, with plans for joint activities including a regular information bulletin entitled Communication for Development.
The network was formed during a WACC-sponsored workshop entitled ‘Communication for Development: Reflection on Current Changes in Africa’, which was held in Luanda, Angola, 21–31 July.
The workshop was the first of a series designed to strengthen church-based communication networks in Portuguese-, Spanish- and French-speaking countries in Africa.
Participants elected a nine-member committee to form the basis of the network, representing Angola, Equatorial Guinea and Mozambique.
The other countries in the network are Cabo Verde, Guinea Bissau and São Tomé & Principe.
During the workshop discussions, participants stressed the lack of communication between these countries and English-speaking Africa, and called on Africans of all backgrounds to ‘contribute positively to current changes in Africa.’
They said that the changes involve refusing to consider Europe and North America as the ‘mirror’ and rejecting the negative image that has been projected about Africa.
‘We must strive to change the African situation by first changing our own perception of its causes and nature and then by forging a new but positive image of ourselves,’ they said, adding:
‘We need to start rebuilding our nations on the basis of our own interpretation of Africa's history and cultural traditions.’
Participants noted that the Church in Africa should democratise its own structures and encourage participatory communication from within, before urging others to do so.
They also called on the churches to teach their leaders and congregations to use alternative models of communication that are accessible to most people and that would enable communicators to get their message across most effectively.
Rev Hilmar Kannenberg, Chairperson of WACC's Latin America/Caribbean Regional Association attended the Angola workshop and shared ideas for new strategies for South-South cooperation.
Discussions focussed on education, training and the role of participatory radio in the process of social change.
For further information, contact Rev Daniel Ntoni-Nzinga of Angola, currently at: F-6 Luther King House, Brighton Grove, Rusholme, Manchester, UK.
Courses & Conferences
Sri Lanka's churches hold television workshop
The Communication Department of the National Christian Council of Sri Lanka (NCCSL) is holding a six-week television production workshop in Colombo, starting 14 October.
The workshop is supported by WACC.
The Protestant churches are keen to take maximum advantage of the free air-time granted to them by the government television network, especially since the NCCSL and the Roman Catholic Church are the only two Christian groups in Sri Lanka which have access to national radio and TV.
The 12 participants will represent both the Protestant and Catholic churches.
The State Television Corporation and the Independent Television Network will also be represented.
The course content includes TV camera work, direction, editing, scriptwriting and production.
Evenings will be devoted to viewing TV and films, group discussions and tutorials.
When they have completed the course, participants will be encouraged to contribute to the television programmes produced by the NCCSL.
Its main programmes are thoughts for the day and two regular programmes — one for children and one broadcast for adults on Sunday evenings.
The NCCSL's Department of Communication was set up in 1975, mainly to produce radio programmes in English Sinhala and Tamil and to promote audio visual aids to make Sunday School teaching more effective.
Its activities have since increased substantially to include telecasting and communication training.
The Department now offers classes in music, dance, art and sculpture as well as courses in theatre, scriptwriting for TV and film, journalism and creative writing.
It also holds workshops on media awareness training.
The NCCSL works closely with other religious and secular organisations in its efforts to make a contribution towards encouraging and assisting individuals and communities whose lives have been devastated by the ongoing violence and ethnic conflict that have wracked Sri Lanka for more than a decade.
Partner institutions include the Marga Institute; the Roman Catholic Centre for Religion and Society; the Buddhist group, Sarvodaya; the Hindu group, Paripalanai Sabha and Worldview International Foundation.
NCCSL Department of Communication, 368/7 Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 7, Sri Lanka.
Tel (1) 597636.
Africans stimulate media education
The African Council on Communication Education (ACCE) is holding a workshop on Women in Media Education in Harare, Zimbabwe, 4–8 November.
The main aims of the workshop are to stimulate the production of media education textbooks and resources for the African context, to equip more people, especially women, as trainers, and to draw up plans for a media education programme in southern and eastern Africa, starting in 1992.
Some 18 participants will be invited from Kenya, Lesotho, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe, seven of whom will be sponsored by WACC.
Teresita Hermano, WACC's Director of Communication Education, will also attend the workshop.
Most of the participants will be women who are involved in journalism and communication training.
One of their tasks at the workshop will be to assess media education resources used on other continents and to select those that are relevant for Africa.
They will then be in a position to identify the additional resources that are needed for Africa, and to discuss how these should be created.
Another aim of the workshop is to set up a group of media trainers and professionals in eastern and southern Africa.
African Council on Communication Education, PO Box 47495, Nairobi, Kenya.
Tel (2) 27043, 722089, 334244 ext 2068.
Telex 25148 ACCE.
Frankfurt Book Fair
Women in Christian publishing
‘Women in Christian Publishing’ is the theme chosen for the seminars organised by WACC to coincide with this year's Frankfurt Book Fair.
The pre-Fair seminar, scheduled for 2–7 October, will be a combination of talks, panel discussions and sharing in small, informal groups.
The thirteen women invited to take part in the seminar hold senior positions in publishing houses in Africa (Kenya, Nigeria, South Africa and Tanzania), Asia (Hong Kong, India, Malaysia, Philippines), Latin America (Argentina, Brazil), the Middle East (Cyprus) and the Pacific (Fiji, Papua New Guinea).
The two resource persons are Dr Musimbi Kanyoro, Executive Secretary for Women in Church and Society with the Lutheran World Federation, and Dr Tobe Levin, founder of the Frankfurt-based group Women's International Studies Europe.
Topics covered during the seminar include ‘An Analysis of Books on Women's Issues’; ‘Women's Contribution to Christian Literature’; ‘Women in the Media — a Global Perspective’ and ‘Women's Contribution to Children's Literature’.
The post-Fair seminar (14–15 October) will focus on sharing experiences of the Fair and evaluating the seminars.
Rev Horace Etemesi, Teresita Hermano and Rebecca Rivera of WACC's General Secretariat will also take part in the Book Fair and seminars.
WACC's co-sponsor for the seminars is the German Association of Protestant Churches and Missions, EMW.
The Fair itself will take place 8–14 October and its main theme will be Spain.
For further information contact WACC, 357 Kennington Lane, London SE11 5QY, UK.
Tel (71) 5829139.
Fax (71) 7350340.
Uganda takes steps against video porn
The Ugandan government has announced plans to encourage the production of videos in rural areas throughout the country to counteract the importation of ‘morally retrogressive films’.
The newly appointed Minister of Information and Broadcasting, Paul Etyang, told a gathering of Christian communicators in Kampala that he was particularly concerned about the widespread distribution of pornographic films which pose a danger to Uganda's youth.
The Minister decried the fact that the Film Censorship Board in his Ministry does not have the power to stop private screening of pornographic films in homes and video clubs.
He added, however, that his Ministry is looking into ways in which it could legally ban their importation.
Mr Etyang was speaking to journalists and broadcasters following a service held on 5 August to mark Communications Day.
The service had been organised by the Uganda Chapter of the African Catholic Press Union and the Catholic Association of Broadcasters and Cinematographers of Uganda.
The communications coordinator at the Catholic Church Secretariat, Fr Marcel Onen, pointed out in his speech that parents should exercise more control over their children's viewing habits.
In addition to videos, parents should also check the contents of music, novels and poems before allowing their children to come into contact with them.
From an article by David Musoke, a personal member of WACC in Uganda.
S African radio sets tone for popular media
Rhodes Music Radio (RMR) became the first campus radio station to broadcast live, when it transmitted to Grahamstown during the Standard Bank National Festival in July.
It marked a significant development in expanding popular access to the media in South Africa.
The initiative coincided with a ‘Switch-on Campaign’ by the campus radio stations, which is lobbying for more open access to broadcasting.
The campaign, spearheaded by the South African Students' Press Union, aims to use campus radio facilities to broadcast to the surrounding communities.
Regular transmission, in defiance of government restrictions, are due to begin in September.
Campus radio stations are among the only groups with the studio infrastructure required for broadcasting.
From SouthScan 
The Reverend Dr James Massey, General Secretary of the Indian Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, teaches publishing and bookselling at a workshop in Bangladesh.
Christian writers look to the future in Bangladesh
‘Writing is not just a means of passing on information but it also bridges gaps of misunderstanding and can help establish good ecumenical relations.’
With these words, leading Christian Bangladeshi editor, Susanta Adhikari, summed up his vision of Christian writing and publishing for participants at the fourth Bangladeshi Booksellers and Writers Workshop which was held in Dhaka on 25–27 July.
As members of a minority faith group in a predominantly Muslim country, Christian writers and publishers strive to express their beliefs without compromise, while at the same time maintaining an open dialogue with all sectors of the population.
Bangladesh's first ever democratic elections in February this year promised a freer media environment bringing with it the relaxation of curbs on communication activities by Christians and other minority faith groups (see Action March/April 1991), but the political situation has changed very little leaving Christian writers and publishers in a vulnerable position.
Journalist Jerom D'Costa discussed some of the problems in his lecture ‘Obstacles in the Way of Christian Publishers’.
He nevertheless expressed the hope that Christian writers would be able to work free from the constraints of prejudice and censorship.
Organised by the Department of Communication and Publication of the National Council of Churches (NCC) in Bangladesh, and supported by WACC, the ecumenical workshop brought together around 35 writers, publishers and booksellers from all over the country.
The Department has been organising seminars for writers, publishers and booksellers for the last fifteen years.
The Rev Dr James Massey, Chairperson of WACC's Asia Regional Association, presented two workshop sessions on ‘Publishing and Bookselling’ and ‘Christian Library Management’.
Another topic covered by the workshop was ‘Literature and the Bible’.
Participants discussed the feasibility of joining together in publishing a nationwide Christian newspaper and arranging a Christian book fair.
Feedback and evaluation of the two days' work was made before the participants dispersed.
The NCC was requested to arrange a similar seminar for publishers in 1992 inviting all Christian publishers in the country.
Department of Communication and Publication, National Council of Churches — Bangladesh, 395 New Eskaton Road, GPO Box 220, Dhaka 1000, Bangladesh.
Media barons rule Brazil
With presidential elections coming up in 1994, it is becoming increasingly clear that political power in Brazil today rests to a large degree with the owners of the mass media.
Latinamerica Press has reported that nearly 200 of the 550 members of Congress and the Senate are owners of or have ties to some media outlet.
A key factor in President Fernando Collor de Mello's February 1990 election victory was the backing he received from major television networks.
Now, Orestes Quércia, who would like to replace Collor de Mello as president, is hopeful of winning similar support.
He has been governor of the state of São Paulo, where he is mounting his own mass media network.
Currently, Mr Quércia owns two radio stations, two newspapers and two television stations.
WACC'S STUDY AND ACTION PROGRAMME (PART 2)
In the last issue of Action we published the first portion of the international Study and Action Programme which was launched in July this year by WACC's Central Committee.
It included an introduction to the Programme and the first theme, Communication Ethics.
The following three pages cover the themes The Right to Communicate, and Communication and Religion.
The remaining themes, Communication, Culture and Change; Communication Education, and Women's Perspectives, will appear in the next two issues of the newsletter.
The right to communicate
Communication ethics are based on certain truths that we hold as self-evident.
One of these principles is the right to communicate.
As several WACC documents point out, it is a fundamental human right because it corresponds to a basic human need both of the individual and for the development of communities and societies.
Human rights in general and the right to communicate in particular are bound up with the notion of democracy.
In fact, the implementation of the right to communicate is tantamount to the democratisation of communication on every level.
This debate, however, has to be set in the context of our world, of nation-states and transnational corporations, technologies of power and social movements.
Many Voices — One World and the movement towards a new information order have tried to concretise and apply the right to communicate in the real world, both on the national and international levels.
Though elusive, the goal of a new order is still valid.
Yet its circumstances have changed.
The support for a genuine ‘new order’ now comes largely from Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs).
Many of their concerns go beyond the scope of the original NWICO to include, for example, the relationship between the natural and human-made cultural/communication environments.
One of the tasks of this programme component is to strengthen the international debate and put NWICO issues, once again, on the public agenda.
This requires a strategy of networking on a wide scale.
Communication in the human rights debate
Communication as a basic human right means freedom of communication.
It thus has a direct social dimension, which other human rights (food, clothing, shelter, health care) do not have in the same way.
Communication as a human right therefore directly relates to human dignity.
‘Communication is God's unique gift to humankind, through which individuals and societies can become more truly human’(WACC's Manila Declaration).
Freedom of the press has a long history, but it is only since 1980 that the right to communicate and the freedom that it entails has been seen as the very centre of human rights, and indeed as a precondition for a meaningful implementation of other human rights.
This debate, still pursued by only a few specialists, has profound philosophical and theological implications.
WACC's Forum Programme should do all it can to facilitate the debate and draw practical and, if possible, legal conclusions.
Democratisation of public communication
The right to communicate privately and interpersonally is hardly disputed.
Not so the right to communicate publicly.
It is often held that this is the prerogative of governments, the economically or politically powerful, the leadership within the churches or simply those who can afford the means.
This notion has been challenged by all manner of grassroots organisations, often as part of their struggle for political emancipation.
‘Professional’ vs ‘people's’media
As the mass media evolved over the course of time, certain professional ‘rules’ were developed.
They reflect both class consciousness and a specific ideology of power.
The mass media are not only instruments of power but, in terms of content, they are wedded to people with power or of popular acclaim (cf the traditional criteria for news).
Thus a ‘professional culture’ of the mass media has emerged.
One of its tenets is that only well educated and professionally trained individuals have the competence to work with the mass media.
In practice this aura of professionalism has worked to the exclusion of the many who have no such education and training.
This notion has been challenged by advocates of ‘people's media’, first in Latin America then elsewhere.
Many have demonstrated that professional competence can be acquired quite simply and successfully by less educated people.
The tensions between these two approaches are inevitable.
But they should be recognised for what they try to achieve: quality and democratisation of the media.
In addition, there is a constant need to evaluate critically the ‘professional culture’ associated with the mass media.
Technologies of power and their globalisation
The advances in information technologies are now such that in most parts of the world the trend is towards monopolisation of both electronic and print media, and particularly, of the culture industry.
WACC's Forum Programme can only monitor what is happening in information technology, relying usually on secondary sources.
What the programme should do, however, is (a) draw attention to intermediate communication technology which functions independently;(b) foster those technologies which allow control by the people, such as audio and video recordings, community press and community radio, and alternative computer networks; and (c) contribute towards the development of communication policies based on the principle of people's sovereignty.
Information/communication technologies are directly related to economic resources and the economic bases of power.
Both have shifted substantially in the last decade, to the disadvantage of developing countries.
The state vs the market
Here opinions differ widely, depending on socio-economic circumstances and on political-ideological persuasions.
For some the state should ideally not get involved in public communication.
For others, governments are to provide the main resources for and be the principal actors in public communication.
In the past, the discussion on the role of the state in public communication has been bedevilled by the East-West conflict.
Now would be the time to put the debate on a more rational and realistic basis.
In all cases, however, state power in communication and elsewhere must be monitored and held in check, not only by the media but also by social movements.
Should the state merely have a ‘regulatory’ function in such matters as the allocation of frequencies for broadcasting, or should it have a more active role as guarantor of the mass media and their ‘public service’?
With the current emphasis on the ‘free market’ and recent experiences with deregulation of mass media, this question has assumed a new urgency.
But the argument from the South is different.
If governments do not support or even own both, governments are, in any case, the news media's most important social actors and their most ‘authoritative source’.
The debate on the role of the state has largely ignored the fact that state means more than government.
It comprises the entire body politic, with all its citizens and all their interest groups and social movements.
WACC should emphasize greater media responsibility towards the public as part of more general endeavours towards genuine democracy.
Role of social movements
In the last ten years social movements of all kinds have played a major part in the transition to democracy (and not only in Latin America and Eastern Europe), in human rights, environmental, peace and other movements.
We owe significant changes on many levels to the women's movement which dates back much further.
Yet those committed to change in communication structures have been slow to link up with these and other movements.
The relationship with what may be called the NWICO movement needs both study and experimentation.
Related to this is the concept of civil society (of Gramscian origin).
It points to some of the ethical roots of social action and the citizens' responsibilities towards a just society.
These reflections, still confined to the academic left, could be a fertile ground for a debate among and between social movements of various
types.
It could also reduce the danger inherent in single-issue campaigns.
Towards a ‘new order’
For over a decade the NWICO has been defamed partly because of the word ‘order’.
Even UNESCO reneged on the normative aspect of NWICO, advocating instead an ‘ongoing process’ without really saying where it should lead.
With the reduction of East-West tensions, the term ‘new order’ has re-emerged, particularly in the US and in Europe, albeit in a different context and with some imperial connotations.
This new development has not only alarmed WACC but also such professional organisations as the International Association for Mass Communication Research (IAMCR), the MacBride Roundtable and many regional bodies concerned with a ‘new order’.
Nevertheless, the quest for a new international order is there.
It is now up to WACC, the churches and NGOs to monitor the discourse critically and make their own contributions.
Global justice and therefore peace will, at least in part, be based on the implementation of the right to communicate.
Communication and religion
So far the WACC Forum Programme has concentrated only on two or three aspects under this heading, namely, communication and theology, the electronic church and the introduction of communication studies in theological education.
Yet the field of inter-relationships is much larger and more intricate.
In addition, if we want to be true to our ecumenical commitment, it should not exclude religions other than Christianity.
A programme of such ecumenical scope could provide a new spiritual and intellectual impetus for WACC's self-understanding and commitment.
Religion has much deeper roots, and its influence is much more pervasive than what is commonly seen and interpreted as ‘religious’.
This also applies to the media.
But, then, as the Christian Principles of Communication recall, the ‘Spirit ‘blows where it pleases’(John 2:8), and no-one, neither church nor religious group, can claim to control it.’
WACC aims to support media projects which address those issues of society which are crucial from the perspective of God's reign.
In Papua New Guinea, for example, video productions are increasingly used by the churches to tackle social concerns.
Religious roles and meanings of media
This is a vast new field of communication studies, which is mainly explored by semiotics and cultural studies.
It comprises such questions as the covert but conscious religious contents of ‘secular’ media or media messages.
Some scholars study the ‘eschatology’ of advertising messages that portray hamburgers as ‘heavenly’, washing powder as the source of almost spiritual ‘purity’or exotic holidays as a quest for ‘paradise’.
There are a great many such ‘eschatological’ deceptions which, cumulatively, play a religious role in a materialistic age.
But there are other implicit religious messages which are genuine; these are modern religious parables.
They are especially prevalent in some feature films, television dramas and documentaries.
Media in addition assume certain religious roles in the perception of viewers, listeners and readers.
They may either be conceived as the ultimate arbiters of truth and values (a function once held by the churches) or they may meet certain religious or psychological needs.
WACC can ill afford to ignore the multiplicity of religious or pseudo religious meanings which are part of today's media world, no matter how vague they may be.
Churches' media
WACC has been in the business of supporting media whose main aim is to foster religious spirit or the nurture of faith.
From the churches' point of view they are ‘religious media’, though a considerable part of their contents may serve to mirror ecclesiastical life.
Yet throughout its recent history WACC has tried to broaden the perspective so as to include life as a whole and those issues of society which are crucial from the perspective of God's reign.
Nevertheless the specific problems and prospects of the churches' own media need to be studied in greater depth.
What, for example, are the principles for religious news?
Or what is the role of the aesthetic, or the work of art, in religious communication?
Or to what extent should a religious discourse be developed or avoided in favour of every-day language?
Some churches have explored ‘alternative’ media or new formats of religious communication, pioneered especially in sound broadcasting.
Yet little systematic work has been done on such alternative formats, nor on the religious symbols employed by them.
Another dimension of religious expression is art in all its forms.
Its conveyance of meaning is complicated, especially in religious media, but its aesthetic value may have a holistic and emotional dimension which adds a special quality.
This raises the question of the pertinence of churches and Christians in their own media productions as well as in those ‘secular’ media especially concerned with artistic values.
Communication and spirituality
Workers in ‘secular’ and church-related media have often tried to identify the broad parameters of their specifically religious contributions.
Such reflections have stipulated (a) the need for pastoral care,(b) the cultivation of a Christian consciousness and responsibility for the media, and (c) the development of the communicative potential of their personalities.
The assumption has been that a communication worker who is imbued by his/her faith will inevitably wish to express it in a manner which is sensitive, sincere and creative.
To succeed in this, a specific faith-centred spirituality needs to be cultivated and shared.
This is a new challenge for WACC.
Media and evangelisation
This topic has lingered as a question over many WACC activities, and a significant contribution has been made by the WACC-initiated study on the mass media and village life in India.
Some theological questions have been raised in connection with American-style televangelism and with religious broadcasting of the public service type.
Yet many issues remain unanswered.
Studies should be made on intermediate models of televangelism as they emerge from some of the mainline churches.
Likewise the instrumentalist approach to communication, as it is still prevalent among most churches, needs further examination.
More recently, attention has been drawn to the evangelising potential of the aesthetic.
Certain works of communication have an artistic quality which engages the psyche of viewers, listeners and readers in a deep way, coming close to a religious experience.
The same holds true for biographical representations.
They may have a lasting impact.
Communication and religious fundamentalism
The analysis of this subject area should go beyond the use and misuse of mass media but explore the phenomenon in greater depth in its context.
There is a host of related social and socio-psychological factors associated with it, including the need for cultural identity and for open religious expression.
Religious fundamentalism should further be analysed in the context of ideology and political pressure, namely, exploitation, including the phenomenon of right-wing religious movements.
On the other hand we should ask ourselves what the mainline churches can learn from pentecostals and charismatics about their own communication and about new possibilities of passing on faith.
Religious fundamentalism does not only exist within Christianity but also in other religions, especially those based on a scripture.
In addition, there is fanaticism and lack of religious tolerance, which has become a major human rights problem in many parts of the world.
These manifestations should, however, be studied in their social and political contexts.
Communication studies in theological education
WACC has acquired a certain expertise in this field, but its activities so far have been confined to a few countries or sub-regions.
Though the demand is great, the danger is that we may want to do too much too quickly.
Experience has shown that the local appropriation of this programme often requires a long process of gestation and steady, patient work.
A special problem is the teaching of homiletics.
It usually has low priority in theological education, is disconnected from communication studies and lacks the rich theoretical input which modern rhetorical insight could provide.
Nor is homiletics immune from the pitfalls of what some have called an ‘authoritative and class-conscious church’(Harare Statement on Communication in Theological Education).
Communication and theology
There are many intersections between communication and theology, covering many subject areas in both fields of studies.
Communication issues can be analysed from theological perspectives.
Likewise, important theological issues can and should be studied by communication scholars, such as how faith is communicated.
A great deal has already been written on this field (see Christian Communication: An Annotated Bibliography, Westport, Conn., Greenwood Press, 1989, 387pp), and several organising frameworks for this study have been developed, partly through WACC's impulses in the mid-1980s.
Yet the field is so rich that new insights emerge year after year which, alas, are largely restricted to specialists.
WACC's work in this area has now been resumed and greater efforts have to be made to popularise the most important findings.
Books & Resources
‘Media Development’ on Gulf War coverage
A special issue of WACC's journal,Media Development , entitled ‘Reporting the Gulf War’, will be published in mid-October.
The issue responds to the high levels of concern among communicators concerning the propaganda and various shades of ‘truth’ that filled both the electronic and print media during the war.
Published in cooperation with the International Association for Mass Communication Research (IAMCR), the issue is based on research and articles presented at a seminar on ‘Reporting the Gulf War’ which was organised by the IAMCR in Istanbul, Turkey, last June.
Media Development is published four times a year and each issue concentrates on a specific theme.
The annual subscription, available from WACC, costs £12.50.
Individual issues cost £3.
New radio opportunities in UK
In Britain, the 1990 Broadcasting Act has significantly altered the way in which the Christian faith can be represented in radio programmes.
In his booklet Air Your Faith Edwin Robertson urges the churches to take advantage of the new opportunities that exist, as well as being sensitive to the difficulties.
Air Your Faith gives the background to religious broadcasting in Britain and outlines the current situation.
It includes details of some church-related radio training courses available in the UK and also gives a list of organisations concerned with religious broadcasting.
Edwin Robertson is a Baptist minister, writer and broadcaster.
He was Assistant Head of Religious Broadcasting at the BBC between 1949 and 1956, and in 1963 became the first Executive Director of the World Association for Christian Broadcasting (WACB), WACC's predecessor.
Air Your Faith: The Growing Opportunities for Christians in Radio by Edwin Robertson is published by Jay Books, 30 The Boundary, Langton Green, Tunbridge Wells, Kent TN3 0YB, UK. 20 pages.
Cost: £1.75.
Ecumenical dictionary published
The World Council of Churches has published a Dictionary of the Ecumenical Movement , which includes more than 600 entries written by leading figures from every Christian confession and all parts of the world.
Many of the contributors are members and friends of WACC, and several references are made to WACC in various articles on the history of the ecumenical movement, including a piece by the General Secretary, Rev Carlos A Valle.
The dictionary's articles cover a wide range of topics connected with the ecumenical movement.
Articles on doctrinal themes such as God, Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit show how the churches have converged in their teachings and also point out the areas of difference that remain.
There are entries on organisations and personalities in the history of the ecumenical movement, and a series of articles on ethical issues such as peace, bioethics, just war and human rights.
Also included is information on ecumenical activity in each region of the world and in the various world communions.
Detailed indexes of subjects and names refer readers to sources of information on a specific topic or person, and the text is illustrated by 130 photographs.
Dictionary of the Ecumenical Movement , edited by Nicholas Lossky, José Míguez Bonino, John S Pobee, Tom F Stransky, Geoffrey Wainwright and Pauline Webb, is published by WCC Publications, PO Box 2100, 1211 Geneva 2, Switzerland.
Hardcover, 1212 pages.
Cost: US$79.95.
Communication and Filipino society
Communication and Society: The Philippine Context is a compilation of papers on diverse aspects of communication and their relationship to national development.
The book aims to chart the direction in which communication in the Philippines can ‘break away from the lingering structures and controls of the past regime towards the democratic, just and humane future Filipinos yearn for.’
Communication and Society forms part of a series of books distributed by the Asian Institute of Journalism.
The aim of the series is to make more locally-written educational texts available to communication students, researchers and practitioners.
Communication and Society: The Philippine Context , edited by Florangel Rosario-Braid (294 pages), is available from the Asian Institute of Journalism, SCC Chevalier Building, 3892 R Magsaysay Boulevard, Corner Santol Road, Sta Mesa, Manila, Philippines.
Tel (2) 607659 and 619666 to 69 ext 25, 26, 28 and 29.
Filipino trainers directory published
A Directory of Communication Trainers has been published by People in Communication, the network of communication organisations in the Philippines.
It is also available on IBM diskette.
The directory lists resource persons and their respective fields of expertise.
It is designed to serve individuals and groups involved in all aspects of communication, including research, production, publication and training.
Directory of Communication Trainers costs approximately US$3 (printed copy) and US$1 (diskette) and is available from People in Communication, Inc, 3rd floor, Sonolux Building, Ateneo de Manila University Campus, Loyola Heights, Quezon City, Philippines.
Tel (2) 982541 to 45 ext 366 and 362.
Fax (2) 565953.
Media programme tackles problems faced by Egypt's youth
Drug addiction and unemployment, which have reached alarming proportions since the Gulf War, are two major problems confronting young people in Egypt today.
In addition, young Christians often face a crisis in their faith, because employers tend to discriminate against the country's Christian minority.
It is against this backdrop that the Coptic Orthodox Church is running a three-year programme of publications and audio visual resources designed to address specific problems and to encourage young people in their life and faith.
The programme, set up with WACC support this year, is organised by the Bishopric of Youth of the Coptic Orthodox Patriarchate in Cairo.
It is designed for Christians of all denominations in both urban and rural areas, and aims to help develop a Christian youth movement in Egypt.
The programme's main focus is a series of booklets and magazines that deal with social and spiritual issues, and which also encourage a sense of mutual support among young Christians.
Ten booklets and two magazines have been published so far.
The Bishopric of Youth was established in 1980, under the leadership of Bishop Moussa, as an expression of concern for Egypt's young people.
It runs various activities throughout the 45 dioceses of the Coptic Orthodox Church, each of which is supervised by a group of young volunteers.
One of its most important activities is a Leadership Training Programme which aims to train a total of 700 animators.
Communication skills, particularly writing, play a major part in their training.
Bishopric of Youth, Coptic Orthodox Patriarchate, PO Box 136 Abbassyia, Cairo, Egypt.
Tel (2) 2844186.
New responsibilities for WACC staff members
María Teresa Aguirre, project assistant for Latin America/Caribbean, has assumed additional responsibilities for the Spanish- and Portuguese-speaking countries of Africa.
Her first task was to attend a workshop on Communication and Development, which was organised for Portuguese- and Spanish-speaking countries in Africa in Luanda, Angola, last July.
She continues with her responsibilities on the Latin America/Caribbean desk, and will attend the WACC-LA/C Assembly in Santiago, Chile, in October.
Ann Davies, who set up and catalogued WACC's library, has taken on broader responsibilities in relation to WACC's Forum Programme.
In addition to continuing to maintain the library, she has now been appointed book review editor of Media Development, and is also undertaking various other assignments.
People
The Reverend Carlos Tamez, a Presbyterian pastor from Mexico, is the new General Coordinator of Alfalit Latinoamericano, based in Costa Rica.
He succeeds Alejandro Figueroa Ventura who returns to the Dominican Republic as Director of Alfalit Dominicano.
Both organisations form part of Alfalit Internacional, which coordinates programmes in grassroots education and communication.
The Brazilian pastor Carlos Dreher has been awarded the 1991 Wilhelm-Sebastian-Schmerl prize for his outstanding contribution to Protestant media work in a German speaking context.
The prize is awarded annually by the Rothenburger Sonntagsblatt (Rothenburg Sunday News) in Germany.
Mr Dreher is responsible for broadcasting with the Lutheran Church in Brazil (EKLBB).
Stephen Webb, Editor of the Christian Conference of Asia's magazine, CCA News, left Hong Kong in August to return to his native Australia.
The magazine will be edited by Clement John until a new Communications Secretary is appointed next June.
Fr Tom Cassidy, an Australian Dominican priest, will succeed Fr James Lyons as Director of the New Zealand media organisation, Catholic Communications, in 1992.
Fr Lyons has held the position for ten years.
Fr Cassidy, who is currently a parish priest in Auckland, New Zealand, has completed research on media criticism and on ethical standards in the news media.
Catholic Communications publishes the newsletter In Touch.