

MASSACRE OF CHURCH GOERS
AT LEAST 19 DEAD IN PEACEFUL RELIGIOUS PROTEST
ZAIRE: At least 19 people were killed when soldiers opened fire on a peaceful religious demonstration in the capital, Kinshasa, on 16 February.
Eye-witnesses claimed that troops of the elite Special Presidential Division used rifles, hot-water cannons, metal-tipped canes and tear gas to break up the crowd, many of whom were reportedly carrying rosaries and prayer books.
At least 13 bodies were later carried to a nearby church and up to a hundred casualties were admitted to hospital.
The march, organised by members of the Roman Catholic Church, followed Sunday services for ‘Peace and hope’ in Zaire.
The demonstrators were calling for the resumption of the National Conference, suspended by the government in January, which had been set up by more than 130 political parties to review and undertake reform on Zaire's one-party political system.
The government has repeatedly used violence to suppress opposition demands that President Mobutu Sese Seko's powers be curtailed.
AI has called on the authorities to initiate an independent inquiry into the incident and to bring those responsible for extrajudicial executions to justice.
No official action has been taken.
Above: Zairian troops opened fire on the peaceful demonstration.
Right: Five victims of the killings, including a 10-year-old boy.
BISHOP FAN XUEYAN DIES
CHINA: Fan Xueyan, who spent a total of 28 years in prison for remaining faithful to the Vatican-loyal Catholic Church in China, died on 16 April 1992, aged 85.
Bishop Fan Xueyan was described by one of his fellow bishops as someone who ‘suffered a lot, spending his life between prison and freedom, more or less always under surveillance’.
He was elected — in absentia— as chairman of the clandestine bishop's conference established in November 1989, as a gesture of respect from the leaders of what has been called the largest illegal religious group.
All the participants in the secret group were themselves arrested within days.
Like most Chinese bishops, Fan refused to bow to state pressure to accept the Communist Party of China or the Chinese Catholic Patriotic Association, which renounced the Vatican.
He refused to consecrate new bishops independent of Rome as demanded by the Chinese authorities from April 1958, and was arrested.
He remained in prison until 1979.
On his release, he resumed his clandestine pastoral work in his diocese of Baoding, consecrating three bishops and ordaining hundreds of priests.
He and another bishop, Jian Zhigou, were described at  a special 1990 party meeting in Hebei province as being ‘the leading centre for the underground Catholic Church throughout China’.
CHICO MENDES MURDER CASE ANNULLED
BRAZIL: Darly Alves da Silva, the man convicted and sentenced to 19 years in prison for ordering the murder of Brazilian trade unionist and environmental leader Chico Mendes, had his conviction annulled by the Justice Tribunal in Acra on 28 February.
According to Index on Censorship , lawyers claimed that there had been ‘insufficient evidence’ and that the outcome of the trial had been influenced by ‘external pressures’which amounted to an international campaign against ranchers in the Amazon (see pages 18–19).
Chico Mendes was internationally known for organising Amazon's rubber tappers to defend their livelihood against the encroachments of landowners and timber merchants.
The trial of his killers has been regarded as a test of the political will of the authorities to put an end to the climate of impunity prevalent in the rural areas of Brazil, where scores of peasants and their leaders have been killed by hired gunmen.
On the eve of the Earth Summit in Rio this month, the Brazilian authorities' persistent failure to bring the perpetrators to justice is acutely embarrassing for the Brazilian government.
Alves da Silva remains in jail pending a new trial this year.
INTERNATIONAL NEWS
CARNAGE IN WEST AFRICA
STUDENTS RAPED, CIVILIANS KILLED
Rebel suspect captured by government forces in Pujehun District, Southern Province
SIERRA LEONE: Unarmed civilians have been extrajudicially executed, tortured and held incommunicado in a hidden and brutal civil war in Sierra Leone.
In March AI representatives travelled to the south east of Sierra Leone and uncovered serious human rights abuses by both government forces and armed rebels.
An invasion force had entered Sierra Leone from the part of Liberia controlled by the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL).
Led by the NPFL, it included Sierra Leonean opponents of the government of President JS Momoh, head of the one-party state in Sierra Leone.
The invaders captured towns and villages in the Southern and Eastern Provinces, killing hundreds of people who refused to help them.
Since then, the rebels and the armed forces of Sierra Leone have been locked in combat.
As the government forces recaptured towns and villages, the army reportedly held ‘kangaroo courts’ and executed anyone suspected of joining or assisting the invasion force.
Villagers were asked to point out rebels and their supporters.
If these suspects could produce no witnesses to vouch for them, they were taken away and shot, usually in public.
COTE d'IVOIRE: Opposition leaders and student representatives were among more than 240 people arrested after violence broke out during demonstrations in the capital, Abidjan, on 13 and 18 February.
Most remain in detention without charge or trial.
The 13 February demonstration was organised by students after the government refused to act on the findings of a Commission of Inquiry into an apparently punitive army raid on Yopougan university campus in May 1991.
The commission concluded that the army's Chief of Staff had personally ordered the raid, in which three women were raped and many students were severely beaten, and had recommended that action be taken against him.
Opposition parties, trade unions and the Ligue ivoirienne des Droits de l'Homme (LIDHO)— the Ivorian League of Human Rights — organised a second demonstration on 18 February.
STUDENT TORTURED, REPORT CONFIRMS
TUNISIA: Islam student leader Faisal Barakat, who died in custody in October 1991, was tortured to death, according to an expert analysis of the official autopsy report commissioned by AI from a professor of forensic medicine.
In his opinion, Faisal Barakat ‘died as a result of the forceful insertion of a foreign object at least six inches into the anus.
‘The entire pattern of injury is that of a systematic physical assault and very strongly corroborates the allegation of ill-treatment and torture that has been made.’
AI has repeatedly expressed concern about the case to the Tunisian Government since October 1991 but the Tunisian authorities have continued to insist that Faisal Barakat had never been arrested and that he died in a road accident.
NEWS IN BRIEF 
SRI LANKA
MORE people have ‘disappeared’ in Sri Lanka than in any other country in the world, the 48th session of the UN commission on Human Rights was told in February.
The UN Working Group on Disappearances, which visited Sri Lanka last year, has recorded 12,000 ‘disappearances’ there since 1983.
CAMEROON
As many as 70 inmates are reported to have died from malnutrition and medical neglect at Tchollir prison camp between December 1991 and March 1992.
All are believed to have been sentenced to death for criminal offences but a warrant had not been signed for their executions and some were still appealing against their conviction.
MALAYSIA
SEVEN supporters of the Parti Bersatu Sabah (PBS), United Sabah Party, continue to be held in detention without trial under provisions of the Internal Security Act of 1960 (ISA).
Vincent Chung, Jeffrey Kitingan, Ariffin Haji Hamid, Benedict Topin, Albinus Yudah, Abdul Rahman Ahmad and Wencelous Damit Undikai were arrested in 1990 and 1991 for alleged involvement in a plot ‘to take Sabah out of the Federation of Malaysia’.
No evidence was supplied.
PERU
SOME 60 people, including ministers during the government of former president Alan Garcia Prez, parliamentarians, lawyers, trade unionists, journalists and a member of the judiciary, were detained on 6 April by the security forces after President Fujimori declared a state of emergency.
The vast majority were released within days.
SYRIA
FOURTEEN human rights activists were sentenced on 17 March to prison terms ranging from three to 10 years after a trial which fell below international standards for fair trial.
Three others were acquitted.
The charges including disseminating false information and withholding information.
The evidence against them consisted of confessions said to have been extracted under torture.
‘INSTIGATING ETHNIC DIVISIONS’
MONGOLIAN TEACHERS DETAINED WITHOUT TRIAL
CHINA: Huchin Togos, a schoolteacher, and Wang Manglai, a Mongolian-language specialist, have reportedly been detained without charge or trial since May 1991 following a crackdown by the regional authorities against two organisations accused of ‘instigating ethnic division’.
AI knows of at least 15 others detained in connection with this crackdown, but the true number of arrests could be higher.
In May 1991 the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) alleged that Huchin Togos and Wang Manglai headed illegal organisations called the ‘Preparatory Committee of the Ih Ju League Ethnic Culture Association’ and the ‘Institute for Ethnic Modernization in Bayan Nur League’.
The CCP document alleged that the two illegal organisations had held meetings in private homes and had drafted, painted and distributed ‘illegal propaganda’ which referred to the ‘unification and survival of the Mongol nationality’.
The groups were also accused of seeking contracts ‘within and without the Autonomous Region’ and of aspiring to ‘change the nature of socialism’in Inner Mongolia ‘in order to overthrow the leadership of the CCP’.
Unofficial sources report that the two organisations aimed to research and develop Mongol culture and that their activities were public.
THREE years after the suppression of peaceful pro-democracy protests, during which hundreds of civilians were massacred in Beijing on 4 June 1989, human rights violations continue unabated in China.
There have been no changes to the laws under which human rights violations are perpetrated and no attempt to introduce fundamental safeguards to prevent certain violations, such as the use of torture to extract confessions.
Thousands of political prisoners remain imprisoned; unfair trials and ill-treatment of prisoners are still common; and the number of executions has risen alarmingly.
AI documented more than 1600 death sentences, including over 1000 executions, during 1991.
Official control over religious practice intensified in 1991.
Scores of Roman Catholics, Protestants, Buddhists and Muslims arrested in the past two years remain in detention.
In the Tibet Autonomous Region, thousands of Tibetan nationalists have been detained since demonstrations in favour of Tibet's independence began in September 1987 (see pages 12–13, 16).
SAD RECORD OF ABUSE IN BURUNDI
BURUNDI: The Security forces committed gross and widespread human rights violations in 1991, especially following a series of rebel attacks in late November, according to an AI fact-finding team which visited Burundi in February.
Hundreds of extrajudicial executions, widespread torture and dozens of ‘disappearances’ were reported, but no public enquiry into any one of these incidents has been held.
The AI representatives met government and security officials, including ministers and the armed forces' Chief of General Staff, and interviewed victims of torture and other abuses, as well as other witnesses and human rights activists.
AI also obtained detailed information about specific incidents in which the army or gendarmerie killed unarmed civilians, including the extrajudicial execution by soldiers of 11 workers at a Roman Catholic seminary in Bujumbura.
Prisoners had also been killed, including several dozen at Bubanza Gendarmerie who were gagged and then beaten to death with pieces of pipe.
More than 30 people arrested at the end of November 1991 are reported to have ‘disappeared’, raising fears that they to have also been killed.
People arrested late in 1991 were beaten at the time of their arrest and tortured and beaten while in detention.
During interrogation some detainees were made to kneel for long periods, in some cases on bottle tops and pebbles, and received severe beatings on their backs, the soles of their feet and hands.
Nearly 500 people arrested after the rebel attacks were still being held at the time of the AI visit.
Virtually none was informed of any charges against them or whether they would be brought to trial.
RELEASES
GHANA
MAJOR Courage Quarshigah and Jacob Yidana together with 15 other political prisoners were released by Ghana's ruling Provisional National Defence Council on 20 March 1992.
However, AI remains concerned that other political detainees continue to be held without charge or trial.
They include four prisoners detained with Major Courage Quarshigah without charge or trial since September 1989: Edward Akakpo, Alhaji Mohammed Abdulai Yusif, Joy Cudjoe and Simon Sablah.
Other political prisoners released including Andrew Kwame Pianim, an economist, businessman and former chief executive of the Cocoa Marketing Board, Bombardier Mustapha Mohamed, one of Ghana's longest held political prisoners, detained without trial since December 1982, and Corporal Stanley Okyere and three others who had been held without charge or trial since 1983 (see AMNESTY, April/May, p10).
ISRAEL
ABIE Nathan, the peace activist jailed for 18 months for ‘openly meeting with Yasser Arafat’, has been released, according to the Israeli Embassy in London.
His release was conditional on his agreement not to hold further meetings with Arafat or other members of the PLO.
Mr Nathan is allowed to continue holding his political views.
The Israeli authorities did not demand from him an expression of regret.
KENYA
PRISONERS of conscience George Anyona, Edward Oyugi, Ngotho Kariuki and Augustine Kathangu were released on bail on 14 February 1992 pending their appeal which is expected to be heard later this year.
The four had each been sentenced to seven years' imprisonment on 10 July 1991 for holding a ‘seditious’ meeting in a Nairobi bar.
All four are still suffering ill-health due to torture, poor diet and insanitary prison conditions.
HOME NEWS
VOTING AGAINST PINOCHET
CHILE'S ONLY WOMAN MAYOR SPEAKS OF LAST CHANCE TO STOP ‘EYES AND EARS’ OF DICTATORSHIP
The council elections to be held in Chile in June will provide the first opportunity in 20 years for Chileans to vote against the ‘eyes and ears’ of the military dictatorship, according to Maria Antonieta Saa, the human rights activist and Chile's only woman mayor.
Speaking in London recently at the invitation of War on Want, Maria was herself imprisoned by Pinochet's regime for holding pro-democracy views.
She was spared further abuse — possibly torture — only after international outrage put pressure on the regime for her release.
She survived to become the only woman appointed by the Aylwin Government to one of 15 council seats which were ‘vacated’ by the Pinochet regime, whose members retain the remaining 320.
Maria's own imprisonment sharpened her resolve to secure a just and dignified position for women in Chilean society: ‘We were kept in a section for long term common male prisoners.
There was a small patio where we could walk, but it was surrounded by men shouting at us and harassing us’.
She claims male political prisoners were kept in ‘a sort of hotel’.
Domestic violence is a major social problem in Chile.
Indeed, the slogan of the Partido por la Democracia (PPD)— the party she helped found after the demise of the Pinochet regime — is ‘Democracy in the Country and at Home’.
Poverty is one problem which she has worked tirelessly to alleviate: ‘Even the political right accepts the need for tax reform to pay for new housing’, she said.
Touring around London, she described Islington council flats as ‘a luxury solution’ to the housing problem in Chile where more than a million people in a population of 13m are homeless.
WILLIAMS FREED ON PAROLE
Vic Williams, the British soldier imprisoned for desertion on the eve of the Gulf War, was released on parole on 23 April after serving just over half of his 14-month sentence.
Williams was adopted by AI as a prisoner of conscience, detained for expressing his conscientiously held beliefs.
Williams told a press conference at the IS last month that he planned to study law from September.
The IS said it had received hundred of letters campaigning for Williams' release from all over the world.
Due to the ‘own country’ status of Williams' case, British members were not able to campaign on his behalf.
Letters addressed to the AIBS concerning Vic Williams have been passed on to the IS.
Please address any further letters to AI 
Ed's Note: the headline ‘Selective Conscience’ in the April/May issue was not intended in any way to call Vic Williams  ' position into question.
NEWS BRIEFS
AIBS: ORKNEY-BOUND?
Are you interested in where the British Section office is?
Do you think the section should decentralise?
If you have views please write in and request the Decentralisation Questionnaire (available from mid-July — deadline for replies, 30 September).
Address your request to   Please mark your envelopes ‘ Decentralisation ’ in the top left hand corner.
COMING FILMS
FILM SHOW AT THE RIVERSIDE STUDIOS, LONDON ON SATURDAY JULY 4.
SUMMER ART RAFFLE
NO one can lose in this Summer Raffle to be held on 20 June and organised by the Ipswich Group.
As many tickets will be sold as there are artworks on offer, so everybody gets a prize.
The ticketholder of the first ticket drawn has the first choice of artwork.
Tickets £30 each.
DUNAMIS DELAY
DUNAMIS, the group which regularly holds talks at St James's, Piccadilly, has had to delay its Summer Programme of public events until September.
Its series of discussions on ‘The New Europe’ will run over three Wednesday evenings, starting 23 September.
Contact    
Punting on the Cam: Ali Bourequat (left), who spent 19 years in Moroccan jails, with his daughter and Dan Jones, head of campaigns (see pages 9 and 11)
ASYLUM BILL REINTRODUCED
AI MAKES RECOMMENDATIONS FOR BILL'S OVERHAUL
THE controversial Asylum Bill, abandoned when the General Election was called, is to be reintroduced.
‘A Bill will be presented to enable applications for asylum in the United Kingdom to be determined quickly and effectively’, the Queen told parliament in her speech on 6 May outlining the new government's policies.
It is generally thought that the new Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, wants to review the Bill introduced by Kenneth Baker, his predecessor.
The previous Bill, intended to ensure ‘a substantial acceleration and simplification of the procedures used to deal with applications for asylum’, met with widespread criticism from the House of Lords, UN High Commissioner for Refugees, the Archbishops of Canterbury and Westminster, the Bar Council and many organisations including AI.
The Government's rationale for introducing such radical legislation was to curb the enormous rise in asylum application in the UK over the last few years.
According to the Home Office statistics the number of people applying for asylum in the first quarter of 1992 more than halved, from 3730 a month last year to 1730 a month this year.
AIBS urges the Home Secretary to relax the tough measures that would have been introduced had the Bill not been dropped.
The AIBS Refugee Office has written to Kenneth Clarke and Junior Home Office Minister Charles Wardle calling for an early meeting to discuss its concerns over the content of the new Asylum Bill.
In its letter, the Refugee Office makes several recommendations for inclusion in the new Bill:
Examination and determination: The government should acknowledge that the handling of asylum applications is best carried out by qualified interviewers with knowledge of conditions in the applicants' country.
Appeals Procedure: Appellants ought to have adequate time in which to prepare their appeals, and an effective opportunity to present a counter-argument to the reasons for refusal.
Legal Advice: Access to independent legal advice, assistance and representation is essential to any refugee determination process.
Safeguards on Detention: The Government should acknowledge that, in keeping with international standards for the protection of refugees, the detention of asylum applicants should be avoided.
According to refugee experts, existing procedures failed to identify and protect genuine refugees.
Those envisaged under the previous Asylum Bill were thought to be inoperable.
The AIBS Refugee Office has incorporated its asylum recommendations into a booklet, Towards A Credible Asylum Process.
Copies are available from the Refugee Office for £1.20 including p&p.
MORE PEOPLE OPPOSE THE DEATH PENALTY
More people in Britain oppose than support the reintroduction of the death penalty for murder, according to the latest poll conducted by Gallup to seek opinions on the restoration of capital punishment.
AI believes this may be the first time a poll has shown such opposition.
When asked if the death penalty should be reintroduced for persons convicted of murder, 44 per cent said ‘No’ while 42 per cent said ‘Yes’.
Asked if the death penalty should be brought back for terrorist murderers, a majority supported its return.
However, all those who said they were in favour were asked if their opinions would change if restoration led to the execution of an innocent person, something AI believes is inevitable under any judicial system.
The response showed a significant shift, with more people ending up opposing the death penalty, even for the specific offence of terrorist murder.
Given the number of prominent cases of judicial error in Britain over the past few years — Guildford Four, Birmingham Six, Stefan Kiszcko, the Tottenham Three and Judith Ward — it is not an abstract question.
Opinion polls may not be at their peak of credibility, in the wake of the election predictions.
Nevertheless, the result is certainly a substantial change on the pattern of previous responses.
URGENT!
The AIBS Urgent Action network deals with more than 500 cases each year.
In about 40 per cent of these cases, there is some improvement in the situation of victims of human rights abuse.
Often long after a release, a reappearance  or the commutation of a death sentence, information reaches us which shows in more detail the impact of your appeals.
This new column by AI's Urgent Action co-ordinator reports on some aspects of UAs which show they are working.
CHINA ‘RECOGNISES’ AI
CHINA: Amnesty International was  publicly recognised by a senior government official in the People's Republic of China for the first time last year, in connection with the commutation of the death sentence of Lobsang Tenzin, a Tibetan student accused of the murder of a Chinese policeman.
In an interview with the Chinese-language newspaper Wen Wei Po in Hong Kong on 21 April 1991, Gyaltsen Norbu, chairman of the government of the autonomous region of Tibet, brought up the case of Lobsang Tenzin:
‘After that sentence was passed, the Amnesty International organisation sent nearly 1000 letters to me…’
Lobsang Tenzin, who became the focus of a UA in February 1990, had his death sentence commuted in March 1991 (see Campaign Action, Tibet, pages 12–13).
AMBASSADOR'S MAILBAG
GUATEMALA: During his visit to London recently Bruce Harris, executive director of Casa Alianza (Covenant House), a centre in Guatemala City which cares for street children, dropped in on the new Guatemalan Ambassador.
Harris asked the Ambassador whether he had received any letters from Amnesty members concerning Guatemalan street children (who are routinely rounded up and beaten by that country's security forces).
Somewhat wearied the Ambassador rolled his eyes and said ‘You know, we probably receive 50 letters a day to the Embassy’(see page 10).
WASHINGTON'S WORLD INDEX: GLOOMIER AND GLOOMIER
UK RIGHTS RECORD SHARPLY CRITICISED
THE UK's ‘record of human suffering’ is worse than every European country except Greece, according to an index published this month by the Washington based Population Crisis Committee.
The UK is ranked 22nd out of 141 countries surveyed in the PCC's Index of Human Suffering, behind Italy, Barbados and Ireland, but ahead of Greece, Israel and Taiwan.
The Index derives its ranking from 10 indicators of human well-being: life expectancy, access to clean water, calorie supply, infant immunisation, secondary school environment, income per head, inflation, access to technology, political freedom and human rights.
Mozambique was ranked bottom of the list, with the highest level of human suffering in the world, followed by Somalia, Afghanistan, Haiti and Sudan.
The top five countries, with the lowest level of human suffering were Denmark, the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland and Canada.
The US ranked 8th best, followed by Norway and Australia.
The countries with the worst human rights records were China, Cuba, Haiti, Iraq, North Korea, Libya, Mauritania, Myanmar, Somalia, Sudan and Syria, according to the PCC.
Dr Sharon Camp, who edited the Index, said: ‘A child born in Mozambique today can expect to live only 48 years and has a one in seven chance of dying before his or her first birthday.
A child born in Denmark will live an average of 75 years and has less than a one in 100 chance of dying before age one.’
She said that three quarters of the world's population live in conditions where high or extreme human suffering is the rule, rather than the exception.
‘Both the numbers and proportion of people in these countries are up significantly from five years ago.
The development gap between the world's rich and poor has widened.’
WOMEN'S RIGHTS AND WRONGS
ONLY through concrete policy changes will the quality of human life for women in Sudan be changed, Fatima Ibrahim, President of the Sudanese Women's Union, told AI's annual conference on Women and Human Rights.
The conference, held on 7 March, drew 150 women to discuss issues such as gender-specific human rights abuses, rape and refugees.
Fatima Ibrahim said that her union's efforts to promote human rights and equality for women had met the full force of repression under different Sudanese governments since the early 1950s.
Another guest speaker, Dr Nawal El Saadawi, the Egyptian novelist, doctor and relentless critic of Arab human rights abuses, attacked the hypocrisy of policies carried out around the world in the name of human rights, democracy and justice.
The Arab Women's Solidarity Organisation, of which she is president, was banned recently for voicing its opposition to the Gulf War.
AMNESTY
You may have noticed the change in AMNESTY's format.
The aim is to make AMNESTY a clearer, more accessible and informative publication.
The very nature of Amnesty's activities means that many of the articles will be about brutal and disturbing events around the world.
But that need not discourage ideas from members for articles on the home front: for example, what your group is doing, any successes you may have had on behalf of prisoners-of-conscience.
We are also pleased to consider photographs and cartoons for publication.
REPLIES
Thank you for sending in replies to your letters.
AMNESTY regrets that it is only able to send full English transcripts of replies to members who write in requesting one (accompanied by SAE).
This column aims to summarise the essence of replies and answer any queries about the proper response to a reply from a Government, Embassy or Human Rights Organisation.
MEXICO
THE NATIONAL Commission for Human Rights in Mexico maintains that ‘it is probable’ that chiefs of police and subordinates in Morelos State were responsible for the ‘disappearance’and ‘probable homicide’of Jose Ramon Garcia Gomez.
This opinion is contained in a letter of reply in Spanish to AI members who had written to the Mexican authorities in late 1991 expressing concern about the ‘disappearance’ of Jose Ramon.
The National Commission's letter recommends ‘some form of penal action’ be taken by the Governor of Morelos against ‘the said functionaries and chiefs of staff for their responsibility in…abuses of authority, falsifying information and obstructing justice’.
AI's research shows that at least two people have been charged in connection with the ‘disappearance’ of Jose Ramon on 16 December 1988.
Although the case has been covered in the Mexican press, the National Commission for Human Rights — a department of the Mexican Government — has failed to name the two people and have declined to issue further information.
Members are urged to write a polite reply to the National Commission for Human Rights asking them to take every step necessary to bring the perpetrators of Jose Ramon's ‘disappearance’ to justice.
THE MEXICAN National Commission of Human Rights also replied to AI members' letters which expressed concern about the use of torture in Mexico.
The Commission states in its reply that torture and inhumane treatment are banned in Mexico.
However, the Commission adds that a total of 139 ‘public officers’ were ‘recorded’as having been involved in human rights abuses, including torture.
Members wishing to acknowledge replies, and urge further action to end torture in Mexico, please write to the above address.
NEWS IN BRIEF 
NEW GROUPS
WE are pleased to announce the registration of the Ware and Hertford Group, whose representative is  
DIARY
THE beautiful gardens of The Old Vicarage, next to St Peter's Church in Alstonefield, Derbyshire,(six miles north west of Ashbourne), will be open to the public from 2–6pm on 23 August.
Admission for adults will be £1.00 and children, 50p (including free access to a ‘bouncy castle’).
There will be refreshments and stalls, with the proceeds going to Amnesty International.
LETTERS
WHAT MAN WILL MARRY THEM NOW THAT THEIR LIVES HAVE BEEN RUINED?
This quote appeared on envelopes sent out to British members as part of the India fundraising appeal.
It is attributed to an Indian woman whose two daughters had been raped.
These are a selection of the letters received by Amnesty in response to the appeal.
The reply by David Bull, director of AIBS, is printed in full beneath.
YESTERDAY I received a letter from you which has considerably upset me and tarnished my feelings towards Amnesty International.
I have had only the highest regard for Amnesty and have never written to you like this before.
The letter in question was another distressing documentation of abuses of human rights, this time in India.
I was shocked by the quote on the outside of the envelope that you had used to ‘draw attention’ to the letter; it certainly worked.
The atrocities against people referred to in the letter were horrific yet the point you used to ‘highlight’ them was ‘what man would want women or girls that had been raped?’
I find this sickening.
Do not bother to write and tell me that in their culture etc, as that is really not good enough.
No wonder women are treated so badly in the world when even an organisation such as Amnesty judges them in terms of their lives only meaning something if they can ‘belong’ to a man.
Also in your letter you state that ‘rape is a crime against all humankind’ more than (just) a being a crime against women.
Does this make it more important?
How dare you make these offensive statements and then ask for money to support you.
Undoubtedly you have better things to do than reply to me, but then again I am too busy to write except that I am so annoyed.
However, I do expect a reply and an assurance of an immediate change in attitude.
I'M writing because of concern about the attitudes of AI re: sexism.
I feel very offended by the slogan used on the envelope of your last mailing.
While such a statement has concern for a woman in her cultural context in India, to use it as a means of evoking emotive reaction to persuade people to give money in this country is to perpetuate the idea that a woman is not an independent human being and has to be sustained by a man, and that men only want ‘pure, untouched, unviolated’ women.
I'd have thought an organisation like Amnesty would be in the forefront of anti-sexism, but I've come across sexism before where I would expect an enlightened attitude (eg Greenpeace)
I WAS shocked to receive this morning a letter from AI in an envelope bearing the question: ‘What man will marry them now that their lives have  been ruined ?’
Fearing the worst, I opened the envelope.
While I appreciate that in many cultures a woman's failure to marry can have serious socio-economic implications which may not exist for many women in the UK, I was distressed by AI promoting this view of marriage as the raison d'etre of a woman, and of a woman whose hymen has been perforated as ‘damaged goods’.
Rape, although unspeakably degrading for a woman, in no way degrades its victims morally.
It is the rapist who is morally degraded by this appalling act.
The fact that it was a woman who delivered the doubly-sexist utterance makes it no more PC.
I find the use of the quote on the envelope of your latest appeal letter offensive.
The information in your letter is generally interesting, factual and covers a wide spread of abuses.
The quote taken out of context trivialises the dreadful crime of vicious rape against two girls of 13 years and 18 years.
To quote a reaction of the mother without any other quotes from her, the two girls themselves, or any other rape survivors, suggests that this is the prime concern.
Is it?
Then to put that quote on the envelope compounds the notion that rape should be stopped in order to keep women desirable.
Girls should not be raped because they don't want to be raped — not because men won't marry them.
Men not wanting to marry the girls is a consequence of a dreadful action (and a social stigma), not the reason for fighting rape.
This suggestion is further insulting as the letter comes from a man.
Your letter condemns governments for persistently refusing to recognise rape and sexual abuse as a serious human rights violation.
Your use of the quote within the letter and on the envelope trivialises it too.
THIS IS A TRANSCRIPT OF DAVID BULL'S REPLY:
THANK you for your letter regarding our recent appeal letter on India.
I want to begin by saying that I fully accept the criticisms that have been levelled, particularly against the quotation on the envelope, by a number of correspondents.
Whilst many people have written to say that they found the letter itself to be interesting and factual, the view has also been forcefully expressed that the quotation on the envelope implies a view that rape is somehow wrong, and to be opposed, only or primarily insofar as it may reduce a woman's chances of marriage.
In retrospect I can see that this implication can be drawn from the envelope, and I only wish I had realised it at the time.
I quite understand that this implication has caused offence or distress to some people, for which I apologise.
It is clearly not Amnesty's view that damage to a woman's marriage prospects is the sole or main reason for opposing rape.
Neither is it our view (as some correspondents have suggested the envelope implies) that rape in any way morally compromises or degrades its victims, or that women's lives should be defined primarily in terms of their relationships with men, or that rape is not grossly abhorrent in itself.
These are not Amnesty's views, or my own, though I can see how such an interpretation can be inferred from our choice of quotation on the appeal envelope.
We do, where possible, try to allow victims of human rights violations, and their families, to speak in their own words in our reports and publications.
The sentiment expressed on the envelope represented the voice of the mother of two of the victims.
It was clearly an important point for her and, therefore, I think justifiably quoted in the context of the full letter.
I accept, though, that taken out of context (as on the envelope) the quotation can appear sexist and insensitive.
I recognise that dealing effectively and sensitively with rape as a human rights violation requires careful treatment and consideration.
For this reason, I have on previous occasions sought the advice of women's organisations regarding advertising copy on the subject.
I assure you that we at Amnesty do take such questions seriously and make considerable efforts to avoid insensitive statements.
In this case we did not take sufficient care.
As a result, we will be more alert in future.
I thank you for taking the trouble to share your concerns with me, and hope that you will find the response reassuring.
I hope, too, that you will not be deterred from participating in our campaign against custodial violence (including rape) in India .
With best wishes.
Yours sincerely  
AMNESTY AGM
ABOUT 300 AMNESTY MEMBERS FROM ACROSS BRITAIN ATTENDED THE BRITISH SECTION'S ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING HELD AT EXETER UNIVERSITY ON 11–12 APRIL.
AMONG THE SPEAKERS WERE ALI BOUREQUAT, THE FRENCH CITIZEN FREED LAST DECEMBER AFTER 19 YEARS IN MOROCCAN PRISONS; BRUCE HARRIS, THE RELENTLESS CAMPAIGNER ON BEHALF OF GUATEMALAN STREET CHILDREN; AND IAN MARTIN, THE DEPARTING SECRETARY GENERAL OF AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL.
THESE REPORTS BY AIBS STAFF.
VISIONS OF THE FUTURE
AMNESTY's British Section attracted 30,000 new members in 1991, bringing the total to 90,000, and saw the formation of 17 new local groups — 13 of them campaigning groups — a total of 318, according to AIBS director David Bull in his report to the AGM.
1991 ended with youth affiliations at an all-time high of 360, and school donations of more than £17,000 coming in to the section.
But Mr Bull said the good news must be set against the closure of seven groups and the fact that the number of new members fell slightly short of the 1991 targeted figure due to the onset of the recession.
Notwithstanding these disappointments, 1991 proved to be a year of immense activity for AIBS.
Mr Bull pointed to a welter of campaigns, urgent actions and prisoner dossiers taken up by the Section.
For example, in 1991:
131 prisoner cases were closed and 181 new dossiers were taken up;
The production of action files — which aim to involve groups in all areas of the mandated concerns — was greatly increased, to 71;
53 voluntary local trainers traversed the country, covering a total of 220 groups, giving guidance in letter writings, lobbying, and running meetings;
14 new regional action network (RAN) co-ordinators were inducted;
458 new urgent actions (UAs) were issued by the IS, as well as 89 EXTRAS (Express Transmission for Rapid Action); the last two months of 1991 were exceptionally busy, with 100 new UA's issued.
The UAs covered extra-judicial executions (EJEs), death threats, torture and ‘disappearances’ in Colombia, Peru, Brazil, India and the Philippines; attacks on street-children in Guatemala; and amputation sentences and crucifixion in Sudan.
As well as major campaigns in Morocco, Peru and in connection with the 30th Anniversary, AIBS responded to a wide range of emergency situations in Kuwait, El Salvador, Grenada, Yemen, East Timor, Kenya and on behalf of the Kurds.
On the home front, AIBS actively campaigned for amendments to the Asylum Bill and the abolition of the death penalty for military offences in the Armed Forces Act.
The year saw the launch of new specialist groups, including the Ex-Services Group, convened by John Warry, which is developing a network of ex-military contacts, and the Business Group, chaired by Sir Geoffrey Chandler, which aims to foster human rights awareness among British companies.
1991 proved to be a year of immense activity for AIBS
Mr Bull laid out a future strategy for AIBS by outlining ‘Eight Visions’ for implementation over the next three years: to promote human rights education on school curriculums; to improve the Section's rapid response capacity; to foster growth without compromising service to members; to develop AIBS's ‘own country’work; to foster regionalisation; to engender co-operation between regional groups; to broaden Amnesty's appeal; and to expedite internal development.
Dan Jones, head of campaigns, in a pensive mood
India poster, from City and Tower Hamlets group
MIDNIGHT MESSAGE
ONE day in 1989, Ian Martin, Amnesty's outgoing secretary general, approached Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega in the lobby of an exclusive London hotel.
He invited the President to visit Amnesty's international headquarters in Easton Street.
To his astonishment, Ortega accepted.
‘Ortega's limousines showed up about midnight that night, after a meeting with Neil Kinnock,’ Mr Martin told the Exeter AGM.
‘Mr Ortega, myself and several staff members ordered some take-away from a restaurant on Rosebery Avenue’
Mr Martin drew Ortega's attention to the Nicaraguan practice of keeping prisoners standing upright in their cells, a particularly painful and degrading treatment against which Amnesty had been vigorously campaigning.
‘Ortega said that it was totally unacceptable, returned to Nicaragua, and ordered an end to the treatment’, Mr Martin said.
Mr Martin recalled this improvement as one of the high points of his term as secretary general.
But he admitted to a great sense of satisfaction at having been in the job at a time when the world had ‘seen the most rapid political changes in the past 50 years’, from the end of the Cold War to the dismemberment of the Soviet Union, and the appointment of former POCs like Vaclav Havel to become heads of state.
With supporters of human rights making waves in virtually every country of the world, perhaps it was appropriate that Mr Martin's last foreign visit as secretary general was to the remote alpine kingdom of Bhutan where he discussed the plight of the Nepali-speaking people with King Jigme Wangchuck.
His advice for the future of the movement?
He invokes the words of another foreign minister in response to his question, ‘How should we keep putting pressure on you?’—‘Keep the letters coming,’ he replied.
FIZZERS AMONG THE SPARKLERS
AN AIR of braced expectancy settled over the 300 delegates in The Great Hall of Exeter University as the British Section director David Bull mounted the dais wearing a black top hat.
‘What's he doing, a Fred Astaire impersonation?’ murmured one group rep.
Alas, it was not to be.
But equally entertaining, perhaps, was David's brazen theatricality in conveying to members Amnesty's ‘Eight Visions’ for the future, an impressive list of commitments to spread the message of human rights throughout the British Isles (see main story).
The convivial mood resumed a more sober pitch as the meeting returned to the serious — and partly ceremonial — business of promoting Amnesty's India campaign (see AMNESTY, April/May).
The fizz of 300 sparklers soon lit up the atmosphere, as across the darkened hall wailed the haunting sound of  sitar (played by Sikhs from Britain Sikh Human Rights Movement).
Onto the  smoky dais loomed Dan Jones, Amnesty's head of campaigns, who unveiled an enormous poster courtesy of the City and Tower Hamlets Group calling for an immediate end to custodial violence in India.
The poster was to be hung outside the Indian Embassy in London.
Members queued to engrave their initials on the vast parchment in a motion faintly reminiscent of a High Anglican congregation taking Holy Communion.
But the sacred soon gave way to the convivial again, as delegates gathered in the Great Hall for a ‘Ceilidh’, a sort of Scottish ‘barn’ dance.
This featured the inimitable cart-wheeling motions of staff member Jess Steele, throwing herself amidst various highly unorthodox renditions of the do-si-do.
Standards re-asserted themselves when press officer Daphne Davies took to the floor, wheeling about the boards in a beautiful solo waltz.
Her performance was only spoiled now and then by the strange proximity of the journal editor, who occasionally showed up, exhausted, by her side…or was he her partner?
BOUREQUATS: IGNORED BY FRANCE
BRIAN DOOLEY SPOKE TO ALI BOUREQUAT AT THE AGM ABOUT HIS TREATMENT BY THE FRENCH AFTER HIS RELEASE
NO FANFARE, no TV crews, no government ministers were there to greet former hostage Ali Bourequat when he stepped off the plane in Paris after 19 years in Moroccan jails.
Bourequat, a prisoner of conscience and French citizen, had been imprisoned with two brothers in the legendary Tazmamert, an underground fortress at the foot of the Atlas mountains.
Since his release, he has been assiduously ignored by the French government, and is bitter about his treatment.
‘I am sad we have not been afforded the same welcome given to the Beirut hostages,’ he told a deeply moved audience at the AGM last month.
‘Why is this?’
Human rights activists and journalists cannot fathom why the Paris government has been so lukewarm to the Bourequats.
Throughout their arduous captivity French officials were notably silent on the issue.
It has been suggested that the French had always regarded the Bourequats as a bit different.
They are members of the Moroccan Royal family and were renowned for their playboy antics in the Sixties.
As such, the brothers didn't fit the usual political prisoner image, and the French were always wary of the association.
The Bourequat family goes back 14 centuries.
Ali's mother was Moroccan, first cousin of King Hassan himself.
His father was a French army officer who set up the Moroccan secret service for the king.
During the early 70s, Ali worked as his father's secretary, when he heard of a plot to kill King Hassan.
Ali told the king in person about the plot, and supplied proof.
Within months, Ali had been arrested.
Circumstances surrounding the arrest are fuzzy, with a French art dealer close to King Hassan somehow playing a part.
The Bourequats also blame the notorious General Dlimy, former head of the Moroccan secret service, for their arrest.
Ali was seized in July 1974.
He was blindfolded and taken to Secret Police headquarters.
From there he was transferred to a prison in Rabat, where he was severely tortured for the next three days.
His nose and temple were broken.
In July 1975 he escaped with his brothers, who had also been arrested in 1974.
The Bourequats lasted only a day on the run, and on their return to prison were forced to watch the execution of a guard.
For the next four and a half years, Ali's hands were tied day and night.
In March 1981, the military took charge of the Bourequats, and they were flown by helicopter to the mountains, and taken blindfolded by truck to Tazmamert.
The Tazmamert dungeons are filled with screaming prisoners, silent guards and walls almost two feet thick.
Ali was never allowed out, but managed to communicate with his brothers by shouting.
Despite their physical deterioration, the Bourequats' hearing has become acute.
For years, few believed any of the brothers were still alive.
Then in 1986, another prisoner bribed a guard to smuggle out a note.
It reached the prisoner's daughter in England, but still the French refused to act.
Then more letters arrived in 1989.
Last year, Amnesty mounted a huge campaign against human rights abuses in Morocco, and King Hassan found himself under increasing pressure to make some sort of response.
During 1991, over 200 political prisoners were freed from Moroccan jails.
In September, they came to clear Tazmamert and release the Bourequats.
Most of the prisoners had to be carried out on stretchers.
Of the 65 men who had languished in the cells, only 34 remained.
Some were barely alive.
A LIFE WISH FOR GUATEMALAN CHILDREN
BRUCE HARRIS, WHO SPOKE AT AMNESTY'S AGM IN APRIL, IS UNDER THREAT OF DEATH FOR HIS EFFORTS TO HELP GUATEMALAN STREET CHILDREN.
MICHAEL CROWLEY REPORTS
ON 14 MARCH 1990 Nahaman Carmona was buried.
The small graveyard in Guatemala City was filled with over 100 children from the slums, Nahaman's companions.
Like thousands of children in Guatemala, Nahaman had lived a life of poverty on the streets; begging, shining shoes, sleeping under benches and parked cars, stealing, sniffing glue; like many his death was violent.
He was murdered; kicked to death by policemen with size 10 boots.
Amongst the mourners at his funeral was Bruce Harris, director of Casa Alianza, the Guatemalan refuge for street children.
Harris, who was brought up in Wareham, Dorset, returned to the UK in April to speak at Amnesty's AGM, and to a conference organised by the London School of Economics.
A highly articulate, impassioned speaker, Harris told both audiences of his work with the street children and of the life and death of Nahaman Carmona.
On the night of 4 March 1990, in a run-down part of Guatemala City, Nahaman and a group of street kids were sniffing glue.
This yellow shoe glue, which the children keep in small plastic bags under their shirts, serves as a cheap, if potentially lethal, escape from the cold, hunger and misery of every-day life.
Four policemen on patrol found them.
Six of the children ran; the four remaining were surrounded by the police who then poured glue over them; over their heads, into their eyes.
This, Harris claims, is standard practice for dealing with street children.
Nahaman resisted.
He pushed away their hands.
The policemen knocked him to the ground and kicked the life out of him.
The children who were with him that night said that you could hear his screams three blocks away.
He suffered for 10 days and died on 14 March.
Bruce Harris says: ‘Can you imagine what would happen if a 13 year old boy was kicked to death by policemen in London?
There would be an outcry.
The government might even fall.
But in Guatemala it is just another body thrown on the pavement…’
Nahaman Carmona.
A street kid who was attacked by police in Guatemala City, who later died from the injuries he received
Bruce Harris, Director of Casa Alianza, Guatemala
Bruce Harris and the 200 strong team from Casa Alianza have been at the forefront in the fight to protect the street children of Guatemala.
Children whom society rejects and treats as disposable.
Through their work of feeding and clothing the children on the street, organising places for them to sleep in safety and providing them with a route out of the barrios, the staff of Casa Alianza have learnt how the police look after the children.
Beatings, extortion, torture, rape and death are the tools the police employ.
Saddened and enraged by the killing of Nahaman Carmona, Bruce Harris decided to fight head on the abuses of street children by the police.
He attempted to bring Nahaman's murderers to justice.
He succeeded.
The four policemen were convicted and given prison terms of between 10 and 15 years.
This was the first time the impunity of the police had been challenged in Guatemala.
No Government can say ‘to hell with the rest of the world’
The victory, however, was shortlived.
On 19 July 1991 the sentences were overturned on technical grounds — a typist's error on the charge sheet.
Casa Alianza has continued to press for a retrial.
Harris and Casa Alianza have continued to document and publicise widespread abuses by the police.
They have found themselves the targets of death threats and kidnappings as a result.
On 18 July 1991, four gunmen opened fire on Casa Alianza's crisis centre.
One of the gunmen shouted, ‘We are going to shoot Bruce Harris and take photographs of all the staff and we are going to shoot them and their children.’
The threats continue.
On 6 March 1992 more than 35 agents of the Mobile Military Police cordoned off four blocks of Guatemala City and violently rounded up the street children, handcuffing and beating them before dumping them in a van and taking them to the 2nd precinct police station.
A member of the Casa Alianza legal office visited them, photographed them and demanded that they be taken immediately to the Juvenile authorities in accordance with article 33 of the Juvenile Code.
The commanding officer refused.
Casa Alianza is now suing the head of the military police and the head of 2nd precinct police for abuse of authority.
This is a major step, and a dangerous one.
‘We are now downright scared because we have been pushed into a confrontation not only with the police but also with the military,’ Harris says.
We have been pushed into a confrontation with the military
‘So what are they going to do?
Two days after we made it public that we are suing the head of the national and military police, we got bomb threats against our building.
They may be unrelated but there is certainly a pattern in all this.’
‘There are rays of hope, however.
The most important is that the Guatemalan government is responding to international pressure.
The nations are now all so inter-related that no government can say, ‘To hell with the rest of the world’.’
Whenever Harris talks of his human rights work, he repeatedly states than none of it could continue without Amnesty's campaigning — the thousands and thousands of letters landing on the desk of the Guatemalan President, the faxes, the questions in Parliament.
‘Don't ever let anyone say that letter writing does not work.
I am here to tell you that it does.
If we had tried ten years ago to do what we are doing now, we would be dead.’
When asked if has any hope for the future Bruce Harris smiles and replies: ‘If you promise to keep writing I do.’
(See Campaign Impact, page 14.)
WHAT SHALL BE THE REPARATION?
ALI BOUREQUAT AND HIS TWO BROTHERS ENDURED 19 YEARS IN MOROCCAN PRISONS WITHOUT CHARGE OR TRIAL.
THEY SPENT 11 OF THOSE YEARS IN A DARK, TINY CELL IN THE SECRET, UNDERGROUND JAIL OF TAZMAMERT.
HERE IS AN EXTRACT OF ALI'S SPEECH TO AMNESTY'S AGM:
‘Ladies and Gentlemen,
IN THE terrible days of moral uncertainty that we have experienced when public awareness seems to be fading, it is to you I speak, you who live, who walk in the streets, who breathe, who enjoy life with your family, your children.
Just stop and think about the word freedom.
You think of freedom as something that you can rely on, something inalienable, but as you read the papers and listen to the radio, you are aware that there are places where human beings still live in the darkness of injustice, deprived of all human dignity, cold, hungry, dirty, sick.
Two hundred years after the Declaration of the Rights of Man took place in France, 200 years after that historic announcement of tolerance and emancipation, we can still see the practice of the most odious and cruel despotism by a man who is the execration of humankind, who is directly and personally responsible for crimes against humanity, and crimes against justice.
That man is the representative of injustice, iniquity and crime.
His name is Hassan II, King of Morocco.
I dare to tell everything.
I have only had one passion in my life: truth.
I am just starting my work.
Truth can overcome all obstacles.
Sometimes truth may be suppressed for a long time but while it is imprisoned it gathers to itself more and more power so that on the day that it is finally released it explodes, blowing everything asunder.
I am with you today by a miracle, you who represent international opinion, you who work tirelessly for justice for all and for fraternal solidarity amongst all human beings.
I belong to a family which goes back for 14 centuries.
My father was a French citizen, Mohamed Abderrahmane Bourequat, who in 1931 founded the Moroccan Section of the League for Human Rights.
Our family were activists, totally committed to the struggle for freedom and justice.
We went on to fight alongside the North African people for their independence.
The three Bourequat brothers, held in incommunicado detention in Morocco for over 18 years, give a press conference in Paris after their arrival in Casablanca, 3 January 1992
We were in contact with the political leaders of the different countries of the Maghreb including the King of Morocco — my mother was a member of the Moroccan Royal Family.
These relationships continued and developed.
At the end of April 1973 I went to see the King of Morocco to tell him about a plot to kill him.
On 8 July 1973 I was kidnapped with my two elder brothers Midhat and Bayazid.
At 4am armed men came into my house forcing their way upstairs to my bedroom.
They asked me to follow them without any explanation and blindfolded me.
I was dragged to a place that I found later was the premises of the Secret Police, ‘the complex’, code named ‘Fixed Point One (FP1)’.
During my first hours there I was severely tortured.
My interrogation must have taken place in the presence of the King himself.
I was transferred during the night to another place with my brothers, the secret prison in Bir Rami, in Rabat, code name ‘Fixed Point 3 (FP3)’.
There, during the second and third days, the interrogation went on with more intensity.
I suffered the torture known as ‘Le Perroquet’—‘The Parrot’.
Your wrists are tied to your ankles, a metal bar is passed under your knees, you are lifted up, hanging from this bar, a wet floor cloth is placed over your face so that you cannot breathe, and your head and the soles of your feet and beaten with a leather belt.
My left temple and my nose were broken.
In April 1974 four soldiers who had been sentenced at the Skhirat trial and a civilian who had been kidnapped in Tunisia, Houcine Manouzi, were brought to our jail.
We all escaped on the night of 12 July, 1975.
On the following day we were all recaptured except for Manouzi and one of the soldiers.
After this escape, my mother and my sister Khadija were kidnapped, and kept in secret detention for 16 months, in the underground cells of the police in Rabat and Casablanca.
My mother died as a consequence of her detention.
We were then transferred to the Gendarmerie Royale, we stayed for one year in a prison camp in Rabat, then four and a half years at the headquarters of the Gendarmerie in Rabat, our hands tied day and night from 13 July, 1975 to 19 December, 1979.
We were held in total secrecy, without any contact at all with the outside world and without ever having been charged or tried.
On 23 March, 1981, we were transferred to a place called Tazmamert on the edge of the desert, handcuffed and blindfolded, travelling by helicopter and van.
We stayed there for ten and a half years until 15 September 1991, without ever having any explanation as to why we were being held.
Each of us lived in a concrete box, nine feet long and six feet wide, with walls one and a half foot thick, and 14 air holes.
There was a cement block two feet high for us to lie on, the toilet a hole without water, two worn blankets (later we got a third one) and one pair of trousers and one shirt per year.
We were kept in almost total darkness.
Our Royal menu consisted of: breakfast, one pot of wish-wash called ‘tea’; lunch, a pot of dry vegetables boiled in water, one pot of vermicelli boiled in water.
I have still not recovered my taste for food.
The whole world has seen and heard our story, and it is in front of the whole world that reparation must take place, reflecting the scale of what was done to us, deploring the fact that a great country like France has accepted such a monstrous crime against us.
I have only one question today' that of justice in the name of humanity.
After such suffering I have the right to happiness, but my mind is in revolt, and my burning protest is only the cry of my soul to hasten the revelations of truth and justice.
But I ask myself one question: what should be the reparation for having been removed from life for 18 years, with my brothers?
What should be the reparation for a mother who died of despair?
What should be the reparation for a five year old child unfairly deprived of a father for 18 years?
I know how difficult your fight is.
I know that, thanks to you, and to your action, this fight saves thousands of people from torture and death.
I know that thousands of others have gained their freedom thanks to you.
My presence among you here in Exeter is the manifestation of my admiration and my solidarity with the human rights movement and your work.
CAMPAIGN ACTION
I THINK, THEREFORE I'M CRIMINAL
IN THE TIBET AUTONOMOUS REGION, HUNDREDS OF MONKS AND CIVILIANS ARE ROUTINELY IMPRISONED AND TORTURED FOR CONDUCTING PEACEFUL PROTECTS IN SUPPORT OF INDEPENDENCE FROM CHINA
EMMANUEL ONWE REPORTS
HUNDREDS of Tibetans have been imprisoned since late 1987 for taking part in demonstrations in favour of Tibetan independence from China or for their peaceful expression of dissent from Government policies in Tibet.
Dozens have been killed during demonstrations.
Torture and ill-treatment remains prevalent and some detainees have died as an apparent result of ill-treatment.
A new wave of pro-independence demonstrations began in earnest in late 1987.
The Chinese authorities claimed these demonstrations were being organised by the Dalai Lama's government in exile, based in Northern India.
The Dalai Lama has sought to secure an agreement with the Chinese Government for the future autonomy of Tibet, which effectively exists at present in name only.
In early 1989, violent riots led to more arrests and killings and the eventual imposition of martial law.
In mid-1990, martial law was formally lifted but the security clampdown remains currently in force.
Political and social controls remain as relatives of political prisoners suffer administrative harassment or become destitute.
‘Political work’ teams monitor the activities of monks and nuns.
The content of prayer is regulated (although widely circumvented).
Between 1989–91, several hundred monks and nuns were expelled from their monasteries and have been restricted to their village of origin.
Dozens of Tibetans were killed during demonstrations in incidents which, in some cases, are believed by Amnesty International to have been extra-judicial executions.
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees is prevalent.
Some detainees have died in detention or shortly following their release as a direct consequence of ill-treatment in prison and lack of adequate medical care.
Regardless of evidence to the contrary, the authorities in the People's Republic of China maintain that there are no political prisoners in China.
They assert that ‘ideas alone, in the absence of action which violates the Criminal Law, do not constitute a crime.’
They have repeatedly stated that all prisoners in Tibet are ‘criminals’ who have broken the law and the constitution.
They deny allegations that torture and ill-treatment are widespread.
However, human rights violations in Tibet have remained uncontrolled and widespread.
The imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, unfair trials of political prisoners, lengthy detention without trial, ill-treatment of detainees, possible extra-judicial executions and excessive use of the death penalty have become prevalent in recent years in Tibet.
Many of the victims have been involved in advocating human rights or taking part in peaceful activities in support of Tibetan independence.
Human rights concerns are regarded as an internal matter by the Government of the People's Republic of China; and information about violations are often treated as a ‘state secret’.
Hence independent information on human rights abuses in Tibet is scarce.
MONKS, HAT-SELLERS, TEACHERS AND CHILDREN
Fifty-five year-old Yulo Dawa Tsering is a senior Buddhist monk and teacher.
On January 19, 1989 he was sentenced to 10 years imprisonment on charges of ‘counter-revolutionary propaganda and agitations’.
Earlier in 1959, Yulo Tsering had been given a life sentence for taking part in the Tibetan revolution of that year.
He  benefited from an amnesty in 1979, together with other long serving political prisoners.
Jampel Changchub and Ngawang Phulchung, Tibetan Buddhist monks at Drepung monastery, were both sentenced in 1989 to 19 years' imprisonment — the longest sentence against prisoners of conscience ever imposed in recent years by the authorities in Tibet.
Ngawang Phulchung, aged 35, was accused of ‘forming a counter-revolutionary organisation’ which produced ‘reactionary literature’and ‘venomously slandered China's socialist system characterised by the people's democratic dictatorship’.
Jampel Changchub, aged 30, was described as a ‘principal member’ of the group and was accused of ‘collecting information and passing it on to the enemy’.
Dawa Dolma is a 23 year-old teacher at a middle school in Lhasa.
In 1989 she was accused of writing ‘reactionary songs’ during class and urging her pupils to read them.
On this basis she was detained but reportedly released, temporarily, to take care of her one year-old daughter.
In February 1992 she was reported to have been sentenced to 5 years' imprisonment.
Tamdin Sithar, a 46-year-old Tibetan, is serving a 12-year prison sentence imposed in 1984, apparently for possession of a printed statement by the Dalai Lama.
He is now held in Drapchai prison in Lhasa, according to unofficial Tibetan sources in the capital of the Tibetan autonomous region.
Tsetsen Norgyal and Thupten Tsering were detained in March or April 1989 in Lhasa on suspicion of  involvement in activities in favour of Tibetan independence.
Together with a woman, Sonam Choedron,(who was released in April 1991) they were tried on 8 February 1991 and reportedly sentenced to four years' imprisonment.
Before his detention, Tsetsen was working as a bookkeeper at the Banakshol Guesthouse in Lhasa.
AI has received reports indicating that he suffered a severe eye injury as a result of beatings during interrogation.
‘Ideas alone do not constitute a crime’ Chinese official
Jampa Ngodrup, a medical doctor at the Lhasa City Barkor Clinic, is serving a 13-year prison term as a prisoner of conscience.
He was accused at his trial in 1990 of having, ‘with counter-revolutionary aims, collected lists of people detained in the disturbances (activities carried out by Tibetans in 1988 in support of independence) and passed them on to others, thus violating the (laws of) secrecy’.
Dorje Wangdu, a 33 year-old Tibetan electrician from Lhasa, received a three-year term of ‘re-education through labour’, without charge or trial, in September 1991.
According to an official document obtained by AI, Dorje Wangdu was accused of ‘advising his acquaintances to wear Tibetan clothes’; ‘making copies of’ a ‘reactionary leaflet’; and distributing ‘symbols of personal protection’(cords blessed by a high lama) to monks in Ganden monastery as a token of respect.
Rigzin Choenyi, Choenyi Lhamo, Sonam Choedron, Konchak Drolma, Tibetan nuns aged between 22 and 29, were detained in 1989 for ‘breaking martial law regulations’ by shouting slogans in favour of Tibetan independence from China.
AI believes that the nuns from Shungsep nunnery are prisoners of conscience imprisoned solely for the peaceful advocacy of their political views.
Dawa Kyizom, a 20 year-old secondary school student in Lhasa, was taken away from her home by officials of the State Security Department on 26 October 1990.
She was detained because the authorities suspected that she had given a Tibetan nationalist flag to a Buddhist monk from Gyurme monastery.
The monk is alleged to have flown the flag from the roof of the monastery.
Dawa confessed, at the time of her arrest, to giving the flag to the monk and in late 1990 she reportedly received a three-year term of ‘re-education through labour’.
Ama Phurbu, a 59 year-old small trader who sells hats in Lhasa, was detained in October 1989 after police found leaflets on Tibetan independence in her home.
Ama Phurbu had also taken part in prayers on the Barkor pilgrimage path in 1989 in central Lhasa in memory of demonstrators killed by police.
ACTION
AI regards these Tibetan people as prisoners of conscience and calls for their immediate and unconditional release.
Please send appeals on behalf of each, or all, to the People's Republic of China.
GYALPO
Gyalpo, a Buddhist monk in his 20s from the Drepung monastery in Lhasa, was killed by police forces in what appears to be an extra-judicial execution, when he was at the head of a peaceful demonstration in support of Tibetan independence on 10 December 1988.
According to witnesses, Gyalpo was holding a Tibetan nationalist flag and marching in front of the demonstration as it progressed towards the Jokhang temple in central Lhasa.
The demonstrators stopped their march, a few metres away from a police line deployed in the temple's front square.
A police officer who was standing in front of the police line reportedly shot, without warning and at close range, killing Gyalpo on the spot.
Another monk, Kelsang Tsering, reportedly died a few weeks later of police wounds.
ACTION
Please send appeals condemning the killing of Gyalpo and urging that a full, impartial inquiry into Gyalpo's death be carried out, and its methods and results made public.
CAMPAIGN IMPACT
AFTER INTENSE PRESSURE FROM BRUCE HARRIS AND THOUSANDS OF AMNESTY MEMBERS AROUND THE WORLD, POLICEMEN IN GUATEMALA HAVE BEEN RECONVICTED FOR THE MURDER OF NAHAMAN CARMONA LOPEZ
‘JUSTICE’ IN GUATEMALA
FOUR Guatemalan police officers were found guilty on 28 April, 1992 of the murder of thirteen-year-old street child Nahaman Carmona Lopez and sentenced by the Fifth Criminal Sentencing Court of the First Instance to imprisonment terms of between 12 and 18 years.
According to AI's information, the sentence also bans the policemen from holding a public post.
At least two key witnesses on the case have been systematically intimidated since the killing of Nahaman Carmona, and one is now in exile.
It is the second time the policemen have been sentenced for the murder of Nahaman, who died on 4 March 1990 as a result of beatings they inflicted.
Due to the efforts of Bruce Harris and Casa Alianza in Guatemala City and appeals from thousands of Amnesty International supporters the policemen were found guilty of his murder in March 1991 and sentenced to prison terms ranging between 10 and 15 years.
However, on 19 July 1991, the sentences were overturned on technical grounds by the Third Chamber of the Appeals Court (Sala Tercera de la Corte de Apelaciones) and a retrial ordered.
The new trial was reopened before the Juzgado Quinto de Primera Instancia Penal de Sentencia (Fifth Criminal Sentencing Court of the First Instance), and new evidence admitted which led to a guilty verdict.
The policemen are now appealing against the second sentence (see page 10).
FURTHER ACTION
Please make telephone calls and send telegrams/telexes/faxes/express and airmail letters:
welcoming the recent convictions on re-trial of four policemen for the murder of Nahaman Carmona López;
expressing your hope that these convictions signal the determination of the Guatemalan government not to tolerate any further human rights abuses, no matter who the perpetrators, and that they represent merely a first step in a concentrated programme of government action intended to return Guatemala to the rule of law;
asking for guarantees for the physical safety of those who have been threatened and intimidated after giving evidence in the trial against the four policemen for the murder of Nahaman Carmona López;
GHABIN REARRESTED
ISRAEL: ‘Abd al-Ra'uf Ghabin, one of the cases featured in the 30th Anniversary Campaign, was rearrested on 11 February 1992 at a roadblock in Gaza in the Occupied Territories.
On 26 February 1992 he was issued with a six-month detention order.
At an appeal hearing held in the Ketziot detention centre on 26 March 1992, the non-classified evidence alleged that he was a leader of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) in Gaza.
No other evidence was made available to either him or his lawyer.
The appeal was rejected and the order confirmed, although a slight reduction was made to take into account the days he spent in detention before his administrative detention order was issued.
He is now due for release on 19 August 1992.
This may sound familiar.
In response to appeals by AI members last year, the Israeli authorities replied in April 1991 saying that ‘Abd al-Ra'uf Ghabin had been arrested due to his activities relating to his alleged involvement in the PFLP — printing and distributing PFLP leaflets.
The only evidence offered by the Israeli authorities to support this allegation was the accusation made by a Palestinian caught in possession of 150 PFLP leaflets.
‘Abd al-Ra'uf Ghabin claims he was tortured during his interrogation in 1990.
His six month detention order was renewed in February 1991 on the grounds that ‘while in Ketziot Prison, Ghabin continued his subversive activities’.
He was released in August 1991.
He had never been charged with any criminal offence.
The Israeli authorities say that ‘Abd al-Ra'uf Ghabin's allegations of torture and ill-treatment were investigated and that ‘there had been no deviation from the accepted procedures for interrogations’.
The Israeli authorities also said that following denials by the accused's interrogator and a polygraph (lie detector) test on ‘Abd al-Ra'uf Ghabin's, his allegations were ‘found to be baseless’, and that he actually ‘retracted most of his allegations’.
‘Abd al-Ra'uf Ghabin gave his lawyer a new signed statement in April 1991, in which he categorically denies having withdrawn any of the allegations of torture and ill-treatment previously made.
He confirms having agreed to take a polygraph test, but says he was not shown the results.
His lawyer has also not seen the results.
Amnesty International opposes the detention without trial of all political detainees, including administrative detention.
ACTION
Please send appeals on ‘Abd al-Ra'uf Ghabin's behalf to the Israeli authorities:
expressing concern at ‘Abd al-Ra'uf Ghabin's most recent arrest and asking for the reasons that lead to it;
calling for his immediate release, and if he is to be charged, given a fair and prompt trial;
asking for details of the investigation into his allegations of torture in 1990, specifically which agency conducted the investigation and what methods were used in that investigation;
EDUCATION
EDUCATION IN HUMAN RIGHTS
AI IS COMMITTED TO BRINGING HUMAN RIGHTS EDUCATION TO COUNTRIES ALL OVER THE WORLD
THE GOAL is clear: a world without human rights violations.
Achieving that goal means more than just exposing and preventing abuses; adequate protection of human rights depends of people knowing what their rights are.
Human rights education is a means of stimulating and increasing this awareness.
Through human rights education, basic human rights can come to be considered universally applicable and will, as a matter of course, be universally respected.
Education can thus be of crucial importance in preventing violations.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), frequently cited and more frequently violated, provides the framework for teaching about human rights.
Its preamble eloquently asserts that the ‘recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice, and peace in the world.’
The Declaration serves ‘as a common standard of achievement for all people and all nations’.
It has power in the world of public opinion, if not in any court, because nations are often sensitive to charges that they are violating the rights of their citizens.
Sean McBride, one of AI's founding members, explained the central role that education must play in promoting the values espoused by the UDHR: ‘Effectively used, world public opinion can in itself become an important influence on the centres of power in the world.
‘Thus, if the Universal Declaration is to become a reality for all, it is not sufficient that its provisions should be known to governments and internal organizations.
They must be made known to the man in the street, whom they are designed to protect, for they are his birthright.
When the people in the world awaken to the rights that are theirs, governments will no longer dare to defy them and set them at nought.’
In 1991 the Chilean National Commission for Truth and Reconciliation stated in its report on human rights abuses in that country after the 1973 military coup: ‘The true cause of human rights violations was the lack of a national culture of respect for these rights…
Therefore, we believe that the introduction of the issue of human rights and respect for human dignity into the education system and the adoption of measures aimed at promoting these values are essential steps which cannot be postponed.’
Human rights education is a growing area of AI's work.
AI's human rights education work aims to inform people of their rights so that they can defend them, and those of other people, as effectively as possible.
This requires more than factual knowledge.
Fostering attitudes of fair treatment for all and developing the skills needed to participate actively in human rights issues are just as important.
All human rights education programmes are different.
They must take account of regional and social differences between countries, and depend crucially on the local culture and the target audience, whether they be village children or police recruits.
People in some parts of the world assume that their basic human rights are inherent and seldom pause to question what they are or how to ensure that they will be available to future generations.
Others face the daily reality of human rights violations and need strategies to ensure that their rights are recognised and protected.
The factual content of most education programmes defines basic human rights according to major contemporary statements such as the United Nations Bill of Human Rights.
Some use an historical approach, describing previous struggles for economic and political rights and the convulsions of the mid-20th century that led to the adoption of the UDHR.
The main categories of human rights are analysed: civil, political, social, economic and cultural.
Human rights education programmes must also provide information about the institutions that exist to protect human rights, and about the mechanisms available for reaching them.
Human rights education means learning about the full range of human rights, as set out in the UDHR and other documents, such as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR).
Although AI believes in the indivisibility of human rights, the campaigning work of the organisation focuses on issues within a strictly defined mandate: No one should be imprisoned for the peaceful expression of their beliefs, or because of their colour, sex, ethnic origin or religion; no one should be tortured, ill-treated or executed; all political prisoners should receive prompt and fair trials.
However, AI does not ignore or underestimate the importance of civil, political, social, economic or cultural rights.
It bases its human rights education work on the full range of rights set out in the UDHR and ICCPR.
As a former UN Secretary-General wrote: ‘The establishment of human rights provides the foundation upon which rests the political structure of human freedom; the achievement of human freedom generates the will as well as the capacity for economic and social progress; the attainment of economic and social progress provides the basis for true peace.’
Attitudes are as important as knowledge.
Human rights education programs aim to foster respect for other people, tolerance, fairness and solidarity.
At the core of human rights is concern for fair treatment and due process — the recognition that those in power have an obligation to acknowledge, implement and observe proper legal procedures.
Learning about human rights means learning respect for justice.
Elaine, a 16-year-old girl who has spent most of her life on the streets of Rio de Janeiro, in Brazil, puts it better: ‘I dream of a better world, a world where children and adults are no longer abandoned, tortured and murdered because of who we are or what we do…
If I had an education I would like to help bring these changes about.’
WORLDWIDE APPEAL
WHAT'S IN A LETTER?
‘Be patient and persistent in writing letters to save these people.
Even if you get discouraged from seeing no results from all your efforts, what you write makes a difference.
We cannot live and struggle without help…’
EX-PRISONER FROM EASTERN EUROPE
YEMEN
Mansur Muhammad Ahmad Rajah
MANSUR MUHAMMAD AHMED RAJIH: a 34-year-old writer and poet, he was held without charge or trial for over a year before being sentenced to death in 1984 after an unfair trial on false criminal charges.
AI considers him to be a prisoner of conscience held solely for his non-violent opposition to the government of the former Yemen Arab Republic.
In January 1983 Mansur Rajih was arrested in Yemen by members of al-Amn al-Watani (National Security) on his return from Lebanon where he had been a university student.
He was held without charge or trial for six months and then released.
Eight days later, he was rearrested in his village of Humayrim in the Province of Ta'iz.
He was taken to Shabaka Prison in the city of Ta'iz, blindfolded and held in solitary confinement for nine months, during which he was subjected to lashings and electric shocks.
In March 1984 Mansur Rajih was tried before the Court of First Instance in Ta'iz for the murder of a man from his village.
The trial was grossly unfair.
Two of the three prosecution ‘eye-witnesses’ failed to identify Mansur Rajih in court.
Defence witnesses, including relatives of the murdered victim, who alleged that the three prosecution witnesses were not present at the scene of the crime, were ruled by the judge to be ‘mentally ill’.
Mansur Rajih was sentenced to death.
The sentence was upheld by the Court of Appeal in Ta'iz in 1986 but is pending ratification by the Presidential Council of the new Republic of Yemen.
Mansur Rajih had been politically active for most of his adult life.
He was president of the Yemeni Student Association in Aleppo, Syria, between 1978 and 1980, and Secretary General of the Organization of Arab Students in Beirut, Lebanon, between 1980 and 1982.
He was also a member of the National Democratic Front (NDF), the principal opposition group in the former Yemen Arab Republic.
However, he disassociated himself from NDF's violent political activities which were carried out between 1979 and 1981.
TIBET
DORJE WANGDU: a 33-year-old electrician from Lhasa, he received a three-year term of ‘re-education through labour’, without charge or trial, in September 1991, for peacefully expressing support for the Dalai Lama, Tibet's Buddhist leader-in-exile, and for possessing ‘reactionary’ documents.
AI considers Dorje Wangdu to be a prisoner of conscience.
In an official notice of punishment, dated 26 September 1991, Dorje Wangdu was accused of ‘advising his acquaintances’ to ‘wear Tibetan clothes’during the period of the Kalashakra Buddhist initiation ceremony, held by the Dalai Lama in late 1990 in India.
The document also stated that ‘reactionary leaflets’ which had been circulated in Sera monastery in Lhasa were found at Dorje Wangdu's home and that he had ‘distributed symbols of personal protection’(amulets blessed by a high lama), brought ‘from abroad’, to monks in Ganden monastery.
The authorities implied that the amulets had been brought from India, where a large exiled Tibetan community is established.
Dorje Wangdu is reportedly detained in the Rawa ‘re-education through labour’ camp, believed to be in Sangyip, a district of Lhasa.
His term of detention was decided by police and government authorities and he was not allowed to present a defence or to be represented by a lawyer.
BURUNDI
GERVAIS SINDAKIRA: he was among 11 agricultural workers at Kanyosha Minor Seminary, a Roman Catholic boarding school on the outskirts of the capital, Bujumbura, who were extrajudicially executed by government troops on 27 November 1991.
He was  bayoneted to death by a soldier in front of two priests who had tried to protect him.
The killings followed an attack by armed insurgents, mostly members of the majority Hutu ethnic group, on a military barracks near the seminary.
It was one of a series of insurgent attacks on military and civilian targets in Bujumbura, and in Bubanza and Cibitoke provinces in the northwest of the country.
Following the attacks, government troops, composed mainly of members of the dominant minority Tutsi ethnic group, launched a counter-insurgency operation and about one thousand people, mostly Hutu, suspected, usually without evidence, of supporting the insurgents, were killed.
Hundreds were arrested and severely ill-treated or ‘disappeared’.
Gervais Sindakira and the 10 other agricultural workers were members of the Hutu ethnic group.
Military officials told AI that they were killed in the cross-fire between soldiers and insurgents.
However, according to eye-witnesses, at about 6am soldiers ordered the workers from the outbuilding where they lived, forced some of them to kneel on the ground and then shot them.
Ten workers were killed.
Gervais Sindakira was injured but managed to run to the main seminary buildings and was sheltered between two priests in the pupils' refectory.
However, despite protests from the priests, who identified Gervais Sindakira as one of their workers, a soldier bayoneted him to death.
The bodies of the 11 were later taken away by soldiers and secretly buried or otherwise disposed of.
SUDAN
DR AHMAD OSMAN SIRAJ: a 46-year-old senior lecturer at the University of Khartoum's medical school, he is serving a 15 year sentence for his alleged involvement in a plot to overthrow the military government of General Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir.
He was previously detained without trial from September 1989 until April 1990 when he was released uncharged.
The government alleged Dr Siraj knew of a planned coup attempt by military officers and that, although he refused to take part, he failed to report the matter to the security services.
AI believes that he is being made to answer for his active involvement in the Sudan Doctors' Union and left-wing politics, his role in the non-violent protests which led to the overthrow of President Nimeiri in April 1985 and his outspoken criticism of the current government.
In January 1991, Dr Siraj and 12 other civilians were summarily tried by a military court, which denied them legal representation.
The individual trials lasted no more than five minutes each followed by a few minutes' deliberation.
They were convicted of ‘waging war against the state’ and sentenced to death.
The Head of State commuted the sentences to 15 years' imprisonment.
In December 1991, Dr Siraj was again brought before a military tribunal, for reasons which remain unclear, and was later transferred from Kober Prison in Khartoum North, to Shalla Prison in western Sudan.
He was subsequently returned to Khartoum for medical treatment and is now believed to be back in Kober prison.
AI considers Dr Ahmed Osman Siraj to be a prisoner of conscience, imprisoned on account of his non-violent opposition to the military government.
He suffers from chronic back pain and clinical depression, conditions for which he is reportedly no received medical attention.
TURKEY
Erdogan Kizilkaya
ERDOGAN KIZILKAYA: aged 23, on 4 August 1991 he was taken from his home in Kayseri, Central Turkey, to Kayseri Police Headquarters and reportedly interrogated under torture in connection with his alleged membership of the armed organization Devrimci Sol (Revolutionary Left).
Erdogan Kizilkaya claims that when he arrived at Kayseri Police Headquarters he was stripped and taken to an interrogation room where electric shocks were applied to his penis, hands and feet.
He was hung by the wrists and electric shocks were again applied to his extremities and sexual organs.
On 9 August 1991, Erdogan Kizilkaya was examined by a physician at a Health Centre authorized by the Ministry of Health of carry out forensic examinations.
The medical report stated that the examination ‘showed no marks of blows or force’.
Later that day, Erdogan Kizilkaya was formally arrested, charged with membership of Devrimci Sol, and sent to Kayseri Prison.
Prison officials, concerned about his poor health, referred him for a medical examination which confirmed widespread injuries, including marks around the wrist, apparently caused by the hanging, and burns ‘possibly caused by electrical current.’
On 11 September 1991, Erdogan Kizilkaya was released pending trial by Kayseri State Security Court.
Erdogan Kizilkaya submitted a formal complaint to the Kayseri State Prosecutor, in which he named those responsible for his torture.
However, in accordance with the Anti-Terror Law passed in April 1991, the prosecutor referred the complaint to the local governor's office for evaluation.
By March 1992, no legal action had been taken against those responsible.
CUBA
JORGE QUINTANA SILVA: a 29-year-old mathematics student at Havana University, he was convicted in November 1990 of ‘disrespect’ and sentenced to three years ‘restricted liberty’.
AI considers him to be a prisoner of conscience.
Jorge Quintana Silva and another student, Carlos Ortega, were arrested on 4 January 1990 and detained for 10 months before being brought to trial.
They were convicted of ‘disrespect’ for writing a letter to the executive board of the Communist Youth Union, of which they were both members, accusing President Fidel Castro of being a traitor.
They received sentences of three and two years' ‘restricted liberty’, and were conditionally released.
Jorge Quintana Silva was rearrested in Havana on 9 October 1991; about 15 members of the unofficial Cuban Democratic Convergence (Concertación Democráca Cubana) were arrested at the same time.
The group had held a press conference two days earlier at which they called on the Fourth Communist Party Congress (Cuarto Congreso del Partido Comunista) to instigate radical political reforms and also attempted to distribute a statement to this effect to Congress delegates.
The authorities claimed that Jorge Quintana Silva was rearrested because he had contravened the conditions of his earlier release, although they did not specify how he had done this.
He was sent to Kilo 8 Prison in Pinar del Río Province to complete the remainder of his three-year sentence.
Of the others arrested on 9 October, some were later released, one is awaiting trail and others have been tried and sentenced to up to three years' imprisonment for, among other things, ‘illegal association’.
FEATURE
Heads of state of the world's richest countries flew into Rio this month on a mission to save the world.
But in the wings of the world's first ‘Earth Summit’, environmentalists are still being harassed and killed by police, and street children, abused and tortured.
The Earth Summit may be most concerned about the survival of trees, but Billy McKenna wonders whether human rights is a higher priority.
PUSHING UP THE DAFFODILS IN BRAZIL
THE EARTH Summit started on 6 June.
Its objective?— To save the world.
Nearly 150 heads of state, including most of the countries of the industrialized West, are putting their heads together to discuss how to curb the production of greenhouse gases, how to slow the depletion of the ozone layer, and how to stop the deforestation of the Amazonian rain forests.
The latter explains why the Summit is being held in Brazil — the country with the largest contribution to the earth's oxygen supply.
But how can we expect the Brazilian Government to care for trees when it doesn't care for many of its people?
Most people in Western countries are aware of the ‘football pitch’ sized areas of rainforest disappearing by the minute, but are they are aware of the murders and disappearances of the people who are living on these acres?
The killing of Indians who obstruct the occupation of their land by speculators is already happening.
Take Antonio Gilvan da Cruz, a member of the Truka community of native Indians living on the island of Nossa Senhora da Assuncao.
The community has been involved in a land dispute with a powerful local landowner.
The landowner, a former state and federal congressman, fenced off property which included part of the Truka land.
He erected large locked gates (guarded), blocking access to a public road and river.
The gates were subsequently burned, probably by some of the Indians.
The Indian people dared to fight back for what was theirs, so the landowner entered the indigenous area accompanied by civil and military police, without a warrant, to seek out the ‘arsonists’.
He was overheard saying, ‘Joaquim Francisco is about to be Governor.
He is a good friend of mine.
When he takes office, I'll show these Indians their rights.’
(Joaquim Francisco was elected Governor of Pernambuco on 15 November, 1990.)
The landowner claimed that Antonio Gilvan da Cruz and the son of the community's political leader were responsible for the incident and at about 4am on 28 November 1990, a group of eight armed men arrived at the Custodio house in a remote corner of the Truka land.
They identified themselves as Federal Police and forced an entry, firing shots wildly into the house.
Antonio's mother said: ‘They shouted that everyone should lie down on the floor, that anyone who looked around would be  killed…they tied up Antonio and grabbed my youngest son (16 year old Jose Custodio).
I started crying and saying that he was only a minor, that he wasn't old enough to be taken away, and hadn't done anything.
He hung onto me and started crying, so they said they would only take Antonio to make a statement.
They left with him tied up like a criminal.
He left alive…’
Antonio Gilvan da Cruz's body was found the following morning.
Besides several bullet wounds in the chest, he was tortured and mutilated.
There were cigarette burns all over the body and knife cuts, including what appeared to be a rough inscription, on Antonio's back.
One arm and one leg had been broken.
One of the young man's eyes had been gouged out and he had been castrated.
Antonio's father, Pedro (Biro) Custodio, was informed of his son's death while reporting his kidnapping to the military barracks the next morning.
Civil police collected the corpse from the neighbouring municipality of Ibo.
President Collor assumed office in March 1991, the first democratically elected civilian President of Brazil since 1961.
His statements on greenhouse gases will no doubt me ambitious and high minded, similar to his statements on human rights in his country.
But he faces a grim legacy: in the 20 years of dictatorship (between 1964 and 1985) some 1200 peasants were murdered as a result of land conflict.
It took only two years of renewed civilian government to see this death toll increase by 50 per cent.
Chico Mendes was one of the 1200, in fact the most celebrated case.
Francisco Alves Mendes Filo, known as Chico Mendes, was renowned nationally and internationally for his work in defence of the forest of Acre.
In 1987 he was honoured with a United Nations award for his work in defence of the environment.
He played a crucial role in the organization of rubber tappers to defend their livelihood in the Amazon against ranchers, timber merchants, land speculators and large internationally financed development projects.
He was instrumental in founding an alliance of Indians and rubber tappers to help defend natural resources in forest areas.
The ‘empate’ was developed where men, women and children would go out into the forest and surround trees about to be cut down.
The safety of these same trees is being discussed at the Summit, yet those protecting them (sometimes with their own lives), those in the front line against destruction of the rain forest, are being given no support  form the host government.
Chico Mendes was murdered on 22 December 1989.
It wasn't unexpected.
He had survived six previous attempts on his life.
On 5 December, the last of several direct appeals was made to the federal and state police to investigate those threatening him.
His murderers finally ended up in gaol.
It is to be hoped that they don't face the same fate as the prisoners in the 42nd Police Precinct of Sao Paulo City.
51 prisoners were forced by military and civil police into a punishment cell measuring 4.5 square metres.
The cell was originally designed to held around twenty inmates.
The cell's steel door was then closed, shutting off all ventilation for those detained inside.
Despite cries for help and shouted warnings that some of the prisoners were suffocating to death, the cell door was not opened until two hours later.
By this time nine prisoners were already dead.
Horrible though these events are, they pale beside the treatment meted out to Brazil's children.
Already in Rio de Janeiro extensive preparations are underway to clean the city before the arrival of one hundred and forty five world leaders.
Above: Chico Mendes, murdered
Opposite: rainforest destruction in the Amazon Jungle
This includes cleaning beaches of sewage, clearing roads of rubbish, and cleaning the street of their ‘human rubbish’— street children.
To quote an Amnesty International poster: ‘Brazil has solved the problem of keeping children off the streets.
Kill them.’
The notorious death squads roam the streets of Rio de Janeiro picking victims at random.
The members of these death squads are often difficult to identify as they make a habit of killing anyone who witnesses their activities.
If the witnesses aren't killed at the time, then they are often murdered at a later date, or frightened off with violent threats.
Take 14-year old Marcelo Moreira Pachecho.
He and his 13 year old friend Andre Leota were playing when they were assaulted by three men.
He escaped, but his friend did not.
Marcelo went to Andre's house the following day for news.
A military police patrol asked that he tour the area with them to find his friend.
He was taken to various locations, until finally the police began interrogating him as if he was responsible for his friend's disappearance.
They applied wires to his fingers, anus and other parts of his body, giving him electric shocks.
This treatment lasted for 12 hours.
His friend Andre Leota was later found shot dead on waste ground.
An estimated seven million children live and work on the streets of Brazil.
Some are drawn into a life of crime: petty thieving, drugs trafficking etc.
Others survive by begging, selling trinkets or scavenging on rubbish tips.
The mere fact of being on the streets, ill-clothed and ill-fed makes such children criminals in the eyes of the police, and easy targets for death squads.
The corpse of Patricio Hilario da Silva, aged 9, was dumped in the fashionable Rio de Janeiro suburb of Ipanema on 22 May, 1989.
A note tied around his neck read: ‘I killed you because you didn't study and had no future…
The government must not allow the streets of the city to be invaded by kids.’
While Brazil prepares to greet the world's leaders, one child per day is being murdered by its death squads.
MEMBERS
DOING MORE…
FINDING NEW WAYS TO CAMPAIGN: HUMPHREY SOUTHALL AND HEDLEY SUTTON, RESPECTIVELY THE CHAIR AND SECRETARY OF THE ACTIVE MEMBERSHIP WORKING GROUP, INTRODUCE THE QUESTIONNAIRE ON PAGE 21 WHICH AIMS TO FIND OUT MORE ABOUT AMNESTY'S MEMBERS.
TOWARDS AN ACTIVE MEMBERSHIP
AMNESTY in Britain has grown tremendously over the last four or five years, but what has this meant for our effectiveness as a campaigning organisation?
Does having more members mean doing more?
Traditionally, the more active members have tended to belong to local groups, and the numbers of groups and group members have not grown as fast as the national membership.
Some members are active through the Urgent Action Network and through specialist groups such as those for doctors and lawyers, but over 70,000 members belong nationally and receive only this Journal from us.
The Journal is the launching pad for many campaigning actions — including the Action of the Month and various Special Appeals, usually linked to country campaigns.
Sometimes we get feedback: in the 1991 campaign on Morocco, over 10,000 members sent birthday cards to King Hassan containing a message about human rights; as part of our campaign for the inclusion of human rights within the National Curriculum, over 3000 letters were written by members to MPs and ministers.
However, most of the time we have little or no idea what action results from articles in the Journal, or whether members would prefer other ways of getting involved.
A working group on ‘Active Membership’ has been set up by the section to explore ways of increasing campaigning by national members.
We want to know what you are already doing, whether you would like to do more, and what the Section can do to help.
QUESTIONNAIRE
Please fill in the questionnaire on the following page: questions 1 to 9 tell us what you are already doing; questions 10 to 14 are your chance to let us know what you want from Amnesty.
Your replies will help decide the final recommendations of the working group, to be made this Autumn.
Some members get involved in other activities when they join nationally: they also join their nearest local group.
We would like to know who they are, and whether out national members would be interested in joining such groups.
It is much easier for Amnesty to help members to do more specialised campaigning if they belong to a group — in particular, we have systems for providing group members with training, and for getting feedback from them — but there may be new types of groups we could develop, and even ways of offering more personalised approaches to campaigning to individual members.
Your answers to questions 10 and 11 will tell us what demand there is for these new, more targeted methods.
Question 12 tells us whether you are happy with how things are, and question 13 asks you about the reasons for not doing more.
However, we don't just want your answers to our questions; we also want your ideas, so please answer the final question.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Our final recommendations will, inevitably, reflect available resources and the international movement's policies — for example, that all members should campaign on all parts of the Mandate — but we believe that new initiatives are possible.
The British Section is making a major commitment to a new computer system, which should both improve efficiency and help us work more flexibly with the national membership.
In Japan, an estimated 45 per cent of members are known to be campaigning, compared with 15 per cent in Britain,
In the Netherlands, as many members are active in specialist groups as in local groups, and national members are offered three distinct levels of involvement.
The membership is the lifeblood of a campaigning organisation like Amnesty, and we must explore new ways of making it as effective, and therefore as active, as possible.