

The Awful Beast
Standing before her across the water was the most enormous beast Anabelle had ever seen.
It had large powerful muscles covered by a sleek golden coat, a massive boxy head with two huge floppy ears on either side, and a broad muzzle with a grand black nose, and two big, quick brown eyes.
Its feet were the size of dinner platters, and its tail was as long and heavy as an oak limb.
A vast pink tongue was hanging out of the creature's mouth between a pair of the longest, sharpest teeth imaginable.
It was a spectacular creature, an amazing animal, a monster by any measure.
The giant had jumped splat into the middle of the canal — and into the middle of the flock of ducks — and now stood there watching the chaos it had created.
The big thing actually seemed happy to have caused so much turmoil and confusion.
as if to prove this very fact, the beast loosed its ear-shattering boom of a  roar once more.
HAR-ROOMF!
HAR-ROOMF!
HAR-ROOMF!
Then another voice called out.
‘Sergeant!
Come, Sergeant!’ it cried, and all at once the great yellow beast turned and climbed the far bank…and disappeared.
The hedgehogs could hear its tremendous feet crunching through the weeds as it bounded away.
Anabelle's small eyes grew big and round.
‘Wow!
That is the biggest creature in the world,’ she gasped.
‘What did you call it?’
‘A dog,’ answered her uncle.
‘A golden labrador retriever — the water-loving variety, to be sure.
Very nice specimen, actually.
But, a bit obstreperous as I say.’
‘Obs-pepper — what?’ wondered Anabelle.
‘Wild,’ Alfred Hedgehog said.
One of the ducks, who had taken shelter nearby, heard Uncle Alfred and swam towards them.
‘Wild!
I'll say he's wild.
That brute is a nuisance.’
‘A menace!’ quacked another duck, skidding in over the water.
‘Everything was fine until he came along.
That's the fifth time this week we've been attacked.’
‘He's a monster!’ grumbled another mallard duck, joining his friends.
‘That beast ought to be put away.’
The mallards shook the water from their feathers and flapped their wings angrily.
‘Every day that animal bothers us.
One of these days he'll go too far!’
Quacking and complaining, the ducks hopped back into the water and swam away.
‘They're right, I'm afraid,’ agreed Uncle Alfred.
‘Something will have to be done before someone gets hurt.’
‘What are you going to do?’ asked Anabelle.
‘I don't know.’
Uncle Alfred wagged his head slowly.
‘This is going to take a bit of brainwork.’
‘Oh, goody!’ squeaked Anabelle agreeably.
‘I'll help.’
Going Too Far
After another meal and a longish snooze, the two hedgehogs crawled from the nest at sunset to walk along the grassy bank of the canal.
Uncle Alfred explained about dogs to Anabelle, who wanted to know all about them.
‘They're not at all like us,’ Alfred told her.
‘They live with humans !’
‘Do they?’
Anabelle could not imagine such a thing.
She had heard of humans, of course, and had seen them walking about sometimes.
But they were very strange creatures, humans, and she could not understand why anyone would want to live with them.
‘Are you certain?’
‘Oh, yes,’ Uncle Alfred insisted.
‘They seem to enjoy it.
I can't think why.
It may be that they have found a way to train humans.
As I say, they're very clever, dogs are.’
Before Anabelle could learn more, however, they heard a splash in the canal and turned to see a little brown head bobbing up out of the water.
It  was a vole.
‘Ho there, Alfred!’ the vole called, climbing from the water.
He scurried up the riverbank and joined them on the path.
‘Wait for me!
I have something to tell you.’
‘Hello, Jeremy,’ Uncle Alfred said.
‘Do you know my young niece, Anabelle?’
‘Pleased to meet you,’ replied Jeremy nicely, taking his tail between his front paws.
‘Pleased to meet you, too,’ answered Anabelle.
‘What's all the excitement?’ asked Alfred.
‘He knew Jeremy seldom roamed far from home unless it was on important business.
‘There's to be a big town meeting tonight,’ said the vole, pressing water from his fur.
‘I'm out spreading the word.’
‘A town meeting, is it?’ replied the hedgehog.
‘That sounds important.’
‘It's about…,’
Jeremy lowered his voice to a whisper, ‘the d-o-g.
Something has to be done.’
‘The dog — you mean the big yellow one?’ asked Anabelle.
‘That's the one.’
The little vole scratched his ear three times very quickly.
‘This time he's gone too far.’
‘What has he done now?’
Uncle Alfred asked.
‘He trampled the swansuo; nest,’ Jeremy told him.
‘Oh, dear,’ sighed Alfred.
‘That's too bad.’
‘Bad enough,’ agreed the vole.
‘But that's not all.
The beast also chased Etty Moorhen within an inch of her life.
She lost six tail feathers, and was lucky to get away at all.’
‘Tch, tch!
I was afraid something like this would happen.’
Uncle Alfred shook his bristly head slowly.
‘You haven't heard the worst,’ Jeremy said.
‘The moment he finished with Etty, the big beast ran over and dug up Admiral King-Fisher's nest.
The Admiral was awfully upset.
He flew right to the Lord Mayor and demanded a town meeting.
I'm out spreading the word.’
‘Don't let us keep you, Jeremy lad,’ said Uncle Alfred.
‘You carry on.’
‘I'll see you at the meeting,’ said Jeremy.
He slipped down the riverbank and into the water.
The two hedgehogs stood on the bank and watched as the vole paddled away.
Uncle Alfred lifted his head and looked at the sky.
‘Come along, Anabelle, we just have time for a bite to eat before the meeting.’
They ambled along the riverbank, stopping to eat a few crickets and an earthworm or two.
‘I've never been to anything like this before,’ Anabelle thought to herself.
‘I wonder what's going to happen?’
THE TOWN MEETING
The first stars were glowing in the sky when Anabelle and Uncle Alfred reached the Lord Mayors house.
Hedgehogs are not the speediest creatures afoot so, by the time they arrived, most of the others were already there.
Indeed, the whole of Riverbank had gathered outside the Lord Mayor's door.
Jeremy Vole met the two hedgehogs as they joined the crowd.
‘Look how many have come,’ he said, scratching his ears excitedly.
‘I never expected so many to show up.
That dog has really thrown things into a tizzy around here.
Some folk are very upset.’
Just then several swans began flapping their wings and hissing.
The ducks began quacking and the frogs croaking.
In no time at all the air was filled with the most appalling racket: croaking, hissing, squawking, mewling, quacking, squeaking, creaking, peeping, squealing, and hooting!
Presently, Bodger Badger, Lord Mayor of Riverbank emerged.
He blinked his small eyes and stroked his handsome silver sides.
Then he sat back on his haunches and sniffed the air, holding his paws in the air for quiet.
When the noise died down, the mayor cleared his throat.
‘Friends, voters, citizens of Riverbank,’ he said in his grand official voice, ‘thank you for coming!
Again I say, thank you!’
The badger folded his paws over his stomach proudly.
‘Now then, as your duly elected leader, let me assure you that I am always working tirelessly on your behalf, and I will continue to do so as long as I remain your duly elected leader.
Rest assured I am doing all I can.
We must all do everything we can — at all times, to make Riverbank a better place to live.
I want personally to thank you all for coming.
Good night.’
He turned to waddle back into his house.
‘Attention, Lord Mayor,’ called the bright blue kingfisher.
‘What about the dog?’
The Lord Mayor of Riverbank seemed slightly startled.
‘Dog?
What dog?
We don't allow dogs in Riverbank.
Who said that?’
The badger peered around and noticed Admiral King-Fisher sitting on a branch above his head.
‘Oh, Admiral, it's you.
Well, as you know, dogs are out of the question.
Impossible.
I won't support any dog  issue, rest assured.
No, please, no need to thank me.
That's what I'm here for.
Ahem, now, if you all will excuse me, I have a very right schedule at the moment.
I really must be going.’
‘Halt!’ the kingfisher persisted.
‘Mayor Badger, what about the dog?
Something will have to be done.’
Bodger Badger, Lord Mayor of Riverbank, bristled at this.
‘Are you suggesting, sir, that I have been shirking my duties?
Of course something will have to be done.
I know that.
As your duly elected Mayor, let me assure you that the situation is being examined very closely.’
‘Is that all?’ demanded the ducks.
‘Aren't you going to do anything?’
‘Examining is doing something,’ insisted the badger.
‘I expect to make a statement any day now.
So you see,’ he bared his teeth in a satisfied smile, ‘there is nothing to worry about.
Go home, all of you.
This meeting is adjourned.’
The badger backed towards his door.
‘The lives of voters are at ssstake,’ hissed a swan named Simon.
‘Lots of voters,’ put in Malcolm Mallard.
The handsome badger drew himself up, full height.
‘My course is clear,’ he said, gazing boldly into the twilight.
‘The good of the voters must come first.
Let the town meeting proceed!’
‘Full speed ahead, sir!’ called the admiral.
‘Now then, what is to be done about the dog?’
Others piped up.
‘We want an answer!
What are you going to do about the dog?’
‘Ah, hmm,’ replied the mayor thoughtfully.
‘Ahem, ah, er, yes, I was coming to that.
Let me assure all you good citizens and voters of Riverbank that no stone shall remain unturned, no avenue unexplored, no expense spared in ridding our fair community of this dreadful menace.
I mean to take drastic action in this matter, I assure you.
Action, that is, of the most drastic kind.’
He held up his paws.
‘No need to thank me.
I'm only doing my duty.’
‘What are you going to do about the dog?’ the swans wanted to know.
‘That beassst has ruined our nests with his big feet!’
‘And he's ruined ours as well!’ cried the mice.
‘He's ruining everything!’ moaned Etty Moorhen sadly.
‘He's a dangerous nuisance,’ quacked the ducks.
‘He's a peril.’
‘If you think we're going to stand for this,’ shrieked the shrews in their shrill little voices, ‘you've got another think coming!’
‘We won't stand for it,’ croaked a chorus of frogs.
‘That's right,’ said a big green frog named  Ferd.
‘That dog has got to go!
It's getting so we don't dare poke our noses out of the water.’
‘That dog must go!’ all the creatures screamed at once.
‘That dog must go!’
‘Very well!’ the Lord Mayor shouted above the noise.
‘I have heard enough!
It is hereby resolved that the dog must go.
I will now entertain suggestions as to how we can rid ourselves of this horrible dog menace.’
‘It's simple,’ stated Simon.
‘Sssomeone will have to drive him away.’
‘Drive him away?’ the mayor wondered.
‘Can we do that?’
‘Yes!
Drive the beast away!’ the crowd answered.
‘Drive the beast far away from us!’
‘Who will do this deed?’ asked Mayor Badger, looking out over the throng.
‘Who among you will drive the dog away?’
Suddenly, no one had anything to say.
The voices that had been loudest only seconds before were the quietest now.
‘Well?’ demanded the Lord Mayor.
‘Who will be first to speak up?’
No one said anything.
No one volunteered.
Who would be brave enough to face the terrible beast?
Who would do such a foolish thing?
No one, it seemed.
‘You there, Simon Swan,’ called the mayor.
‘As  it was your idea, perhaps you should be the one to drive the dog away.’
The swan ruffled his feathers importantly.
‘An interesting notion, Mayor Badger,’ the swan replied.
‘But hardly fitting for a creature in my position.’
‘What about you, Admiral King-Fisher?’ demanded the mayor.
‘You've had more experience with this sort of thing than anybody else.
Well?
How about it?’
‘Out of the question,’ squawked the kingfisher.
‘A chap's first duty is to his family.
Besides, I'm retired.’
‘Ducks?’ inquired the mayor.
‘What about you?’
The ducks gazed thoughtfully at the sky and flapped their wings, but not so much as a peep was uttered by any of them.
‘Mice?
Moles?
Shrews?
Frogs?’ implored Mayor Badger.
But no mice, shrews or moles remained to be seen.
They all had crept quietly away.
‘Will no one drive the dog away?’ pleaded the Lord Mayor.
The citizens of Riverbank hung their heads and shifted their feet nervously.
Everyone looked at everyone else and thought of urgent matters to attend to elsewhere.
No one said anything.
The silence was almost deafening.
But then one small voice spoke up, clear as a bell ringing in the quiet air.
‘I will do it,’ said the voice.
Everyone raised their heads to see a young hedgehog standing before the Lord Mayor.
‘Anabelle!’
Uncle Alfred whispered sharply.
‘Anabelle ‘come away from there!’
‘I will do it, Mayor Badger,’ Anabelle said again.
‘I will face the dog.’
Official Dog Chaser
‘I can't let you do it,’ said Uncle Alfred sternly.
‘It's out of the question.
You don't know what you're doing.’
‘Leave her alone,’ quacked a duck carelessly.
‘She's made up her mind.’
‘Somebody has to face the dog,’ croaked Ferd the frog.
‘Why not a hedgehog?’
‘She's too young,’ insisted Uncle Alfred.
‘She doesn't even live here!
And she knows absolutely nothing about dogs.
She doesn't stand a chance against a beast like that.’
‘She has as good a chance as anyone else,’ observed the swan named Simon.
‘Anabelle's the perfect choice, I'd say.’
‘Then it's settled,’ said Mayor Badger quickly.
‘All who vote for Anabelle driving off the dog, say ‘Aye.’’
And all the creatures cried, ‘Aye!’
All the creatures, that is, except Uncle Alfred.
He  shouted ‘No!’ but no one paid the slightest attention to him.
‘Congratulations, Anabelle,’ the mayor said, ‘you are hereby elected Official Dog Chaser of Riverbank.’
‘Golly!’ gasped the young hedgehog.
‘Think of that!’
‘And,’ continued the badger ceremoniously, ‘I am sure I speak for the entire population in wishing you all the very best in driving away this menace in our midst.
Good luck, Anabelle.
Our warmest wishes go with you.’
‘Three cheers for the hedgehog!’ cried the ducks, and all the creatures shouted at once: ‘Hip, hip, hooray!
Hip, hip, hooray!
Hip, hip, hooray!’
Little Anabelle blushed, but sat up straight and tall.
When the noise died down, she looked at the mayor and said, ‘Thank you, Lord Mayor.
I will do my best.’
‘I'm sure you will, my dear,’ replied the badger.
‘Now then,’ he said, speaking to the assembly, ‘I declare this town meeting adjourned.
Go home, everyone.’
He turned round and disappeared into his house before anyone could think of anything else to say.
All the other animals turned tail at once.
They seemed only too anxious to leave.
‘Look at them running away,’ Jeremy Vole said, stepping near.
‘I  can't say I blame them, though.
That dog is very big.’
He paused to scratch nose.
‘Well, I should be getting along.
If you need anything, you know where to find me.’
And the vole hurried away, too, leaving Anabelle and Uncle Alfred alone.
‘Well,’ sighed Uncle Alfred, ‘that, as the saying goes, is that.
I suppose I should have known something like this would happen.’
‘It will be all right, Uncle,’ said Anabelle.
‘Just you wait and see.’
The two hedgehogs turned to begin their slow walk home.
They had only taken a step or two when they heard a rustle in the leaves, and a sound like someone huffing under a heavy load.
A long moment later Herkimer Housebound, the ancient turtle, shuffled into view.
He was a little out of breath, having hurried to the town meeting.
‘Splendid,’ he wheezed, ‘I — PUFF!— made it just in — HUFF, PUFF!— time.
Hello, Alfred — GASP!— early, too, I see!
WHOOF!’
‘Sorry, Herky.
You're too late,’ Uncle Alfred told him.
‘The meeting's over.’
‘Oh, drat.’
The turtle sat down heavily.
‘Late again.’
He glanced around slowly, blinking his eyes.
‘What happened?’
‘To make a long story short,’ explained Uncle Alfred, ‘young Anabelle here was elected Official  Dog Chaser.’
‘Was she indeed?
You don't say?
How very interesting,’ said the turtle slowly.
‘Whatever next?’
He turned his wrinkled face towards the young hedgehog and looked at her with his deep brown eyes.
Anabelle had never seen a turtle before, and thought him a kindly creature.
She liked him right from the start.
‘What will you do now, little one?’ he asked gently.
‘I don't really know,’ answered Anabelle.
‘I haven't had much time to think.’
‘You will need help,’ the wise old turtle told her.
‘You will need a plan.
It must be a very clever plan if you are to succeed.
Dogs are very clever, and they can be fierce.’
‘Oh,’ Anabelle said, feeling foolish and small.
‘I hadn't thought of that.’
‘Well, it's time you did,’ Herkimer said.
‘But don't worry, we can discuss it over tea.
I make a very nice nettle tea, you know.
Why don't you both come along tomorrow afternoon?’
‘Yes, please,’ said Anabelle.
‘Splendid.
That's settled.’
Old Herky turned around and slowly started back the way he had come.
‘Tea is a tonic — a very tonic.
Keeps you on your toes!
Don't know why I didn't think of it sooner.
it might not help, but at least it couldn't hurt.
Good night!’
Good Advice
‘You take my advice, young lady,’ said Admiral King-Fisher, shaking his long beak at Anabelle.
‘Attack the beast before he attacks you.
It's your only chance.’
‘Well, I —’ Anabelle began.
She had been awake all night and was looking forward to taking a nap.
She would have been fast asleep already, but for the Admiral's early-morning call.
The kingfisher continued.
‘Believe me.
I know all about these things.
Strength is the only thing a beast like that understands.
Hit him hard and hit him often.
You've got to show him you're stronger than he is.
Remember: the bigger they are, the harder they fall.’
‘Hit him?’
Anabelle tried to think how she would do that.
‘Smack him!
Sock him!
Swat him!
A full frontal assault right in the snout.
Then he'll think twice about attacking civilians in their homes,’ the  admiral said.
‘Fight fire with fire, my dear.
If you know what I mean.’
The blue bird fixed her with a steely eye.
‘Do you understand?’
‘Yes, I understand,’ the young hedgehog replied.
‘Thank you for your advice.’
No need to thank me,’ Admiral King-Fisher said.
‘We've all got to do our duty, pull our weight, et cetera, et cetera .’
‘Yes, sir.
Thank you all the same.’
‘Just you remember what I said,’ the bird told her.
‘Fight fire with fire?’
‘Affirmative!’ the admiral said with a loud clack of his beak.
‘Chin up, sailor.
We're counting on you.
Carry on.’
The kingfisher spread his wings and darted away low across the water.
The little hedgehog smoothed her quills and tried to look dignified.
She so wanted her first day as Official Dog Chaser to go well.
It was a very great responsibility.
As the kingfisher had reminded her, all of Riverbank was counting on her.
‘I won't let them down,’ Anabelle told herself.
Still, smacking the dog on the snout might not be the easiest thing to do.
It was a very big dog, after all.
And Anabelle was a very small hedgehog.
She yawned sleepily and slipped down the bank to the water's edge to wash her face with her paws.
She took a drink and sat back to think.
‘It  really is very pretty here,’ she thought.
‘So peaceful and quiet.
Everyone is so friendly.
I like it here.
Its a pity we can't all get along together.’
‘Is that old windbag gone?’ a nearby voice croaked.
‘Excuse me?’ asked Anabelle.
‘Who said that?’
‘Down here,’ said the voice.
‘It's me, Ferd Frog.
I've been waiting for that featherbrained bird to buzz off,’ said the frog.
He hopped out of the water and sat down on the bank next to Anabelle.
‘You remember me — I was at the town meeting last night.
I thought you might need a little help chasing that dog.’
‘Thank you,’ said Anabelle.
‘But I really think —’
‘Listen, kiddo, I've been thinking about this.
I know a thing or two about dogs, see.
I'm wise to their ways, you might say.’
The green frog puffed himself up.
‘I'm the guy you want to talk to, not some dotty old bird.’
‘Admiral King-Fisher was very helpful.
He told me that —’
‘Forget what he said.
He's a birdbrain.
If you want to get rid of that dog, listen to me.
I've got the answer.’
‘Very well, I'm listening.’
Ferd sucked in a deep breath.
‘First thing: you can't just haul off and smack a dog in the snout  and expect him to turn tail and run away.’
‘No?’ wondered Anabelle.
‘No.
That won't work,’ the frog said.
‘Second thing: they're sneaky.
They've got mean little minds.
Cunning beasts, dogs are.
So, what you got to do is outsmart them, see?’
‘How do I do that?’
The frog inched closer.
His voice dropped to a whisper.
‘You ambush him.’
‘Ambush him!’ cried Anabelle.
‘What in the world is that?’
‘Shh!
Keep your voice down,’ said the frog, looking this way and that to see if anyone was lurking near.
‘Ambush — you know,surprise him.
You find out where he goes, see.
Then you hide in the bushes.
When the big beast shows up, out you jump.’
‘What then?’ asked Anabelle.
‘The dog runs away, of course.’
‘Just hide and jump out?
That's all?’
It seemed to the hedgehog that there should be more to it than that.
‘It is, if you do it right,’ Ferd the frog assured her.
‘Take it from me, kid — ambushing's a lot better than smacking him in the snout.
You could get yourself hurt doing that.’
‘I suppose you're right,’ the young hedgehog allowed.
Ferd seemed like the kind of creature  who would know about leaping out at folks.
‘You bet your bristles I'm right,’ Ferd replied.
‘Scare tactics — that's what it is.
Gets 'em every time.
I guarantee it.’
‘Thank you, Mr Frog,’ said Anabelle.
‘I will surely keep it in mind.’
‘You do that, kiddo.
Well, that's my civic duty done.
Best of luck!’
The green frog plopped back into the water and disappeared with a loud PLOOK!— leaving a very puzzled Anabelle sitting on the bank of the canal.
Better Advice
The instant Ferd Frog's green head vanished underwater, three mallard ducks came skidding across the water to where Anabelle sat.
‘Frogs!
Frogs!’ quacked the Duck One.
‘Can you believe that guy?
Water on the brain if you ask me.’
‘Totally soaked,’ said Duck Two.
‘Loopy as a lord,’ Duck Three said.
The ducks swam right up to Anabelle.
They did not waste a moment, but started quacking at her.
‘Good thing we got here when we did,’ hollered Duck One.
‘Forget what that foolish frog told you.
Rubbish!
Pure rubbish!’
‘Ambush!
Ha!’ scoffed Duck Two.
‘That's a laugh!’
‘Might as well try to ambush an elephant!’ quacked number Three.
‘Take our advice,’ Duck One continued, ‘the only way to get rid of a dog is to poison him.’
‘Poison?’ squeaked Anabelle in surprise.
‘That's right,’ agreed the Duck Two.
‘Quick and easy.’
‘No muss, no fuss’ Duck Three confirmed.
‘Works every time.’
All three looked at one another and nodded their heads together.
‘Poison,’ they said.
‘It's the only way.’
Anabelle's eyes grew wide.
‘But it sounds so cruel — and dangerous!’
‘Naw, dogs get poisoned all the time.
They're used to it,’ replied Duck One.
‘I don't know,’ Anabelle told them.
‘I'll have to think about it.’
‘You do that,’ said the ducks.
‘But don't think too long, or you'll be sorry.
A monster like that is nothing to mess around with.
Poison the beast, and we'll all rest easier.’
‘Well,’ answered the little hedgehog slowly, ‘thank you for your advice.’
There came a hissing sound and the ducks turned to see a swan cruising towards them.
‘Uh-oh, here comes that stuffed shirt Simon.
We'll be going now,’ the mallards told her.
The first duck leaned close and whispered.
‘Poison.
It's the only way.’
The ducks hurried away, complimenting one another on their amazing cleverness.
The swan eyed them with royal disgust.
‘Really, I'm  surprised at you, my dear,’ intoned Simon.
‘Paying heed to a rabble like that.
I wouldn't give them the time of day.’
‘They were only trying to help.’
‘With suggestions of poison?’ the swan sneered.
‘Come now, you can't be serious.
Everyone knows that ducks are dimwits.
Ninnies and noodleheads the lot.
Look at them —’ The swan stretched a wing and pointed at the departing ducks.
‘Haven't a single brain among them.’
Then he turned his stern gaze on Anabelle.
‘I'm deeply shocked that you would even speak to them, my girl, let alone listen to them.
Poison!
Pshaw!
The very idea!’
The little hedgehog squirmed under the swan's harsh stare.
‘I was only being polite,’ she murmured.
‘All well and good,’ sniffed the swan, ‘but you listen to me, young lady.
Listen carefully and do exactly what I say.
Are you paying attention?’
‘Yes, I am,’ replied Anabelle, wishing that she was curled up in her nest fast asleep.
‘The best way,’ said the swan, ‘the very best way to get rid of a troublesome dog is to starve him.’
‘Starve him?
You mean take away his food?’
‘Precisely.
Take away his food and he will starve.’
The swan ruffled his feathers proudly, quite pleased with his brilliant idea.
‘But the dog would die,’ pointed out the hedgehog.
‘Not necessarily,’ hissed the swan.
‘He might go elsewhere to find food.
Either way, he ceases to be a problem.
Starvation is the best way, my dear.
That much should be obvious.’
Simon reared up in the water and flapped his wings.
‘Well, I must be running along — I've got a nest to rebuild.
Ta, ta, my dear.
I'm sure you'll do The Right Thing.’
The swan turned and paddled regally away.
Anabelle watched him go, thinking that she had never met so many hard-hearted and spiteful creatures in her whole short life.
But then, the day was just begun.
There were many, many more creatures yet to see.
Sergeant
Over at Sixty-two Dale Close, the great yellow beast yawned and stretched.
He looked out at his patch of garden and shook himself all over.
The garden was really too small for a dog so big.
But he was patient.
He could wait and wait — all day if need be.
He did not mind, because he was waiting for his boy to come home from school and then he'd have his run along the riverbank.
His boy was a smashing, dark-eyed lad named Drake Stephen Robert, but the dog — whose full name was Sergeant Major — just knew him as Master.
Sergeant and Master would play together.
Master would laugh and throw sticks for him to fetch and they'd wrestle and run and leap and chase and, for a little while at least, he would be free.
That was the thing he loved best of all: running free.
No walls, no fences, nothing to hold him  back.
When Master let him out, he could run and run and feel the wind in his ears and the earth under his feet.
And he would run down to the canal, leap into the water, and splash and frolic to his heart's content.
Free!
What a wonderful feeling.
If he had to wait all day for Master to come home, that was all right.
It was worth the wait.
Just to hear the sound of his own deep voice booming out across the water made the long, lonely day seem worthwhile.
The big yellow dog sighed softly to himself, and scratched his ear with his hind foot.
He stretched and got up, then trotted over to his water dish and slurped up a great guzzling mouthful.
He walked over and put his paws on the gate and listened.
He did not hear what he hoped to hear, so he shambled back to his spot by the door and stretched himself out once more.
Ah, another lazy, lazy day.
He closed his eyes and went back to sleep.
Sergeant dozed the day away, dreaming of chasing ducks along the riverbank.
That was one of his best dreams: chasing things.
He was in the middle of a delicious dream where he had leaped right smack into a big, fat flock of gawking, squawking mallards when…
What was that?
He woke up.
He listened.
And at last Sergeant  heard the voice he had been waiting all day to hear:
‘Sergeant!
Here, Sergeant!
Get up, you lazy dog!’
The big dog jumped up at once.
‘Master is home,’ he barked.
‘HAR-ROOMF!
Master is home!’
He ran to the garden gate, put his feet on it and peered over.
Sure enough, here came his boy.
‘HAR-ROOMF!
HAR-ROOMF!
Hello, Master!’
‘Get back, you big thing,’ the boy called from the other side.
‘I can't open the gate with you standing there.’
Sergeant jumped down and the gate swung open.
The boy ran to his pet, and the dog leaped up to meet him.
They tumbled backwards together in a happy heap.
Sergeant licked Master's face and hands and gave him playful nips on the arms.
‘Hey!
Hey!
You're sliming me!’ cried the boy.
They rolled around on the ground together for a few moments and then the boy's mother came out and gave him Sergeant's leash.
‘Time to play, Sergeant,’ Master told him.
‘Come on, let's go!’
Off they went.
They stayed on the footpath and Sergeant practised heeling while Master held tight to the lead.
They walked along the canal until they came to the footbridge.
Then they  crossed the bridge and entered Water Meadow, where Master stopped.
‘Here you go, boy,’ he said, removing the leash from the collar.
‘Run!’
Run!
Oh, could he run!
The dog sped across Water Meadow as if he were a furry rocket.
His long legs stretched and gathered; his ears flapped in the wind; his tail sailed out behind him.
Free!
Free at last!
He ran great loopy circles, barking with delight, while Master dodged and dived, trying to catch him.
Around and around he went in a silly game of tag.
After that, they played fetch with a stick Master found.
Time after time, the boy threw the stick and the big yellow dog bounded after it, snatched it up, and brought it back, eager to fetch it again.
Once, however, Master threw the stick and Sergeant went to retrieve it, and the dog heard something rustle in the long reeds that grew beside the canal.
‘Ducks!’ he thought.
‘I'd better go and see what they're doing.’
He dropped the stick and dashed for the canal.
HAR-ROOMF!
HAR-ROOMF!
‘Ser-r-geant!
Come back!’ yelled Master, but the dog did not hear him and ran on.
A moment later, the big, galumphing dog came crashing through the reeds and…
KEERSPLOSH!— into the water, right on top of a  line of mallards peacefully cruising along the canal.
SQUAWRK!
SQUAWRK!
Feathers flew everywhere.
The frightened ducks slapped water with their feet and wings, scattering in all directions.
Sergeant laughed to see the commotion he'd caused.
HAR-ROOMF!
HAR-R-ROOM-MFF!
He loved jumping in and stirring things up.
What fun!
What joy!
The ducks scattered, and the dog watched them go.
Then, as he climbed out of the water, he noticed a hole in the ground.
He sniffed at it.
‘Hmmm,’ he thought, ‘something interesting lives here.
I wonder what it is?
Well, there's one quick way to find out.
I'll dig it up!’
At once the big yellow dog began digging away at the hole in the bank.
Dirt flew in a thick, black fountain.
Deeper and deeper he dug, following the tunnel into the bank.
In no time at all he had made a good-sized hole in the riverbank.
‘Sergeant!’ called the boy.
‘Stop that!
Come away from there, Sergeant.
You naughty dog.
Come!’
Reluctantly, the great golden beast left his excavation and pushed back through the reeds — pausing only to shake the dirt from his coat.
He returned to his boy and the two of them  continued with their play until it was time to go home for tea.
Master attached the lead to Sergeant's collar and they walked home together, side-by-side.
‘It is good to be a dog,’ Sergeant thought happily.
‘And one of these days I'm going to catch one of those ducks.
Won't that be a treat!’
The dog loosed his loud, happy yelp — HAR-ROOMF!
HAR-ROOMF!— and hurried home for his supper.
Tea with the Turtle
Uncle Alfred woke from his day-long nap to find Anabelle sitting by the canal.
He took one look at her long face and said, ‘What's wrong, sugar plum?
Why so glum?’
Anabelle sighed heavily.
‘I don't know.
I've been chatting with the river folk about the dog.’
‘Oh, I see.’
Uncle Alfred nodded patiently.
He knew the river folk pretty well; he could guess what they had said.
‘I'm sure they meant well.’
‘Each and every one had a different idea about how I should get rid of the dog,’ Anabelle told him.
‘I hate to say it, Uncle Alfred, but some of the things they said were not very nice at all— starving, poison, ambush and attack.’
‘Oh, dear.’
The elder hedgehog shook his bristly head sadly.
‘I should have guessed something like this would happen.’
‘And that's not all.
The things they said about each other were not much better.’
‘I'm afraid this dog affair has got everyone in a nasty mood,’ Uncle Alfred explained.
‘But I know just the thing to cheer us up.’
‘What's that?’
‘A nice cup of tea.
Have you forgotten?
We're to be guests of Herkimer for tea.’
Alfred Hedgehog climbed up the bank of the canal and started off down the trail.
‘Come along, Anabelle.
We don't want to be late.’
Herkimer Housebound did indeed serve a fine cup of nettle tea — poured into walnut shells with a splash of parsley milk, and a bit of meadowsweet to eat.
Anabelle thought it a splendid treat, and drank it down at once.
She sat quietly munching her meadowsweet while her uncle and the turtle chatted about this and that.
At last the old turtle turned his wrinkled head to gaze steadily at Anabelle.
‘Well, well,’ he said, ‘ah, yes, well.’
He paused for a long time, and then said, ‘Tell me, little one.
Have you any ideas what to do about the dog?’
‘No, not really,’ Anabelle admitted.
‘But I've had ever so much advice.’
And she told the turtle about all the advice she'd received: starving, smacking, ambushing and poisoning.
‘I might be wrong,’ the young hedgehog said, ‘but I keep thinking there must be a better way.’
‘Of course there is,’ the turtle assured her.
‘I  may not know much, but I know the best way to deal with situations like this.’
‘What is that?’
Anabelle wanted to know.
The turtle smiled kindly.
‘Why, treat others the way you would like to be treated yourself.’
‘Yes!’ cried Uncle Alfred.
‘Do as you would be done by!
Of course, why didn't I think of that?’
‘I don't understand,’ complained Anabelle.
‘What does that mean?’
‘It means,’ replied the elder hedgehog, ‘that you simply put yourself in the dog's place, and think how you would like someone to behave towards you.’
‘But I don't know the first thing about being a dog,’ young Anabelle pointed out.
‘I don't know the first thing about anything, really.’
‘It's very simple,’ Herkimer told her.
‘To turn an enemy into a friend, all you have to do is love him.’
‘Love him?
Are you sure?
That doesn't sound easy at all.
That sounds terribly difficult to me.’
‘Oh, it is difficult,’ Herkimer agreed.
‘Probably one of the most difficult things in the world.
But I said it was simple, not easy.
If you want easy, you can always try poison, I suppose.’
‘Well, if I don't try something soon,’ Anabelle said, ‘I'm afraid the other animals will become very angry.’
‘You have taken on a great responsibility,’ the turtle told her.
‘The river folk will be expecting much of you.’
Anabelle sighed and hung her head.
‘Maybe too much.’
‘You will do well, little one.
The main thing is not to get all in a fluster.’
Old Herkimer blinked his eye and nodded wisely.
‘Folk do rush around so these days, Everything goes too fast.
Everyone wants all their problems solved yesterday or the day before.’
‘What's wrong with that?’ asked Anabelle.
‘Then we shouldn't have any problems at all.’
‘Patience, child,’ Herkimer said.
‘Some things take time.
Making a friend out of an enemy takes time — and love, don't forget.
An awful lot of love.’
Anabelle did not understand.
She wanted the turtle to tell her more about this Love Your Enemies scheme, and she would have asked him, but all of a sudden they heard a tremendous HAR-ROOMF!
HAR — R-ROOMF! and knew that the terrible yellow beast had come to Riverbank again.
The Shouting Match
Anabelle and Uncle Alfred left the turtle and hurried along the bank of the canal until they came to a hole in the ground, where they stopped.
The hole was freshly dug, and not at all neatly done.
There were huge gouges where the earth had been scooped out, and dirt scattered everywhere.
Uncle Alfred took one look and groaned.
‘Oh, dear,’ he said, shaking his head slowly.
‘Oh, dear, dear me.’
Anabelle stared at the terrible mess.
‘What is it?
What's the matter?’
As she spoke, out of the hole popped the fuzzy brown head of Jeremy Vole.
‘Uh — oh, it's you!
Hello, Alfred,’ said the vole.
‘I was afraid it was someone else.’
‘Such a shame,’ said Uncle Alfred.
‘I can guess what happened.’
‘Yes, it was that horrid dog,’ replied the little vole, taking his tail between his front feet and  holding it glumly.
‘That big yellow beast did this while I was out for a swim.’
‘I was afraid of that,’ said the elder hedgehog.
‘Your beautiful house is ruined.
What will you do?’
Before the little vole could answer, four mallard ducks came sliding in across the water.
‘We saw the whole thing,’ they said.
‘It was terrible.
Just terrible.
We saw the whole beastly thing.’
As the ducks were squawking about what they had seen, three tiny shrews scampered from the undergrowth.
‘It was terrible, all ,’ said the leader.She whirled around and jumped up in Anabelle's face.
‘Where were you?’
The young hedgehog started in surprise.
‘Me?
I was having tea with —‘
‘Having tea!’ shrilled the shrew.
‘You were having tea, while that horrid beast raced around digging up our homes?’
‘You tell her, Meg!’ squeaked the other shrews.
‘If she thinks we're going to stand for her having tea while our homes are dug up and flung about, she's got another think coming!’
‘I'm sorry,’ began Anabelle, ‘but I —‘
‘The damage is done,’ yelled one of the mallards.
‘It's too late for sorry.
You should have been on duty.’
‘He's right!
He's right!’ shrieked Meg.
‘So now  what are you going to do about it, you overgrown pincushion?’
‘Hold on!
It's not her fault,’ said Jeremy Vole, but no one heard him because Ferd Frog and his wife, Polly, hopped from the water just at that moment and joined the ruckus.
‘You should have ambushed the beast when you had the chance,’ croaked Ferd.
‘None of this would have happened if you'd listened to me.’
‘My Ferd's right, he is,’ added Polly.
‘Now look what's gone and happened.
This is just the sort of thing that we were all afraid of.
A crying shame, that's what it is.’
‘Dreadful thing,’ said a deep voice.
They all looked up to see Simon Swan standing over them.
‘Sylvia and I want to go on record as protesting this outrageous incident in the ssstrongest possible articulation.’
‘You tell 'em, Stretch!’ squealed the shrews.
‘We protest, too!’ added the ducks.
‘In the strongest possible…um, whatever, too.’
Admiral King-Fisher swooped in just then.
‘This never would have happened if you had not deserted your post!’ he snapped sharply.
‘I warned you!
The best defence is a good offence!’
‘Now wait just a minute,’ put in Uncle Alfred.
‘Everybody pipe down.
There is no need —’ But  no one paid any attention to him.
They all began shouting at Anabelle.
‘Some Official Dog Chaser you turned out to be,’ huffed the ducks.
‘What's the use of having an Official Dog Chaser, if she won't chase the dog away?’ croaked the frogs.
‘Are you going to protect us or not?’ shrilled the shrews.
‘It's getting worssse,’ hissed the swan.
‘I say, you're supposed to do something.
You're supposssed to protect usss!’
‘What are you waiting for?’ the kingfisher demanded.
‘Are you going to do your duty, or turn tail and run?’
And then everyone began screeching at once.
Uncle Alfred tried to calm them down, but they only screamed louder.
Anabelle had never heard such a ruckus.
‘They're right,’ she said to herself.
‘I am the Official Dog Chaser — it's my responsibility.
I have to do something.’
She left the citizens of Riverbank to their shouting match and struck off along the trail to the footpath.
No one saw her go — they were too busy hollering at one another to notice that she had disappeared.
Anabelle scrambled across the footbridge to the other side of the canal.
She was going to find the  dog.
She didn't know what she was going to do when she found him, but that did not matter right now.
‘I'll think of something,’ she told herself, and scurried on.
A Long Night's Work
It took a bit of doing, but Anabelle found the place she was looking for.
She crawled under a shrub beside the brick wall.
In the garden on the other side of the wall lived the big yellow dog.
The little hedgehog made a nest among the dry leaves and sat down to think.
‘He is far too big to swat,’ she thought.
‘And ambushing might work for a long-legged frog like Ferd, but I don't think I could leap out of a bush if I tried.
There must be something else I can do.’
A red and orange sunset spread across the sky, and the shadows stretched long across the path.
Still Anabelle thought and thought what she might do.
Attacking and ambushing were out.
Likewise poison.
Ugh!
What about taking away his food?
Of all the advice she had received from the other creatures, taking away the dog's food was the only one, she decided in the end, that might  have a chance of succeeding.
But she would have to wait until the dog was fast asleep before going into the garden.
She curled up in her nest and waited for night to come.
When Anabelle woke, she crawled out from under the shrub and saw the moon sailing high in the sky.
She put her ear against the wall and listened carefully.
No sound came from the garden, so she crept along to the gate and squeezed herself under.
She waited there in the dark, quiet as could be, and gazed around.
Across the garden, in front of the door to the house, lay the great yellow monster.
In the moonlight, he looked like a gigantic hill of sand.
Anabelle watched him for a long while, but he didn't twitch a muscle.
She grew bolder and stole a wee bit further into the garden.
And there, in the middle of the garden, she found the great beast's supper dish.
It, like the beast, was simply enormous.
Gathering up her courage, the little hedgehog crept to the dish.
‘So far, so good,’ she thought, pulling herself up the side of the supper dish.
The dog's big dish was still more than half full.
The young hedgehog sniffed at the food.
PHEW!
She touched some of it with her foot: it was soft and squishy, but not too soggy.
She tasted it.
‘Mmmm,’ she thought, ‘It's not half bad.
In fact…but there's far too much for one small
She looked at the dish and the food again.
Now what?
It would take a week to eat all that food, and the dish was much too heavy for her to move.
‘I'll have to carry the food away bit by bit,’ she decided.
And crawled over the edge of the dish and slid down into the mushy stuff.
‘Yish!’ she grunted aloud.
‘I'll need a bath after this.’
Wasting not a moment, Anabelle rolled some of the dogfood into a lumpy ball with her forefeet and then clambered back out of the dish.
Half-carrying, half-rolling the stuff, the young hedgehog hauled the food away.
She squeezed back under the gate and carried the ball to the riverbank and pushed it in.
The dogfood rolled down the bank and PLOONK! into the water.
She turned around and scampered back across the footpath to the gate, squeezed under and crept to the dish.
She clambered over the edge of the dish, rolled together another lumpy ball of squishy food, climbed back out of the dish, rolled the ball across the garden and under the gate, scurried across the footpath to the riverbank, pushed the ball of dog food down the bank and into the drink.
PLOONK!
‘Whew!’ puffed Anabelle.
‘This is going to take all night.’
It did.
She ate a little to keep her strength up.
But it was back and forth, back and forth, all night long — gathering up the food, rolling it into a ball, pushing the ball to the water…
The plucky little hedgehog kept at it until the dog dish was empty and not a scrap remained.
By the time she had rolled the last lump of dog food into the canal, the sun was beginning to rise in the east.
‘Finished at last,’ she sighed, peering into the empty dish.
Across the garden, the big yellow dog snorted and made digging motions with his paws.
‘He's waking up!’
An exhausted Anabelle ambled to the gate and squeezed herself under for the last time.
And then, peering under the gate into the garden, she waited to see what would happen next.
A Hungry Dog
Anabelle waited a long time, watching from the other side of the gate.
But at last the huge tawny beast opened his enormous eyes, yawned, stretched his great long legs, arose and trotted round the garden three times.
Then he came to his empty dish, paused and sniffed the bowl.
At once he ran to the house and began scratching at the door.
This went on for some time, until the dog's master came to the door.
‘Good morning, Sergeant,’ Master said, and began petting the big yellow beast.
The dog licked Master's face, and they romped together in the garden.
‘That looks like fun,’ Anabelle thought to herself.
She watched the two playing so happily together and wished that she, too, had such a good friend.
The boy's mother came to the door and called, ‘Come in now, dear.
It's time to get ready for school.’
The boy ran across the garden to the dog's dish.
‘Sergeant!
You greedy pig — you've eaten up all your food.’
Master laughed.
‘You must be having another growth spurt!
Don't worry, I'll get you some more to eat.’
Anabelle watched from under the gate while the boy snatched up the huge bowl and dashed into the house.
He returned a few moments later with the dish, and the little hedgehog could hardly believe her eyes: the gigantic dish was overflowing with dog food.
The young hedgehog saw the mountain of food in the dish, and saw the boy place the dish before the dog.
‘There you go, Sergeant,’ said Master.
‘Don't gobble it down all at once this time.
Save some for later.’
The yellow dog barked excitedly and shook himself; he shoved his nose into his dish and began gulping down the food in huge, hungry bites.
Anabelle did not need to see more.
She turned round and slowly headed for home.
Uncle Alfred was waiting for her at the entrance to the nest when she arrived.
‘Where have you been?’ he asked.
‘I've been worried about you.’
‘I've been to see the dog,’ Anabelle replied, and told him about taking away the dog's food.
‘That was a very risky thing to do,’ Uncle  Alfred said.
‘What if the beast had woken up and found you taking his food?’
‘But he didn't,’ Anabelle replied.
‘Well, you were lucky this time,’ her uncle said sternly.
‘You might not be so lucky next time.’
‘There won't be a next time,’ the young hedgehog said.
‘It was a long night's work wasted.’
And she told how the boy brought the dog his food.
‘No sooner is the dish empty than it is filled again — and with more food than before!’
‘Incredible!’ said Uncle Alfred, shaking his bristly head in awe.
‘I've heard of such a thing, of course, but I've never seen it myself.
It must have been an amazing sight.’
‘Amazing, but true,’ Anabelle replied.
‘The beast has as much food as he wants.
I'll never be able to take his food away.
It is plain impossible.’
‘You're probably right,’ Uncle Alfred agreed.
‘We'll have to find another way.’
‘Could we find it later?’
Anabelle yawned and rubbed her eyes.
‘I've been working all night and I'm worn out.’
‘Of course, my dear.
You have a nice sleep.
I'll fetch some nice grubs for us to eat when you wake up.’
The weary little hedgehog stumbled into the leafy nest and curled up in a prickly ball.
She  closed her eyes and fell instantly asleep.
She would have stayed asleep, too, if not for the outrageous racket that erupted outside at that very moment.
Beast on the Loose
Anabelle awoke with a start.
The noise outside the nest sounded like a mass of buzzing wasps in a thunderstorm.
‘Whatever can that be?’ wondered the young hedgehog.
‘Whatever it is, it sounds like trouble.
I'd better see if I can help.
She rolled to her feet and crawled out to find almost the whole population of Riverbank gathered outside.
‘There she is!’ quacked a nearby duck.
‘I told you she was hiding in there!’
Suddenly, Anabelle found herself surrounded by furious, frowning faces.
‘What is wrong?’ she asked.
‘Why is everyone so angry?’
Simon Swan thrust his long neck at her.
‘as if you didn't know!’
‘But I don't know,’ Anabelle said.
‘It's that horrid beast, of course,’ said Etty Moorhen.
‘He's on the loose again.’
‘That monster has dug up my nest now!’ cried Admiral King-Fisher.
‘Some Official Dog Chaser you are!’
‘The rogue roams free, destroying everything, and you just sssleep!’ hissed Simon.
‘But I was working all night —’ she began.
Sylvia Swan cut her off.
‘Working?
Ssstuffing yourself, more like.
I've never seen such a lazy Dog Chaser.’
‘You haven't done anything!’ shouted Ferd Frog.
‘Not a single, solitary thing.’
‘Oh, but she has done something,’ quipped the kingfisher.
‘She's made everything worse!’
They all started shouting again.
Anabelle felt like curling up in a ball and plugging her ears until they all went away — and she would have, too, if she had thought it would do any good.
And if the shouting weren't bad enough, all of a sudden the mice began wailing: ‘The brute is loose!
The brute is loose!’
More ducks arrived, shouting, ‘He has escaped from his garden!
The monster is running loose!’
‘And he's destroying everything!’ shrieked the shrews.
‘Do something!
Do something!
Hurry!
Hurry!
Do something!’
All at once, everyone began chanting ‘Do something!
Do something!’
Angry voices filled the air: squeaks and squeals, whoops and wails, growls and grunts.
‘Do something!
Do something!
Do something!’
Anabelle stared at the hysterical creatures.
‘Very well,’ she said to herself — for no one else was listening; they were all too busy shouting themselves silly to pay any attention to her —‘I will do something.
But this time I will do it my own way!’
She turned her back on the squabbling creatures and crept off along the footpath.
Uncle Alfred, returning from a ramble up-river to fetch food, heard the commotion and hurried home as quickly as possible.
He took one look at the creatures gathered in front of his house and said, ‘What is the meaning of this?
Where's Anabelle?’
The animals glanced around.
Anabelle?
Where's Anabelle?
‘Upon my word, she was here a moment ago,’ stated Simon.
‘Most likely she's hiding!’ put in Admiral King-Fisher.
‘Our Dog Chaser does nothing but hide.’
‘She's run away,’ added the mallards.
‘Run clean away — that's what.’
But then Jeremy Vole piped up.
‘She hasn't run away!’ he cried.
‘Look!
She's swimming across the canal!’
Everyone looked where the brown vole was pointing and, sure enough — there was little Anabelle with her nose barely out of the water, paddling bravely across the canal.
And from  somewhere on the other side they heard the sound they all dreaded: HAR-ROOMF!
HAR- ROOMF!
HAR-R-R-R-R-O-O-O-O-M-M-M-F-F-F!
Anabelle Hedgehog was going to face the great golden beast.
Facing the Beast
‘Come back!
Anabelle, come back!’ shouted Uncle Alfred.
But the young hedgehog, if she heard, did not turn back.
She kept right on swimming, until she reached the other side.
She scampered up the bank through the weeds to the footpath.
The loud HAR-ROOMF!
HAR-ROOMF! grew louder and, all at once, there he was: the great boxy head with two huge floppy ears on either side; broad muzzle with a grand black nose; feet the size of dinner platters; a tail as thick as a mooring rope; vast pink tongue hanging out between a pair of the longest, sharpest teeth imaginable.
And the golden beast was standing on the footpath in front of Anabelle, looking at her with its huge brown eyes.
ROOMF? it said, and lowered its enormous nose to sniff the little hedgehog.
‘Run, Anabelle!
Run!’ cried Uncle Alfred.
‘Hide!’
The citizens of Riverbank stood at the water's edge and stared in horror at the two on the opposite bank.
What would happen?
Surely the young hedgehog would be killed.
For the yellow menace.was even bigger and more terrible than they knew.
Seeing him towering over the young hedgehog like that, licking his great, greedy chops…
Oh!
It was too, too much!
‘Please, Anabelle!’ shouted Uncle Alfred as loudly as he could.
‘Run away!
Run and hide while you still have a chance!’
But Anabelle did not run away.
She had no thought of hiding.
And she did not do what hedgehogs usually do when they find themselves in a bit of trouble: curl up in a tight, prickly ball.
Instead, she sat up and looked the big rascal right in the eye.
‘Hello,’ Anabelle said in a brave voice.
‘How are you?’
‘HROOF?’ said the dog.
He held his massive head to one side and raised his ears.
‘GRRRR.’
‘HSSSH!’
The creatures watching from the riverbank gasped.
‘0000!’
The brave young hedgehog did not quiver a quill.
In her most polite and charming voice, she said, ‘My name is Anabelle.
What is your name, please?’
‘G-R-R-RUFF!’ replied the dog.
The fur on his  shoulders stood up in stiff spikes.
‘Look out!’ hollered the ducks.
‘He's going to attack!’
‘He'll do no such thing,’ snipped Admiral King-Fisher.
‘He's simply going to gobble her whole!
That's what they do, those canines.
Gobble a body whole.’
‘I can't look!’ said Etty Moorhen, hiding her head under her wing.
‘It's too horrible.
Won't someone do something?’
Just then Bodger Badger, Lord Mayor of Riverbank, waddled into the crowd.
He had heard the commotion and roused himself from his noonday nap to come and see what had caused such an uproar.
‘Make way!
Make way for the Lord Mayor!’ he bellowed, shoving through the throng to the riverbank.
‘Here now!
Here now!
What is going on?
Who called this meeting?’
‘It isn't a meeting,’ explained Simon Swan.
‘It'sss a massacre.’
‘A massacre?
What?
Where?
Who's massacring whom?’ the mayor demanded.
‘Do they have a licence?’
‘It's Anabelle,’ replied Uncle Alfred.
‘She has gone across the canal to face the beast.’
‘She's about to get et up, too,’ added the mice.
‘That dog will gobble her down whole — the  admiral said so!’
‘Upon my word!’ barked the badger.
‘We can't have this sort of thing in Riverbank.
Why didn't someone stop her?’
‘You're the one who made her Official Dog Chaser,’ pointed out Ferd Frog.
‘She's just doing her job.
Let her go, I say.’
Away across the canal, brave little Anabelle sat down on the footpath under the great beast's nose.
‘Now then, I've told you my name,’ she said nicely.
‘It's good manners to tell me yours.’
The dog flattened his ears.
‘G-R-R-R-R-OWF!’ he rumbled, hunching his back so that his fur stood straight up.
‘Oh, oh!’ squawked the ducks.
‘It's all over now!’
The dog bared his long, sharp teeth, and raised one enormous paw to strike.
Friends?
‘You don't frighten me,’ Anabelle told the dog.
‘You're just pretending.’
‘G-R-R-R-L-L-L!’ growled the golden monster from way down deep in his throat.
He inched closer, his face all wrinkled and nasty, his eyes two tiny mean slits.
‘S-N-N-R-R-R-L-L!’
‘Oh, go on,’ the young hedgehog said.
‘I'm not running away, and you're not about to bite me.
Quit pretending.’
But the ferocious beast really did look very serious about biting the little hedgehog.
He snarled again and lifted his paw still higher.
‘Look out, Anabelle!’ shouted Uncle Alfred as loudly as he could.
Anabelle heard that.
She glanced across the canal to where all the animals were gathered watching her.
‘Hello, Uncle!’ she called, and waved.
‘Hello, everyone.
I'm talking to the dog.’
As soon as the hedgehog turned, the big rascal  attacked.
Down came the huge paw.
SWAT!
Right in the middle of poor Anabelle's back.
SMACK!
‘OOOOO!’ shrieked the citizens of Riverbank.
‘She's killed!’
‘YOUCH!’ yelped the dog.
‘Y-I-I-E-E!’
Anabelle picked herself up and dusted herself off.
The golden giant shook his paw gingerly.
‘Hey!
What did you do that for?’ he whined.
‘I'm sorry,’ replied Anabelle.
‘Are you hurt?’
‘You stung me!’ muttered the beast, licking his wounded paw.
‘I didn't know you could st-i-i-n-ng.’
‘I might have warned you,’ said the little hedgehog.
‘But you shouldn't have swatted me.’
‘Aw, I was just having fun,’ said the dog.
He looked at her with big, brown, sad eyes.
‘I didn't really mean any harm.
It's just that I get so lonely sometimes.
I don't really have any friends.’
‘You play too rough,’ Anabelle told him firmly.
‘That's what I want to talk to you about.’
‘No,’ the dog said, wagging his tail briskly.
‘Let's play!’
‘Not until we talk.’
The little hedgehog would not budge.
‘ROWFF!’ the dog replied.
‘My name is Sergeant!
Come on, let's play.’
He began running circles around her and barking.
‘I won't play with you,’ Anabelle insisted, ‘until we talk.’
Sergeant took a playful nip at the hedgehog and got a noseful of stinging quills.
‘YOWFF!’ he howled.
‘OWWW!’
The beast did not like getting pricked.
He flicked out his paw and gave the hedgehog a sideways swat.
The young hedgehog tumbled across the footpath.
‘Sting him again!
Sting him again!’ the Riverbank creatures cried.
‘Teach the brute a lesson!’,
For a moment she thought that just might be the best thing to do.
But then she remembered what the wise old turtle had told her about putting herself in the dog's place, and doing what she would want to have done to her.
‘If I was a big lonely dog,’ she said to herself, ‘I know would want a friend.’
She looked at the dog, who was licking his injured paw and rubbing his sore nose.
‘Did I hurt you?’
Anabelle asked.
‘Yes!’ whimpered the dog.
‘Sting him again!
Sting him again!’ the Riverbank creatures shouted.
‘Drive him away!’
‘I am sorry,’ said Anabelle, creeping close.
‘You're no fun,’ said the dog.
‘I'll find somebody else to play with.’
He turned round  and began to trot away.
Anabelle called him back.
‘Don't go, Sergeant.
I want us to be friends.’
‘Friends!
You mean it?’
The dog bounded back.
‘Then we can play together?’
‘Yes,’ said the hedgehog.
‘We can play together — as long as we play as friends.’
‘Play as friends?’
The dog sat down on the footpath and scratched his head.
‘I don't understand,’ he complained.
‘It's very simple,’ Anabelle told him sweetly.
‘Friends do not play rough with each other: friends do not hurt others.’
‘Is that all?’ the dog asked.
‘Almost,’ Anabelle continued.
‘Friends respect one another 's property.’
‘Property?’
The dog shook his head.
‘What is property?’
‘Your house and belongings,’ Anabelle explained, ‘your special things.
A friend would never break or take another's things.’
‘Right!’ answered the dog.
‘Now, let's play!’
‘Friends?’ asked Anabelle.
‘Friends!’ barked the dog happily.
‘Let's play!’
They played a lively game of Hide ‘N’ Seek, where the little hedgehog would crawl away to hide in the weeds or under pile of leaves and the big beast would seek her out and bark loudly  when he found her.
Over and over again they played the game, until the dog heard his master calling and said, ‘That's my boy, Master.
I have to go now, but I'll come back tomorrow.
Goodbye, Anabelle!
Goodbye, friend!’
As he galloped away, Anabelle was filled with such joy that she just couldn't help singing…
Oh, hedgehogs are slow,
and hedgehogs are shy.
We never run,
and we seldom fly.
We don't have feathers,
and we've not much fur;
though prickles can sting,
there's one thing for sure:
If ever you're glumly,
and need a small friend,
a hedgepig will love you,
to the prickly end.
A Secret Plan
All the animals were waiting for Anabelle when she returned to Uncle Alfred's nest on the other side of the canal.
They had seen her frolic with Sergeant and they did not like it.
‘Well, that accomplished nothing!’ quacked the ducks.
‘Some Official Dog Chaser you are!’ shrilled the shrews.
‘Now look what you've done!’
‘You were sssupposed to chase him away!’ shouted Simon Swan.
‘Not encourage him.
Now he'll be harder to get rid of than ever!’
Uncle Alfred hurried to meet her.
‘Are you all right, Anabelle?
Did the beast hurt you?’
‘He didn't hurt me in the least.
I don't think he really wants to hurt anybody,’ Anabelle replied happily.
‘He just doesn't know any better.’
‘You should have smacked him a good one when you had the chance!’
Admiral King-Fisher told her.
‘I warned you this would happen!’
‘Dry up, fishface!’ squawked the ducks.
‘She should have poisoned him!
That's the way to get rid of an enemy!’
‘Shut up, you featherheads!’ croaked Ferd Frog.
‘Ambush him!
Ambush him!
I told you it was the only way!’
All the animals began shouting at poor Anabelle.
Finally, Mayor Badger stepped up and said, ‘As Official Dog Chaser of Riverbank, you have failed in carrying out your duty.
What do you have to say for yourself?’
‘You chose me to deal with the dog because none of you would do it,’ Anabelle answered.
‘That means I get to do it the way I think best.’
‘It does not!’ screamed the animals.
‘Yes, it does,’ Anabelle told them.
‘And I think it's a far better thing to turn an enemy into a friend.’
‘Friend?
Friend !
That monster has ruined Riverbank!’ howled the creatures.
‘He digs up our houses, he destroys our nests, and chases our children!
He roars and runs and tears into everything!
Nothing is safe when he's around!
He is a menace!’
‘Then we must help him learn the proper way to behave,’ said Anabelle simply.
‘We must help him learn to be a friend.’
‘This used to be a happy place,’ moaned the animals, ‘until that beast came along.’
‘And it will be happy again,’ Anabelle told them.
‘In fact, it will be an even happier place than it was before.
But turning an enemy into a friend is not easy, we must all pitch in together.’
‘What do you mean?’
The animals did not like the sound of that.
‘I mean,’ explained Anabelle, ‘I can't do it all alone.
I must have help — I need all of you to do your part.
Now, I have a plan.’
‘A plan?’ asked the citizens suspiciously.
‘What kind of plan?’
‘A secret plan,’ Anabelle told them.
‘What sort of secret plan?’ they all wondered.
This sounded interesting.
‘Gather round, all of you,’ said the young hedgehog, ‘and I will tell you.’
They all crowded close around her, and Anabelle, in quite a loud whisper, began to tell them her secret plan.
‘Listen,’ she said, ‘here is what we must do…‘
Something Funny
The next morning, after Master had gone off to school for the day, Sergeant decided to pay a visit to Riverbank to see his new friend Anabelle Hedgehog.
The big dog used the new trick for getting out he'd taught himself.
He dashed across the garden and pounced upon the garden gate, pressing the latch with his big feet.
The gate rattled and bounced open.
Instantly, Sergeant stuck out his neck and wormed the gate open with his nose.
Then — ZIP!
ZAM!— he was free.
He trotted along the path to the footbridge, crossed it and raced out onto Water Meadow.
He made his way to the canal and followed the trees along the bank towards Uncle Alfred's nest.
‘What a friendly creature is Anabelle,’ the big dog said to himself.
‘Of all the riverfolk I've met, she is the only one who was ever nice to me.’
He ran on until he came to the tall reeds.
‘Here is where the frogs live,’ he said to himself.
‘Ho, ho!
I'll just pop in and give them a good scare.
What fun!’
And, with that, Sergeant gathered himself and leaped right into the reeds.
He landed SPLOSH! in the middle of Ferd and Polly's morning sunbath.
‘Ha, ha!’ he thought.
‘Watch them hop and flop!’
But no!
What's this?
No hopping, no flopping.
The frogs calmly raised their heads and smiled.
‘Oh, hello, Sergeant,’ they said.
‘HAR-ROOMF!’ he replied, using his loudest, most obnoxious howl to scare them.
The frogs did not bat an eye.
‘Welcome to Riverbank,’ Ferd answered.
‘I see you are out bright and early this morning.’
‘Oh, yes,’ added Polly.
‘It's ever so good of you to pop in.’
The big dog shook his head until his ears flapped.
‘What was that?
Did I hear right?’
‘We were just finishing breakfast,’ said Ferd Frog.
‘Would you care to join us?’
‘Oh, do,’ Polly urged.
‘Can I offer you anything?
A fly?
A nice fat waterbug, perhaps?’
‘ROWF!’ said Sergeant.
‘Um, no thanks.
I'm looking for Anabelle.’
‘Perhaps another time,’ offered Ferd.
‘Yes,…maybe some other time,’ said the dog.
He turned and started away again.
‘So long,’ said the frogs.
‘We'll be seeing you!’
Sergeant did not answer.
He ran along and saw a very small creature swimming beside the bank.
‘Ah!’ he thought.
‘Here's a bit of fun.
I'll splash him!’
PLOOSH!
The great beast landed with both feet in the water, right on top of the little fellow swimming there.
The dog's victim disappeared underwater.
‘Hee, hee!’ thought the dog.
‘That's more like it!’
But a moment later the little fellow bobbed up.
He shook the water from his eyes.
‘Why, hello, Sergeant!’ piped the vole.
‘My name is Jeremy.
I don't believe we have met.’
‘Um, no, I suppose not,’ said the dog, suddenly feeling a little guilty for splashing such a friendly creature.
‘I live in a hole in the bank of the canal just there.’
The vole pointed a few paces further along.
‘You're welcome to come by any time.’
‘I am?’ wondered the dog.
He looked where the vole was pointing and suddenly remembered the place.
‘Didn't I dig that up a day or two ago?’
‘Yes, you did,’ answered Jeremy.
‘No doubt it was an accident.
Anyway, now that you're here and we'll be getting to know one another better, I'm sure nothing like that will happen again.’
‘Why, um — No!’
Sergeant barked.
‘Of course not.’
‘If you are not busy,’ offered Jeremy Vole, ‘I thought perhaps you might like to stop by for a chat.’
The big golden beast shook his head with a slight bit of confusion.
‘Ah, well,’ he replied, ‘I was on my way to visit Anabelle.
‘Another time, then,’ Jeremy said nicely.
‘I shall look forward to it.’
‘Me too,’ said the dog, lifting his big feet from the water and bounding away.
‘Goodbye!’
‘Goodbye for now,’ called the vole.
‘See you soon!’
‘What a nice chap he was,’ thought the dog.
‘I'm sorry I wrecked his house.
Well, I certainly won't do that again.’
The beast was still thinking this when he heard a loud whistle from the tree branch above him.
‘Ahoy there!
Attention, Sergeant!’
The dog stopped and looked up.
‘Ahoy?’
His eyes moved along the branch and came to rest on a brilliant blue bird sitting there.
Who are you?’
‘Admiral Reginald King-Fisher, Retired,’ replied the bright blue bird.
‘At ease, Sergeant.’
The dog sat down.
‘How do you do, sir?’
‘Very well, thank you,’ said the kingfisher.
‘Now then, I have, a-hem, noticed your presence  in Riverbank and thought perhaps you might appreciate a word of welcome.
Now then.
Hear this: Welcome — I repeat — welcome to Riverbank.’
‘Thank you, sir,’ Sergeant said.
‘Very nice of you, sir.’
‘Think nothing of it, sailor.
We must all pitch in and do our part.
Right!
That's it, I'm off.
Cheerio!’,
The bird vanished in a flash of blue.
The dog scratched his head with a hind foot and looked all along the riverbank.
‘Something funny is going on around here,’ he said.
‘What is it?’
What Was Going On
What Sergeant said was true.
Something very funny was going on in Riverbank — and it was all Anabelle's doing.
It was her secret plan in action, of course.
And it was working better than she could have hoped.
For, no sooner had Admiral King-Fisher flown away, than who should come gliding along but Simon and Sylvia Swan.
‘Greetings and sssalutations,’ said Simon.
‘I give you good day, sir.
Super day, what?’
‘Oh, yes,’ the big dog agreed.
‘Super.’
‘Lovely day for a swim,’ said Sylvia.
‘You do swim, don't you Mr Sergeant?’
‘Course I swim!’ the dog barked.
‘I love a good splash up!’
‘That's the stuff!’ remarked Simon.
‘We must go swimming together one day.
I don't mind telling you, I am something of an expert at swimming myself, and I know some smashing spots for a jolly good sssplash up.’
‘Why, we could show him one now,’ suggested Sylvia Swan.
‘Then he could go swimming any time he liked.
Would you like that, Mr Sergeant?’
‘Boy, would I!’ the dog barked.
Then he remembered he was looking for his friend.
‘Well, maybe tomorrow would be better.
I'm on my way to see Anabelle.’
‘Tomorrow, then.
Splendid!
I shall look forward to it with ssspecial pleasure.’
‘We both shall, my dear,’ added Sylvia.
‘Good day to you, Mr Sergeant.
Until tomorrow, then.’
The two swans stroked away slowly.
The dog watched them go.
‘Gosh,’ he said, ‘what nice folks they are, once you get to know them.
To think I trampled their nest.’
Sergeant the dog trotted along the riverbank a little further and came upon a flock of mallard ducks, each with beak tucked under wing, sunning themselves on the bank.
‘Ah,’ he thought, ‘here's a bit of fun.
I'll scare them silly!’
He gathered himself for a giant leap and SPRONG! landed right in the middle of the sleeping ducks.
As expected, the ducks woke up squawking, flapping their wings, scattering every-which-way.
‘Ho, ho!’ laughed Sergeant.
‘HAR-ROOMF!
HAR-RO OMF!’
But then a curious thing happened.
Instead of scurrying away to hide in the weeds, the ducks  came back.
‘You certainly scared us,’ quacked the first duck.
‘Golly, what a fright!’
‘Yessiree,’ agreed the second, ‘you had us going all right.’
‘That's a good one on us,’ added the third.
‘What a joke!’
‘Caught us napping, you did,’ laughed the fourth.
‘Dear me, yes,’ said the fifth.
‘You are a clever dog.’
Sergeant could hardly believe what he was hearing.
‘What?
You mean you're not cross with me?’
‘Cross with you?’ cried the first duck.
‘Never!
It's a well-known fact that no one likes a good joke as much as a mallard.’
‘We're great jokers,’ said the second.
‘Of course we are!’ replied the third.
‘The best jokes are duck jokes, we always say.’
‘He's right,’ put in the fourth.
‘The very best jokes.’
‘So, you'd better be careful,’ warned the fifth with a chuckle.
‘We might just sneak up on you next time.’
They all laughed at this, and began quacking about how they would surprise the dog when he least expected it.
Sergeant laughed, too, and thought what a pleasant thing it was to have a  flock of fun-loving ducks for friends.
‘I'm sorry I pounced on you before,’ the dog told them.
‘I get a little carried away sometimes.’
‘Think nothing of it,’ said the ducks.
‘We understand completely.
Pounce away all you like, we don't mind in the least.’
‘And you can surprise me any old time,’ the dog offered.
‘I like surprises.’
Talk about surprises!
Why, the dog could hardly turn round without someone greeting him, welcoming him, and wishing him well.
Certainly no one had ever done that before.
Sergeant continued on his way to the hedgehog nest beneath the trees.
There he found Anabelle curled up sound asleep.
‘HAR-ROOMF!’ he called, sticking his big nose into the nest.
‘Hello, Sleepyboots.
Time to get up!’
The young hedgehog yawned and waddled outside.
‘Good morning, Sergeant,’ she said, blinking in the sunlight.
‘How are you today?’
‘Great!’ barked the dog.
‘Never better!’
‘Is everyone treating you all ?’ asked Anabelle, smoothing her quills with her paws.‘Terrific!’exclaimed Sergeant.
‘But now that you mention it, I think I've discovered something very odd going on around here.’
‘Whatever could that be?’ wondered Anabelle  innocently.
She knew very well what the dog was talking about.
‘Well,’ confided the dog in a low voice, ‘everyone is being nice to me.’
The hedgehog peered up at the dog.
‘What is so odd about that?
Folks should be nice to one .’‘I mean extra special nice — the sort of nice you don't see every day.
People are treating me like they're happy to see me.’
‘We are happy to see you, Sergeant.
We love you.’
The big dog cocked his head to one side and raised his ears.
‘Me?
You love me — even after all the terrible things I've done?
I've chased ducks, and dug up homes, and trampled nests, and caused commotion wherever I went.’
‘Some of us have noticed,’ Anabelle agreed.
‘But we decided to love you anyway.’
‘Really?’
The big dog could hardly believe his floppy ears.
He bent his head down and gave the little hedgehog a big wet lick right on the nose.
‘Don't worry.
I won't disappoint you!’
‘What do you mean?’ sputtered Anabelle, drying her face with her paws.
‘You'll see,’ announced the great beast proudly.
‘I'm going to be a different dog from .’
A Different Dog
The creatures of Riverbank did not see the big dog the next day.
Nor did they see him the day after that.
They went about their business, expecting him to appear at any moment.
When he didn't, they grew worried thinking the beast was planning something really terrible.
Finally, they couldn't stand it any more.
They just had to know what was going to happen next.
So, once again, Anabelle was awakened in the middle of her sleep by the buzz of loud voices outside the nest.
She yawned and rubbed her eyes, and poked her head out to see what was going on.
‘I tell you, it isn't working,’ Ferd Frog was saying.
‘All our hard work for nothing.’
‘It was a poor plan,’ agreed Admiral King-Fisher.
‘Never should have agreed to it.
Bound to fail.
Knew it would.
Pity.’
‘I sssuppose,’ lisped Simon Swan, ‘that we  shall have to find a new Official Dog Chaser.
I don't sssee what else we can do.’
‘We can move’ suggested a duck.
‘Clear out, scram.’
‘We can't all move, surely,’ Sylvia Swan said.
‘Some of us have very lovely homes, you know.’
‘Sylvia is right,’ put in Jeremy Vole.
‘I wouldn't dream of moving.
Riverbank is my home.’
‘If you think we're moving,’ squeaked the shrews.
‘You've got another think coming, flatfoot!’
‘What are we to do?’ wondered Polly.
‘We can't go on this way.’
‘Look!
There's Anabelle,’ said one of the mice.
‘Ask her.’
‘Why all the worry?’ asked the young hedgehog, joining the group.
‘Has Sergeant been playing rough again?’
The creatures looked at one another and shuffled their feet.
Simon Swan answered for them all.
‘Well, no — not yet.
But he will.
That beast is just waiting for his chance.
He means mischief.
It's no good pretending otherwise.’
‘That's right!’ the animals all agreed.
‘He's planning something really awful for us.’
‘Oh, no,’ Anabelle told them.
‘I think you've got the wrong idea.
Sergeant wants to be our friend.
He really does.’
‘We tried that and it didn't work,’ the kingfisher told her.
‘No use crying over spilt milk.
Not really your fault, my girl.
You are young — you don't know these things like we do.’
‘Maybe not,’ said Anabelle, looking across the water.
‘But I know a friend when I see one.’
She raised her front paw and pointed to the other side of the canal.
‘And here comes a friend right now!’
They all turned, just in time to see Sergeant bounding down the riverbank.
He did not stop when he got to the water, but leaped in feet first and landed with a tremendous SPEELOSH!
He came up swimming, and sounding his booming roar.
‘HAR-ROOMF!
HAR-ROOMF!
HAR-R-R-OOO-M-M-F!’
‘OOO!’ gasped the mice.
‘Here he comes!
Everyone hide!’
‘Run for it!’ said the ducks.
‘Get out while you can!’
‘Let him come,’ cried Admiral King-Fisher.
‘We'll stand our ground and fight!
Give it to him, both barrels!’
‘No one is going to do any of those things!’ snapped Anabelle.
‘No fighting, no hiding, and no running away.
Sergeant hasn't done anything bad.
Let's just wait and see what he wants.’
In a few moments the big dog reached the  crowd gathered on the bank.
He charged up out of the canal and shook himself, splattering water everywhere.
‘Hey!
Watch it, you great lummox!’ shouted the shrews in their shrill little voices.
‘You're soaking everyone!’
‘Oh, sorry!’ replied Sergeant.
He stopped shaking and sat down.
‘I'm glad you are all here,’ he said, ‘it saves a bit of time.’
‘You bet it does,’ croaked Ferd Frog.
‘You can get us all at the same time this way.’
‘Shhh!’
Anabelle hushed.
‘Let's listen to what he has to say.’
To the dog, she said, ‘Go on, Sergeant, we're listening.’
‘I've been very busy the last two days,’ the big dog announced proudly.
‘But it's ready now, and I want you all to come to my house.’
He jumped up and dashed off at once.
‘Come on, everyone!
It's a surprise.’
The riverbank creatures hung back.
No one wanted to go to the dog's house.
No one, that is , except Anabelle.
She jumped up at once.
‘Let's go!
I can't wait to see what it is.’
She scampered down the bank after the dog.
At the water, she paused and called to those waiting on the shore.
‘Hurry up, everyone!
You don't want to miss the surprise!’
Jeremy Vole jumped up next.
‘We've come this  far — let's see it through.’
The furry brown vole joined the hedgehog at the water's edge and they started across the canal together.
Polly nudged her husband.
‘I'll go if you go, Ferd,’ she said.
‘Come on then, Polly, old girl,’ replied the green frog.
‘We might as well get it over with.’
The two frogs hopped to the water.
The ducks watched them and the leader said, ‘Come on, mates.
We don't want to let a load of frogs and voles get there before us.’
All the ducks quacked in loud agreement and flapped into the water in a rush.
‘Hey!’ squealed the mice.
‘Wait for us!’
And off they ran.
The swans and the kingfisher watched the rest of the creatures hurrying away.
Just then, Uncle Alfred poked his head out of the nest.
‘What's all the uproar about?’
‘It's the dog,’ explained Simon Swan.
‘He's at it again.’
‘What's he done now?’ asked Uncle Alfred.
He glanced across he canal to the swimming animals.
‘And where are they going?’
‘He's invited everyone to his house,’ said Sylvia.
‘Though I can't think why.’
‘I'll tell you why,’ put in the admiral.
‘It's a ploy — a trap!
Get us all together and — WHAM!— he  lowers the boom.
That's the way it's done.
Surprise?
I'll say — it's a rude surprise.’
‘There's one sure way to find out,’ observed Uncle Alfred.
And he gathered his feet under him and hurried after the others.
‘Wait for me, everybody!
Hey, wait for me!’
‘Let them go,’ sniffed Simon.
‘I wouldn't be seen at that beast's house.
Come, Sylvia, we've better things to do than go chasing after that silly rabble.
Sylvia?’
He looked around; she wasn't there.
Then he saw her, swimming after the hedgehog and the others.
‘Sylvia!
Come back here thisss instant!’
‘Sorry, Simon!’
Mrs Swan called back.
‘I'll tell you all about it when I return.’
‘I'm sure I shan't wish to know a thing about it,’ intoned the swan icily.
‘Come along, Admiral King-Fisher.’
The swan stuck his bill in the air and paddled upstream slowly.
‘Apparently, it is up to us to uphold the high standards of Riverbank.’
Friendship Tunnel
Sergeant ran ahead of the others and reached the garden first.
He paused on the footpath, and barked, urging the animals to hurry along.
Anabelle and Jeremy arrived to discover the dog standing proudly before a hole in the ground next to the wooden fence.
‘What's this?’ asked the hedgehog.
‘It's a tunnel,’ explained the dog.
‘I dug it.’
‘Why, yes, I can see it's a tunnel,’ agreed Anabelle.
‘But where does it go?’
‘Why not take a look and see?’
The big dog was so excited he could hardly stand still.
He kept prancing around in circles and yipping happily.
‘Go on!
Go on!’ he urged.
‘Look and see!’
‘Very well,’ said Anabelle.
‘Coming, Jeremy?’
The hedgehog and vole went into the tunnel together and when they came out they were in Sergeant's garden.
‘Like it?’ asked Sergeant, who had dashed round through the gate and now  welcomed them on the other side.
‘I dug it myself.’
‘It's a nice bit of work,’ replied Jeremy.
Being a vole, he knew a good tunnel when he saw one.
‘But what's it for?’ wondered Anabelle.
The dog barked happily.
‘Ho, ho!
I'll show you as soon as the others arrive.’
They heard quacking on the other side of the wall.
‘And it sounds like they're coming along now,’ Sergeant said.
He dived under the fence and a moment later the ducks began waddling through the tunnel and into the garden.
‘What's going on?’
Duck One asked.
‘Why all the secrecy?’ asked Duck Two.
‘A tunnel?’
Duck Three wanted to know.
‘Is that what the fuss is about?’
The mice were next, and the frogs and shrews.
They all wanted to know more or less the same thing: ‘What is this tunnel thing about?’
When everyone had gathered in the garden, Sergeant joined them and said, ‘Welcome, everyone!’
‘Thank you very much,’ said Anabelle.
‘But would you mind telling us why we're here?’
‘Gladly,’ answered the happy dog.
‘You have all been so nice to me, I wanted to do something nice for you.
This is my garden — and now that I've dug the tunnel, I want you to think of it as your garden, too!’
The animals gazed around cautiously.
‘It is a lovely garden, Sergeant,’ Anabelle told him.
‘And it's really a very nice tunnel.’
All the animals agreed — in a sort of puzzled way.
‘It isn't just any old tunnel,’ Sergeant told them.
‘It's a friendship tunnel!
That means everyone is welcome here any time.
There will always be food and fun for all.’
The Riverbank folk could hardly believe their ears.
A friendship tunnel!
Who would have guessed?
‘Don't be shy,’ the dog said, wagging his tail furiously.
‘Look around everyone!
Look around!’
Slowly, carefully, the creatures began to investigate the garden.
The ducks were the first to find a surprise.
‘Bread!’ quacked the leader.
‘Look, everyone!
I've found bread!’
‘Let's see!
Let's see!’ said the others, crowding in around a big pan of stale bread and biscuits.
‘That's right!’ barked the dog happily.
‘Come on, everyone, look around.
There's more!’
‘Frogs don't like bread,’ Ferd pointed out.
‘Gummy stuff.’
‘Then I suggest you hop along to the end of the garden,’ Sergeant told them.
‘You might see things differently from down there.’
The frogs did as Sergeant advised, and discovered at the far end of the garden, near the brick wall, a fine shady place among a cluster of mossy rocks.
‘Lookee here, Ferd,’ chirped Polly,
‘I do believe it's a rock garden, it is.
Ooh, it's nice and cool, too!
And what do I see?
Bless me, there's flies and midges galore!’
‘That's right!’ yipped Sergeant.
‘Got it in one!’
The frogs settled in the shade, croaking happily, and gulping flies.
‘Nice place you've got here,’ said Ferd.
‘Very nice.’
‘Hey!
Save some for us, Fatso!’ said Meg the shrew.
She and her friends scampered into the undergrowth where there were plenty of grubs for all.
‘We don't eat bugs,’ snipped the mice.
‘It's beneath us.’
‘Look around!’ said Sergeant.
‘Look around!
There's something for everyone here!
Shrews and mice — I would suggest looking over there under that apple tree.’
The mice scurried across the grass to a slender apple tree, and lo and behold—‘Sunflower seeds!’ screeched the mice.
‘What we like best!’
‘It's from the birdfeeder,’ explained the dog.
‘This time of year my people begin putting out the seed.
I thought you would like it.’
‘We love sunflower seeds!’ they all cried, and began stuffing themselves with big black seeds.
‘You might like this, Jeremy,’ Sergeant said, rolling a bright red object across the lawn.
‘An apple!’ squeaked the vole in delight.
‘For me?
Oh, thank you!’
He loved apples, but rarely had a chance to eat them.
‘All for you,’ the dog told him.
‘And there's more where that one came from.’
Just then Uncle Alfred and Sylvia Swan arrived and peeped in through the gate at the happy crowd.
‘Look at all this,’ said the swan.
‘It's a banquet!’
She found the tunnel and joined the ducks at the bread.
‘Help yourself,’ called Sergeant.
‘Thank you,’ said the swan politely.
‘I don't mind if I do.’
‘Greetings, Uncle Alfred,’ called Anabelle.
‘What do you think?’
‘Very impressive,’ replied the older hedgehog, gazing at the garden party thoughtfully.
‘A wonderful gesture.
I imagine there are grubs and worms among the shrubs.’
‘Oh, there's something better than that,’ Sergeant said, looking towards the house.
‘It should be here any moment now.’
Late Arrivals
Before the dog could say more, there came a hissing from outside the wall.
‘Pssst!
Pssst!
What do you see, Admiral?’
‘It looks like a party!’ replied the kingfisher, perched on the wall.
‘And a jolly good one, too.’
The bright blue bird flew into the garden to join the fun.
‘Pssst!
Admiral?
Where are you?
Don't leave me out here!’
Sergeant ran to the tunnel.
‘Come on through, Simon!’
The swan hesitated.
‘I can't go through there!’
‘Of course you can,’ Uncle Alfred told him.
‘Just bend that stiff neck of yours and you're halfway through.’
Simon Swan swallowed hard and slid under the wall.
He came up on the other side shaking dirt from his fine white feathers.
‘I say, that wasn't so bad.
Did I hear someone mention  bread?’
He waddled across the garden to join Sylvia and the mallards, head-down in the bread pan.
Inside the house, the boy Master heard the happy quacking, chirping, croaking and squeaking, and went to the window.
‘Look at all those animals!
It's a party!
Hey, Sergeant's having a party!’
Then he saw the hedgehogs.
‘And there's hedgehogs, too!
Oh, boy!’ he shouted, running to the kitchen.
‘I know just the thing for a hedgehog party!’
A few minutes later, the door to the house opened a crack and a small hand appeared with a big bowl.
‘ROWF!’ barked Sergeant.
‘Right on time!’
‘What is it?’ said Anabelle.
‘Don't be afraid — it's only my boy, Master.
He's brought you something special.’
The boy placed the bowl on the ground ever so gently, so as not to disturb the wild animals — then slipped back into the house.
As soon as the door closed again, Sergeant led the hedgehogs to the bowl.
‘It's a special treat just for you.
Go on, have some!’
Uncle Alfred did not need coaxing.
He dived right in.
‘Dog biscuits!’ he squealed.
‘I haven't had a dog biscuit in years!
Anabelle, my dear, you must try some.
They are delicious!’
The dog biscuits were scrumptious.
Anabelle had never tasted anything so wonderful.
She ate so many she looked like a prickly pincushion.
And there were plenty left over for everyone else to have a taste, too.
They all had a wonderful time at Sergeant's garden party, and when it came time to leave they all promised to visit again very, very soon.
‘Well, my dear,’ said Uncle Alfred when the last guest had gone.
‘I suppose we should shuffle along as well.’
‘Not me, Uncle Alfred,’ Anabelle replied.
‘I'm going to stay right here.’
‘Really?
You mean it?’
Sergeant's tail almost wagged itself clean off.
‘You would live in my garden?’
Uncle Alfred wrinkled his nose at the idea.
‘Now, Anabelle, are you sure that is such a good idea?’
‘HAR-ROOMF!’ roared Sergeant.
‘Hooray!’
So Anabelle made her home under a lilac bush in Sergeant's garden.
She liked having a place of her own, where she could come and go as she pleased.
She spent her nights romping along the canal in the moonlight.
And her days?
Most days she slept snug in her nest.
Sometimes, however, she could be found curled in a tight prickle-ball between the big yellow dog's front paws.
Nor was Anabelle the only one to enjoy Sergeant's company.
The friendship tunnel became a well-worn path — what with all the to-ing and fro-ing of furred and feathered visitors.
For the Great and Terrible Beast of Riverbank — once a most hated enemy — had become a much-loved friend.