

Now, for next-to-nothing, secure your child's future.
As children grow, so do bills.
But for as little as £30 a month (your child benefit should take care of that), you could be presenting your child with their first car or some solid help towards their first home.
Sounds too good to be true?
Far from it!
Just call Susan Clegg or Tony Linehan at Sabre Associates today, or use the coupon for further details of Irish Life's Children's Plan.
Honestly, its the Best Policy.
Bankers Trust Company
Today, a bank should be able to show you opportunity anywhere in the world.
It's clear which way the wind blows today.
All signs point to more and more transactions that cross borders.
Yet where do the best opportunities lie?
Bankers Trust can show you.
Among the international clients with whom we have forged solid relationships, we number many with specific merger or divestiture needs.
Needs which might be a perfect fit with yours.
Bankers Trust's ability to advise them or you on cross-border transactions is widely recognised.
As are our skills at arranging the most intricate forms of financing.
Our American roots give us broad knowledge of the U.S. corporate world.
But with our strong presence in Europe, Japan and Australia, we are equally at home in these worlds, too.
With that in mind, bear this in mind: Today, few banks can show you more international opportunity than we can.
Bankers Trust Company Because today isn't yesterday.
IMI a commitment to quality, reliability and innovation
LONG TERM CREDIT CORPORATE FINANCE INVESTMENT BANKING ASSET MANAGEMENT COMMERCIAL BANKING
Internationally the IMI Group provides investment banking and asset management through the following main foreign subsidiaries:
IMI Securities Corp (USA)(Member of the New York Stock Exchange)
IMI Capital Markets (UK) Ltd (member of the Securities Association)
IMI Securities Ltd (UK)(member of the International Stock Exchange)
IMI Bank A.G. (member of the Frankfurt Stock Exchange)
IMI Capital Markets (Lux) SA (member of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange)
The Guinness Flight Global Strategy Fund
Why four funds make a first.
The news is out.
Of the 16 funds that made up our Global Strategy umbrella fund when it was launched five years ago, no less than four have come first in their respective sectors over this period, according to Finstat.
Another three funds were in the top quartile of their sectors.
And over three years 11 funds were in the top quartile.
Increases in value included 403% for the European Fund and 268% for the Global Leisure Fund over the five years.
All good reasons to look to Guinness Flight first when you want to invest internationally with confidence.
The Umbrella Advantage
With Global Strategy you can spread your investment monies widely, if you wish, whilst still only dealing with one fund manager.
Our unique mix of funds includes money (or cash), bond and equity funds.
In fact you can participate in practically every major investment opportunity in quoted financial assets around the world by being under our umbrella.
And at any time if you decide you'd rather be in government bonds than in, say, stock market shares, just let us know.
The costs and the paperwork for switching are minimal.
The minimum investment in any one of the 21 funds is £2000 (say, $3300), payable in a choice of major currencies.
The Tax Advantage
Another point to keep firmly in mind about the Guinness Flight Global Strategy Fund is that all fund dividends are paid gross rather than net of tax.
The GF Advantage
Over $250 million are now invested in the Global Strategy Fund by investors from all around the world.
Guinness Flight itself, a subsidiary of the well respected merchant bank, Guinness Mahon, currently manage or advise on over $14000 million.
Investors are reminded that as a consequence of the general nature of the investments held and of possible exchange and interest rate fluctuations, the value of their shares and the yield from them may go down as well as up and that past performance is no guide to the future.
Also deduction of the Fund's initial charge (where applicable) means that if an investor withdraws from his investment in the short term he may not get back the amount he originally invested.
To learn more about how well our funds have done and to see our comments on future prospects send the coupon today.
Guinness Flight
Swiss Life
WHAT GIVES SWISS LIFE THE RIGHT TO TELL OTHERS SECOND BEST IS NOT ENOUGH?
You're heading a subsidiary of an internationally active company, or you're coordinating employee benefit planning on an international level.
Your main concern is to establish local plans which combine maximum benefits with the best attainable cost effectiveness.
In either case, there is one infrastructure that fully meets these objectives: SWISS LIFE and its international Network of local insurers.
You see, the primary aim of SWISS LIFE Network is to provide the world's best employee benefit plans.
Market-leading local insurers, known for their commitment to SWISS LIFE's high standards, link up to form the world's largest and most efficient insurance Network.
At one and the same time, you benefit from the best available local plans tailored to suit your company's needs and the backing of an experienced and reliable international Network, for a cost-benefit ratio that may well astound you.
You can be confident you're with the best in the business.
Whatever country you're in.
If you manage a subsidiary, contact your local Swiss Life Network Partner — as a market leader in your country, he's easy to find.
And if you are in parent-company management, call us direct at Switzerland +1/ .
Swiss Life THE RIGHT DECISION
Legal & General
We've been going up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up.
1989 PRELIMINARY RESULTS
•Excellent unaudited Pre-tax Profits to £142.3 million from a record £132.5 million, before exceptional life and pension profits.
•Dividend for the year up 16.2% to 15.8p per share.
•Life and Pensions profits up 22% to £104.0 million
•Record new business figure of £1.66 billion — up 65%.
The end of the decade is a good time to look back.
And Legal & General shareholders have better times to look back on than most.
Dividend per share has increased from 3.0p in 1980 to 15.8p in 1989 — a compound growth rate of 20% per annum.
And the share price has out-performed the FTA All-Share Index increase of 425% during this period.
The Legal & General share price was nearly 700% up at the end of last year.
A new decade is a good time to look forward too.
Our recent run of outstanding new business figures will continue to provide a growing quality earnings stream for many years to come.
To find out more, telephone 01–  and ask for a copy of our 1989 Report and Accounts or send the coupon below:
SUMITOMO BANK
The character of international banking with Sumitomo.
In Japanese, friendship has a special character, the character tomo which appears in our name.
Everyone writes it a little bit differently, with a personality all his own.
That's something we at Sumitomo Bank keep in mind when we deal with our customers, combining our specialized expertise in international banking with original thinking to offer service with just the right character to fit their particular needs.
In today's competitive financial environment, we're friends indeed — the friends you need.
Sumitomo: the bank with friendship in its name.
SUMITOMO BANK
Friendship Tomo
RZB
HOW FAR EAST DO YOU NEED TO GO TO UNDERSTAND EAST EUROPEAN MARKETS?
The gradual raising of the Iron curtain isn't just good news for politicians.
It's good news for business, too.
The 1990's should mean a new horizon of opportunity for trade with Eastern Europe.
But only if you know the market well enough to avoid the pitfalls.
That's where RZB, one of Austria's largest banks, comes in.
Austria's central location has made it a natural corridor for East-West trade for many years.
And RZB's willingness to find flexible solutions to trading problems have gained us a reputation for business without barriers.
We're known both West and East for our services supporting exporters to Eastern Bloc countries.
These include corporate trade products such as à forfait and counter trade transactions, as well as joint venture financing.
Best of all, our new offices in London put all that expertise right on your doorstep.
Quite simply, if you can get to Central London, you can get to Eastern Europe.
RZB Austria THE BANK AT EUROPE'S CROSS ROADS.
MITSUI TAIYO KOBE BANK
When we touch on April 1, the power of the blossom will be at your fingertips.
On April 1, two of Japan's most successful banks will merge.
The marriage of Mitsui Bank and Taiyo Kobe Bank will create a new leader in the world's financial institutions.
Our symbol is the cherry blossom.
symbol of the fruitfulness we promise in any relationship you form with us.
The cherry blossom also symbolizes an opportunity for you to tap a powerful new source of experience and committed expertise which will help your business blossom; the Mitsui Taiyo Kobe Bank.
Blossom with us.
MITSUI BANK TAIYO KOBE BANK
EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANKING REPORT
European Finance — The Challenge of 1992
•What opportunities is 1992 creating in each European financial centre?
•How are market regulators responding to the demands of their customers?
•Which Brussels directives will change your business?
•What are the plans of the major European players and their non-Community rivals?
•What are your competitors' strategies for exploiting new business opportunities?
The answers are all in European Investment Banking Report, the confidential monthly newsletter from The Economist Publications.
European Investment Banking Report ensures your strategies are proactive — not reactive.
Launched in 1986 to guide firms through ‘Big Bang’, European Investment Banking Report now takes into account the dramatic changes sweeping across Europe.
Each month you will receive an update on the latest developments in investment banking and securities trading with full analysis of the implications.
Saitama Bank.
A sound banking system matched to new banking needs.
Trade financing?
Syndicated loans?
International securities?
In these and other areas of international banking Saitama Bank has established its capability and credibility worldwide.
For over 40 years we've built our solid base and sound banking system in the Tokyo metropolitan area, Japan's vigorous economic centre.
Saitama Bank is fast-growing and forward-looking: Change orientated.
Positive.
And assertive — as seen in our electronic banking technology.
Grow together with Saitama Bank — sound, experienced and flexible in matching its services to new banking needs.
The Japanese bank that helps you grow.
SAITAMA BANK
Head Office: Tokiwa Urawa Saitama Pref., Japan 
DAI-ICHI KANGYO BANK
International financial services?
We talk your language.
We're talking Euro-yen capital market activities.
And we're talking business in Japan.
In fact, we're multilingual, capable of talking many of the languages you speak, like currency and interest swap transactions.
We're also quite fluent at making order-made financial plans for you.
These talents grow out of over $414 billion in assets, making DKB the strongest funding base in Japan.
We offer services that are worldwide, integrated and completely comprehensive.
That's how we got to be who we are.
Not just by being friendly, but by talking your language.
We have your interests at heart.
DAI-ICHI KANGYO BANK
Yamaichi
A new industry is growing up around investors' urgent needs for fast, accurate and systematized management of financial data.
What Yamaichi calls Financial Science.
To help its clients keep up with the seemingly exponential growth of market data, Yamaichi Securities Co., Ltd. has created the world's first integrated information system focused exclusively on the financial sector.
Integral-25, and the Integrative Series upon which it is based, are Yamaichi's latest advancements in financial information systems — and the beginnings of a new range of information services.
Financial Science.
The latest financial theory plus high-speed and efficient computer processing.
Yamaichi's Financial Science is grounded in the most advanced market theories and computer technology.
Developed by Global Advanced Technology Corporation (GAT), a New York-based company co-established with Yamaichi in 1987, CAPMD (Capital Asset Pricing, Multiple Dimensioned) combines the outstanding features of CAPM and APT, yet remedies their deficiencies and incorporates multi-variable analysis.
The AR (Arbitrage Free Rate Movement) model provides an integrated framework for pricing all types of fixed-income securities and derivatives, such as mortgage-backed securities, CP, loans, Treasuries, futures and options.
To enable users to evaluate changes in world markets rapidly, Yamaichi's special high-speed processor circuitry works 100 times faster than ordinary PCs.
The ability to follow every financial instrument on every market for effective asset management.
The Integrative Series is a set of powerful, stand-alone functions designed to aid asset allocation into global markets and currencies, securities analysis and evaluation, portfolio management, risk management, hedging and all other operations necessary for effective asset management.
Yamaichi Group companies worldwide provide asset management services based on these systems.
•Integrative Asset Allocation System (IAS)
•Integrative Bond System (IBS)
•Integrative Convertible Bond System (ICS)
•Integrative Data Base System (IDS)
•Integrative Expert System (IES)
•Integrative Forex System (IFS)
•Integrative Index System (IIS)
•Integrative Money Market System (IMS)
•Integrative Option and Future System (IOS)
•Integrative Position Management System (IPS)
•Integrative Research System (IRS)
•Integrative Stock System (ISS)
•Integrative Trading System (ITS)
Here is a description of some of the notable examples.
ISS, based on CAPMD, enables multi-dimensional analysis and construction of optimized stock portfolios.
Yamaichi employs ISS in its index-linked portfolio services to manage more thoroughly risks.
While carefully weighing a variety of possible portfolio strategies, investors should be able to aim at investment performance that exceeds the TOPIX.
IES is an application of the so-called fuzzy process of computer decision making, which more closely mimics human reasoning.
In formulating its market timing recommendations, IES applies rules and inductive reasoning as well as the combined expertise of professionals.
With IES, Yamaichi can judge the best timing of investment following a change in the market.
Yamaichi anticipates enhanced performance employing IES in conjunction with ISS.
Integral-25 is a powerful, modular, PC-based super network.
By combining the Integrative Series products, global market information and conventional software, Integral-25 enables investors to take full advantage of the power of Yamaichi's Financial Science.
Contact your nearest Yamaichi office, worldwide, for more information.
A Leader in Financial Science.
YAMAICHI SECURITIES
NatWest
NATWEST IS A PIONEER IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF COMMERCIAL PAPER.
The spirit of high adventure isn't one you'd normally associate with Commercial Paper.
But in the last year we've taken some very bold steps.
We were the first to act as Arranger and Dealer for a privatised water company.
We acted as Dealer on the first Sterling Commercial Paper programme with a syndicated bank guarantee.
And we broke new ground when we arranged a £150 million programme on behalf of The Mortgage Corporation — the first case of a Sterling Commercial Paper Issuer being backed by a US Investment Bank covenant.
(Three months later, to our mutual delight, The Mortgage Corporation came back for another £100 million.)
If you'd like to know more about the other innovations we're making, Theo van Hensbergen on  will be pleased to put you in touch with one of our intrepid experts.
We'll help you explore the possibilities of high finance.
But keep your feet firmly on the ground.
NatWest Corporate Finance
Bank of America
Underlying Strength.
Amidst the shifting currents of today's financial markets, Bank of America stands on a solid foundation of experience.
It enables us to look at your goals with a long-range perspective.
To see opportunities that may not be clear to others.
And to deliver the support you need to seize them.
The Golden Gate Bridge, photographed by Alan Ross.
NORD/LB
BANK ON A BANK THAT'S TO THE POINT.
A waste of words is also a waste of time and money.
With our vast information resources we can get to the point quickly, to give constructive advice without juggling words.
This is just one of the reasons why we have become one of the largest banks in West Germany, with a balance sheet total of over DM 116 billion.
If you're looking for an international business partner, bank on our precision.
NORD/LB NORDDEUTSCHE LANDESBANK GIROZENTRALE
KfW 1989
Strong promotion of the German economy
In supporting the Federal Government's public policy objectives, KfW extended long-term loans and grants worth 27.8 billion Deutsche Marks in the year under review, which means a 25% increase.
7.3 billion DM went to small and medium-sized enterprises, promoting competition, enhancing structural adjustment and creating new jobs.
Roughly 60% of the export credits was extended in foreign currency and used almost exclusively for the financing of ships and passenger aircraft.
For structural reforms in third world countries, KfW for the first time granted a special loan of 1.7 billion DM to the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
As a major source of funds KfW issues high-quality bonds and notes.
KfW's long-term debt has been rated ‘Triple A’ by the leading international rating agencies.
KfW's 1989 Annual Report is available on request.
KfW Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau
Datastream International
NO-ONE CHECKS DATA IN GREATER DEPTH.
For a deeper view of international investment, you need data you can depend on: Datastream.
Accurate.
Our data is collected, validated and checked by a 120 strong team — using multiple sources to ensure reliability.
Comprehensive.
25,000 equities, 44,000 bonds, 50,000 economic series plus features, options, forex and interest rates.
Timely.
On-line direct to your PC for fast, easy access.
For investment research, sophisticated programs combine functionality and flexibility: high-quality graphics, cross-market searching and analysis of markets and securities against your own criteria.
For fund administration, there's InterPort for multi-currency funds, running on PC networks or DEC VAX.
Or, there's our mainframe service supporting investment accounting, valuations and administration.
All flexible, easy-to-use and with specialist after-sales support.
For facts you can trust, use Datastream.
Call  for an information pack.
Datastream International A company of the Dun & Bradstreet Corporation
ANZ
There are some places your business can't deal with an ANZ Bank.
ANZ Banking Group has one of the world's largest international banking networks.
So there are very few places we can't be found.
And with ANZ Grindlays Bank, we're in over 48 countries, covering Australasia, South Asia and Asia Pacific, the Americas, Africa, the Middle East and Europe.
We have around 2,300 offices worldwide.
So you'll even find us in markets other international banks ignore.
Which means when you do business with ANZ you can be sure of dealing with the same bank at both ends of the transaction.
Having the same financial people on either side doesn't just make for faster communication.
You also get more control and benefit from local bank contacts as well.
When dealing internationally, it pays to do business through ANZ Bank and ANZ Grindlays.
After all, the right network can make a world of difference to your business.
ANZ Worldwide
Bankers Trust Company
Not only leading, but showing the way.
Innovative corporate finance is our business.
Whether it's advisory, acquisitions, re-capitalisations, buy-outs or buy-ins, we have the experience, expertise and energy to get the job done efficiently and effectively.
We also have the commitment and financial muscle to back our judgement with our own resources.
No wonder we're leading the field at the start of the '90s.
Bankers Trust Company
Jardine Fleming
We have an edge in Japan
Jardine Fleming established the Tokyo office in 1971, which today employs over 200 people.
In 1986 we became a full member of the Tokyo Stock Exchange.
We are now the largest foreign investment advisory company in Japan in terms of funds under management, with 6 resident experienced fund managers.
We are proud to be the corporate advisers to a selection of Japan's foremost corporations, and leading underwriters in Euro issues for Japanese companies.
In short, we provide the groundwork, the teamwork and the network.
Contact Brian Matthews and profit from the Jardine Fleming edge.
Jardine Fleming The leading edge in Asia.
BARCLAYS MERCANTILE
WE'RE THE FIRST TO RECOGNISE THE FACT THAT EVERYBODY'S REQUIREMENTS DIFFER.
If every company conducted the same business, were of the same size, even had the same plans for expansion — then perhaps it would be safe to assume that their asset financing requirements, too, would be the same.
In the real world of course they're not.
Take your company.
Consider the difference between acquiring another car or two and investing in a multi-million pound plant.
The principle may be similar but the financing demands are not.
Fast and efficient service for one, intensive analysis the other.
That's what we provide.
We do not offer a uniform solution but a wide spectrum of specialised Financing Facilities to satisfy all your requirements.
Asset Line, Asset Plus and Asset Plan are three such facilities.
New concepts born out of the fact that everybody's requirements are not the same.
Get the facts for yourself now by calling our databank service on 0800 373270.
Lines are open 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
BARCLAYS MERCANTILE Business Finance
The West Lancs Project
Your very own motorway…plus cabbages and kings
West Lancs with its towns of Ormskirk and Skelmersdale connects nationwide via its own M58 motorway linked to M6 and M62.
Only the shortest drive from Blackpool's famous seafront and the golden mile of elegant Southport's sands.
Just thirty minutes from the UK's second largest population concentration, West Lancs greenfield sites offer pastures new to industry and commerce.
ANGLO AMERICAN CORPORATION OF SOUTH AFRICA
What does South Africa's biggest company have to say on South Africa's biggest issue?
The issue is now longer apartheid, but what kind of society will replace it.
Gavin Reilly, Anglo American Corporation.
February 1990.
South Africa today stands on the threshold of enormous change.
It is an exciting, if dangerous moment in its history.
Now, for the first time in 40 years, South Africans of all political beliefs can take part in open, free and vigorous debate about the future of their country.
For the first time, black and white political leaders are starting to talk to each other about a common, not a divided, South Africa.
The dialogue has just begun, but the process is irreversible — a process that will inevitably see the collapse of the last remnants of apartheid, and the emergence of a radically different society.
This has all come as welcome news to the Anglo American Corporation, South Africa's biggest industrial and mining group.
We have always believed that South Africa can only realise its true potential if it becomes a prosperous, non-racial, multi-party democracy.
For political freedom will mean little it if is not underpinned by economic freedom as well.
Real prosperity can only be achieved if every South African is free, not only to cast an equal vote, but to participate in wealth creation.
Under apartheid, the majority of South Africans could do neither.
Which is why, for more than 40 years, we have spoken out consistently and vocally against the apartheid laws which restricted both individual freedom as well as economic growth.
In a post-apartheid South Africa all its people must have equal access to both the ballot box and the market place, if they are to be liberated not only from oppression, but from poverty.
And if South Africa is to become the engine of growth for the whole of Southern Africa.
For South Africa's economic problems — high unemployment, a low growth rate, and a crippling shortage of skills — will not miraculously vanish when apartheid goes.
And to substitute one state controlled, interventionist society for another would do nothing to help solve the problem.
Anglo American as a South African Company and proudly so.
We are confident about South Africa's prospects and our own.
Which is why we will invest R8 million in South Africa over the next three years alone.
Why we are helping the explosion of small business by assisting black entrepreneurs with training, guidance and substantial contracts.
Why we have established non-racial schools where white and black South Africans can learn together — and learn to know each other.
Why we are funding both university places and bridging programmes to help students to overcome the deficiencies of ‘apartheid education’.
Why we have established technical colleges where black South Africans can acquire the skills they and South Africa so desperately need.
Why we have given our employees a stake in our corporation, and a share in its wealth through a free, voluntary share ownership scheme.
As South Africa's biggest business, we have always believed in a future beyond apartheid.
When apartheid finally disappears, we want the South Africa that emerges to escape from the ignorance, envy, deprivation and fear.
We want South Africans of all races to be free, not only to vote, but to create wealth for themselves and prosperity for their country.
ANGLO AMERICAN CORPORATION OF SOUTH AFRICA
If you'd like to know more about what we're doing to help build a fairer, post-apartheid South Africa, please write for our fact book to: AAC, Department No.
ECO1, PO Box 43, London EC1P 1AJ.
Allow 28 days for delivery.
Singapore
Before you invest in a country, ask how much the country has invested in itself.
Singapore is one of the few countries that supports the reality of global business.
For instance, Singapore Telecom operates Asia's first international digital telephone exchange with the world's highest density of optical fibre networks.
Furthermore, Singapore is the only country currently providing ISDN on a nationwide basis.
Today, companies in Singapore benefit from advanced, world-class telecommunications services and networks at very competitive rates.
Singapore's continuing investments in education and training has brought a tenfold increase in our pool of Information Technology professionals and the Singapore worker has been consistently rated by BERI as the world's best in terms of technical skills, attitude and productivity.
And with a history of political stability, business freedom and international competitiveness ideal for business to grow and prosper, Singapore has established itself as an excellent telecommunications hub and global business centre.
Now, is it any wonder why American businesses in Singapore have for the last 5 years registered a remarkable 25% average rate of return.
Or why Singapore is, in the opinion of 3000 of the world's top global businesses, the preferred location.
Singapore.
Speaking the language of global business
MESSE MÜNCHEN
Europe is opening its frontiers.
When Europe's frontiers pen, new markets will be born.
Munich, the metropolis at the heart of Europe, has always been a meeting place for international experts and decision-makers.
Today, with its unique mixture of tradition and innovation, it is an extremely popular venue for the world of business.
The success of the many top international events speaks for itself.
Munich planned its future long ago.
Come to the Munich trade fairs and plan your future without frontiers.
MESSE MÜNCHEN INTERNATIONAL.
FOR FIRST-CLASS BUSINESS.
aerospatiale
TOGETHER WE BUILD A COMMON EUROPEAN SKY
Born beneath the European sky, AEROSPATIALE, is part of a family as are Great Britain, Germany, Spain and Italy.
We all share the same sky and the same passion, which is to see our joint projects take to the air.
Ideas are born and are exchanged between one partner and another — as equals speaking to equals — talking the same language: that of aeronautics and space technology.
aerospatiale
ITEL
ITEL ANNOUNCES A REVOLUTIONARY INVESTMENT POLICY.
Buy and hold.
At Itel, we see things a little differently from ‘catch the wave’ investors.
We think we serve our shareholders best if we think long-term.
So we involve ourselves in businesses that perform consistently well over time.
And then stick with them, build them, help them to add to their earning power.
Case in point: Anixter Bros., Inc.
Anixter distributes 90,000+ wiring systems for voice, data and video communications; supplies customers worldwide, usually within 24 hours.
When we bought Anixter in 1986, revenue was $625 million.
In 1989, after some constructive investing on our part, revenue topped $1.2 billion.
Still, Anixter has only begun to exploit its potential.
Its markets are expanding, and it's the world's #1 supplier of wiring systems.
We're glad we've held.
And we continue to invest.
Other successes:
We've built a transportation services capability that includes the world's leading container and rail car lessors and a nationwide third party logistics network throughout the U.S.
We own the Western Hemisphere's leading dredging and marine construction company — Great Lakes Dredge & Dock.
We hold substantial positions in American President Companies Ltd., Santa Fe Pacific Corp. and Quadram, S.A. de C.V.
(Mexico).
Results:
In the last four years, our revenue has climbed 1844%, operating earnings 1535%, cash flow 921%.
When we say ‘our’, we mean it.
Itel people own 26% of Itel Corporation.
Want to learn more about our company of ‘slow buck artists’ who believe the way to build value is to buy and hold?
Contact Tim Croasdale, Vice President, Itel Corp., Two North Riverside laza, Chicago, IL 60606, –1515, FAX  –1573.
ITEL WHATEVER IT TAKES.
WHEREVER IT IS.
B.A.T INDUSTRIES
Record Pre-Tax Profit £2.04 billion — up 14%
•Financial Services profits rose by 83 per cent to £807 million, after providing £25 million for 1990 storm damage.
Farmers more than covered its financing costs.
•Tobacco trading profit up 25 per cent to a record £945 million.
Group cigarette volumes increased by 2.1 per cent in world markets which rose by 1.6 per cent.
Exports up 16 per cent.
•Continuing Group pre-tax profit up by 30 per cent to £1.71 billion, greater than the pre-tax profit for the entire Group in 1988.
•Demergers of Argos and Wiggins Teape Appleton are proceeding and disposals are on schedule for completion by the end of June 1990.
B.A.T INDUSTRIES
STANDARD LIFE
Highlights from the Annual Report for the year ended 15.11.89.
ASSETS INCREASE TO EXCEED £20bn NEW BUSINESS
‘The Company has continued its record of impressive growth both in terms of assets under management and new business secured,’ said Norman Lessels in his Chairman's Statement.
Standard Life operates in the U.K., Canada and the Republic of Ireland.
Worldwide new business premiums exceeded £1.7 billion.
In the U.K. 1989 was an exceptional year with 620,000 new policies issued for total new premiums of £1.3 billion.
Details of the Company's success in its main markets in all three countries are given in the report.
ASSETS
Total Group assets under management increased over the year by almost £5 billion, and now amount to some £20.2 billion.
BONUSES
The 1989 Declaration of Bonuses will once again ensure that the amounts payable under maturing Standard Life policies will compare extremely favourably with those payable under comparable policies issued by other life offices.
In his Review last year, A.S.
Bell, the Company's Managing Director, explained why it was in the interests of the Company's policyholders that levels of reversionary bonuses not only had regard to the investment outlook but also preserved the Company's ability to invest freely so that its total performance would not be adversely affected.
‘For this reason,’ said Mr Bell, ‘although we have maintained current levels of reversionary bonus rates for our life assurance policies, we have thought it appropriate this year to reduce slightly the interim reversionary bonus and bonus growth rates in respect of our pension business in the United Kingdom and Republic of Ireland.’
INVESTMENT
Standard Life is one of the major equity investors in the U.K. with ordinary share investments accounting for 2% of the U.K. equity market.
The Company continued its policy of favouring equity-type assets.
Well over £2 billion has been invested in such assets since the stock market collapse in October 1987.
Most equity investments in 1989 were made in the U.K. but significant additions were also made overseas and the programme of property developments has continued.
The various funds under management achieved excellent investment performance over the year.
MARKETING
Last year, the Company announced its intention to distribute its products through Appointed Representatives in addition to independent financial advisers.
Since that time the Halifax Building Society and the Bank of Scotland have become Appointed Representatives and in future will sell only Standard Life's products through their branches.
A number of other companies have also become Appointed Representatives.
However, the independent sector remains by far the most significant source of Standard Life's business and the Company will continue to support fully the interests of independent advisers.
Referring to the abolition of the Maximum Commissions Agreement in 1989 and the consequent review of commission rates, Mr Bell said, ‘In determining the rates we would pay, we were particularly concerned to hold a fair balance between the interests of the policy holder and the increased costs which the requirements of the Financial Services Act imposed in independent advisers.’
SERVICE
The many changes required by legislation to contracts and the computer systems stretched the company's administration capacity in 1988 and 1989.
Life assurance business is being serviced satisfactorily, but the huge and largely unpredictable surge in pensions business and the intrinsic complexity of this type of business have given rise to administrative problems both at Standard Life and across the entire industry.
‘We are all fully aware of the over-riding importance of providing a consistently good administrative service and the achievement of this aim will be a major priority in 1990,’ said Mr Bell.
SELF REGULATION
The regulatory regime brought in by the Financial Services Act has been costly and disruptive for offices and confusing for their customers.
While welcoming in principle the SIB's recent proposals for simplification of the rules, Mr Bell said: ‘Any changes, no matter how desirable, must however be implemented sensibly in order not to increase unnecessarily the already considerable costs of the regime, which in our case can only be borne by the policy holders.’
EUROPE
The European Commission has reaffirmed its commitment to meeting the 1992 deadline for providing legislation for a single European market in life assurance.
In welcoming this commitment, Mr Bell pointed out that the substantially greater freedom which U.K. insurers have enjoyed in product design and in investment policy has been to the distinct benefit if their policy-holders in the past.
‘We must ensure that the admirable aims of European integration do not result in poorer returns to our policyholders.’
It is the Company's intention to have an operational presence in key member states as and when suitable opportunities arise.
THE BOARD
On 1 April 1989, Mme. Marie-Josée Drouin was appointed a Director of the Company.
Mr. J.G.S. Gammell is to retire from the Board following the Annual General Meeting after 36 years of service.
The election of Mr. I.C. Lumsden, General Manager (Actuarial), as a Director of the Company will be proposed at the Annual General Meeting.
STAFF
Both the Chairman and the Managing Director paid tribute to the hard work and positive attitude of the Company's staff.
THE FUTURE
While 1990 is likely to be a difficult new business year, Mr Bell declared himself confident ‘that our financial strength and reputation, allied to the determination and enthusiasm of our staff, will again enable us to increase further our share of the various markets in which we operate.’
Standard Life
We don't follow standards.
We set them.
TAYLOR WOODROW
WE'RE PROUD THAT THE BEST CIVIL ENGINEERING BRAINS IN BRITAIN ARE WORKING ACROSS THE CHANNEL ON THE PROJECT OF THE CENTURY
Fortunately, they're not involved in some huge brain-drain.
They're members of the Taylor Woodrow team and part of the consortium which is designing and constructing the largest underseas transport system in the world.
The Channel Tunnel.
It's an incredible engineering feat, boring 2 running tunnels and a central service tunnel with a total length of over 150 km.
And the good news is over 59 km have already been completed, despite the extraordinary geological conditions.
A multi billion pound high-profile project, it requires the combined prowess of a consortium of 10 companies, 5 British and 5 French.
As Taylor Woodrow's success as an international company is built on our belief in Teamwork and free enterprise we are working happily within this framework.
In fact, it's a philosophy that's making history and leading the way into Europe.
TAYLOR WOODROW Skill and technology pulling together worldwide
BANC
ECONOMICS OF THE ENVIRONMENT
The conservationists response to the Pearce report
A BANC report by John Bowers, Leeds University
I GAZED AND GAZED, BUT LITTLE THOUGHT
AT WHAT PRICE NATURE'S GIFTS WERE BOUGHT
This report is a comprehensive analysis and critique of ‘Blueprint for a Green Economy’ by Pearce et al and examines the limitations of a market approach to solving environmental problems.
BANC British Association of Nature Conservationists
BRITISH AEROSPACE
British Aerospace
British Muscle
The facts that everybody should know about British Aerospace are far more than statistics.
They are hard-won credentials that show outstanding strengths in some of the most competitive business sectors in the world.
They demonstrate that no heights are unobtainable by British Industry if it is willing to apply its enterprise and commitment to excellence.
The record speaks for itself.
Britain's leading exporter of manufactured goods.
Britain's largest exporter of cars.
Winners of 22 export and 8 technology Queen's Awards to Industry.
Comprehensive range of defence systems.
Prime contractor for Britain's largest ever export deal.
(Project Al Yamamah in Saudi Arabia.)
Architects and builders of the 25km King Fahd Causeway linking Saudi Arabia — Bahrain.
Manufacturers of the world's quietest jet airliner the BAe 146.
Prime contractor for Olympus, the world's most powerful civil communications satellite.
An average of over £1½-million spent on research & development every day.
BRITISH AEROSPACE Todays Leader in Tomorrows World
TEESSIDE
THE UK'S BIGGEST NEW URBAN DEVELOPMENT PROJECT…offers the biggest opportunities
The UK's biggest new urban development project offers the biggest opportunities to investors, developers and new industry.
High quality factory units and greenfield sites now available.
Over a million square feet of prestige industrial and commercial premises under construction or being planned.
Specialised accommodation on technology and business parks.
Participation and business opportunities in Teesside Development Corporation flagship initiatives: Teesdale — a £200M rejuvenation of 250 acres as a high quality office, home, retail and leisure mix.
Hartlepool — provision of residential, leisure and business amenities and maritime-related enterprise at the new marine complex.
Teesside Park — specialist retail outlets at the old Stockton racecourse, now being developed together with the UK's largest leisure centre.
Teesside opportunities — backed by Development Area grants and Enterprise Zone incentives.
To find out more contact Duncan Hall, Chief Executive, Teesside Development Corporation, Tees House, Riverside Park, Middlesbrough, Cleveland TS  RE.
Tel .
FAX .
TEESSIDE Initiative Talent Ability
BUSINESS NEW YORK
If you think New York State is a great place for your factory, you're not alone.
After all, New York State has attracted more foreign companies than any other state, from headquarters operations to manufacturing operations.
And as you can see, a lot of them are British.
Maybe they come for our superior quality of life.
A life that includes rural beauty as well as the world's most exciting city.
Cultural diversity.
A superb educational system.
And one-of-a-kind entertainment.
Or perhaps they're attracted by New York State's international business atmosphere.
It's a welcome atmosphere unique to New York.
And New York State even has its own office in the U.K. to give you close personal attention.
Of course, New York also has access to the largest, richest markets.
One of the most productive, competitively priced work forces in the nation.
The greatest source of capital.
An unrivalled transportation network.
And one of the best packages of loans and financial assistance.
So if you're interested in putting your factory on our map — or just finding out more about us — please send this coupon to our London office.
Girobank
You're witnessing a robbery.
(The victim's the one on the left.)
Incidents like this happen up and down the country every day.
A businessman walks into a bank armed with his day's takings, hands them to the cashier, then leaves.
Innocent enough.
What he may not realize is that often when he puts money in, the bank effectively takes money out.
Exactly how much each transaction costs him he may never know.
(Banks rarely itemize all their charges.)
From the banks' point of view, this is perfectly reasonable.
After all, why should they want his money?
They've got vaults full of the stuff.
And checking cash, credit card receipts and cheques takes time.
At Girobank, you'll find it's a slightly different story.
Our links with the Post Office mean we're always hungry for your cash.
As you may imagine, the Post Office network of 20,000 branches needs vast amounts of cash to pay out in pensions and benefits.
Which, in turn, means we're able to offer our customers extremely competitive business rates.
But there's more to Girobank's service than competitive rates alone.
Using the Post Office also provides us with more branches than all the other clearing banks put together.
We're open until 5.30 at night and on Saturday mornings.
(We don't know of many businesses that shut at 3.30 pm.)
And there are no hidden charges.
Our charges are agreed in advance and our statements are fully itemized.
All in all, it's a service which is now attracting over £100m a day from businesses across the country.
Clearly, when is comes to your day's takings, it would be a crime to bank it anywhere else.
If you suspect you could improve your business banking, simply return the coupon or, better still, call free on , anytime.
MELROSE RECESSION AS OPPORTUNITY
Smart moves for tough times.
with Tom Peters
When storm clouds gather on the horizon, the urge to retreat becomes overwhelming.
Every instinct tells us to run for cover: to withhold information, slash jobs and cut investment.
Best-selling author and management expert Tom Peters tells us otherwise.
In this compelling new video, Peters offers six ways to weather a recession and shows us how we can use recession as an opportunity.
‘Recession As Opportunity’.
Once you've seen it, you'll want to share it with everyone in your organisation.
Available exclusively from Melrose in the UK. £695 2 day rental £125 1 day evaluation £50 (prices exclude carriage and VAT)
MELROSE THE TRAINING COMPANY We have no serious competition