

Few colours are hard enough to last 250 million years.
(But we're working on it.)
SENSIQ MADE PURELY FOR YOU
Introducing new Perfect Nail Colour from Sensiq.
It's chip resistant, it's easy to apply and it comes in a choice of twelve brilliant shades.
(Shown here is Classic Crimson.)
And that's not all.
We also have Smoothing Nail Base for a perfectly smooth surface.
Protective Nail Shine with a special strengthener to help fragile nails.
Gentle Nail Polish Remover with moisturiser to help prevent splitting and breaking.
And, though we give you a finish that's as hard as nails, everything is made to a remarkably gentle formulation.
We use no formaldehyde and the whole range is dermatologically tested.
For details of your nearest stockist call Freephone .
CACHET
‘I'm not a face in a crowd.
I'm not a number in a file.
I'm not a brick in a wall.
I'm not a cog in a wheel.
I'm not a log in a pile.
I'm not a fish in the sea.
I'm me.’
Your Free Gift From Cachet.
A perfume atomiser with every 50ml Eau de Toilette purchase.
From 11th February in selected Boots, Departmental Stores and Chemists.
Offer while stocks last.
CACHET.
THE ESSENCE OF INDIVIDUALITY.
HANDMADE FOR EVERY POCKET FUJI EXTRASLIM TAPES.
Just hold a Fuji Extraslim cassette in your hand and you'll feel the difference.
Subtly rounded corners give it that added touch of class, while the slimmer and lighter size adds to a smoother profile in your pocket.
Of course, being Fuji tapes they'll measure up to your highest needs and musical tastes.
Available as Super Ferric (type I), Chrome and Superchrome (type II), each Fuji Extraslim delivers outstanding results from both digital and analogue sources.
Music feels better on Fuji Extraslim, ask for it by name wherever good tape is sold.
The first ever personalised beauty programme written for you by experts, with cosmetics specially selected for you from an exclusive new range.
NEW IMAGES is a personalised Beauty Programme sent to you in monthly parts.
Each part covers one aspect of your beauty and has a wide selection cosmetics and beauty products selected individually for you by our Experts, and a Beauty Report showing how to use them.
Part 1 ‘Colour Play’ is a complete face make-up kit personalised to you.
Beauty advice from experts
When we receive your answers to the questions below our Beauty Experts will decide what ‘look’, what ‘image’ will suit you best.
They will then select the colours and formulations you will need.
International make-up artist Pia St. Luce will personally verify their recommendations and write to you with simple step-by-step instructions and advice on how to apply her cosmetic selection for perfect results.
She will write a simple no-nonsense report with superb colour pictures and diagrams to make things easy for you.
It couldn't be simpler.
Exclusive Pia Cosmetics
Your cosmetics will have been chosen from the vast range that only Pia can offer.
No other range has enough formulation and colour combinations to meet our requirements exactly.
Shop bought cosmetics tend to be designed for the more common skin types and colourings — specialist cosmetics are difficult to find, and if they do exist, are usually expensive.
How to Order
Complete the questionnaire and post it to NEW IMAGES 
Over £18.00's worth of exclusive cosmetics for only £9.50 + £1 p & p.
Every item will be specially formulated to suit you, your own hair, skin and eye colouring, and will be selected to bring out your natural good looks.
Available in U.K. & Eire only.
Price in Eire IR£10.99 incl p. & p.
Questionnaire
Please read carefully and write in the boxes below the answer number that best describes you (only one number per question).
If you have any problems answering these questions then ring  for help.
1.
What is the predominant colour of your eyes?
1
Brown
2
Hazel
3
Blue
4
Green
5
Grey
2.
Do you wear contact lenses?
1
Yes
2
No
3.
Do you wear glasses?
1
Yes
2
No
4.
What is your skin tone?
1
Fair
2
Fair with freckles
3
Rosy
4
Light Olive
5
Olive
6
Dark
5.
What is your skin type?
1
Oily (looks shiny within an hour of cleansing; prone to spots, blackheads, open pores)
2
Balanced (looks shiny within several hours of cleansing; occasional spots and blackheads
3
Dry (rarely looks shiny, feels taut; fine-textured)
4
Combination (oily panel on forehead, nose and chin; dry on cheeks and under eyes)
5
Sensitive (very dry, chaps easily, prone to irritation and thread veins).
6.
Do you have acne?
1
Yes
2
No
7.
What is your predominant hair colour at present?
1
Blonde (e.g. light, medium or dark blonde)
2
‘Mousy’ or light brown
3
Red (e.g. ginger, copper)
4
Reddish brown (e.g.chestnut, auburn)
5
Medium brown
6
Dark brown or black
7
Grey
8.
What is your hair type?
1
Oily (lank and greasy within two days of shampooing)
2
Normal (shiny and manageable)
3
Dry (flyaway, lacks shine)
4
Over-processed (very dry and brittle from perming or bleaching)
9.
Which of these best describes your hair?
1
Thick and coarse (may be unmanageable, feels wiry and a bit rough)
2
Medium thickness and texture (usually manageable and holds a style)
3
Thin and fine (flattens out quickly, lacks bounce)
10.
What length is your hair at present?
1
Long (below shoulder level)
2
Medium (between jawline and shoulder level)
3
Short (above jawline)
11.
How curly is your hair at present?
1
Straight
2
Wavy
3
Curly
12.
Do you have dandruff?
1
Yes quite often
2
Yes occasionally
3
No
13.
What condition are your hands in?
1
Soft and smooth
2
A bit dry
3
Rough and very dry
14.
Which of these best describes your nails?
1
Soft and Weak
2
Normal
3
Hard & Brittle
15.
Do you bite your nails?
1
Yes
2
No
16.
Please write your age in this box
PIA PRODUCTS ARE CRUELTY FREE AND ARE NOT TESTED ON ANIMALS
THE Designers' SALE
An invitation for CLOTHES SHOW readers to attend the EXCLUSIVE FIRST NIGHT of Europe's Premier Event 
Designed to inspire and entertain, our specially choreographed fashion shows feature the designs and creations of over fifty of our top designers.
Come early, relax with a drink or a snack.
Your seat is guaranteed, and you can purchase direct from the designers at anytime during your visit.
Timeless classics and exciting innovations are all available at showroom prices.
STRICTLY BY TICKET IN ADVANCE * £7 EACH
Tickets are available by completing the form below, enclosing your payment by cheque, postal order or major credit card (not Amex or Diners), together with self addressed envelope (no stamps necessary), and post to:
Or if you prefer, we can accept your credit card orders on  or  — book early and be sure of a place.
OPEN TO THE PUBLIC
Admission £2 — Three fashion shows each day
BODY RESHAPING
WEAR THE CLOTHES YOU ALWAYS WANTED TO
Are you one of those people who despair of ever getting into some of their favourite clothes again?
It is now possible to remove those fatty deposits that will not respond to either diet or exercise from areas such as under the chin, tummy, buttocks, thighs, calves, ankles and the male breast.
Liposuction is a minor surgical procedure which reshapes the body by the removal of stubborn fat from problem areas.
Benefits are permanent, as once fat cells are removed they cannot return.
Our comprehensive range of corrective procedures for women and men includes body, breast, face, nose and ear re-shaping, eyelid surgery, Collagen implantation, varicose and thread vein removal, permanent eyelash line enhancement, baldness reversal and a unique non-surgical treatment for the ageing face.
FOR A FREE, TOTALLY CONFIDENTIAL CONSULTATION PLEASE TELEPHONE US ON 071  
THE HARLEY MEDICAL GROUP
NOW OPEN IN MANCHESTER
A little moisture helps everything stay beautiful.
SENSIQ
MADE PURELY FOR YOU
At Sensiq, we're particularly sensitive to the needs of sensitive skin.
Hence Sensiq's new skin care collection.
Cleansers, moisturisers and a soothing toner all specially formulated to be as pure as possible.
That means no fragrance and no common allergens or sensitisers.
The result?
Creams and lotions that are very light yet which protect your skin, leaving it softer and smoother.
(You're not the only one to benefit either — we don't test on animals.)
Sensiq skin care is dermatologically tested and available in three skin types: Oily, Dry and Normal/Combination.
From £2.99 to £5.99 at Boots and other leading chemists.
SIX LAYERS OF PAINT PROLONG THE LIFE OF THE CAR.
A SEVENTH PROLONGS THE LIFE OF THE DRIVER.
The engineers at BMW had a clear vision of what they wanted to achieve with the 5 Series.
Namely, clear vision for the driver, whatever the conditions.
With this in mind, they devised a unique rain simulation experiment.
During wind tunnel tests on the car, at the development stage, water was added.
And an all too familiar aspect of British weather was recreated at a single stroke.
The rain was impregnated with a special fluorescent paint and blown over the car.
Using ultra-violet light, the engineers were able to record the pattern of rain dispersal.
What they found was that the wipers cleared the windscreen perfectly well.
And the aerodynamic design of the car filtered most of the rain away.
But, to be honest, not all.
In fact, what rain was left stayed mainly on the side windows.
So a little lateral thinking was called for.
The specially designed rain traps around the windscreen and the door mirror housing were modified until rain was successfully deflected clear of the side windows.
Another ingenious development is BMW's wiper system, fitted to the 530i and 535i.
When driving at speed, the engineers noted that headwinds and crosswinds caused the blades to lift off the windscreen.
To remedy this, they designed a motor in the driver's wiper pivot that increases pressure on the screen as the car increases its speed.
So there is no lift during take off.
But there's further evidence of BMW's enlightened attitude towards safety; every model is fitted with ellipsoid headlights.
They don't reflect the light in the way that a conventional headlight does.
They project it through a special lens.
Which means they're 30% brighter and better directed so as not to blind oncoming drivers, while minimising back glare in fog.
One more dazzling feature is the anti-dazzle rear view mirror.
So called because it dips automatically should a car approach from behind with all lights blazing.
Once the light values are back to normal, the mirror simply adjusts back.
Thus preventing the driver being blinded by anything but science.
All things considered, you can be sure of one thing in your BMW.
Whatever the conditions, the outlook will always be bright and clear.
THE ULTIMATE DRIVING MACHINE
HIGH GOAL DRAMA
The most exciting High Goal polo match in the summer season, the Moët & Chandon Challenge, will take place again this year at the Royal County of Berkshire Polo Club on Saturday 23rd June.
Make a note of the date in your diary.
Details of the exciting international teams taking part in next month's Harpers & Queen, or contact Penny Sackier, The Royal County of Berkshire Polo Club 
‘My Rolex is more than just a watch, it makes me feel dressed.’
In everything that she does, Dame Kiri Te Kanawa combines a remarkable liveliness and spontaneity with an absolute obsession with perfection.
She delights in Strauss and Mozart ‘because the women in their operas are contradictory; warm and cool at the same time’.
Two of her favourite roles, for example, are the sad young Countess in ‘Le Nozze di Figaro’ and the frenzied, passionate Donna Elvira in ‘Don Giovanni’.
When she decided to sing the Feldmarschallin in ‘Der Rosenkavalier’, Kiri said it was ‘because the character appeals to me.
She has understanding and maturity and when she lets her lover go, you feel it's not completely the end of the world for her.
I'm sure I will have to sing the Marschallin 100 times before I fully understand the depth of the character.’
Her famous voice (‘Percet’ said Sir Colin Davis of the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden), is in such worldwide demand that she is booked up for years to come.
Will her voice stand the strain?
Kiri says, ‘What you have to remember is to give quality, not quantity.’
For many years, Rolex has shared that same obsession.
‘My Rolex,’ says Kiri, ‘is more than just a watch, it also makes me feel dressed.
It has been a friend for a long time.’
THE PENTHOUSES
Bickenhall Penthouses…the best London has to offer.
From the time this imaginative project was conceived, the aim has been to create the most exciting and original selection of luxury homes available in Central London.
Within each Penthouse , a unique environment has been created, encompassing both style and originality.
15 Penthouses with accommodation varying from one to four bedrooms, all with terraces, have been constructed above this beautifully refurbished building.
Each Penthouse has its own individual character, and is built using the highest quality materials and fittings, ensuring a superb finish throughout.
999 Year Leases — £275,000–£1,500,000  
Just in time.
Estée Lauder research brings you new Time Zone Moisture Recharging Complex
The rich, soufflé creme so influential, it can reprogramme the future of dry skin.
For every skin that's dry before its time, Estée Lauder brings you Time Zone.
In this world of stress, artificial air and ultraviolet rays, ‘dry’ skin is a problem for more and more women, starting at an earlier age.
Not just another moisturiser, Time Zone is a true dry skin treatment that addresses, for the first time, the multiple, dermatological causes of dry skin — as well as the results.
No matter what your skin's present condition, Time Zone's newly discovered emulsion system helps reprogramme your skin to better retain moisture like young skin.
Time Zone also normalises your skin so it can resist forming lines and wrinkles for years longer than you'd expect.
And its totally new, silky texture feels so beautiful, you'll feel the comfort and immediate relief of dry skin symptoms the moment you smooth it on.
Try it today.
There's no time like the present for beautiful skin.
LONDON'S MOST IMPORTANT JEWELLERY SALE.
JUNE 20TH.
This Cartier sautoir, valued at £150,000, along with other jewellery and precious gems — including the legendary ‘Agra Diamond’ once owned by Babur (1483–1530) India's first Mogul Emperor — is now offered at auction in London's finest ever sale of this kind.
Closing date for entries, April 20th; please contact Raymond Sancroft-Baker on  2388.
CHRISTIE'S
MAY WE SUGGEST YOU TELL THE BOARD YOU'RE CHOOSING A FIVE-SEATER FAMILY SALOON.
So you've spent the last few months diplomatically ‘losing’ at golf.
You've laughed at the MD's jokes (some were even funny) and you kept schtum when the Chairman's wife deliberately forgot your name.
Yesterday it paid off.
Your back was patted (not stabbed) and you've just been told to invest some company money in some brand new metal.
Allow us to make a suggestion.
Test drive the stunning new CD Carlsson from Saab.
Of course, you'll be hooked from the moment you sit in the driving seat, but then there's a problem.
People may think you're getting ideas above your already lofty station.
And you didn't get where you are today by people thinking you're getting ideas above your already lofty station.
So here's what you tell the Financial Director: Firstly, the new Saab is a four door, five-seater, family saloon.
Don't mention the integrated aerodynamic skirts, alloy wheels, or exclusive badging.
Secondly, inform him there is 23.8 cu. feet of luggage space in the boot, but omit there's 195 b.h.p. 16-valves, and an all new turbo-charged power unit under the bonnet.
Say that it's quite nippy, and jolly safe when overtaking.
But please leave out the 0–60 in 7.5 seconds, forget that it's faster than a Ferrari Mondial from 50 to 70 m.p.h.
Oh, and mention the 38.1 m.p.g.
Not the 140 m.p.h.
And finally, whatever you do, don't say the new CD was partly developed by Erik Carlsson, the legendary rally driver.
Just explain that it's wholly favoured by Harry Dobson, the frugal company car manager.
If all goes well, you'll soon be driving the new Saab Carlsson CD into the company car park.
Obviously, you'll be hiding it in a corner until it's time to make your move.
That day, in the not-too-distant future when you ‘accidentally’ park it in the Chairman's space.
Or have we been addressing the Chairman all along?
THE NEW MAZDA MX5.
IT'S SET MOTORING BACK 30 YEARS.
Remember the classic sports car of the Sixties?
Those growling, nippy two-seaters that you thought had gone for ever?
They're back in the new Mazda MX5.
It's one of the most advanced cars on the road.
But you'd never guess as you step back three decades into the snug, low-slung cockpit.
The traditional leather-trimmed wheel and large round instrument dials are just as you remember them.
As indeed is the stubby gear shift with the ultra short throw.
(Car and Driver magazine compared it to a toggle switch).
As you'd expect, the 1.6 litre fuel-injected 16 valve DOHC engine is mounted at the front.
And supplies power to the rear with a throaty roar that's guaranteed to make you grin.
As well it might.
Mazda engineers listened to recordings of over 100 classic engine notes to perfect it.
The result even managed to move some hard-bitten motoring journalists.
‘Flat-out gorgeous’ was the verdict of What Car?
While Road and Track judged the MX5 to be one of the five best cars in the world.
(Second only in fact to the Ferrari Testarossa).
Admittedly though, not every detail is authentic.
The roof doesn't leak for a start.
Nor will the car break down every week.
(Like all Mazdas it's so reliable it comes with a 3-year warranty).
And although the odd purist might object we've also included power steering, electric windows and a high quality car stereo.
At under £14,500 it won't break the bank either.
We could go on and on.
But there is a better way to appreciate the MX5.
Have a word with your Mazda dealer and take a test drive down memory lane.
MAZDA Building Excitement
Microbubbles achieve the impossible.
LES MAJEURS
At the heart of the success of Les Majeurs are Lancôme's exclusive microbubbles.
These minute, supple spheres rest invisibly on the surface of the skin.
The texture of Les Majeurs is so light and natural that it gives a sensation of comfort and a sensational finish.
The magic of make up.
Precious.
It is often said that Godiva chocolates should not be valued in pounds, but rather in carats.
For each elegant piece is deliciously precious.
Morsels of luscious chocolate that seem shaped by a jeweller's hand are filled with sumptuous extravagances.
PATEK PHILIPPE GENEVE
There's a woman in you who already wears a Patek Philippe.
A woman whose values lead her to all that is genuine.
Who is guided by the need to excel, and who can bring her dreams within her reach.
She's proud of these ideals — and of the success they have brought…she knows it's the moment for a just reward.
To this woman, we offer the time that is hers and hers alone: Patek Philippe.
Nautilus quartz movement.
Water-resistant to 60m.
In gold and gold/steel.
WINDSMOOR
Timelessly elegant, unquestionably chic.
Bold, bright suits of lipstick pink, ultra violet, classic check or startling black and white team up with simple blouses.
In a lighter mood, shaped pretty dresses are stamped with graphic modern florals.
Provocative and stylish, strong but essentially feminine.
This is global chic that crosses both boardroom and international borders.
THE small persons EMPORIUM
THERE IS STILL A haven of tradition WHERE THE DISCERNING SMALL PERSON WILL FIND A SELECTION OF British clothing AT ITS BEST.
WE OFFER BOTH pre-requisites OF THE PARTY SEASON (HAND-SMOCKED DRESSES, BUSTER AND SAILOR SUITS), PLUS AN abundance OF SENSIBLE DAY WEAR MADE FROM NATURAL FABRICS DESIGNED TO LAST.
WHETHER THEY ARE 8 weeks or 8 years old SCOTT-ADIE HAS A RANGE OF CLOTHING TO FIT YOUR SMALL PERSON AND YOUR BUDGET.
TUENDA.
THE CONTEMPORARY ANSWER FOR AGEING SKIN.
Ageing skin, a problem recognised for centuries but one never properly understood, until today.
The complex factors involved have finally been established, and at last a truly effective anti skin ageing treatment has been created — Tuenda by RVB.
Tuenda treats the actual causes of ageing skin, not just the symptoms.
Now, for every woman, there is a choice.
Ask for Tuenda treatment and homecare products at your Depilex Appointed beauty salon.
THE Original ENGLISH Waterlily
Perennial aquatic plant of the family NYMPHAEACEAE (75 species).
Its name derives from Nymphe , one of the water nymphs.
W. NYMPHAEA ALBA (illus.)is recognised by its snow-white flowers.
This ‘sinless and scentless flower of the lake’ is the oldest of all British flora.
THE Original ENGLISH Water
Perennial aquatic beverage.
Orig. native of MALVERN HILLS (c. 1601).
Prefers cool, shaded site away from direct sunlight.
Easily distinguished from other hybrids by its natural clarity, refreshing purity and the fact that it's got the word MALVERN written on it in big letters.
The Golf GTi and its nearest rival.
People say ‘Aren't you a little put out by all the other GTi's around these days?’
Flattered, yes.
Put out?
No.
After all, most of them take their lead from our very own Golf.
And a fair stab at it most of them make.
Some, let it be said, are even made faster, and many's the driver who's scared himself half-to-death trying to prove it.
Which is just our point.
You see, a GTi is not only about going fast.
It's about going slow.
It's about painstaking research and laborious testing.
It's about designing a chassis that's more than equal to the demands of high-performance driving.
It's about a suspension that leaves you stirred not shaken.
And a brake system that's anything but heart-stopping.
It's about the patience it takes to apply 7lbs of paint without a drip.
The kind of patience that ensures every join fits flush, every seam runs straight, every screw stays screwed.
Frankly, until somebody finds a better way to build a GTi, we're all the competition we need.
Clarins.
Beauty Secrets from Plants.
The Power of Plants for Beauty: Face Treatment Creams with Plant Extracts
Why plants?
After 30 years of research, Clarins is still fascinated by the beauty secrets of plants.
Shea butter, hazelnut, horsetail plant, cucumber; orchid and St. John's wort are associated in ‘Blue Orchid’ Cream to provide an effective, natural product to treat dry, devitalized skin.
‘Santal’ Cream is provided with a superb array of natural beauty extracts ideal for dry, high-coloured skin.
Peach extract and ginkgo-biloba help normalize the hydration level of the skin, whilst camomile, red poppy and sandalwood act to decongest and shea butter; moringa, wheatgerm and almond extracts nourish and revitalize.
For oily skin/enlarged pores, ‘Lotus’ Cream combines the astringent actions of sage, lemon and witch hazel with the softening benefits of camomile and lotus extracts.
And there are still more plant extracts in the superb Purifying Plant Mask!
Grapefruit, marjoram, peach and camomile for radiance and freshness.
Essential Plant Oils: 100% Natural, Rapidly Absorbed, Ultra-Effective
Pure plant extracts, Clarins Face Treatment Oils consist of the most concentrated, active part of plants: their essence.
Just a few drops of these precious essential oils are sufficient.
The perfect night-time complement to Clarins Face Creams with plant extracts.
‘Blue Orchid’ Oil for devitalized, dehydrated skin, improves tone, suppleness and vitality of the skin.
‘Santal’ Oil provides unequalled comfort whilst improving tone of the capillaries of high-coloured skin.
‘Lotus’ Oil acts to normalize oily skin with ultra gentle effectiveness.
Naturally!
Do you know that this unique shower gel actually leaves your skin up to 28% smoother?
Skin-smoothing Neutrogena Rainbath  not only cleanses gently and effectively but also rinses off completely to leave your skin feeling softer and smoother!
Experience the unique pleasure of a light, skin-silkening body oil after bathing.
Neutrogena  natural sesame seed Body Oil is non-greasy.
It vanishes into your skin without a trace to leave your skin feeling deliciously supple and silky-soft.
ULTRATONE.
GIVES YOUR FACE A LIFT.
The stylish hand held Ultratone Facial unit is the perfect way to achieve tone and lift, keeping your face looking good.
It's designed to gently exercise the small, delicate facial muscles to help prevent wrinkles and sagging.
The Ultratone Facial works by stimulating the muscles and giving them concentrated exercise.
Use it regularly and you'll soon see a dramatic improvement to the neck, chin and lines around the mouth and eyes.
The Ultratone Facial firms and tightens the muscles, lifting your facial contours for a healthier, younger looking face.
Linen CULTIVATE THE DIFFERENCE
REAP THE NATURAL REWARDS OF LIFE WITH LINEN.
THE CRISP, FRESH FIBRE WITH THE INHERENT TOUCH OF TIMELESS ELEGANCE.
ENJOY THE UNIQUELY RICH TEXTURE, A QUALITY DIFFERENCE ONLY A NATURAL FIBRE LIKE LINEN CAN BRING.
LINEN BREATHES AND ADAPTS TO THE WAY YOU LIVE TODAY.
CRISP AND ELEGANT IN ANY INTERIOR, LUXURIOUSLY FRESH IN ANY SITUATION.
LOOK FOR THE LINEN SYMBOL, ONE OF THE NATURAL REWARDS OF LIFE, FOR PEOPLE WHO KNOW HOW TO CULTIVATE THE LINEN DIFFERENCE.
LINEN, UNDENIABLY THE DESIGNER FIBRE
Over the years, Liberty have maintained their reputation for Afghan and Persian carpets despite tough competition.
On the Afghan border with Soviet Uzbekistan lies Mazar-e-Sharif.
Not a city for the lily-livered or faint-hearted.
Here a Kalashnikov in the back is as common as a delay on the Northern Line.
Drug traffickers and  guerrillas mix with spies and mercenaries, all cautiously watching their backs.
But when a certain Englishman in baggy khaki shorts hits town, he looks at his feet instead.
Because he's the fellow who now acquires carpets for Liberty.
Not for him a cool, air-conditioned dealing-room in Hong Kong.
Or the exotic comfort of Istanbul's Grand Bazaar.
Or the convenience of an importer's warehouse in Essex.
He has no time for the factory-made products of China, Pakistan or Morocco.
He seeks the rare, the eccentric, the authentic.
Like ‘Bokhara’ carpets from the mean streets of Mazar-e-Sharif.
And the dozen handmade rugs bought from a tribeswoman in a remote village in Central Anatolia.
And the collection of carpets from the battle-scarred Afghan hill incorporating typical local sights — Russian tanks and helicopters.
Even though such finds fill the Liberty carpet department, some customers may wonder if the tales of derring-do are exaggerated.
Rest assured.
They simply continue a tradition established by Arthur Liberty, the firm's Victorian founder.
He would disappear into the Orient for months, regularly sending back shiploads of jewellery, pottery, textiles and works of art, of exotic styles and astounding quality.
This Marco Polo spirit lives on in Liberty's buyers to this day.
Of course, since they're not merely ‘buying’ but ‘finding’, they tend to develop a nose for hidden treasures.
But, sadly, even they are not infallible.
A worn and grubby old carpet was recently obtained from a contact in Armenia.
After cleaning, it was displayed in the department and immediately snapped up by an excited young Australian.
Perhaps the rigours of travelling 25,000 miles through Central Asia had blinded our buyer to its true value.
The Antipodean gentleman was from the Textile Museum in Melbourne which is where the carpet is now displayed.
ERNEST AND JULIO GALLO CHOOSE THEIR PICKERS BY THE GRAPES THEY LEAVE BEHIND.
If you were to report to Ernest and Julio Gallo that their pickers seem to have missed an awful lot of grapes, you probably wouldn't get much of a reaction.
You see, as far as they're concerned that's just the way it should be.
Vines, they'd tell you, tend to mature their grapes at different times, and only an experienced eye can spot which to pick and which to leave behind.
At this point the brothers have been known to make a few derogatory remarks about the ability of ‘newfangled’ machinery to make this fine distinction.
Hand picking may not be the fastest way to harvest, but as Ernest and Julio are fond of pointing out, it provides the best start a wine can have.
And as to the finish, well, they'd be more than happy for you to check the results for yourself.
THE WINES OF ERNEST AND JULIO GALLO
‘Whatever your lighting needs you're sure to find it in my new No. 10 Lighting Catalogue’.
The new No. 10 Catalogue is certainly his most comprehensive to date, containing every aspect of lighting from candle lamps to the most modern halogen spotlamp.
Within its 180 beautifully illustrated pages you will find hundreds of lamps and shades of every era.
From early Victorian and Edwardian lamps, exotic Art Nouveau designs and stylish Art Deco models to the exciting and decorative range of Tiffany lamps — almost indistinguishable from the priceless originals.
There are many new additions too in this catalogue.
The exquisite and romantic ‘de Vianne’ Collection, the Christopher Wray Chinese Collection, the largest range of candle lamps to be seen today.
And lastly, the very fashionable Pickled Pine Collection.
To see the full range of Christopher Wray lamps come in and see us.
Or send for the new No. 10 Catalogue.
Each one contains a money back voucher worth £5.00, valid against any purchase from Christopher Wray.
Catalogue available at your nearest emporium or telephone CATALOGUE HOTLINE 01–  and quote your credit card number.
The Reflection of Generations of Craftsmanship.
The creation is yours.
The expression of impeccable taste in your table presentation.
Add the hallmark of excellence to every occasion with Arthur Price of England Silverware and Cutlery.
Our reputation is built on the manufacturing skills that have made Sheffield world famous for cutlery and Birmingham equally renowned for silverware.
This is a quality that will last forever.
50 classical and contemporary patterns all exquisitely hand crafted.
In canteens and place settings from leading stores.
Post the coupon for a full catalogue, a list of appointed stockists and special introductory £10 voucher.
Arthur Price of England Master Cutlers & Silversmiths since 1902
Reflect on your Entertaining
ACRES FARM FENDERS
Hand made CLUB FENDERS in brass, copper, steel or wood with upholstered leather seats.
Each fender is designed to fit the customer's fireplace and there is an almost infinite combination of styles and materials available.
Please ask for our colour brochure.
BELMONT INTERIORS
Pam Ward has a wealth of experience from designing Embassy Interiors, to flats, offices and country houses.
Each interior will be individually designed to suit your needs.
She has an extensive range of designer fabrics including Henry Newbury, Gainsborough & Percheron.
Visit her in the new showroom one minute from Harrods.
BRUTON KITCHENS LTD
Prestigious Poggenpohl and Siematic specialists.
Experienced designers who will visit your home in London or the country to advise and create practical and exciting kitchen layouts.
Personally supervised top-to-bottom installation service.
Happy to co-ordinate with interior designers, architects and contractors.
CERAMIQUE INTERNATIONALE LTD
Established in 1974.
With three floors of showrooms offering ceramic tiles for every application, from Period to Modern; exclusive ranges from around the world including handmade Delft, Murals and Terracotta; and providing professional advice and technical assistance; we are sure Ceramique Internationale Limited can meet your every creative requirement.
CHRISTOPHER WRAY'S LIGHTING EMPORIUM
The largest and most exciting lighting store in Great Britain is now open in the Kings Road.
10,000 sq.
feet exhibiting the very best of British made and designed decorative lighting.
The 180 page full colour catalogue is now available £6.95.
Money off voucher worth £5 in every copy.
CLARE HOUSE LTD
Specialising in fine handmade lampshades, lamps and lamp conversions.
Will visit and advise outside London.
COVER UP DESIGNS LTD
Are you looking for that elusive kidney-shaped dressing table.
We manufacture a wide range.
Our interior design company offers a complete making up service and we have our own upholsterer on the premises.
Our Highclere Voiles are very attractive.
All these items can be seen in our showroom, and visitors are welcome, but by appointment please, Catalogues are available at £1 each.
C.P. HART & SONS LIMITED
London's largest and most comprehensive bathroom and kitchen store.
Extensive showrooms offering complete ranges of traditional and modern baths, sanitaryware and accessories.
Major stockists of Aquaware products including Duker cast iron baths.
The kitchen studio has 22 fully accessorised displays including an extensive British made range.
Totally fitted and tailored rooms from original plan through to installation.
CUSHIONS & COVERS
Cushions & Covers design and make the widest range of styles in cushions.
Readily available in lots of sizes, colours and fabrics — cotton, silk, woven and printed brocade, tapestry, lurex, velvet, embroidered, quilted and more.
Plus collectable ranges of Tribal and Village needlework, embroidery and silk from all over the world.
Also, a great selection of bedcovers, quilts and tablelinen.
All prices for cushions are inclusive of the feather pad and VAT and start from £7.95 for a cotton, contrast piped, 16″ × 16″ cushion with a choice of 30 colours!
All very tempting and very affordable.
DANIELLE LTD
A small Interior Design practice, offering our own exclusive range of fabrics, wallpapers, tiles and matching bed linen, as well as skilfully chosen collections from other leading manufacturers.
In a friendly atmosphere look around at leisure and allow our experienced designers to give you advice and original ideas.
ENRIQUETA
Enriqueta has the authority of many years as a top designer so she is perfectly qualified to equip you for success in this competitive field.
In three weeks learn everything from starting out to making profits — from finding suppliers to coping with clients.
Also five day courses on interior design and business.
FIONA CAMPBELL LTD
Established interior designers and curtain specialists giving personal attention to detail and high standard of finish (with own workshop on site).
Friendly showroom with very wide selection of fabrics, carpets and wallpapers as well as furniture, lampshades and upholstery.
G & H INTERIORS
Creators of beautiful handmade curtains, blinds, and sofas, complemented by a superb range of carpets, wallcoverings and accessories.
A former ballroom is the charming setting for their Studio — an oasis of style and inspiration.
From here Paul Carter and his team have established an enviable reputation with commissions undertaken in the UK and Europe.
JACQUARD
Curtain specialists and manufacturing upholsterers, all produced to an exceptional standard in our own workshops, and fitted by our own team of experts who will travel anywhere in the UK or abroad.
Large international collection of lamps, prints and objects.
Interior design service available.
KLC SCHOOL OF INTERIOR DESIGN
The courses offered by KLC range from one to three day workshops on specialist subjects, including curtain making, decorative paint finishes and antique restoration, to a thirty week Diploma Course, a Fine Arts Course and an Advanced Year Course in interior design.
Four week Certificate Courses are also run three times a year.
MICHEAL SZELL DESIGNS
Micheal Szell is a leading fabric designer specialising in hand printed glamorous designs on a variety of ground cloths and printed to order.
Additionally the full range from Marvic Textiles is now available from Sloane Avenue providing an exceptionally comprehensive selection of furnishing fabric.
REAL FLAME
Real Flame provide a complete fireplace furnishing and building service from their seven showrooms in the Greater London area.
As Europe's largest manufacturers and retailers of gas log and coal fires, they can supply standard or customized fires to suit any grate or fireplace, as well as pine mantelpieces, marble, brass frames, firegrates and fireplace accessories.
SITTING PRETTY LTD
Wooden loo seats — the original and still the best.
Seats emblazoned with your coat of arms our speciality.
Classic bathrooms inspired by the great ages of design.
Roll top baths, mixers, heated towel rails, soaps and towels.
Write or phone for free illustrated brochure and expert advice.
STAVEDENE DESIGN LTD
Our design team are able to offer a complete personal service tailored to your individual requirements.
A small friendly and efficient company with our designers, architects, curtain makers, decorators, carpet and flooring layers and all building trades.
TOP LAYER AND TOP LAYER INTERIORS Wallpapers, fabrics, furnishings, etc.
Very friendly and approachable shop selling the largest collection of wallcoverings and fabrics in inner London.
Silk hand painted Chinese wallpapers a speciality.
We also make curtains, upholstered furniture and carpets.
Full interior design service or design advice by the hour.
Exceptional service a normality.
TRIO DESIGN LTD
A gifted decorating triumvirate with an outstanding range of experience and the capacity to interpret clients' own wishes rather than to impose a ‘house style’.
A supporting team of fine craftspeople, and well-tested ability to shoulder all the attendant problems of designing an interior — from one living-room to a five storey office block.
Bendicks Mint Collection.
Five different tastes that everyone can share.
‘Julian claimed his new Ferrari was more investment than status symbol.’
‘Arabella said she'd rather die than live in Wimbledon.’
‘Nick confessed to being something of a Heavy Metal freak.’
‘Amanda waxed lyrical on the genius of Jeffrey Archer.’
‘And Hugo showed me how England should play the West Indian pace attack.’
‘…
Thank goodness I remembered Bendicks Mint Collection!’
Indisputably Britain's finest chocolate mints
HAZEL PORTMAN-STUART
Diamonds in all but price
This exclusive collection is equal to the finest jewellery to be found in Bond Street — but at a fraction of the price.
Each piece is individually made in solid gold and set with the world's finest alternative to diamonds.
Every piece is fully guaranteed and comes with a valuation certificate.
No more insurance or security problems.
PLEASE SEND ME A COPY OF YOUR 1990 CATALOGUE PRICE £1  
Do you know how to feed a kitten whose appetite was formed in the wild?
Whiskas does.
THE ANCESTORS of these two little animals evolved in hot and arid conditions.
So you can understand the trepidation with which your kitten greets, some would say, our less civilised climate.
Both the kitten and her wild relative need a high energy diet.
Whilst the lion cub's mother can hunt for what she needs, your kitten depends on you.
Luckily, you need to hunt no further than Whiskas Kitten Food.
It is perfectly balanced to satisfy a growing appetite.
A kitten requires three times more nourishment, relative to body weight, than a fully grown cat.
So after weaning at around 6 weeks she will need Whiskas Kitten Food until she's about 6 months old.
Whiskas Kitten Food is highly digestible, important when a small stomach has to meet a large energy need.
It is also extremely palatable, it has to be to please extremely sensitive tastebuds.
If you would like to find out how to help your kitten grow up healthy and strong, Whiskas have produced a booklet ‘Know Your Cat’ that tells you all about her needs from kittenhood to adulthood.
To receive your copy, simply write to Whiskas Cat Book Offer 
In the meantime, while your kitten is polishing her hunting skills by stalking your feet, you can introduce her to the civilised way to eat.
whiskas THE MOST PREFERRED CAT FOOD
OVER 40 AND STILL GOT YOUR TOUCH.
When your skin looks and feels good from the outside, you feel great inside.
Empathy understands that and knows that your skin needs are different.
That's why Empathy created the first skincare range specially for women over forty.
Each product, including the cleanser, contains a rich blend of moisturisers to improve the condition and texture of your skin.
The moisturisers also contain a UVA filter that helps protect your skin against the ageing effects of everyday sunlight.
Treat your skin to Empathy and it will never feel its age.
NOW THERE'S NO AGE LIMIT TO LOOKING GOOD.
TO FEEL MORE BEAUTIFUL, SLIP INTO SOMETHING SMOOTHER.
If you like the feeling of silk next to your skin, you'll like our new Light and Natural Mousse Make-up.
Being a water-based mousse, it's ultra light to apply and blends in perfectly with your natural skin tone.
It has sunscreens to protect you from the sun's harmful rays, and a unique bio-collagen complex to nourish and moisturise.
What's more it is as kind to the environment as it is to your skin, thanks to our ozone-friendly dispenser.
Max Factor Mousse gives you ninety applications in pre-measured amounts so you never get too much.
And at just £3.99, you can afford to wear something silky every day.
NEW MOUSSE MAKE-UP.
MAKE YOUR BEAUTY COME TO LIFE.
From Sainsbury's, the antipasto that isn't an anticlimax.
In 1878, the Citterio family started selling their cured meat to a grateful public in Milan.
Today, there is still a Dr. Citterio at the head of the family, but his salami, bresaola, mortadella and prosciutto have become international favourites.
In Britain, you'll find them in Sainsbury's.
(And as Dr. Citterio would say, you won't find better.)
Served together they make a wonderful mixed antipasto — a dish used by Italians to stimulate the appetite for the pasta, fish or meat to come.
At seven o'clock on our mixed plate is prosciutto crudo, a thinly-sliced, naturally cured ham.
Ours comes from Langhirano, a small town in the foothills of Parma, the heart of the prosciutto region.
Carefully selected legs of pork are conditioned in salt and then left to age for at least 12 months.
This ageing is an art and is surrounded by ritual (and not a little secrecy).
Many things have to be right — the ventilation must be slow and natural and temperature and lighting are critical.
Patience, however, is rewarded with the delicate and slightly sweet flavour of prosciutto.
(When you're not eating it with other meats, try melon, fresh figs or avocado.)
At ten o'clock on the plate you'll find Milano salami.
Made from fine-cut beef and pork, this salami is cured naturally in salt and then left to mature for three months in a controlled but draughty atmosphere.
Low in salt and spices, Milano salami is one of the most popular in Italy.
(And in Sainsbury's.)
Next to the salami is bresaola, a speciality of the Valtellina region.
This naturally cured beef comes from only the finest fillets and is matured for up to five months.
Try it with lemon juice and then drop on a little olive oil — about ½ tablespoon per slice.
(In Italy, many people add some finely chopped parsley and freshly-ground pepper.)
The last meat on our plate is mortadella, the only cooked meat in the antipasto.
Seasoned beef and pork are combined to make a rich, flavoured sausage that originated in Bologna in Northern Italy.
For Dr. Citterio, this classic antipasto goes back more than 110 years.
For the rest of us, it's just the perfect beginning.
Good food costs less at Sainsbury's.
A little idea that could help a lot of women, every day.
Until recently, many of those women who experience a light vaginal discharge at certain times between their periods may have thought that they were the only ones to have this problem.
Now surveys show that it is in fact quite common and that as many as 61% of women experience it and suffer a certain amount of discomfort as a result.
Tight fashionable clothes, the pill, ovulation and hormonal change (e.g. after pregnancy) are just a few of the reasons today's women might experience light vaginal discharge.
Realising this, Johnson & Johnson introduced Carefree Panty Shields* — slim absorbent shields that protect your underwear and leave you feeling fresh, confident and comfortable at all times.
Now, as the popularity of Carefree Panty Shields grows, more and more women consider them very much a part of their everyday lives.
We're sure that once you're experienced the comfort and freshness of Carefree you'll feel the same way.
In fact the time may come when you'll wonder how you ever did without them.
Carefree is now available in both flat and ‘folded and wrapped’.
Carefree PANTY SHIELDS* FOR FRESHNESS, EVERY DAY
FOR PERFUME AND JEWELLERY RASHES IT WORKS A TREAT
Bothered by an itch or a rash?
Use Dermacort cream — gentle, soothing treatment for itches or rashes due to perfume, deodorants or jewellery — also reactions to plants, insect bites, soaps and detergents.
Available without prescription
Just ask your pharmacist
Dermacort What a relief!
you can see the thinking
Without really knowing why, the thing that Zak remembered most about her was her hair.
Even on Washington Square, Mari was the kind of girl to get noticed.
Wide mouth, green eyes, and hair that was an ice-cool cocktail of two colours: blonde and blonder.
A street light caught the softness of her hair as she got out of the cab at 14th.
The feeling of that moment stayed with him all the way back home to 81st.
YOUR HAIR IN ITS BEST LIGHT.
That's the promise of Contrasts High and Low lighting kits — the easy way to enhance your natural hair colour.
Want golden blonde highlights?
You've got them.
Light blonde?
No problem.
Or go for lowlights in a rich autumn glow.
The choice is yours.
Be as subtle or as dramatic as you wish.
Wella's high quality, creamy formulations give you a look you never dreamed you could achieve at home.
That's fact, not fiction.
CONTRASTS.
YOUR HAIR, YOUR WAY.
Migraine makes you feel a lot more than ‘off-colour’
When you experience distorted vision, bright lights, loss of appetite, nausea, a severe pain in the head or other symptoms you could very well be having a migraine attack.
You'll be relieved to see that there's a comprehensive migraine-specific treatment called Migralift, which is much more than just a painkiller.
Ask for it now from your pharmacist.
Migralift deals with migraine, in two ways.
Pink tablets to be taken at the first sign of symptoms and Yellow tablets that only need to be taken if symptoms persist.
And if you'd like to discover what triggers your migraine, write to Dept.
SHI  
‘MY VISION IS BLURRED AND I SEE BRIGHT LIGHTS’
‘I FEEL SO SICK’
‘I'VE GOT A BLINDING HEADACHE’
Migralift DOUBLE DEFENCE AGAINST MIGRAINE
I SAID IT'S REALLY BUTTERY AND THEY SCOFFED
Clover Light is a deliciously healthy spread with only half the fat of butter or margarine.
But with the really buttery taste that's so obviously lacking in other low fat spreads.
CLOVER LIGHT IS A LOW FAT BLEND OF VEGETABLE OIL AND CREAM.
DAIRY CREST
Tintern Abbey looks particularly beautiful in Hong Kong harbour.
What can be more beautiful than a reminder of favourite places when you're far away?
Which is why we offer Pictorial Aerogrammes in a choice of six evocative designs.
From England's green and pleasant lands to the cool deep waters of a Scottish Loch.
All have been chosen to bring a nostalgic lump to the throat of loved ones in foreign climes.
They are available at your local post office.
Each one is worth a thousand words, but a pack of six costs only £2.85.
ROYAL MAIL International By Air, By Land, By Pictorial Aerogrammes, By Hand.
JOLEN
It works.
Jolen bleaches dark hair to blend with your own skin tones.
It works well.
On face, arms, body, brow, wherever dark hair needs paling Jolen makes it barely visible.
It works wonders.
In the privacy of your own home.
Simply, safely, privately.
It has worked.
For millions of women, for a quarter of a century, the world over.
Isn't it time you tried legendary Jolen Creme Bleach?
TASTE NOT WAIST
Vegetable Lasagne is just one of the great new range of Weight Watchers from Heinz frozen meals.
There are thirteen dishes to choose from in three separate ranges: Vegetable Plus, Pasta Plus and Menu Plus.
All are under 300 calories and all taste absolutely delicious.
Topol — more than just toothpaste
Topol Toothpaste has been specially developed to fight the stains of tea, coffee, wine and tobacco.
Now with its proven anti-plaque formula, brushing with Topol ensures healthy teeth and gums.
And its added breath freshener leaves your mouth tasting fresh longer…for a smile that gets you noticed.
Use Topol Stain-Fighting Toothpaste…and smile
LYONS KEEP THE BODY
Lyons have been selecting fine teas for almost 100 years.
Now they've discovered something totally unique, Lyons Decaffeinated Tea.
The first decaffeinated tea to combine all the flavour of a traditional cup of tea with all the flavours of a modern one.
It respects the body.
The drink's as much as the drinker's.
LYONS KEEP THE FLAVOUR * LYONS KEEP THE TASTE
HYPO-ALLERGENIC TREATMENT MAKE-UP TO CARE FOR YOUR SKIN
•Your complexion deserves make-up which not only improves its appearance but also cares for it throughout the day, so RoC's foundations are designed to do just that.
•Hypo-allergenic, free of perfume and tested non-comedogenic, they provide extra help to keep your skin supple, healthy and looking fresh and radiant.
And what's more, they all protect against the ageing effects of UV light.
•You can choose between:
•Moisturising Tinted Day Cream which protects and moisturises all skin types with translucent, natural looking colour.
•Moisturising Fluid Foundation keeps normal and combination skins soft and supple, and gives a smooth, satiny finish.
•Foundation Cream moisturises and protects dry and very dry skins against dehydration with a soft, velvety finish.
•Mat Foundation for oily and acne prone skins helps to prevent ‘shine’, and disguise blemishes.
•RoC hypo-allergenic treatment make-up for skins which deserve more than just colour.
RoC HYPO-ALLERGENIC* WITHOUT PERFUME
WHEN IT COMES TO HAIR, EVERY WOMEN IS IN A MINORITY OF ONE.
Your hair is unique.
Wella understands this, which is why we've created the ultimate hair treatment range: System Professional.
The range is vast but the aim is simple: to lock in condition and keep your hair in peak health.
But please don't look for System Professional in the shops.
It takes a stylist's skill to choose exactly the right combination for you, and to advise you on maintaining the treatment between visits.
INDIVIDUAL CARE FOR BEAUTIFUL HAIR.
YOU DON'T HAVE TO BE A PROFESSIONAL TO LOOK THE BUSINESS.
Try the Big Shot from Clairol with its large professional diffuser for lots of wild curls and body.
It has six heat and speed settings, including a Cool Shot, plus a narrow concentrator nozzle for spot styling.
The Bit Shot is also quiet, lightweight and easy to handle.
And it comes with a removable air filter, an extra long cable, fitted plug and a two year guarantee.
In fact, everything you need to get yourself noticed at the top.
CLAIROL TOOLS OF THE TRADE.
TOTAL WATER HEATING OR NOT — I'M NOT DOING A NUDE SCENE.
Total Water Heating
However you like to take a bath, if you use electricity to heat your water, you can save up to £70 a year — with Total Water Heating.
Simply switch to the Economy 7 tariff and update your immersion heater with an inexpensive Maxistore conversion package.
From then on, you'll be sure of making the best use of electricity on the cheap night rate.
For details dial  free of charge and ask for Total Water Heating.
Or send the coupon.
JUST PUBLISHED — HORNES EXCLUSIVE NEW MENSWEAR CATALOGUE
Now you can have quality menswear delivered quickly to your door.
The new Hornes Collective catalogue makes it all so easy.
Our handsome first edition covers everything from suits to casual wear.
All stylish, all well-made from top quality fabrics.
Plus the shirts, shoes, ties and belts to go with them.
And you can order everything by phone — just quote your Access, Barclaycard or Sears Card number.
Everything comes with a money-back guarantee.
How do you get hold of a catalogue?
Simple — phone the special local-rate number.
Or if you prefer, post the coupon.
We'll rush you a copy at once.
CALL  FOR YOUR FREE COPY AND SHOP FROM HOME 
PURE NEW WOOL IN CLOSE UP.
MARKS & SPENCER CLOSE BY.
Daylight reveals pure new wool in its true to life colours.
The soft, fine feel tells you this is pure lambswool, pure luxury.
Great value and machine washable.
Classic easy wear and easy care.
Christian Dior
CAPTURE THE VICTORY OF SCIENCE OVER TIME.
A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY ON AGEING.
* The ageing process is very often accompanied by hardening of the cell membranes.
NOW DIOR-PATENTED ‘LIPOSOMES’ provide a revolutionary solution.
Liposomes are microscopic capsules prepared from plant extracts, then ‘loaded’ with active ingredients, which fuse with the membrane restoring fluidity.
RESULTS ARE SPECTACULAR.
The metamorphosis rapid.
You'll see a change within days.
Your complexion becomes brighter, more luminous.
Your features seem smoother and wrinkles appear reduced.
Your skin regains suppleness and tone.
Research by the Christian Dior laboratories in collaboration with the Pasteur Institute.
COMPLEXE LIPOSOMES Christian Dior
3 drops of Capture Gel morning and night.
Recipe for a lunch date: Dress from Paris.
A drop of silver from London.
Cotton from America.
To start, something light.
A delectably cool camisole and a pair of pure, white cotton pants.
To follow, a drop of silver and a splash of something special.
No fabric is more comfortable than cotton and no cotton is more natural than cotton from America.
Next time, look for the Cotton USA Mark and, whatever the cut or colour, you'll know you're going to be comfortable with it.
THE PICK OF COTTON.
PLAY SAFE WITH SAVLON.
Because on one wheel is more fun than riding on two.
Because no matter how much you warn them, they'll probably find out about wasps the hard way.
Because to germs, an open cut is an adventure playground.
Because shoe laces are hard to tie but easy to trip over.
Because the best conkers are always at the top of the tree.
Because if there's a thorn bush around, the ball will land in it.
Because you need a cream that's tough on germs but gentle on grazes.
Because kids will be kids.
Because after all, it's better to be ‘Savlon’ Safe than sorry.
KEEP YOUR FAMILY SAVLON SAFE
PASSIONATE, POWERFUL, UTTERLY ENTHRALLING…
IF YOU LOVE CATHERINE COOKSON, YOU SIMPLY MUST READ BETTY BURTON Women of No Account 
They lived in the tiny village of Croud Cantle, nestling in the heart of the Hampshire Downs.
Lidi and Sarah.
Ordinary, yet extraordinary, girls and then women of the last century, who refuse — in their different ways — to remain women of no account.
With real magic and feeling, Betty Burton tells an unforgettable story of soaring love and ambition.
Hard Loves, Easy Riches
A towering saga of passion, courage and independence, featuring spirited new heroine, Ruth Tylee.
OUT NOW IN GRAFTON PAPERBACK
OUT NOW IN GRAFTON HARDCOVER
MARY WESLEY
HER NEW NOVEL SECOND FIDDLE
‘A book that is as rich and funny as you would expect from Mary Wesley’
Cosmopolitan
‘She writes like an avenging angel, with a freshness, vigour and zest for sex (but never for sleaze) that belie her years.’
Sunday Telegraph 
AVAILABLE NOW IN BLACK SWAN PAPERBACK FROM W.H. SMITH AND OTHER GOOD BOOKSHOPS
OCEAN SPRAY CRANBERRY SAUCES
WE'RE NOT JUST TALKING TURKEY
Only Ocean Spray offer you the rich, fruity Original Cranberry Sauce or Jellied Cranberry Sauce for the same delicious taste in a smooth, light jelly.
Treat the family and serve it with your favourite meats and salads — don't save it just for the turkey!
THE MOISTURISER WITH THE NATURAL TOUCH.
Your skin asks for a gentle moisturiser that works in harmony with its own natural properties.
Timotei Moisturiser, with its pure, herbal extracts, is just that.
Timotei Moisturiser is able to nurture the softness of your skin by working in perfect harmony with it.
Timotei Skin Care also has a Deep Cleansing Lotion, Facial Wash and Herbal Freshener.
TIMOTEI SKIN CARE for naturally beautiful skin.
AEG Washing Machines For Cleaner Fish.
People don't buy AEG just to care for their clothes.
Our Lavamat automatic washing machines are also designed to look after something far more delicate.
The environment.
By fitting a unique valve called an ECO Lock into the sump, we can prevent undissolved detergent being pumped out of the wastepipe.
Which means nothing nasty gets flushed into our ponds, rivers and streams.
These natural habitats are being rapidly destroyed by pollution.
Our aim is to improve the quality of life, not impair it.
It's a small step for a manufacturer.
But it's a giant leap for trout, tench, roach, loach, pike, perch and bream.
AEG — Advanced Engineering from Germany.
Living ideas…by Allied.
‘Sheer inspiration.’
Shopping at Allied is something really special — a new and stimulating experience.
See it in the quality, value and size of our range.
Feel it as you walk around our stylish and beautifully co-ordinated room sets.
Discover the new Allied and find a whole world of living ideas to inspire your imagination.
Whatever your taste in furnishings — classic, country or contemporary, you'll find exactly what you want.
Ready-made and made-to-measure curtains, linens, lounge suites, famous name beds, bedroom furniture and, of course, our outstanding range of carpets, all there for the choosing.
Take your time, browse around — you'll be surprised by the choice and no less by the price.
Everything carries our unique 60-day low price guarantee.
Our friendly and knowledgeable sales staff will also be pleased to tell you about our many customer services that include free estimating and measuring on carpets, complimentary bedroom planning and design and up to £1000 instant credit.
Nobody looks after you better than Allied — we look forward to showing you around.
Call 01–  for local store & range details.
A superb range of co-ordinated linens to complement your bedroom.
Free design and planning service on bedroom furniture.
Free making on lined, standard made-to-measure curtains.
Beautiful lounge suites to suit every taste and style.
Choose from our famous range of over 2,400 top quality carpets.
Allied A Division of Allied Maples
It's Nice, It's Easy, It's Allied
THE AMERICAN DREAM.
THE BIGGEST OFFER WE'VE EVER MADE.
We've never been able to offer you such big, comfortable suites as in our exclusive new American Colonial Collection.
And you'll find the prices are very generous too.
The three piece suites, in six fabric designs and numerous colourways, are from £949.95.
The dining sets are from £919.65, and in each case items are available separately.
When you consider the beautifully tailored elegance, combined with the luxury of hand-polished wood, you can only draw one conclusion.
This is a dream that could soon be a reality.
Delivery is exceptional.
Our ‘Homefast’ service guarantees it's within 4 weeks.
QUEENSWAY EXPECT THE UNEXPECTED.
FOR THE FIRST TIME, EVERY COOKING COMBINATION UNDER THE SUN.
Along with the latest Solarspeed halogen hob, Creda's new Concept Microwave Circulaire has everything you need, from automatic microwave combination programming to ‘Circulaire’ fan oven, grill and microwave.
And because you can use each method separately, you can cook six different ways, so the Concept shines in comparison to standard cookers.
To start with, the ceramic hob has two Solarspeed heating areas that respond faster than you can say ‘speed of light’.
Pre set microwave programmes take the guess work out of cooking by calculating over temperatures, microwave power and timing for you.
You can brown roasts or bake golden pastries perfectly, in a fraction of the time.
There's also an autotimer, a temperature hold that keeps food hot at the end of cooking and a food probe that cooks food exactly how you want it, without timing worries.
And the controls are so easy to operate, you won't have to be an Einstein to use it.
(Although anyone choosing the Concept is sure to be a smart customer).
Being all in one, the Concept slides neatly between kitchen cabinets without gaps, adjusting to fit flush with the worktop.
Which makes cleaning effortless.
And if you compare the cost of an oven, microwave and halogen hob separately, the Concept's price of around £1099.00 makes it a bright idea.
When you see it for yourself you'll agree it's brilliant.
WHAT YOUR BODY CAN'T REPAIR, WE CAN.
Your body is capable of many things.
It can cope with a cold, fight off a serious illness and with time, even mend a broken bone.
But it can't do anything about dry or damaged hair.
Why?
Because basically your hair is dead.
The only living part is the root.
As a result your hair is totally defenceless against everything it is exposed to.
Harsh sunlight, city smoke and grime, perms, colouring and heat from dryers and styling tools.
Fortunately, all this doesn't have to be hair raising.
Let us introduce the Gliss Corimist Hair Repair Programme.
Just as you have a routine for looking after your skin, so you need one for looking after your hair.
Which is why all the products in the range are carefully formulated, not just to work in isolation but to work together as a complete programme — repairing, cleansing, caring and styling.
At each stage, the programme works on the structure of your hair, helping it to look as healthy as nature intended.
So while the world is doing its utmost to damage your hair, you can rest assured that the Gliss Corimist Hair Repair Programme is doing its utmost to undo the damage.
Leaving your body to get on with more important things.
REPAIRING CLEANSING CARING STYLING
GLISS CORIMIST THE HAIR REPAIR PROGRAMME.
Thankfully, prevention of split ends isn't as drastic as the cure.
The prevention is new Wella Balsam Intensive Dry Ends Conditioner, regularly massaged into the ends of your hair, left for a few minutes and rinsed out.
It softens, moisturises, and could save you having to resort to the scissors.
Because if your dry ends turn to split ends, the only cure is no ends.
Wella Balsam.
Now your hair's better dressed.
Your hair — as unique as your handwriting
However you colour, cut or style your hair, it still has a personality all its own.
And only by listening to your hair's basic needs can you persuade it to respond as you wish.
Today, there's an exciting range of salon products designed to restore, repair and protect.
Treatments formulated to maintain your hair's vital protein/moisture balance, giving condition and control.
Creating a structure on which to build your style.
You'll find these treatments only in Lamaur appointed salons, where expert knowledge and advice will interpret what your hair is saying.
Make a date at your nearest appointed salon and discover what Lamaur hair care can do for you.
Lamaur.
Seek it out.
And start to treat your hair in a far better way.
NOW — THE ‘JUST RIGHT’ SCRUB FOR YOUR SKIN
Natural, creamy walnut formula clears dull complexion!
Mudd Scrub Plus, with its creamy natural ‘walnut formula’, works on and beneath the skin surface to remove make-up residue, dulling grime and skin debris.
Works gently but quickly — without harsh abrasive action — to unblock clogged pores, draw out excess oils and help you to a clearer complexion.
Effective for combination and dry skin too!
Leaves your skin soft…smooth…vibrant.
MUDD SCRUB THE DEEP CLEANSING FACIAL FORMULA WITH THE GENTLE SCRUBBING ACTION plus 
HOW TOP MODELS LOOKS NATURAL AND FLAWLESS…
CLOSE UP!
Corn Silk, a unique super-absorbent superfine face powder that ends oily shine.
Made from crushed walnut shells the finer texture and super sheer translucent character of Corn Silk makes it the ideal base for your make-up.
No wonder top models use it.
At most Boots stores, your chemist or department store now.
NEW CORN SILK MICRON POWDER
Available in loose or compressed powder form.
Pure colour
Pure Sensiq
Sensiq Foundation cares for your skin and allows it to breathe.
And it looks completely natural.
In 3 silky smooth foundations.
Satin Cover, Natural Finish and Protective Moisture Tint with sunscreen.
Each in 5 shades at £2.79.
Sensiq Perfect Powder Blush.
Smooth even colour in ten, long lasting shades at £2.59.
All lanolin and fragrance free and developed without testing on animals.
At selected branches of Boots and other leading chemists.
Call freephone  for your nearest stockist.
SENSIQ Colour was never so pure
She's got FINESSE!
You like to express your individuality.
Whether you want to change your personality from night to day, from work to play or from mother to managing director, the way you wear your hair speaks more clearly than your clothes do.
When you need a quick change of role — or want to take extra time to look stunning — start with your hairstyle.
Fortunately technology has come to the rescue — the new Finesse styling aids range is as sophisticated and versatile as you are.
Creative effects
If you want to transform your quick and easy daytime look into a bold, creative effect for evening, then you need new Finesse Spritz.
It's a maximum hold spray, ideal for using with tongs or hot brushes — one quick fizz, twist the hair round the tongs, and you're off.
Perfect control
Hairspray is a time-honoured way to hold your hair in place.
Finesse's hairspray formulations are non-sticky, and yet give perfect control when applied to dry hair.
Finesse's new hairsprays come in aerosol and non-aerosol spray, so there's one for you whatever your preference.
Beautiful body
Even if you don't like to fiddle with curlers and tongs you can show off your cut to best advantage by adding more volume and body to your hair.
(And giving your hair more body is probably also the best way of looking healthier and younger, short of a facelift!)
There are two great Finesse products for this — Luminescent Mousse and Gel Mist.
Gel Mist is an entirely new product which combines the benefits of a hairspray and a gel.
It gives a terrific boost to the volume of your hair, and it can also be used for styling a few special details, because it stays pliable while you create them.
Gel Mist is especially useful for those with curls or perms because it helps your curls fall into place without frizziness.
Finesse Luminescent Mousse has, as its name suggests, a luminescent quality which gives your hair a healthy shine and brings out the natural highlights.
Towel dry your hair after shampoo it and spray a golf-ball size blob of Mousse onto your hands.
Stroke the Luminescent Mousse quickly through your hair and comb through, making sure that it is well distributed at the roots.
Then you can either blow dry or use heated rollers or tongs.
It's available in both normal and extra control.
Luminescent Gel provides the ultimate in body and control, without leaving your hair sticky or dull.
Like the Mousse it gives your hair a healthy gloss and, because it doesn't contain alcohol, it won't dry your hair out.
So goodbye to the days when washing your hair meant using just shampoo and conditioner, and relying on your own dexterity to make your hairstyles work.
With the new sophisticated Finesse range you can be your own top hairdresser.
Relax and let Finesse take care of your hair
Finesse Gel Mist adds volume and gives total styling control.
Finesse Hairspray — firm hold all day long
The new complete styling range from Finesse
DISCOVER THE CHEESES OF ENGLAND AND WALES WITH WENSLEYDALE, YOU CAN HAVE YOUR CAKE.
Traditionalists insist that there are only three appropriate accompaniments to Wensleydale:— apple pie, gingerbread, or fruit cake.
Apparently, nothing else quite matches the subtle, clean, refreshing taste of this lightly-pressed, smooth-textured cheese, which is rich in nutritious calcium and protein.
It is with some trepidation, therefore, that we now suggest one or two newer ways to enjoy Wensleydale.
Try them on your family soon.
We think they'll like them.
AND EAT IT.
APPLE AND WENSLEYDALE TART
5 oz Wensleydale, grated •6 oz of plain flour •5 oz of butter •1 yolk of egg •1 tbsp lemon juice •4 eating apples, peeled, halved and cored •1 tbsp of chopped parsley
Cube 3 oz butter and rub into flour.
Stir in 3 oz cheese, add egg yolk, 2 tablespoons water and mix to firm dough.
Knead lightly.
Melt remaining butter in shallow flameproof dish, add apples and turn gently in butter until lightly browned.
Remove from dish.
Sprinkle remaining cheese and parsley into dish and place apples on top, core side up.
Roll out pastry and cover apples, tucking in edges.
Bake at 190°C, 375°F, Gas Mark 5 for 20 minutes.
Leave to cool for 15 minutes.
Turn out and serve warm.
Serves 6–7.
WENSLEYDALE FISH PIE
1 lb smoked haddock •1 pint milk •3 oz of butter •2 oz of plain flour •12 oz of broccoli florets, parboiled •3 tomatoes, skinned and chopped •6 oz Wensleydale, crumbled •pepper •8 slices of French bread, cubed
Place fish and milk in wide shallow pan.
Bring to boil, cover, simmer for 6–8 minutes until the fish is cooked.
Skin and flake the fish.
Strain the milk.
Melt 2 oz butter in saucepan, add the flour and cook for 1 minute.
Gradually stir in the milk until thickened and smooth.
Stir in the broccoli, tomatoes, fish, half of the cheese and pepper.
Turn into an ovenproof dish.
Heat remaining butter, add bread and stir to coat.
Spread over sauce and sprinkle with the remaining cheese.
Bake at 190°C, 375°F, Gas Mark 5 for 25 minutes, until golden.
Serve hot.
Serves 4
PEAR AND WENSLEYDALE SALAD
1 large orange •2 pears •1 bunch watercress •a few radicchio leaves •1 oz walnut halves •8 oz of cubed Wensleydale •4 tablespoons French dressing
Peel and segment orange.
Halve, core and slice the pears.
Arrange pears in fan on four plates with orange and watercress.
Add the radicchio and walnuts.
Sprinkle the cheese over the salad and add the French dressing.
Serves 4  
ANY WAY YOU PLEASE IT CHEESE IT
Turn fish into Filet de Morue Hollandaise.
With ‘Bonne Cuisine’, you can master the art of sauce making.
Always smooth, always light, each of the seven ‘Bonne Cuisine’ sauces transforms an everyday meal into a deliciously different dish.
So try ‘Bonne Cuisine’.
The simple way to make superb sauces.
For a free recipe leaflet, please write to: Crosse & Blackwell ‘Bonne Cuisine’ Recipe leaflet   
Eat well.
Crosse & Blackwell.
DOLCELATTE FULL FAT SOFT CHEESE
Dolcelatte gets rid of meal time blues.
Sweet by name, mild by nature.
Creamy, blue-veined Dolcelatte is the perfect way to round off your meals and delicious to nibble in between.
FOR RECIPES CONCERNING THIS CHEESE, SEND A 9″ × 6″ S.A.E. TO GALBANI LONDON LTD  
Tryton Inn Yorkshire Puddings seen around all the best joints
Sirloin on Sunday or midweek's leg or lamb, Tryton Inn Yorkshire Puddings make a delicious accompaniment to all your meat dishes.
In fact they are regularly seen around all the best joints.
Is yours one of them?
TRYTON INN rises to the occasion!
Now you can ‘Snack’ without that guilty feeling — Munch a MATZO!
Matzo — the crisp 'n' tasty King Size Cracker is really great for all the family — It's the natural snack for today's fitter lifestyle.
The secret of Matzo is what's left out — NO FACT, NO SUGAR, NO SALT and NO GUILTY FEELINGS.
ANYTIME, WITH ANY TOPPING — MUNCH A MATZO
Available in Leading Supermarkets
John West Salmon Parisienne.
(In the time it takes you to read this you could be enjoying it.)
John West's new Microwave Meals take just 3 minutes to prepare.
Simply peel off the cover, pop the plastic pack in the microwave and in no time at all you have a tasty meal for one.
Choose from Mediterranean style Tuna Florenza; spicy Tuna Mexicana; Salmon Parisienne with a delicious white wine sauce; Tuna Indienne, a mild curry; Tuna Italienne, with pasta; or Salmon Imperial in a delicate dill and a sherry sauce.
All are specially vacuum sealed, will keep anywhere in perfect condition without freezing or artificial preservatives, and are ready in just 3 minutes.
In fact, the only thing likely to take any time is deciding which to have.
Insist on the best.
John West.
TAPAS & LA INA
The Spanish custom that's becoming a British habit.
It all happens later in Spain.
Lunch can be at four, dinner at ten (blame it on the midday heat).
To stave off the pangs and cool the tongue, tapas are eaten and La Ina is drunk.
Tapas?
A mouthwatering variety of small portions of all kinds of food — from seafood to salad, omelettes to meatballs.
And La Ina?
The classic aperitif from Domecq.
Refreshing, pale, light, dry and crisp, it has a faint bouquet of almonds.
Served chilled it awakens the palate.
But you don't need the heat of the sun in Spain to enjoy this delightful custom.
At midday or early evening, tapas and La Ina is a wonderful combination for pairs or parties.
It goes with gossip, it livens up the day, it becomes a social event in itself.
TAPAS.
Can be cold: chorizo sausages, cured ham, asparagus, prawns and all seafood.
Or hot: calamares, grilled sardines, small Spanish omelettes, anchovies and meatballs.
LA INA.
Always serve fresh and chilled.
Available in bottles and half bottles.
Without doubt, the world's most civilised aperitif.
If you'd like to know more, send for Elisabeth Luard's new book, ‘The La Ina Book of Tapas’, sending a postal order or cheque for £2.50 made payable to Dent & Reuss Ltd., together with your name and address (in block capitals) and a till receipt showing a purchase of a bottle of La Ina (ringed in ballpoint pen), to: The La Ina Tapas Book Offer  
La Ina The world's most civilised aperitif.
THE PROJECT
1) Do you take as much care in looking after your body as you do your face?
2) Which part of your figure a) worries you b) worries you most?
3) What action do you take to improve your body?
Diet Exercise Use specialist body products Treatments in beauty salons
4) Do you think you have cellulite?
(If you're not sure of the definition, see above)
5) Have you ever used anti-cellulite creams, gels, soaps or oils (often called body profiling products)?
Yes, in the past Yes, currently No
If yes, please name products
6) What do you feel about these products?
They are a waste of time and money and I don't believe they work
I feel sceptical but would give them a try I believe they work but only in conjunction with a healthy diet and regular exercise
I know they work and I am an enthusiastic user
7) Elancyl and SHE would like you to test products that will help you get rid of cellulite and improve skin texture and tone.
The Active Toning Kit is for those who have time to work on their body.
You will receive the massage glove and soap, and the Active Toning Gel.
MP24 is an Elancyl gel with microparticles which prolong the effect for 24 hours, so that you only need to massage it in lightly.
Which one would you like to try?
(Tick box) Active Toning Kit MP24 
Sarah Harrison's brilliant sequel to Hot Breath is out
COLD FEET SARAH HARRISON
The further outrageous adventures of Harriet Blair: with one foot in suburbia and the other in the glamorous world of the bestselling author — harassed parent, part-time wife, and seductive career woman — Harriet Blair is truly a comic heroine for the 1990s.
THE LAND OF OUR DREAMS
It's Christmas, 1912, and as the McKie family prepare for the festivities, the ambitions of the younger members show that the world is rapidly changing.
But, with the Great War looming, the future will be harsher than any of them could ever expect…
UTTERLY COMPELLING
Oh Deardrie!!!
THE WHOLE WORLD'S PROBLEMS…
Don't keep your worries to yourself!
I'm under here somewhere to offer you advice on family or personal problems.
If you don't see your letter here, don't worry, I promise I'll get round to it soon.
He's too noisy!
It's my husband Deardrie — he keeps me awake at night, grinding his teeth!
It's so loud some nights I've got to go downstairs and sleep on the sofa.
I've got some ear-plugs but they don't work — I still hear him grinding, but don't hear the alarm.
I've quizzed him about the noise, but he says he's never heard it — well of course he hasn't, he's fast asleep!
Next door must think we're up to something kinky.
I haven't slept for weeks, you should see the bags under my eyes — Deardrie, should we get separate beds, or should I get a tape recorder under the covers so he can hear the racket he makes?
BRENDA
Oh Brenda, it's no fun, not getting a wink at night — you could end up some kind of insomniac or a nymphomaniac, whatever the correct term is!
You may not know this — I've studied sleeping, around the corner at the local college — grinding's the result of too much stress.
Your husband needs to relax before he hits the sack.
Make him a delicious cup of 99 tea, Brenda, it licks other bedtime drinks — and it'll put an end to his night-time grinding!
I married Batman
What do you do with a 46 year-old, 5 foot nothing, exceedingly chubby hubby who's convinced he's Batman?
I can't get any sense out of him — he comes home from work and disappears straight away through the cubby hole under the stairs — to his ‘Batcave’!
He's costing me a fortune in tights — I wondered who'd been taking them at first.
And he wears these horrible Y-fronts, with his Batman T-shirt tucked into them!
He's seen the film 36 times already, and all I can get out of him is how he should have had the part.
‘I can just see that Kim Bassinger falling for you,’ I told him.
‘So can I,’ is what he said.
Deardrie, how do I bring him back to reality?
I want a normal man, not a Batman.
LINDA
Holy hard luck story, Linda!
Could this be the end…of a beautiful relationship?
Has the Caped Crusader…been exposed?
Who can save the world now? 99 tea of course— slip a few tea bags into his utility belt tonight, Alfred can make him a cup downstairs.
Next time you see him he'll be a changed man —‘Bagman’!!
Could this be the start…of the Cupped Crusader?
Holy 99 tea bags — SLURP!
GULP!
DUNK!!!
She's leaving me
My Sheila — she's never satisfied — always wants to go some place different.
Take last year's holidays — I fancied Prestatyn, and we ended up in Bolivia.
Full of robbers it was — more one-armed bandits than the Golden Mile.
Well, last night I asked her where she thought of going this year — I suggested Prestatyn.
‘Go where you like,’ she said, ‘I'm off to the moon.’
Just like that.
'Course, I was shocked — I didn't know Thomsons went there.
Turns out, Deardrie, she's applied to be an astronaut — I remember seeing the advert, asking for people to go to the moon — it's not that I'm jealous, but why didn't she ask me first?
Deardrie, should I give her a rocket, or just wait for a postcard?
NEIL
I don't know Neil — girls these days, they expect the moon as well as the earth, don't they?
What's wrong with flying round the M25 once in a while?
You really must come to terms with space Neil — the space in the kitchen where the kettle goes.
Make Sheila a wondrous cup of 99 tea — that'll have her over the moon in seconds.
Give her another cup, she may change her mind about going in space Neil, you may get the odd flying saucer, but when has anyone seen a cup of 99 tea?
Sick of Neighbours
It's my neighbour Deardrie — he's a right old interfering whatsit.
He's got nothing better to do than keep nagging on about our new garden fence.
He says it's too high.
‘Course it's high,’ I told him.
‘To stop you poking your head over it!’
Next thing, he tried to knock it down with his lawnmower — said it ‘ran out of control’.
Yesterday was the limit.
I went out to water some plants and there was piles of soil all over the lawn — I was furious.
He claims it was a mole but I know it was him — what can I do to shut him up?
BARBARA
Neighbours, I believe, should know their place — and that's on the TV, not in the back garden.
This one's got a big mouth and I suggest, rather than put a sock in it, put a cup of 99 tea in it instead!
He's obviously badly in need of a friendly brew — he'll stop having you over the fence after that, I'm sure of it.
After all, why have a crackpot, when you can have a teapot!
Everything's fine with 99!
ULTRATONE.
TONES AND LIFTS FOR MORE SHAPELY CURVES.
A firm bustline does wonders for your figure and you won't have to move a muscle to create the look you desire.
Ultratone will do it for you while you relax, watch TV or listen to music.
By gently giving your muscles concentrated exercise, Ultratone tightens, lifts and firms your breasts.
Regular sessions will dramatically improve their tone and your whole bodyshape.
Clip the coupon and we'll reveal the full picture of how easily Ultratone gets you into shape — and into fashion.
A BALANCED CALCIUM INTAKE TODAY MEANS A HEALTHIER YOU TOMORROW
As we grow from childhood, the role of calcium in our bodies changes from building bones to maintaining them.
Every year, your body replaces 20% of its bone calcium and you simply cannot afford to fall behind in this natural process.
Why is calcium so important to women especially?
As a woman, you will require more calcium throughout your life than your male counterpart.
Unfair, but a fact of life.
If you are pregnant, or breastfeeding, for example, you will need more than double the recommended daily amount of calcium.
At the age of around thirty-five, we start to lose calcium faster than we can replace it — a process accelerated by hormonal changes during the menopause.
So women around, or beyond, this age will probably need more calcium than before.
By balancing your calcium intake at an early age, your bones are better prepared for these potentially damaging changes.
Calcia helps you keep in balance
Recognising the problems associated with calcium deficiency facing women particularly, English Grains Healthcare formulated a dietary supplement called Calcia to ensure your calcium intake keeps pace with your body's needs.
In addition to calcium, Calcia supplies those other minerals and vitamins essential to a woman's health, including iron and vitamin D.
Calcia puts in what your diet leaves out
Modern dietary trends are making us healthier in many respects and yet, as we move away from calcium-rich foods like milk, cream and cheese, a valuable source of calcium is being lost.
Women on crash diets, or merely slimming, should take particular care.
Also, natural fibre such as bran products tend to bind to calcium, making it difficult for the body to use the calcium, making supplements more necessary than ever.
Calcia.
Probably the best long-term investment a woman can make
Just three Calcia tablets a day provide you with sufficient calcium to supplement your diet, supplying both your immediate and your long-term needs.
Calcia may be found at all chemists, drug stores, supermarkets and health food shops.
Remember, by taking care of today, tomorrow will take care of itself.
CALCIA Inner Strength A CALCIUM, IRON AND VITAMIN SUPPLEMENT ESPECIALLY FORMULATED FOR WOMEN.
THE COLLAGEN PROGRAMME (non-surgical)
WRINKLES?
PERMANENT EXPRESSION LINES?
Restore and maintain youthful appearance with the non-surgical Collagen Programme
The Collagen programme has been designed for use in the comfort and privacy of your own home.
The preparations within the programme are easy to apply which helps to ensure that delicate skin tissues are not damaged in any way during application.
Collagen
Young skin contains well formed Collagen fibres, a natural biological material which is vital in helping to maintain the skins youthful appearance.
As the skin matures these fibres become distorted, causing loss of elasticity which often results in wrinkles & lines and should be supplemented to ensure a younger, smoother look and feel.
Use of the Collagen Programme will help to combat the effects of skin hydration and the resultant wrinkles and sagging.
The Programme comprises: Collagen Cleanser; Collagen Toner; Collagen Moisturiser; Collagen Night Cream, and most important of all, Collagen Ampoules.
The Ampoules are designed for non-surgical, external application and contain very active ingredients, which when used correctly, and especially when used in conjunction with the other preparations in the programme can produce spectacular results.
Please Note: Collagen Ampoules are suitable only for dry and mature skin.
Because you want the very best for your hair…
…it's important to insist on a Mason Pearson brush.
For the famous Mason Pearson pneumatic cushion technique conditions your hair as it brushes, reaching right down to the scalp and firmly but gently caressing each strand to promote shining health and loveliness.
Ordinary brushing simply isn't in the same class!
Mason Pearson's unsurpassed reputation for true value combined with the very highest standards in hair care now spans a whole century.
Theirs, then, is the name you can trust…always.
There is a comprehensive range of Mason Pearson brushes at various prices.
A free haircare leaflet comes with most brushes — or write for a copy to:
THE CURSE.
No woman feels her best during the period leading up to a period.
But help is at hand.
New Duosome Cream contains that remarkable polyunsaturated fatty acid GLA whose special properties have already been well documented.
Duosome Cream is a beauty product whose active ingredients include Elastin, Collagen, Vitamins E and F, together with liposomes which carry them beneath the skin to the cells below.
There's never been a more attractive way to see what GLA can do for you.
THE BLESSINGS
THE POWER PLAYER IS BACK!
PENNY JORDAN Silver 
Silver , the latest blockbuster from the gifted pen of Penny Jordan, looks set to repeat the huge success of her last novel Power Play .
Geraldine Frances, a plain, shy teenager is the sole heiress to the family fortune.
Tragically, her father's suicide coincides with the shattering discovery that her cousin Charles' interest in marrying her is based on greed — not love.
To escape this bitter betrayal, she decides to fake her own death and disappear.
With the help of cosmetic surgery she undergoes a dramatic transformation to re-emerge as Silver .
A hauntingly beautiful woman with no apparent past, but with a secretly burning passion for revenge…
RED LEICESTER CAN BRING A LITTLE COLOUR INTO YOUR LIFE
WELL, INTO YOUR PANCAKES, ANYWAY.
Red Leicester didn't get its name by accident.
It adds a bold splash of colour to all kinds of snacks, and turns everyday items into original-looking and great-tasting treats.
Try one soon.
DISCOVER THE CHEESES OF ENGLAND AND WALES
Now Sainsbury's can satisfy your child's hunger for knowledge.
They say the human brain is at its most receptive when it is young.
It has even been suggested that three-quarters of what we know as adults we learned in childhood.
Certainly, these early learning years are crucial to a child's educational development.
Which is why the Sainsbury's Home Learning Programme is such good news for parents.
Because it helps you make a real and personal contribution to your child's education.
The Programme has been devised by leading primary educationalists and follows the framework of the national curriculum.
It covers the core subjects of Reading, Maths and Science at five age-group levels: 3–5, 4–6, 5–7, 6–8 and 7 upwards.
In each subject, and at each level, there is a learning book and an accompanying ‘write-in’ workbook.
Quite simply, the Sainsbury's Home Learning Programme makes learning fun.
The Reading books help children to enjoy words, whether written or spoken.
They introduce the concepts of rhyme and wordplay, as well as covering basics like alphabet and spelling.
The aim of the Maths series is to make the subject one to enjoy, rather than fear.
Each page is a game, with ideas like Missing Numbers introducing children to algebra long before they've even heard of the word.
In the Science books, children are encouraged to look around and observe how things work.
Using everyday objects, basic scientific principles can be explained even to the very young.
Each book is prefaced with simple parental guidelines explaining the skills each exercise aims to develop.
Above all, the Sainsbury's Home Learning Programme is designed to help parents actively participate in their children's education.
It creates a common link between teaching in schools and learning at home.
Importantly, too, it helps you understand the often alien terminology used in today's teaching.
(Modern education methods differ greatly to the teaching you had when you were at school.)
The Sainsbury's Home Learning Programme is now available at most Sainsbury's stores.
At only £1.50 for a learning book and 75p for the accompanying workbook, the entire volume of thirty books costs just £33.75.
Small price to pay for providing your child with the most valuable gift of all.
The gift of knowledge.
I don't suppose a walrus knows
The proper way to clean his toes,
Or perhaps among the rocks
They have no need of shoes and socks.
At which time was the shadow of the bottle shortest?
Colour the sweets red and green.
Colour them so that there is a different number of red sweets in each jar.
No-one goes to greater lengths to get the perfect fruit for their juice.
Who else would go 1,000 miles for the right apricot?
7,000 miles for the perfect mango and 8,000 miles for the best pineapple?
Who else harvests at dawn to make their vegetable juice second to none?
Even our orange juice is made from special Brazilian oranges.
And only freshly pressed apples will do for our apple juice.
We have to travel thousands of miles to gather the fruits, and vegetables of our labour.
All you have to do is take a stroll down the high street.
With an Epilady you don't end up with a prickly pear.
An Epilady is as quick and easy to use as a shaver.
Except it's not.
Instead of blades, it has a unique, smooth round coil which works like waxing, lifting the hairs right out from the root.
Not cutting.
Naturally enough, you'll feel a gentle pluck (that you soon get used to) then your legs are perfectly peachy smooth.
And the real point is this.
Since a plucked hair regrows much more slowly and softly than a snipped hair, your legs stay that way for weeks and weeks.
After all, you've probably got better things to do.
So treat your legs to an Epilady.
It gets right to the root of the problem.
WORKING THIS CLOSE TAKES PURE CARE
IF YOU WEAR CONTACTS, OR IF SENSITIVE EYES MAKE YOU WARY OF CONTACT, THEN PURE CARE CONTACT LENS MASCARA IS MADE FOR YOU.
IT IS FIBRE-FREE AND WON'T SMUDGE, FLAKE OR RUN.
YOU KNOW IT'S SAFE BECAUSE, LIKE ALL PURE CARE PRODUCTS, IT IS ALLERGY-SCREENED AND FRAGRANCE-FREE AND IT HAS BEEN THOROUGHLY TESTED ON HARD AND SOFT LENSES.
SOUNDS PERFECT?
NO 7 PURE CARE CONTACT LENSE MASCARA LOOKS PRETTY GOOD, TOO.
NO 7 PRODUCTS ARE NOT TESTED ON ANIMALS
Trainee Tanning Researchers hard at work.
It's a tough job being a full-time Tanning Researcher here at Hawaiian Tropic and it's best to start nice and young.
However, we know that young or sensitive skins of any age require special attention.
Everyone can start off with our Baby Faces and Tender Places Lotion with Protection Factor 15.
And if that's not enough, we've got a Sunshield Lotion with a Protection Factor of 30.
Using natural ingredients, which tend to grow on trees round here, they are both water resistant.
Which means that, no matter how often the little tanning researchers are in and out of the water, they get a safer start to their tanning programme.
After successfully completing the initial phases we move everyone on to our Sun Screen Cream, Protection Factor 8.
Or should they prefer, trainees can opt for our Factor 6 lotion instead.
For the more grown-up researcher who has successfully completed a week's training or so, there is the ultimate goal, Hawaiian Tropic Royal Tanning Blend which has no protection at all.
We keep our trainees hard at it and even when the sun goes down the programme continues.
There's Hawaiian Tropic Aftersun Moisturiser, with tropical oils, and aloe rich, Cool Aloe Gel to apply through the long tropical evenings.
However, given the right kind of motivation and with proper training we feel that anyone can become a fully qualified Hawaiian Tropic Tanning Researcher.
For more information and advice, dial 100 and ask for Freephone Tanning Research.
Escape the nightmare of itching.
Itching is a very personal torture.
No-one else can possibly picture what you suffer.
As you know, scratching is no answer.
But Eurax Cream is.
It contains a unique ingredient, Crotamiton, widely prescribed by doctors.
It will rapidly relieve your itch whether it be a mild irritation or an allergic rash, on any part of the body.
And it will bring blessed relief from your personal nightmare for up to ten hours.
IT 'ASDA BE TENDER GREEK STYLE KEBABS
INGREDIENTS: 1KG (2LB) BONED LEG OF LAMB.
JUICE OF 1 LEMON.
3 × 15ML SP (3 TBSP) OLIVE OIL.
1 GARLIC CLOVE CRUSHED.
1 × 5ML SP (1 TSP) OREGANO.
SALT AND FRESHLY GROUND BLACK PEPPER.
8 ONIONS, PEELED AND HALVED.
8 SMALL TOMATOES HALVED.
16 BAY LEAVES.
METHOD:
1.
CUT THE LAMB INTO 2.5CM (1″) CUBES.
2.
IN A LARGE BOWL, BEAT THE LEMON JUICE INTO THE OLIVE OIL, AND THE GARLIC, OREGANO AND SEASONING.
MIX IN THE MEAT CUBES AND ALLOW TO MARINATE FOR SEVERAL HOURS OR OVERNIGHT.
3.
THREAD THE LAMB ONTO SKEWERS WITH THE ONION, TOMATO AND BAY LEAVES.
4.
COOK OVER A HOT BARBECUE FIRE OR UNDER A MODERATE GRILL TURNING FREQUENTLY AND BASTING WITH THE MARINADE FOR 15–20 MINUTES.
5.
SERVE WITH LEMON WEDGES, SALAD AND WARM PITTA BREAD.
ASDA STOCK A WIDE RANGE OF QUALITY MEAT AND POULTRY IDEAL FOR BARBECUING, SUBJECT TO SEASONAL AVAILABILITY.
Now Braun has an Independent for you, whoever you are.
Whatever your look, whatever your mood, Braun has an Independent for you.
Choose the new Independent 500 in stylish black, or the Independent 2000 with easy cartridge system, and you'll have cordless convenience for quick effective styling any time, anywhere.
And now, from around £11.00, the new Independent 500 Tong, Brush and Combi mean that there is a Braun Styler to suit you.
And your pocket.
BRAUN Designed to perform better
smooth the way to perfect skin
There's a bewildering range of skincare products to choose from, but one name that is trusted by millions of women, is Pond's.
Pond's skincare range provides everything you need to keep your skin looking youthful — without spending a fortune!
Because of its greater exposure to the elements — sun, wind and heat — your facial skin is especially prone to moisture loss.
It therefore needs an abundant supply of nature's essential rehydrating fluid — water — to keep it soft and supple.
Pond's moisturisers help maintain and replenish your skin with natural ingredients such as glycerine, which helps prevent moisture loss and attracts extra water from the air.
Whatever your skin type, Pond's Creams will help maintain it in peak condition.
Choose from:
Dry Skin Cream a rich moisturiser to smooth out fine lines.
Light Day Cream a non-greasy moisturiser which is absorbed efficiently.
Vanishing Cream a greaseless moisturiser for oilier skins, leaves skin shine-free.
Night Cream a rich blend to restore moisture balance while you sleep.
Rinse Off Cleanser fragrance and soap-free, without any drying effect.
Cold Cream Cleanser dissolves grime and waterproof make-up.
WHAT MAKES UP A WOMAN?
COLORFAST — SKINCARE FOR YOUR MAKE-UP.
No two women are the same.
And make-up is one way of expressing that individuality.
Yet all women would agree that, whatever their make-up, it should care for their skin.
Which is why the Colorfast range of cosmetics is as unique as every woman who chooses to wear it.
Colorfast's hydrovitalising formula means your complexion no longer need be a slave to fashion.
Constantly moisturising, with a combination of vitamins, sunscreens and conditioners, it does as much for your skin as for the way you look.
Colorfast.
Whatever your make-up.
TABLE WATER TALK.
NUMBER 53.
‘Purity,’ said Alan.
‘Many seek it, but who finds it?’
‘The French,’ said Mark.
He poured a glass of Volvic mineral water from the blue plastic bottle on the table.
‘The French?’
‘Volvic.
Pure French mountain springwater from the Auvergne, naturally filtered through volcanic rocks.
Pure, conventual purity.’
Sarah sipped her glass of Volvic.
‘Purity for all,’ she said.
‘What an appalling thought.’
WELLA You can see the thinking
To add volume to an entire head of hair, we start with each individual strand.
Because one in three women in Britain have fine flyaway hair, we've introduced new Wella Balsam Hair Restructurant.
Unlike ordinary conditioners, which simply coat the outside of the hair, Hair Restructurant actually works on the inside and remains in the hair all day to give volume and body.
Technically speaking (as the diagram shows), the unique formula penetrates the hair, enters the cortex and strengthens the hair bonds.
Or, in plain English, it gives natural strength and volume to each strand, making your hair noticeably thicker, shinier and easier to style.
So if you want to give your hair extra body, try new Wella Balsam Hair Restructurant, the latest from the Wella Balsam range.
After all, as everybody knows, true beauty comes from within.
Two women.
One childhood dream.
Across the sweeping landscapes of rugged Cornwall to the grim tenements of turn-of-the-century New York…the start of a stunning three-part historical saga.
The Azure Bowl ANITA BURGH author of Distinctions of Class and Love the Bright Foreigner 
‘Anita has the storyteller's gift’THE DAILY EXPRESS 
OUT NOW IN PAPERBACK FROM W.H. SMITH AND ALL OTHER BOOKSELLERS £3.99
THE GOLDEN BUTTERFLY, Book 2 in Anita Burgh's enthralling trilogy,
Daughters of a Granite Land , is now available in hardback from Chatto & Windus, price £13.95.
When romance is in the air, Anjou is on the table.
Anjou wines are so distinctive, that in 1920 a competition was held to design a glass to do them justice.
The winner is still in use, a tribute to Louis Mignot, a local grower.
The wines we introduced to this country by Henri Plantagenet, Count of Anjou, in 1154.
Clearly a golden year — a grateful nation made him King Henry II thereafter.
Perch, Salmon, Pike and Eel; regional specialities from the freshwater fish are perfect accompaniment to the wines of Anjou.
Or is it vice versa?
Anjou, both rosé and white, comes from the Loire near Angers.
For Anjou Rosé, look for the tall, fluted bottle.
For the medium-dry white, look for Anjou Blanc on the shelves.
Make friends with the wines of France.
IF YOU'RE A BRIGHTON, BLACKPOOL OR BOGNOR BABY, YOU'RE BETTER OFF WITH BRITISH GAS WATER HEATING.
GAS.
THE HEAT OF THE MOMENT.
Oh, we do like to be beside the seaside.
Why do people take so much pleasure in immersing themselves in warm water?
One theory is that it awakens distant memories of floating in the comfort of the womb.
Another reason might be that the human species evolved in the water.
Our streamlined bodies, lack of fur and webbed fingers suggest this could be true.
Babies know how to swim at birth.
Perfect, if you've got the Mediterranean on your back doorstep.
Possibly a little bracing if your nearest stretch of coast is in Britain.
British Gas water heating may not sound as romantic as the sea but it remains one of the quickest, most controllable ways of providing oceans of hot water.
Without having to splash out too much.
The Inside Story
Le Yogurt Actif is a new yogurt from Chambourcy.
What makes it so different?
All yogurt is made with cultures, but Le Yogurt Actif also contains two special active cultures known as Bifidus and Acidophilus.
Medical evidence suggests that these cultures are particularly effective in promoting a healthier digestion.
And if you feel good on the inside it shows on the outside.
Le Yogurt Actif is deliciously fruity with a refreshingly different taste.
There are two types, Real Fruit and French Style Set.
We're sure you'll find them both irresistible.
So now you've got the inside information, try Le Yogurt Actif.
It's the taste of things to come.
Your skin is only ever four weeks old.
Pond's can help it feel that way.
About once a month you get a new skin.
Unbelievable but true.
During this time, the top layer of your skin is shed to reveal a fresh new one.
Unfortunately, however, it doesn't provide an antidote to wrinkles.
The problems start as the years go by.
When your skin was young, it could fend for itself.
Keeping in moisture to protect it against all manner of evils.
The weather, central heating, to name but a few.
With age, the skin's inner layer loses its elasticity.
It's no longer as efficient at retaining this crucial moisture.
If you're not careful, this is when lines start to creep up on you.
Now, don't despair, there is something you can do.
Pond's moisturisers can help you in two ways.
They replace essential moisture whilst forming a protective layer to hold it in.
Even the way you apply Pond's can help keep you looking young.
As you rub it in, be sure to use gentle massaging movements.
This will stimulate the flow of blood to your face, revitalizing your skin.
Although they perform these tasks, Pond's moisturisers don't feel greasy.
We've made them lighter and they're easily absorbed.
Why not set a few moments aside first thing in the morning and last thing at night?
With a little help from Pond's, your skin will never feel more than four weeks old.
Helps skin stand the test of time.
the RoC safe tanning survey
We've linked up with RoC — the hypoallergenic skin care experts — to find out more about your attitudes to suntanning.
If your completed survey arrives before August 31, you will automatically be entered into RoC's special prize draw.
•First prize is a weekend for two at a leading UK health hydro with £100 of vouchers to spend on treatments of your choice.
•Two runners-up will receive RoC skin care products to the value of £100 and £50.
•Plus there are 1,000 free samples of Invisible Sunscreen (3ml) and Moisturising Tinted Day Cream (5ml) for the next 1,000 entries to be drawn.
Look out for the results of our survey, to be published early next year.
1.
Are you: Female Male
2.
Age?
3.
Are you:
a)
married
b)
living with a partner
c)
single
d)
widowed/divorced/separated
4.
Do you have children?
5.
If yes, what are their ages?
6.
What is your skin type?
a)
very fair, never tans
b)
fair, goes red then tans lightly
c)
tans easily, but can burn
d)
tans easily, never burns
e)
brown skin (Asian)
f)
black skin
7.
How sensitive is your skin?
a)
sensitive
b)
slightly sensitive
c)
not at all sensitive
d)
prone to allergies
8.
Where do you usually go on holiday?
a)
UK/cool climates
b)
Europe/Mediterranean climates
c)
tropical climates
d)
skiing
9.
How many weeks holiday do you spend in the sun in total (including skiing)?
10.
Do you use sun protection products throughout your holiday?
a)
yes, always
b)
for most of it, but not during the last few days
c)
only for the first few days
d)
only if I burn
e)
I never use sun protection products
11.
Which type of products do you use?
a)
cream
b)
lotion
c)
gel
d)
oil
e)
other (please specify)
12.
Which SPF levels do you use?
13.
Do you change SPF according to the tanning stage you are at?
14.
Do you buy specific sun protection products for your children?
Which SPF level do you use on their skin?
15.
Do you buy specific sun protection products for your face?
Which SPF level do you use on your face?
16.
How long do you sit in the sun on the first day of your holiday?
17.
What do you do if your skin begins to turn red?
a)
cover up and sit in the shade
b)
apply more sun cream and carry on sunbathing
c)
carry on sunbathing without applying any more cream, in the hope that you'll tan more quickly
18.
How does a tan make you feel?(tick as many as apply)
a)
more attractive
b)
sexy
c)
fitter and healthier
d)
slimmer
e)
I prefer not to have a tan
19.
How important is it for you to go home with a tan?
a)
essential
b)
important
c)
quite important
d)
not at all important
20.
Do you use a sunbed?
If so, how often?
a)
more than once a week
b)
once every 2 weeks
c)
once a month
d)
only before a sun holiday
e)
never
21.
Do you use aftersun products?
a)
yes, both during and after my holiday
b)
yes, but only on holiday
c)
I tend to use any body moisturiser
d)
no, I never use anything
YOU'LL NEVER REGRET GOING ON HOLIDAY.
HITACHI
If you don't want to be greeted by a pile of dirty washing on your return from holiday, buy an Hitachi washing machine before you go.
The new models are so easy to operate that even wayward teenage sons can cope with all the washing while you're away.
Because one-button programming selects the correct temperature, wash action and spin cycle.
In fact, the new Microchip machines have every feature you could wish for, including Crease Save to give you a nice rest from heavy ironing sessions.
We're so sure about the reliability of our washing machines that we've given them a full 5-year parts guarantee.
Because we don't want you to have any regrets.
Especially when you're on holiday.
YOU'LL NEVER REGRET BUYING HITACHI
the CHALLENGE
LESS FAT MORE FIBRE LESS SALT
Trying to improve the eating habits of a modern family can be a complicated and mind-boggling task.
However there's nothing complex or mysterious about LoSalt, the reduced sodium salt alternative.
It contains all the flavour of common salt but only a third of its sodium.
Substitute LoSalt for common salt, at the table and in cooking to reduce your family's salt intake.
LoSalt is supporting the Family Heart Association's Cholesterol Countdown Campaign.
Are you?
ALL THE FLAVOUR FOR ALL THE FAMILY
Good Sense with Salt
SOME OF OUR FINEST HAMS ARE NUT ROASTS.
Our nut roasts aren't exactly made for vegetarians.
Though they'll certainly tempt everyone else.
Coated with delicious French walnuts, the joints of prime English ham are cooked to perfection.
Then, prior to roasting, they're lavishly glazed with pure honey.
Thus creating a succulently flavoured ham that goes perfectly with a watercress and avocado salad and a few slices of brown bread.
So, if you're nuts on ham, why not try one with nuts on it?
Mattessons When it really matters.
Half the fat, more salad days.
Hot, halcyon days of sunshine and vapour trails, butterflies and crammed picnic baskets.
This is the stuff of memories.
Plump red tomatoes, crisp green salads fresh with the bite of radish, spring onion and a trickle of salad dressing.
Ahhh…those lazy days of spooning mayonnaise.
Remember how the cool salad dressing ran smoothly over the crunchy lettuce.
Or how the mayonnaise melted into a piping hot baked potato?
But this is more than just a taste of the past.
Weight Watchers from Heinz mayonnaise and salad dressing have all the traditional flavour, but to let you delve into a jar more often we've simply taken out half the fat.
Which, of course, means you can unleash upon your family unlimited old favourites.
From Egg mayonnaise
Divide a small lettuce between 4 plates.
Halve six hard-boiled eggs and lay 3 on each plate.
Spoon over the eggs Weight Watchers from Heinz Mayonnaise.
Garnish with diced anchovy fillets and sprinkle with chopped parsley.
Serve with thin slices of bread and butter.
To Tuna Italienne
Cook 250g of pasta shells until they are al , then drain.Finely chop 200g of skipjack tuna.
Mix with 90g of sweetcorn, 2 diced red peppers and 3 tablespoons of Weight Watchers from Heinz Mayonnaise.
Season with a little paprika and cayenne pepper.
Serve hot or cold.
With only 29 calories a dessertspoon for mayonnaise and a mere 15 calories for salad dressing they're well worth dipping into.
And by combining them with any of the rather healthy range of foods from Weight Watchers from Heinz, your picnic basket will be the only thing bursting this summer.
There's no thicker pasta sauce.
It's hardly surprising that Ragu's so thick.
We cram over a pound and a half of plum, sun-ripened tomatoes into every single jar: unlike some pasta sauces which are thickened with a generous helping of starch, rather than a generous helping of tasty tomatoes.
Ragu's also packed full of other good things, like herbs and spices.
After all, it's made from a genuine fifty-year-old Italian family recipe.
In short, pasta couldn't wish for a tastier sauce to turn good old ‘spag bol’ into the most bellissima bolognese.
Just like mama used to make.
Ragú.
It brings out the Italian in you.
‘No job's too big for Baby Fresh.’
The easiest way to clean your baby is with Baby Fresh wipes.
They're three times thicker than most other wipes, and big enough to cover a whole grown-up hand.
What's more, they're soft and gentle enough to clean your baby's face and hands as well.
And they also come in a Fragrance Free alternative, for mums concerned about extra sensitive baby skin.
So, whether it's a big job or a little job, you can be sure Baby Fresh will get to the bottom of it.
From Boots, a range of toiletries especially prepared for your little angel.
Nobody's skin is as sensitive as a baby's.
And like most mums, we take the view that you can't be too careful.
Of each product in our baby toiletries range we ask the question, ‘Is it as safe as possible?’
Is it gentle, dependable and kind?
To make sure we have a ‘yes’ without hedge or hesitation, each product is rigorously tested and re-tested.
Don't you worry: anything that vaguely worries us, is out.
Lanolin, for example, finds no place in our range.
(While it may moisturise mature skin, it's just not gentle enough for baby.)
Only when we are happy that the quality of the product is beyond question will it take its place on our shelves.
This applies across our entire range.
From our petroleum jelly and moisturised creams, to our zinc and castor oil cream and 3 thicknesses of wipes.
From shampoo and powder to bubble bath and lotion.
They're pictured here in their brand new packs.
Note the indentations on the side which will help you keep a sturdy grip.
(Soap and water, need it be said, are extremely slippery customers.)
And the easily re-sealable flip-top lid.
A combination of features that makes it possible to use our products one-handed.
Designed, you might say, to make bathing your little handful less of a handful.
But then at Boots we pride ourselves on our usefulness to mums.
Pick up a pack or two next time you visit your local branch.
A better buy at Boots 
‘Now with my Musical Busy Box, I can really rock around the cot.’
Little eyes dance with excitement when they catch sight of Playskool's Colour 'n Contrast Musical Busy Box.
You see it's been specially designed, with bold patterns and bright colours to appeal to a very small baby's sense of sight.
And it's got ten funtime activities like a spinning teddy, clicking dog and musical wheel to help an older baby's eye to hand co-ordination.
So it will keep little eyes, ears and hands busy all day.
‘Now I like the sound of that!’
Playskool COLOUR 'N CONTRAST
ENJOY A SANDWICH THAT WON'T MAKE YOU SPREAD
What's this, bread on a diet?
That's right, Slymbred.
Rye, Sesame, Wholemeal or Original.
Tasty eating made from only natural ingredients, low in calories and high in protein.
What more could you want?
Except maybe an adventurous topping or two.
So start spreading Slymbred right now.
Available from all good health food stores, Superdrug and Boots Food Centres.
SLYM MORE OF WHAT YOU LIKE
As soon as kids learn to walk, they learn to fall over
From the moment children become active they seem to be falling over themselves in the pursuit of adventure.
Leaving you to patch up the little cuts and grazes that germs love so much.
When scratches, cuts and grazes call for fast action, Sudocrem can help, quickly, gently and effectively.
Sudocrem Antiseptic Healing Cream works four ways.
It contains a mild, local anaesthetic to soothe the pain, kills germs to reduce the risk of infection, actively helps the healing process, and forms a protective barrier over the vulnerable area.
Make sure you keep a tube of Sudocrem at hand — when children's tumbles end in tears, Sudocrem can help make it better.
Fast Aid for Little Emergencies
CALPOL SOOTHES HEADACHES, EARACHES, TOOTHACHES, AND HEARTACHES.
When your child is unwell, you suffer too.
But most of your worries can be put to rest with a spoonful of Calpol.
For over 20 years mums have been able to rely on Calpol to relive their children's aches and pains, fevers and teething troubles.
And for over 20 years those children have swallowed their Calpol without complaint.
So, next time these problems come along, you can be sure of fast, effective pain relief with Calpol.
And as soon as your child cheers up, you'll feel better too.
Calpol A BIG RELIEF FOR EVERYONE
Does your baby need protection from the sun?
Both of these do.
Although Daniel's dark skin offers him the same protection as a mild sunscreen, it's not enough to block all the sun's harmful UV rays.
Mark's fair skin blocks even less.
The fact is that any baby, whatever its complexion, is vulnerable.
A baby's skin is also thinner than yours, so you can't be too careful.
That's why Uvistat created the Babysun range.
Hypo-allergenic, non-greasy and easily absorbed: it's just right for your baby's skin.
And unlike most sun creams, which only filter out UVB rays (the ones that cause burning), Babysun also stops UVA rays.
These are the rays which pass deep into the skin's tender layers causing long term damage, like ageing and wrinkling.
There are two water resistant preparations for you to choose from; a factor 12 sun cream and a factor 22 total sunblock.
You'll also find an Aftersun lotion with calamine.
Remember calamine?
Its soothing action has been called upon for many generations.
So before you head for the sun, head for your nearest chemist.
Because Babysun is one thing that every baby is going to need.
Babysun UVISTAT.
THE GENTLE ART OF SUN CONTROL
The beauty treatment for the whole day.
•Start your day with Evian Mist Facial Spray.
Revitalise your face, moisturise your skin, and prepare it for make-up.
•After you've made up your face, apply a very short spray of Evian from arm's length to fix.
•Evian's fine mist refreshes your complexion throughout the day by replacing lost moisture, without you having to remove your make-up.
•In the summer, by the sea, Evian removes all traces of the salt which can irritate your face.
•During and after sunbathing, Evian keeps your skin soft and moist.
•Evian soothes skin irritated by waxing, shaving or peeling facial masks.
•Use Evian after sport.
Its natural purity and almost neutral pH help restore water loss the natural way.
•Last thing at night, use Evian to remove all traces of cleanser, soap and make-up.
Evian Mist Facial Spray is ozone friendly.
Win a £5000 HOLIDAY of a Lifetime
Yes, you can win holiday vouchers worth £5000 in this easy to enter competition.
You and your family could be enjoying the delights of Bermuda, Florida and Disneyland, Australia and its Great Barrier Reef, or the exotic mysteries of Thailand with its capital Bangkok, the ancient worlds of Greece and Egypt, or you can travel even closer to home in the UK.
The choice will be yours!
You don't need to have just one holiday, you could enjoy several up to the value of £5000 spread over a period of one year.
All you have to do…
It couldn't be easier.
Simply telephone  (24 hrs, 7 days a week) and listen to the recorded message which includes five general knowledge questions based on holidays and sights around the world.
Write your answers, along with your name, address and telephone number on a postcard and send it to:
To arrive not later than 12 noon on September 5th, 1990.
The winning entry will be the first all-correct entry picked out of the bag by Jannine Kaye, Manager of Pickfords Travel, Cheapside, Halifax.
Pickfords are one of the UK's largest travel agents with over 330 agencies nationwide and a member of ABTA.
The Prize…
The winner will receive £5000 worth of holiday vouchers valid at any branch of Pickfords which can be used however you wish during the twelve month period to have the holiday (or holidays) of a lifetime.
Enter now…
Simply pick up the phone and dial 
Our lines are open 24 hours, 7 days a week.
Calls charged at 38p/min (peak), 25p/min (off-peak).
Aquanaut Sylvia Earle probes earth's other space.
In Maui a woman hangs suspended in the Pacific depths, eye to eye with the great humpback whales of Hawaii.
Intent and unafraid, Dr. Sylvia Earle never turns back from a challenge.
Dr. Earle is a marine biologist, oceanographer and botanist.
The sea is her element.
Here she has spent more than 5,000 hours — just over 200 days.
Here she explores, observes and searches for ways to conserve marine life.
Since leading America's first team of female aquanauts, leadership has been Dr. Earle's lot.
She has directed or participated in more than 50 expeditions.
Few divers have spent more time under waters as diverse as the Pacific Ocean and the Red Sea.
Diverse.
And deep.
Of a dive that took her 1,250 feet down to the floor of the Pacific, Sylvia Earle said, ‘The light was faint but, when my eyes adjusted, the world I saw was incredibly beautiful.
I wandered through fields of coral.
The bamboo corals spiralled up like whiskers and, when I touched them, rings of light pulsed up and down between base and tip.’
But not all of her fame has been achieved submerged.
She has lectured in 40 countries and written more than 70 articles.
She is also authoress of the National Geographic book,Exploring the Deep Frontier .
The very embodiment of the adventurous spirit, Dr. Earle is committed to preserving the seas and ardent in her defence of marine life.
Today she researches methods of ocean conservation.
She rallies support for the endangered whale, catalogues underwater life and creates new devices in which to explore virgin sea worlds.
For the life she leads, no wonder Sylvia Earle relies on a Rolex.
The accomplished make no compromise with excellence.
DR.
SYLVIA EARLE DESCENDS INTO THE PACIFIC OFF HAWAII TO EXPLORE THE SEA-FLOOR AT 1,250 FT.
THE ROLEX DATEJUST CHRONOMETER, MEDIUM SIZE, IN STEEL AND YELLOW METAL.
ALSO AVAILABLE IN 18CT.
YELLOW GOLD OR IN STAINLESS STEEL.
The Classic VICTORIAN GREENHOUSE
Elegantly styled in the traditional Victorian fashion.
Built to your individual requirements.
FOR OVER 25 YEARS ALITEX HAVE DESIGNED AND BUILT SUPERIOR STRUCTURES FOR THE MOST BEAUTIFUL GARDENS THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY.
WE ARE PLEASED TO CONTINUE THIS TRADITION WITH THE CLASSIC VICTORIAN GREENHOUSE.
AN ORIGINAL CONCEPT IN GREENHOUSE DESIGN, THE CLASSIC VICTORIAN RECREATES THE TRADITIONAL CHARM AND GRACE OF A BYGONE ERA.
USING ONLY THE MOST PRACTICAL OF MODERN MATERIALS.
THE SUBTLE COMBINATION OF WOOD AND POWDER COATED ALUMINIUM GIVES AN ELEGANT YET EASY TO LOOK AFTER BUILDING.
EACH GREENHOUSE WE SELL IS DESIGNED AND BUILT SPECIALLY DRAWING ON OUR LONG EXPERIENCE OF MEETING THE INDIVIDUAL REQUIREMENTS OF OUR CUSTOMERS.
WE CAN BUILD FREE-STANDING, ¾ SPAN OR LEAN-TO STRUCTURES FROM 12ft.
LONG TO OVER 100ft.
AND CAN INCORPORATE SPECIAL STAGING, HEATING, VENTILATION, SHADING AND IRRIGATION.
ALITEX THE GLASSHOUSE COMPANY
New Superstyle ready corded curtain track, unbeatable in a tight corner.
Whether you're in a tight corner or just playing it straight, fit Harrison Drape's new Superstyle ready corded track and you'll discover it has some unexpectedly handy features.
The unique beaded cord is remarkable strong and won't snag or jam even round tight corners.
With Superstyle's Masterglider the problem of getting corded curtains to meet perfectly in the middle is solved effortlessly, in seconds.
And with Superstyle Twin Track, a valance rail allows you to add a little extra style even in those awkward situations.
So, with Harrison Drape's Superstyle you can get in and out of the most tricky situations, with unashamed ease and style.
At Sainsbury's, you can nourish your body without eating.
Eating well isn't the only way to look after your body.
Which is why, as well as wholemeal bread, fresh fruit and muesli, Sainsbury's now offer you Hollyhock, Tigerlily and Linden Blossom.
These are just some of the many natural ingredients that go into ‘Nature's Compliments’, our range of 31 new beauty preparations.
Each preparation is a blend of fruit, flower, herb or plant extracts.
And each extract has renowned beneficial properties for skin or hair.
Our Rose and Cinnamon foaming bath creme, for example, helps tone and revitalise the body.
And lying in a bath of Almond and Mallow will soothe your skin, leaving it feeling soft and supple.
Yarrow and Melissa nourish hair.
So we've combined them in a shampoo that makes dry hair lustrous and more manageable.
You'll find our beauty preparations complement each other perfectly too.
Our Oatmeal and Avocado face mask will absorb any impurities or excess oils from your skin.
Whilst our Samphire and Mallow moisturising cream, with its light blend of oils and waxes, will immediately restore the skin's emollient feel.
Our range also includes cleansers, toners, hand and body lotions, wash gels, conditioners and vegetable soaps.
Yet none of our preparations has been tested on animals.
At Sainsbury's, it's not just you we look after.
Nature's Compliments from Sainsbury's.
ELIZABETH ARDEN
Introducing CERAMIDE TIME COMPLEX CAPSULES
One of the purest and most potent forms of skincare today
Elizabeth Arden Research has developed a major technological breakthrough in a skincare.
The unique patent-pending CERAMIDE formula is encapsulated in a single dose form to deliver maximum purity and efficacy.
The CERAMIDE formula, developed exclusively by our laboratories, repairs and restores your skin's moisture barrier, smoothing out fine lines and wrinkles for a firmer, younger looking skin.
One precious CERAMIDE capsule and your skin is on its way back to a smoother, silkier, younger appearance.
Time after time.
CERAMIDE Time Complex Capsules are dermatologically and clinically tested — contain no preservatives and are fragrance free.
Non-comedogenic.
SKIN RENEWED BY NEUTROGENA
DISCOVER what your skin feels like when it is naturally soft and supple •NEUTROGENA NORWEGIAN FORMULA brings immediate relief to dry and rough skin •Recommended by dermatologists •The HAND CREAM'S concentrated formula pours in moisture and forms a long-lasting protective barrier •LIP CARE soothes and heals cracked, chapped lips •EMULSION keeps skin moisturised all day.
DISCOVER YOUR NATURAL BEST
FASHIONED BY AEROSPACE NOT FASHION.
The Saab 900 T16S was conceived and shaped in a most uncarlike manner.
Not the lofty creation of some Turin styling studio, but rather the realisation of men with rather higher ideals.
The forerunners of the 900 started life as a blank sheet of paper literally.
Unbelievably, hardly a single member of the design team possessed a driver's licence.
All were aeronautical engineers; and all high-fliers in their particular field.
Their creation therefore, was mercifully free of prejudice and traditional, inward-looking car thinking.
So, starting with the driver as pilot, a car was designed and built around the most important component.
You.
A chassis and body was built from the pilot's hip out (to keep him at one with his machine).
An ergonomically designed cockpit was devised labelling everything clearly and putting everything within easy reach.
Heated seats were conceived, because a warm pilot is a more responsive and safer one.
As well as a list of passive and active safety features that help to make Saab one of the safest cars in the world.
All of which keeps the pilot alert and in control, even on the most fatiguing of journeys.
As attractive as the 900 T16S is, it owes its seductive lines to function rather than fashion.
Wind not whim.
Its body shape means it is one of the safest and most stable road vehicles in cross winds.
And its aeronautically inspired rear wing and shape helps to keep all 175 bhp of turbo-charged power where it belongs, on the tarmac.
So whether you possess a pilot's licence or a driver's licence, you'll discover the real beauty of the 900 Turbo T16S is that it's a real flying machine.
For a test flight, ring .
SAAB AIRCRAFT INSPIRED
THE REGINA RANGE.
A FINE WAY TO TREAT YOUR BODY.
REGINA ROYAL JELLY
Since its introduction over 15 years ago, Regina Royal Jelly has become an indispensable part of the health and beauty regime for women of all ages.
Thousands of women can already testify to Regina's extraordinary power to restore balance and well-being in their bodies.
Now we are pleased to introduce two new products to create a more complete body care package.
Regina Royal Ginseng and Regina Evening Primrose Oil take those two remarkable natural substances and combine them for the first time with Regina's fresh Royal Jelly.
These products have been formulated to enhance and complement that vital effect.
REGINA ROYAL GINSENG.
For over five thousand years, Ginseng has been used in the East as a natural tonic.
Regina have now managed to obtain the highest quality 6-year old Korean Ginseng root and combine it with fresh Royal Jelly, to create a harmonious formulation to help you cope with the pace of modern life.
REGINA EVENING PRIMROSE OIL.
Long-established as a rich source of the unique G.L.A. (Gamma Linolenic Acid), which contributes to the health of the blood and the condition of the skin, this Evening Primrose Oil is supplemented with Regina's fresh Royal Jelly to provide a unique new formulation.
VITALITY COMES NATURALLY.
FOR A BABY, IT'S EXTREMELY GROWN-UP.
Just place four fingers and one thumb around the new JVC GR-AX7 and cradle it.
The first thing you'll notice is how snugly this miniature camcorder fits your hand.
How easily the controls come to reach.
At an ounce or so over 1½ lbs, its lack of weight may surprise you too.
(Its array of advanced features certainly will.)
This little gem has been blessed with the swiftest auto focus lens of its kind.
There's also a sound and vision fader linked to the trigger, enabling you to produce professional-looking transitions between sequences.
There's a cinema mode for creating a wide-screen look.
An edit function.
An encore function for instantly repeating the last ten seconds of the scene you've just watched.
This machine even has a head cleaner that is actually built in.
After you've captured those once-in-a-lifetime moments, the GR-AX7 also lets you share them with your friends and relatives.
This tiny camcorder uses JVC's convenient, pocket-sized VHS-C tape.
That's a compact but totally compatible version of the same VHS tape nearly everyone uses in their video recorders at home these days.
Like the GR-AX7, you can take these tapes virtually anywhere and be sure they'll rise to the occasion.
JVC THE INVENTORS OF VHS
FITS LIKE A GLOVE.
Multi-Active Day Cream: The most important treatment product.
Clarins is the first to create a true day cream which adapts to all daytime elements; because daytime bears the greatest responsibility for the visible signs of skin ageing and wrinkle formation: wide-ranging temperature and humidity changes (indoor/outdoor transitions), varying light, UV rays, facial movements and expressions.
Long Lasting Radiance
A double revolutionary breakthrough, Multi-Active Day Cream provides lasting active effectiveness for up to 10 hours after application.
The Multi-Lamellar structure, a unique biological formula, stores soluble active ingredients in successive layers and progressively releases them according to the needs of the skin.
Licorice Phytosome enhances better absorption of the active ingredients and increases their effectiveness for a prolonged period of time.
This results in a truly spectacular feeling of comfort and radiance late into the night whatever your skin type and lifestyle may be.
The first true day cream.
A day cream is the most important skin care treatment.
It maintains the longest contact with the skin when it is most required.
In daytime our skin synthesises vitamin D and a natural protective pigment whilst facial movements enhance tone and elasticity.
Yet daytime is also believed to be responsible for about 75% of the visible signs of skin ageing.
MULTI-REGULATING: A MULTITUDE OF BEAUTY TREATMENT ACTIONS.
Moisture regulating — Multi-Active Day Cream allows the skin to continuously normalize its hydration level.
Temperature regulating — it compensates for extreme variations in temperature.
‘Photo’ regulating — it allows the skin to benefit from the positive effects of daytime whilst preventing the formation of free radicals.
Tone regulating — filmogenic actions help prevent facial expressions and movements transforming themselves into visible signs of skin ageing.
For people who don't want to do the pools; they only want to win them.
Do the Pools your way.
One standing forecast coupon and you're in with a chance every week for 8–60 weeks.
It's as simple as that.
No weekly checking, no need to be a football expert, just a golden opportunity to win £1½ Million any week.
For your standing forecast coupon PHONE FREE .
LITTLEWOODS POOLS
THE ORIGINAL VICTORIAN CONSERVATORIES
For over a century, Amdega have been designing and building the highest quality conservatories.
They are still handmade to order, using traditional skills, from Canadian cedar.
There are distinctive styles and finishes to suit all types of houses and all budgets — prices range from £5,000–£50,000.
Amdega's exclusive design service is absolutely free and includes drawings and quotations.
Garden buildings include revolving summer houses (to catch the sun), greenhouses and hexagonal gazeboes.
AMDEGA * CONSERVATORIES SINCE 1874 *
BECAUSE NO TWO OF OUR CLIENTS ARE THE SAME, NEITHER ARE OUR KITCHENS
Because you have your own ideas of what makes a perfect kitchen, our specialist furniture designers offer you almost limitless design options.
We believe that only furniture designers who are skilled in every aspect of kitchen design and construction can ensure that your commission reflects your taste and your needs down to the last detail.
Recent commissions have included design influences from traditional Victorian to geometric Art Deco to Mackintosh in a wide variety of hardwoods.
But to really appreciate a Woodstock kitchen you have to look deeper than the cabinet door.
Ordinary kitchens are ‘customised’ by hanging a choice of door styles onto a standard frame, a practice known as ‘front-framing’.
At Woodstock, we construct every cabinet from solid wood as a complete piece of furniture.
The door is, therefore, an integral part of the cabinet.
So besides a breadth of designs you won't find anywhere else, your Woodstock kitchen is built to last with beauty that is more than skin deep.
We believe the extra time and attention to detail is worth it.
The result is a Woodstock kitchen you will be truly proud to call your own.
For more information or a copy of our brochure, please visit our showrooms or telephone  /3220.
Carpet Imagination
Some free advice on choosing the right carpet
There is more to choosing a carpet than price.
For instance, Du Pont STAINMASTER carpets give you certified quality plus built-in stain and dirt resistance for lasting good looks.
That should be high on your check-list, surely?
They also offer a complete range of carpet colours, styles and textures to suit every decorating idea.
Why compromise?
But we know that buying a carpet isn't something you do every day, and some general advice before you shop might be welcome.
That's the idea behind Carpet Imagination, our 16-page brochure which tells you all you need to know about carpets and how they can improve your home.
For your free copy, ring anytime…0800–  The call is free, too.
Miele make kitchens
Miele quality appliances have been putting the finishing touch to kitchens for years.
But did you know Miele also make kitchens?
The same principles of design, quality and attention to detail ensure that Miele kitchens offer much more than meets the eye.
…they also make kitchens
Behind closed doors you will find a variety of shelves, drawers and pullout units, each carefully designed to function smoothly and silently without fuss.
To make sure you don't cry over spilt milk, Miele seal base units all round, including the top and that's before putting your worktop on.
Giving total stability and protection against moisture.
Small things to many, but at Miele excellence of design and construction ensure a kitchen whose performance will remain faultless and give pleasure for life, which has been our philosophy since we introduced major kitchen appliances at the turn of the century.
Whether stylish laminate, natural wood or high-gloss finish, the Miele Specialist can tailor a kitchen to perfectly match your requirements.
So Miele make kitchens.
Miele Anything else is a compromise
‘Mummy, how do you keep your hands so soft?’
Imagine just how much work a dishwasher could take off your hands.
Believe it or not, it can wash (and dry) virtually everything to a better finish than you can in the sink.
Day in, day out, it cleans pots and pans as well as plates.
It even helps tidy the kitchen by keeping all the dirty dishes out of sight.
If you'd like more information you can call us free on .
After all, the best washing-up liquid in the world can't keep your skin as soft as we can.
DISHWASHELECTRIC
Pure in body
In the heart of the English countryside we grow a very special flower.
And from the tiny seeds of this delicate bloom is produced a very special oil.
Epoc Oil of Evening Primrose.
Epoc stands for Evening Primrose Oil Company, where meticulous attention is given to every detail of cultivation and production.
So you can always be sure of the quality.
The value of Epoc is that it contains Gamma Linolenic Acid (GLA).
GLA is an important substance in the body's production of prostaglandins, which play a vital part in many of the body's functions — including the menstrual cycle, the regulation and control of cell growth and the maintenance of normal skin.
Many women find, over a period of time, that they like to take a regular supplement of evening primrose oil.
All that's added to our evening primrose oil is a little vitamin E to help your body obtain its full goodness.
But that's all — no artificial additives, colourings or preservatives.
So when you're choosing a supplement of evening primrose oil, choose Epoc.
From the Evening Primrose Oil Company.
It's pure common sense.
SMALLBONE OF DEVIZES
HAND PAINTED BEDROOMS & BATHROOMS
Cobalt blue, introduced sparingly in the mouldings, tiles and fabrics, set off against a subtle ivory background, echoes the complementary colours of the decorative Chinese porcelain to achieve a perfect unity in this classic hand-painted bathroom.
Your Dolphin fitted bathroom is made to measure.
Beautifully.
Planning a new fitted bathroom is far easier than you ever imagined.
More and more people are choosing one company to handle the whole thing for them.
Coming to Dolphin for your fitted bathroom takes all the worry off your shoulders and leaves you free to enjoy the result.
First of all, you'll find how helpful we are at the planning stage.
(We actually sit down with you at home and work out the design together.)
And how comprehensive our range of suites is.
You'll see how thoroughly we check every little detail before installation.
And how skilfully we tackle all the difficult and messy jobs like plumbing, wiring, plastering and tiling.
In fact, we don't consider we've finished your new bathroom until you tell us we have.
Ask for our free colour brochure for lots of interesting bathroom ideas.
But for more details of how Dolphin can make your bathroom beautiful, and to qualify for our fabulous free Power Shower or up to £250 trade-in-discount, ask for our free Home Design Service now.
‘Buying a Permutit water softener from EcoWater was certainly one of our better decisions’
Experience the softer side of life with a Permutit water softener from EcoWater.
The gentle touch of softened water is kinder to your skin and hair, and brings a new softness to towels and clothes.
It keeps baths, basins and taps sparkling clean and prevents costly limescale build-up in shower heads, water pipes and hot water cylinders.
Softened water may feel like a luxury but, it's a real necessity for you, your family and your home.
Don't you deserve luxury on tap?
Another time, another place…
It's a picture we all know.
The country cottage with roses round the door.
Some time, not that long ago, when the sun always shone, when you could still hear church bells over the roar of traffic, and when the bobby rode a bike not a panda.
You can't turn the clock back but with Potton's help you can still make those dreams come true, recreating the warm cosy atmosphere of yesterday by building your own Heritage cottage.
It will have a genuine inglenook fireplace, exposed posts and beams, low overhanging eaves — maybe even a minstrel gallery…
Exuding period style and atmosphere but using the best of modern building technology to make your home the comfortable and luxurious haven you deserve.
From the pretty little Hatley to the magnificent six bedroomed Abbotsley there is a Heritage cottage to suit you, and by self building with Potton you can be involved in every element of the design — so your home is just as you want it.
And remember, at every stage you're helped and guided by Britain's leading self build home company.
Write or call now for a comprehensive information pack or to arrange a showhouse visit.
Bring your dreams to life — with Potton.
BRITAIN'S LEADING PURVEYORS OF SELF BUILD HOMES
Is the Gruyère you buy from Gruyère?
‘La Gruyère is one of the most beautiful unspoiled regions in Western Switzerland where the people still follow the age old traditions.
Making Gruyère SWITZERLAND cheese is one of the oldest traditions.
It is still made in village dairies throughout South Western Switzerland by local cheese-makers who take pride in achieving the unique, smooth rich creamy taste, with a distinctive briny-dry sharpness.
The combination of clear, fragrant Alpine air, pedigree herds of cows, fresh milk and cheese-making skills handed down through the generations give the cheese its true taste and character.
So why compromise?
Look for the Gruyère SWITZERLAND rind markings, the name SWITZERLAND or the Alphorn Blower trademark.
It's your guarantee that you are really getting a cheese appreciated by connoisseurs the world over.
Some other delicious ‘Cheeses from Switzerland’ for you to enjoy are, Emmental, Sbrinz, Appenzeller & Royalp SWITZERLAND.
HUSQVARNA'S PRIDE A GARDENER'S JOY
Few things in life give as much pleasure as a well-tended garden.
With Husqvarna, that pleasure comes without the spadework.
Instead, our range of superbly designed garden machines keeps everything beautifully in trim, leaving you time to enjoy the fruits of your labour.
From ride-on and pedestrian mowers to blower-vacs, cultivators and scarifiers, your specially appointed Husqvarna Forest & Garden dealer will reveal it all.
And use his expert knowledge to give practical help with all those perennial gardening chores.
It's all part of the service.
As you'd expect from the range that prides itself on keeping your garden in shape.
HUSQVARNA ENGINES RUN ON UNLEADED FUEL
HICKORY DICKORY DOCK
Precious moments that stay with you for ever Do you remember when as a child you would stand transfixed, gazing up at the grandfather clock, with your little heart beating faster and faster as the minute hand slowly crept up to the hour when suddenly, with magical ringing chimes it burst into life.
Just like that old grandfather clock the memories of those precious moments last for ever.
Now Emperor Clocks gives you the opportunity to own a classic timepiece that will stay in your family for generations and give to your children and your grandchildren the same precious memories.
Choose from solid woods and a range of finishes.
The prime materials used are solid hardwoods and solid brass.
The hardwoods; Oak, Walnut and Cherry, are fully seasoned and we guarantee them against warping and splitting for 5 years.
No rain forest products are used.
The finish is up to you, whether you clock is in kit form or assembled and polished, you can choose from traditional polished finishes and colours, or lacquer finish in black or white, or even limed in pastel colours.
We can provide any special veneers or inlays you may require — the choice is yours.
The movements and dials are made in brass and come with a range of extras.
Westminster chimes are standard, but for a little more you can have a selection of three chimes.
(All chimes can be switched off at night.)
Our clocks carry a five year guarantee.
Our extensive range includes Grandfather, Grandmother, Wall and Mantel clocks.
We also stock furniture in several styles; Queen Anne, Chippendale, country and Military.
Our kits are easy to assemble and our extensive knowledge and experience is always on hand to help you achieve the best possible end result.
The price.
The savings we make by supplying direct are passed on to you…up to 50% can be saved off high street prices.
If for any reason you are unsatisfied with your purchase, we give a full refund of the purchase price when the goods are returned within 30 days.
We call this our peace of mind guarantee.
We buy and spell Antique & specialist clocks
Makers of Fine hand-built oak, pine and mahogany furniture.
We offer hand-built copies of 18th Century period furniture.
Each piece is traditionally constructed, polished and is correct in every detail, even showing ageing from centuries of use, making them virtually indistinguishable from the originals.
Gateleg tables, refectory tables, rush-seated spindle and ladderback country chairs, dressers and dresser bases, mahogany chairs, bureaux and bureaux bookcases, etc.
Visit our showroom at: Lion House Antiques  
Specification and colour of individual items can be suited to customer's requirements
How MARSTON & LANGINGER created the perfect conservatory for this Norfolk rectory
WITH its lacy bargeboards and dramatic finials echoing the original features of this Norfolk rectory, it's difficult to imagine the conservatory wasn't built by the same Victorian craftsmen.
BROCHURE AND DESIGN SERVICE
A lavishly produced 56-page guide (£3) that tells you all you need to know about the design, construction and furnishing of your conservatory.
If you would like a copy, or an appointment with one of our designers in Norfolk or London, please write or telephone Marston & Langinger Limited  
Bargeboards and finials match those on house.
New doors and windows on porch to match new conservatory.
Cast-metal cresting follows faithfully the traditional style.
Only Sainsbury's is French bread.
Sainsbury's have been baking french bread for many years.
But now, cooling down in our larger stores, you'll also find French bread with a capital F. Because although Sainsbury's bake it, it's actually made in France.
With French flour, French yeast, French water and, dare we say it, French savoir faire.
The dough is made in Lyon.
We then ship it over to England and bake it in our in-store bakeries.
The bread that comes out is as French as any boulangerie could bake it.
It has a light, airy texture, with a crisp ‘eggshell’ crust.
And oh, the flavour!
(Close your eyes, and you could be in a pavement café on Boulevard St. Germain.)
As well as the classic white baguette, we also bake a selection of other French breads and pastries.
You'll find baguettes de campagne (a brown version made with sour dough), Pain de campagne (a short, cob-shaped loaf).
And petit pain boules (small, but perfectly formed rolls).
And if you want to know where the expression ‘melt in the mouth’ comes from, just try our butter croissants.
Like all Sainsbury's bakery products, our traditional French bread is freshly baked every day.
Or perhaps we should say, Frenchly baked every day.
Good food costs less at Sainsbury's.
There's nowhere you can't go in the new G-Series
If, en route to a favourite fishing spot, you point your Mercedes-Benz G-series at a one-in-1¼ hill — that's steeper than 45 degrees — it will willingly climb it (fully laden).
And if you show it the sweep of a gravel drive framed by cypresses and a manicured lawn, it will usher you elegantly to the ball.
Just as convincingly.
A lofty and spacious carriage, the G slips from rough country into a more courtly role as if to the manner born.
Step aboard in all your finery and you'll barely need to incline your head, let alone disturb a vicuna pleat or crush the crinoline.
THE WIDER G-SERIES ROLE
It's a vehicle you don't need to think twice about using, no matter what the physical or social demands, and no matter where you're headed to: to the cottage with all the kids and their friends, to the local shops, to Kitzbühel for the skiing.
The Mercedes G is a pretty good working definition of complete mobile security.
The incomparable off-roader, its restyled interior also sets new luxury standards for a leisure vehicle — they're fully up to the rich appointments of a Mercedes-Benz saloon.
Only the additional specialist controls and panoramic driving position signal the G's more versatile nature.
Run your eye over the expanses of polished zebrano wood as you settle into redesigned seats in any of the four new models (three doors or five, with six-cylinder 3.0-litre petrol or 3.0-litre diesel engines).
MORE COLOURS — INSIDE AND OUT
There are three interior colour schemes — black, grey or cream beige — to complement the 18 body shades.
And the still dramatically purposeful exterior is now softer-edged.
Even if you rarely stretch the G's exceptional 2.9-ton towing limit, or test the new drivetrain which keeps you mobile even if only one wheel has any grip, at least you can savour the high, commanding view every time you slip behind the wheel.
That's quite an advantage, you'll be more than satisfied to discover, as you search out the last parking spot at the charity ball.
ENGINEERED LIKE NO OTHER CAR IN THE WORLD
LLOYD LOOM LIVES AGAIN.
The perfect classic designs of Lloyd Loom furniture, beloved by your mothers and grandmothers, are being made here in Britain, using the original technique developed by Marshall Lloyd.
Unlike cane furniture, Lloyd Loom is made from strong spun kraft paper, wrapped round wire and woven into a firm weave, upholstered by hand by Lincolnshire craftsmen on to strong beechwood frames.
The quality and strength, allied to their beauty, mean that our chairs and tables will last as long as the old Lloyd Loom furniture now fetching high prices in antique shops.
Now you don't have to search for them.
Buy them direct from us.
Send for our brochure, featuring the complete range in a choice of 12 colours, or 'phone .
As an introductory offer the first 1,000 brochures to be sent will include a 10% discount voucher.
So reply today.
COTSWOLD by Paula Rosa
Cotswold combines the ageless charm of traditional country kitchens with the warm, mellow welcome of expertly selected pine.
Each door and drawer is individually finished by craftsmen to bring out the full beauty of the grain.
This range offers many features including original butterfly fretwork, spindles and cabinets with apothecary drawers — a choice which allows you to create a kitchen uniquely individual to you.
Cotswold, one of many designs which, over 25 years, has made Paula Rosa the hallmark for design, craftsmanship and excellence.
For details of our full range of kitchens, please visit or phone your nearest showroom:
Paula Rosa Individual kitchens from Storrington, West Sussex.
HAND MADE FURNITURE NEWCASTLE FURNITURE COMPANY
Newcastle Furniture Company design and make fitted and freestanding furniture of the highest quality.
Our designers are not limited by the constraints of standard sized units — all our custom made furniture is manufactured to meet the clients specific requirements.
Careful attention to detail ensures that we create a unique interior using only the finest timbres — maple, reclaimed pine, oak — with a range of finishes including traditional hand painting.
With over 10 years of experience we are able to provide a complete service from initial site survey through to an expert installation.
To appreciate the difference please send for further information or visit one of our showrooms to discuss your requirements.
THAT AWFUL MOMENT WHEN YOU HAVE TO GET IT DIRTY FOR THE FIRST TIME
AL-KO lawn tractors are almost too good to be used.
Fortunately, however, their sleek lines are as tough as they are functional and good looking.
From the corrosion-proof aerodynamically-styled bonnet to the extra wide turf tyres designed to prevent lawn damage.
What really helps that difficult decision to let one out into the world, though, is a desire to spoil oneself, not the machine.
Because, if anything, they're even better to use than they are to look at.
ALL WHEEL STEER NOW AVAILABLE FOR EXTRA MANOEUVRABILITY!
AL-KO Your choice for all seasons
A cup of tea?
The cup of tea must be the world's most familiar symbol of hospitality and civilisation.
Or something a little stronger.
A cup of Assam tea from the north east of India, has a strength of character and verve that sets it apart from ordinary teas.
Assam itself is an extraordinary place.
Its rolling plains, watered by the mighty Brahmaputra river, are home to elephants, leopard, tigers and the world's rarest rhino.
Here, India's native tea bushes were first discovered growing wild in the jungle.
It's small wonder, then, that Assam tea should offer such full-bodied bright liquor.
perfect served with milk.
To be sure of authentic Assam tea from India, look for the Rhino logo and extend the tradition of hospitality with a rather special cup of tea.
ASSAM FINE TEA FROM INDIA
AT DARTINGTON THERE ARE NO SHORT-CUTS IN MAKING CRYSTAL AS ELEGANT AS THIS.
IN FACT THERE ARE NO CUTS AT ALL.
Let's go back to 50 BC.
That was when Man discovered you could blow molten glass into a bubble at the end of a long metal pipe.
In the 2041 years since, glassmakers have striven for the ultimate: to blow glass as brilliant and pure as the natural rock crystal itself.
That's why, even today, Man at Dartington has to sweat ten years in front of the furnace before he's considered a Masterblower.
Only when he's learnt to blow crystal without blemishes and scars, does he make the grade.
We don't give marks for glass that's marked.
Nor do we score crystal by cutting it.
So we can't cover-up any imperfections.
After all, we are perfectionists.
At Dartington we don't believe in such short-cuts.
In fact we don't believe in making any cuts at all.
DARTINGTON CRYSTAL
The difference is crystal clear.
Only Volkswagen can do this.
With our ingenious roofrack, you get more than a practical convertible.
You get the ultimate sportscar.
Well, why not.
Among other things, it can carry a couple of surfboards.
Or three bikes.
Or six pairs of skis.
It also carries all the hallmarks of our old colleagues, Karmann of Osnabrück.
Coach builders to their fingertips, they hand-cut, hand-stitch and hand-fit the hood, too.
It's fully five layers thick.
And allows for a rear window made of proper glass.
Which, in turn, allows for a proper heating element.
Try that with a plastic window and, kaput, no window.
Nicest of all, though, the hood operates electrically (Karmann don't believe in doing everything by hand).
That aside, don't go thinking we've made things to easy for you.
There's still the question of which convertible.
Our Clipper?
Or our GTi?
Both are quick.
With power to spare.
But neither could be called thirsty.
Golf Convertible.
Bob Martin pet healthcare.
Tried and tested for generations.
Since 1892, we at Bob Martin have been developing, improving, refining and perfecting our Flea Treatments, Wormers and Condition Tablets to make them the best you can get your paws on.
Well, isn't that what you'd expect from the company with the longest pedigree in pet healthcare?
Bob Martin A pet's best friend
CLEAN UP WITH AN ATCO COMMODORE
There are many reasons for choosing an Atco Commodore cylinder mower.
Its superior cutting ability, effortless handling, those impeccable stripes and, of course, its unrivalled reliability.
Now there's another reason.
Choose the Commodore with a Mitsubishi engine and we'll give you an Atco Blow & Vac (usual price £229) absolutely free.
This remarkable machine vacuums up leaves and debris to keep your garden clean and tidy all year round.
Don't miss this ‘priceless’ opportunity to clean up with a Commodore — the offer is open while stocks last.
Return the coupon today for a free full colour brochure and details of your nearest Atco Appointed Dealer.
The art of relaxation: Glow from a single malt.
Drowsy tick from an antique clock.
Softness from Pringle and Cotton from America.
The leisurely lunch is over and you can now stretch out and do just as you please.
Sheer bliss.
What moments in life could be more pleasurable?
Particularly when you're wearing something as soft and comfortable as Pringle knitwear in cotton from America.
In America, we've spent years developing better cotton.
We've nurtured different varieties, each designed to do a particular job perfectly.
You can choose cotton that's blissfully warm, or crisp and cool; hard wearing and tough, or soft as velvet.
But above all cotton that's comfortable.
So whatever the design, you'll know you're going to be comfortable with it.
Just as long as you look for the Cotton USA Mark.
Pringle OF SCOTLAND The Natural Name For Knitwear
COTTON USA THE PICK OF COTTON
THE CONSERVATORY FOR ALL SEASONS
A conservatory is the most adaptable room in your home — and it can be as changeable as the seasons.
Cocktail parties on long, hot summer nights or breakfast in the Winter sun.
A rainy-afternoon refuge for the children or just a wonderful place to relax — whatever the weather!
Conservatories and porches — at very competitive prices — can be designed to your exact requirements and cover a whole range of specifications to suit your property.
You can choose from either the graceful resilience of hardwood or the fresh, flawless look of uPVC.
And both are maintenance free.
Molloy Conservatories are part of the Molloy Group, who have over 25 years experience.
Our fully comprehensive service includes design, building work and installation.
To complete the whole conservatory package Molloy provide any plumbing, electrical work and landscaping required.
Enjoy the first flowers of Spring or the last leaves of Autumn — on the longest night or the longest day!
A Molloy Conservatory provides a unique and versatile window to your garden — for all seasons.
CONSERVATORIES & PORCHES * IN HARDWOOD OR uPVC
A FEW OF THE MANY BEAUTIFUL BEDROOMS YOU'LL FIND BETWEEN THE COVERS OF OUR NEW BROCHURE
To see the very latest in fitted bedroom designs, built in the time honoured tradition of craftsmen, send today for your FREE 72 page Strachan brochure.
All Strachan fitted furniture is expertly crafted to your exact requirements in our own workshops.
Which not only guarantees you the widest choice possible but also allows you complex control over the design of your beautiful new custom-built bedroom.
To find out more call in at your local Strachan showroom or return the coupon below.
PHONE NOW  FOR A FREE BROCHURE OR DETAILS OF NEAREST SHOWROOM 
ASK ABOUT THE SPECIAL OFFERS ON CERTAIN RANGES
39 SHOWROOMS NATIONWIDE
TRADITIONAL TASTE HALF THE FAT
As in many foods, the fat in cheese contains much of the flavour and it is, therefore, a real breakthrough to be able to create the full flavour of a traditional blue cheese with less than half of the normal fat content.
Made in the heart of Bavaria, Bergader Half Fat Blue with only 12.5% accomplishes both these ideals and offers you a brand new cheese with taste, character and a lower fat content.
Try it yourself, we're sure you'll agree.
Brother Basil is a natural cheese prepared to a traditional recipe, then smoked in real wood smoke to give it a distinctive flavour.
Finally, it is coated with dark brown wax to seal in the flavour and help keep it fresh.
Perfect for slicing or cutting, the distinctive taste and natural texture make this new cheese deliciously different.
BERGADER BLUE * HALF FAT
For further details of the Bergader range please contact:H.T. Webb & Co.
Ltd.
Cut down on fat.
Eat pies, cakes and puddings.
How do you have your cake and eat it?
Use new Gold for Cooking.
Gold for Cooking is unique: it can be used in the same quantity in your recipes as butter or margarine but has 25% less fat.
Which makes new Gold for Cooking just about the only way you can cut down on fat without cutting out most of your favourite dishes.
What's more you can cut out the coupon opposite and get your first pack at around half price.
WITH A CONVENTIONAL OVEN, YOU'D BE SUNK.
What chance has your soufflé got when you open the oven door?
With a Neff Circotherm it has every chance.
The Circotherm system includes a unique, finely balanced, fan which cleverly draws any wasted heat directly back into the oven.
Which means that even the most delicate of dishes will rise to the occasion.
And the wide range of economical cooking methods and equally wide range of colours and styles make it easy to choose the right oven for you.
Anything less than a Neff could leave you feeling more than a little deflated.
circotherm PRACTICALLY ART
A FLOWERED VICTORIAN BELL PULL
A Needlework Design from Elizabeth Bradley
Attractive embroidered Bell Pulls were an essential feature of many Victorian houses.
Today they look supremely elegant and decorative hanging in 20th Century rooms.
Each Bell Pull design is worked in 24 soft and pretty shades of Elizabeth Bradley Wool.
Generous quantities are provided so that this 46 × 6 inches design, on 10 mesh interlock canvas, can be worked in full cross stitch.
This comprehensive kit contains not only a printed canvas, but also a full size coloured chart, wool card, detailed instructions and needles.
All these components are enclosed in an attractive, luxury box which is ideal for holding the work in progress.
Victorian Bell Pulls were traditionally finished with brass end fittings.
These fittings are available exclusively from Elizabeth Bradley Designs Ltd.
A youthful eye on the future.
The merest glance speaks volumes.
Your eyes express everything.
And like an early warning system, they're the first to reveal whether you possess the freshness of youth or whether you are reflecting fatigue or the signs of ageing.
Fine lines, crows feet?
These problems demand intensive treatment — moisturising and nourishing but at the same time non-oily.
The Clarins research team successfully created two ultra effective products.
Two Eye Contour Balms ‘For all skin types’ and ‘Special’for very dry eye contour areas.
Ultra rich revitalizing balms, they literally melt into the epidermis, providing comfort and softness.
TREATMENT FOR THE ENTIRE EYE CONTOUR AREA.
To complete this specific plant extracts treatment Clarins recommends gentle daily cleansing with Eye Make-Up Remover Lotion.
It soothes and provides a feeling of comfort whilst also conditioning the lashes.
When cleansing, gently wipe the lotion over the eye lids and lashes and use light gentle movements for all eye treatments.
Puffy eyes, dark circles?
These present completely different problems to fine lines and crows feet, requiring a soothing and calming solution.
So Clarins created Eye Contour Gel with plant extracts from camomile, cornflower, marigold, soothing mallow and astringent witch-hazel.
A superb relaxing refreshing decongesting natural treatment ideal in the morning or at any time during the day — even over make-up.
NEW CLARINS.
THE BEST UNDER THE SUN
For a better tan on a beautiful skin.
A new generation of sun care!
Clarins totally unique approach to tanning reconciles sun with youthful-looking skin and has resulted in a complete range of Multi-Protection Tanning Treatments with plant extracts.
Designed to suit all skin types, for use with or without the sun, during sun exposure, and after sun.
With or without the sun, rapid golden colour.
Clarins two new Self-Tanning Treatments promote a superb natural golden tan within one hour and a ‘just back from holiday’ look in less than three hours!
In addition, when applied two or three days prior to going on holiday, protective filters leave the skin better prepared for first exposure to the sun while preserving the natural qualities of the skin.
The quality of a tan is determined by the quality of the skin.
Dermatologists agree unanimously, the sun is a vital source of health and radiance.
However, over-exposure to the sun or insufficient protection is a major cause of premature skin ageing.
Clarins understands the concerns associated with sun exposure and has created a tanning treatment range that reconciles tanning and beauty, the skin and the sun.
Clarins transforms tanning treatment into superior skin care.
Only a specialist could respond intelligently to provide the best under the sun!
After-sun, revitalizing multi-treatments.
What better reminder of sunny days than lasting, golden colour?
This is the role of after-sun tanning treatments.
Priority treatments to enhance youthful-looking skin…
As their name suggests, Clarins After-Sun Tanning Treatments provide superior moisturising care to revitalize, desensitize and help compensate for over exposure or insufficient re-application protection.
The Gel and Moisturizer prolong and accentuate a golden tan, highlighting natural radiance.
Prolonging a tan with Clarins means enhancing the natural beauty of the skin.
CLARINS TANNING ADVICE
•Prepare your skin for a lasting radiant tan by using Exfoliating Body Scrub and Gentle Facial Peeling once or twice a week.
•Choose the correct protection according to your sensitivity to the sun, the location of your holiday and the intensity of the UV rays.
•During the first few days, expose the skin very gradually to the sun, especially if you are fair skinned.
•Re-apply the product regularly throughout the day and concentrate on sun sensitive areas such as face, neck, bust and hands.
A new idea from Ideal-Standard that won't raise a mother's temperature.
Place your fingers into the water running from our new single lever Domi tap and experience first-hand what the expression ‘more thought in the bathroom’ means.
The unique Domi bath, bidet and shower taps have a hot water limiter which restricts the amount of hot water allowed to mix with the cold.
Once set, the limiter makes Domi extremely safe.
Domi is a new idea that brings home the importance of safety in a way you'll warm to immediately.
More thought in the bathroom
WHAT'S THE MOST COMMON CAUSE OF BLOCKED PORES?
MAKE-UP, DIET OR ANTI-PERSPIRANT?
Believe it or not anti-perspirants block your pores.
Not the pores on your face of course, but the thousands under your arms.
Every morning the chemicals in your anti-perspirant react with your sweat to form a plug.
Stopping the flow of perspiration.
Since the day they were introduced, all anti-perspirants have worked in this way.
But now, almost fifty years later, we have discovered a new and more natural way to stay dry.
Kyomi is the first ever deo-perspirant.
Rather than plugging up your pores with chemicals, Kyomi uses a new material derived from natural plant fibres.
It works by absorbing moisture on the surface of your skin.
What's more, Kyomi is available in three delicate fragrances; Blush, Aqua and Coral.
So now you can stay fresh and still allow your skin to breathe.
The way nature always intended it to.
KYOMI WORKS WITH YOUR BODY, NOT AGAINST IT.
YOUR ANTI-PERSPIRANT MAY BE NATURAL BY NAME, BUT IS IT NATURAL BY NATURE?
These days, certain anti-perspirants seem to be jumping on the ‘natural’ band wagon.
But are they really as natural as their brand name might suggest?
You see any product that calls itself an ‘anti-perspirant’ works by actually blocking the pores of your skin with chemicals.
Hardly the most natural solution to the problem of perspiration.
Some have tried to appear natural by mixing these chemicals with plant extracts.
But these clever pieces of camouflage don't alter the basic fact: anti-perspirants block your pores.
Fortunately, there's now a real alternative to anti-perspirant.
Kyomi is the first ever deo-perspirant.
Instead of blocking up your pores, Kyomi absorbs moisture on the surface of your skin.
Letting it breathe.
To suit all tastes, Kyomi is available in three delicate fragrances, Blush, Aqua and Coral.
Since a deo-perspirant is now the most natural way to stay dry, why use an anti-perspirant that takes nature's name in vain?
KYOMI WORKS WITH YOUR BODY, NOT AGAINST IT.
HYGROVE
Leave planning your kitchen to Hygrove…and leave nothing to chance.
We custom-build beautiful kitchens in solid woods, or in any painted finish, to the very highest standards.
Whatever the size of your kitchen, our talented designers will be pleased to help you plan it.
At a realistic price.
Our service is second to none.
Personal, friendly and sympathetic to your own ideas.
Contact us and find out how pleasant planning a new kitchen can be.
We have a host of very satisfied customers who would gladly endorse this.
THE MARGARET LOXTON COLLECTION
SCENES of RURAL FRANCE
From the golden fields to the country kitchen and the village square
FOUR COUNTRY SCENES BROUGHT VIBRANTLY TO LIFE AND CAPTURED IN OIL
Wherever you look, the French countryside is brimming with light, colour, the aroma of herbs growing in the wild, and a people and scenery that make it one of the most wonderfully enticing parts of the world.
Every area is rich in spectacular views and welcoming villages…the locals all with tales to tell and a wealth of country cooking to make your mouth water.
MARGARET LOXTON has captured the sheer enjoyment of French country life, the relaxed pace, simple pleasures, local characters and the essence of the varying landscape in her sensitive collection of paintings.
And, by special arrangement, they are now available in a strictly limited edition of 1,950 signed prints — only the second collection the artist has ever issued.
Applicants are now invited to view Le Coq Blanc , the first print in the collection, without obligation, simply by returning the Reservation Form below.
Collectors who choose to take all four prints will be guaranteed the same edition number throughout the series.
Each print is double-mounted in a beautiful walnut veneer frame and measures 20½″ × 17¾″.
And every print is signed by the artist herself.
MARGARET LOXTON:Award-Winning Artist 
Margaret Loxton was born in London in 1938 and began painting in 1981.
In 1984 she won the prestigious City of London painting prize.
In 1986 she was invited to exhibit at several French museums, including the famous Musée Fabre, Montpelier.
During this time she travelled the French countryside, and the result was an exhibition in 1989 which sold out instantly.
YOU ARE INVITED TO VIEW Le Coq Blanc without obligation in your own home for 28 days.
The cost of each framed print is £75, including mainland delivery.
If you decide to start your collection, you may pay for this first print in three interest-free monthly payments.
The three other prints will then be available to you on the same basis and each may be paid for in the same way.
You are, of course, at no time under any obligation to complete the set.
AN AUTHENTIC RICARD CARAFE — YOUR TASTE OF FRANCE FREE WITH YOUR FIRST PRINT
Yours to keep, whether or not you keep the print.
1.
Le Coq Blanc — a pause from haymaking to admire their fine cockerel.
2.
Le Déjeuner — a simple midday meal after a morning in the fields.
3.
La Bavarde — a village gossip shares the day's news.
4.
Le Dimanche — Sunday afternoon whiled away over a game of cards.
Every beautiful garden has its secrets.
Secrets give a garden a sense of mystery and magic.
Imagine the effect of a pergola, ablaze with laburnum.
A gazebo heavy with the scent of jasmine or honeysuckle.
Or a hidden rose-scented bower where you can while away an hour or two in peace and seclusion.
None of this is wishful thinking.
You simply need Garden Secrets, a unique range of authentic, easy to maintain structures that would give your garden an entirely new dimension of colour and beauty.
A Garden Secrets measuring, design and erection service is available in most parts of the country.
Colour brochure and information hotline: 0342–319111 
SEE GARDEN SECRETS AT THE CHELSEA FLOWER SHOW.
YOU'LL FIND THEM IN MAIN AVENUE GARDEN 12 —‘THE THIRD DIMENSION’.
ROLEX THE SYMBOL OF DURABLE DISTINCTION
Each Rolex watch is a celebration of skilled craftsmanship, a creation combining the foremost in technical knowledge with a design that is unparalleled for style and strength.
The Oyster case is the epitome of strength, carved from a solid block of Stainless Steel, Gold or Platinum, in no less than one hundred and sixty-two separate operations with a further thirty-two operations required to produce the Twinlock winding crown, a hermetic seal that ensures perfect waterproofing to a depth of one hundred metres.
The Oyster case is the ultimate setting for the Rolex Perpetual movement, first created in 1931 and the subject of many advanced innovations to produce todays movement with a self winding mechanism sensitive to the slightest movement of your wrist, which holds the mainspring at equal and constant tension producing excellent precision timekeeping.
The Perpetual movement intensely tested and proved under every possible condition throughout the world is indeed worthy of the title Swiss Chronometer, a title much coveted and jealously guarded, awarded by The Controle Official Suisse de Chronometres, only after exhaustive and rigorous tests have been completed.
Each Rolex watch is created with care to produce supreme timekeeping.
Alexanders, the jewellers, have been a Rolex concessionaire for over forty years now enabling us to offer you a service that we firmly believe is second to none.
Interest Free Finance at Alexanders allows you to purchase the Rolex watch of your choice with a deposit of only ten percent and twelve monthly payments for the remainder.
INTEREST FREE CREDIT
IF YOU'RE USING UNLEADED FUEL WHY BUY BATTERIES WITH MERCURY IN THEM?
If you care about environmental issues then you probably already use lead-free petrol, CFC-free aerosols and even mercury-free ordinary zinc chloride batteries.
Every year many tonnes of mercury are deposited in land filled waste sites, much from discarded alkaline batteries.
Now you can take another positive step in helping to preserve our planet by using new mercury free long life alkaline batteries from UCAR…which last much longer than the ordinary types.
So now you don't have to put up with a two-star performance from ordinary mercury-free batteries, when there is now a new four star alternative.
AVAILABLE AT SELECTED TESCO STORES NOW!
UCAR — The world's first mercury-free long-life alkaline battery
Relax with the one decaffeinated coffee that is Nescafé.
Nescafé decaffeinated tastes every bit as good as the Nescafé you know and love.
That's because it is Nescafé.
So we use a special blend and roast to create that richer, smoother taste.
And we simply decaffeinate it naturally.
So, you can enjoy the full flavour of Nescafé in a decaffeinated form.
Nescafé decaffeinated.
Coffee at its best.
IF YOU THINK YOU'RE PREGNANT, DON'T BELIEVE EVERYTHING YOU'VE READ.
Your period's late.
You feel a bit different, and you want to find out why.
Quickly, and without a lot of fuss and bother.
So what can you do?
Ask your friends.
Ask your pharmacist.
They'll tell you that while some pregnancy tests say they're simple, they're actually more like chemistry sets.
And that could be a problem.
Because the fiddlier a test is, the less chance there is of a reliable answer.
That's why most people will tell you that there's really only one uncomplicated test.
That's Clearblue One Step.
In fact there's just one simple step to carry out.
There's no need to separately collect urine, no mess, and no waiting around for a result.
With Clearblue One Step, in just three minutes a blue line appears in the small window to show you the test's complete.
If there's a line in the large window you're pregnant.
If there's no line you're not.
The result is clear and unmistakable, and is 99% accurate — you can even test on the day your period's due.
And because Clearblue One Step is so simple to carry out, you can rely on the answer being right.
So it's not difficult to see why it's the test most pharmacists recommend.
If you really want something you can believe in, you should choose Clearblue One Step.
You can't always be sure your cycle is regular — so if you test on the day your period's due, you should confirm the result after three days.
This is in line with medical advice for all home pregnancy tests.
CLEARBLUE ONE STEP HOME PREGNANCY TEST.
THE TEST MORE WOMEN TRUST.
Stop Feminine Itching Fast!
Today, more and more women swear by a special remedy for feminine itching.
It's LANACANE Medicated Creme — a remarkable medical formula available without a prescription.
LANACANE gives you fast, long-lasting relief from sensitive, embarrassing external itching you can experience at any time of the month.
Starts to work fast.
LANACANE has a special anaesthetic action that rapidly soothes the irritation and cools the burning of delicate tissues.
Checks bacteria, aids natural healing.
LANACANE forms a germ-fighting layer over the skin.
The active ingredient checks the growth of bacteria and so helps natural healing.
Pleasant to use.
LANACANE does not sting, is non-greasy, and has a pleasant fragrance.
Now rely on LANACANE Creme, the special medication that stops feminine itching — fast.
Available in 30gm and 60gm sizes.
Available at your chemist
THE MENTAL AND PHYSICAL ANGUISH OF SEVERELY DRY SKIN.
DERMACARE HELPS SMOOTH IT ALL AWAY.
Tightness, itchiness, soreness.
For 24 hours a day, the irritation caused by severely dry skin verges on torture.
Fortunately there's Vaseline Dermacare.
It works immediately to alleviate cracking and smooth away dryness and scaling.
It's also the only product to contain Vaseline Petroleum Jelly, recommended by dermatologists as one of the world's most effective moisturisers.
Dermacare is non-greasy, long-lasting and fragrance free.
DERMACARE HELPS SKIN HELP ITSELF.
Their skin is the same age.
One of them needs Pond's to look after it.
Every month the top layer of your skin is replaced by a fresh new one.
With time, however, it becomes less efficient at supplying itself with the moisture that wards off wrinkles.
Luckily Pond's moisturisers help counteract this by replacing essential moisture.
Plus they're now lighter and more easily absorbed.
Just rub in a little every night and morning and make child's play out of keeping your skin looking young.
Helps skin stand the test of time.
Jonathan, 18 months, demonstrating the principle behind Togs new wetness barriers.
Beach boys (and girls) will be glad to hear that Togs are now better for the prevention of leaks at the legs than any other nappy.
This is because Togs have wetness barriers.
These two lines of super absorbent material work like dams, holding liquid back so that none of it ever reaches the elastic at the legs.
So if you want to prevent leaks — why not send for a free sample of ultra-absorbent Togs?
They're the new wave in nappies.
At Cow & Gate, we believe babies should always drink their greens.
Cow & Gate have always encouraged healthy appetites in babies.
(Our babyfood range is one of the largest and most varied you can buy.)
But we also like to encourage something else.
Healthy thirsts.
So, alongside our Pure Fruit Juices, we're very proud to present new Cow & Gate Herbal Drinks.
Liquid Goodness.
They're a wonderful blend of natural, gentle herbs and a hint of pure fruit juice, with added vitamin C. And they can only be described as liquid goodness.
They make a soothing refreshing drink for baby.
And they're safe and gentle on baby's tummy.
You can start to introduce them at around three months.
Look, No Sugar.
They're low in acidity.
They contain no artificial colourings, flavourings or added preservatives.
And absolutely no added sugar.
(Surprisingly, other herbal drinks do.)
The sweetness in ours comes from the fruit sugars which are naturally present in the fruit.
There are four tempting varieties: Chamomile with Apple, Fennel with Pear & Apple, Fennel with Orchard Fruits and Peppermint with Apple & Peach.
Why not try them out when baby is ready?
Healthy Encouragement.
The sooner you can encourage a taste for healthier drink and food, the better it will be for your baby.
And who knows?
When they're a bit older, maybe you'll even get them to eat their greens, too.
If you would like more information please write to Cow & Gate Limited, Trowbridge, Wilts.
BA  YX.
Cow & Gate The Babyfeeding Specialists.
Which child needs more calcium and iron?
Children on average grow as much as 2 feet between the ages of six to twelve.
Bones which grow so fast need lots of calcium.
And, to help the body absorb all that calcium, vitamin D.
At school age children also need iron.
Iron is vital for healthy growth — both mentally and physically.
So, to answer the question, it's the child on the left who needs more calcium and iron.
As well as a balanced intake of vitamins A, B, C and D. But what of the child on the right?
Aren't all these vitamins just as important to him?
Of course.
But children at different stages of growth need different combinations of vitamins.
As well as different dosages.
And their eating habits can be unpredictable so you can't always guarantee them a healthy diet.
Which is why Sanatogen have developed Childplan.
One sort for three to five year olds — all the right vitamins for healthy growth.
And another for six to twelve year olds, with extra vitamins plus calcium and iron.
And for both, Sanatogen Childplan.
Available from Boots, major supermarkets, chemists and drug stores.
A MOTHER WILL ALWAYS WORRY ABOUT HER CHILD.
FROM TODAY, SHE CAN WORRY A LITTLE BIT LESS.
It's only natural to worry about whether your child is getting a healthy diet.
Especially if more of his carefully-planned meals end up on the wall than in his mouth.
That's why Haliborange have just brought out a new Multivitamin Liquid containing essential vitamins A to E in the proportions that a growing child needs.
All in a delicious fruity-tasting daily spoonful.
Doctors and other experts also recognise how important a balanced diet is for a child's normal development.
In a recent government report they say:
‘We recommend that vitamin supplementation (of vitamins A, C and D) should be given to infants and young children aged from 6 months up to at least 2 years and preferably 5 years.’
Our new Multivitamin Liquid is specifically designed for children, because their vitamin requirements differ from those of adults.
So you can be sure they won't be missing out on anything important.
And it even comes in a plastic bottle, so it can be thrown at Teddy without causing serious injury.
But what it hasn't got is just as important.
It's completely sugar-free and contains no artificial colours or flavours.
In fact, our Multivitamin Liquid leaves you with hardly anything to worry about at all.
Except, of course, teething.
Oh, and clothing.
Oh yes, and toys, bedtimes, schooling…
NEW HALIBORANGE MULTIVITAMIN LIQUID.
Pliko PUSHCHAIR
Especially for you
For style conscious parents, Mamas & Papas provide an exclusive range of stylish high quality nursery products in a choice of fashionable fabrics, which have been designed and are featured in our 60 page colour brochure which contains the full range of Mamas & Papas prams, pushchairs, cots, highchairs, changing stations, playpens, travel seats, baby walkers and playmats etc.
Especially for you
You can select from a range of quality products which are safe and stylish.
To ensure that you and your baby stand out from the crowd, send now for your free Mamas & Papas brochure by completing the coupon.
DELICIOUS.
REFRESHING.
ROBINSONS.
From a very early age — in fact, right from the early weeks — babies enjoy a refreshing drink.
And there's none more delicious than Robinsons new range of concentrated fruit juices.
First, there's Robinsons Apple & Orange Delrosa.
It's still made with extract of Rosehips for extra goodness — but now without preservatives.
Then we've two new varieties — Apple and Apple & Cherry.
Like Delrosa, they're pure concentrated fruit juices, with no added sugar, artificial colours, flavours, sweeteners or preservatives.
Your baby will love the taste — and you can be happy in the knowledge that Robinsons concentrated juices are giving them the goodness that they need.
So now, whether you'd like granulated fruit & herb flavour baby drinks, ready to drink juices or concentrated juices for baby, you can safely turn to Robinsons.
LOOK AT THE CONCENTRATION!
THEY KNOW A GOOD THINK WHEN THEY TASTE IT.
ROBINSONS Baby Drinks THE TASTE OF HAPPINESS
8 BOOKS FOR 99p (+p&p).
SAVE OVER £21 ON PUBLISHER'S PRICES
And they all read happily ever after.
PLUS FREE LOTTO WORTH £4.95
Eight ‘first’ books for under one pound will strike you as a remarkable offer right now.
We can only assure you that, as the years go by, you'll be more and more delighted you took it up.
Research shows that children who read well do well.
And we believe this selection from one of our leading publishers is an excellent introduction both to his skill — and to a lifetime's love of books.
But reading ability is just one talent this Usborne range will develop.
There are titles to improve vocabulary, to teach easy arithmetic, counting, writing — as well as three classic children's stories.
And on every page, you'll find warmth, humour and lively illustration making the educational process as joyful as it is instructive.
SAVE OVER £21 ON PUBLISHER'S PRICES
This offer is a valuable introduction for you too — to Books for Children.
When you accept these books, you not only save £21.51 (and the Lotto Game comes free); you automatically become a member of this celebrated Club with over twelve years' experience of recommending the best children's books.
At well under publishers' prices.
All we ask is that over the next year, you make four more selections from over 300 titles for children of all ages — each picked by our expert panel for its quality and educational value, and described for you in our free monthly magazine.
Once upon a time there was the offer of a lifetime from Books for Children.
Why not take the first step to a happy ending — and complete the coupon right now?
Thicker Baby Fresh Wipes give better coverage of the big events.
Have you heard the news?
Baby Fresh wipes are three times thicker than ordinary wipes.
They're soft on baby's skin yet strong enough to clean up any job.
For anyone worried about extra sensitive skin, there's also a fragrance free wipe.
And for mums with their hands full, there's a trouble-free container.
What could be better news?
He's new, he's adorable and he's unique to The Red House — get our soft cuddly JESS the cat absolutely FREE and follow his adventures with a Free Postman Pat book too.
As the UK's leading children's book club, The Red House is also the fairest.
No automatic selections sent
You choose what you buy when you buy
Your family will enjoy choosing from the 100's of books brought to you every month in The Red House Post and At Home magazines.
You'll find best selling children's authors, fictional favourites, first readers, work books, popular TV characters and even books for parents.
All are publishers' editions and they are nearly always offered to you at greatly reduced prices and start from as little as £1.95.
And what's more, there's no pressure to buy, no long term commitment to meet and a Red House ordering procedure that guarantees that you only ever get the books you ask for.
The finest books and the fairest deal
Joining The Red House is simple.
All you have to do is fill in the coupon.
Then, we'll send you your first issue of The Red House Post and with your first order we'll send you Jess the Cat and a Postman Pat book, free.
From then on you're free to choose as many or as few books as you wish.
Our only request is that you choose at least three books in your first year's membership.
It really couldn't be easier — or fairer.
After all, 200,000 families can't be wrong!
Open your children's eyes and minds to the world of books in The Red House — it could be the start they'll always thank you for.
NO OTHER CHILDREN'S BOOK CLUB CAN OFFER YOU ALL THIS
•No automatic selections sent * Prices from £1.95
•Finest publisher's editions •Latest titles, top authors
•Huge savings on nearly every book
•Over 100 books to choose from EVERY MONTH 
THE RED HOUSE WHERE CHILDREN LEARN TO LOVE BOOKS
High Tea's more of an event with Farley's Tea Timers.
You'll really be for the high jump if you don't put Farley's Tea Timers on their menu.
Especially since there are two new courses to choose from: Spaghetti Bolognese and Apricot & Lemon Yogurt.
So now there are five varieties packed with vitamins and minerals to liven up 4 o'clock.
All in all, it can only mean that tea time is on the up and up.
Ordinary milk is only ideal for one kind of six month old baby.
Farley's Junior Milk is a better alternative to cow's milk for babies from six months.
Because cow's milk is specially formulated for baby cows.
And Farley's Junior Milk is specially formulated for baby humans.
It gives them vitamins and minerals they need, to complement a healthy baby's diet.
Whereas cow's milk doesn't have enough vitamin D or iron.
But there again, it is specially formulated to complement a diet of grass.
Breast feeding or the feeding of infant formula can be continued with advantage up to 12 months of age.
SO FARLEY SO GOOD
Powered by Imagination
Your child's imagination is as big as it's allowed to be.
And there's nothing better to stimulate the mind and develop creativity than this brightly coloured Wooden Railway from Brio.
Starting with the basic train set it can grow as your child grows.
Docks, farms, animals, people, towns and villages all make up a complete railway system.
Made from smooth, solid beechwood it is chip-proof, non-toxic and completely safe.
What's more, it's fun!
Brio Wooden Railway; just add imagination.
To find out more simply send in this coupon or telephone  (24 hours).
Sleeping Beauties…from the home of ‘VIVISENT’
Sleep is an important time for any young child, and making sure that your sleeping beauty receives the support and comfort is where Rochingham Babycrafts excel.
Our range of sleeping beauties have all been especially designed to meet the two highest standards there are: you and your child's.
However we make sure that they are manufactured to the latest BSI standards using only the best quality materials.
Put our mattresses to the test…buy one for your Sleeping Beauty.
•Golden Slumber — traditional hair core — water-resistant quilted cover.
Perfect for new born to 4/5 years.
•Dovetail — removable ‘break-through’ section allows for easy cleaning/replacement.
Ideal for new born to early toddler.
•Kumfy Flex — the firmer mattress with a water-proof and cotton face, giving full flexibility.
For all ages.
PREGNANT?
Can't find anything to wear?
Blooming Marvellous
We offer what you simply can't find in the shops.
Maternity clothes with real style and individuality — at very reasonable prices.
A complete range, including trousers, shirts, leggings, dresses, jeans, tracksuits, swimwear and more.
Designed by women who know exactly what it's like to be pregnant.
And made in top-quality fabrics, carefully finished.
Speedy service.
And you'll find it's so much easier to try everything in the comfort of your own home.
Save yourself a wild goose chase round the shops.
MATERNITY AND CHILDREN'S WEAR
Blooming Marvellous.
It's how to look when you're pregnant.
The Bitrex way to household safety
Some household cleaners and garden products are potentially harmful.
50,000 children are admitted into hospital each year because they have been drinking harmful products.
So it pays to keep all of them well out of the reach of young, inquisitive hands.
Under-sink cupboards and garden sheds should be kept permanently locked.
Where possible, only buy bleaches, disinfectants and floor cleaners that are fitted with childproof caps.
Never decant diluted household and garden products into lemonade or orange-juice bottles.
As a final safeguard, buy those products having the ‘Bitrex Protected’ stamp.
Bitrex is the most bitter substance in the world.
Children hate it.
So when it's added to harmful substances, it makes them unpalatable.
Bitrex protected means Bitrex safe.
Look out for the ‘Bitrex Protected’ stamp.
IF HIS MAIN COURSE GIVES HIM WIND, TRY DENTINOX FOR STARTERS
When baby gets wind, it's a comfort to know that Dentinox is on hand to relieve the pain.
But it's even more of a comfort for baby if he doesn't get wind in the first place.
That's why mothers today make Dentinox part of their regular feeding routine from birth onwards.
Taken before, during or after the feed, gentle Dentinox will help prevent the build up of wind, so baby can enjoy his meal without having to pay for it later.
So give him Dentinox for starters, and he'll be happy ever after.
DENTINOX Colic Drops 
ALCOHOL FREE
THE SAFE, SURE REMEDY FOR Wind, Teething Pains AND Tummy Upsets
Nurse Harvey's after a feed soothes away wind and tummy upsets and relieves pain during teething.
Baby sleeps soundly at nights and you get the rest you need to restore your energy.
Nurse Harvey's is pleasant-tasting and safe for baby right from birth.
‘GENTLY RELIEVES WIND AND DISCOMFORT’
‘I have used Nurse Harvey's Gripe Mixture for all my four children.
It seems to relieve wind and discomfort gently and soothingly without any stress on the baby.
I recommend it to all new mothers.’
Mrs. H. D., Nr.
Chester.
UP TO 60 DOSES PER BOTTLE ACCORDING TO AGE
Recommended Retail Price £1.06
FROM CHEMISTS EVERYWHERE
As soon as kids learn to walk, they learn to fall over
From the moment children become active they seem to be falling over themselves in the pursuit of adventure.
Leaving you to patch up the little cuts and grazes that germs love so much.
When scratches, cuts and grazes call for fast action, Sudocrem can help, quickly, gently and effectively.
Sudocrem Antiseptic Healing Cream works four ways.
It contains a mild, local anaesthetic to soothe the pain, kills germs to reduce the risk of infection, actively helps the healing process, and forms a protective barrier over the vulnerable area.
Make sure you keep a tube of Sudocrem at hand — when children's tumbles end in tears, Sudocrem can help make it better.
Fast Aid for Little Emergencies
KEEP SMALL HANDS SAFE WITH OvenSafe AND GrillSafe
ONLY £15.99 EACH inc.
Postage & Packing (50p for each unit sold will be donated to the British Burn Association)
Statistics compiled by the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (RoSPA) reveal that, each year, there are 200,000 accidents in UK kitchens, 20,000 of which result in burns.
It's only sensible, then, to take any possible measures to minimise the dangers in your home, especially if there are small children about.
Glass oven and grill doors, a popular feature on modern cookers, can reach external temperatures of 95°C when in use.
That's hot enough to cause burns.
Now, you'll be pleased to learn, a Lincolnshire company has developed an inexpensive way of drastically reducing that particular hazard, as temporarily as necessary, for instance, while your children are young.
The devices, named ‘OvenSafe’ and ‘GrillSafe’, clip neatly over the existing glass door, presenting a cooler, safer surface to the touch.
Available in white or brown, ‘OvenSafe’ and ‘GrillSafe’are supplied with full fitting instructions.
NEW AND ONLY AVAILABLE FROM US
SAFETY SENSE
Give your baby something comfortable to sit on.
Nappy rash can be a real problem.
But used regularly, Drapolene can help prevent it occurring.
Tried and trusted for generations, Drapolene's special formula won't block the action of disposable nappies.
And our easy to use tub makes your life a little easier too.
Use Drapolene regularly.
It's not just your baby who'll feel more comfortable.
WELCOME RELIEF FROM NAPPY RASH.
An exceedingly nutty afternoon.
Who could have guessed what would happen,
for it started like any other day,
with some goodies laid out on the table,
and us napping the warm day away.
But just then Uncle Septimus landed,
astride a giant wholemeal syrup pecan tart,
with his nutty nutty friends and companions,
turned our day upside down for a lark.
PECAN PIE
All-in-one shortcrust pastry.
225g (8oz) plain flour, sieved.
150g (5oz) margarine (at room temp.)
Water to mix 30ml (2 tbsp)
Pre-heat oven to 220°C/425°F/Gas Mark 7.
All in one method: Place one third of the flour, the margarine and water in a mixing bowl and cream with a fork until well mixed.
Stir in the remaining flour to form a firm dough.
Turn out onto a lightly floured table top and knead thoroughly until smooth.
Place in a polythene bag and leave in refrigerator for at least ½ hour.
Line a 23cm (9inch) flan tin with the pastry, and leave to chill.
For fillings: 3 eggs, 150ml (¼ pint) Lyle's Golden Syrup. 125g (4 oz) Tate & Lyle Light Brown Soft Sugar.
50g (2oz) butter, softened.
175g (6oz) pecan nuts or walnut halves, 15ml (1 tbsp) rum or milk.
Beat the eggs.
Boil the sugar and syrup together in a saucepan for 3 minutes.
Slowly pour onto the beaten eggs and stir in the butter and rum.
Use half the nuts to cover the base of the pastry case, spoon the syrup mixture over and cover with the remaining nuts.
Bake in pre-heated oven for 10 minutes.
Reduce heat to 170°C/325°F/Gas Mark 3 and cook for a further 35 minutes until the filling is set.
Serve warm or cold with unsweetened whipped cream.
SERVES 6–8
FOR DELICIOUS GOLDEN RECIPES WRITE TO: TATE & LYLE SUGARS  
Give 'em the Lyle's Smile.
IT 'ASDA BE FRESHLY PREPARED
FRESH ONIONS, FRESH RED OR GREEN PEPPERS, FRESH MUSHROOMS AND FRESHLY-SLICED TOMATO.
AT ASDA, WE MAKE UP FRESHLY-PREPARED PIZZAS ALL DAY AT OUR PIZZA BAR.
THERE ARE NINE OF YOUR FAVOURITE PIZZA RECIPES TO CHOOSE FROM.
OR IF YOU LIKE, YOU CAN CREATE YOUR OWN BY ADDING ANY OF THE FIFTEEN TOPPINGS THAT TAKE YOUR FANCY.
AND YOU CHOOSE YOUR BASE.
THIN AND CRISPY, DEEP PAN OR SOFT GRAIN.
SO NOW THAT WE'VE DONE ALL THE PREPARATION, ALL YOU HAVE TO DO IS PUT YOUR PIZZA IN THE OVEN AND TUCK INTO THE FRESHEST-TASTING PIZZA IN TOWN.
AVAILABLE AT SELECTED STORES.
IT 'ASDA BE ASDA
Only Sharwood's use 21 spices to make a curry powder.
Is it really worth it?
Wars have been fought over spices.
Ships laden with nutmeg or cinnamon, cloves or coriander once battled the Seven Seas to bring home their precious cargo.
These days, you'll find a wealth of spices in Sharwood's Curry Powders.
But why do Sharwood's go to such trouble and expense when other people make do with so much less?
After all, it would save us time and money to use fewer spices.
But which one should we leave out?
Cardamom?
It is, after all, one of the world's most expensive spices, second only in cost to saffron itself.
But there's no substitute for its warm aromatic bouquet.
What about cinnamon?
No, we think you'd really miss the woody sweetness.
Of course, it isn't just a question of using more spices, but of knowing how to blend them.
Spices can be divided into the pungent (for heat), the robust (for flavour) and the aromatic (for fragrance), and each spice we choose has its own special role.
Sharwood's have five curry powders: Mild Madras, Medium, Hot Madras, Extra Hot and a Tandoori Mixture.
Each blended to give a different taste as well as a different strength.
(One doesn't make a mild curry hot just by upping the number of chillies.)
We also produce a powder called Garam Masala.
It's an authentic blend of several spices often found in Indian cuisine.
But the proof is in the curry.
Try these simple recipes for yourself.
We think you'll be pleasantly surprised.
CHICKEN DO-PIAZA
Serves 4. 2 medium onions — finely chopped 5 × 15ml spoons (5 tbsp) oil 1 × 5ml spoon (1 tsp) puréed fresh ginger (optional) 1 clove garlic — crushed 3 × 15ml spoons (3 tbsp) Sharwood's Medium Curry Powder 450g (1 lb) skinned and boned chicken — cubed 150ml (¼ pint) natural full fat yoghurt 1 × 15ml spoon (1 tbsp) lemon juice 1 large onion — sliced salt to taste rind of a lemon — cut into thin strips
METHOD: Fry the onions in 2 × 15ml spoons (2 Tbsp) oil until soft and slightly brown.
Add the ginger, garlic and Curry Powder, fry gently for a few minutes.
Stir in the chicken and fry until brown.
Very gradually incorporate the yoghurt and the lemon juice into the sauce.
Lower the heat and simmer for 25 minutes.
Fry the sliced onions in the remaining oil until golden brown.
Set aside a few fried onion rings for garnish, add the remaining to the chicken.
Soak the lemon rind in water to soften.
Simmer the chicken for a further 10–15 minutes until the chicken is tender.
Serve garnished with the retained onion rings and the drained lemon rind.
BOMBAY POTATOES
Serves 4 as an accompaniment.
1 medium onion — finely chopped 1 clove garlic — crushed 5 × 15ml spoons (5 tbsp) oil 1 × 5ml spoon (1 tsp) whole cummin seeds 1 × 5ml spoon (1 tsp) black mustard seeds 2 × 15ml spoons (2 tbsp) Sharwood's Medium Curry Powder salt to taste 450g (1 lb) cubed and boiled potatoes
METHOD: Gently fry the onion and the garlic in the oil for 5–10 minutes until soft and slightly brown.
Add the cummin seeds and the mustard seeds and continue frying until the seeds ‘pop’.
Stir in the Curry Powder and fry gently for 2–3 minutes.
Add the salt and potatoes, stir and fry until well coated in the spice mixture.
If necessary, add a little water to prevent sticking.
If you have any questions about our curry powders, or you'd like a copy of our booklet on Indian cooking, send a first class stamp to ‘The Indian Kitchen ’
Natural to the last drop.
Kikkoman Soy Sauce takes a full 6 months to naturally ferment, just like a fine wine.
Many other soy sauces are chemically produced in a matter of hours.
Or brewed in just 2 to 3 weeks.
Some of these inferior soy sauces even have their colour, flavour or aroma artificially added.
Kikkoman Soy Sauce takes its pure and subtle flavour from the lengthy natural fermentation process.
We use only the finest soy beans, wheat and a specially developed yeast to produce the world's finest soy sauce.
Used as a versatile seasoning, Kikkoman enhances the natural taste of many different and varied dishes.
Always in harmony with the original flavours, never overpowering them.
So, to bring out the best in your cooking make sure you use the purest soy sauce, Kikkoman Soy Sauce.
Because Kikkoman is undoubtedly a drop more natural.
Who says you can only add water to Bisto granules?
Quick Cider Sauce
15 g (½ oz) butter * 1 small onion, finely chopped •1 green eating apple, grated •150 ml (¼ pint) dry cider •150 ml (¼ pt) water •20 ml (4 tsp) Bisto Rich Granules for chicken.
Heat butter in a small pan, add the onion and cook for 3 minutes.
Add apple and cook for a further 2 minutes.
Pour over the dry cider and water and bring up to the boil.
Sprinkle on the gravy granules whilst stirring.
Simmer the sauce gently until thickened.
Ideal for serving with chicken, gammon, pork or sausages.
Quick Italian Sauce.
15 ml (1 tbsp) olive oil •1 clove garlic, crushed •½ red pepper, finely chopped •150 ml (¼ pint) water, boiling •20 ml (4 tsp) Bisto Rich Gravy Granules •1 × 227 g can chopped tomatoes •5 ml (1 tsp) tomato purée •5 ml (1 tsp) red wine vinegar •2.5 ml (½ tsp) oregano
Heat oil in a small pan, add garlic and pepper, cook for 4 minutes.
Make up Bisto with boiling water and add to peppers with remaining ingredients.
Heat until gently simmering.
Ideal served as hot relish with beefburgers or sausages.
Try with pasta or over poached fish.
Quick Fruity Sauce.
15 ml (1 tbsp) oil •1 small onion, finely chopped •1 orange, grated rind and juice only •60 ml (4 tbsp) red wine •30 ml (2 tbsp) redcurrant jelly •20 ml (4 tbsp) Bisto Rich Gravy Granules
Heat oil in a small pan, add onion and cook for 4 minutes.
Blend orange juice and wine, making up volume to 225 ml with water.
Stir liquid into the onions with orange rind and redcurrant jelly.
Bring to the boil sprinkling in gravy granules and stir until dissolved and the sauce has thickened.
Ideal served with hot or cold sliced meats such as duck, pork, gammon, turkey or chicken.
WITH CHARACTERISTIC PRECISION AND MORE THAN A SOUPÇON OF INSPIRATION, THE SWISS CREATED THE DUROMATIC
Few nationalities are more creative in the kitchen than the Swiss.
The Duromatic pressure frypan is the proof of the pudding.
And now, it's available exclusively from Kuhn Rikon for a mouthwatering £49.95.
Combining all the advantages of a fully-automatic pressure cooker with those of a universal frypan, the high quality stainless steel Duromatic is guaranteed for ten years.
A simple handle-sliding action secures the cooking position, the bell-shaped shield diffuses steam downwards and at the lightest touch, all pressure can be harmlessly released.
Cooking versatility is the other chief ingredient.
This whisper-quiet Duromatic effortlessly retains nutrients, flavours, colours and aromas — and in so doing, also dramatically cuts the cooking time.
This Coq au Vin for four will take a mere 8 minutes, for example.
In addition, the waffle-textured interior makes browning and frying easier than ever.
What's more, the Duromatic's heavy thermic sandwich base is suitable for use on electric, gas, ceramic and halogen hobs.
So if you'd like something rather tasty and typically Swiss in the kitchen, send for the Duromatic frypan now.
To order, simply call — FREE — on  with credit card details or fill in and return this coupon.
Coq au Vin
Ingredients: 8 chicken pieces, 1 ¼ cups of red wine, 2 large onions, 7oz. mushrooms, 3.5oz bacon, 2 tablespoons butter, 1 cup chicken stock, 2 carrots, 1 leek, 1 celery stalk, 1 clove garlic, 1 bunch parsley & chives, bay leaf, clove, salt & pepper.
Method: Chop garlic, parsley & chives.
Slice mushrooms & quarter onions.
Heat butter in Duromatic, sauté bacon with all the above.
Remove from pan.
Sauté chicken, pour on stock & wine.
Return bacon, onions etc., then add vegetables, bay leaf & clove.
Season to taste.
Cook under pressure for 8 minutes.
Open pan, remove clove & bay leaf.
Purée vegetables, return sauce, reheat and serve.
Et voilà.
FREE 96 page Recipe Book
KUHN RIKON SWISS FOR COOKWARE
To make our special pasta, we break a few eggs.
Egg pasta is something special.
It's the pasta Italians use for those glorious family feasts that mark special occasions — or just any time they feel like spoiling themselves at table!
It's a warm, golden yellow and richer than regular pasta.
But to get the richness of true Italian egg pasta, you need at least four eggs per kilo of flour.
At Buitoni we go even further and blend a full five eggs — quality controlled and fully pasteurised — into each kilo.
So now you know how to turn any mean into a special occasion!
THE STORY OF OUR SPECIAL SHAPES
Egg pasta is firmer than regular pasta and allows the use of more distinctive shapes.
For Le Preziose, Buitoni have created four new shapes, which do more than just look beautiful on the plate, they are specially designed to hold the delicious and subtle sauces that you'll find in our recipes.
Choose from RICCIOLI (ringlets), TORCHIETTI (torches), ONDULE (ripples), and CHIOCCIOLE (spirals).
So Le Preziose not only tastes special, it looks special too.
HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM LE PREZIOSE
Egg pasta is easy to cook.
Using the biggest pot you have simply plunge it into lots of boiling salted water.
Note that it has a different colour from regular pasta while cooking.
When partially cooked, regular pasta has a slightly transparent look, and becomes whiter and more opaque as it finishes cooking.
However, you'll see that Le Preziose is opaque from the start thanks to all those eggs blended in by Buitoni, and as it cooks the yellow colour becomes more intense and golden.
To make sure it turns out just right every time, remember to keep the water bubbling.
Be guided by the cooking time on the packet and always taste the pasta yourself to check that it is not overcooked.
And when you drain it, it's a good idea to leave a little moisture in the pot to help the sauce mix in really well.
‘LE PREZIOSE’ is a term of praise for Italians and means quite simply ‘The Precious Ones’which perfectly describes the quality and ‘specialness’of this new range of pasta.
OUR RECIPES: we have chosen two distinctive recipes for you to enjoy with LE PREZIOSE.
Each one uses a sauce that's a little bit special and is particularly enhanced by the shape of the pasta.
However, both the dishes are simple to make and use a 250g pack of LE PREZIOSE which will serve four people.
THE FINEST VINEGAR COMES FROM ITALY!
BUITONI Balsamic Vinegar is lovingly manufactured all year round by a husband and wife living in the Modena region.
The centuries' old recipe has been handed down from father to son.
The grapes are picked from the local vineyard and brought to the house where they are crushed.
Over the next 3 years the maturing Balsamic vinegar is carefully transferred from Mulberry to Chestnut to Juniper wood barrels.
Finally it is blended with 10 year old Balsamic vinegar to give its distinctive dark, sweet, rich flavour.
The vinegar is then bottled in the traditional flask and sealed with a cork to preserve its high quality.
RICCIOLI PRIMAVERA:
A recipe that blends the subtle flavours of fresh vegetables with the richness of egg pasta.
Fry a diced onion and 100g of ham (parma if you can find it) for 3–4 minutes in a little olive oil.
Add a crushed clove of garlic but don't let it burn.
Chop a carrot, 50g of mushrooms, 50g of French beans and 3 courgettes and fry in the pan for another 2 or 3 minutes, seasoning with black pepper.
Add a small can of chopped tomatoes and some parsley.
Meanwhile, cook 250g of Riccioli in boiling salted water.
Drain and mix carefully with the vegetables.
And when serving sprinkle with a little Parmesan cheese.
CHIOCCIOLE CON SALMONE E MELANZANE
A luxurious pasta experience!
Put 250g of Chiocciole to cook in plenty of boiling salted water.
Pour a little olive oil in a pan over a moderate flame and lightly fry half an onion, finely chopped and one large aubergine, sliced.
Add 50g of stoned black olives, a medium sliced tomato, scalded in water to remove its skin and de-seeded, and a glass of dry white wine.
Cook for 3–4 minutes and then add 250g of fresh salmon which has been boned, skinned and chopped.
Stir the mixture carefully and season with fresh ground black pepper and a little salt.
After 4 more minutes blend in 140ml of double cream — you can use crème fraîche if you prefer.
Taste the pasta and when it's al dente, drain and mix carefully with the sauce.
Garnish with dill or parsley and serve right away.
This the Seal of the Casa BUITONI, the family home of BUITONI in Sansepolcro Tuscany, and found on every authentic BUITONI product.
SHARE the ITALIAN LOVE of FOOD.
ROULÉ RECIPES
Roll up for Roulé.
The Cheese with a Swirl.
LE ROULÉ LIGHT
Le Roulé Light has all the flavour of original Le Roulé but only half the fat.
So if you're watching your waistline but still want to enjoy life's little luxuries try Le Roulé Light — the taste of success!
Roulé is available at most good cheese stores but do look out for the name.
If it's not called Roulé, it probably isn't.
Le Roulé with Spinach Noodles
INGREDIENTS:
2 slices Roulé Herbs & Garlic Cheese cut into 6 6 sprigs basil 450 g/1 lb Spinach noodles
THE SAUCE
INGREDIENTS
285 ml/½ pt double cream 60 g/2 oz unsalted butter 60 g/2 oz Roulé Herbs & Garlic Cheese 50 g/2 oz thick slice of lean ham, cut into small dice salt and freshly ground pepper
METHOD:
Reduce the cream in a wide pan by half.
Whisk in the butter and 60 g (2 oz) Roulé.
Add the ham.
Season generously with salt and pepper.
TO SERVE:
Boil the pasta in plenty of boiling salted water.
Drain and turn in the sauce.
Serve the noodles in a shallow bowl with a warmed slice of Roulé on each bowl of pasta.
Garnish with basil leaves.
Serves 6 
APPROVED BY THE VEGETARIAN SOCIETY
ROULÉ, ONE OF THE MANY ORIGINAL CREATIONS FROM
Fromageries Triballat
The Height of Fashion
Cooking * Hot Water Central Heating
The Stanley Super Star does it all.
It's also the same height as your kitchen units for a perfect fit.
Running on Solid Fuel, Oil Gas or LPG.
Cast Iron quality and a dazzling range of vitreous enamel colours.
HEALTHY EATING STARTS HERE WITH THE ORIGINAL HACKMAN UNIPOT
NOW AVAILABLE BY MAIL ORDER
This is the original 3 in 1 UNIPOT designed and made in Finland from  stainless steel.
The UNIPOT offers the ultimate in healthy and economical cooking.
It does the work of a whole set of saucepans and when used separately it gives you a SAUCEPAN, a CASSEROLE, a BAIN MARIE, a STEAMER, and a COLANDER.
When all the parts are used together you can cook a whole meal in one go.
You can boil meat, potatoes, pasta or rice, make a stew or soup in the base pan, steam your vegetables in the steamer and simmer your gravy or sauce in the porringer on top.
The UNIPOT is renowned for its complete versatility and quality of manufacture.
UNIPOT is available to you in two sizes…
3 Litre size for 2 to 3 people £37.50
5 Litre size for larger families £48.50 Please add £1.95 to your order for post and packing.
•Special 3 part sandwich base, suitable for GAS, ELECTRIC, SOLID FUEL, AGA, CERAMIC and HALOGEN.
•Cooking with the UNIPOT will produce healthy meals keeping all the vitamins and minerals locked in.
•Only one heat source is needed and only low heat is required for fast even cooking.
•Frozen food can be defrosted gently in the steamer.
•The UNIPOT needs the minimum of cleaning, to keep its good looks simply wash in hot soapy water or put it in the dishwasher.
•Full 10 year Guarantee.
Many of the finest Chinese dishes come from the same region.
Just along from the fish fingers.
We've introduced a new range of Chinese food.
There are starters, main courses and side dishes and you'll find them in the freezer cabinet.
They've been created for us by none other than Mr. Ken Lo, restaurateur and leading authority on Chinese food.
Hardly surprising then, that there's rather more to our Chicken in Blackbean Sauce than just chicken and black beans.
Fresh peppers, sliced onions and sherry are all part of the recipes.
In other words, it's the kind of food you'd get from a restaurant in Chinatown.
Except now you can get it from a supermarket in your town.
MEMORIES OF CHINA FROM KEN LO
DISCOVER DALEPAK'S NEW TASTE IN VEGETABLES FRESH IDEAS IN FROZEN FOODS
Take a fresh look at cauliflower cheese with new, great-tasting Cauliflower Cheese Grills from Dalepak.
Quick and easy to prepare, each Cauliflower Cheese grill is packed with a delicious blend of the finest quality cauliflower, green beans and cheddar cheese, in a light, golden, crispy crumb.
Served as part of a main meal or simply as a snack, they're a great new taste for all the family.
And, of course, they make an ideal vegetarian meal too.
Look out for the full range of Dalepak's new Vegetable Grills and Vegetable Burgers in your supermarket's freezer cabinet.
There's no substitute for Kibun Prawn sticks!
Once…there were only prawns, expensive, wasteful and sometimes of doubtful quality and flavour.
Now…there's KIBUN PRAWN STICKS that will meet the growing demand for interesting Seafood products, superb in taste and texture, there really is no substitute!
New Kibun Prawn Sticks are extremely versatile.
In addition to salads use them as starters with avocados or as dips with your hors d'oeuvres.
Serve them hot or cold, you'll be a great success with Kibun Prawn Sticks!
Susanne Hsu tells how she makes the greatest stir-fry in South Ken.
Before you do anything else, commit the following phrase to memory ‘HOT WOK, COLD OIL’.
It's the first thing I learnt about traditional Chinese stir frying and it's the most important clue to the whole principle of the Wok — things happen fast.
Because China was often short of material to fuel ovens, a cuisine sprang up where a strong flame cooked food very quickly.
Nowadays, of course, unless you have a raging open fire to hand, the only way to get the same responsiveness is with a gas hob.
As to oil I use the lightest possible, which is grapeseed oil, but it has a high water content.
So to avoid ‘spitting’, I mix it with sunflower oil.
Be very careful of recipes which recommend sesame oil.
I would only ever use a tiny quantity for its perfume.
If you've only got one wok, start with your vegetables and part cook them.
Set aside and then cook your meat and fish.
Then finish the vegetables.
You'll read about many flavourings, but the universal Chinese taste comes from a combination of soy sauce and five-spice powder.
These are substitutes, but you'll need it for the authentic taste.
In China, a cook regulates the speed of cooking by moving the wok on and off the heat.
With a gas hob, it's all possible with the touch of a fingertip.
If you stick to these simple basics, you and your gas hob will produce stir  fries which are truly 
Cantonese Sweet and Sour Fish
Sauce
4 tablespoons of Pineapple or Apple Juice 2 tablespoons of Medium-dry Sherry 2 tablespoons of Wine Vinegar 2 teaspoons of Sugar 1 tablespoon of Soy Sauce ¼ pint of Water 1 tablespoon of Cornflower Salt and Pepper
Fish
1 Egg White 2 tablespoons of Soy Sauce 1 teaspoon of Five-Spice Powder 2 large White Fish Fillets, skinned and cut into thick strips Good Quality Cooking Oil 1 Leek, sliced diagonally 1 Clove of Garlic, crushed 1 Red Pepper, cored and sliced ¼ Cucumber, halved, deseeded and sliced 1 tablespoon of Fresh Ginger, grated
Method
Place all the sauce ingredients in a jug, mix together well.
In a large bowl mix together the egg white, soy sauce and five-spice powder.
Mix in the fish strips until they are well coated.
Heat about 1 inch of oil in a wok.
Add the fish and stir fry for about 2 minutes until golden brown and crispy.
Remove the fish with a slotted spoon and drain on kitchen paper, keep warm on a serving plate.
Pour off all but 2 tablespoons of the oil and reheat.
Stir fry all the vegetables and ginger for 3 minutes.
Pour the sauce over the vegetables and stir until it has thickened.
Season to taste.
Spoon the sauce over the fish and serve immediately.
COOKABILITY Great cooks cook on Gas.
Most cereals have an offer on the packet.
Quaker Oat Bran Crispies are no exception.
You won't get picture cards when you buy our cereal.
You won't get stickers or transfers.
But you will get oats.
And there's twenty five years of evidence to show that oats can help reduce excess cholesterol.
So long as they're part of a sensible low fat diet.
Now, isn't that better than a plastic submarine?
Without a dishwasher where do two years of your life go?
Washing up after every meal can mean you spend around an hour a day sunk in the sink.
That adds up to over two weeks a year, or two years of your life.
On the other hand it takes no time at all to load a dishwasher.
They wash the pots and pans as well as cutlery and crockery.
And they come in a whole range of sizes, so there's one to fit every kitchen.
Call us free on  and we'll send you all the latest information on dishwashers.
Machines that can actually add years to your life.
DISHWASH ELECTRIC
Discover what's cooking in your garden.
Pick up new BBC Gardeners' World magazine and you'll find food for thought from some of the country's favourite gardening personalities.
There's over 120 pages of invaluable advice and inspiration plus an informative Gardeners' Manual to pull out and collect.
BBC Gardeners' World magazine.
Compulsive viewing every month for gardeners.
FREE Gardening Gloves with the March Edition
AVAILABLE FEBRUARY 14TH FROM YOUR NEWSAGENTS