

UNRIVALLED CHOICE FOR NOVICE OR EXPERT FROM EUROPE'S LEADING SPECIALISTS
Northumbria Horse Holidays
THE WAY TO REALLY ENJOY THE FREEDOM OF Britain's Big Country 
Wide open spaces, breathtaking scenery, great company, superb horses — that's Northumbria Horse Holidays.
This summer come Post Trail Riding and discover excellent riding on the drovers' trails and bridle paths of Britain's Big Country Northumbria.
No matter what is your previous experience — whether riding in a novice party or with a group of experienced riders — we have a superb selection of horses to suit everyone, hunters, thoroughbreds and top quality cobs of all sizes.
And at the end of every exhilarating day, long summer evenings are spent in the warm welcome of a country hotel where you can relax in the company of newly made friends.
Start a lifelong love affair with horses on a 5 day Learn to Ride holiday; make great progress with your riding on 5 day Improve your Riding holidays.
We've holidays for everyone.
All tremendous fun — all incredible value.
FULLY INCLUSIVE HOLIDAYS FROM ONLY £149
5 DAYS LEARN TO RIDE HOLIDAYS
5 DAYS IMPROVE YOUR RIDING HOLIDAYS
7–14 DAYS TRAIL RIDING HOLIDAYS
CHELTENHAM Easter Break
Make a provisional booking now by phone and reserve your place
USE YOUR ACCESS or visa
4 days just £129
•3 nights half board at the Cheltenham Park Hotel
•Tour of the Cotswolds
•Visit to Sudeley Castle
•Explore Gloucester
•Children half price
We invite you to join us on our latest luxury weekend combining the regency splendour of CHELTENHAM with its myriad antique shops, a relaxing tour of the GOLDEN TRIANGLE and historic GLOUCESTER.
Accommodation has been arranged at the prestigious 5 crown 
CHELTENHAM PARK HOTEL.
FRIDAY
Arrive at your hotel anytime after midday and then meet your fellow weekenders at a pre-dinner reception at 7.00 pm followed by a leisurely dinner.
SATURDAY
Cheltenham is a town of spacious elegance from sweeping terraces and broad avenues bordered by trees and gardens galore.
Houses and villas retain their splendid Regency ironwork balconies and verandas.
Be sure to visit the Pittville Pump Room (Try the waters!)
Gustav Holst Museum where the composer of ‘The Planets’ was born, and renowned Art Gallery & Museum including paintings from the Age of Rembrandt and designs in the style of William Morris.
The glories of ancient Greece and Rome are echoed at Montpelier Walk and the Rotunda.
Cheltenham is justly famous for its reputation as one of the country's leading antique centres, where objets d'art, fine furniture and paintings galore are displayed in traditional Regency settings.
SUNDAY
After a full English breakfast, we take you on a tour of the Cotswold countryside.
Known as the ‘Golden Triangle’, some of the many private royal residences in the area include Gatcombe Park, built in the 18th century for a wealthy clothing manufacturer, and now the home of Princess Anne and her family.
Highgrove is the charming 18th century home of the Prince and Princess of Wales, and Princess Diana is reputed to do her shopping in nearby Tetbury.
Nether Lypiatt, near Stroud, is home to the Prince and Princess Michael of Kent.
Later we visit Sudeley Castle, the magnificent palace of Catherine Parr, 6th wife of Henry VIII, and inspiration for ‘Blandings’, the stately home in the novel of P.G.
Wodehouse.
Set in superb formal gardens, the house has many fascinating collections in addition to antique arms and armoury, works by Constable, Turner and Rubens.
The dungeon tower houses craft workshops and the resident falconer gives regular displays.
MONDAY
Roman and Saxon heritage combine in GLOUCESTER, a city of great antiquity, famed for its magnificent cathedral.
Don't forget the historic docks, housing the National Waterways Museum, an Antique Centre, the New Regimental Museum and the Mariners' Church.
YOUR HOTEL
Opened in May 1989 following a total refurbishment.
The superb hotel is set in 9 acres of grounds close to Cheltenham's town centre.
An air of gracious living and elegance combines with all modern facilities.
Each of the luxurious bedrooms has its own private bathroom, colour TV and hospitality tray too.
A 3-course dinner and English breakfast are included each day.
Single room supplement £6 per night.
Children under 12 sharing with two adults are half price.
HOW TO BOOK
Book early — complete the coupon or telephone now on .
Ask for the ‘Cheltenham at Easter’ weekend and state the date and departure point you require.
You will be allocated a unique reference number.
Please quote this on the booking form and return it to us at the address shown, together with a deposit of £25 per person and optional insurance of £6.
If you have an Access or Visa card you may use this to pay for your holiday and should complete the form.
Within 28 days we will forward your confirmation, full details of your holiday and insurance cover.
The final balance is due six weeks before departure.
GROSVENOR INTERNATIONAL
Close to the city — Rosemary St, Islington, London N1.
Within walking distance of The City, Camden Passage Antique Market and The Regent's Canal.
A unique opportunity to acquire a stylish and very easy lifestyle in fashionable Islington.
10 pretty newly built quality houses designed by famous architects CZWG.
Backing onto a Park — Rosemary Gardens — with sports facilities and playground.
Choice of 3 styles offering 3 beds, 2 baths, 2 receps, German kitchens, lux carpeting in choice of colours, garage, sun terrace and patio gardens.
An outstanding realistically priced investment.
From £229,500 Freehold.
Sole Selling Agents.
FARRAR STEAD & GLYN
Energetic, expanding firm with a reputation for service.
Well established firm encompassing every facet of residential and commercial property, including sales, lettings, investments, developments, professional management and interior design.
With a Far Eastern office in Hong Kong (established 7 years ago), FSG offers vendors, purchasers and investors an unrivalled service, which can be adapted to meet individual requirements.
Chelsea:Beautifully finished 4 bed house in superb, exclusive new development with excellent security.
BAKER STREET ESTATES
MATCHING PEOPLE TO PROPERTY
At Baker Street Estates our clientele are all treated as individuals and detailed advice from an experienced member of our integrated team ensures that any property requirement can be efficiently satisfied from an office that offers the friendliest atmosphere in W1.
Our independence is your guarantee that someone you can trust is overseeing your investment, selling your home, finding the shop or office that suits your business or renting you a luxury flat for a comfortable and enjoyable stay in Central London.
PENTHOUSES LONDON W1.
SELECTION AVAILABLE FROM £235,000
SARA BATTING
SELLING THE BEST PROPERTY IN THE THAMES VALLEY
Sara Batting is one of the South of England's independent Estate Agents who specialises in the sales of luxury apartments, country cottages, new executive homes, riverside homes and country mansions.
One of Berkshire's distinguished country houses, set amidst landscaped Gardens and natural woodlands of 11 acres in idyllic rural hamlet ideally located for easy access to London and the West Country.
ALDINE HONEY & CO.
BROOKS MEWS, MAYFAIR, LONDON W1
An exceptional first floor flat in a small modern block situated in a quiet mews behind Claridges in the heart of Mayfair.
The flat has been interior designed throughout with the advantage of its own parking space behind electronically controlled gates.
MAJENDIE
The letting and management of residential property in Central London.
Our houses and flats range from £150 to £2,500 per week, tenants mainly multi-national companies and banks.
An experienced team provides advice on rental values.
We run a management service which is essential for the absentee landlord.
If you are considering investing in property to let we will be pleased to provide an independent appraisal of the likely return.
Our furnishing department provided practical and economical assistance in interior design.
HAMPTONS
Leaders in the specialist market of Letting and Managing property in London and the Home Counties.
Hamptons let superior apartments and houses to substantial U.K. companies, major multi-nationals, diplomatic personnel and visitors.
We have the ability to suit requirements ranging from small apartments from £200 per week to large houses from £2,500 per week.
If you wish either to let your property or require accommodation for long or short term, we have the market knowledge and professionalism to advise you.
TOWN & COUNTRY
Carmen Dudley and Laura Wildgoose take the stress out of finding the Right Property.
If you are planning to move, Town & Country are uniquely qualified to assist with all aspects of relocation — from finding the right house/apartment to finding the right school.
Town & Country are trained to deal with the problems associated with moving — for example local area orientation; and offering advice on solicitors; schools; household removals and even baby-sitters!
In fact the full range of services available are ideal for those people who lead a demanding and hectic life.
STRUTT & PARKER
A selection of fine residential apartments ranging in size from studios to 2 bedroom flats.
each flat has an underground car space.
THE PROPERTY REGISTER
Offering an alternative service to house purchase and selling in the UK and overseas.
A superbly presented two year old condominium (townhouse) in an elevated position, above Flatts inlet with panoramic water views to the North Shore, Harrington Sound and the South Shore.
The property is perfectly set for easy access to the capital city of Hamilton.
The property comprises of 3 bedrooms, two luxury bathrooms (one en-suite), 1 downstairs cloakroom, 2 reception rooms, kitchen, large utility and storage area, expansive balconies providing excellent sea views.
CHESTERFIELD & CO.
Chesterfield and Company is one of the leading independent firms of Estate Agents and Chartered Surveyors specialising in prime Central London residential property.
During the last year the firm sold well over £100,000,000 of quality flats and houses.
They offer not only all the finest portfolio available but also accurate advice and help.
For further information on any aspect of the London residential market contact the Chelsea or Belgravia office.
One of our Pelham Crescent houses, £1,275,000.
GALITZA & CO.
SEARCHING FOR A SERIOUS PROPERTY OVER ½ MILLION?
With over 20 years experience in the Home Counties West of London, we specialize in finding Houses of distinction for the discerning Buyer.
By really understanding our Buyers' needs we cut out time wasting and abortive visits and ensure you pay no more than the correct price in this mixed market.
Full structural survey fees are included if you buy through us and detailed advice about the property will be prepared for your solicitor to check.
WE GIVE A 100% SERVICE FOR ONLY 1%.
LA ALDEA DE BENAHAVIS
A LIMITED EDITION — SOUTHERN SPAIN.
‘La Aldea de Benahavis’ is the lifelong ambition of renowned artist David Marshall to create twelve finely sculptured and unique country cottages nestling within the charming mountain village of Benahavis.
This developer's vision and commitment has captured the spirit of the Andalucian craft tradition.
Each superbly finished home is unique, exclusive and a tribute to the connoisseur of fine art and fine living.
‘A village set within a village’ Aldea de Benahavis enjoys a genuine Spanish setting while remaining within fifteen minutes drive of the world famous marina Puerto Banus and Marbella's finest golf courses.
INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY CONSULTANTS
MARBELLA — Enjoy life in a good climate
With golf and leisure by the Mediterranean Sea in a scenic relaxed environment.
Apartments, town and country villas for discerning buyers.
Properties carefully selected to clients individual requirements.
Projects for investment and building land.
As professional consultants we also advise and take instructions for design, supervision and structural surveys.
Illustrated: The Royal Heights, Marbella.
New luxury villas from £300,000 viewing arranged.
CHARLES MACKINTOSH F.R.I.C.S.
Chartered Surveyor and Estate Agent specialising in exclusive properties on the French Riviera
Resident in the area, I provide a personal service to discerning clients who seek the best apartments, villas and country properties in and around Cannes.
Exclusive new developments and older character properties, such as former oil mills and farmhouses, are offered with prices ranging from FF 1.800.000.
This magnificent modern villa blends well into the countryside of Opio.
BANQUE PIGUET
DISTINGUISHED SWISS FREEHOLDS
Banque Piguet, a private Swiss bank established in 1856, has advised non-residents on the purchase of Swiss freeholds for the past 40 years.
A wide and varied portfolio is on offer, with excellent winter and summer sporting facilities in the mountains of French speaking Switzerland, and some on the shores of Lake Geneva.
Prices up to £500,000.
The Bank organises briefings in London, selection on site, purchase formalities, financing and after sale administration.
BOVIS ABROAD LIMITED
LUX.
VILLAS, 100,000M 2 PRIV.
LAKE FROM £167,000
For immediate sale.
Choice of lux. villas in Lakeside Village in Quinta do Lago (the most beautiful and sought after area in the Algarve, Portugal.)
Village overlooks beautiful 100,000m 2 .
lake, providing instant access to all manner of watersports.
Sporting and leisure facilities include golf, tennis, riding, restaurants, bars, nightclubs.
Uncrowded beaches and Atlantic nearby.
Superb investment opportunity for the future.
Prices from £167,000–£300,000.
Subject to availability.
For more information contact Bovis Abroad on 01–  or call in at our sales office.
PRUDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY
MALTA AND GOZO
The beautiful islands of the Maltese Archipelago offer a diverse range of properties, converted farmhouses, opulent villas, luxury beachfront apartments and rustic courtyard houses.
With associate offices in Malta and Gozo, we are perfectly placed to offer the widest selection of new and re-sale properties.
This freedom of choice, our local knowledge and the security of purchasing through a household name must be an unbeatable combination.
Call Ken Anderson now for further details.
BENDINAT
THE MOST EXCLUSIVE ADDRESS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN
Bendinat are now proud to offer a selection of property for the discerning purchaser.
From the Anchorage Hill Villas with breathtaking views over the sea to the exciting apartments on the Royal Bendinat Golf course, Bendinat offers a quality of construction and design unequalled on the island and an excellent record of capital growth for the investor.
Call our London office for more details on properties available and how to visit Mallorca.
SOTHEBY'S INTERNATIONAL REALTY
THE VILLA MAIONCHI, NEAR LUCCA
Enjoying an outstanding position in the hills north of Lucca, the property was formerly a sixteen century convent and is now an elegantly restored villa with eight bedrooms.
Surrounded by thirty hectares of vineyards, olive groves and woods the small estate consists of the main villa, several outbuildings and barns, a swimming pool, a farm house and an old mill.
Brochure No. 1840010.
Viewing strictly by appointment.
Offers in the region of 4,200,000,000 Lire
For local enquiries please contact Nigel Sundius 
EURO PROPERTY ADVISERS
Personal Service is the key to our success.
Our Portfolio includes prime new and established coastal and golf Developments; an extensive choice of re-sale Villas and Apartments; a custom-design & build service; special projects for major investment.
We provide a highly professional service, backed by many years' experience, specialising exclusively in the overseas property market.
Viewing arrangements individually planned.
ETRUSCAN PROPERTIES
THE ITALIAN PROPERTY SPECIALISTS
A classical villa near Arezzo attributed to the famous architect Giorgio Vasari.
The house, totalling 1,400 square metres, is set within 12 acres of land including a classical Italian garden with statuary.
Although requiring modernisation the state rooms are still intact including their painted ceilings.
The accommodation is currently divided into three apartments and there is a large area suitable for conversion.
The contents of undoubted value can be acquired separately.
Price on application.
LOVELL ESPAÑA
Only Lovell has the Mijas touch.
To visit the Lovell village of Puebla Aida is to see possibly the greatest commitment by any developer to real individuality and imagination.
This extraordinary vision in the Mijas Golf estate offers a wide variety of superbly finished homes, each capturing the real spirit of the Andalucian craft tradition.
Lovell's own tradition of quality housebuilding is the golden touch which adds the investment security and continuity you'll be looking for.
Prices start at £48,000; brochure and video available on request.
A UNIQUE INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITY
FINCA LAS LIMAS GAUCIN
Currently Spain's Costa del Sol offers some of the best investment opportunities in land and property available anywhere in Europe.
A few kilometres inland in the foothills of the Ronda mountains, nestling below the spectacular white village of Gaucin you will find — FINCA LAS LIMAS.
15 exclusive plots each a minimum of 25,000 square metres accessible to the costas cosmopolitan pleasures yet a world apart.
An oasis of tranquillity with dramatically spectacular views.
The ideal place to build your Spanish home.
All plans are offered with guaranteed clean title in offshore companies.
Complete with all services plot prices start from £75.000
For your personal information pack on Fincas Las Limas return the coupon or contact us by phone or fax.
FINCAS LAS LIMAS DISCOVER IT YOURSELF
Second home, first choice
Euroactividade, creators of the exclusive Carvoeiro Clube, offers homes of elegance and style on luxury developments located around the picturesque fishing village of Praia do Carvoeiro and on the Parque da Floresta Golfe & Country Clube on the Western Algarve.
A wide variety of sports and leisure facilities is available for your entertainment.
The range of on-site services provides you with trouble-free enjoyment, combining all the benefits and standards of a 5-star hotel with the comfort and privacy of your own home.
Properties include New Villas for immediate occupation, Plots with villa designs, Townhouses and Apartments.
Financing is available.
Great Brampton House Antiques
Interior design, furniture and furnishing for the period and traditional home.
We have one of the largest and finest collections of antique furniture in the country.
Free delivery in our own vehicles to most parts of the U.K. Goods packed and shipped to any part of the world.
7 miles S.W. of Hereford, 15 miles from the M5/50 and 50 minutes from the M4.
An extremely handsome 18th Century partners desk in a rich mahogany stamped ‘W. Priest, Blackfriars’.
Incorporating nine drawers to the facing side and to the reverse three drawers, with a cupboard in each pedestal.
The top is inset with attractive dark tan hide and the desk measures 72ins wide × 41ins deep × 30½ins high.
A pair of exquisite early 19th Century gilt settees of elegant proportions.
With very fine ornate acanthus leaf carvings.
Each settee measures 47ins wide & 25ins deep × 33½ins high.
In the background a spectacular vitrine of the 19th Century attributed to the F Linke.
In the foreground stands a 19th Century giltwood stool, standing upon attractive carved cabriole legs.
A fantastic Adam period mahogany serving table of serpentine form.
Standing upon finely tapered supports and decorated with fluted carving and classical urn and harebell decoration.
Circa 1770.
On either side of the table are George II style gilt side chairs.
Of the 19th Century an imposing and most impressive empire mahogany breakfront bibliotheque embellished with superior ormolu mounts and surmounted by a classical pediment.
The three doors are covered with a fine brass grille to enable display of books set upon the four shelves.
It measures 76ins wide × 20ins deep × 94ins high.
‘MARRIAGES ARE MADE IN HEAVEN’.
THE REST CAN BE ARRANGED BY US.
Your future husband, that's up to you know who, but as for everything else The Savoy Group can arrange it.
In our wedding brochure you'll find ideas for everything from the flowers and the cars to the reception and the honeymoon; there's even our own health hydro, Forest Mere, ideal to soothe pre-wedding nerves.
The Savoy Group consists of six hotels, four in London, The Savoy, Claridge's, The Connaught, The Berkeley.
In the Cotswolds there is The Lygon Arms and in Paris The Lancaster.
Each one is totally different, each with its own history and character, but all offer the same exceptionally high standards of cuisine and service for which The Savoy Group is renowned.
Call us on 01–  or write to 1 Savoy Hill, London WC2R 0BP for a copy of our brochure and have over a century of experience available to you and your family.
THE SAVOY GROUP OF HOTELS AND RESTAURANTS
Welcome to GLENBORRODALE CASTLE
Take a wonderful holiday — amidst some of the most beautiful scenery in the world.
Glenborrodale, on the northern shore of Loch Sunart, holds a magic for everyone — nature lovers, artists, historians, sportsmen, geologists, gardeners, or those who just want to unwind and relax from the pressures of everyday life.
Sailing, tennis, golf, riding, fishing, sporting clay shooting, sauna, solarium, gymnasium, croquet, walking and stalking.
Only a few hours drive from Glasgow to a world of serenity and tranquillity.
Fifteen bedrooms and state-rooms each with bathroom en suite.
Fine home cooking and all the other special comforts you would expect in this beautifully restored home.
Open Easter to October.
Good looks can last your lifetime!
No-one can turn back the clock.
But at The Pountney Clinic our experienced cosmetic surgeons have achieved remarkable and lasting improvements to face and figure for men and for women.
Thousands of people of all ages have  benefit from well-proven cosmetic improvement procedures.
Can cosmetic surgery help you?
To find out obtain our comprehensive full colour brochure.
Then, if you wish, arrange a no-obligation surgeon's consultation at our clinic.
Our surgeons are highly experienced and all are Fellows of the Royal College of Surgeons.
All have extensive Plastic and Cosmetic surgical backgrounds.
The Pountney Clinic is one of Europe's longest established and respected specialist cosmetic surgery hospitals.
At a consultation you will be able to assess for yourself the excellent facilities that we have been able to develop (with the assistance of the Area Health Authority) specifically for patients seeking improvement through cosmetic surgery.
Some of the excellent procedures undertaken at The Pountney Clinic 
BREAST ENLARGEMENTS, UPLIFTS AND REDUCTIONS
INVERTED NIPPLE IMPROVEMENT •SPOT FAT REDUCTION
NOSE IMPROVEMENT & REFINEMENT •FACELIFTS
WRINKLE IMPROVEMENT •EYEBAG AND EYELID IMPROVEMENT
SCAR REFINEMENT •‘TUMMY TUCKS’•‘BAT EAR’ CORRECTION
RECEDING CHIN CORRECTION •CHEEK IMPLANTS
MOLE & TATTOO REMOVAL •OVERCOMING MALE BALDNESS
Earn your American University Degree at a College in London
Study Business Administration, Commercial Art, Fashion Design, Merchandising and Interior Design.
At The American College in London you earn more than a degree — you receive an education with a career focus and individual attention from faculty who are professionals in their fields.
If you wish, you have the opportunity to continue your studies at the college's sister campuses, located in two of America's most exciting cities — Atlanta and Los Angeles.
The Colleges offer a wide range of specialized courses with the aim of conferring a university-level Bachelor's or Associate's degree while providing the best practical training for your future career.
Classroom studies are supplemented by a variety of special projects, field trips and study tours.
The American College in London is the European campus of The American College for the Applied Arts, Atlanta, and is authorized to confer American university level degrees by the State of Georgia, U.S.A. Department of Education.
Further, the college is affiliated with the University of Wisconsin-Stout, U.S.A. All three Colleges are accredited by the Commission on Colleges of the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools.
Terms begin October, January, March, May and July.
Student housing facilities and placement services available.
CHRISTIAN FISCHBACHER LTD
A wide range of furnishing fabrics, wallpapers and borders from famous designers such as Phillip Edwards, Collier Campbell, Munro & Tutty and Jack Prince and the famous Italian designer Gianni Verscace.
Full interior design service available as well as friendly practical advice on curtains, upholstery and colour schemes.
MAX PIKE'S BATHROOM SHOP
Go to Pike's shop and see his Kallista range.
It's perhaps the finest range, and sometimes very expensive.
Of the highest quality, generously made and with a wide choice of rigid baths and fittings.
Pike is a fund of knowledge (this is free!) with excellent design sense.
Can't do without it.
Can you?
Speedbird WORLDWIDE
Speedbird make holidays in the same way a great artist creates a painting: 10% inspiration, 90% perspiration.
That's why Speedbird holidays give such pleasure and work so well.
With over 20 years in the business, more destinations than many other long-haul operators, matchless world-wide resources and know-how, expert assistance on the spot — Speedbird will simply take more care of you.
From Antigua to Zimbabwe.
Escorted touring to beach holidays.
Utterly hedonistic luxury on wilderness trek.
Concorde and Club class options.
We've the flexibility to offer alternative itineraries, should you wish.
We can even create a holiday just for you.
For your 1990 Speedbird brochure phone  (24 hrs) or call at an ABTA travel agent.
For one day all this could be yours.
Yours for a day, the magnificence of the Venice Simplon-Orient-Express.
Experience all the glamour and nostalgia of the world's most romantic train as it winds its way through the English countryside.
On board, liveried stewards serve delicious meals and fine wines with the style and elegance you would expect from the ‘King of Trains’.
Where you travel on your day out of the ordinary is up to you.
Choose from Arundel Castle, Hever Castle, Bristol, Bath, Folkestone, or Salisbury.
Or why not travel to Ascot or Newmarket for one of the big races of the year?
Prices start at just £95 per person.
For more details and a colour brochure please contact your travel agent or telephone Clare at our Reservations office on 01– .
A Day Out of the Ordinary.
HOLIDAY ONTARIO.
GETTING THERE IS ONLY HALF THE FUN.
Thursday afternoon, Lake Huron.
Lazing on a gleaming deck, the water lapping gently against the side is like a lullaby and I manage only 15 pages of Frederick Forsyth before succumbing to the pleasures of a hot Ontario sun.
Unbelievably, after breakfast at home this morning, we crossed the Atlantic in unashamed supersonic luxury before arriving in Toronto in time for lunch.
Heading for our connection, a brief glimpse of the sleek city more than justified the time we intend to spend there next week.
An hour later, taxiing across the glimmering surface of the lake, the floatplane approached the jetty.
We board our 40 ft. yacht, the ‘True Love’(ugh!) and meet the crew.
(De-rigging the spinnaker had sounded too much like hard work.)
Unable to compete with the delights of fishing off the world's largest freshwater island, tomorrow should be blissfully quiet.
Having granted permission to go ashore, I've been promised trout for supper, although he's never caught anything worth eating yet.
Anyway, with 400 miles of deep blue paradise still to be explored and a tall drink on its way, courtesy of a rather handsome member of the crew, I think I could get used to this.
Ontario by Concorde.
Experience the moment.
Edward Goodyear LIMITED
COURT FLORIST
Whatever your requirements, from traditional wedding arrangements, including delicate bridesmaids' posies, to exquisite designs for a special occasion — whether for a large dance or small party — Edward Goodyear will be delighted to provide you with a free estimate to suit your individual desires.
Nothing but the best!
And why not?
You're the sort of person who values good relationships and basically, feels very positive about life.
Now you're thinking of sharing it all with someone who feels the same.
You're also wise enough to know that finding the person who's right for you requires a very subtle alchemy.
We think we know a thing or two about alchemy at TWO'S COMPANY !
We believe in a quietly considered approach to relationships, because we're rather sensitive to the way other people feel.
That's why we're so good at introducing people who belong together!
If you'd like to find out more about us, please contact us at:
TWO'S COMPANY — Where introductions are a gentle art!
JULIANA'S NO ORDINARY EXPERIENCE
With 24 years experience behind us we know what it takes to make an event stand out.
Our skilled team will assist in the design and planning of your event using our group's extensive resources.
With the upmost care and attention to detail we create exciting results.
Whether you require help with the entire event or would just like to use one of our discotheques we look forward to speaking to you.
JULIANA'S PARTY ORGANISING LTD.
akti myrina
For the discerning holiday makers wanting to get away from it all while enjoying all the luxury conveniences of top class accommodation, the AKTI MYRINA is the perfect choice.
The Hotel is a group of bungalows, like a village set among luxuriant vegetation, with quaint alleyways running down to its private sandy beach.
Accommodation comprises 110 twin bedded bungalows and 15 Duplex Suites each with its own shady terrace and small walled garden.
Other amenities include two heated swimming pools (one specially for children), private beach, three tennis courts, three dining rooms, grill room, open air seaside restaurant, bars, boutique, hair salon and disco.
Daily trips to the Island's many sandy bays with hotel's caique/island schooner and a variety of water sports.
In addition to the excellent service from our efficient and smiling staff, guests can enjoy delicious Greek and International Cuisine.
The location of this unique holiday retreat is on the unspoilt Island of Lemnos in the Aegean Sea, dotted with vineyards, almonds orchards and many archaeological sites.
Daily flights via Athens and Thessaloniki.
‘We met through Dateline’
You too can find love
If you would like a ‘love story’ of your own, someone to love and care for, and you are beginning to wonder where you can find that special person, come to Dateline.
Many tens of thousands of people of all ages and occupations, from all over the country, join Dateline every year looking for happiness and a loving partner.
The couples in our advertisements are just a few of the thousands who find it.
If you want to meet someone with the same hopes, ambitions and interests as yourself, and are simply not meeting them socially or at work, Dateline, the largest, longest established and most successful computer dating agency in the world, can open up a whole new circle of people; interesting, suitable people who could be living very close to you, people who you might never meet without Dateline's help.
To find out how Dateline could be successful for you, complete the coupon below and send it to us in complete confidence, and without any obligation.
We will send you FREE a full colour, comprehensive guide to how Dateline works, and ALSO a free copy of ‘All you need is Love’, a book full of genuine stories of how real Dateline members found their ‘perfect partner’.
This tells you more than any brochure possible could, the true story of Dateline…
Start your ‘love story’, by posting this coupon today to: Dateline   
You too can find love
‘We met through Dateline’
‘I met lots of different men at university but when I started work the opportunities for meeting single men were really limited.
I joined Dateline then and went out with one person I met for two years, but then I moved away with my work.
After a while I thought that as Dateline had been such a success the first time why not have some fun and do it again?
I do admit though that I really was looking for someone special!’
When Karen met Robert, teased by his description of himself as ‘one of the few people who has never seen the ‘Sound of Music’, she thought ‘nice…
I think I'm going to enjoy this!’
Robert, a 31 year old architectural technician, found her very attractive too, and felt that he definitely wanted to know her better.
For the next few weeks they went out one late night after another —‘I don't know how we survived,’ says Robert.
They are now together and Robert says ‘I am so happy having found someone I want to spend my life with.
I see people now in the same situation as I was before, unable to meet anyone, and they don't feel they can do anything about it, and I want to say ‘Yes you can!’
When you join Dateline not every date is going to be your ‘ideal person’ but you will find things to enjoy in 90% of the people you meet — and if you meet ‘that special person’it's the most wonderful bonus!’
‘I saw the Dateline ad. and thought of joining other smaller agencies, but thought I might as well get the best.’
‘The first night we met he gave me a bunch of flowers,’ says Denise.
‘I was speechless!’
‘Actually even if we hadn't wanted to see each other again she would have got the flowers,’ laughs Colin.
‘They were a token of appreciation for having the courage to turn up!’
‘Everything was so easy.
We chatted so much on that first date, and then Denise asked me out to dinner the next night.
I found her so refreshing — amusing and extrovert — and knew very quickly that we had something special.’
So special that three months later they were engaged.
‘I asked her to marry me that first night.’
Jean, 42 and divorced, has her own wool shop, not the most obvious place for meeting single men.
A friend of a friend had recently married through Dateline so she thought it seemed worth a try.
Barry had been divorced for twelve years, had been a member of Dateline but then had moved because of work.
He rejoined and his name appeared on Jean's first list.
When they met ‘Everything was so magnetic between us that I just didn't want to leave him,’ says Jean.
‘I actually asked her to marry me that first night, and she said yes,’ says Barry.
‘It may sound unbelievable, but we are such a good match.
I didn't get too much sleep that night though, wondering if I'd done the right thing!’
However Dateline was right about both compatibility and chemistry, and Barry and Jean married earlier this year.
If you would like a ‘love story’ of your own, someone to love and care for, and you are beginning to wonder where you can find that special person, come to Dateline.
Seventeen to Seventy…
Many tens of thousands of people of all ages and occupations, from all over the country, join Dateline every year looking for someone to love.
These are people who instead of waiting passively to see what life will bring, have decided not to leave their happiness to chance.
Every day couples meet who are amazed at how right they are for each other— proof that Dateline works!
If you want to meet someone with the same hopes, ambitions and interest as yourself, and are simply not meeting them socially or at work, Dateline, the largest longest established and most successful computer dating agency in the world combines personal service with the speed and efficiency of modern technology to open up a whole new circle of compatible people for you; interesting, suitable people who could be living very close, people who you might never meet without Dateline's help.
The world's largest most successful agency
The CHÂTEAUX and CUISINE of the WESTERN LOIRE.
What finer ENTENTE CORDIALE?
If you have an appetite for culture and gastronomy, the Western Loire is the place to go à la carte.
We've been cultivating both for centuries.
As you drive from our patchwork countryside into towns like Saumur, Angers, Nantes or Le Mans, your journey takes you back hundreds of years.
Here, you'll get an authentic taste of life as it was in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance.
At the Royal Abbey of Fonteyraud, for instance, and the château du Roi René at Angers, the original ambience has been restored with the help of the Caisse Nationale des Monuments Historiques et des Sites.
(You can enjoy the fruits of this organisation's work at 100 historical monuments throughout France.)
You can join us as we relive our history, too.
Because on summer nights, we put on spectacular pageants at châteaux like Le Lude and le Puy du Fou.
Or for a romantic touch, you can see many more of them beautifully illuminated from the rivers as you cruise on a boat over dinner.
You could even have a personalised château holiday, enjoying the hospitality of a family who may well have been in residence for generations.
In any event, you can be sure that you'll dine in grand style wherever you stay in the Western Loire.
On our menus, you'll find dishes like Loué chicken in a cider sauce, tender veal with pears in a rich sauce, seafood from our Atlantic coast, oysters and locally caught salmon, pike and perch in a beurre blanc Nantais sauce.
To wash them down, the wine list includes Anjou rosé, Muscadet and sparkling Saumur.
Ring  for a Western Loire information pack and the Brittany Ferries brochure.
With a heady blend of culture and cuisine, we offer the perfectly balanced holiday for connoisseur's of France.
Brittany Ferries give you the shortest drive to the Western Loire.
They have special rates and inclusive hotel and self-catering holidays.
Two-night packages from only £56.
TAKE A BREATHER.
If you're travelling to France, Ireland or Holland, why not start your holiday before you arrive?
On Sealink's ships you'll enjoy the benefits brought by a £178 million investment in our services.
We now offer you a wider range of routes than any other ferry company and are opening our Southampton-Cherbourg crossing to smooth your passage to Western France.
You can even leave your complete holiday arrangements to us: anything from a short break to a fortnight's package.
It's one way of ensuring your stay is as enjoyable as the journey.
FOR DETAILS OF ALL OUR SERVICES, CONTACT YOUR LOCAL TRAVEL AGENT, OR CALL US ON  (FERRY TRAVEL) OR  (HOLIDAYS).
TAKE A BREATHER AND HOLIDAY IN HOLLAND.
There's more to Holland than windmills, tulips and canals, but they're a start.
And to discover the rest of it, why not take a Sealink ferry from Harwich to the Hook of Holland?
You can plan your own trip from there, or ask us to help.
We can arrange your stay anywhere from the legendary delights of Amsterdam to the healthier calm of the Dutch countryside.
You could enjoy a week in a Center Parc (this is where they started), or pursue the more cultural charms of Breughel and Delft pottery.
So, pack your cycle clips and either pick up a brochure from your local travel agent or call us on freephone .
This summer, heighten VOTRE PLAISIR.
Drop in on LES SAVOY ALPS.
How would you like to take a hand glider swooping out over the waters of Lake Annecy or Lake Le Bourget?
Or would you prefer to venture on horseback through some of Europe's most dramatic mountain scenery?
Discover Savoy Alps this summer and you'll find holidays that suit tout le monde down to the ground.
In the tranquillity of our vast, national parks, there'll be a carpet of wild flowers stretching out before you.
The terrain's just as perfect for rambling or mountain biking as for exploring à cheval.
If you fancy scaling Mont Blanc, allez.
(A cable car will take you almost to le sommet.)
Or if a round of golf gives you a lift, you can play at the foot of this legendary mountain.
Our region's speckled with golf courses in breathtaking locations.
And the Savoy-Mont Blanc Golf Pass gives you a package of reduced green fees at any of them.
Perhaps you would prefer a crack at archery, however.
Or the hair-raising experience of shooting the rapids.
With our lakes and rivers, we've got watersports to rival any seaside resort.
And we're unrivalled for fitness holidays, because we invented them.
At the spa resorts of Evian and Aix-les-Bains, you can have les vacances which combine treatment, sport and relaxation.
Of course, if all these activités sound too énergetiques, you can soak up the scenery and immerse yourself in our natural convivialité.
You're well set for it with Apremont, our famous white wine, our cheeses which include Reblochon, Beaufort and Tomme de Savoie, as well as our delicious Gâteau de Savoie.
While you're spoiled for choice with activities in Savoy Alps, you've got a choice of accommodation which is equally splendide.
There are campsites, rural cottages, family-run hotels and extremely grand ones.
C'est à vous à décider.
Next year, our region will be hosting the Winter Olympics.
But if you come in the heat of summer, you'll find we're pleasantly free of les touristes.
For a Savoy Alps information pack and the Air France and Sealink Holidays brochures, just ring  (24 hours).
Enjoy the beauty of the Savoy Alps on a Sealink Holiday.
Prices for a family of four staying in an apartment for two weeks this June start at just £287 — and that's for the whole family!
For our brochure ring 0303 , quoting reference FG.
Air France flies direct to Lyons from Heathrow every morning and evening.
With more destinations in France, and departure points throughout the UK, Air France is the leading airline to France.
WISH YOU WERE HERE
Two superb family hotels, newly refurbished public areas — stay at one and you are free to use the facilities of both.
Mums and Dads can just relax and enjoy the leisure facilities, including Swimming Pools, Saunas, Solariums.
Children have their very own entertainers and a full programme keeping them occupied during the day and early evening (During Season and Bank Holidays).
SANDBANKS HOTEL
The ideal Family hotel, the Sandbanks is one of the only hotels in the area situated right on the beach, one of the very few in the UK to hold the coveted EEC Blue Flag Award for clean beaches.
Complete family holiday services include Children's Restaurant, Nursery and Activities.
All rooms are En-Suite, many with sun balconies and breathtaking views of either Poole Bay or Harbour, Rooms have Baby Listening, Tea and Coffee making facilities, Satellite TV, in-house Videos, Radio and Direct Dial Telephones.
CHINE HOTEL
Occupying one of Bournemouth's finest positions overlooking Poole Bay to the south as well as the beautifully landscaped Boscombe Chine Gardens.
Level of service is exceptional combining a warm, friendly atmosphere with real old-world charm and high standards of modern facilities.
All rooms are En-Suite and have Baby Listening, Tea and Coffee making facilities, Colour TV, in-house Videos, Radio and Direct Dial Telephones.
Extensive indoor and outdoor children's facilities and their own entertainer during season.