

EDITORIAL
THE BMC'S BUXTON FESTIVAL PROVIDED YET ANOTHER FORUM FOR THE BOLTS ISSUE TO BE DEBATED.
PETER EVANS WAS THERE TO HEAR THE PROTAGONISTS BATTLE IT OUT
So the great debate has taken place — and its overwhelming conclusion is that ‘the traditional ethos of British climbing’(stand up and define it anyone bold enough to try)‘is being endangered by sport climbing.’
The people have spoken, and though not with unanimous voice, in large enough numbers to make the message clear: the bolters need controlling if our crags are not to become clinical, sporting playgrounds where all you'll need is a rack of quick-draws and a chalk bag.
It may be fun, and on the harder routes it will certainly be physically demanding; but it will lack adventure and risk; will remove the judgement and skill required in the placement of protection; will emasculate climbing of its quintessence.
The audience at the British Mountaineering Council's Buxton Festival waited with baited breath as the debaters took the stage.
Would Jerry Moffatt and Chris Gore stand a chance against the fulminating frothings of Ken Wilson and the sober sophistry of Royal Robbins.
They didn't.
Ken, in the event neither fulminated nor frothed, and managed to restrict himself to a 15-minute speech in which he advanced some very cogent and well measured arguments for preventing bolting gaining the same sort of prominence it has in other countries — notably France and America.
Royal, who looks like a bit he's been carved out of rock, warned of what will happen if we follow in the wake of what's been going on in the States.
Catherine Destivelle issued a similar caveat from the floor about the situation in the Alps.
Jerry, Chris, Johnny Dawes and Pete Gomersall failed to convince the assembly that bolting is not a threat, and the vast majority of British climbers, it seems, want the bolters firmly kept in their place.
In the end this is a debate not about bolting versus traditional climbing, it's a debate about morality — about what goes on inside a climber's head when he look s at his (or her) environment.
We have to remember that we are not the only people who take recreation in the countryside; we share it with others, whose views about disfiguring a crag with bolts and taking a drill there to do it for goodness sake! may be very different from ours.
I have some sympathy with the bolters, having talked over the issues a lot in the past few months.
It must be incredibly frustrating to have the weight of climbing opinion against you if you're at the front end of the game and you want to climb a new line without considerable risk of topping yourself unless you place bolts.
But those at the front will be imitated, and I share Ken Wilson's fear for the future.
It's already beginning to happen as retro-bolting increases (see our Compass columns for an excellent example).
Climbers with fewer scruples than those prepared to weight the issues, will place bolts on ‘easier’ climbs, and we'll be on an escalator that's hard to stop.
Maybe I'm too cynical, but I find it difficult to accept Pete Gomersall's faith in human nature and the view that climbers will not step out of line and place bolts in the ‘wrong’ locations.
What's good about the debating is that people are talking about the rights and wrongs of bolting as a practice — and that has to be welcomed.
Unless we talk we won't reach conclusions that are acceptable to the majority.
I know there are those who would prefer anarchy to hold sway, but what they do is destroy everything about climbing most of us hold dear.
But we won't be deprived of it without a fight.
At the opening of the Buxton Festival, Lord Hunt (now a sprightly 80) made a heartfelt plea for the protection of the mountain environment worldwide.
Like oxygen bottles on Everest and increasing Himalayan tourism, bolting is something which has to be controlled.
I hope, as a climbing fraternity (and sorority) we can keep a grip on it.
Footnote:The BMC deserves a hearty slap on the back for the organisation of this year's festival and the quality of the speakers.
Paul Piana's presentation of the first free ascent of the Salathe Wall on E1 Cap will go down in history as one of the best ever.
Catherine Destivelle has established herself firmly on the big mountains scene again with her incredibly bold and gutsy free ascent of the Bonatti Pillar solo.
And watch out for the name Tomo Cesen figuring increasingly on the honours board of daring deeds.
Having seen and heard him at Buxton, I find it hard to believe claims that he did not solo the South Face of Lhotse: claims, in any case, which Cesen has countered with an explanation.
Jerry Moffatt (right) and Chris Gore in contemplative mood.
American visitor Royal Robbins.
(photos by Ed Douglas).
COMPASS
COMPILED BY STEVE DODD
THE COMMERCIAL OVERTONES OF CLIMBING
Revealed: another side to the Buxton bolts debate
Are bolts really the chosen weapons of British climbing's hypothetical assassins?
The question occupied the hearts and minds of hundreds at the conference, was tossed around in a rather lack-lustre debate, and sparked flames of pub argument long into the night.
But who is really the villain of the piece?
A glance at the vested interests of the four debaters, debating whether sports-climbing is threatening the traditional ethos of British climbing, throws up interesting comparisons.
Ken Wilson, long-term opponent of the idea that rock isn't dressed properly without stainless steel accessories, is climbing's most famous publisher.
His books have done so much to popularise the sport.
A quick visit to the Roaches the day after Buxton revealed dozens of the climbers' cars stretching along the road, and gritstone's most sculptural crag crawling with their occupants.
When I first visited the cliff 15 years ago, that level of congestion would have been unimaginable.
Why so many climbers unwittingly created so much visual pollution?
Could increasing commercialism have anything to do with it?
Who makes a profit from cramming more climbers on to our cliffs?
Ken does, this magazine does, the gear manufacturers certainly do.
American Ed Webster, one of the Buxton speakers, said a few days after visiting the Roaches that he had never seen so many climbers at a cliff.
Ken was ably assisted by seconder Royal Robbins, who has probably drilled more bolts than anyone else.
But those are aid bolts, of course, on huge multi-pitchers.
Does that make a difference, or did he and others just start the ball rolling?
Against them, Jerry Moffatt, the man who should have won the world championship but fell off his bike.
Jerry has obvious vested interests to protect.
He makes, by all accounts, a very nice living from sport climbing.
He used to be the boldest man around, of course, but bolts mean he can now earn that living without risking his life.
Chris Gore, who was Jerry's seconder, earns his keep from the sport too, as technical adviser for Merrell, the American boot company.
On the whole, very good reasons for keeping both cliffs and pockets as full as possible.
The debate itself was marred by the inexperience of the speakers.
Only Ken Wilson seemed to have  grasped the essentials of public argument.
Royal Robbins spoke with some stature, but little cohesion, and Jerry and Chris smiled a lot, but said little.
The vote at the end, taken on a show of hands, proved a decisive victory for the forces of tradition (editorial, p2)
Ed Webster: amazed at numbers on Roaches (photos, Ed Douglas).
Jerry Moffatt: making the case for bolting.
MAGNUS FINDS HIMSELF IN THE HOT SEAT
Quizmaster Magnus Magnusson KBE has landed in the hot seat himself.
A month ago he chaired the first meeting of the ‘great and the good’ who make up the Cairngorms Working Party.
The Secretary of State for Scotland decided who should go to the party, but it appears that you had to be rich, a local landowner or preferably both to receive an invitation.
There was a token minority of conservationists and poor Eric Langmuir, having to wear half a dozen recreational hats.
It seems that by leaving mountaineers off the working party, the organisers have forgotten this is a mountain range.
A mountaineer of repute, whether local or not, is conspicuous by his or her absence.
A similar fate befell Adam Watson, who subsequently called for the quizmaster's resignation.
Adam probably knows more about the Cairngorms than anyone, which of course explains his absence.
You can't have a working party member who knows more than the quizmaster!
RADICAL REVISION FOR EIGER CLASSIC
Heinrich Harrer's classic account of the first ascent of the North Face of the Eiger in 1938,The White Spider , is to be published in a radically revised and updated version later this year.
Harrer's original story was published in 1959, and has been continually in print ever since — something of a rarity for a climbing book.
The last English edition was in 1976, and Harrer has extensively updated the story of the climb that the Guinness Book of Records once dubbed ‘The Meanest Mountain on Earth’.
In the 80s an American writer published a complete history of the mountain, entitled Eiger, Wall of Death , which was heavily slated by mountaineers for its sensationalist writing (the author had never climbed the route)— but it still sells well in the Grindelwald.
Harrer's new book will be called The Book of the Eiger , and is scheduled for release by Hodder and Stoughton in August.
The same publisher is also bringing out new books by Victor Saunders and Jim Curran, and a ‘field guide’ by Richard Gilbert for those of you would bought Big Walks ,Classic Walks and Wild Walks , but need even more information spoon-fed to you before you'll leave the car.
BMC GIVES CASH SUPPORT TO BRITISH EXPEDS
Decision will aid ‘unglamorous’ peak bids
Victor Saunders: set for peak bid with London team (photo, Dave Willis).
The spirit of 1992 and European unity could get you on a freebie to the Himalayas.
A French-led team, which claims to have European Community cash behind it, has contacted the British Mountaineering Council asking if any British climber would be interested in joining a multi-European team to Gasherbrum I in 1992.
A great gimmick and I wish I'd thought of it.
Actually, the BMC doesn't know all the details yet and it's highly probable you'll have to come up with a bit of cash yourself, but if you're keen call Roger Payne on .
Meanwhile, 30 British expeditions have won BMC approval and grant aid this year.
Julian Freeman-Atwood and a very strong London team of Steve Sustad, Mick Fowler and Victor Saunders are off to attempt Ultar, a 7,000 metre unclimbed peak in the Karakorum.
The got £1,800 in grants from the BMC.
David Wilkinson leads a team (backed by £2,200 of BMC cash) to Chongkumdan, another unclimbed 7,000 metres plus summit in the Indian Karakorum.
BMC national officer Roger Payne explained that the policy at the BMC is to try and give funding to experienced groups of British climbers attempting the sort of peaks which provide a strong technical challenge but are unlikely to get commercial sponsorship, simply because no-one apart from climbers has ever heard of them.
It would be easy enough (in theory) to get money for Everest or K2, but if Mick and Vic turned up at the doors of a giant multi-national with the word ‘Ultar’ on their portfolio, they might well be shown the corporate door.
Andrea Stimpson, who recently climbed The Nose on Yosemite's El Capitan, is leading an all-woman team to the Karakorum to attempt a sub-5,000 metre pack this August.
Veteran climber mike Banks, who's now 67-years-old, is again giving hope to the rest of us when he takes a team with an average age of 60 plus out to Janoli in the Gharwal Himal.
A RECIPE FOR DISASTER
Stewart Hulse, team leader of the Langdale and Ambleside Mountain Rescue Team, has some harsh words for youth groups who set out onto the Lakeland Fells, determined to complete their objectives at all costs.
His comments come in the team's 1991 Yearbook, where he condemns the ‘win at all cost’ attitude of the 90s, and the danger those attitudes bring if taken into the mountains.
‘I find that the concept of certain youth expeditions undertaken in wild country areas can, in my opinion, unless strictly controlled, be downright dangerous!’ he writes.
‘The fear of failure to gain a personal award, or a self-promotion which is linked to an outdoor pursuit, can be fraught with danger and detract from the ethics of basic mountaineering.
There is a school of thought that to give personal rewards to youngsters for attempting an outdoor pursuit can cloud one's thinking.
In fact to fail, no matter how legitimate, can be seen as a disaster both to the participant and the organisation he or she represents.’
Steward cites the medical reasons given for rescue team callouts by friends of youngsters who have collapsed in the hills.
It reads like a medical dictionary: fractures, viral infections, flu, fainting, blisters, food poisoning, sprained ankles and ligaments, exposure, sun stroke, heat stroke, dehydration and 50 different types of allergies.
‘I have no doubt,’ comments Stewart, ‘that one or two of those medical symptoms are genuine; but the main problem for these youngsters collapsing and feeling very ill is just plain exhaustion, or to put it in simple mountaineering  jargon — physically knackered.’
N-ICE WORK BY FOWLER IN DEVON
The north-west Highlands, Ireland, mid-Wales, St Pancras station.
All familiar targets for the ice-climbing aspirations of Londoner Mick Fowler, who has now added Devon to his winter itinerary.
This year's freeze, the first reasonable winter conditions in years, tempted Mick, a trained geologist, to ferret around in his stock of Ordnance Survey maps looking for the word ‘waterfall’.
The result — a 700 per cent increase in Devon's winter climbing.
The waterfall next to the summer route of Pressure Drop at Speke's Mill Mouth, on the Culm coast, was first on the list, providing a 70 foot grade III/IV.
Then it was back to Mick's summer stamping ground at Henna Cliff, one which Mick dubiously claims is getting ‘very popular’, and climbed Henna Fall (grade III/IV and claimed as a three-star 95 foot classic).
The county's only existing ice-climb, Salute the Admiral, was graced with a direct finish, then Mick and team moved to Cornakey Cliff, the site of the classic summer VS, Wreckers' Slab.
This provided meatier fare — a 550 foot grade III, aptly named Drive Because You Have To.
The name comes from the press hysteria about driving conditions that weekend…the country gripped in an evil blizzard…skid-pan Britain…a new ice-age.
As it turned out, most roads were fine, but there were dire warnings from the traffic organisations to drive only if your journey was strictly necessary.
Mick ruefully admits to one small entanglement with a tractor on the snow-covered roads to Hartland, but undeterred collected other routes along the coast over the winter.
Mick's also been typically busy in the Highlands this winter, climbing new routes with Dave Wills (whom Mick describes as ‘a lunatic New Zealander’, the highest form of Fowler accolade) and others on Skye, Fuar Tholl and Mainreachan Buttress.
He hasn't neglected the chalk either, adding Mr Angry — a 190 foot grade V — to the white cliffs of Dover.
The name comes from the chap who lives in the house at the top of the cliff, who became ‘exceptionally angry’ and rang the police.
Fortunately they saw the funny side.
Mick Fowler: Devon now figures in winter itinerary
RETRO — BOLTING RUBICON
The British Mountaineering Council's Buxton thrash got excellent press coverage in the ‘quality’ nationals this time round.
The Daily Telegraph sports supplement carried large colour pictures of star speaker Catherine Destivelle, who also featured in The Times .
The Independent featured a long news article about the Great Bolt Debate, written by Stephen Goodwin, an Indy staff newsman who, I'm reliably informed, is rather a good climber.
The article told us that the climbers meeting at Buxton ‘firmly turned their backs on seductive French influences to make their sport safe’.
The article was accompanied by that old picture you've all seen before of Jonny Woodward on Beau Geste at Froggatt, described in the caption as a ‘prime potential target for bolting’.
Hardly likely.
More trivial gossip from Buxton.
Ian MacNaught Davies, you future president, arrived at the post-thrash climbing session at the Roaches in a huge G registered Mercedes.
Full marks for style, but how on earth is he going to cope when environmental matters are on the agenda?
Tomo Cesen, the man who almost certainly climbed the South Face of Lhotse but forgot to take any pictures, arrived for his session with a highly professional career package.
His state-of-the-art audio-visual was stunning, and he already has the book of the film of the climbs in print.
It's called ‘Sam’— Yugoslavian for ‘alone’— and has a series of stunning shots of his solo exploits in the Alps and Himalayas.
This man understands the need to get the product on the market at the right time.
And gossip arrived that Rubicon, the overhanding, classic limestone E4 in Water-cum-Jolly, had been retrobolted!
I cannot possibly reveal the name of the alleged culprit, because at the time of going to press he's taken a well-deserved holiday in the ardeche from his climbing wall company
(see P.56 for a photo special).
Buxton heavyweights: From left to right, Lord Hunt, Ian MacNaught Davies and Chris Bonington photo Ed Douglas).
Tomo Cesen (Ed Douglas).
PEN TRWYN ANCHORS
Climbing on Upper Pen Trwyn, above the Marine Drive in Llandudno, should be legal again by the end of the summer.
Already some groups have been discretely visiting the cliff, but the BMC would appreciate it if some people could continue to obey the present climbing ban until new abseil stations (the familiar two-bolts-and-a-chain) are in place.
Work on drilling more than 100 anchors should already have started by the time you read this.
They are needed to avoid the loose rock above the climbs, and in any event will make this excellent semi-sporting climbing venue an even more attractive proposition.
So stay away until they've been drilled, or Aberconwy District Council will stop the fun for everyone.
Rap-stations are also being drilled at Cheddar, so those of you who've had your appetite whetted by Pat Littlejohn's excellent new South-West Climbs and want to sample the delights of the Ginsberg Wall will have even more reason to visit this excellent, albeit usually freezing, venue.
The new guide should be out by October, too.
Now how many times have you heard that?
QUOTE OF THE MONTH
Quote of the Buxton Conference came from American Paul Piana, whose audio-visual about the first free ascent of the Salathe Wall on El Cap proved to be a masterpiece of comedy.
Paul began the show with a few mouth-watering shots of American roadside crags.
‘They've proved very popular,’ he said.
‘Some of them are just minutes from the road.
In fact, some climbers have even been known to crash their cars into them.’
Paul Piana (Dave Willis)
RANGE WAR
OFF BELAY
JIM PERRIN GOES TRESPASSING ON A MILITARY RANGE, BUT FAILS TO FORCE A CONFRONTATION OVER ACCESS
Right: David Cook below the 170 foot unclimbed wall.
Let there be no mistake about this — the purpose of our visit was ‘criminal trespass’.
Or at least, that's how the military and its bylaws term our walking along the coast and climbing on the cliffs between Stack Rocks and Linney Head, which form the westernmost part of the Castlemartin peninsula in South Pembroke.
Dave Cook and myself planned to force a confrontation with the military over the issue of access to Range West.
In the event, the military offered rather less opposition to us than the  Iraqis did to them: which was a mixed blessing.
I'd broken my heel the week before whilst soloing at Pex Hill!
Hobbling into Range West on crutches, with a rope round my shoulders, I was looking forward to the expressions of disbelief that would have greeted my reply to sentries' questions about what I was doing.
But they weren't there, so it was free range and no chickens all the way!
There's a context of polarities to be outlined here.
At one extreme is the Ministry of Defence, determined to hang on to its exclusive tenure of Range West and, with the exception of half a dozen conducted walks it's prepared to allow from Stack Rocks to Freshwater West every summer, to keep out the public.
In that aim it is abetted both by nature conservation bodies — duped by the MoD's tendentious Defence and the Environment prospectus of three years ago, into believing that the area's interests are best served by the public being kept out — and by factions within the Pembrokeshire Coast National Park Authority, most of them with a military background, who also tug their forelocks to that aim.
At the other extreme is the stance taken on the MoD's continuing tenure, which insists that it is not proper that the public continue to be excluded some of the time from all, and all of the time from some, of the finest coastal scenery in the British Isles.
In The Guardian ten years ago, the former editor Alastair Hetherington described the situation most succinctly when he confessed to having ‘trespassed’ here himself  and to finding the situation ‘a national scandal’.
In between these two extremes comes the large mass of honourable and intelligent outdoor enthusiasts who listen to the frothings and bayings back and forth between the two factions with alarm, but without the detailed information from both sides which would enable them freely and democratically to make up their own minds, and if necessary bring their concerted pressure to bear on one side or the other to desist.
Where Dave Cook and myself fit into this scheme is debatable.
Politically, we're both of the idealistic left, and were comrades together in the Communist Party for many years.
This commitment, and the overall pacifist, pro-feminist, libertarian, green and non-exploitative ethos we espouse has generally led to our expressed opinions on the Pembroke Ranges issue being greeted with scepticism and distrust by the climbing establishment.
It is an establishment which still, rather too easily, defaults to a competitive, male-dominated and achievement-oriented set of attitudes and values which finds itself — as evidence by a plethora of Pembroke route names — in easy sympathy with militarism.
For all that, as far as I'm concerned, so long as the debate is pursued fully, openly, and in a spirit of dialectical integrity, its outcome is secondary.
I do not mind being told what I cannot do, so long as I can accede to an adequate reason why.
This latter is what, in 20 years of campaigning to get public access to Range West, has never been accorded to me or to anyone else who has raised the issue.
Birds are invariably brought into the equation by the army.
This is abject Realpolitik .
The interests of birds are patently not best served by proximity to military manoeuvres and firing, however much exclusive use of the quiet times is relished by those who study them.
Those who acquiesce in this cynical co-incidence of interest would do well to apply themselves to the conclusions of the recent Ramblers' Association study on Birds and Walkers : ‘this work suggests that there is no reason to prohibit public access, but that careful management is required.
In the busiest areas there is every reason to find ways of making access compatible with maintaining a breeding population…‘
The record of climbers in observing voluntary agreements to avoid particular cliffs during breeding seasons in recent years is, I would suggest, exemplary.
Can the same be said of military firing at those times?
No Activity
The question of the frequency of military use of these ranges is also worth considering in detail.
A circular is sent out regularly from Castlemartin to interested parties, giving the dates on which military exercises on the ranges are supposed to take place.
Whilst I was in Pembroke on this February visit, three separate people in positions to know volunteered the information that ‘often as not’ on the given dates, no firing or activity takes place.
The army's next line of defence concerns the use of live ammunition.
Range West, military spokesmen claim, ‘is quite different from Range East in this respect.
There are unexploded shells lying around and live firing takes place there.’
When Colin Mortlock and myself initiated the first phase of exploration on these cliffs in the 60s, we negotiated an access agreement with the commandant of the Castlemartin camp.
It depended on our signing indemnity waivers, freeing the military authorities from responsibility should we be blown to smithereens by the unexploded shells then deemed to be scattered freely across both Range West and Range East.
Armed with this indemnity, we went freely into both ranges.
Is not the MoD now being rather less than frank in changing its story, claiming Range East is safe whilst Range West is not?
What about the cattle which our bird and animal loving army allows to graze on the latter, or do they not matter?
This is just some of the background to the debate as to whether access should be gained or desired to Range West.
The climbing world's response over the years has been ambivalent.
The BMC's current view is a wanly pragmatic notion that this is not a good time to raise the issue.
But when is?
I've climbed or just walked in Range West on many occasions.
So have dozens of other climbers who adopt our community's traditional response to an inadequately justified prohibition.
On the other hand, though, all descriptions of climbing here were excluded from the last Pembroke guide by the Climbers' Club's editor for the volume.
Why?
Guide writers have a traditional obligation to honour the historical record, alongside their duty to point out present circumstances.
The CC is greatly at fault to have ignored this.
That's why Cookie and myself went down there.
We did a single unimportant new route on the western end of the cliffs at The Wash.
It was HVS, loose, and less than 100 long.
No Peace for the Wicked we called it.
In the logbook at the Climbers' Club's May Cottage we wrote up the details and history of all climbing activity in Range West.
Whether or not the new guidebook's editor includes all this in his volume will be a test of his, and the club's position and historical responsibility.
To the right of the route we did is a leaning wall with two of the most dramatic and difficult lines left even in Pembroke.
Non-tidal and desperately steep, they'll be too hard for an old fart like me; but round the corner is a huge, blocky, roofed sweep of rock on which I'd reckon to stand a chance.
I'll be back beneath it when the bird bans come off the rest of this stretch of coast on August 15th, unless the military gives me a very good reason not to in the interim.
And if I can't get in by land, they have no powers to stop me doing so by sea.
Meanwhile, I stand here as self-confessed criminal trespasser, though one who has done no harm and will continue to show every care for this precious environment.
If the military really believes in the justification of its exclusive stance, then let it stick to its guns and prosecute me for my actions.
I await its summons, and as a preliminary response, end with two lines from Blake's Milton : ‘If you account it Wisdom when you are angry to be silent, and Not to shew it, I do not account that Wisdom, but Folly…‘
Right: David Cook below the 170 foot unclimbed wall.
QUALITY CLIMBS
By Bill Birkett
SWORD OF GIDEON
Unpronounceable Gaelic and secretive Scottish ways have shrouded the magnificence of the climbing to be had in the North West of Scotland.
Maybe this is no bad thing, maybe it's a damned shame; but whatever your point of view, make no mistake there is quality rock climbing here in abundance.
Add the wilderness feel, a unique mountain landscape and you have the recipe for something special.
The rose coloured Torridonian sandstone on Sword of Gideon is superb, perfect, a revelation.
On the middle pitch, with its grain as fine as sandpaper, you will be hard pushed to find a single loose hold.
I checked carefully and didn't find one.
A steep, wall as clean as a whistle, without a scrap of vegetation.
While the first and last pitches are pleasant, it is the steep, sustained middle section that elevates this route to a climb of memorable quality.
A combined series of moves that give it a keen cutting edge; an experience to be remembered and savoured; a problem that takes both skills and nerve to solve.
Immediately the halfway ledge is vacated, the groove becomes steep and baffling, demanding a subtle use of existing holds to locate further unknown holds.
Protection is spaced.
Then the groove runs out (there is a good runner) and a bold, balance foot smear traverse leads left to a recess.
The crack above is quite awkward to start, but press on to finish this long pitch in one.
To halt would break its perfection.
Tom Patey appears to have soloed this first ascent on the buttress — of the area.
Quite remarkable, and although it's a difficult route to grade, I feel it's closer to Hard Very Severe than the traditional Very Severe.
I can't imagine anyone reversing the delicate traverse — although I think the groove below is technically harder.
So alone and unroped he must have had to tackle the daunting vertical crack above, knowing he was fully committed.
That's real adventure — bright enough to shine through the densest of Scottish mists.
SWORD OF GIDEON — APPLECROSS
Sword of Gideon:350 (104m), HVS (5a).
First Ascent:Tom Patey, 1961 Location:Buttress One, Sgurr a'Chaorachain, above the pass of Bealach na Ba, Applecross.
Map Ref:NG 789413.
Guidebook:Rock Climbing in Scotland by Kevin Howett Rock and Protection:Torridonian sandstone of immaculate quality; small to medium Rocks and Friends.
Access:Possibly the most accessible climb in Scotland once the driving is over.
It lies directly above the Loch Kishorn to Applecross road on the south side of the famous Bealach na Ba pass.
It is best reached from Inverness via the A835, Fort William via the A872, A87, A890.
Nearing the head of the pass on its south side (the right side driving up), are a number of clean and compact buttresses.
Drive beneath them until a spacious pull-in/layby is reached on the right, just past the crags.
Stroll up the hillside to the first (nearest) buttress, reached in a couple of minutes.
Observations:Paradoxically, in this far flung Applecross region of the North West Highlands, this is a south facing, roadside crag.
The rock is the most perfect sandstone imaginable; the situation incomparable.
It makes sense to gear up at the car — as the descent leads logically back to this point.
Descent:Traverse leftwards until easy ground leads down to the road.
The Route:An obvious horizontal break runs into the toe of the buttress from the side (about 30ft up), and it is logical to start from a little corner at the end of this.
1.
150ft (45m),(3c).
Move up and left, then continue more or less directly (making it as difficult as possible) to reach the large halfway ledge and the start of the real meat.
Move right to belay by a shallow corner.
2.
120ft (35m),(5a).
Climb the groove above which is surprisingly awkward and blind until (after about 45ft) it runs out.
Step down and make a delicate traverse left to move up into a recess and small ledge.
It is possible to belay here, but much better to continue.
Gain and climb the distinct crack above, awkward to start, until it eases beneath a small overhang.
Move right to a corner and climb this steeply to a ledge — belay here.
3.
80ft (24m),(3b).
Move right and climb the pleasant walls and rib above to the top and a broken blocks belay.
Left: The steep groove which opens the magnificent second pitch.
Climber Trevor Jones (photos, Birkett).
Right: The final rib gives pleasant climbing on immaculate Torridonian sandstone.
Under the Gorge
WITH THE AVON GORGE'S MAIN WALL CLOSED TO CLIMBERS FOR AT LEAST THREE YEARS, GAVIN NEWMAN TAKES A LOOK AT WHAT'S BEEN HAPPENING
Since the 1950s, tunnellers have been busy working away under Bristol creating a huge network of tunnels.
These provide the city's sewage and rainwater drainage needs and run all the way to the main water treatment works near Avonmouth.
In places these tunnels actually run along the gorge, under the River Avon.
So far the city is ringed by tunnels on three sides and the purpose of the ‘Northern Foul Water Intercept’ is to make a northern link between these tunnels and the main drain down to Avonmouth.
Since the main climbing area has been closed, a ten metre deep, four metre diameter shaft has been sunk in the old car park area next to the toilet block/bouldering wall.
Towering above this is a fixed crane  derrick used to haul equipment and spoil from the shaft.
If anyone out there wants a crane, makes an offer to Bristol Works Department in about three years' time — they bought it cheap (£16,000) because nobody else wanted a crane that couldn't be moved about easily!
From the base of the shaft, the main drain to Avonmouth is only about one metre away in the direction of the river.
This one metre section, however, will be the very last part of the connection to be made.
By January 1991, the tunnellers were about ¾km in from the shaft, somewhere beneath Clifton College.
At the shaft head the tunnel is ten metres beneath the surface, although it immediately deepens by 67m as it passes under the gorge wall.
The initial section of the tunnel had to be dug by hand until there was enough space to lay the railway needed to carry the drilling rigs.
Due to the tunnel going through several types of rock of varying hardness, the tunnellers cannot use a tunnelling machine like the ones used in the Channel tunnel work.
A heavyweight machine to cut the hard rock would sink in the soft sections, and a lightweight machine couldn't cut through the hard rock sections.
This Catch 22 means that the tunnel is excavated by more traditional blasting techniques.
Depending on the rock type, the tunnel is either self supporting or shored with metal arches and stabilised by spraying the walls with concrete.
Eventually, the complete tunnel will be lined with a concrete shell, reducing its diameter to approx 3½ metres.
The mining operation goes on 24hrs a day, supported by over 20 miners and engineers.
As well as the ventilation system, the tunnel also has to be constantly pumped to remove groundwater seeping into it.
The tunnel is running in several straight legs under Bristol, following a very small gradient to create the required flow.
A laser system ensures the tunnellers stay on track.
So far, the only physical effects on the climbing areas is the wire mesh covering the upper part of the cliff face immediately above the month of the shaft.
This will eventually be removed when the works are finished.
Reinforced fencing has also had to be installed along the top of the cliff face to try and reduce the danger of people committing suicide by jumping off the top.
Since starting work on the site the workmen have had to contend with three ‘jumpers’— one still inside his car!
Fortunately, so far, no one below has been hit.
The tunnelling of Phase 1 of the project from the gorge site is scheduled to take three years to three and a half years to complete.
At this stage, it is uncertain whether Phase 2 of the project, towards the Feeder Road side of Bristol, will also be operated from the gorge shaft.
If this does prove to be the case, then the Main Wall area will be closed to climbers for an unspecified time.
The only slight consolation is the plan to develop the site once the works are completed.
It is proposed to extend the car parking facilities with improved amenities and probably a café replacing the old caravan snack bar.
Concrete spraying inside the tunnel (photo by the author)
HILLWALKING
THE CONON CORBETTS
HAMISH BROWN DESCRIBES A GROUP OF HILLS THAT ARE OFTEN ADMIRED, BUT SELDOM CLIMBED
A farmer had a load of unwanted sawdust so piled it at the end of his drive with a notice: ‘Free sawdust — help yourself’.
After two weeks nobody had taken any.
He then changed the notice to ‘Sawdust for sale’.
Within two days it had all been mysteriously removed !
The moral of this tale you can carry away at the end of my story of two Corbetts.
From Achnasheen and curlew-loud Strath Bran, or up on Foinavon, the eye is caught by a group of hills to the south east.
They rise, a coronet of tops, beyond the glitter and goo of Strath Bran, looking quite unapproachable.
For years I'd intended to climb them sometime, but psychologically they are very skilled at keeping aspiring visitors away.
Just how do you reach them?
That I discovered when on quite another ploy — with a school gang visiting any Telford churches we could discover (information on them being scarce in those days).
Thomas Telford is better known for such engineering feats as the Menai Suspension Bridge or the Caledonian Canal, or roads and bridges throughout the Highlands.
He also built 32 churches in remote places, from Shetland to the Outer Isles, Mull, Islay and in the straths of Bran and Conon.
Not knowing more than that, we had a long drive up the Conon before we came on the church — which is sited right below what we thereafter called ‘The Conon Corbetts’.
Probably the most accessible Telford church is the Strath Bran one at Lochluichart, by the A832 Garve-Achnasheen road.
All Telford's churches were built to a standard style, so when you see one you'll recognise others, even if later alterations have added porches, changed windows into doors and such like.
They are all small and simple, with a tiny lantern belfry on one gable and always four windows on the sides.
Two windows have been changed to doors in the Strath Conon church, buy the pattern still holds.
The stark simplicity was needed to keep within the £1,500 budget allowed for church and manse.
Having noticed the hills were well defended to the north, this in itself became something of a challenge, and on my Groats End Walk , having met a friend off the train at Achanalt, we followed the only practical tracks south from there, which skirted out peaks on their east flanks.
Between Achanalt and Achnasheen there are no real breaches in their defence system.
The Bran is deep, the bogs are deeper and the moors offer further resistance.
The Conon Corbetts are reached most easily by Strath Conon, which means starting on minor roads at either Muir of Ord or Marybank — places now much more off-route with the fast western approach via the Black Isle Bridge.
Probably the quickest approach from the south is to cross the Black Isle (which is neither black nor an island) and take the A832 from the Tore roundabout to Muir or Ord and Marybank, where the glen road is signposted.
The lower strath is well wooded and has two lochs, which are basically reservoirs — part of a complex hydro scheme: Lock Achonachie and Loch Meig.
The main river of the strath is not called Conon but Meig and its headwaters rise on the slopes of Moruisg/Ceannaichean above Achnashellach, giving a through route which was once as busy as Strath Bran but now only sees the rare backpacker with an eye for good cross-country walking.
From Scardroy, where the public motor road ends, there is another old drovers' route through to Loch Gowan and Achnasheen, so even without a car some interesting trips could be made taking in the Conon Corbetts by using post bus and train services.
Chilly Changes.
My first attempt on these hills ended at about 1500 feet when two of us were simply blasted off, which I suppose served us right for even setting out on a morning dark and grey as a used Brillo pad.
But it is a long way to upper Strath Conon, especially from the Welsh Marches, whence my companion had drive.
The situation reminded me of an announcement made on a flight over the Himalayas.
‘ You are fortunate to fly Air Nepal ladies and gentlemen.
Air India would not fly in weather like this.’
Or the Tuareg saying that ‘if you walk in the desert you get sand in your shoes,’ the aquatic equivalent being that if you go on the Scottish hills you stand a fair chance of being hammered.
When I did finally traverse the hills it was on a spring day of constantly changing conditions, all of them chilly.
The lower slopes glowed with sunshine on old bracken, the upper slopes glittered with sunshine on new snow and, in between, there was and is a great deal of heather, which makes the group appear dark and glowering from many viewpoints.
The Telford church is a suitable place to start and you can just angle up the hillside to gain the ridge to Creag Ruadh,the red crag , a good first viewpoint.
Meallan nan Uan,little hill of the lambs , sticks out as a sharp cone, and a grand highway leads along to its double top, with unusual views of familiar ranges lying in every direction.
Hail and sleet showers swept over the ridge, and the Torridon giants, which rose as distant black battlements when seen from Meallan nan Euan, had changed to seemingly nearer whitewashed walls by the time I'd dropped and climbed.
Sgurr a'Mhuilinn,the peak of the mill — at 879m the highest of the group.
The cold, even in the golden fragments of sun, was biting.
Miserable wheatears looked as if they wished they had stayed in Africa.
Good intentions of traversing the other hills were frozen out.
I headed for home.
The south east ridge leads down into a bowl of porridge-like peat, so I bore off eastwards, still rough enough, into the paring wind, crossing the Allt an t-Strathain Mhoir high up to drop down to the church.
The rest of the day was spent by lonely Loch Beannacharain at the head of the glen.
It was January before I came back.
The forecast had been dismal but wrong.
Dawn ‘beat the twilight into flakes of fire’ as I cycled up Gleann Meinich.
The whole north flank is steep and rough, and rocky Creag Ghlas jagged up as a dark prow over the green smother of spruce.
I left the cycle near a ruin and followed up the burn beyond.
Eventually I came out of the leeward shadows into ‘the gleaming halls of morn’ and, bliss at last, walked on firm snow instead of haggling through heather.
Sgurr a'Ghlas Leathaid is the dominant peak in the view from Achnasheen, so there was a smug satisfaction in being on it at long last.
There was a delicate, crystal clarity and I sat and wrote out all the names of the hills in sight.
‘As fine a view as possible,’ I summed up.
‘And not even a Corbett.’
Sgurr a'Choire Rainich,the peak of the heathery corrie , is the secondary ‘horn of this north west thrust of hill, and called for another long pause to gaze over ‘the ever silent spaces of the East.’
(A day of Tennyson you'll notice, all from Tithonus — not Ulysses , which tempts with more outdoor ‘quotes’ and book titles than any other poem.)
Maybe, of course, I was the ‘white-haired shadow roaming like a dream.’
Beard and moustache, as well as hair, were white with hoar.
Snow bunting were flitting about the lochan on the walk over to Sgurr a'Mhuilinn.
Loch Coire a'Mhuilinn was frozen over but crazed with cracks — a lonely spot which would make an evocative campsite.
That day I never wanted to descend, and lingered till the sun set beyond the towers of Torridon.
The descent through the forest is best glossed over.
Some of it I battered down backwards, having had visions of leaving and eyeball dangling on a branch like a festive light.
The cycle chain came off twice on the three miles back to the van, but I couldn't be cross.
The day had been too good to smudge with complaints.
In the breathy calm I was able to sit outside for supper, under a sky powdered with stars, limpid river sounds in the background, and a very proper glass of peaty, river-coloured liquid in hand.
I drank to the Conon Corbetts, glad, as st Augustine wrote, that ‘men go out to wonder at the Mountain Heights.’
Useful Maps Bartholomew 55, OS Landranger 25 and 26.
Photo: Meallan nan Uan and Sgurr a'Mhuilinn.
(Photo: Hamish Brown).
MOURNE MEANDERINGS
CELEBRATED IN SONG, NORTHERN IRELAND'S MOURNE MOUNTAINS OFFER ESCAPE AND SOLITUDE FOR HILL WALKERS SEEKING A HAVEN AWAY FROM THE CROWDS
If you are like me, and feel hopelessly inadequate having toiled to the top of your favourite peak in what seemed to be ‘the worst weather I've seen for years,’ only to come across a party equipped with jeans, trainers, and Tescos bags, then the Mourne Mountains are for you.
Not that the weather is any less prone to wetness in the Mournes than elsewhere, or that the slopes are any less steep.
It's simply that on even the sunniest days you are unlikely to meet other walkers in the sorts of numbers typical elsewhere.
The mournes are one of the best kept secrets of the British Isles, which is strange considering they aren't exactly inconspicuous, are celebrated in both song and verse and are featured prominently in every piece of literature ever published by the Northern Irish tourist boards.
Despite being reached from Belfast in less than an hour, and despite the fact that Slieve Donard towers 850m above Newcastle, one of Northern Ireland's most popular seaside resorts, the hills are rarely visited.
This is a mixed blessing for those of us who have been tramping the mountains for years.
Mixed because you can find real solitude in the Mournes, but lack of people often means a lack of facilities.
This has changed only a little over the years, but more recently the need for some sort of central policy for the area has increased.
In only the last two years I've noticed that more people are being drawn to the hills in Northern Ireland.
Still in relatively few numbers, and luckily it seems mostly enthusiasts — the tourists haven't blazed a trail to the top of Donard in the way they have on Snowdon or Nevis.
Recently the National Trust announced it had bought large areas of the Mournes, including Binnian and Donard, so with good management, facilities and access might improve without the area losing its appeal.
The Lake District might boast summits that are, on average, 500ft higher, and the crags of Snowdonia may well be more numerous and forbidding, but the Mournes are a challenge for other reasons.
Consult the 1:25000 O.S. map of the area and the reason is immediately apparent.
Where are the paths?
The few paths that do exist stay strictly to the valleys.
The result is that should you strive for the tops, you plot your own route and live with the consequences.
Not that this should put off the more cautious or less experienced, because although the Mournes are no place to be when the mist is thick and low, the famous Mourne Wall is never far away and provides an excellent point of reference.
The wall was built by the water authorities to secure the catchment area of the splendid Silent Valley and Ben Crom reservoirs, and for many years marked the route of the annual Mourne Wall Walk, which followed the wall for much of its 22 mile circuit and was the only occasion when walkers could be seen on the hills en masse.
Several years ago the authorities decided that the mountains needed time to ‘rest’ from such a massive intrusion, and the walk has never been held since.
This isn't such a bad thing: the Mournes never looked comfortable with so many people tramping them at once.
Tolerant Farmers
Far from being a no-go area for the inexperienced, the Mournes are ideal for those with the spirit of adventure.
They have all you could need to test your mountain skills in relative safety.
Access is easy, for although the car parks are few, they are strategically placed, and I've not yet come across a walker with tales of local farmers barring the way.
This understanding may be due to the farmers being highly tolerant because there are so few walkers, but if you've ever sat down to have a chat with a shepherd on the windy fellsides you might be more likely to say that tolerance and friendliness is in their nature.
One year, a few days after Christmas, I was walking in the Slieve Muck area.
It had been dark for an hour when I got back to the car park.
I packed my things, and as I was manoeuvring the car I reversed it into a ditch from which it would not shift.
Hopeless, I walked towards the nearest town, which was further away than I cared to think about.
I'd been walking for 45 minutes when I was hailed by a local farmer who had seen me on the moonlit road.
He asked if I was in trouble and drove me back to the car park, where he produced a tow-rope.
Within minutes the car was free, and before I could thank the young farmer I'd been invited back for a cup of tea and some hot broth.
The Mournes can be thought of as being in two sections: the higher, more popular eastern range, where they ‘sweep down to the sea’ and the lower, even less frequented, western range.
Although there are many fine walks in the western range, my own preference is to follow the ‘crowds’ and stay in the east.
The biggest peaks are here and the Irish Sea forms a backdrop to all the views to the south and east.
On a clear day you can see as far as Dublin from the Great Car of Donard (or so they say), but mist or heat haze have always foreshortened the view for me.
Donard is the highest mountain in all of Ulster, and you could be forgiven for believing it to be the highest in the world when viewed from Newcastle.
It is the most easterly peak in the long north ridge which runs from the sea to the Hare's Gap: a junction of several low level paths and exit point of the Brandy Pad — a path that, so the story goes, was used by smugglers to take illegal supplies of drink from the coast at the Bloody Bridge, inland.
A Topping Dilemma
From this north ridge three upland figures point southwards.
The central figure running from Slieve Commadagh in the north to Slieve Binnian in the south is, in my opinion, the best walking territory in all of the Mournes.
Its traverse, either in one go or, as I prefer it, in sections as the ‘crux’ of other walks in the immediate vicinity, is a must for anyone who wants to sample these hills at their best.
I can never really be sure as to whether Binnian or Slievelamagan is my favourite top, but take endless delight in going back to them time and time again in the hope of solving this important question.
Of course, I'll never find an answer, because the one I love most is always the one I gaze on from the other.
The Silent Valley and Annalong Valley fall to the west and east of the central ridge respectively.
Both provide easy access from the south right into the very heart of the range, and both provide excellent walks in their own right should the clouds be low.
The western slopes of the Annalong Valley are a superb vantage points to watch shepherds and dogs in action, and if your itinerary always includes a stop for a mug of tea then be warned that the only tea-shop I know of in the area is in the park at the bottom of Silent Valley.
Another must for this briefly visiting the Mournes is the traverse of the north ridge of the Bloody Bridge, on the Irish ea coast, to the Trassey road near Tollymore Forest Park; or better still, on reaching the Hares Gap climb Bearnagh, Meelmore and Meelbeg and descend the broad slopes to Fofanny Dam.
You'll need two cars for this one, but a round can be made of the traverse by coming back via the Brandy Pad.
The remaining three peaks of the west ridge (Loughshannagh, Carn and Muck) are not especially exciting, but below the ridge to the east is a broad shelf containing the beautiful little lake of Lough Shannagh and ending abruptly at the top of the Ben Crom cliffs.
This shelf is best reached by following the Banns Road and walking north of Doan (the Hook).
The view from the exposed summit of Ben Crom is one of the best in the Mournes, taking in, as it does, the Silent Valley, Binnian, Lamagan and beyond Donard.
It is not advisable to attempt this walk in conditions of poor visibility since the plateau is featureless and it's difficult to know when you are close to the Ben Crom crags.
The last time I was walking by Loughshannagh, our party of three followed the tracks of a fox, clearly left in the snow, around the southern base of Doan to the lovely Ben Crom river.
Strangely, the tracks came directly from the lough; there seemed to be no tracks going into the lough.
A few days later, when doing some research on the Mournes, I read an account of a legend that described how a princess was drowned in the deep waters of the lough and now haunts the area in the shape of a fox!
There are many other legends associated with the region.
Next time you find yourself queuing to have your photo taken on the Cantilever in Snowdonia, or looking for a vacant shelter to eat your sandwiches in on Scafell Pike, stop and look to the west.
If the atmosphere is clear you might just be able to make out the Mournes on the horizon.
They're much closer than you think.
From London you can be putting your boots on at the Bloody Bridge car park in less than three hours if you have a mind to.
The same is true of every major city in the British Isles.
Consider that when you next plan a holiday in a hills.
Where the Mountains of Mourne sweep down to the sea’.
The skyline south of Newcastle is dominated by Slieve Donard.
(Photos by the author).
Above: The Silent Valley, a man-made reservoir that leads into the heart of the Mournes.
Right: ‘On the road to Lamagan’.
GUNPOWDER, TREASON AND PLOT
Martin Hebbert plans to take advantage of beautiful weather on Cloggy by deciding to fit two classic climbs into one day.
Alas, life just isn't that simple!
Remember, remember the crux of Joe's Vember!
How could they ever forget?
Gunpowder: the smouldering disbelief of McFall during his long and lonely vigil at the belay; Treason…that Velcro-like Cloggy turf which sent Hebbert plummeting from the easier pitch above: Plot: read on…
It all began with the totally illogical decision to go to Cloggy when one of the only two cars in the party was going to Gogarth and the other to The Pass.
That meant a long walk and a hitch back to Capel Curig if there was any chance of making the pub before closing time.
But warm sunshine and dry rocks made the Dark Cliff irresistible.
Great Slab/Bow Slab combination (VS, 4c) was actually the target.
A lift up to the Llanberris path and a hot and sweaty flog in competition with another party — evidently intent on the same prize — brought them to the brooding llyn and awesome amphitheatre of Arddu.
Treachery from a party gearing up below White Slab — only to sneak onto Great/Bow ahead of the queue.
The dynamic duo were second in line and, unnerved by the wait and the antics of the interlopers, the McFall sewing machine did a brief turn on the delicate opening slab.
Hebbert replied in kind with his customary dithering ‘will he — won't he’ approach to the equally thin traverse from Bow to Great.
A sunbathe at the top — cruelly interrupted by Arddu midges — and that dreadful slither down the hot and dusty scree descent…and it was still only mid-afternoon.
Now came the second, and more seriously illogical decision.
Who on earth climbs two routes on Cloggy in one day?
Hebbert and McFall do, Hebbert decided, and he  persuaded his partner they could not leave it at that after such a long flog up the mountainside.
McFall was only half convinced.
But Hebbert was there, guide in hand, picking out the classics on the Left Wall (he reasoned it had to be a route on the left wall to provide a contrast to the big slab route just completed).
‘How about Curving Crack — a classic VS, 4c and a comparative sheep among wolves according to the guide?’
He even picked out somebody on it far above — in a sort of shallow groove at the top of the wall.
Sweating Heap
Barely pause and they were at the foot of a steep corner crack.
Two ageing rock stars in front made it look easy and Hebbert was fooled.
It was a grit man's delight but a Lakelander's nightmare of delicate bridging, jamming and powerful laybacking.
He propelled himself to the ledge with minimal protection — being too knackered to stop and place anything better — and arrived in a sweating heap, to the knowing grins of the rockstars.
They went off right and did something horrific, while the grunts below confirmed McFall was finding the start no easier.
Then it was the latter's turn to make a blind swing into a bottomless groove to start the second pitch.
Now McFall either jumps in at the deep end or dithers and backs off — he never falls off.
He jumped, much to his partner's relief.
There followed a series of spider-like manoeuvres to negotiate the chimney-groove and become ensconced on the ledge belay.
Hebbert joined him and moved left to the obvious beetling crack and groove line he had spotted from below — omitting to pause and wonder why this particular line soared up straight as an arrow, on a route called Curving Crack!.
The first few strenuous bridging moves sowed the seeds of doubt — not over the route's identity so much as whether he could get up it.
But it was only 4c so he pressed on…and the going got tougher.
He came to an impasse and the choices appeared to be an improbable looking layback, a highly unlikely deviation at the left wall, or retreat.
Laybacking had accounted for more than half his leader falls, and retreat did not bear thinking about.
Four attempts proved the deviation impossible and McFall prepared for a spot of slip fielding.
Before he had decided what to do, Hebbert found himself in full layback position and simply had to carry it through or fall.
Four moves later he was at another  semi-resting place.
The jamming and bridging got steeper — with the one big consolation that, strength permitting, you could pop in nuts almost at will — until he reached a ledge which elsewhere he would have regarded as a slab to be climbed, but here seemed a spacious refuge.
Anxious inquiries from below.
‘I'm OK — just need to get my breath back’(and wits, composure, bottle, sanity).
‘Looks hard for 4c,’ said McFall.
‘It's probably just me — you'll be alright (you'd better not be after I've put up such a struggle).
‘Take a good rest’— well the heart was back to pounding instead of its previous maniacal thump, so time to press on.
‘I think the worst is over,’ Hebbert announced.
He through wrong.
The groove proved every bit as fierce as the crack, straining arm muscles and will to the limit: bloody ridiculous for 4c…
Welsh couldn't grade a bag of Homepride.
The last straw was located about 10 or 15ft from safety, at which handholds seemed to disappear altogether and aching feet were scrunched up the tiniest of ripples.
Employing the winter tactic of faith in grass, he clutched wildly at a tuft, which amazingly held until he was established on the rugosity above.
A few easy moves brought him to the sanctuary of the belay ledge.
‘A gutsy performance’ he thought…but it was only 4c!
Fit Of Temper
McFall's ascent was accompanied by frequent shouts for a tight rope and ended with a shell-shocked face appearing over the rim and the declaration: ‘If that's 4c I'm definitely selling at my climbing gear’.
He looked as if he meant ti.
In fact he was so unnerved by the pitch that after an exploratory foray up the finishing wall and the placement of one runner, he returned and refused to lead further.
Hebbert had wound down after the adrenalin rush and was furious at having to crank up again.
In a fit of temper he shot up past the runner, and just as he was reaching for a ledge above, the turf he was standing on performed its Velcro imitation and propelled the stunned climber into the air.
His ribs thudded into the rock at the top of the previous pitch and he dangled, shocked and winded, over the scene of his epic struggle.
In a trance-like state he re-climbed the wall and this time made the top, in pain but without further incident.
Fury returned as he thought how he had been cheated of glory by a treacherous piece of turf, when it had not even been his turn to lead!
Feeding flies made hitching hell, but eventually a farm wagon delivered them battered and bumped — which did a lot for Hebbert's ribs — at the Pen-y-Gwryd.
They began a long march back to Capel Curig with no hope of making closing time — when a touring couple took pity and gave them a lift straight to the pub.
Two pints were swiftly downed in the 10 minutes remaining, helping to cool tempers and throw a more rosy glow over the day's epic proceedings.
It was back home they discovered the truth.
Hebbert was leafing through Hard Rock to re-live Great/Bow combination and just glancing at the Vember chapter, which was the nearest the book got to Curving Crack.
Wait a minute…why was there a picture of a climber on the top groove of Curving Crack.
Hold on…that stance looked remarkably like that slab resting place.
His heart began to flutter…a look at the crag diagram in the guide and the quick read of the relevant bit of The Hard Years confirmed it…bloody hell it was Vember!
Never mind the fall, never mind route finding on mind-blowing ineptitude — he had climbed Vember!
Vember, that legendary classic of the Rock and Ice years; Vember, the route that had scoffed out at him from the pages of Hard Rock with the ultimate aura of impregnability; Vember — probably the only E1, 5b pitch he would ever lead; Vember, oh no — he would never forget!
The Great Wall on Clogwyn du'r Arddu, with the line of Vember marked.
ALPINE CLASSICS
The DRUGS TRAVERSE
IN PERFECT WEATHER, BILL O'CONNOR TACKLES THE GRAND TRAVERSE OF THE DRUS — ITS KEY A SUCCESSFUL ASCENT OF THE INFAMOUS ‘Z PITCH’
There are two Drus, big and small, stacked one in front of the other.
Seen from the church at Pras des Chamonix, or bustling Montenvers, they rise: a single phallus of red granite, so impossibly shocking to Victorian sensibilities that they were left untouched until well after Alpinism's ‘Golden Age’ passed in 1865 with Whymper's epic on that other quintessential alp, the Matterhorn.
For a long time the Drus were passed off as a mere shoulder of the greater Aiguille Verte.
But the conquest of the 400ers brought a new age, with fresh eyes hungrily seeking steeper rock and ice that demanded a willingness to take a quantum leap in technical difficulty to achieve a first.
That first success on the Dru twins came in 1878 when Clinton Dent, with his companion J. W. Hartley and Swiss guides Alexander Burgener and Kasper Maurer, reached the summit of the Grand Dru [3,754m]— much to the chagrin of the local men.
Their ascent, by an intricate route on the south-east flank, came only after prolonged and persistent effort.
A year later pride was restored when the slightly lower — but more difficult — Petit Dru [3,733m]was climbed by the local trio of Charlet-Stratton, Payot and Folliguet.
Despite the fact that the two summits are separated by a relatively small gap, the Breche des Drus, to reach the summit of the Grand Drug from the breche demands the ascent of a vertical wall of granite, topped by a large overhang.
Initially descended on a rope in the early 1880s, it was top-roped by Miss K. Richardson in 1889.
Its ascent by the famous ‘Z’ pitch remains a key on the traverse of the Drus.
For many years attempts at a complete traverse of the two peaks was naturally in the direction of the Grand Dru/Petit Drug, since it was possible to rope down the infamous ‘Z’ pitch and the more difficult south west flank of the Petit Dru to the Flammes de Pierre.
It was not until 1903 that the famous rope of Ravanel, Giraud and Comte completed the first grand traverse of the Drus in the opposite direction.
Their route, graded alpine ‘D’ is long, strenuous and difficult, and remains a great alpine Grand Course.
Impeccable Logic
The summer season of 1990 was spectacular.
Throughout July, clear blue skies graced the alps.
Day after days of grand beau brought no rest for those of us fortunate enough to be there.
My annual rendezvous with Ben Holt, a climbing friend based in Geneva, came on the 125th anniversary of the first ascent of the Matterhorn, which we celebrated with an ascent of the Dent Blanche.
Alone on the summit, whilst the hoards hounded the streets of Zermatt, the subject of the Drus raised its pointed head.
Holt was at pains to point out that from his garden, if he stood on tiptoe, craned his neck and employed both imagination and compass he could, perhaps, in the right light, makes out the Drus.
‘Therefore,’ he said, with impeccable logic, ‘we ought to climb them.’
The day after the Dent Blanch we indulged in a prolonged breakfast of copious coffee, yesterday's paper and a plateful of croissants before joining the tourist throng on the Montenvers railway.
Climbers looks incongruous in this crowd: their large packs, big boots, axes and crampons in start contrast to the squeaky clean tourists in shorts, T-shirts and tight skirts.
But here alpinists are forced to become rubbernecks, halted in their tracks to stare hypnotically across the ‘sea of ice’ at the Drus, rising like an enormous sea-stack above and beyond a beach of boulders and moraine.
Our quest for the Drus traverse began on the well-worn path from the station, our objective for the day the Charoupa refuge, magnificently situated at the top of the Charoupa rognon, in the awesome, rocky cwm below the south faces of the Drus and Aiguille Verte.
An hour of easy plodding over the glacier found us on a hideously loose moraine which we climbed precariously, balancing on huge boulders held loosely in a matrix of soft cement.
Steep scrambling next, up a polished slab by a cool cascade, opening unexpectedly on a flower filled alp, sparkling with meltwater.
A final climb to the hut finds a way over ice polished rocks, made simple by ladders that snake upwards almost to the hut door, where the friendly  guardian and her daughter made us welcome.
Holt, as is the nature of the man, carefully and quickly arranged his slot in the diminutive refuge, while I ordered a carafe of Vin des Vieux Guide, which we  quaffed on the rocks outside the hut.
High on the Charpoua Glacier tiny figures crossed the bergschrund while far below, on the banded sea-of-ice, more, in ant-like procession, were marching towards Montenvers.
During the late afternoon others arrived; some stayed, resting before climbing to the Flammes de Pierre to bivouac before the Bonatti Pillar.
We watched them climb upwards and across the Charpoua Glacier, following a tongue of snow into the rocks of the Drus.
Traversing quickly left they went down, then up again, to cross an awkward ice patch, finally climbing steeply upwards in a broad couloir to the pinnacled ridge, where the red granite flickered warmly in the evening alpenglow.
Two hours before dawn, in the wavering beam of our torches, we followed their steps to the Flammes de Pierre and caught them, still cocooned amongst the rocks.
A mouthful of chocolate passed for breakfast before we forsook big boots for sticky rubber.
Two rope lengths later we regretted our haste as we teetered across a steep snow patch barring the way to a secondary ridge, climbed by a series of cracks and strenuous pulls.
This, the south west flank of the Petit Dru, combines the best of what classic Chamonix climbing has to offer: intricate route finding up steep, athletic walls, cracks and chimneys with tremendous exposure overlooking the Bonatti Couloir and Pillar.
Bold Bridging
Rarely did the climbing difficulty exceed IV, and such is the nature of the rock that superb natural protection abounds.
Yet despite the fine weather of the previous  week, many of the cracks and chimneys, shaded from the sun, were ice-bound, so we bridged and balanced boldly to avoid having to change back into big boots.
Weather is everything on a long alpine route.
When it's doubtful the pressure's always on; a niggling anxiety whittling at your confidence.
But here we were, high on the Drus, climbing in shirtsleeves under a deep blue sky, with the meteo reduced to a simple one liner —beau fixe .
Enjoying every minute of it we traversed right along a wide ledge sparkling with quartz crystals to an impasse, where the way ahead was stopped by a vertical wall suspended over immense space.
Twin cracks led upwards airily to a comfortable belay at the bottom of a snow gully, where boots again became the order of the day.
Grade 1 step kicking and a strenuous pull round an overhung chockstone led to a notch below the summit.
Above, an awkward shuffle up a short steep wall deposited us on a flat-topped summit of the lesser Drug, with only the choughs for company.
To suggest that it was ‘all over bar the shouting’ would be premature.
We lunched content upon the flat granite table top of the summit, throwing our cheese rinds to the acrobatic choughs.
Across the gap we could see, quite plainly, the buttress of the higher Dru, cut and slashed by cracks and ledges like the mark of Zoro — the infamous Z pitch.
Easy scrambling down snowy rocks led quickly into the breche, with the Dru Couloir falling fathomless into shadow on its north side.
Balancing precariously I crossed the narrow snow arête to the foot of a steep crack.
Boot wide and solid, the crack led upwards to a commodious stance with a ledge running rightwards across an awesome drop.
A series of short pitches, to avoid rope drag, zigzagged upwards to below a huge overhang, where a traverse left teetered to a safe, sunless stance overlooking the north face.
We were already congratulating ourselves on a smooth and successful ascent, but you must beware.
The Grand Dru is no pussycat; rather a scorpion, saving until last its tail sting.
Above the ledge a steep crack leads apparently to the security of a deep recess, curving leftwards, which I flew at hoping to regain the sun.
Once inside the trap was set.
Its bowels and bounding walls were thick with ice.
Every upward inch was fought for — I pressed, kicked and squirmed to make upward progress.
At last, jamming a fist and then a boot between rock and shrunken ice, I fingered a flake and heaved myself a cheval onto a sunlit stance, metres from the summit.
Then I repeated the oft cried lie, ‘Climb when you're ready Ben…it's a piece of cake!’
In descent the Grand Dru has proved a problem for many, even though the guidebook is both plain and correct in its detail.
However, unless you are climbing on a single 50 metre rope, it's preferable to abseil direct down to the couloir rather than take the pendulum of the normal route.
A single, 50 metre abseil from the peg leads more quickly to the top of the final couloir, which is followed in three full abseils to the Charpoua Glacier.
By the time we lowered ourselves over the bergschrund and had descended the soggy snow of the glacier, the sun was dipping below the satellites of Mt Blanc.
The sky remained clear and the first starts of the evening were already apparent in the inky space above our heads.
As we glissaded down the final snows to the hut, the summit of Mt Blanc was burnished by the setting sun and the Flammes de Pierre were flickering, true to their name.
The summit of the Petit Dru, with the Aiguilles and the great dome of Mt Blanc beyond (photos Bill O'Connor).
Ben Holt on the Z-pitch, leading to the summit of the Grand Dru.
ALPINE SKILLS
MOVING TOGETHER
MOUNTAIN GUIDE MARTIN MORAN DESCRIBES AN ESSENTIAL SKILL THAT CAN SAVE VALUABLE TIME ON A BIG ALPINE ROUTE
The technique of moving together on the rope is one of the most mistrusted and misused methods of travel in the mountains.
This is a pity, since moving together is the essence of safe, quick alpine mountaineering.
On glaciers, snow climbs, arêtes and easy mixed ground it is the only way to ensure fast movement, while retaining some degree of security.
Some people perceive moving together solely as a method for guides and their parties, and ignore it completely.
So you still see parties walking on glaciers unroped, or climbing easy routes in an endless series of laborious pitches.
More usually, first time climbers in the alps are aware of the technique's importance, but have little idea of how to apply it effectively on different types of terrain.
The best place to witness how NOT to move together is the Aiguille Petite Verte in the Mont Blanc range on a busy summer day.
On the short mixed ridge leading to this minor training summit, you can view an endless stream of parties coming up from the Grands Montets cablecar station for a taste of a real alpine mountaineering.
Reaching the ridge, a logjam of bewildered novices develops.
Long lengths of rope trail dangerously on the ground.
Rope variously run between legs, twist around people's backs or over their shoulders.
Some parties pitch the ridge with agonising slowness.
Then descending parties join the melee, variously down-climbing, lowering or abseiling.
Total confusion reigns supreme, and an atmosphere close to mass hysteria ensues.
It's enough to put some people off the alps for ever.
Such an experience may be demoralising if you're unlucky to get caught up in the tangle.
The rope seems more bother than it's worth, creating confusion and danger rather than security.
But please don't be deterred.
Watching other people's mistakes suggests ways to manage your own ropework more efficiently.
For instance, why not get rid of all that loose rope and move together on short, taut spacings.
You'll be faster, less bothersome to other parties, and won't spend the whole climb in  mortal fear of tripping up on your own rope!
Certain principles determine moving together, but there are important variations of the technique on different types of terrain.
Size of Party
On harder alpine routes, the size of party is dictated by the difficulties of the pitched sections, and a team of two is appropriate.
However, on easier routes or glacier tours, where a party moves solely by moving together, numbers can be safely increased.
A roped party of five or six is ideal on glaciers.
There is minimal danger of everybody being dragged in if one person falls into a crevasse, and sophisticated rescue methods can be substituted by sheer manpower on the surface.
Similarly on ridges, the rope linking a team of four can be weaved from one side of the arête to the other and threaded behind rock spikes, to create natural running belays.
Consequently, there are more anchors and counterweights along the rope than between a team of two, increasing security in the event of a slip.
Conversely, there are safe limits to the size of a party moving together.
Communication becomes difficult in a big team, and slack rope is more likely between the climbers, creating potential for the last member of a large team to fall and pull off those above.
On arêtes or mixed ground of uneven difficulty, a large roped crocodile is interminably slow, because the party's overall pace is determined by whoever is engaged on the difficult bits.
Sensible group sizes for moving together are five to six on glacier tours and three to four on snow climbs, mixed ground and ridges.
Type and Length of Rope
A 45m or 50m rope should be carried on all climbs, even though only short sections are used when moving together.
The spare rope is an important reserve for pitching any sections, abseiling or effecting a crevasse rescue.
For strength and abrasion resistance, a single 11mm rope is good for moving together, particularly on rocky ground, most alpine aretês being littered with razor sharp flakes.
However, a 9mm rope is adequate for glacier work or easy angled snow terrain, and is considerably lighter.
For rock sections, a 50m 9mm rope could be doubled to give 25m of climbing, with twice the strength/abrasion resistance.
A good compromise is 50m of 10mm rope, such as the Mammut Galaxy.
It has 11mm specification but is little heavier than a 9mm.
Tying On
When moving together, climbers on the ends of the rope should tie direct into their harnesses in the normal way.
Those in the middle of the rope will tie into a screwgate karabiner on their harnesses by using a figure of eight knot on the bight.
The karabiner must be correctly attached to the harness.
Some modern Troll harnesses have a 2cm sewn tape linking leg loops and waistbelt which is ideal for karabiner attachment.
However, many climbers have harnesses like the troll Whillans.
On this harness the karabiner attachment on the crutch strap is dangerously low and should never be used alone.
When tying into the middle of the rope, Whillans users have to clip another karabiner into a short sling, threaded through the waist attachment points.
The karabiner tie-in bight should be 18 to 24cms long, so that the live rope can bypass the middlemen.
This is an important principle when moving together on steep snow.
If someone at the back of the party slips, the load is transmitted straight through to the leader rather than pulling direct on the intermediate members.
This gives those in the middle time to take guard and adopt the arrest position before they, too, might be pulled.
Having correctly spaced the members of the party at the other end of the rope, any spare rope should be coiled neatly around the leader's shoulders and tied off with an overhand knot, ready for possible use later in the day.
In all cases, except glacier travel, it is appropriate for the leader to carry the spare coils, but where there is a crevasse danger the spore rope should be split equally between front and rear members.
This avoids the scenario of the leader plus all spare coils falling into a crevasse, leaving those above with insufficient rope to effect a rescue.
Having tied off the coils with an overhand knot, a final tie in must be made so that the leader's attachment will be loaded in the desired manner.
Figs. 1a and 1b show two possible methods.
In Fig. 1a the loop from the overhand knot is clipped directly into a screwgate karabiner on the harness.
This is the quickest method, and achieves the effect of a chest harness when placed under an upward load, as is desirable in a crevasse fall.
It is therefore the preferred way for glacier travel.
However, when given a downward loading, this tie-off gives an outward pull on the chest and shoulders, which is painful and liable to pull the leader off.
So in all other situations, my preference is for the leader to tie into the harness on a separate figure of eight on the bight, adjusted so that any downward load pulls down through the waist and onto the thighs, as in (Fig. 1b).
This is a more stable and secure load bearing direction.
The whole process of sorting out the lengths of rope, tying in, and tying off the coils may take several minutes in a party of novices.
With practice it can be developed to a fine art, so that little time is sacrificed.
Rope Spacing
The optimum spacing of the team members of the rope varies greatly with the terrain:
Glaciers (Fig. 2a): Spacing must eliminate the risk of more than one member falling into the same crevasse, or one member pulling the others in.
In a party of two 12m to 15m is safe, but for larger groups 8m to 10m is more normal.
On chaotically crevassed terrain, and particularly when crossing glaciers parallel to the crevasse lines, these distances should be substantially increased.
Snow Slopes (Fig. 2c): On steep snow, short roping is the order of the day, with 3m spacing normal.
This keeps the party close with no chance of dangerous slack developing.
Snow Arêtes (Fig. 2c): Horizontal knife-edges of pure snow provide the classic alpine spacewalks, such as the Rochefort Arête or Liskamm Traverse.
Moving together is essential, and the only reliable means of stopping a fall is by jumping to the other side of the ridge.
Here a spacing of 4m to 6m is advisable and, contrary to normal practice, each member should carry a couple of loose coils in the hand which can be cast away in the event of seeing a slip.
This slack gives vitals seconds to get down the opposite flank before the load comes on the rope.
Once a snow arête becomes steeply angled you should revert to the short rope technique.
Rock or mixed ridges (Figs. 2d and 2e): Security here is increased by keeping members on a different sides of the ridge, or by taking natural running belays over spokes and flakes; 6m to 8m is a reasonable spacing for this.
Where the terrain increases in difficulty, or the whole party is forced onto the same flank, the leader climber can place sling and nut runners, which are clipped back down the rope and collected by the last member.
This maintains running protection so that, in the event of a fall, no more than a pendulum can occur.
The party must periodically re-group to pass all the gear back to the leader.
Wit this technique a 10m to 15m spacing will be efficient.
Rope Handling
The golden rule on snow terrain is that the rope should be kept taut between all members of the party, with no loose coils carried in the hand.
Any slip is then immediately transmitted up the rope and braked by those above.
Thus a slip should never become a fall.
Likewise on glaciers, tight ropes should prevent anybody from ever dropping much more than waist deep into a hidden crevasse — a position from which the victim can usually be dragged out.
Hand coils create unwanted slack and immediately tighten around the hand under load, trapping the fingers and preventing an effective arrest.
The carrying of hand coils is only appropriate on snow arêtes (as explained above), or on rock ridges of uneven difficulty, where party speed is increased by members picking      up coils on the easy sections.
On all crucial passages of a rock ridge, the rope should be kept right.
A question for the middlemen is the choice of which side to put the rope.
Climbing steep snow in a series of zigzags as in (Fig. 2b), the axe is held in the uphill hand and the rope goes on the downhill side direct to the next person on the rope.
This prevents the rope getting twisted round the back in such a way that a downward pull rotates and dislodges the body.
When the party changes direction, the middlemen step over the rope behind them and the rope is transferred to the correct downhill side.
The same logic applies on mixed or rock ridges.
The rope should never be allowed to run between the legs, for all too obvious reasons.
Novices often like to hold the rope above them as a handrail, but in a slip their instinctive reaction will be to pull on the rope, giving a dangerous jerk on the leader.
This temptation should therefore be resisted.
Initial attempts at moving together in a team often cause frustration and irritation.
The rope is either too tight or not tight enough, and runs everywhere it shouldn't.
Particularly on descents there is a danger of being tugged by unthinking members of the team below.
All these ruffles should be smoothed out after a few days.
Harmony and group  awarenesses develop, in particular a realisation of responsibility towards your companions.
Who Goes First?
Where there is an obvious leader in terms of skill and experience the answer is easy.
The leader goes ahead in ascent, routefinding and safeguarding the party, and brings up the rear on steep descents to protect the team from above.
On steep ground the rule that ‘the leader must not fall’ applies.
It would be very difficult for other members to hold a leader falling past them without a belay.
If the party is of even ability the leading role can be periodically swapped to give each member a rest from the mental stress of going in front.
This doesn't mean that the seconds can wholly relax, or afford to indulge in sloppy technique.
Above all, moving together requires a sense of shared responsibility for the risks involved.
Arresting a Fall
Firstly it is important not to be overawed by the situation.
Provided proper rope management has been employed it is surprisingly easy to arrest a slide.
On steep snow the leader should always plant the axe in a manner from which it would be easy to hold a sudden load.
If the snow is soft the axe shaft should be planted firmly, close to the body.
On an icy surface the axe pick should be jabbed or swung in securely at each step.
Good kicked steps or firm crampon placements ensure stability for the lower body, so that a load should pull you more firmly into your footing.
If this fails to stop you being pulled off, get straight into the ice axe arrest position.
Remember that those below you should be doing likewise, and a fall is often stopped by a joint effort.
Many people recommend passing the live rope from the waist in a loop around the ice axe.
By plunging the axe in to the hilt, a belay is instantly created to hold a fall.
Personally I see this as wishful thinking rather than practical logic.
The axe could easily be snatched away before it is properly planted, or else could pull straight out in soft snow.
One useful refinement in arresting a slip is for the leader to have a hand loop tied in the rope with an overhand knot.
This enables the leader to take any initial pull on the arm while bracing the legs and body.
The loop must be big enough that the hand can easily be slipped out.
On rocky ground the friction of rope over crests and round corners much reduces fall impacts.
Similarly on glaciers, the impact on a crevasse fall is greatly lessened by the friction of the rope cutting into the crevasse edge, and the load is easily held by sitting down on the surface and digging in the heels.
When to Pitch
Where the terrain becomes so steep that the leader no longer has a reasonable likelihood of controlling a slide, then belays of some form should be taken for the seconds.
These may be quick direct belays on situ pitons or round spikes or flakes.
Alternatively, the leader may no longer feel confident to continue in the situation of effectively soloing and require belays from his seconds to tackle more difficult sections.
The decision to transfer to pitched climbing is crucial.
Do it too early and you may be dangerously slowed.
Leave it too late and you may climb dangerously unprotected.
The benchmark grades for moving together are Peu Difficile (PD) and Assez Difficile (AD).
On the harder ADs and Difficiles, and increasing proportion of pitching will be necessary.
On snow and ice climbs conditions can, of course, vary enormously.
What is a safe exercise in moving together on firm névé snow one week can require strenuous and laborious pitching on brick-hard ice the next.
However, the list does give an indication of those routes which should be tackled largely or wholly by moving together.
A party which feels obliged to pitch such climbs in good conditions should really go and choose something easier.
Fig. 1a below, shows a method of tying off rope coils.
Here the loop from the overhand knot round the coils is clipped directly to a screwgate karabiner on the harness.
A superb snow arête — difficult to protect.
(All photos and illustrations by author).
Fig 1b.
An alternative method of tying off rope coils using a separate figure of eight tied into the harness.
SOUTH WEST TRADITIONAL
WITH A REVISED VERSION OF PAT LITTLEJOHN'S POPULAR ‘SOUTH WEST CLIMBS’ GUIDE NOW AVAILABLE, PUBLISHER KEN WILSON DESCRIBES SOME OF THE EXCELLENT AND ADVENTUROUS EXCURSIONS AWAITING THOSE WHO VISIT THE AREAS COVERED BY THE BOOK
Much has happened in the South West since the publication of pat Littlejohn's first selected climbs guide in 1979.
Lundy, once the venue of the local expert, is now widely recognised as an idyllic venue for holidays, and the number of clients there has quadrupled.
Jersey is another island that has enjoyed steady and worthwhile development — all on excellent granite.
Pat provided his usual catholic selection of medium grade and hard routes for the area, but last minute enquiries elicited that The Anvil is now a highly regarded three star V. Diff, so that was a late entry.
On the same theme, we even managed to squeeze in a note about the granite climbing possibilities of the Scilly Isles (with the help of Dave Basset).
The steep limestone cliffs around Torbay have become a focus for some of the hardest climbs in the book, including the awesome Caveman on Berry Head, and the steeply impending Free The Sprit, in Anstey's Cove.
There are also many easier climbs of stature, including the celebrated Moonraker (HVS) and the classic Gates of Eden (Severe).
Torbay also has its own mini-Malham with a statutory quota of bolt-protected, overhanging testpieces.
Bolts have also been used on some of the wilder walls of Cheddar Gorge to establish, bolts notwithstanding, some of the most challenging climbs in the region.
These bolting incursions are presently the exception rather than the rule in the South West and there is a strong feeling by many that it should stay that way.
Luckily the valuable Swanage cliffs remain largely bolt free but, ominously, the nearly Portland area (not featured in the guide) has seen intensive activity by those developing sport climbs.
In November I made a much delayed return to the Swanage area after a ten year absence.
The cliffs are not very high, but once you have abseiled over the edge you enter a world of powerful adventure, whatever your grade of climbing (and there are fine routes in every grade).
My partners were Doug Scott, squeezing climbing into a packed lecture programme, and David Harris, the author of Vortex , who was visiting Britain for the Boardman-Tasker Award ceremonies.
While the rest of the country was swept by autumn storms, we enjoyed two days of outstanding climbing on Guillemot and Cormorant ledges.
Our target route — the  splendid Tudor Rose, which takes a stunning line up of the best section of the cliff above Guillemot Ledge — remained unfulfilled, as we found handling a clutch of fine HVS and VS routes fully occupied our energies, leaving us totally sated.
Of these I might mention the powerful Spook (HVS) and one of the best VS expeditions we had ever experienced — Quality Street above Cormorant Ledge.
Here you launch straight into a 120ft free abseil to a sea-washed rock platform, which serves as a base for a splendid two-pitch wall climb, finishing with a joyous (and solid) jug-pull, poised above the sea.
These climbs emphasise Swanage's outstanding qualities as one of the most valuable areas of sea-cliff climbing in Britain.
Easier Climbs
Moving further west, among the well known attractions west of the Tamar, are some relatively new areas.
Of particular interest are the cliffs around Lizard Point, which I sampled during a family holiday based in the delightful fishing village of Cadgwith.
From here, the coastal path leads attractively by a switchback of hills and wooded dales (often equipped with refreshment stops) round to Lizard Point, passing above some intriguing and largely undeveloped cliffs.
Bass Point, one that has been developed, boasts a group of fine wall climbs of which The Cull (E3 5b/c) in particular should be noted.
Wet of the Lizard, the coastal character changes to open moorland reminiscent of Lundy.
The cliffs of Lizard Point offer worthwhile easier climbs such as Sirius (Severe), but some miles further along the coast are bigger and more serious ramparts of soapstone at Vellan Head, where Hidden Buttress has distinctly Gogarth-like qualities.
Pat had stressed its appeal in his manuscript so, on a snatched afternoon's climbing, I met Don Sargeant and we set out to investigate.
After a warm-up climb on the interesting granite cliffs of Basher's Harbour near Pra Sands, and fortified by a cream tea, we hastened, for it was now after 7pm, across the moorland from the car-park south of Mullion Cove, to Vellan Head.
True North is one of those big-cliffs HVSs, which, with the eye-catching grades of 4a, 5a and 4c, seemed to offer prestigious, but not unduly difficult, booty.
The sun was low in the sky as we worked our way carefully down the descent slopes and gullies.
Once at sea level, smooth soapstone slabs had to be traversed for some distance to reach the cliff.
Though bone dry, they shone in an evening sun that dazzled us, as we linked up the infrequent holds.
Above us the cliff grew steadily larger, until, where the slabs eased, it assumed its full height, silhouetted and jutting the odd ramp glinting amidst shadowy walls of Vector-like steepness.
We felt seriously ‘big cragged’.
With no option but courage or ignominious retreat, I set about the 4a first pitch — an intimidating looking crack breaking through the overhanging lower wall.
Though steep, this disgorged a statutory quota of jugs and runners, allowing me to gain a band of slabs and ribs sandwiched between overhanging walls.
The way now worked left across the slabby walls, moving round into the subtle, hidden corners, heading into the sun.
The situation felt very exposed and precarious.
Each corner contained a runner of sorts, which increased the rope drag, so that by the time I peeped round into the main central corner that was clearly the key to the route, the drag was very serious.
Hauling in four feet of slack, and highly tense because of the unaccustomed big crag environment, I clawed across the remaining few feet to gain a sloping stance at the base of the imposing corner.
The situation was most impressive as the crag below overhung.
I filled the crack above with belay nuts, tied off, and eventually relaxed enough to hang into my harness and haul in the rope.
Don followed steadily, murmuring with pleasure as each new aspect of this fine and, in retrospect, quite easy pitch unfolded.
The sun was now very low in the sky, and the urgency of the situation was clear.
Don moved briskly up the 5a pitch and quickly reached the crux, where the corner was blocked by an impending slab.
In my hanging position I contorted to watch him, so it seemed like he was tackling a serious overhang.
It took some time to get the obstacle equipped with runners.
The sun dropped below the horizon, the minutes ticked by and an involuntary bivouac began to seem a possibility.
Eventually Don grappled with the critical section, and with a quick windmill of arms and legs was up and establishing himself on the next stance.
I prepared to climb, anxiously scanning the description of the third pitch, which talked of ramps, exposure and steep moves on arêtes.
Creaking Jugs
I hastened up the big pitch, finding time in the rush to note its splendid position, with awesome exposure at the overhang.
The ramp, mottled in yellow lichen, gleamed in the crepuscular light.
Peering into the gloom I moved up, ready for anything, plopped in two comforting nuts, swung across a void, stretched up to creaking jugs and levered up to the arête, fully expecting to face an overhanging wall.
But there was a step or two and then hillside — it was over.
What a magnificent climb.
We crowed with pleasure as we rushed up the remaining feet to the top and, in the last dregs of daylight, hastened back across the lonely moor to the car, Mullion, and a well earned pint.
On a modest few hours climbing we had sampled two new crags and climbed fine routes — a melange of anxiety, adventure and delight set against a backdrop of a wild, lonely coastline.
Those days climbing at Swanage and the Lizard reminded me of some familiar truisms, so easily lost when one is chained to the desk: that the spice of adventure and uncertainty, faced in partnership with others who feel the same, is at the core of all good climbing.
This adventure climbing — so fragile, so uncertain — can it continue to claim our allegiance?
The bolt boys are on the verge of denouncing it as insane.
Given half a chance they would ‘retrobolt’(what curious technical names they give to hearsay these days) everything we hold dear.
Yet those days on Vellan Head and Swanage, and many more besides, convince me that, risk notwithstanding, it is worth sustaining.
Climbing has to be more than a race for E points, pumping away on raddled lumps of overhanging bolt-protected, sweaty limestone, or cavorting on plywood Towers of Babel, studded with artificial holds, floodlit for a ‘quick-fox’ titillation of the idle masses.
No doubt some bolt-protected routes have valuable qualities, but in general, particularly in the easier grades, they offer merely a form of fool's gold.
How could such predictable junk fare, however hard, be compared to the excitement of conquering Il Duce or Caveman, climbing the tremendous granite routes of Chair Ladder and Bosigran, embarking on any route at Carn Gowla, or even just soloing on the sensuous jug pulling of Sennen — all untamed and wonderfully sculptured cliffs, free from the canker of distracting metal.
The South West, like many other areas in Britain, is a treasure chest of magnificent adventure climbing; a precious legacy worth protecting.
It is the stuff of dreams and memories and heady ways on the rock: all the more valuable in that it can be enjoyed at all levels of difficulty.
It would be a tragedy if it was ever ‘Europeanised’ into bland ‘fun climbing’for the masses.
Let's keep it special and challenging!
Let's keep it as ‘real’ climbing.
Left: John Square seconding Central Groove, a steep Hard Severe on The Dewerstone, eight miles north east of Plymouth.
Right: Des Hannigan leads Saxon (HVS) at Carn Kenidjack, Cornwall (photos: Dave Hillebrandt).
Crossing the corners on the first pitch of Sirius (Hard Severe), Lizard Point, Cornwall (photo: Don Sargeant).
FROGGATT EDGE
TRUE GRIT CO-ORDINATION, TECHNICAL ABILITY AND NERVE — THEY'RE ALL SKILLS NECESSARY FOR CLIMBING QUALITY GRITSTONE, AS BILL MCKEE EXPLAINS
Gritstone: windswept, weathered forms set amidst heather-clad moorland, the jewels that stand proud from the mysterious Dark Peak.
For those who cut their climbing teeth on this most demanding of rock types, the eastern edges of the Peak District will always retain a magical aura.
They are places of many moods: clear, late autumn days when the rock exhibits an embarrassing degree of friction, or the biting cold and raw-limbed excesses of a winter day, usually spent thrutching in dank clefts in an attempt to escape the wind.
It is generally acknowledged that gritstone is the acid test of a climber's ability; if you can handle its subtleties and idiosyncrasies, the inadequate creases and sparse protection, then the grip and pull or sharphold security of other rock types will be easy meat in comparison.
This characteristic stems from the diversity of techniques required to climb the rock.
Far from relying on the merely muscular, grit requires co-ordination, technical ability and nerve in no little measure and, perhaps most elusive of all, what may best be termed as simply a ‘feel’ for it.
Gritstoners, like any other group of enthusiasts, could doubtless argue ad infinitum the whys and wherefores of their favourite patch, but for the uninitiated, Froggatt Edge represents an excellent starting point for a crash course in the gritstone art.
One of a string of edges which flank the eastern rim of the Peak District's Derwent Valley, its position on the edge of part of the Dark Peak moorland plateau gives a commanding outlook over the gentler contours of the limestone White Peak to the west.
It's easy on the eye — sometimes a relaxing break from the climbs which, for the most part, are somewhat more taxing.
Amid the stark, and in places green-hued contours of the half mile or so of cliff and tumbled boulders that is Froggatt, there exists a wealth of entertaining and varied climbing.
Here, among the sand, the birches and the occasional gnarled oak which grace the bottom of the crag, can be found gritstone gems to rank with the finest.
Good climbs here are sufficiently thick on the ground to make the task of sorting out the best rather bewildering to the newcomer, but an acquaintance with the following three routes ought to leave little doubt just what Froggatt can offer, probing as they do into most areas of the gritstone experience found at the ‘middle grades’.
Sunset Slab (VS 4b) provides a good starting point for this brief tour.
It displays one of the foremost characteristics of gritstone climbing, and one which is by no means confined to Froggatt: namely a dearth of protection!.
In Sunset's case you are acutely aware of this as the moves into the upper groove are made — definitely not a place to part company with the rock!
Despite being a serious lead for the grade, the climbing itself is reasonable and, although the 1978 guide flirted with an HVS tag — thereby causing traditionalist apoplexy!— Sunset remains a fine VS.
Nobody ever said that a VS had to be lace-up, did they?
This delightful faith and friction climb actually starts with a crack, although this can be bypassed on the left via the direct start, thus ensuring nothing but slab all the way.
Either choice leads to a rippled scoop, where the unsuspecting will become acutely aware of the inadequacy of the handholds, or what passes for them.
Above and left, over a slight bulge, lies a slim groove flaunting a flake at its base — something to get redundant fingers behind.
Before this tempting carrot can be reached, however, you must teeter carefully across the scoop, mindful of the ever-growing distance from the unforgiving ground.
Once gained, the flake is quickly dispensed with, and very soon you're eyeballing the top, just one insecure looking smear away!
By this time though, judging what footholds you can and cannot use on this  bizarrely rippled slab, should have become a touch clearer.
Confidently (or perhaps a little more heart in mouth) the step is made: welcome to the gritstone art!
Excellent Placements
There can be no doubt about the classic status of Valkyrie, my next choice.
From the evocative first ascent photo of Joe Brown and Wilf White in 1948, which featured in the 1978 guide, through the Hard Rock treatment, the hundreds of ascents this route receives each year indicate its lasting popularity and quality.
The diversity of climbing styles packed into just 60 feet of grit is remarkable — only the off-width connoisseur will be disappointed — and the combination of this, a natural line of least resistance and finishing atop a genuine, albeit modest, summit provides one of the most enjoyable excursions for a first acquaintance with Froggatt.
A stride from an adjacent boulder gains the initial crack.
Those familiar with hand-jamming will find this quite accommodating, well-furnished as it is with excellent placements.
Others may resort to laybacking the slightly rightward-leaning crack.
Either course of action leads to a constricted ledge and, to its right, a horizontal break leading out to a stance on the crest of Froggatt Pinnacle — yes, a two-pitch out-crop route!
Resist the temptation to climb onto the ledge, for this is one of those red herrings which prove difficult to retreat from, and make haste with the short traverse, after which a few moves on rounded layaways gain the surprisingly airy belay.
This is a good spot to take in the surroundings and admire the view out over the valley, not least because the jutting roof above, taken by a similarly graded (HVS 4c, 5a), but more intimidating direct variation, prevents much of a sight of what's to come and, equally atmospheric, what's just been!
The second pitch is undoubtedly the crux, despite being much less sustained than the initial crack.
Large holds lead up just right of the pinnacle's rounded southwest arête, until a stretch back left gains a shelf on its undercut edge.
The large and comfortable handhold which the shelf at first provided doesn't feel quite so satisfying now it's at chest height; which course of action to take?
A sense of urgency begins to make its presence felt.
A straight mantleshelf will appeal to the bold or those unconcerned by the prospect of knees or feet catching the underside of the projection causing this impasse, while the downright devious will immediately start to shuffle, heart in the mouth, leftwards to the other side of the arête, from where a straightforward step up gains the shelf and relief.
Others pull on ‘slopers’ above the shelf, combined with delicate use of a toe-crease above the foot-level break.
this is a clean and neat move, nicely capped off with the gentle finish to the summit.
Ways of retreat from this point are various and there is even a metal ring — I hesitate to say bolt — to facilitate an abseil. the able can reverse the climbs on the pinnacle's short side and the crazy always have the option of hobbling away with a sprained ankle after ‘successfully’ negotiating Cook's Leap, the jump across the gully to the main edge!
Our last  port of call is at Chequer's Buttress (E1 5b), which fittingly stands at the far right end of Froggatt Edge.
Approaching from the south via the track along the top of Curbar Edge this striking, square cut buttress, sporting a fine undercut arête, can be seen, heralding the beginning of Froggatt's features.
It would be easy to be intimidated here on first acquaintance, for this part of the crag is less friendly than the rest.
For the most part the walls are steep and blank, formerly quarried in places, and split by non-too-friendly cracklines.
One or two of these, big Crack and Chequer's Crack, at El and HVS respectively, would also be worthy of inclusion  on any ‘best of’ list.
Amongst all this apparent severity hangs the upper arête of Chequer's Buttress, a gauntlet thrown from the crack that just  cries out to be taken up.
A gentle, very gentle, introduction is made via a ramp on the right side of the buttress; just enough to get limbs moving and anticipation rising before a small platform is gained.
Climbers who have succumbed to the lurking intimidation will find this little haven quite familiar over the next few moments…hours?…as repeated attempts are made to commit themselves to a traverse across the wall towards that seemingly distant arête.
There really isn't any need to worry though, for all around are ample nut slots, several with the tell-tale whitish scarring that bears witness to the secure passage of countless stoppers and hexes and thus, be implication, other climbers.
Once the traverse is begun, peace of mind is more easily attained, albeit temporarily.
The wall is not as steep as it looks and a pleasing sequence of stretches and foot-changes, made all the more enjoyable by more excellent protection, leads to a stopping place just short of the arête.
There now ensues the nagging doubt that so often accompanies the crux of the climb; it's all very well getting this far, but until those crucial moves are made it could all still come to nought.
In the case of Chequer's Buttress the key is a long, long reach left to a rounded ‘break’ on the arête, the security of a good crack on the right fading as commitment takes over.
Don't expect a jug, although the further you reach the better the hold feels.
Once both hands are across, the feet will inevitably follow, smearing cautiously on another of those rounded breaks that are a trademark hereabouts.
Perched on the arête you can now savour the position — the exposure is out of all proportion to the route's meagre size — before the next exhilarating section leads to an abrupt finish on the flat top of the buttress.
Layaways, jugs and flakes, with the protection now well below, provide a fitting culmination to a memorable outing, not to mention an insight into the nature and satisfaction of climbing gritstone.
Articles such as this more often than no conclude with the location of the nearest recommended watering hole, and this one is no exception.
A track, starting close to Froggatt Pinnacle, leads down through the birchwoods, between moss-clad boulders and crackling bracken, to emerge on the main road near the Chequers.
For a long time this was a virtual no-go area for climbers, particularly scruffy ones, but this is now no longer the case, and a pint or two here ought to round off a Froggatt day rather nicely.
Climbers on Valkyrie, HVS 4c, 5a, Froggatt Pinnacle — a summit, albeit a modest one (photos by the author).
John Fleming on the final moves of the upper arête of Chequer's Buttress, E1 5b.
Running it out on the adventurous Sunset Slab, VS 4b.
TRAVELLING LIGHT
AFTER A FEW HOT SUMMERS, LIGHTWEIGHT, POLYCOTTON CLOTHING HAS COME INTO ITS OWN.
WE REVIEW SOME OF THE WIDE RANGE OF PRODUCTS AVAILABLE
EQUIPMENT
LADIES FREESTYLE TROUSERS
Mountain Equipment Approx retail £37.95
These are lightweight trousers made from 50% cotton, 50 polyester.
Their main features are: a double thickness of fabric over the behind, incorporating two large zipped pockets, knee patches, two front zipped pockets, a zip fly with button fastening and a non-elasticated waistband with belt loops.
The seams are well stitched and overlocked to prevent fraying and improve strength.
After considerable wear, I've found that the clever construction of the rear pockets provides extra protection against abrasion, while also helping the trousers keep their shape.
Both pockets are large enough to carry guidebooks or passports etc, without spoiling the line of the trousers.
The design of the front pockets allows for expansion and a place to put a pen/pencil.
Knee patches improve durability and help lessen the bagginess caused to the knee area after climbing or walking.
I've found the sizing of the Freestyle trousers to be quite generous, which makes them a bit baggy at the waist.
A partly elasticated waistband might help eliminate this problem, but would probably spoil the overall neatness of the trousers.
The trousers come with a good length in the leg, but this is easily turned up.
The trousers are not water resistant, but do dry very quickly when wet.
In short, they are versatile summer trousers which have proved a useful addition to my wardrobe both for use in the UK and on the continent.
A men's version is available at the same price.
Unisex Freestyle shorts are available at £27.95.
LADIES' BAGS
Rohan Approx retail: £39
These trousers are made from a 50% cotton, 50% polyester mix, which is slightly heavier than that used for the shirt.
Mine are a new style that's a wider and more practical fit on the calves.
They are well cut, flexible, pleasant to wear, and excellent for summer hillwalking.
In general, Rohan have managed to combine roomy practicality with stylishness.
My one complaint is the proportionate sizing of hip to  waist — the waist is large for women's trousers.
They are well-endowed with pockets: two zipped at the back (giving double thickness to the seat), one of which has a side opening to take a map but too narrow for an OS map.
There is a double set of front pockets on each side — first a zipped pocket and in front of it an open patch pocket, and both are excellent, deep pockets.
A side pleat with stud fastener allows extra capacity.
The pocket zips are good quality plastic, so I'm not sure why the main zip is lightweight metal.
The stitching on my Bags is rough and badly finished off, especially on the belt loops.
The hems are simply overstitched for individual adjustment, and there's double thickness on the knees.
Like rohan's other garments, one of the great features of these bags is the choice of colours.
But, be warned, the strong colours will run.
LADIES' TRAIL PANTS
Craghoppers Approx retail: £35
These trousers are comparable with the Rohan bags.
Like them, they are made from a 50% cotton, 50% polyester mix, though the result is a thicker and slightly stiffer material — undoubtedly more hardwearing, but not as comfortable in texture.
The Craghoppers trousers are a good fit on the waist, with plenty of room to move.
The one oddity of the cut is the excessive width of the lower leg — in fact the trousers don't appear to be tapered at all.
On a tall person this may not be as ludicrous as on someone 5ft 4″.
The hem is left simply overstitched for self-adjustment and there is a double thickness across seat and knees.
There are two deep, zipped back pockets and double pockets at the front, the inner ones too small to be really useful.
The volume of the outer patch pockets is limited by their slanting cut.
Once again the opportunity for a secure pocket has been overlooked.
The plastic zips are of reasonably good quality but small, with fiddly zip pulls on the pockets.
The stitching is good, the waistband overlaps with two buttons and the waist loops are securely sewn under the waistband.
My trousers are dark navy — a dull but worthy colour; rather like the trousers themselves.
HAVANNA HIKING TROUSERS
Jack Wolfskin Approx retail £39.95
Americans have been using 60/40 material for jackets and trousers for years, yet for some reason it's never quite caught on in this country.
The weft, which makes up 60% of the material, consists of pure cotton thread, while the warp, the other 40%, is nylon thread.
This combination offers a lightweight, yet pretty tough material which doesn't fee too synthetic.
On the other hand, don't expect a nice, soft cotton feel.
The nylon blend does mean these trousers are tough and hard wearing.
In the past six months I've worn a pair for a variety of purposes, from rock climbing to trekking, from gardening to pubbing and they're still presentable.
I've managed to get them pretty manky from time to time and a spin through the washing machine brings them up as good as new.
They're comfortable, too, with plenty of room where it counts.
Having said this, I'm sure some folk would prefer them a bit tighter round the seat and hips.
The pockets, two at the front and a zipped one at the rear, are spacious, and there's a useful little knife pocket on the side.
I've used it for carrying pens — you don't get too many grizzlies or wolves where I live!
Other features include double material at the knees, double belt loops and a good sized ‘leg’ pocket with a press stud flap, complete with muddy paw print!
SOLO TROUSERS/COLORADO PANTS
Calange Approx retail: £30/£32
These two styles of easy care trousers from calange are the epitome of simplicity and lightness, just what's needed when climbing or walking in hot climates.
Last year I used a pair of Colorados for a week's climbing in the Verdon and a pair of Solos for a week's backpacking in the Pyrenees.
Solos come with an elasticated and drawcord waist, cut to length legs, two side pockets and a zipped rear pocket, and a baggy cut which allows you to climb, scramble and walk without restriction.
The Colorados have elasticated ankles and a very baggy cut for wide, wide bridging and come in ‘two sizes fits all.’
An adjustable elastic waist fits a number of sizes.
The trousers have two deep waist pockets and a zipped pocket at the rear.
Both trousers are cut to be loose fitting and this is a tremendous benefit for the fair skinned in hot climates.
My Solos are in a 50% cotton and 50% polyester fabric, but Calange now use a microfibre called Sofitex for both garments.
I have a few niggles about design, finding the waist drawcord on the Solos awkward and annoying and the elasticated buckle on the Colorados inclined to slip and get in the way of a harness.
I've also found the size pockets on the Colorados too shallow for safety.
But these aren't big problems and I'd recommend both trouser styles to anyone, providing you can afford them.
Furthermore, the Print Colorados have outrageously loud designs for an extra £1!
TOM PRENTICE
FREESTYLE SHIRT
Mountain Equipment Approx retail: £22.95
This shirt's 65% polyester 35% cotton fabric is warm against the skin even when first put on.
It dries surprisingly quickly, and providing it's laundered as directed on the label it's relatively crease resistant.
However, I did find that after a short time the material began to pill quite badly around the cuffs and down the front.
It may be that the percentage of polyester needs to be reduced and the cotton increased.
The shirt is traditional in style, the main features being: a collar and yolk, a pleated vent down the back beneath the yolk, two large chest pockets with buttoned flaps and a section for pens/pencils.
The cuffs have a large opening secured by two buttons making it very easy to roll them up the arm.
A very high standard of stitching and finishing can be found on this shirt, the seams either being overlocked or enclosed, making them fairly robust.
Generous sizing allows room for movement and another thermal layer underneath if desired, making the shirt a functional garment for the outdoor enthusiast.
A summer weight version is available and the shirt comes with the option of short or long sleeves at £17.95 and £21.95.
LADIES' SAFARI SHIRT
Rohan Approx retail: £26
This versatile long sleeved shirt has become an essential part of my wardrobe.
It is a practical and generous fit with plenty of length in body and sleeves, and roomy across the shoulders.
It is beautifully cut and is stylish enough to wear off the hill.
The collar is a fraction low for wearing with a tight crew-necked jumper, but is excellent with anything looser and sits well fastened or open.
The front pockets — an elegant version of patch pockets — are fastened at the top by a single stud fastener — okay for a hanky but don't keep your car keys in them!
The stud fastenings are less fiddly than buttons and coloured to co-ordinate with the shirt.
The stitching is well finished and the Safari is a good quality shirt — but no more than you'd expect for the price.
The shirt comes in the usual varied rohan colour range — the colour (in the case of my turquoise shirt) is safe after a few washes, and there is a short-sleeved version available for £22.
The material is a 65% polyester 35% cotton mix called Finelight, which has a cool, silky feel without being delicate.
It's quick drying and not particularly crushable, so travels well — useful if you need a walking shirt which emerges reasonably unscathed.
As for the Rohan logo?
I'm learning to live with it.
Loud colours in the Verdon — Calange's Print colorados in action (photo Roger Everett).
Relaxing with a Rohan Safari Shirt and a brew on the Pyrenean High Route.
ON THE ROCK
THE MOUNTAINEER AS ARTISAN
STEVE SUSTAD'S HIMALAYAN EXPLOITS ARE SUBSTANTIAL, YET THIS PUBLICITY-SHY CHARACTER CLAIMS HE HAS NOTHING TO TALK ABOUT.
ED DOUGLAS SET OUT TO DISCOVER WHAT MAKES HIM TICK
Some people say there is no God, others just don't know.
Me?
I'm convinced there is something out there, moving mysteriously and performing wonders.
I'll elucidate.
It started in Fat Harry's, long after the nominal closing time, across a table littered with empty glasses.
I was observing how difficult it was to arrange a day on the crags with a mountaineering celebrity when the weather is warm and very wet.
The bespectacled, quietly-spoken American sitting next to me immediately piped up with the appalling suggestion that I could always go to Beachy Head.
I'm not good at hiding rabid terror, but I'm equally poor at turning down intelligent suggestions.
With no ice and the rock wet, what could be better than combining the two?
But then again, have you ever woken up at two in the morning covered in sweat, with the absolute conviction that your time on the planet is about to run out?
So the good Lord's timely intervention in the form of a burglar at the back door of Steve Sustad's North London address the  night before D-Day might spell bad news for some insurance company, but I sure wasn't complaining.
And having committed the boy to a day on the rubbish, he could hardly turn me down when I suggested we settle for a couple of hours' conversation over a few beers, after he'd sorted out the mess.
Steve recalls how his brother (an accountant) hospitalised a burglar with one of his golf clubs.
Looking at his tall, angular frame, I have no doubt that Steve, if he chose, could repeat the performance.
Somewhere in  Haringey is one lucky house-breaker!
Steve warned me early.
Sitting in his half-constructed conservatory carefully rolling a cigarette, he recounted how, on his return from Everest in 1987, he was asked to give an interview to Capital Radio.
At the end of the recording, the woman who had been showering him with questions observed the following: ‘I have never done such a difficult interview.
How can you make such an interesting subject seem so banal?’
She may have felt aggrieved, but she also missed the point.
Sustad does not give interviews because he dislikes reading about climbing about as much as he dislikes talking about it.
And so you'll appreciate that talking about himself doing it and then having to read the result is doubly distasteful.
But it's not just that.
Several months ago at a party I asked him why he hadn't written a book about his years in the Himalaya.
He's done more than most in the Greater Ranges in the last ten years and still has the prospect of many more years to come.
Didn't he wish to put his considerable experience on paper?
He looked very carefully at me, which is his way of getting your attention, before saying no.
At the stage of our acquaintance I was unaware of when to change the subject.
‘Why not?’
I persisted, rather surprised that somebody who really had done something was so reticent, when there are people, like me for instance, who bleat on about the most tawdry experiences.
Steve continued to fix his eye on me before adding finally, ‘Because I've got nothing to say.’
Stayed Put
Nothing can be quite something.
Steve grew up in Seattle and began climbing in the Cascades Range.
He met Georges Bettembourg there in 1979, they became friends and Sustad was invited to go to Shivling in 1981 with Bettembourg and a strong team that included Doug Scott who was to become a great friend and partner, and Don Whillans, who, despite being in his 50s, by then still contributed to the expedition.
For Sustad it was obviously enjoyable climbing with the man.
‘I found him generous and friendly.
He was a sort of mentor.’
After reaching the top of the Voie Normale, Sustad and Whillans refrained from continuing to the summit.
‘Don and I were near the top,’ Steve explains, ‘but we just saw down in the snow and Don pulled out a bottle of booze.
They didn't bother going any further.
At the mention of Whillans’ middle-aged spread, Steve smiles and observes that while he and Greg Child began the climbing thin and disappeared, Whillans trimmed down to normal weight.
After Shivling, Steve returned to Seattle and in 1982 went to Yosemite.
Extracting information on what he got up to there isn't easy.
What, I wondered, did he do in California?
‘Oh, a few things.’
Would he care to elaborate?
‘When, you know…(long pause)…the Salathé, Half-Dome, the Nose, Washington Column, that kind of stuff.’
Although Sustad has the reputation of a formidable Himalayan climber, it's obvious that these big-wall climbs mean a lot to him.
Likewise his early days in the Cascades, where he recalls a scene as off-beat as the one he adopted over here.
‘I remember one guy,’ he says, ‘I think he was an ex-Hell's Angel.
He had three bullet-holes in him.’
Steve falls silent after offering this last piece of information, and I foolishly plunge into the trap.
‘Why was that?’
‘I guess somebody shot him.’
Sustad's self-contained appearance and low-key humour belie outrageous behaviour of his won.
He recalls with obvious pleasure winning a bet by eating 11 raw eggs.
And why I saw raw, I mean shells and all!
In 1983 Sustad returned to the Himalaya, this time on a Doug Scott special with K2 the main objective.
While the expedition failed on the South Face, the two climbed Broad Peak.
Sustad is effusive in a quiet, low-key sort of way, on the subject of Scott.
‘He's very safe, he's very careful but he's fairly pushy.’
On the way down from the summit of Broad Peak they passed Greg Child and the ailing Pete Thexton, who was to die in a lower camp that night from pulmonary oedema.
In the same year, as the result of a freak accident in the Alps, Steve's friend Georges Bettembourg perished.
Sustad is phlegmatic and observes the irony that Bettembourg had remained in Chamonix when he had intended accompanying the expedition.
‘He had fallen in love and decided that the risk of going to the Himalaya wasn't justifiable.
Roger Baxter-Jones decided the same thing the next year for similar reasons and died guiding on another freak accident.’
I ask Steve if he can see any reasons behind the constant attrition of top mountaineers.
‘Bad luck,’ he answers, flatly.
‘How do you come to terms with it?’
I query.
‘I don't think about it,’ Steve responds, equally flatly.
‘I've got life insurance.
It's a good policy.
It pays out three  times as much as if I check out overseas.’
Rock Fright
After his Karakoram trip Steve returned to the UK and decided to winter in anticipation of leaving for Nepal and Makalu the next year.
While staying with Doug Scott he met Rose, who was then living in Nottingham.
They were married in 1985 and their first child, Katie, was born last year.
Their understanding and Rose's tolerance have cemented their relationship: something that Steve recognises and appreciates.
‘Every Himalayan climber I know is selfish in one way or another, and most Himalayan climbers seem to get divorced,’ he says.
The agony that others seem to go through as they try to balance the contrasting facets of their lives leaves Sustad largely unaffected.
Doesn't he ever get frightened?
‘Yeah.
I get frightened rock-climbing.’
He visited Nepal in 1984 to attempt the traverse of Makalu.
Two hundred metres below the summit Jean Afassanieff announced to Doug Scott and Sustad that he was going down and immediately turned round.
They had been above 8000 metres for several days and Steve recalls being as ‘nutty as a fruit-cake’.
Despite remonstrating with Afassanieff, they continued descending.
What did he do after being so close and yet so far?
I had a 12 egg omelette.
‘Yes, but what did you do after that?’
‘I had another 12 egg omelette!’
In retrospect Steve feels they should have kept going, since the easiest way down was over the summit and onto the North-West Ridge.
He also recalls coming across the body of a Czech climber sitting upright in the snow.
After an unproductive trip to the Karakoram in 1985 and some time off, Sustad joined Scott again in 1987 on an expedition to the North-East ridge of Everest, bedevilled by snowstorms.
He also suffered a bout of typhoid and while the trip made a lasting impression on his bowels, it also confirmed his dislike of traditional expedition tactics.
And he mistrusts the public attention mountaineering offers, preferring to stay out of the limelight.
While he doesn't support competition climbing, he cannot see what right he has to offer an opinion on the subject, especially when he considers the commercialism of some Himalayan mountaineers.
Since Everest he has concentrated on small, alpine style trips, climbing Rimo II in 1988 with Nick Kekus, and Makalu II with Victor Saunders in 1989, although they failed in their main objective of traversing Makalu.
For the last three years Steve and Rose have lived in London, having moved from Nottingham so that Steve could take a course in carpentry.
In Seattle he had studied philosophy, citing Nietzche and Camus as two of his more important influences, and he has a remarkable grasp of both British and American politics.
But you get the strong impression that he gets most cerebral satisfaction from dealing with physical problems.
As somebody who helps build houses, he has a dim view of architects, which provokes a long and hugely enjoyable arguments with fellow Londoner Victor Saunders, himself an architect.
Steve also reads voraciously, usually on expeditions, and he remains obsessive about his favourite work, Herman Melville's Moby Dick .
As a metaphor for the modern mountaineer, the life of Captain Ahab has some disturbing parallels.
When Rose was pregnant, Steve threatened to call the poor child after the book's narrator, Ishmael!
Last year he stayed home, although it didn't stop him from travelling to Ireland with Mick Fowler.
He has a tremendous respect for Fowler, adding: ‘If he applied himself and packed in his job as a taxman he could be the best in the world.
He's audacious, talented…actually he's rather perverse.’
They climbed on the still unexplored sea-stacks of the west coast.
‘We saw several things we were too frightened to attempt.’
I don't think I can imagine how frightening that is.
In July Steve leaves for the Karakoram to attempt Ultar, the highest unclimbed peak in Pakistan, with Fowler and Victor Saunders.
He expresses no doubts, knows precisely what is required and will set about the job with the same approach as he would building a house.
In the Himalayan environment — Steve Sustad on the Makalu expedition of 1989 (photo A. V. Saunders)
REPORTS
SCOTLAND
by Andy Nisbet
RIP to a good winter.
The buttresses of all grades are black and the gullies are trickling away into the valley streams.
But we had continuous climbing conditions from late November to March, reaching a peak during the cold, calm spell of continental air during early February.
The interesting feature for me has been the wider range of climbers active on the hard classics.
Five years ago the grapevine could list all the repeats.
This year, footsteps have been spotted exiting from Cold Hole (Fuar Tholl, Hard V), and I haven't heard who has made the second ascent, and it bugs me!
The most notable conditions were low down in the West, particularly in the Glencoe area, where every stream formed a mini icefall and icy crags like Beinn Udlaidh were in excellent condition.
Despite that, the Elliot's Downfall icicle only just touched the ground, so the ice was much thinner than in 1986.
Glencoe has been so popular in the past that unclimbed ice is hard to find, and new route activity has been further afield.
Steve Kennedy and David Ritchie climbed an icefall (III) which forms down the summer route The Whore's Apron (on the Glen Ceitlin Slabs; and if that means nothing to you, it's on Beinn Chaorach, off Glen Etive.
Steve and Arthur Paul climbed another grade III icefall nearby, while George Szuca and Mark Garthwaite climbed a short, steep icefall in the corrie left of Beinn Udlaidh (Hyde and Seek, IV).
Another ‘obscure’ venue was Stob Coire Altruim on the Buachaille, where Roger Everett and Simon Richardson climbed a fine, icy chimney in the centre of the main buttress (IV).
A snowfall the previous night, however, had covered the tracks of Graham Little and A. Baker, who had climbed it the day before — also singing its praises for the deep caves and icicles.
They also climbed a short ice line left of the easy gully (III).
In the mixed style, Rab and Chris Anderson and Rob Milne climbed two grade IVs on the far eastern buttress of Aonach Dubh.
In the better known winter venue of Stob Coire nan Lochan, the same team used the original start to Tilt, a line eyed up by several, and finished on the left to call it Inclination (VI).
After last month's report, Rab notes that he used peg runners, selfishly prolonging his life expectancy.
Central Grooves was repeated, making at least five ascents now, and hard V (or is it an easy VI?) seems the consensus.
I went to Ben Nevis in February after reports of good conditions, but was disappointed at the lack of ice compared to previous visits.
Few of the face routes were in nick, so it's not surprising that new route activity was limited and mixed in style.
An obvious gap in the guidebook was a winter ascent of Kellett's North Wall Route on Carn Dearg Buttress, made by Mark Charlton and Martin Burrows-Smith, with a serious crux pitch.
Another mixed route was the North-West Face on the Douglas Boulder (V) by Doug Lang and Colin Stead.
Aonach Mor has rapidly gained popularity and routes are being repeated as well as created.
With different teams competing for routes it's difficult to know what's new, but conditions have certainly been good this year.
The groove line left of Gondola with the Wind (name of the year?) and called Tinsel Town (IV/V), by Steve Kennedy and Paul Mills, seems to have been climbed before by Roger Webb.
In the middle of Central Buttress is a depression with an icefall (Roaring Forties, IV, climbed by Simon Richardson, Roger Everett and John Wilkinson).
Left of Molar Canal is a bay with an icefall called The Slever, IV, climbed by Steve Kennedy and Dave Ritchie.
Aonach Beag is Aonach Mor's remoter cousin, but Steve and Dave walked in (another sign that Aonach Mor is worked out?) and climbed Sideslip, a grade IV corner right of The Clare Effect.
Further South, on Creag an Socach of Beinn Dorain, Kev Howett and Graham Little climbed a hard direct line between Kick Start and Scorpion (The Prophet, V), and The Sting (V), right of Scorpion.
An icefall with a name like Terminator seems predestined to have a reputation, despite mark Garthwaite and George Szuca's grade of IV/V.
It forms down a route called Terminal Wall on Creag Tharsuinn.
On nearby Beinn an Lochain, a route called the Frog doesn't stir the same dread, perhaps reasonably so as it is a II/III crossing Toad, and put up by Tom Redfern and Klaus Schwartz.
One of the few small numbers this month!
Over on Creag Meaghaidh, one of the most obvious lines left in Scotland has been climbed.
Obvious because it stares you in the face as you walk in to the corrie, and also because you can see that the icicle hasn't quite formed despite rumours that it does.
Having failed on it myself, I'm disappointed that the barrier wall was mixed climbed, ending another vigil.
the line in question is the big corner and icicles above Staghorn Gully, climbed by Andy Perkins and Mal Duff at grade VI and called Postman Pat.
The same pair also combined a Grade V line right of 1959 Face Route — Deadline.
The classic lines here were in better condition than those on Ben Nevis, and The Fly received two ascents despite some thin and scary ice.
Nearer home for me in the Cairngorms, conditions were reasonable but nothing special on the high cliffs, whereas the lower Creag an Dubh Loch was in good nick for a while.
The iced wall on Labyrinth Direct was unusually thick and had several ascents, as did the Hanging Garden routes.
Wilson Moir climbed almost all of Goliath but ran out of ice just below the top.
The only new route was the Titan, a ramp and corner system to the right of Hemesis, graded IV/V by Graeme Ettle and Steve Blagbrough.
Even some of the remote crags were visited when walking and skiing conditions were easy.
On Braeriach, Andy Cunningham and I climbed Phoenix Edge (IV/V) on a long day visit on skis, while Brian Davison and I climbed Didgeridoo (V/VI) from a base in the bothy.
On a Creagan a'Choire Etchachan, a line spotted in the summer beside scabbard and crossing Sheath, therefore called Switchblade (V), gave another long day to John Lyall and me.
Citadel was repeated, again using an alternative finish and a little aid, after route finding problems on the top slab, by Pete Barass and Dave Heselden.
The winter line takes a descending right traverse under an overlap from the stance above the upper crux.
This is far from obvious in snowy conditions, and attempts to go up form the stance are forced off left.
A previously attempted line on the right side of the crag, right of Unknown Gully, gave a grade V — Games of chance — to Allen Fyffe and Richard Mansfield.
New lines in the Northern Corries must be getting scarce because only three were climbed recently, although White Magic was repeated by Graeme Ettle and quoted as straightforward V.
Graeme and John Lyall, with Stuart Cameron, girdled the crag at V (The Flying Doctors) while Andy Cunningham and Allen Fyffe climbed the short arête between Rampant and Bellhaven (Burning and Lotting, IV/V).
Nearby in Coire an Lochain, Brian Davison and I started up Daddy Longlegs and finished up Ventricle for a very hard route called Big Daddy (VI).
In the Northern Highlands conditions were good, but thinner than the best.
The thicker icefalls on Liathach and Beinn Bhan had frequent ascents, particularly Poacher's Fall and Silver Tear.
Also on Beinn Bhan, Der Riesenwand was climbed by Roger Webb by the original line, and Robin Clothier by an accidental direct finish (sorry, partners unknown), and Gully of the Gods by Robin Beadle and Martin Moran, who described it as a superb but straightforward grade V.
In the Fannichs, the magnificent line of Skyscraper Buttress was climbed by Chris Cartwright and Robin Clothier (‘an easy V’) and abseiled off by Wilson Moir and Niall Ritchie (‘a tottering heap of rubble’).
Surprisingly derogatory for one of the best lines in the Northern Highlands.
On Fuar Tholl, Wilson and Niall freed the superb Tholl Gate in good condition at V. On Sgurr a'Chaorachian's north-west buttresses, the chossy summer line Jupiter, a fine but rarely frozen 1200ft I/V, was climbed by Brian Davison and I. We also climbed Eastern Promise, a very steep but co-operative V on the eastern Ramparts of Coire Mhic Fhearchair and made the first ascent of the West-Central Wall by an even steeper line based on Mistral (VI).
Further north on An Teallach, the winter saw the demise of another long-eyed line — the awesomely steep face of Lord Berkley's Seat, climbed by Simon Jenkins and I at a reasonable V. North again, Brian Davison and I accidentally repeated The Gully of Nedd (easy IV) on Quinag, but fortunately also climbed the chimney on its right, Noggin the Nog (IV).
In the same area, a speculative trip to Beinn and Fhurain (where?) was disappointing, but we salvaged a steep but scrappy line of icefalls (IV).
Finally, let me end a long, but hopefully not tedious, list of routes with a real gem from Skye.
Martin Moran and M. Welsh climbed Deep Gash Gully (V) on Sgurr a'Mhadaidh, describing it as a formidable and atmospheric winter climb.
Chris Forrest on the first winter ascent of Mariella, Coire an t-Sneachda: one of this season's new routes (photo Graeme Ettle).
SHORT CHANGE FOR CLIMBING WALLS
One of the MCofS policies being reviewed at present is that of the provision of indoor training facilities for rock climbers.
The MCofS's aims in this field are to provide facilities which cater fully for the climbing population's needs in the greater conurbations.
We intend to give help and advice to local climbers, local authorities, sports centres and The Scottish Sports Council in their choice of sites, type and size of wall, and funding.
And let's face it, with Scotland's poor weather, nowhere deserves more priority.
Climbing walls in the past have always been given short change from sports centres and the Sports Council.
They are usually stuffed away in dark corridors or storerooms that are of little use to the centre itself, and are given low priority, so receive only small funding.
As a result, the walls built so far in Scotland have proved inadequate for the number of people using them.
The same situation was prevalent in England over a decade ago, and while the new breed of English walls has blossomed to state of the art types such as Newcastle's Berghaus Wall, Scotland's walls remain poor relatives.
Although walls can be initially quite expensive, they require very little maintenance, little or no staffing and draw in many user visits (10,000 per year in Glasgow, 6,000 per year in Fort William) thus paying for themselves after only a few years.
And of course, the better the wall the greater its use (Newcastle's draws visitors from over 150 miles away and often sees 90 visitors in one evening).
Although it is good to see the number of such facilities increasing in Scotland, it is sad to see some of these falling far short of the standards required.
The new state of the art Berghaus wall in Newcastle (photo Dave Pegg).
MOUNTAINEERING COUNCIL OF SCOTLAND NEWS
The McofS has only been involved with two developments so far (The Kelvin Hall in Glasgow and the Leisure Centre in Dundee — currently being built).
It is hoped that the new McofS policy will be widely distributed to relevant bodies, and that any future developments are  of a higher standard than at present.
We will continue to campaign for greater funding from the Sports Council and perhaps influence well known Scottish outdoor equipment specialists to follow the Berghaus example and become involved.
The next priority location is being considered in Edinburgh where there is, at present, no easily accessible or suitable wall.
While this development must take the majority of any forthcoming Sports Council funding, it is obvious that many of the existing facilities need to be dramatically expanded and the MCofS will endeavour to ensure this happens sooner rather than later.
ANNUAL MEETING
The 1991 Annual General Meeting will be held in the Glencoe Ski Lodge at Bridge of Orchy on Saturday, May 11, at 7.30 pm.
This annual gathering of the clans has, in the past, been associated with magnificent weather, allowing executive members to combine business with pleasure.
The turnout last year was heartening, with the lodge packed to the brim, and I hope as many members will attend again this year.
Items for discussion include: the adoption of MCofS policies (Access and Conservation; Safety and Training; Bolts, Competitors and Climbing Walls) and a proposed subscription increase to include liability insurance for clubs.
Any other items for inclusion on the agenda should be sent to:.
The following executive posts are vacant: Vice President: June Ross, eligible for re-election; Secretary: J. Leftley, demits office (John Morrison nominated); Treasurer; Dugald Mackie, eligible for re-election.
Ordinary members: potentially three vacancies (Vaughan Hammond, Kate Ross and Chriss Rice already nominated).
Any other nominations should be sent to John Leftley by April 30.
Free accommodation is available at the Lodge (contact J. Leftley) on May 10/11.
Otherwise the convenient Bridge of Orchy Hotel has a bunkhouse, posh B&B, good food.
LAKES
by Bill Birkett
A period of frost in mid February produced good ice conditions in certain locations.
While nothing new has been recorded (and conditions could generally be described as lean), it is worth noting for future reference that the following were climbable:
Inaccessible Gully received a handful of ascents, Dove Crag Gully on Grasmoor was ascended, the icefall forming the Right Hand Finish to Great Gully was probably the most fully formed and was hammered; C Gully was much harder and received perhaps only three ascents.
Al Phizacklea repeated Minotaur on the East Buttress of Scafell (again abseiling in from the top to the start of the ice).
He reportedly found it very hard and was left hanging from his axes as both crampon placements broke loose nearing the top.
Low Water Beck was ascended but conditions here (unusually) were never great.
Shoulthwaite Ghyll remained in a very good condition for a surprisingly long period.
While most of the snow gullies remain choked, snow conditions have generally been disappointing.
Central Gully on Great End kept up its yearly performance when the cornice collapsed with a climber attached (Sunday, March 3)— he and his partner were swept down the gully (unfortunately one was rather badly hurt) picking four others up en-route.
Alan Hinkes was reportedly one who got a lift and carried down, while Mick Fowler watched from the South East Gully.
My first record of a Central Gully avalanche is in 1917, taken from Lakeland pioneer H.M.
Kelly's diaries (he was swept down with fortunately only a twisted knee to show for it).
On the personality scene, Paul Ross's Jack Russell terrier Blencathra Badger won at Crufts and Doug Scott (north Cumbria based) drove off the road and into the river when looking for Grey Mare's Tail.
Apparently a couple of somersaults ensured a complete write-off.
Paul Ross and his prizewinning dog Blencathra Badger (photo Birkett).
PEAK
By Graeme Alderson
The particularly inclement spring weather this year has led to a continuing lack of dry rock and new routes, resulting in an exodus to warmer places, notably America.
Before his whirlwind trip to Colorado, Ben Moon managed to push bouldering grades that little bit further with his extension of the ‘Jerry Traverse’ at Stanage's Plantation boulders.
Given a grade of Fontainbleau 8a (which in English is bloody hard) the problem is un-named but ‘The Horne Brothers’(geddit?) has been suggested.
Ben and Mark Pretty, seems to have given those colonial chappies a good seeing to on their recent sojourn in Colorado, with numerous on-sight flashes of high grade routes.
Ben made the first on-sight of Psycho () and followed it up with on-sights of Genesis (), Rainbow Wall (), Your mother, Monument and Anarchiste (all ) with Mark sharing the honours on Monument.
Ben capped this with the first ascent of the roof right of Psycho.
No name as yet, but with a grade of E8, 7a, it is harder than Agincourt and is arguably the hardest (or most powerful) route in America.
That should keep those American chaps busy…for the next decade or two!
Ben Moon: pushing Peak bouldering grades (photo Steve Dodd).
IMAGES OF BUXTON '91
Light relief at the cabaret after the formalities were over.
Jeff Lowe and Catherine Destivelle — starred in a film of free ascent of Trango Tower.
Above: Spot the likeness.
The day after Buxton Alan Hinkes left his daughter for a trip to Everest.
Right: Jeff Lowe receives a parting gift from Chris Bonington.
Above: French kissing?
Catherine Destivelle bites a chunk out of Bonington's beard.
Right: Lord Hunt delivers his potent plea to conserve the mountain environment.
Below: Adrian Burgess — spoke about personal responsibility in Himalayan mountaineering.
Above: Paul Piana shares another joke with the audience.
BOOKS
POWER POLITICS AND SHADES OF GRAY
MOUNTAIN LOVER by Dennis Gray, Crowood Press, £14.95
Autobiographies are addictive, especially to the people who write them.
Mountaineers are especially susceptible: Eric Shipton wrote two; Chris Bonington has already published three volumes of his, as well as a pictorial reprise, and is probably this very moment rapturously engaged on volume four.
And now Dennis Gray has weighed in with a second version of his ‘Life as a Climbing Tyke’— the first having been that marvellous tale of human bondage from 20 year ago,Rope Boy , or ‘How I survived an apprenticeship with Joe Brown and started to love climbing’.
Fortunately for us readers, Dennis has never stopped loving climbing.
His second venture into self-mythography is every bit as entertaining as the first, and has the added spice of political and personal deep texture.
Mountain Lover is one of the most intriguing (in several senses of the word) books I've read about the global climbing village.
Like its author, this is a book which insists you forgive it every one of its manifest faults simply because it presumes to be no other than it is.
There are things which let it down.
Proof-reading is of the abysmal quality we've come to expect from this particular publisher, and there's a certain amount of sloppiness and inaccuracy which a good editor would have pruned.
But it's horrid to dwell on these things where the central effort and basic attitude is so right minded.
Dennis no arriviste , no poseur or commercial exploiter.
He's a climber right down to his grit-scoured fingertips.
He's been there, sacrificed for it and been changed by it.
He's one of the initiates, and in my opinion that counts for, and perhaps even excuses, a lot.
The climbing and the people who climb are central to this book, and Dennis's descriptions of both are rich, but rich with sensation, humanity, humour, magnanimity.
Great stories about — Brown on a winter's day leading a verglassed Freddie's Finale; Robin Barley out there on Macabre; Beardie cruising the hill-streets of Meanwood…
The problem is — if it is a problem — that personality has its downside.
Dennis was the best political administrator the British climbing world has ever had; and we, as climbers, will remain in his debt for decades to come.
But to some, his ease and aptitude in dealing with people and issues implied a power they coveted.
Dennis's last years as general secretary at the BMC — already personally unhappy for him because of his divorce — were made professionally difficult by the unprincipled, sustained and often personal vendetta conducted against him by the man termed, in this book's account of the period, as ‘the BMC's tame Rottweiler’.
As someone who worked in the BMC when it was at its height, and who has very long acquaintance with both protagonists, I can vouch for the veracity of Dennis's story as told here, and can only lament the nit-picking which has continued even after its publication in this book.
It has been one of the saddest episodes in the whole climbing-village soap-opera.
But though we might have to plough through the politics and suffer with Dennis as we do so, the book still ultimately gets the accept right and takes us out promiscuously to Korea and the Cape, Russia, America, Israel and Morocco.
It trades in the primal delight which the hills bring; in their clean innocence and the wonderment they inspire.
I don't always know where Dennis is at.
There are passages in this book which are curiously enigmatic or coy; but I'd recommend it to anyone and I'd freely tell them about Dennis that he's a good old boy, a sound socialist, a grassroots climbers.
As for his critics (Wilson et al), compared to the breadth of interest and activity on display here, who gives a toss what a critic thinks, apart from the critic himself?
THE CORBETTS Scottish Mountaineering Club, £14.95
I was in the hills north of Achnashellach recently on a day of low cloud and smirry rain.
My destination, Maol Chean-dearg, for all it is a fine hill, just fails to make it as something special.
Surrounded by like Fuar Tholl and Sgorr Ruadh in the east, Ben Damph and all the Torridonian giants in the north, and the majestic corries of Beinn Bhan in the west, Maol Cheandearg just fall short of that majestic category.
But close by Maol Chean-dearg another massive hill appears, like a great serrated wedge of light coloured rock.
Below its steep face, two or three lochans nestle in slabby cradles, and you find yourself almost wishing that was your destination.
This hill is called An Ruadh-stac, and it fails to make the magical Munro status by just 25 metres.
In many ways it is typical of so many Corbetts — those hills that are below 3000ft yet are higher than 2500ft, in that in every way other than height they are aesthetically more satisfying than their higher neighbours.
Indeed, three of the mountains I mentioned earlier which surround Maol Chean-derag are Corbetts: Fuar Tholl, Ben Damph, and Beinn Bhan.
I can think of dozens of Corbetts which are finer mountains in every way than many of their higher counterparts in the Munro bracket.
Ones that come immediately to mind include the Cobbler, Goatfell on Arran, the Cuillin of Rum, Stac Pollaidh, Suilven and Canisp, Beinn Dearg near An Teallach, Streap, Ben Aden and many, many more.
Corbetts are not inferior mountains because they lack a little bit in height.
It's a message all Munro baggers wold do well to remember.
But such is the way of life and the pressing business of climbing all 277 Munros that the Corbetts tend to be ignored, at least for the moment.
But Now the Scottish Mountaineering club has just published a guide to all the 221 Corbetts.
Called The Corbetts and other Scottish Hills , it's produced in the same successful format as the SMC's previous guide to the Munros.
Each page has a colour photograph of the mountain, a sketch map and a description of the route.
It's a simple formula, but one that seems to be quite successful, judging from the number of copies sold already.
There are those who shake their heads and make negative noises about guidebooks like this, but there is an argument that says the publication of a Corbetts guide could take some of the pressure off the Munros.
Working on the basis that there is a finite number of hill walkers, and I believe that to be the case, then spreading the load will only have a good effect on the more popular hills — some of which are showing signs of over-use.
I don't think this guide will make any difference to erosion on the hills at all.
And if it does, then the SMC plans to donate £1 of the proceeds of every book sold to grant aid for the repair and maintenance of footpaths in Scotland.
That's fair enough.
This is a book I heartily recommend to al hill walkers.
I believe it's actually a better publication than the Munros book, and if like me, you've just finished the Munros, or are just about to ‘compleat’, then this new book will have your mouth watering for the new challenge ahead.
SKI TOURING IN SCOTLAND by Angela Oakley, Cicerone Press, £7.95
Angela Oakley is a past president of the Glasgow Nordic Ski Club and is currently the club's Vice-President and Training Co-ordinator.
She is nothing if not an enthusiast and exhibits that special quality so necessary for a regular ski touring in Scotland; a voracious appetite for sniffing out snow in sufficient quantity to make a continuous tour.
The very fact that over the past few snow starved winters she has compiled a guide book to Nordic ski touring in Scotland, is sufficient testimony to this characteristic.
But it's also testimony to something else.
While downhill  skiing demands regular and sustained snow to cover the pistes and while Nordic ski racing relies on frequent low lying snow in sufficient quantity to cut tracks, Nordic ski touring can be enjoyed on a surprisingly large  number of days, simply by going high on the mountain.
The Nordic ski touring community in Scotland is a friendly one, and Angela gives notice of this in her book, when she acknowledges a healthy exchange of information between skiers from all over the country.
This exchange has established some facts about where the snow is likely to be found and which terrain gives the best ski running.
The book records this knowledge and aims to inform the skier of worthwhile ski areas, routes and runs.
Perhaps not surprisingly, the vast majority of the 51 recorded routes are in the Central Highlands area, particularly in the central and eastern Cairngorms area.
These predominantly rolling hills certainly hold snow better than the hills of the west, but I'm just a bit disappointed that some super areas north of the Great Glen have been missed out.
Some of my own best ski touring days have been in the Fannichs and in the Beinn Dearg hills, Slioch offers a stunning day out on skis as do the big and mighty hills east of Achnashellach, Maoile Lunndaidh, Lurg Mhor, Sgurr Choinnich and the rest.
Missing too are some of the ski mountaineering classics which are ideally suited to Nordic touring gear.
The high level traverse from Kingshouse to Inveroran over Meall a'Mhuiridh, Clachlet and Stob Ghabhar, Stob Binnein and Ben More, and the Aonachs and Grey Corries, now made easily accessible by the Aonach Mor Gondola.
But this book takes in many forest areas too and I suppose there isn't room for everything.
Sit it beside Donald Bennet and Bill Wallace's Ski Mountaineering in Scotland guide and you have a good guide for every ski touring eventuality.
BORROWDALE by R. Kenyon, Fell and Rock Climbing Club
Borrowdale is a cragger's delight.
Steep routes, close to the road, sunshine, pleasant surroundings and generally good quality rock; plus there's a bit of adventure away from the crowds for those prepared to look for it.
This new edition by Ron Kenyon is largely based on the excellent modern guide written by himself and Dave Armstrong in 1986.
So what's happened in the past four years?
Well, not a lot really.
Certainly there are 130 new routes on a number of good quality, though generally small, buttresses scattered here and there throughout the valley — but not a lot to take the breath away.
A handful of exceptions are a bunch of top quality climbs in the E6 bracket on the seriously steep Reecastle.
A number of classics have (justifiably) been upgraded — Route 1 (Upper Falcon Crag) to E3, Greatend Pillar (Greatend) to E3 and both Banzai Pipeline (Greatend) and Praying Mantis (Goat) to E1.
Meanwhile, Footless Crow receives a strange grade of E5.
Strange because the author admits that climbers of average height and with average reach will not be able to clip the protection peg for the traverse, and will find it E6.
So if the majority of climbers will find it E6, why on earth grade the route for the minority.
The guide caused a bit of stir in Lakeland circles with the author's comments on Paul Ross's route Prodigal Son (comments which later turned out to be misplaced).
The incident seems to have been settled, but remains a warning to writers of climbing guides that they aren't above the law of libel.
In general, this guide continues the same high standards we have come to expect from the Fell and Rock, despite a scattering of proof reading errors here and there.
Oh, one downgrading — Nagasaki Grooves (Greatend) goes from E4 to E1.
Yes, it's a gremlin — let's hope no one  gets hurt!
ROCK CLIMBS IN THE PYRENEES by Derek L. Walker, Cicerone Press, £9.95
Derek Walker's guide covers a delectable area of rock climbing, as he rightly points out in his introduction.
Moreover, by describing the seven selected areas from a single, attractive base, the spa town of Pantlcosa, a wide range of climbs is concentrated into one slender book, this being the strength of this timely volume.
Flicking through the guide confirms the varied nature of the climbing, from the familiar Pic du Midi granite to the outrageous conglomerate of Riglos.
The photos, especially those in colour, give a fair taste of what's in store.
The cover shot nicely evokes the bewilderment felt when climbing in Ordesa.
The guide, in common with general style, comes with a flexible, weatherproof cover.
General style for climbers in Britain; but when you live in Spain, like I do, you genuinely appreciate such details.
The organisation of the contents is clear and the maps do their job, except for the one on page 96.
The diagrams mainly use a topo format, and though I personally do not like this much, use and  usability dictate here.
Of the 90 or so major climbs, over 50 are in the TD/ED grade.
Unbalanced for some, but those who know the area will agree that you cannot make Moderates out of vertical rock.
By current tastes the text is dry, but I buy a guide for the information, and there are final blank pages for DIY humourists.
It is the text, however, where I fear I must fault the guide at times.
Walker gives routes a pitch by pitch description where he feels they are hard to follow.
Fine in theory; but why, then, does the Ravier in Ordesa, ‘logical in line’, receive this treatment, while the nearby Franco-Espaffola does not, for example.
More serious are the occasional discrepancies over grades between text and topos.
Though generally they are only out by one grade, that can be make or break for some.
This occurred on several Riglos routes, where text and topo also differed as to the number of pitches (Routes 2, 9 and 14 are good examples).
Notwithstanding my  criticisms , though, congratulations to Derek Walker for packing so much potential adventure into such a  usable volume.
It is surely a must for anyone tired of the somewhat claustrophobic feel of the now more popular French and Spanish venues.
MAIL
Do yourself a favour, wear a helmet
I am writing to express my sincere thanks to the rescue services who, on Saturday, January 26, rescued my injured partner Stuart Adam from Winter Corrie, Glen Clova.
Unfortunately Stuart died that night of severe internal and spinal injuries after having lain in the corrie for four hours before being airlifted.
Stuart was only 17 years old and it is a tribute to his strength and personality that he was still conscious when the rescue team arrived, one and a half hours after I left him to go for help.
We had had a superb day's climbing, and to say his death was tragic is an understatement.
However, let me add something, if I may, to the Great Helmet Debate.
Stuart lost control due to bad snow conditions, halfway down our descent route, and slid uncontrollably for 400ft.
His injuries were incurred when he struck the gully wall, head-first, at considerable speed.
He was wearing an Ultimate Climbers' Helmet and you will be glad to know that although the helmet sustained considerable damage, Stuart had no head injuries.
This may not seem relevant in the light of Stuart's subsequent death, but let me assure you it is.
The helmet allowed us to have the last few hours of his life together before his airlift to hospital, and this would not have been possible otherwise.
PLEASE wear a helmet, summer or winter, for Stuart and for his family's sake.
Let him know that something good has come out of his tragic death.
For those of you who may be wondering, I am also 17 years old.
We were both experienced climbers with numerous winter ascents to our credit.
Finally, many thanks are due to the Tayside Police Mountain Rescue team and the search and rescue crew based at Leuchars for their support and help.
‘I TAKE COMFORT IN THE FACT THAT YOU ARE SAFE,
BELAYED TO THE CLOUDS AND HIGH PEAKS,
BLOWING WITH THE SNOW…
EVERLASTING PEACE,
…
I'LL SEE YOUR FACE AGAIN, IN SNOW, ON THE SUMMIT…’
The state of Stuart's helmet, inside and out, after the fall.
But it still prevented him getting a serious head injury.
When will we see this guide?
To The Fell and Rock (Guidebook Committee) with regard to the Gable/Pillar guide.
Are we ever going to see the  publication of this masterpiece?
I run the climbing shop at Wasdale Head and am being asked constantly by despairing climbers if there is any news of a release date.
After five years when it seems it has been written, rewritten, proof read etc, I have now run out of answers.
In this time it seems that all other areas of the Lakes have had a new guide, and some of them two.
Perhaps there are so many new routes being done West Cumbria that the writers cannot keep up; or is it that other areas are more important to the committee?
Whatever the reason, can the committee make a public statement regarding this lack of publication, as another climbing season is upon us and I still have no answers to give my customers.
Access to Egerton
Just a note with regard to one of the pieces reported in the February edition of Compass.
Further to the report on proposals for Egerton Quarry in Lancashire (February Compass), the article which appeared to cover one quarry was in fact describing issues arising at two separate sites.
Recently, due to legal complexities, the owners of Egerton Quarry have written to the BMC to advise climbers that climbing is not allowed at this location.
They have existing quarrying permission for part of the site and are required by law to take steps to ensure the public do not enter the area where permission applies.
Climbers intending to visit the site should telephone Bill Wright at the British Mountaineering Council for clarification of the position 
The other site referred to is presently subject to negotiations between a local authority in the North West of England and the BMC, and due to the need to avoid jeopardising negotiations between the council and the present landowner, no further details can be given at present.
Climbing mecca that deserves your respect
Climbers in the South East have long recognised the sandstone outcrop at High Rocks as a mecca for hard routes and new lines.
Last summer was no exception, with many fine lines going at 6a, 6b and 6c, thanks to the warm, dry weather and a lot of tenacious application.
During the summer months climbing charges rose considerably and it was rumoured that climbing access would be curtailed, due, in part, to malicious damage to gates and fencing (although there was no proof that this was done by climbers).
The present owners run the High Rocks Inn and its grounds as a commercial enterprise, and local climbers have been at pains to create a harmonious relationship between themselves and the owners.
To this end, prolonged negotiations have resulted in the following season ticket rates being granted to climbers: Three months, £10.00; six months £20.00; one year £30.00; family one year, £40.00.
Application for these can be made at the bar in the High Rocks Inn.
In view of this generous gesture it is hoped that both local and visiting climbers will treat this venue with the respect due to a Site of Special Scientific Interest and a first class example of sandstone rock.
In particular, slings should always be used on the tops of climbs to avoid any erosion due to rope friction, and no climbing or abseiling should be undertaken in big boots.
(Army lads please note!)
Take direct action to protect outdoor freedom
In the increasing access climate your Forbidden Arans article in the February issue further demonstrates the need for a concerted and unified stance from all those who value the open moors countryside and mountain areas in Britain.
Scottish access is following a similar trend with crop forestry, eight foot high fences and electrified fencing all being deliberately placed to deter access.
The traditional routes to the Fannichs from the Ullapool road are now in danger of being blocked off by extensive crop forestry ploughing and ‘deer fencing’.
It is necessary for everyone to stand up and be counted in a combined effort to make all MPs and prospective parliamentary candidates state their stance on free public access.
It is an affront that the basic right to walk open country is denied by a minority of anachronistic, autocratic landed gentry.
None of the recent legislation and carve-up of countryside bodies by the present regime holds anything of good for the public.
All is slanted to maintaining the Establishment stranglehold on vast tracts of land for their own selfish playgrounds.
If any freedoms are going to remain, now is the time to take action; physically as well as verbally.
With an estimated 18 million people actively walking, rambling and climbing, we should not be barred at the whims of a privileged few.
If everybody does not have the moral resolve to make their views known, and their presence felt, we will be restricted to walking reservations and climbing on climbing walls.
Borrowdale confusion
With reference to Mr Kenyon's letter (March issue),
I hope I don't add to the confusion of the Borrowdale guidebook editions when I point out that their detailed account of what occurred on the first ascent of Prodigal Sons is in fact what happened on a totally different route named  Déj ‘a Vu.
The misinformation concerns only the route  Déj ‘a Vu and has nothing at all to do with Prodigal Sons.
Also, while I have the chance, could I point out that in spite of the FRCC guide crediting me with the first ascent of the bolt ladder route named Fiery Cross (Dry Grasp) on Upper Falcon Crag, it has nothing to do with me or B. Henderson, listed as my second.
I hope the FRCC can understand my annoyance, since I have never placed a bolt on a Lakeland crag.
It seems only fair to ask that future FRCC guidebook writers check out these rumours with the actual climbers involved.
While we are on the subject, may I also point out that it is not on the FRCC guides that have printed so many incorrect ‘historical facts’.
A great deal of history in recent Lakeland books is total rubbish.
One writer copies the other without checking the facts — and so it goes on.
Perplexed by a deafening silence
My young friend Ed Douglas is wrong in assuming that Victor Saunders is excluded from hero-candidacy by virtue of his Gordonstoun education, but right in suggesting its irrelevance (April issue).
My reference to it was simply a tease, and all the more tempting given Victor's known sensitivity on the point.
Not that he's the only climber who appears to wish to play down the education aspects of his past — amongst many others with whom you can have sport in this manner are Stephen Venables (Charterhouse), our own Tom Prentice at Climber (Harrow), or even Ed himself (Uppingham).
Why they should be so flinching on this score is beyond me, but let me assure Ed that I'm note remotely intolerant of any of them, only surprised and amused that its mention should matter to them so much.
Shades of Hurd, Eton and Thatcher in succession!
As to the more serious matter of the Boardman Tasker Award, I'm as perplexed as Ed on the question of what should be done with it.
It has been open to abuse, and indeed has been abused in the past by the Sheffield Mafia, which continues to exercise a covert control over British climbing media and administration out of all proportion to its collective record or ongoing contribution.
That situation should be ended for good.
It will certainly be held in abeyance, given the composition of the present judging panel ().
But they won't be there for ever.
I'd like to see the award restructured as a bursary for aspiring talent — though that, too, would have obvious pitfalls — rather than the annual sop to what Ed terms ‘the interests of publishers, literati or establishment’.
But it does look as though the whole business is irretrievably in their hands now — an impression strengthened by the deafening silence in response to the honest and serious disclosures I made.
It's likely in consequence to become more and more of an irrelevance, and that seems to me profoundly sad — especially given the examples it was established to uphold.
And by the way, I still believe Dermot Somers' was immeasurably the better book.
Is there nobody out there apart from Ed — whose opinions I respect but do not always share — prepared not only to disagree with, but also to argue a case against, that proposition?
Surely if the judges did come to their decision on the grounds of relative merit, they should be prepared to defend it?
Or are they, too, in retrospect, unsure?
CLUB NOTES
EQUIPMENT DIRECTORY
PETE LIVESEY
TRAINING IN TURMOIL
CONSULTATION IS NOT THE BMC'S STRONG POINT WHEN IT COMES TO MOUNTAIN TRAINING, ACCORDING TO PETE LIVESEY.
HE EXPLAINS WHY HE HOLDS THIS VIEW, AND WONDERS WHAT HAS HAPPENED TO THE TRAINING COMMITTEE
I have to admit to being somewhat partisan in this month's column, for I am,(or rather think I am) a member of the BMC's Training Committee.
I'm note sure because I don't think the BMC has a training committee any more.
I am not alone in this stage of limbo, for none of the other ordinary members of the committee knows either.
What we do know, however, is that we were due to finalise proposed changes to the Mountaineering Instructors' Certificate syllabus at the next meeting.
But our deliberations were pre-empted by a printed booklet arriving in the post in mid-March, which no accompanying explanation, which detailed the new MIC syllabus the training committee was supposed to debate!
What on earth was going on?
To understand the situation, a brief resume of the BMC's involvement in mountain training and the history behind the committee's existence is necessary.
At its inception the BMC adopted a positive attitude towards it training commitments; it recognised a duty to foster the safe training of young climbers.
The BMC underwent several ‘lean’ decades with a minimalist ethos holding sway.
The attitudes to training were fashioned by the ‘Taught-myself-with-mothers-clothesline-brigade and if-you-don't-die-in-the-first-year-you'll-have-made-it.’
This attitude is still held by some major climbers.
The Mountain Leadership Training Board was formed by the Central Council for Physical Recreation because the BMC had no interest in such a training scheme.
The BMC re-emerged from its lean years, got a grant and important: it wanted control of the wicked things the MLTB was doing to the ethics of mountaineering.
An acrimonious argument and clash of personalities flared up between the BMC and MLTB, which ended up in a London arbitration court that suggested a formula for reconciliation, Lord Hunt reported on the way forward: a key element being that the BMC should retain and foster its influence and activity in the training sphere.
The BMC now re-affirmed its commitment to training and took full responsibility for all training matters in the mountaineering, apart from the Mountainwalking Leader Scheme, which the MLTB continued to run.
The newly formed Training Committee was to steer and manage the training initiatives of the BMC, of which the MIC is the major component.
The committee comprised of a handful of well known climbers and mountaineers who are also respected and known in the training field, plus a ‘climber in the street’ watchdog.
At a later date the committee was augmented by one or two ‘users’ of mountain training.
It quickly became apparent that the BMC Management Committee was antagonistic towards training initiatives and dismissive of the training committee, instead preferring to talk to the external advisory board SACOMT, which contained real climbers and not the self-interested educationalists infesting the training committee.
The training committee continued to advise the training officer, but all real initiatives were overturned or dismissed by the management committee.
And so to the present.
As I reported in April, the SACOMT panel reported on the future of training in the 1990's with a plea for rationalisation — part of which was apparently the quiet displacement of the training committee.
The BMC is to continue to have a training officer (presently Iain Peter) who will continue to do what he did before, but instead of answering to a neutered committee, training decisions are now to be made by a BMC vice president — probably John Porter.
It should be noted here that while Porter is an eminently sensible and clear-thinker his role as a member of the training committee was one of ‘climber in the street’, whose job was apparently to steer the committee  away from any productive involvement in training.
To have an ‘anti-trainer’ leading policy matters in the BMC's training involvement seems a clear reversal of the past policy.
The training committee was wound up by Vic Machin, the chairman and the BMC secretary Derek Walker some months ago — but they have yet to inform the committee: a clear snub to the many volunteers who banged their heads against a wall with only limited success for a dozen years in a genuine attempt to impart some credibility to the BMC's involvement in mountain training.
The BMC apparently now sees the MLTB as a controllable board which will steer mountain training with the best interests of the BMC in general at heart.
If (the MLTB) now has control of the MIC and presumably the Single Pitch Scheme, with the guides' carnet soon to follow, the whole thing will be out of BMC hands.
That, of course, is if the BMC still exists in its present form.
Presently much of its grant will be directed to the MLTB as the country's major influence in what goes on in mountain training, for a  sizeable portion of the BMC's grant income is awarded because of its past role in training young climbers and mountaineers.