

Explanations of Language Development
Is language learned?
Introduction
At the beginning of Chapter 1 it was suggested that linguists and psycholinguists interested in children's language have addressed two major questions.
First, what are the changing patterns of language abilities which characterise development?
And, second, what are the processes by which developmental change occurs?
The next two chapters are concerned with this second question and present a brief overview of different explanations of how development occurs.
As we have seen in the preceding chapters, language development gives rise to a complex set of interrelated abilities.
Motor abilities, perceptual skills and increasingly sophisticated forms of cognitive representation are all implicated in the mastery of spoken language.
Furthermore, an adequate characterisation of spoken language requires the integration of descriptive frameworks from different branches of linguistics and psychology.
In view of the complexity of the psycholinguistic abilities which contribute to normal language functioning, it is perhaps not surprising that attempts to explain how these abilities emerge in the first place and are orchestrated into the unified process which we recognise as language have met with only limited success.
This chapter and Chapter 5 consider the three most popular theories of language development to emerge in recent years, beginning with the publication of Skinner's book Verbal Behaviour in 1957.
At this point it is also worth considering the relevance of theories of normal developmental progress to a book concerned with the assessment and treatment of children with language difficulties.
It might be argued that children experience difficulties in the area of language development precisely because the normal developmental processes have broken down.
In order to help such children, it is necessary to introduce novel and artificial procedures to assist learning and it is therefore unlikely that an understanding of normal processes will be of any help.
The alternative view is that an understanding of how normally developing children learn language is essential, first, in order to understand why a child is experiencing  difficulty and, second, to provide insights into the best and most effective strategies for remedial intervention.
It is this second view which is reflected in this chapter and the next, and in Chapter 11 on intervention strategies.
Learning, acquisition and development
The terms ‘learning’, ‘acquisition’ and ‘development’are often used interchangeably and, so far in this book, there has been no attempt to define distinctive meanings.
However, a consideration of the processes involved in developmental change invites a more critical view of the way in which these terms are used.
It will be suggested here that, because each one of these terms carries with it connotations regarding what these processes are, ‘learning’, ‘acquisition’ and ‘development’are associated with different accounts of developmental change.
For psychologists learning implies the occurrence of new responses or the modification of old responses in the light of specific experiences.
Thus, when a child who calls a stool ‘chair’ is corrected and introduced to its more accurate name and subsequently uses the term ‘stool’, it would be reasonable to say that the child had learned a new word.
The term acquisition is more frequently associated with the child's mastery of higher-order understanding which cannot easily be reduced to the additive effect of different learning experiences.
Thus, a child may be said to acquire the rules of grammar, although it is difficult to see how such rules can be established as a result of numerous discrete learning experiences.
‘Acquisition’ is often used in the context of innate, non-specific forms of understanding — for example, knowledge of linguistic universals, being realised in respect of specific linguistic categories or rules.
Finally, the term development is amenable to a number of different interpretations (Francis 1980), with the most general being ‘changes which occur over time’.
When development is used in the literature on children's language it usually implies acknowledgement of processes over and above learning (for example, Piaget 1970) and an underlying continuity with respect to earlier-occurring relatively simple abilities and later, more complex abilities.
The rest of this chapter and the following chapter provide a more detailed account of the processes which are involved in a child's mastery of language from the perspective of learning theory, the acquisition of abstract rules and developmental change.
Language learning: behavioural explanations
Chapter 3 described how Skinner attempted to circumvent the thorny problem of mentalistic descriptions of language by insisting that descriptions of language focus on observable language behaviour .
This in turn made  it possible to consider changes in language behaviour which occurred during childhood as products of the same mechanisms which had been documented in respect of other kinds of behaviour; verbal behaviour was to be understood in terms of the same learning principles which had been derived from studies of the behaviour of rats, pigeons and monkeys.
Skinner argued that behaviour occurs as a function of previous experiences and that, given a clear understanding of the contingent relations between the environment and a specific behaviour in the past, it is possible to predict, with a very high degree of accuracy, the conditions under which that behaviour will occur in the future.
Where a behavioural response has, in the past, been followed by environmental events which are pleasurable or which reduce the degree of discomfort experienced, then the same behaviour will be likely to occur in the future.
But behaviours are only consistently followed by predictable outcomes under certain conditions — for example, the child's request for a drink is followed by a drink only if an adult hears the child's request.
Individuals therefore learn to discriminate the conditions which are associated with behaviours being followed by contingent events which are desirable, from those which are associated with no environmental change or those which are followed by unpleasant events.
A behavioural response is strengthened when it has an increased probability of occurring (frequency) or when it is likely to be performed for a longer period of time (duration).
Environmental events which are pleasurable will, if they consistently occur immediately after a behavioural response, have the effect of increasing the strength of the response.
When such a relationship is established between a response category and an environmental event, the event is said to reinforce the behaviour.
For example, Skinner argues that, to the extent that the thirsty person receives a drink after going into a pub and requesting ‘a pint of beer’, that behaviour, requesting a pint of beer, is reinforced.
Alternatively, if the behaviour is followed by an undesirable or noxious event on a regular basis, the response is likely to occur less frequently under similar conditions in the future.
Under these conditions, the environmental event is said to exert a punishing influence on the behaviour.
An example of a punishing event would be a child at school who is reprimanded for talking during lessons.
Where a behaviour has been established under conditions of reinforcement, if the contingent relationship between the behaviour and the reinforcing event is broken so that the one does not consistently follow the other, then the strength of the response will gradually diminish.
This is referred to as extinction .
Extinction might be expected to occur if your local pub stopped selling your favourite drink.
Under such circumstances the frequency with which you visited the pub would be likely to decrease gradually over time.
There are two other contingent relations which should be mentioned at  this stage.
The first concerns behaviours which are followed by the termination or cessation of unpleasant environmental events — for example, when shutting a window reduces the volume of traffic noise or turning on the heating reduces the discomfort from cold.
In this situation the contingent relation results in the strengthening of the behavioural response and is therefore described as reinforcing.
However, because reinforcement is derived from the termination of noxious events, it is referred to as negative reinforcement .
The second contingent relation is concerned with the parallel relationship for pleasant or desirable events.
When a behaviour is consistently followed by the termination of desirable events, the effect is to reduce the strength of that behaviour.
For example, a child might be told that certain behaviours will result in the loss of free time; if the child misbehaves, the penalty creates a contingent relationship in which the child has less time to play.
Since this relationship is established through the reduction of pleasant environmental events, it is referred to as negative punishment .
While these four contingent relations between specific response categories and environmental consequences provide an account of how behaviours can be increased or decreased in frequency, they are not sufficient to explain how behaviours might change in form and character over time.
Qualitative changes in behaviour depend upon the concepts of behavioural variability and selective reinforcement .
While it is possible to identify responses which are, at first sight, repetitions of the same behaviour, it is evident that each performance of a behaviour introduces slight and, in some respects, insignificant changes.
Thus, even routine behaviours which occur many times — such as tying shoelaces, brushing teeth or washing a cup — will never be performed in exactly the same way on two occasions.
This gives rise to behavioural variability.
If the contingent environmental events are then altered so that certain ways of performing the skill are preferred to others, then some ways of performing the behaviour will be selectively reinforced at the expense of others.
For example, if by trial and error I discover that one particular way of ironing a shirt results in the job being completed more quickly, the reinforcement arising from removing a noxious event (I hate ironing) will very likely result in that technique becoming well established.
Similarly, behavioural variability means that I sometimes iron with the television on and if this reduces the discomfort I experience from ironing (even though I take longer to finish),selective reinforcement from TV viewing while ironing may mean that this also becomes part of my behavioural repertoire.
These changes are not so much concerned with the frequency or duration of ironing behaviour as with the precise form of the behaviours which make up ‘ironing’.
The gradual change in the form or quality of behaviours as a result of selective reinforcement of variable response characteristics is referred to as shaping .
Having described the principles of operant conditioning in respect of non-verbal behaviours, it is now time to explore how they relate to speech and language.
Do children learn language?
Once language is described as a category of behaviour , it is possible to explain its occurrence with reference to the contingent relationships which have been shown to influence other kinds of behaviour.
Skinner (1957) also argued that these contingent relationships between behaviour and subsequent environmental events control language changes during childhood.
Thus, a child is said by Skinner to vocalise because this kind of response is strongly reinforced through adult attention and the gratification of physiologically based needs.
Because of the way in which adults respond to infants, these early vocalisations occur with increasing frequency.
Since adults are also highly motivated to respond selectively to vocalisations which are similar to real words, phonemes and phonemic sequences are gradually ‘shaped’ until they resemble words in the adult language.
When a child is able to produce phonemic strings which sound like real words, reinforcing adult responses become contingent upon the child's use of words to create meaningful word-referent relations.
Once the child has mastered ‘Dada’, this response will be more consistently reinforced when the referent ‘Daddy’ is present compared to when he is out of sight.
Similarly, the child's mastery of syntax is seen as a product of the adult's ability to respond selectively to those aspects of a child's language which are developmentally progressive.
While shaping describes a mechanism which could theoretically account for numerous changes in a child's language, Skinner acknowledges that it is a somewhat laborious and inefficient way of learning.
It is for this reason that the category of echoic verbal behaviour, described in Chapter 3, is particularly important, since it offers a way of ‘short circuiting the process of progressive approximations’.
For example, a child might be told to say ‘She sells sea shells on the seashore’ and be reinforced if her response matches the model utterance.
Similarly, a child might be taught the names of objects or colours when a generalised reinforcement — for example, ‘That's right!’— consistently follows an utterance which names an object or the colour of an object.
The principles of learning theory provide a prima-facie explanation of the linguistic changes which occur during childhood.
In spite of the power and continuing influence of Skinner's ideas, it is important that Verbal Behaviour is seen more in terms of a set of claims or predictions, which are illustrated with anecdotal evidence and hypothetical examples, rather than a theory which has been tested against research evidence.
In fact, most researchers now believe that, on their own, the principles of learning theory are insufficient to account for the child's mastery of language; the bulk of the  research on children's language which has been carried out since the publication of Verbal Behaviour has been concerned with illuminating other processes which may be involved.
However, the learning theory approach to language has continued to receive considerable support from teachers and clinicians concerned with helping children with language difficulties.
Therapeutic implications of the learning approach to children's language
The major advantage of considering children's language as a complex set of learned behaviours is that it gives rise to direct implications for language intervention.
If Skinner is right, and children's language is strongly influenced by the way in which those around them respond, how much more effective might the same processes be if they were applied deliberately and systematically.
This is the starting-point for behavioural approaches to language teaching.
Furthermore, once language is recognised as simply a type of behaviour, it seems to make sense to treat it like any other subject which adults deliberately teach to children.
For the teacher or therapist, behavioural intervention can be considered in terms of a structured sequence of activities.
First, it is necessary to determine one or more behavioural teaching objectives.
Here, the aim of the therapeutic intervention is specified in terms of the verbal responses which are considered desirable for a particular child but are as yet not part of the child's verbal repertoire.
Second, the contingent environmental events which may strengthen or weaken verbal responses are specified and an attempt should be made to identify those contingencies which will operate to maintain the target behaviours in the natural environment once they have been established through systematic teaching.
For example, if a child is taught to answer certain kinds of question appropriately, it is important that, after teaching, she will experience lots of opportunities to respond to similar questions and that appropriate responses will be systematically reinforced.
The third step is to describe the child's current level of functioning in terms of verbal behaviour, and to identify the environmental contingencies which serve to maintain that behaviour.
Fourth, using this information, it should be possible to establish a sequence of intermediate teaching objectives.
These will define the behaviours which a child must learn in order to move from her existing pattern of responses to those described in the teaching objectives.
Finally, the programme should describe a set of teaching procedures which will create the necessary contingent relations between the child's language and environmental events to ensure that the child progresses along the sequence of teaching objectives.
Inevitably, these procedures will involve the use of reinforcement, but they may also involve more elaborate techniques such as shaping and modelling.
A more detailed discussion of behavioural intervention strategies is included in Chapter 9.
Criticisms of the behavioural approach to children's language
The major theoretical problems which arise from explanations of language development as a process of learning verbal behaviours were first presented by Chomsky (1959) and, in many respects, this still represents the best critique of Skinner's position.
Only a brief summary of some of Chomsky's detailed arguments are presented here.
Chomsky points out that the principles of operant conditioning were originally derived from experimental studies of animals, in which the ex-perimenter could achieve a very high degree of control over variables which were presumed to influence behaviour.
Thus, the contingency relations between environmental events and specific responses could be easily manip-ulated and measured.
Once experimental control achieved in laboratory conditions made it possible to demonstrate that the strength of specific behaviours was indeed a function of environmental events, it seemed reasonable to describe such events as reinforcers.
The use of such terminology is, however, appropriate only when a relationship between behaviour and contingent events has been empirically demonstrated.
It is not legitimate to extend the use of such terminology prospectively, to naturally occurring behaviour where there is no possibility of testing the contingent relations through experimental investigation.
Chomsky is therefore highly critical of the way in which Skinner uses operant terminology to account for language.
For example,
The phrase X is reinforced by Y…is being used as a cover term for ‘X wants Y’, ‘X likes Y’, ‘X wishes that Y were the case’, etc….
Invoking the term ‘reinforcement’ has no explanatory force, and any idea that this paraphrase introduces any new clarity of objectivity into the description of wishing, liking, etc., is a serious delusion.
(Chomsky 1959:38)
Since the terms which describe the process of behavioural change cannot be tested against examples of natural language, Chomsky concludes that Skinner's whole account of language is fatally flawed:
As far as acquisition of language is concerned, it seems clear that reinforcement, casual observation, and natural inquisitiveness (coupled with a strong tendency to imitate) are important factors, as is the remarkable capacity of the child to generalise, hypothesise and ‘process information’ in a variety of very special and apparently highly complex ways which we cannot yet describe or begin to understand, and which may be largely innate, or may develop through some sort of learning or through maturation of the nervous system.
The manner in which such factors operate and interact in language acquisition is completely un-known.
It is clear that what is necessary in such a case is research, not dogmatic and perfectly arbitrary claims, based on analogies to that small  part of the experimental literature in which one happens to be interested.
(Chomsky 1959:43)
The questions to which Skinner has addressed his speculations are hopelessly premature.
It is futile to inquire into the causation of verbal behaviour until much more is known about the specific character of this behaviour; and there is little point in speculating about processes of acquisition without much better understanding of what is acquired.
(Ibid.:55)
Additional criticisms of Skinner's position have arisen from empirical studies of children's language.
It has been pointed out that, far from reinforcing grammatically correct speech, adults typically respond to children's utterances in terms of their perceived communicative value and the intentions which they seem to express.
In doing so, adults will often ‘reinforce’ ungrammatical word combinations (Brown and Hanlon 1970).
While this evidence makes it unlikely that children learn grammar through reinforcement of ‘correct’ utterances, it leaves open the question of the role of reinforcement in the development of different language functions.
Research has also raised doubts about the role of imitation in children's learning of language.
It was suggested in Chapter 1 that children's utterances are frequently characterised by novel combinations of morphemes and words which are not found in normal adult speech.
It is, therefore, highly unlikely that imitation of adult models can explain their occurrence.
The fact that such grammatically incorrect combinations are frequently systematic (Berko 1958; Ivimey 1975) suggests that children are organising their utterances on the basis of a knowledge of rules, rather than simply in response to environmental contingencies, and that such rules are, at least to some extent, generated spontaneously.
For example, the application of the regular past-tense morpheme -ed to irregular verbs (‘go-ed’; ‘run-ed’) or the use of the irregular plural /s/ with irregular nouns (‘sheeps’; ‘mouses’) suggests that children overgeneralise simple rules to non-appropriate target words.
Such ‘incorrect’ utterances seem to reflect the child's search for underlying order in language, rather than reinforcement by adults.
While simple imitation fails to explain the occurrence of such novel utterances, a number of researchers have presented evidence indicating that imitation may nevertheless play a significant role in the child's mastery of vocabulary, syntax and pragmatic functions (Bloom et al .
1974; Clark 1977; Folger and Chapman 1977).
One of the ways in which the seemingly enormous differences between the ideas of Skinner and Chomsky may be reconciled is to recognise that, to a great extent, they were interested in quite different aspects of language.
For Chomsky, language is an abstract system of rules which is used by human minds for transmitting and receiving ideas; the natural focus for research  is a description of the rules by which that system is organised.
In contrast, Skinner regards language as part of the process by which human beings interact with their environment and this points to the relations between utterances and their environmental effects as the natural focus for research activity.
In other words, the differences between the two may come down to the fact that one is a linguist interested in grammar, while the other is a psychologist interested in the functional relations between language and the immediate context.
Even though it is generally recognised that, at best, the principles of operant conditioning described in Verbal Behaviour contribute but a small part to our understanding of the processes of language development, this does not immediately rule out the possibility of employing techniques based upon operant conditioning to help those children who are not developing language in the normal way.
Perhaps where ‘natural’ processes have failed, it is sensible to apply ‘non-natural’teaching techniques.
In fact, it might be argued that because teaching techniques based on operant conditioning are derived from a scientific analysis of behaviour change, they offer, potentially, an approach which will be more effective than natural processes (Kiernan 1981).
A considerable body of literature now exists to demonstrate the efficacy of operant conditioning for producing changes in the language behaviour of language-impaired children (Garcia and DeHaven 1974; Mowrer 1984; Ruder 1978; Snyder et al .
1975).
However, there remains considerable controversy concerning how far changes in language behaviour resulting from these procedures are similar to naturally occurring changes observed in normally developing children (Harris 1984a; Rees 1978).
In particular, it is widely recognised that behavioural methods often result in relatively rigid language patterns, and that subsequent generalisation beyond training sessions and the spontaneous combination of taught elements into novel combinations continue to be problematic.
Finally, the recent emphasis on the pragmatic aspects of language during development have raised further questions regarding the suitability of learning theory approaches for language intervention (Rees 1978).
Are linguistic abilities innate?
The case for language acquisition
For Chomsky (1965) and McNeill (1970) the problem posed by children's mastery of language was how such inexperienced and, in other respects, immature human beings could learn to speak in accordance with the rules of grammar.
Grammatical rules are seen as existing independently of the child, and changes in the child's language in the direction of conventional syntax and morphology are seen as indicative of the child acquiring the rules which make up the grammatical system.
An outline of the phrase-structure and transformational rules identified by Chomsky is provided in Chapter 1.
Chomsky's view of the problem of language acquisition can be simply illustrated.
On the one hand, the child hears people speaking; like the linguist studying children's language, children have access to a corpus or sample of language in the utterances they hear.
This appears to be the only source of information available to the child regarding how phonemes, morphemes and words are organised into meaningful sentences.
On the other hand, after a period of some four to five years' (and after only two to three years of first speaking words) exposure to the language of those around them, children seem to have mastered the underlying rule system which enables them to produce an infinite variety of relatively well-formed, complex sentences.
An additional problem for the child language learner is created by the imperfect relationship between a speaker's knowledge of grammatical rules (usually referred to as ‘competence’) and the language which is actually spoken (usually referred to as ‘language performance’).
Under ideal conditions, ordinary speakers of a language are quite capable of demonstrating their grammatical competence by producing fully grammatical utterances and by distinguishing grammatical from ungrammatical utterances (see Chapter 1).
However, in every day settings, limited attention, distractions and interruptions interfere with the process by which competence is translated into performance.
Ordinary speech is therefore usually a very imperfect representation of the underlying rules of grammar and appears not to provide a sound database for the derivation of these rules.
There is thus a gap between rapid acquisition of complex and highly abstract knowledge by individuals with very limited cognitive resources and the degenerate information, in the form of spoken language, which seems to provide the only source of information the child has to work on.
Chomsky filled this gap by suggesting that infants are born with innate knowledge of the properties of language.
This can be seen as a kind of intermediate position halfway between the child as a tabula rasa with no innate knowledge of the world and the child being able to speak at birth.
Clearly, children cannot speak at birth, but Chomsky wishes to credit them with two distinct kinds of knowledge.
First, he argues that infants possess an understanding of the basic features which are common to all human languages.
This might include a set of rules for relating the surface form of an utterance to its underlying meaning, and certain grammatical categories such as sentence subject and object of the verb.
Clearly, to be useful, these features must be common to all languages, since children seem to be able to learn any language with equal facility.
For this reason, they are referred to as linguistic universals .
Second, Chomsky suggests that children are born with a knowledge of appropriate processing strategies for analysing the language they hear and determining the patterns which are indicative of the underlying rule system.
Together, the knowledge of linguistic universals and the innate processing strategies are referred to as the ‘Language Acquisition Device’ or LAD.
Thus, the LAD needs to contribute enough (but no more than enough) innate knowledge for the child to learn the grammar of a language from the utterances which she hears in the first four or five years of life.
Implications of the acquisition approach for language teaching
Although Chomsky's description of language in terms of transformational grammar has had a considerable impact in respect of work on language intervention, the influence of his theory of language acquisition has been much more limited.
This is mainly because this account of the mechanisms of language development attributes the major role to hidden processes in the LAD.
Not only does this make it difficult to test the theory empirically, but it also creates problems regarding recommendations for intervention.
For a child with long-term language difficulties, an appropriate interpretation might be that the LAD is damaged in some way but, without a more detailed analysis of the processes at work and how they contribute to language performance, implications for intervention which stem directly from this theoretical position remain elusive.
Even were descriptions of the relationship between LAD operations and specific aspects of language functioning to emerge, it seems likely that they would be highly abstract and therefore of very little value in planning therapy.
Criticisms of the language acquisition approach
The acquisition theory of language development is an attempt to explain how children acquire the rules of grammar.
To the extent that transformational rules have been challenged as accurate accounts of children's emerging knowledge of the rules for organising language structures (see Chapter 1), the LAD is suspect.
Furthermore, it is now recognised that in learning language, children are doing far more than acquiring the rules of grammar and it may be that the key to the mastery of abstract grammatical rules lies in the socially mediated learning of functional language skills (Bruner 1983; Halliday 1975; Wells 1981).
Chomsky's invocation of the LAD was at least partly attributable to the apparent speed with which acquisition occurred.
However, studies of children's communicative abilities prior to the onset of spoken language have indicated that the origins of communication may be traced back to the earliest days after birth, and that full mastery of the morpho-syntactic devices for expressing complex meanings may not be fully understood until early adolescence.
The period of language acquisition may therefore be much longer than Chomsky originally thought.
A third point of criticism concerns Chomsky's declaration that the child was exposed to ‘degenerate’ examples of language which did not accurately reflect the underlying rules of grammar.
Abundant research over the past  two decades has indicated that the language employed by most adults when addressing babies and infants is, in fact, highly simplified and largely correct in terms of grammar.
While this indicates that the language young children hear may provide useful input for learning the rules of grammar, it does not, of itself, rule out the need for an innate ability to process speech sounds (Gleitman and Wanner 1982).
Finally, while Chomsky assumed that without a priori knowledge, a distributional analysis of a naturally occurring language sample would inevitably fail to identify correspondences between words and their respective lexical roles, more recent studies have suggested that this view may have been unduly pessimistic (Maratsos 1983).
In conclusion, the nativistic position presented by McNeill and Chomsky may have overestimated the contribution to language learning which must be ascribed to innate knowledge and underrepresented the part played by child-environment interactions.
While the criticisms outlined above do not obviate the necessity of some nativistic assumptions, they do suggest a different way of addressing the problem.
Chomsky started by defining the nature of the learning objective — that is, adult grammatical proficiency — and then worked backwards to determine how much of the workload in language learning had to be borne by innate knowledge.
An alternative approach is to seek a better understanding of the developmental processes which seem to be at work by studying young children as they involve themselves in getting to know the language.
As more and more is understood of the way in which interactions between the child and the environment create privileged opportunities for language learning, so it may be possible to reduce the burden of explanation which has fallen on innate factors.
Developmental approaches to children's language
Introduction
Perhaps the most distinguishing features of psychological approaches to the study of human development are the assumption of underlying continuities between behaviours at different points in the lifespan, and the attempt to understand how interactions between the individual and the environment at one point in time make possible more elaborate interactions at some later point in time.
A simple example concerns the question of continuities between early motor abilities, such as crawling and reaching, and later, more sophisticated abilities, such as walking and pointing.
Needless to say, when developmental psychologists are studying language, the ‘environment’ includes not only the physical environment provided by objects and materials, but also the social environment provided by other people.
In general terms, developmentalists take the view that it should be possible to examine the ways in which infants and young children interact with the physical world and with other people and to determine how they change as a result.
The behaviour of even very young children is often highly complex, as for example, in the case of language.
As we have already seen, attempts to explain the rapid changes in complex behaviour simply in terms of contingent relations between behaviour and the environment have not been particularly successful.
For this reason, developmental psychologists frequently introduce descriptions of mental models, cognitive representations or conceptual understanding to provide a link between the kinds of learning which may have occurred at one point in time and the relatively sophisticated behaviours which are subsequently observed.
While such mentalistic constructions may sound implausible at first sight, they are justified in three ways.
First, it is argued that mental events are a fact of life and, therefore, a legitimate object of psychological enquiry.
Second, it seems that any adequate account of language must include descriptions of abstract knowledge which makes production and comprehension possible (see Chapter 1).
Third, from a methodological perspective, perspective, mentalistic accounts are seen as valid so long as they are closely tied to observations, so that any proposed link between behaviour and underlying knowledge is subject to rigorous scrutiny and ultimately to falsification through additional empirical enquiry (see Figure 5.1).
The account provided here of the developmental approach to the child's mastery of language will be dealt with in two parts.
The first part considers those pre-linguistic experiences by which the child establishes patterns of behaviour and levels of cognitive representation which permit the learning of spoken language.
These will be referred to as developmental foundations for the mastery of language.
The second part considers how interactions between the child and her linguistically more competent caretakers may create privileged opportunities for language learning, and thereby constitute a form of environmental support for the child's mastery of language.
Cognitive foundations for language development
One of the motivations for children to Speak is that they have ideas which they wish to communicate to other people (Bloom 1973).
A sine qua non for language development might therefore be the emergence of ways of understanding the world which are amenable to expression in language.
At this point it may be worth reiterating a distinction made in Chapter 1 concerning conceptual levels of understanding and the expression of related ideas in language.
Here, the argument is presented that conceptual levels of understanding are necessary precursors to the emergence of spoken language, since language is, in effect, the linguistic realisation of those conceptual distinctions already established at a non-verbal level.
When conceptual distinctions are expressed in language they are referred to as semantic  relations .
While emphasising the interdependence between semantic expres-sions and underlying cognitive concepts, this approach also implies that not all of a child's understanding of a particular experience may be expressed in language, and that a child may intend to express more than she is actually able to encode formally in language structures.
For example, Chapter 1 discussed the ways in which researchers have introduced the notion of a ‘rich interpretation’ of utterances such as ‘sweater chair’, ‘Daddy car’in order to disambiguate alternative meanings.
Is it possible to determine the ways in which children think prior to the emergence of spoken language and, if so, what kinds of description can be offered for the conceptual understanding which precedes the expression of ideas in language?
These two questions represent the focus of a considerable amount of research by developmental psychologists over the last 30 years.
While this is not the place to explore that research in any detail, it will be helpful to describe briefly the kinds of understanding which are believed to be present in young children by the time they begin to use language.
This summary is based on the work of Jean Piaget (Piaget 1970; Piaget and Inhelder 1969).
Piaget's work is important because it provided one of the first developmental accounts of the emergence of logical thought.
For Piaget, the adult's ability to think logically, to manipulate symbols in meaningful ways and to solve complex problems can be traced directly back to the infant's first attempts to make sense of her surroundings.
And, by the same token, the emergence of language is made possible by the developmental achievements of the first two years.
Piaget viewed the emergence of intelligent thought as a process of construction , in which the infant actively seeks to make sense of her surroundings and, more particularly, the relationship between her own actions and the contingent events in the environment.
However, unlike Skinner, Piaget believed that development is best explained by describing the ways in which children understand such relations.
One useful analogy for understanding Piaget's theory is to view the child as a scientist who is seeking a ‘theory’ to explain complex phenomena; like the scientist, the child at play carries out practical ‘experiments’by acting on the environment and observing the outcomes.
In the light of these observations, the child constructs ‘theories’ which are then used as a basis for further experimen-tation and observation.
An important aspect of Piaget's approach is his claim that, since children the world over are very similar physiologically and neurologically, and since the world they explore is regulated by the same laws of nature, progress, in terms of their ability to make sense of the world, will be broadly consistent across all children.
Extensive research in a number of quite different cultures has largely corroborated this assumption and vindicated Piaget's decision to base his theory on the detailed investigation of a relatively small number of children.
Here, we are concerned with the way in which Piaget described children's ‘knowledge of the world’ at different stages of development.
Once again, constraints on space make it necessary to address only the first stage of development, which occurs between the ages of 0 and about 18 months.
Piaget's name for this important first stage in the child's long struggle to make sense of her environment was the sensori-motor stage , since at this time the child is seen as only being able to make sense of what is happening around her in terms of establishing relatively simple relations between her motor actions and the associated sensations.
For example, as a 3-month-old baby waves her hand in front of her face, she gradually becomes aware of the relationship between the act of waving her hand in this way and the visual changes which accompany waving.
At birth, Piaget sees the infant as having no a priori knowledge of her environment or of the way in which she can act upon it.
Babies are profoundly egocentric in that they are unable to view themselves as having an identity which is separate and distinct from the world which they are aware of through their senses.
Only after a considerable period of experience do infants give clear signs that they are aware of the extent of their own bodies and the division between themselves and the wider world.
But by the age of 18 months children seem to have a relatively clear understanding of the actions over which they have direct control and the events in the material world which they can influence only indirectly via their actions or the actions of other people.
During the first year of life children seem to become aware of objects and to realise that objects behave in quite different ways to themselves and to other people.
Experience of objects is mediated by the senses, and it takes some time before the child appreciates that objects are best understood not as functions of action and sensation, but as entities which have an existence that is independent of the child's own actions and experiences.
For example, infants of 8 months of age will continue to search for an object, such as a toy, which is repeatedly hidden behind the same cover.
If the toy is subsequently hidden under a different cover or in a different place, infants of this age will almost invariably search under the cover where the toy was last found , and not where it was last seen to disappear.
For Piaget, this indicates that the infant still thinks in terms of‘making’ or ‘materialising’objects through action, rather than ‘discovering’objects which have simply been hidden from view.
Emerging concepts about objects are closely linked to the child's growing understanding of space, spatial relations and the notion of objects and people being located in a common space.
By exploring the world in terms of the actions and their effects, young children come to realise that objects can be acted upon in different ways and that actions often result in objects changing their location; they may be moved to a new place, positioned with respect to other objects or located on surfaces and in containers.
The child's actions on the material world also provide a stimulus for conceptual development.
Piaget suggested that, in performing actions, the child has first-hand experiences of the relations implicit in physical causality.
The relationship between ‘cause’ and ‘effect’is illustrated when a child's action ‘causes’a particular event or ‘effect’to happen.
By the age of 18 months or so, the child is able to understand the extent of her own ability to make things happen and the reciprocal powers of other animate beings.
She will also be able to establish mental goals and to organise a linked sequence of actions designed to achieve a particular objective.
Perhaps the most significant achievement of the sensori-motor stage is the child's ability to let one aspect of experience stand for, or represent, another.
For example, a child may use an action previously performed as part of a game to signify that she wishes the game to continue.
Here, the action refers to a game which has ceased.
Similarly, a child at play may use a stick as an aeroplane or a settee as a car.
Here, the child is using one object to represent another.
This kind of representational ability is thought to be a particularly important developmental achievement since the essence of early language is the child's ability to use speech sounds to represent or refer to objects, actions and locations.
This ability to use gestures and to engage in symbolic play is considered a necessary precursor to the child's understanding of the way in which meanings are represented in words and sentences.
How might the conceptual abilities described by Piaget as part of sensori-motor development be related to the emergence of spoken language?
A number of researchers have suggested that the semantic relations which seem to characterise children's two- and three-word utterances bear a strik-ing resemblance to sensori-motor concepts and this in itself presents a case for an underlying developmental continuity (Brown 1973).
More specifically, it has been suggested that the language which children hear from adults contains frequent examples of those two- and three-term semantic relations which also occur in the language of young children (Snow 1977).
The child's problem is to figure out the precise way in which the conceptual categories established during the sensori-motor stage map on to the semantic categories which are expressed in adult speech (Edwards 1973).
Unfortunately, we still have relatively little idea of how the child is able to move from a practical understanding of how, for example, objects change location as a result of actions performed by people, to the more abstract and general understanding of semantic categories such as agent, action and object, which provide the basis for early syntax (Bowerman 1976).
One possibility is that conversational interactions are structured in such a way that they provide additional support for the induction of grammatical generalisations.
This suggestion is discussed in more detail below.
A second possibility is that the child is able to employ a set of relatively sophisticated strategies for analysing adult speech.
For example, Slobin (1973) has put forward a number of ‘operating principles’ as a way of accounting for the  appearance of language forms which suggest this kind of abstract grammatical knowledge.
Only four examples are given here to illustrate this approach.
1
Pay attention to the ends of words.
This strategy is particularly important for learning inflectional suffixes.
2
The phonological forms of words can be systematically modified.
This is a basic assumption for the child to recognise that a single word might be realised in different forms, depending on its grammatical function.
3
Pay attention to the order of words and morphemes.
This is a basic requirement for understanding the way in which word order is related to the expression of word meaning.
4
The use of grammatical markers should make semantic sense.
This is important since phonological variation in words is not arbitrary but bears a direct correspondence to expressed meaning.
If, indeed, such principles are a feature of children's attempts to understand adult language, it remains to be seen whether they can be seen as the outcome of earlier developmental processes or, as seems more likely, innate abilities and therefore features of Chomsky's LAD.
Social foundations for language development
While it may be true that, in speaking, children frequently express in words underlying conceptual distinctions, a number of researchers have suggested that the ability to use language to communicate needs, interests and desires to other people presupposes another, rather different, set of developmental abilities.
For these researchers, language is, first and foremost, a social process and its utilisation implies social understanding and a variety of social skills.
This section provides a brief overview of those social abilities which are thought to be development precursors to the emergence of spoken language.
From birth, the environment in which babies find themselves is an intensely social one and almost inevitably they become enmeshed in a network of social interactions (Richards 1974; Schaffer 1977).
Thus, while Piaget emphasised the importance of the child's actions upon the world, other researchers have focused upon the child's reactions to other people and the interactions which occur when adult and infant act and react towards each other over a period of time.
But what evidence is there that babies acquire social knowledge and that their behaviour to other people is qualitatively different from their behaviour to inanimate objects?
First, a number of studies have shown that babies respond in quite distinct ways to stimuli which have social significance (see Bremner 1988 for a review).
For example, they show an early preference for face-like  configurations compared with other equally complex geometrical designs, and this soon develops into an interest in real faces.
Similarly, infants as young as 6 weeks of age consistently show preferences for familiar as compared to unfamiliar faces.
In the same way, infants seem able to discriminate voices and, under optimal conditions, they will respond preferentially to their mother's voice compared to the voice of a stranger.
Experimental studies have also demonstrated that young babies can separate a continuous stream of speech sounds into discrete phonetic units and that they are sensitive to phonemic changes — for example, the difference between/p/ and/d/ — only a few weeks after birth (Eimas et al .
1971; Gleitman and Wanner 1982; Morse 1972, 1974).
Second, some responses are specifically social in nature and create opportunities for adult caretakers to interpret the infant's behaviours as indications of social responsiveness.
For example, most infants smile to visual stimuli at about 5 weeks of age.
Although smiling may be  elicited by a range of social and non-social stimuli, it is used by adults as a cue to the child's emotional state.
Mothers are able to discriminate different kinds of crying pattern and they typically interpret crying in terms of needs and emotional state.
Further evidence comes from detailed observational studies of adult-child interactions which have suggested that infants are able to synchronise gross motor activity with the intonational contours of adult conversation (Condon and Sander 1974) and that imitation of an adult's facial expression can occur as early as three days after birth (Meltzoff and Moore 1977, 1983).
Third, it seems that most adults are predisposed to respond to infants as social beings, and they are prepared to spend a considerable amount of time and energy in establishing a degree of social rapport.
Initially, this may simply involve the elicitation of a sequence of sounds or actions which can be endowed with social meaning.
For example, an adult may focus on a non-social action, such as tongue-poking or arm-waving, and interpret this as if it were, in fact, performed as an expression of some kind of social intention.
It is as though the adult needs to see the infant as intentional and her actions as purposeful in order to respond appropriately.
The significance of the adult's capacity to attribute meaning to actions which are not performed with communicative intent lies in the learning opportunities which are created by the adult response.
When the adult responds to a particular behaviour as if it were socially significant, the infant is provided with a demonstration of the communicative potential of her own actions.
She is placed in an ideal position to appreciate that actions and gestures can in fact be used deliberately to express social meanings (Newson 1979).
The first obvious signs that infants are able to participate in social interactions comes from repetitive sequences in which adult and child take turns.
For example, a mother and infant might establish a simple play routine which involves each partner taking a turn to ‘blow a raspberry’.
Over  time, more complex social routines may be established as adult and infant begin to build up a set of expectancies or joint understandings regarding the meanings of particular behaviours.
For example, Bruner (Bruner and Sherwood 1976; Ratner and Bruner 1978) described a game of ‘peekaboo’ in which the adult covered the infant's face with a soft cloth and then used vocalisations to build up dramatic tension before the infant pulled the cloth away.
The climax to this game suddenly dispels the tension and is followed by mother and infant laughing.
Bruner argues that social routines such as this form a framework within which young children learn a variety of social skills which are important developmental precursors to spoken language.
For example, although, initially, children separate actions on objects from interactions with people, at between 8 and 16 months of age infants become able to organise their activity to include both objects and people.
This development places extra demands upon the infant's powers of attention and requires that she co-ordinate her behaviour with respect to both the object and the other person.
The demands of this kind of social experience are perhaps most acute when the infant wishes to communicate to the adult about the object — for example, if the child wishes to draw the adult's attention to an object or request an object from the adult.
In each case, the child must not only find a way of getting the adult to notice the object, but she must do this in such a way that the adult is aware of what she is doing and why she is doing it.
It is only if all these conditions are met that the adult is likely to respond appropriately (see acts performed by children's first words, Chapter 3).
These relatively complex communicative demands establish the conditions in which simple gestures, such as pointing, are particularly useful.
However, in order to be used successfully, pointing must be carefully co-ordinated with the child's vocalisations and her direction of gaze and be performed at a time when the adult is attending to the child (Lock 1980a).
In using a symbolic device, such as a pointing gesture, to communicate with another person about something — for example, an object — it is clear that the child has learned many of the social skills necessary for linguistic communication.
Some researchers (for example, Bates 1976; Lock 1980a) have gone a step further and proposed that the non-verbal communicative skills which are displayed in ‘showing’ and ‘requesting’objects are direct precursors to the linguistic functions of ‘telling’or ‘giving information’and ‘asking questions’.
The following section will describe how patterns of non-verbal communication established in well-rehearsed games and social routines help in another way by providing an important source of environmental support for the development of spoken language.
Environmental support for language development
The developmental view of children's language suggests that, in addition to establishing prerequisite cognitive and social skills, the child must have access to a number of environmental support systems (see Bruner 1983).
These support systems arise principally from the maintenance and elaboration of the social routines described in the preceding section, and the special characteristics of adult speech addressed to infants and young children.
Social routines as environmental support for language
It has already been noted that interactions between infant and adult lead to the development of pre-verbal communicative exchanges in which adult and child are able to refer to objects and events; successful joint reference makes it possible for these external objects and events to become ‘topics’ for further exchanges.
In this way, the infant is not only learning to communicate with another person, but also to communicate about something .
This form of pre-verbal communication may then provide a highly supportive context for the child to interpret adult speech and actively to test her own hypotheses about how words can be used to assist communication.
Bruner has made some specific suggestions about the nature of the ‘scaffolding’ which occurs during adult-child interactions.
First, and perhaps most importantly, the existence of communicative understanding at a pre-verbal level means that the precise meaning of the words spoken by the adult are likely to be redundant.
Or, to look at it from the child's point of view, the words the adult uses will be interpreted in the light of the forms of social understanding which have already been forged non-verbally.
For example, if the adult holds an object, such as a doll, in the child's line of gaze, the child is likely to look at the object and then immediately glance at the adult's face to check that they are looking at the same thing.
Establishment of joint reference in this way serves as a basis for agreement on communicative ‘topics’(Bruner 1975).
If at the same time the adult says, ‘Look’ or, ‘What's this?’it seems plausible that the words will be interpreted by the child in terms of the communicative acts they accompany — that is, as ‘attention-getters’and devices for locating conversational topics.
On the basis of past experience the child is likely to try and interpret the adult's next act as some form of ‘comment’ on this topic.
If, instead of acting physically, the adult names the object —‘dolly’— the child is likely to interpret the vocalisation not only as referring to the object, but as a description of the ‘doll’ as an entity (Ninio and Bruner 1978).
Second, the action sequences which constitute social routines may provide the child with the basis for making some initial hypotheses about the relationship between syntax and meaning (McNamara 1972).
For example, consider a child who already understands that joint visual reference to an object she is holding, followed by the adult extending a hand with upturned palm, means: ‘I want you to give me what you are holding.’
Suppose this child is also familiar with the names of some common objects.
Repeated exposure to the ‘give and take’ routine and the associated words —‘Give me the doll’, ‘Give me the ball’, ‘Give me your spoon’— provides the child with opportunities for interpreting the basic grammatical elements for requesting specific objects: ‘give me’plus name of object requested.
It should be emphasised that these opportunities do not constitute ‘language development’ nor do they ensure that development will take place.
Rather, they help us to specify more precisely the nature of the problem with which the language-learning child is faced.
Third, pre-verbal procedures for joint understanding enable the adult to maintain a constant check on the child's verbalisations.
Even if the child's articulation is poor, the adult is likely to be able to make a good guess as to a likely meaning.
Similarly, contextual support and existing levels of shared understanding about routines mean that the adult is well placed to endow a child's utterance with meanings which extend or elaborate on those expressed.
For example, an utterance such as ‘juice’ might be glossed as ‘That's juice’, ‘I want some juice’or ‘The juice is all gone’, depending upon the situation and the child's behaviour.
The guess as to the most plausible interpretation of the child's utterance will guide the adult's own actions which, in turn, provide the child with feedback regarding how successful she has been in making her needs and intentions explicit.
The child's behaviour may then cue the adult as to how successful was the initial interpretation.
Fourth, the adult's ongoing assessment of the child's ability to understand what is being said and to make herself understood, may determine what the adult talks about and the way in which adult language is related to the context.
Bruner (1983) refers to this as a ‘communicative ratchet’ which enables adults gradually to increase the demands which are placed upon linguistic communication, while at the same time minimising the consequences of misunderstandings.
It seems that adults who provide optimal conversational support for language learning are those who are sensitive to the child's conversational needs and are able constantly to adjust their own contributions to match those of the child (Wells 1981; Wood 1988).
When the child is communicating fluently and clearly, the most appropriate adult response may be to listen and encourage.
Here, adult contributions might be reasonably elaborate, in that they might add new information or extend what the child has said.
In contrast, when the child is having difficulty, the adult may need to make more frequent contributions of a different kind in order to help the child express her ideas in words.
The final way in which social routines may provide support for language is that they create the conditions whereby the child is motivated to speak.
It is not clear whether this motivation arises from a pragmatic desire to  influence other people in order to achieve common objectives, or whether social  interactions act as a catalyst for the child's intrinsic curiosity about language as a system for communicating with other people.
However, it is clear that social interaction and play routines create the conditions within which children become enthusiastic conversational partners and, in doing so, actively promote their own language development.
Adult speech as environmental support for language acquisition
Chomsky's claim that the young child is exposed to degenerate samples of language which distort the relationship between surface forms and meanings has been challenged by a considerable amount of recent research.
This has shown that the language which adults address to young children is different in many ways from the language of adults talking to one another.
The remarkable consistency with which adults and, particularly, mothers modify their language when talking to young children has encouraged researchers to term this form of address ‘Motherese’ or ‘Babytalk’.
Some of the key differences observed in the speech of adults addressing younger children compared to adults talking to each other or to older children are summarised below (for more detailed reviews see DePaulo et al .
1978; Snow 1977).
In terms of structural characteristics, mothers talking to young children employ shorter sentences, a lower mean length of utterance, more single words, fewer complex sentences and a more restricted vocabulary.
Grammatical errors are very infrequent.
Motherese tends to be produced at a slower rate, with more pronounced pauses and exaggerated intonational contours.
The semantic characteristics of adults talking to children are that adults talk about objects and events in their immediate surroundings and they frequently focus on topics identified in the child's talk.
The semantic relations encoded in ‘Motherese’ are generally limited to the restricted set of relations which the children themselves use.
In terms of discourse characteristics, ‘Motherese’ contains a high frequency of self-repetitions and imitations of the child's language.
Often imitations are extended to provide a more accurate rendition of the child's intended meaning or elaborated so that new but related information is added.
This kind of evidence led many researchers to suggest that simplified input of the type found in ‘Motherese’ might be implicated in language learning.
However, ‘Motherese’ is composed of many different characteristics and it seems reasonable to suppose that there is considerable variation among adults in respect of how far these features are reflected in their speech to young children.
Is it therefore possible to separate out those aspects of ‘Motherese’ which make a positive contribution to language  learning from those which are merely incidental and possibly those which are actually detrimental?
A number of studies have attempted to do this both by comparing the rates of progress of children whose caretakers employ different styles of ‘Motherese’ and by deliberately seeking to modify adult input.
Similar studies have also been conducted with children attending pre-school play-groups and nursery schools, where the caretakers have been either voluntary helpers or professionally trained nurses and teachers (Wells 1981; Wood et al .
1980).
However, the results from such studies are far from consistent and there is considerable disagreement about precisely which features of ‘Motherese’ actually contribute either positively or negatively to language learning.
Some researchers noted a consistent relationship between the mean length of utterance of the adult's speech and that of the child so that, during development, the adult is invariably using slightly longer utterances than the child.
This gave rise to the ‘fine-tuning hypothesis’ which suggested that learning opportunities are maximised if the adult is able to ‘fine tune’her speech so that its structural complexity is always slightly in advance of that of the child.
More recent research has not only failed to support this view, but has also laid open the possibility that simplified input may not be particularly useful.
Instead, it has been argued that exposure to complex sentences is necessary so that the child can adequately test inferences about the relationship between grammatical form and meaning (Gleitman et al .
1984).
In terms of the semantic features of ‘Motherese’, there is considerable evidence to support the view that talking about objects and events in the immediate surroundings is helpful.
It has also been shown that children benefit when adult contributions are semantically related to their own utterance.
Examples included direct imitation, expansion of the child's utterance into a phrase or sentence which captures the child's intended meaning, extensions which include a novel contribution, and recastings in which the child's meaning is reflected back in a different syntactical form (see Chapter 10).
Adult speech which contains a relatively high proportion of statements or declaratives has been associated with accelerated language development in young children, while studies of pre-schoolers have indicated that conversations are more likely to be maintained over a number of turns if adults make positive contributions by adding new information (Wood et al .
1980).
Similarly, there is agreement from research with very young children and with pre-schoolers that ‘acceptances’(‘yes’, ‘good’, ‘that's right? and ‘phatic’ responses (‘oh, I see’, ‘really? are positively associated with progress.
However, there is some disagreement about the role of questions.
With young children, a high proportion of questions seems to be beneficial (Nelson 1973), but in slightly older children at pre-school, questions were  found to be detrimental to the maintenance of conversational exchanges (Wood et al .
1980).
One danger with this emphasis on the language of adults is that it easily leads to the conclusion that adults actually cause developmental progress by the way in which they speak to young children.
In contrast, the actual role of modified linguistic input may be to provide the child with a restricted set of choices, any number or combination of which may ultimately lead to developmental progress.
The range of choices which are made available to the child may not be determined by the adult so much as by the nature of the interactions which are jointly established between adult and child.
Hence, the child may actively influence the kinds of learning opportunities which are represented in the language she hears.
Furthermore, children may be born with, or acquire at a relatively early stage, processing biases which will constrain the forms of adult input to which they will be most sensitive.
Under such circumstances characteristics of adult language input would be reflected in differential rates of progress only to the extent that they coincided with the child's existing ‘style’ of learning language (Gleitman et al .
1984).
Language as process
The emphasis placed on pre-verbal social interaction as a precursor to spoken language, and the pre-eminent position of dialogue, in this developmental account of language acquisition, is indicative of a particular view of what language is .
In contrast to the grammarian's concern to represent language as a rule-governed system for expressing meanings, recent psychological studies of children's language have increasingly addressed language as part of a larger social process broadly concerned with the regulation of joint activity.
Here, it is suggested that symbols such as words and gestures are introduced and initially learned as devices to mediate interaction.
The meanings expressed by specific words are only appre-hended as a result of the effects which are achieved when they are used.
The use of words and symbols to influence other people in predictable ways requires that the child must be able to represent mentally the relationship between the symbol (word or gesture), the meaning for which it stands and the intended effect on the other person.
In learning to communicate, therefore, the child is also learning to represent experience and, most importantly,learning to think .
This view was most effectively expressed by writers such as G.H. Mead (1934) and L.S. Vygotsky (trans. 1962, 1978) over 50 years ago.
Both Mead and Vygotsky proposed that communication between the child and older children or adults provides the essential conditions for emergence of ‘media-tion’, whereby a word or gesture can stand for an aspect of experience.
For Vygotsky, all higher mental processes are established at the level  of interpersonal interaction and are, therefore, social in nature.
It is only subsequently that ‘inter-mental’ processes are understood to the point where the child can dispense with the adult and manipulate symbols ‘intra-mentally’.
Language is first learned as a means of relating to other people where those others provide social and psychological supports which enable the child to be an effective communicator.
In this sense, the child's conversational partner creates the conditions which make meaningful communication possible.
Through participation in the process of communication the child gradually becomes aware of the significance which can be attributed to her own actions and vocalisations.
At this stage, the child is able to achieve, in consort with a sympathetic adult, far more than she could possibly achieve alone.
Vygotsky called this range of ‘adult-supported’ activity the zone of proximal development :
It is the distance between the actual developmental level as determined by independent problem solving and the level of potential development as determined through problem solving under adult guidance or in collab-oration with more capable peers.
(Vygotsky 1978:86)
It is of particular importance because it offers a way of anticipating developmental achievements: ‘What a child can do with assistance today, she will be able to do by herself tomorrow.,
The extent to which the ‘potential’ revealed by the child's adult-supported activity is realised depends to a great extent on the way in which the adult interacts with the child.
The process of scaffolding the communicative abilities of young children is not straightforward and depends on how the adult interprets the child's verbal and non-verbal communication.
Optimal scaffolding is that which promotes the highest level of functioning with the minimal level of support; a child who is having difficulty in making herself understood may require a great deal of support; a few minutes later that same child dealing with a different topic may become relatively fluent and require a much lower level of adult participation.
Too little support when the child is having difficulty, or too much intrusion when the child is succeeding, will have the same effect of reducing the child's opportunities for developmental change.
Implications of the developmental approach
One of the attractions of this developmental explanation of children's language is that it is a very rich source of ideas for remedial strategies.
This section provides only a brief indication of the way in which therapists and clinicians have adopted and adapted this approach in working with children who have language difficulties.
The importance of developmental prerequisites
If ordinary children build their linguistic abilities on antecedent social and cognitive abilities, these may, in fact, be necessary prerequisites for the emergence of language.
This view has led a number of researchers to question whether some groups of children are slow to develop language because their pre-verbal social and cognitive abilities have not developed to the point where the child is ready to begin using spoken or sign language.
Studies with Down's Syndrome children in particular have indicated that if these children are provided with enriched opportunities for developing pre-linguistic abilities, their understanding and production of language is enhanced compared to children who do not have such opportunities (Bricker and Bricker 1973; McClean and Snyder 1978).
The importance of social routines
One of the problems with many children who experience difficulties with language and communication is that they also experience limited opportunities for engaging in social routines.
This may be because their communicative impairments limit their scope for participation and places a heavy burden on any adult who seeks to engage them in routine activities.
Alternatively, it may be because particular educational placements have very limited opportunities and few resources for this kind of activity.
A third possibility is that teachers and care staff may not recognise the importance of such activities.
Recently, a number of researchers have drawn attention to the importance of providing language-impaired children with opportunities for learning language in contexts where language is both natural and appropriate (Harris 1984b; McClean and Snyder 1978; Nelson et al .
1986).
Rather than treating language as a ‘learning topic’ which can be compartmentalised and taught in a formal setting such as a classroom or a clinic, an increasing number of therapists and teachers are beginning to explore ways of dealing with language as an integral part of the communicative process which surrounds any social activity.
Any naturally occurring activity, such as dressing, feeding, shopping, cooking, or playing games, which provides a context within which communication is necessary, is a potential context for language learning.
Adult speech as environmental support for language learning
The important role attributed to ‘Motherese’ in language development among normally developing children, has, in turn, fuelled speculation that some forms of language impairment may arise from the child having  insufficient exposure to adult language or, alternatively, being among adults who adopt inappropriate styles of talking to young children.
The quality and quantity of language a child hears from adults may result in variations in speed of acquisition (Clarke-Stewart 1973) and knowledge of the ways in which language can be used (Heath 1983).
These problems may then lead on to additional difficulties at school, especially if the teaching staff mistake linguistic delay as indicative of limited intelligence, or interpret differences in a child's ability to use language as a sign of impaired ability to learn language (Heath 1983).
However, young children's ability to develop language is extremely robust, and unless there are additional cognitive or emotional problems, children learn the language of their community even under conditions where exposure to adult input seems to be remarkably impoverished.
It is therefore extremely important when assessing any child for language impairment to ask what kind of language is appropriate for the child's home and immediate environment, and whether or not the child's ability is consistent with her experience and the expectations of those around her.
This will help teachers and therapists to distinguish between problems of language development, on the one hand, and social and educational problems on the other.
A separate issue concerns whether adults who care for or teach children who have impaired language adopt appropriate forms of speech and styles of interaction in the light of a child's specific difficulties.
Here, the question of what constitutes useful linguistic support for the child is much less easy to answer.
Speaking as you would to an ordinary child, of a similar level of linguistic ability, may be the most natural response and in most cases this is likely to be a safe strategy.
However, the fact that the child has language difficulties is probably a good indication that exposure to the kinds of language which enable most children to learn will not be sufficient to enable this child to make progress; she may require adult input which is specially tailored to help compensate for particular areas of weakness.
In support of this view, a number of studies have indicated that language-impaired children make significant improvements if the adults around them are induced to make systematic changes in certain aspects of their language (Howlin 1984; McLean and Snyder 1978).
Unfortunately, at the present time, little is known about the kinds of adult language which may be most helpful for children who experience different forms of language impairment.
A second, more serious, problem is that, very often, the nature of the child's language problem makes it impossible to speak to the child ‘natur-ally’; the adult is forced to employ ‘unnatural’ language and to adopt ad hoc conversational strategies.
Once again, it remains problematical as to whether this kind of input is appropriate and to what extent a child who has serious language difficulties actually restricts adults' ability to provide appropriate linguistic support.
Language as process
The notion that language development is best thought of as part of a process for regulating joint activities, rather than as a subject, has profound implications for helping children with language difficulties.
Most obviously, it shifts the focus from what children know about language and their command of language structure, to how they use language and the extent to which they are able to utilise conventional language forms in order to satisfy interpersonal needs.
This might include exploiting various language functions in different social contexts, as well as being able to participate in conversations.
This approach also suggests that the most important language is that which represents the child's attempts to express her own needs and intentions rather than language which arises as the child tries to express ideas supplied by the teacher.
Finally, Vygotsky's description of the ‘zone of proximal development’ provides a clear indication of the way in which environmental support is likely to be effective.
It is not so much a matter of deciding in advance which activities and what kinds of adult input match the child's level of development, either in terms of language or cognitive abilities; rather, it is a matter of the adult being sensitive to the child's changing communicative needs and adjusting her speech and actions from one moment to the next.
In this way the child's performance is continually sustained by the adult who, almost paradoxically, is always seeking to withdraw so that the child is able to participate in interactions as an independent and autonomous individual.
Criticisms of the developmental approach
In the light of the available evidence the ideas presented in this chapter must be regarded as the ‘front runners’ in terms of a satisfactory explanation of how children master the language system.
However, this should not be taken to imply that this approach does not have its critics or that all researchers working within the developmental paradigm are in agreement regarding the more detailed aspects of language development.
It should also be recognised that while this chapter has stressed the view of language as a process, it is nevertheless the case that, at some point, children do reach a level of mastery where it makes sense to describe them as having acquired knowledge of an abstract set of rules which can be used to express meanings.
What is at issue is whether young children begin by addressing the problem in this way or whether they approach grammatical competence via a circuitous route which begins with pre-verbal social interaction.
Perhaps the most important criticism of this approach is that much of it is essentially speculation about how language development might occur and that there is relatively little conclusive evidence that this is indeed how young children do, in fact, master language.
In addition, close scrutiny of  any one part of the process quickly reveals additional questions about how such developmental changes take place in the light of what still appear to be impoverished and often infrequent learning opportunities (Shatz 1983).
As a result, research in this area is not only clarifying the possible role of prerequisite abilities and environmental support, but it is also resulting in some very strong indications that infants are, to a remarkable degree, pre-adapted to the kinds of learning necessary for language acquisition (for example, see Gleitman and Wanner 1982).
Inevitably, this is likely to be perceived as gloomy news for those concerned with therapy and teaching.
However, this is still a new and exciting field of research which no doubt has many surprises to spring before the mysteries of early language are solved.
Furthermore, it is likely to take many years of research and practical work on intervention before we will be clear about the implications of this approach for children with language impairments.
Language Assessment
Practical and theoretical issues in language assessment
Why assess language?
There are many reasons why it may be regarded as helpful to gather information about a child's language, and the uses to which any formal assessment results may be put will influence decisions about how assessments can best be carried out.
This chapter will begin by considering the reasons for carrying out language assessments and the ways in which information from language assessments is used.
Identification of children with language difficulties
On many occasions assessments will be carried out because it is suspected that a child is experiencing some difficulty with linguistic communication, or because there are other areas of functioning in which the child is having difficulty which may have implications for language development.
Here, the aim of assessment is simply to identify whether or not the child's language is unusual or atypical compared with that of other children of a similar age or in respect of other aspects of development.
For example, a child with language which is less advanced than the language of other children of that age would be regarded as having delayed language ; in contrast, children whose language stands out because it is deficient when compared with the way in which they perform on other social and intellectual tasks may be regarded as having a language deficit .
On the basis of this analysis, a child with severe learning difficulties might have both delayed language, in that she would be functioning at a level below that normally expected for children of her age,and a deficit if her language skills were more severely affected than other areas.
Screening assessments are normally carried out using tests which enable teachers or therapists to obtain a broad-spectrum view of the child's language abilities.
While such tests should ideally sample structural, semantic and pragmatic aspects of language, this is seldom feasible and frequently language screening occurs as part of a more general screening assessment which considers other aspects of a child's social and  psychological functioning.
While many language tests are relatively quick and easy to use, they do not generate the quality of information desirable for diagnostic statements or the formulation of remedial intervention strategies (see Chapter 9).
Placement
A child who has problems in any area of development may be regarded as being likely to benefit from some form of special educational placement, either full time or part time.
Similarly, a description of a child's linguistic abilities may be influential in determining what kinds of educational provision are most likely to meet that child's special needs.
Recommendations regarding placement will need to bear in mind not only a child's existing abilities, but also the progress a child is likely to make in different educational settings.
The extent to which a child is able to take advantage of the learning opportunities, which are made available within a particular setting on a day-to-day basis, will be a major factor in influencing how much progress occurs.
For this reason, assessments intended to provide a basis for making decisions about placement should consider not only the child's performance under ‘test’ conditions, but also the child's capacity for engaging in linguistic interactions in ‘naturalistic’settings.
For example, a child who is sociable, and is likely to benefit from social and linguistic interactions with other children, may be best placed in an ordinary classroom but with special periods devoted to those areas of language which are giving cause for concern.
On the other hand, a child who has difficulty in establishing social contact with others may find the unpredictability of an ordinary classroom overpowering and be better placed in a special class or unit.
Special classes usually have the advantage of lower teacher-pupil ratios and it is therefore easier for teachers to organise activities in which the child's level of participation in social and communicative activities can be carefully monitored and adapted to suit existing abilities.
Similarly, the gradual introduction of more challenging activities intended to facilitate language development is likely to be more easily accomplished in a small class with specialist teachers.
Diagnosis and prognosis
In the field of medicine, disorders are recognised according to their pattern of symptoms, since it is usually the case that similar symptom patterns are indicative of illnesses that have similar underlying causes.
An understanding of the aetiology of disease makes it appropriate to target treatment on the underlying cause or causes of an illness rather than the symptoms.
For this reason, accurate diagnosis of underlying causes on the basis of visible  symptoms plays a major part in the treatment of physical illnesses and will often enable doctors to provide accurate predictions about the future course of the illness.
The success of the ‘symptomatic’ approach to physical illness has led to its adoption by other, paramedical, professions concerned with helping people with other kinds of disability.
In the field of clinical linguistics, there are many conditions which, it is often assumed, have similar causes and which can be treated in similar ways.
For example, Cantwell and Baker (1987) devote a chapter to ‘Differential diagnosis of syndromes involving speech and language’.
However, they acknowledge the difficulties in applying this kind of taxonomy to language disorders:
We wish to preface our discussion of syndromes involving abnormal language development with the disclaimer that, while these categories may delineate separate psychiatric categories, it is not yet clear that each of these categories represents a unique type of linguistic disorder.
(Cantwell and Baker 1987:70; emphasis added)
Here, the only justification for the introduction of these syndromes is that they reflect a psychiatric (i.e. medically based) taxonomy.
Crystal (1984) points out that attempts to classify linguistic disabilities have led to considerable confusion and that terminology is seldom used systematically.
The most obvious reason for this is that neuro-science has not yet reached the point where it is possible to describe language as a direct manifestation of underlying physiological of neurological states.
Instead, the best accounts of the ‘causes’ of language are social and psychological, where language is seen as occurring as a result of interactions between people and their environments.
It is therefore seldom appropriate to treat disorders of language and communication by trying to influence presumed underlying causes.
Even when it is possible to tackle the perceived origins of language difficulty, this will not immediately result in the affected individual being cured.
For example, a child who is experiencing language difficulties brought about by severe environmental deprivation will be saved from further harm if removed to another, more stimulating, environment.
However, this does not in itself overcome the language problems which have arisen during the period of isolation.
This can only be achieved by working prospectively on the child's future environment and by deciding which new experiences may be introduced to compensate for those which, in the past, have proved to be inadequate for language development.
Similarly, a child who has language problems because of hearing loss caused by a temporary blockage (otitis media) may have her hearing corrected by surgical intervention, but this will not automatically remedy the child's problems with language; this will require additional treatment to  create the possibility of appropriate learning (Downs and Blager 1982; Quick and Mandell 1983; Godowski et al .
1986).
This analysis suggests that the identification and diagnosis of language disorder is unlikely to provide the basis for more than relatively crude speculations regarding the child's prognosis.
While it may be possible to say, on the basis of a diagnosis, that a child will continue to experience considerable difficulties with various aspects of language, it remains true that the course and speed of language development will depend, to a great extent, upon the kinds of experience to which the child is subsequently exposed.
Over and above these difficulties, there are considerable variations in the way in which different authors use the term ‘diagnosis’(Crystal 1984).
For example, while Cantwell and Baker (1987) imply that diagnosis is in some senses indicative of aetiology , Ingram (1976) restricts his use of the term to the description of speech and language difficulties using a particular theoretical framework.
In this book,diagnosis will be used in the traditional medical sense: to designate a process of classification on the basis of presumed causes.
The description of speech and language difficulties which draws on recent psycholinguistic research will be referred to as the process of assessment .
Assessment may provide the foundations for an intervention programme because it describes an individual's strengths and weaknesses, irrespective of the presumed underlying causes of those difficulties.
The rationale for using assessment procedures to diagnose different kinds of language disorder rests principally on the assumption that different treatments can be evaluated with respect to different conditions (Cantwell and Baker 1987).
If it is found that a particular form of therapy is effective for a group of individuals with a particular pattern of language difficulties, or for those who share a common aetiology (that is, they have the same diagnosis), it may be that others with similar difficulties may be helped by the same form of therapy.
For example, hearing impairments provide a common aetiology for linguistic difficulties among deaf children and for this reason it is usually assumed that deaf children will respond to therapy in similar ways.
Likewise, children with ‘acquired childhood language disorder’ may be recognised as having similar kinds of communication difficulties (irrespective of specific causes) and, on the basis of this diagnosis, they may be recommended for certain kinds of therapy (Cantwell and Baker 1987).
It is important to note that the reasoning here is as follows: assessment → diagnosis → treatment.
Thus the crucial determiner of the therapeutic experiences to which the child will be exposed is whether or not the child is categorised as ‘having’ a particular condition.
There is, therefore, a danger that the assessment is carried out solely to determine the diagnosis and that treatment is designed for the diagnosis rather than for the child.
Given the present state of understanding regarding the causes and  appropriate forms of intervention for children with language difficulties, this kind of short-cut is likely to lead to inadequate assessment and ineffective treatment.
Diagnosis may facilitate communication among professionals in obtaining an appropriate placement for a child.
However, it should be stressed that diagnosis is only one of the aims of assessment and diagnosis on its own may be of limited value in developing strategies for intervention (Crystal 1984).
Communicating with other professionals
Very often assessment of a child's language is required in order that it can be presented to other professionals who are seeking to help that child.
The information from the assessment may be presented orally at a case conference or it may be presented in the form of a written report.
It may also be reported informally in the context of more general discussions or ‘chat’.
In whichever way the results of an assessment are communicated, it is reasonable to assume that they may have important implications for the way in which the child is dealt with in the future.
This information may also influence the way in which other people perceive the child and, consequently, the way in which they interact with the child on an individual basis.
The information which may be derived from an assessment can be roughly divided into two types: first, there is the information which is obtained from the assessment procedures and, second, there is the interpretation which is placed on this information.
For example, in terms of the discussion in the preceding section, a diagnosis is an interpretation of the evidence obtained from the assessment.
In the interests of maintaining objectivity it is always helpful to keep these two kinds of information distinct and to indicate clearly how an interpretation is derived from the evidence presented.
Communicating with parents
One of the most important roles for any person who conducts a formal language assessment on a child is to communicate the results of the assessment to the child's parents or guardians.
This raises rather different issues compared to communication with other professionals since the child s parents are likely to be much more involved, both personally and emotionally.
For this reason, it is necessary to consider not only what information to provide for parents, but how this information can be most usefully presented.
Parents will frequently already be aware that the child is experiencing difficulties with various aspects of language, although they may not have considered the implications of these problems in any great detail.
However, they are likely to appreciate a straightforward summary of the results of the  assessment which places equal weight on the child's abilities as well as on her disabilities.
Once again, it may be helpful to distinguish between objective evidence obtained from an assessment and the conclusions which are drawn from this.
It will also be necessary to consider the extent to which the evidence involves technical data and the extent to which any particular parent is likely to find this kind of information helpful.
In many cases, parents will be more interested in the way in which the professional uses information from the assessment to answer practical questions, such as‘Will she need to have speech therapy?’,
‘Will he be able to go to the same school as his brothers and sisters?’ or ‘Will she be able to speak like other boys and girls when she is older?’
Many parents will have experienced considerable anxiety prior to the assessment because of the uncertainty of suspecting that there is something wrong with their child but not knowing what.
They may therefore approach the post-assessment consultation in the expectation of being given some definite information regarding the child's difficulties and the likely prognosis.
However, as has already been mentioned, providing clear predictions about the course of any child's linguistic and communicative abilities is extremely difficult.
It may not, therefore, be possible to give direct answers to many of the questions which parents may ask.
It is then up to the teacher or therapist to help the parents accept that an assessment may be useful as a way of helping the child without necessarily providing a diagnostic label or a clear statement regarding the child's future.
Very often, parents can be helped by a clear description of the child's abilities and the areas of relative weakness, especially if this is written down so that they can take it away and read it at their leisure.
This may also help parents to be more aware of language and communication in ordinary, everyday settings and to notice when and on what occasions a child's language seems to be improving.
This may not only be encouraging for the parents, but it may also provide the teacher or therapist with valuable information about the child's functioning which would not otherwise be available.
In addition, some parents may find that it is easier to cope with a child who has a serious language problem if they are able to participate in the process of assessment and intervention.
This may require the parents being given some special activities to be carried out each day, or it may involve more general and less highly structured activities, such as looking at books or playing with toys.
In these cases, it is important that the parents are given regular feedback regarding progress and that activities are frequently modified to reflect even modest progress.
It may also be necessary to ensure that parents do not become over-zealous in their commitment to a particular kind of therapeutic activity to the extent that it limits, rather than expands, the child's experiences, or dominates the lives of other members of the family.
Measuring changes over time
An important function of assessment is that it can help determine the extent to which a child's language is subject to changes over time.
This involves carrying out two separate assessments and comparing the results.
Clearly, the longer the time interval between the two assessments the greater the chances that there will be differences.
Such differences may be indicative of more elaborate language and progress in the direction predicted by normal developmental trends, or the child's language may be deteriorating.
It is also quite likely that there will be a mixture of positive and negative changes which need to be carefully interpreted.
One particular difficulty in assessing change over time is that any differences between the two assessments will be influenced by a host of ex-traneous factors which may either conceal or exaggerate the real changes in the child's language.
Some published language tests provide data regarding the variability to be expected in test scores if the test were to be repeated on the same child at relatively close intervals.
Under such conditions, it is assumed that there would have been no ‘real’ changes in the child's language and that any differences in the two test scores would be due to error arising from the limitations of the test itself (see Chapter 7).
It is only changes in test scores which exceed these reliability estimates that can be regarded as reflecting real changes in the child's ability.
Unfortunately, other forms of assessment do not lend themselves to precise measures of test-retest reliability and the clinician may need to judge how far situational factors might have influenced the two assessments.
For example, a sample of naturalistic speech, on a tape recorded in the child's home, is probably not directly comparable with a sample taken while the child is in a school or clinic.
Even in the case of language tests, it is possible that situational factors will influence a child's performance and hence make comparisons between two sets of scores difficult to interpret.
For example, a child who is assessed while slightly under the weather or simply in a bad mood will be likely to perform below par, and a comparison of this assessment with a prior or subsequent assessment will provide a distorted impression of any real changes which have occurred.
Evidence of change may be useful in deciding whether or not a child requires special placement, and it is likely to be particularly helpful when discussing the child with other professionals or parents.
However, in addition to providing information about the child, an indication of change over time may also be helpful in evaluating the success of previous attempts at remedial intervention.
It might reasonably be expected that a child placed in a special class would make more progress after the placement than during a comparable time period before the placement.
Similarly, a child who has been receiving some form of individual help from a clinician, teacher or parent, might be expected to show the effects of that treatment and a  comparison of changes over time on the basis of formal assessments would be an appropriate way of obtaining relevant information.
The ideal way to evaluate some form of special teaching help is to compare the changes which occur over two periods of time, only one of which is associated with intervention, such as a special placement or a particular kind of therapy (see Figure 6.1).
Clearly, in order to obtain this kind of information it is necessary to conduct three assessments under similar conditions so that they are directly comparable and spaced at equal time intervals.
If such a procedure is to be successfully executed, it is likely to require careful planning and substantial time commitment.
However, when this approach is used with single children or with small groups, it may still not be possible to attribute any observed changes in the child's language to the effect of the intervention.
Other factors may also have played a part.
For example, the child's home experiences may have changed during the same period, thus helping or hindering language development, or the fact that the child is older during the second time period may influence language performance.
In addition to this ‘before-and-after intervention’ approach, there are other experimental designs which have been specially developed for teachers and therapists working in therapeutic settings.
One popular technique is to measure a child's ability with respect to a number of relatively discrete aspects of language and then to target specific areas for intervention.
The areas which do not receive intervention can then serve as a basis for comparison with the targeted areas after a suitable period of time has elapsed (see Table 6.1).
If the intervention is effective, the areas specifically addressed by the teaching programme should show greater signs of improvement than the areas not targeted for intervention.
In this kind of evaluation of change over time, it is argued that it is easier to attribute changes directly to the planned intervention, since it is unlikely that other experiences to which the child might be exposed would produce the same pattern of differential progress across different aspects of language.
Developing strategies for teaching
One of the principal reasons for conducting a detailed assessment of a child's language is to determine the most effective way of helping that child.
This raises the question of exactly what kinds of experience are likely to be most helpful to a child who is experiencing difficulties with language and communication.
At some point it is necessary for someone to provide clear guidelines regarding how others should interact with that child in order to promote learning and developmental changes most effectively.
The question of how best to structure a child's learning experiences invites the   teacher or therapist to switch from the focus on linguistic description, presented in Chapters 1, 2 and 3, to the concern about explanations of language development discussed in Chapters 4 and 5.
Therapeutic recommendations involve moving beyond a description and interpretation of the child's difficulties, and expressing a commitment to a theoretical framework concerning how changes can be initiated or accelerated.
This chapter will deal only with issues relating to description and assessment, leaving a discussion of different approaches to intervention until Chapters 9 and 10.
However, it is possible to make some general comments about the ways in which descriptions of a child's language difficulties can contribute to planning intervention.
First, it is appropriate for those working with a child to try to communicate at the right level; this means introducing language structures with which the child is already familiar and trying to ensure that the content of conversations is appropriate to the child's ability to understand and to her interests.
It also means creating opportunities for interaction, either verbal or non-verbal, which reflect the child's command of the functional characteristics of language (for a description of language structure, content and function, the reader is referred to Chapters 1, 2 and 3).
While it is true that a sensitive adult will respond intuitively to a child's language and make numerous adjustments to his or her own language in a way that will reflect the child's strengths and weaknesses, it may nevertheless be helpful to make these explicit in a written assessment so that intuitions can be further re fined on the basis of objective information.
Second, since intervention is often directed at the areas of relative weakness in a child's linguistic abilities, it may be helpful to identify what these are and to what extent they are likely to impair the child's ability to communicate in a variety of settings.
If a child has a number of areas of weakness, it should be possible to organise these in terms of their significance for functional communication.
Alternatively, for a child with  generally delayed language, it may be necessary to generate a set of priorities solely in terms of the communicative situations which the child has to deal with on a daily basis.
Third, an assessment should identify those areas of language and communication in which the child has relative strengths.
This provides useful information for anyone who needs to address the child as part of a daily routine or anyone who seeks to engage the child in conversation informally.
It may also be desirable to use existing, well-established language and communication skills as the basis for teaching weaker or less well-established skills.
For example, in discussing the way in which normal children develop language, Slobin (1973) has suggested that new functions are first learned using existing language forms or structures and, conversely, new forms or structures are first used to express well-established functions.
This simple ‘bootstrapping’ approach to language suggests a specific strategy by which teachers and therapists might capitalise on areas of relative competence in order to assist a child in those areas where she is experiencing difficulty.
Theoretical issues in language assessment
Interpreting assessment information
The underlying rationale for any psychological or linguistic assessment is that it provides objective evidence which can be appropriately interpreted and evaluated.
Most assessment procedures are developed in order to provide a particular kind of interpretation and because of this the criteria against which the child's language will be evaluated are implicit in the procedure.
An interpretation of a child's language will be derived from some comparison between the child's actual language and a descriptive framework incorporated within the assessment procedure.
Because the basis for making comparisons is not always made explicit, it may be helpful to discuss two kinds of descriptive framework which are frequently employed in assessment procedures.
therefore involve teaching a child to make phonemic contrasts which are not normally associated with phonological development (Ingram 1976).
Such situationally based or functional descriptions are clearly important in determining the focus of any therapeutic intervention, but they also have limitations.
For example, on the basis of an approach concerned with the adequacy of communication in different situations, all children and many adults might be assessed as having language difficulties.
A normal child of 3 is far from being a completely effective language user, and yet it would be inappropriate to target that child for therapy.
Some other form of comparison is therefore necessary to indicate the extent to which a child is experiencing difficulties.
Second, many assessment procedures are based on an implicit comparison between the language of the child being assessed and the language of normally developing children of a similar age.
Here, it is assumed that the severity of any language problem is indicated by the extent to which a child's language differs from that found among other children of a similar age.
This line of reasoning then raises the question of what might be regarded as an accurate description of the language of ordinary children at different ages.
After all, normal children, who are not identified as having language problems, show considerable variation with respect to the overall speed of language development and in terms of the relationship between the structural, semantic and functional features (Brown 1973; Lieven 1978; Nelson 1973).
Developmental norms
Developmental norms are an attempt to provide an indication of the ages at which one might expect ordinary children to show evidence of certain skills or abilities.
Since children vary with respect to the ages at which they demonstrate any particular behaviour, norms represent an ‘average’ obtained from an examination of the developmental changes occurring in a large number of children.
Data from a large sample will show the earliest age at which a child would be expected to gain control of a particular aspect of language, and the age by which 90 per cent or 95 per cent of non-handicapped children might be expected to show evidence of the same ability.
If children who have already been diagnosed as suffering from some specific handicapping condition are included, the data will show the expected age delay before this group matches the performance of the normally developing children.
Significant age norms may be identified on the basis of the age at which most children first demonstrate a particular linguistic skill.
For language skills which are first seen to occur in children of very different ages, it may be more helpful to choose the age by which a given percentage (for example, 50 per cent ) of the total sample has shown evidence of that skill.
However, the average figure would need to be interpreted in the knowledge that substantial age variations were in fact a part of the ‘normal pattern’.
For more detailed information on the age norms for a number of structural, semantic and functional features, the reader is referred to Bloom and Lahey (1978) and Miller (1981a).
Any subsequent comparison of an individual child with the age norms will indicate the extent to which that child's performance is consistent with the performance of most other children and, if there is a discrepancy, an indication of the time-gap involved.
One obvious problem in establishing and using age norms is that, for any given child, it is not easy to be precise about when any specific skill has been mastered.
A child's linguistic performance may vary from day to day and even from hour to hour.
Detection of small but important changes may also be dependent upon the knowledge and sensitivity of the adult observer.
For example, if we were to ask ‘When do children first become able to use single words?’ the immediate response might be: ‘It depends on what you mean by single words.
Do you want to count idiosyncratic words, phonologically constant forms or only utterances which are clearly recognisable as conventional words?’
Since children's linguistic performance varies across situations, it is particularly important that the conditions associated with the collection of the data for the age norms are repeated as closely as possible when an individual child is assessed.
How far this is possible depends to a great extent on the quality of the instructions accompanying the assessment procedure.
However, even when this is achieved, there may still be problems in interpreting what this information means.
Structure, meaning and function in language assessment
The first three chapters suggested that there are three main levels of linguistic description; structure, meaning and functional characteristics.
Structural descriptions are concerned with the realisation of meaning through the organisation of speech sounds and subsume grammatical descriptions at the level of phonology, morphology and syntax.
Descriptions which focus on meaning are concerned with the way in which conceptual understanding is expressed in language and functional descriptions are concerned with the relationship between language and the social context in which it occurs.
Speech-act theory offers a way of integrating these different levels of description and, in doing so, emphasises that any utterance is amenable to description and analysis at each of these levels.
As ordinary, non-handicapped children develop, the three aspects of language are co-ordinated, to a considerable degree, so that changes in one are associated with changes in the other two.
Similarly, difficulties with respect to one of these aspects of language are likely to be associated with  difficulties in the other areas.
While it is true that different assessment procedures usually focus on one or other of these different aspects of language, this is a reflection on the recent history of psycholinguistic research and ought not be taken to imply that assessment is best carried out by focusing on discrete areas.
Indeed, the development of a set of assessment procedures which integrate structural, semantic and functional descriptions of language is perhaps the next major focus for clinical research.
In the meantime, the task for the teacher or therapist is to examine all aspects of the child's language, using whatever devices are available, with the objective of generating an assessment which reflects both strengths and weaknesses in the three areas, and indicates the extent to which difficulties identified in each of these areas may or may not be interrelated.
Competence and performance
One of the major distinctions between the different approaches to language description already discussed concerns the extent to which it is deemed appropriate to regard language behaviour as being a reflection of an underlying knowledge base.
Traditional behavioural formulations have regarded spoken language as the minimal units for any form of analysis.
Increasingly detailed levels of analysis might therefore be concerned with the patterning of sounds within words or, alternatively, with the relationship of words to other words or of words and sentences to the surrounding context (Skinner 1957).
In direct contrast to this emphasis on the surface features of language, Chomsky (1959) argued that the complexity of grammar indicated that language users have a sophisticated understanding of a rule system and that any description must be concerned with a speaker's knowledge of these rules.
According to Chomsky's formulation, speech and, indeed, writing are examples of language performance .
In contrast, the knowledge of the rule system, which an individual needs in order to be able to produce and understand grammatical sentences, is referred to as language competence .
This differentiation of competence and performance is necessary, since ordinary speech is frequently ungrammatical, while adults and children are well able to demonstrate knowledge of linguistic rules by distinguishing between grammatical, anomalous and ungrammatical word strings (Chapter 7).
Thus, what people seem to know about grammar is not always reflected in the language they use.
Chomsky's explanation for this apparent contradiction is that, during the process of production, grammatical knowledge is imperfectly translated into speech because of memory constraints and fluctuating attention.
The competence-performance distinction is maintained in contemporary approaches to language description (see Chapter 1).
It is also reflected in both the nativistic and the interactionist accounts of language development (see Chapter 5).
The approaches to gathering linguistic information described in the next chapter are all based on the assumption that it is possible to sample a child's language and that, under certain conditions, this will provide a useful indication of the child's linguistic ability in other situations.
Such an assumption requires the invocation of additional processes to explain precisely how what a child does or does not do in one setting might be related to the child's performance in a different setting.
Conventionally, this problem has two solutions.
The first is to argue that the elicitation procedures used in language assessment provide examples of language behaviour, which is determined by the child's previous learning experiences within similar situations.
Any inferences regarding the applic-ability of the assessment information to other settings will be based upon the notion of generalisation — that is, an analysis of the inferred or observed similarities between the stimulus conditions obtaining in the assessment procedure and those which are present in other naturally occurring settings.
The second solution is to regard linguistic knowledge or competence as a characteristic of the individual child.
It is then assumed that if the child demonstrates a knowledge of the rules for producing or comprehending language in one setting, that knowledge will be transported with the child to any other setting and will be available for deployment in communicative interaction.
These two explanations of the relationship between language produced in assessment settings and language in other everyday situations suffer from fairly obvious limitations.
In the first explanation there is too little attention paid to the role of the child as the mediator between environmental stimuli and language use.
Conversely, in the second account, there is too much emphasis on individual knowledge and too little emphasis given to the way in which individual abilities vary as a function of the social and physical context.
In spite of these criticisms, these two explanations are frequently implicit in the conduct of language assessments.
Part of the reason for this is that they make the interpretation of information derived from assessments unproblematical.
For example, if language difficulties identified from an assessment can be described in terms of a functional analysis, and an environmental deficit, remedial procedures might be directed at rearranging the contingencies in the child's natural environment.
Alternatively, if language problems are seen in terms of the child's limited understanding of the rule system, this, in turn, might lead on to a programme of intervention designed to teach the child more about the rules assumed to underlie language use.
This could be carried out in the school, the clinic or the child's home.
Since the assumption is that the child will carry around any new linguistic knowledge, there will be no need to take any account of the environment within which the teaching takes place.
One reason why these two interpretations are commonplace is that, until recently, there has been no clearly articulated theoretical position which  offered a viable alternative.
However, there is now a growing body of research literature which emphasises the interdependence of both individual and social influences on language use (Austin 1962; Searle 1969; Vygotsky 1962, 1978).
Within this framework, language may be conceived of as a process which arises from the social interaction of individuals; it is neither a skill possessed by individuals nor simply a reflection of environmental influences.
Of course, individuals do become fluent in the exercise of language within a number of very different contexts and some of these may not, at first sight, appear to be social.
For example, writing a letter or reading a book may appear to be solitary activities in which individuals exercise personal skills.
But in order for these activities to be meaningful, they must be understood as communicative processes between people, and the individuals concerned must be able to construct social contexts within which their reading and writing activities can have meaning.
This interactionist approach to language description has resulted in an emphasis upon functionally based descriptions (see Chapter 5).
It is therefore important to examine methods of language assessment in terms of the interaction between individual abilities and contextual influences on performance.
Sources of linguistic information
Introduction
Normally developing children often seem to be inexhaustible sources of spoken language; they seem to relish their developing abilities and to use them on every possible occasion.
However, the situation immediately becomes more complicated when an attempt is made to determine precisely what language a child is capable of producing, how much a child understands, and, if the child appears to be experiencing difficulties, just where these difficulties lie.
The central problem is that it is only ever possible to sample a child's language over a fixed period of time and within a finite number of situations.
However, development is never static, and therefore an assessment at one point in time is an artificially frozen ‘snapshot’ of a dynamic process.
Second, when making an assessment, information about what a child is able to do in one situation must necessarily form the basis of inferences about what a child might be able to do in other situations.
For example, we might draw the inference that a child who is able to name a picture of a boat, while looking at a picture book with her mother, will be able to name it on any other occasion; the child ‘knows the meaning of the word boat’.
However, it will never be possible to test the validity of this conclusion, since ‘knowing the meaning of a word’ implies being able to use that word in an infinite number of possible situations.
It may be that the child only recognises a particular picture in a particular book as an appropriate context for the word ‘boat’; or she may be able to recognise sailing boats but not canoes and motor boats.
Thus, one of the problems of language assessment becomes how to make a fair estimate of the child's language ability, given evidence from a very restricted set of situations.
There are two ways in which researchers and clinicians have attempted to solve this problem.
The first involves designing special procedures for  eliciting language from a child and the second involves sampling the language produced by the child under ordinary, everyday settings.
Elicitation procedures make it possible to examine a very broad spectrum of linguistic abilities in a systematic manner over a relatively short period of time.
However, they are limited in that they create artificial contexts which may not provide a good basis for predicting performance in other settings.
Second, elicitation procedures suffer from difficulties in interpreting what ‘no response’ means.
On the one hand, it may be indicative of the absence of a particular linguistic ability while, alternatively, it may be explained by influences unrelated to linguistic ability, such as lapses in attention, bore-dom or a failure to understand instructions.
Sampling language from a range of everyday settings overcomes the problem of the artificiality of elicitation procedures.
However, the information collected will be determined by the situations and activities in which the child is engaged during the period of time being sampled.
Some linguistic abilities may not be detected, not because the child is not able to demonstrate them, but simply because the occasion did not arise where they were required.
This chapter will consider a number of elicitation strategies before turning to the procedures for collecting language samples in everyday settings.
Elicitation procedures
An elicitation procedure is designed to provide a child with the opportunity to respond to a specific set of stimuli; the relationship between a stimulus and the child's response is then taken as an indication of the child's mastery of a particular aspect of language.
There are two types of elicitation pro-cedure; the first involves the child in making a non-verbal response to a verbal stimulus and is used as a measure of the child's comprehension of spoken language.
The second requires the child to make a verbal response to either a verbal or a non-verbal stimulus and is used as a measure of the child's ability to produce spoken language.
Elicitation procedures for language comprehension
Elicitation procedures which measure a child's comprehension of spoken language generally only require a relatively simple response.
This might involve the child in selecting a picture or an object from an array to match the word or words spoken by the teacher or therapist.
For example, in the British Picture Vocabulary Test, the child is required to point manually or to eye-point to indicate her selection from a set of pictures.
This simplifies the response aspect of the task and makes it more likely that errors will be the result of difficulties in understanding the verbal stimulus, rather than problems in signalling what has been understood.
Balanced against these advantages is the limitation that a pre-selected array inevitably increases the chances of the child guessing the correct answer.
Given a two-choice array, there is a 50 per cent possibility of a correct response occurring by chance, while with a four-choice array there is only a 25 per cent chance of a random response being correct.
Some comprehension elicitation procedures involve the child in manipulating simple toys.
For example, during the administration of the Reynell Developmental Language Scales, the child is told, ‘The doll sits in the chair.
Show me the doll in the chair’ and, ‘The spoon goes in the cup.
Show me the spoon and the cup.’
When using these procedures, there is obviously the danger that the materials themselves will invite the child to perform certain actions (the spoon naturally goes in the cup), irrespective of whether or not the child understands the instructions.
On the other hand, instructions which require the child to perform unusual or bizarre actions may simply result in hesitation or confusion, even though the child may have understood the language used.
With items concerned with grammatical relations, the verbal stimulus may be more complex and the choices presented in the stimulus array will be designed to reflect specific aspects of grammatical knowledge.
For example, M. Harris (1986) describes a strategy for assessing a child's understanding of number markers.
Four different number markers were presented in sentence pairs:
Demonstratives: ‘This sheep jumped’; ‘These sheep jumped.’
Regular nouns: ‘The girl jumped’; ‘The girls jumped.’
Auxiliary verbs: ‘The sheep is jumping’; ‘The sheep are jumping.’
Third-person regular present tense verbs: ‘The sheep jumps’; ‘The sheep jumps.’
Each sentence was presented in conjunction with two pictures, one of which depicted the singular version of the sentence and one the plural.
The child's task was to point to the picture which correctly depicted what was described in the sentences.
Elicitation procedures for language production
Perhaps the simplest procedure for eliciting spoken language is to require the child to imitate a model provided by the adult.
This has the advantage of establishing a high degree of control over the target utterance and, if the child is co-operating, it is possible to make a direct comparison between the utterance the child was attempting to produce and what the child actually said.
Unfortunately, imitation makes special demands upon the child's pragmatic skills and may not, therefore, always provide an accurate indication of the child's ability to produce language spontaneously (Ingram 1974) or of the child's underlying linguistic competence (Slobin and Welsh 1973).
More-over, the effects of imitation on performance seem to differ with respect to phonological abilities and grammatical abilities.
Ingram reported that for children with phonological disorders, imitation tasks lead to fewer errors compared to spontaneous speech.
He suggests that whereas spontaneous speech invokes the child's own realisation rules, imitation does not.
Fraser et al .
(1973) also argued that grammatical errors were less frequent and less systematic within an imitation task, compared to an activity in which a child was required to match a sentence to a picture and say the sentence.
Like Ingram, they concluded that imitation is predominantly a perceptuo-motor task which is not influenced by the child's understanding of meaning.
In contrast to these results, Slobin and Welsh found that a child was able to imitate one of her own utterances immediately after she had produced it spontaneously, but that errors occurred when the child was asked to imitate the same utterance some minutes later.
They suggest that production is supported by conceptual knowledge and the intention to communicate.
In the absence of intentional communication, as is the case with imitation tasks, the child is restricted to a linguistic analysis of the target utterance without any contextual support.
Slobin and Welsh argue that this actually makes imitations of phrases and sentences more complex tasks than spontaneous production.
On this basis imitation tasks ought to be regarded as giving a conservative estimate of the child's grammatical knowledge.
Consistent with this interpretation is the finding that some errors in imitation are a result of the child trying to understand the meaning of the target utterance and then encoding the meaning according to the child's own grammatical system.
For example, Slobin and Welsh report a child being asked to imitate, ‘This is the giant, but this one is little’ and saying, ‘Dis one little, annat one big.’
Thus, while imitation tasks appear to provide a simple and direct way of assessing a child's linguistic ability, the interpretation of children's performance on imitation tasks is far from simple.
It may be possible to target specific phonemes to assess articulation but the child's performance is likely to be somewhat better than during spontaneous speech.
On the other  hand, requiring the child to reproduce phrases and sentences may lead to a lower level of performance as the child seeks to make sense of the adult constructions and in doing so reinterprets them through her own emerging system of grammatical rules.
In addition to imitation, there are a number of other procedures designed to give the teacher or therapist some degree of control over the child's language production.
These include sentence-completion tasks, the use of puppets and role playing (Miller 1981b).
The main advantage of elicitation procedures is that they give a relatively high degree of control over areas of linguistic ability which are being assessed.
Furthermore, because the child is provided with simplified situations which have been specifically designed to help the child understand what is required, it might be argued that elicitation procedures should provide an optimal measure of performance.
Balanced against this is the problem that these procedures are likely to involve the child in unusual activities with strange people; they may not, therefore, provide an accurate picture of what children are able to do under more natural and relaxed conditions.
Of particular importance is the fact that all these procedures impose considerable constraints on the pragmatic and conversational aspects of the child's language production, and as yet little is known about how this may interact with measures of grammar and meaning.
Whatever measures are derived from a structured task, we are still likely to be left wondering how they relate to the language the child uses in everyday settings and it is to a consideration of procedures for sampling naturalistic language production that we now turn.
Naturalistic language samples
The rationale for trying to obtain verbatim records of children's speech in naturalistic settings is that it provides the best indication of what language a child actually uses in ordinary, everyday settings.
In the past, samples of children's language have been collected using a diary approach where examples of children's utterances, together with a description of the surrounding context, were simply written down over a period of weeks or months (Miller 1981a).
This is a time-consuming activity and obviously susceptible to human fallibility.
However, diaries kept by parents can produce valuable information and also help parents to see themselves as active partners in the assessment process.
Miller suggested that parents focus on five aspects of language and communication:
1
the sounds and words the child produces;
2
whether or not the child's sounds or words are imitations;
3
whether or not the child's words are addressed to another person;
4
why the child said a word or phrase;
5
what is happening in the immediate surroundings when the word is produced.
Since the advent of electronic recording, examples of children's language in ordinary settings can be made using audio or audio-visual recorders.
Consequently, the language of the child and others addressing the child can be coded or transcribed.
The procedure for collecting language samples in this way can be considered under four headings: recording equipment; sampling children's language; observer effects; and transcription.
Recording equipment
Although video recordings may have a strong appeal, in so far as they appear to capture a more complete picture of any speech episode, they have major disadvantages in that they are highly obtrusive, they usually need to be manned and they are relatively cumbersome if the child has to be followed around.
Tape recorders, on the other hand, are relatively small and can therefore be placed in position where they will not attract much attention.
Furthermore, if necessary they can be left unattended.
The major disadvantage with audio recorders is that a great deal of contextual information is not recorded and therefore, unless some other method of recording the context, such as note-taking, is employed, it may not be possible to recover a ‘rich interpretation’ of the child's language.
The decision to use a video recorder or an audio recorder will depend upon a number of considerations, including the reason for making the recording, the data which the teacher or therapist hopes to recover and the resources available for making recordings and for coding and/ or transcribing.
Recordings of one child with one adult may be made using a domestic tape recorder and a standard microphone.
However, if it is necessary to follow the child around from one room to another, or if it is desirable to record a child with other children or with more than one adult present, then it is advisable to use a radio microphone which can be attached to the child's clothing.
This will ensure that a relatively good recording of the child's language will be obtained, together with a fair amount of the language of the other people.
If it is particularly important to record the language of two or more people in a group (for example, a teacher and a pupil in a classroom), then it is better to use two radio microphones transmitting on different frequencies and with the two signals fed through a sound mixer before being recorded.
A cheap alternative to a radio microphone that produces acceptable recordings of one speaker is to use a small tape recorder attached to a tie-clip microphone.
In either case, it will be necessary to attach a small microphone somewhere below the child's chin and to provide some arrangement for the child to carry around the radio transmitter or the small tape recorder.
Sampling children's language
Before any recording is undertaken it will be necessary to obtain the co-operation of the child's parents and teachers.
This ought not to present any problems, although it is probably a good idea to emphasise the importance of the child's language and to try to reduce any anxiety or embarrassment that adults might feel at the prospect of being recorded.
It is also worthwhile explaining that the recording is intended to capture the child's natural language and that the adults should try to behave as normally as possible and should not make any special efforts to get the child to talk.
The main questions regarding sampling are: under what conditions and for how long?
Rather than simply sampling at random, it is helpful to make some preliminary enquiries among the child's parents or teachers regarding the kinds of situations in which she is most likely to talk.
Alternatively, it may be considered appropriate to make a series of short recordings in different settings and compare the results.
A number of researchers (Hughes et al .
1979; Wells 1981) have reported that the amount of talk by children and their caretakers varies, both in respect of the time of day (more talk first thing in the morning and early afternoon) and as a function of their familiarity with the process of being recorded (less talk on the first day, compared with subsequent days).
This last point indicates that it is useful to introduce at least one dummy-run to familiarise children and their caretakers with the procedure prior to making the recordings to be used for analysis.
While it is true that the longer the period of time over which the child's language is sampled, the more representative that sample will be of the child's underlying linguistic knowledge, in practical terms the length of any recording will be constrained by the time available for transcription and coding.
In general, it is reasonable to assume that a simple transcription in traditional orthography (that is , without using phonemic symbols or a phonetic transcription) will take between four and six times the length of the original recording.
Fortunately, there are now a number of assessment instruments designed to utilise spontaneous speech samples, and some of these suggest coding utterances direct from a tape without the need for transcription.
Observer effects
The goal of collecting naturalistic language data is, by definition, to capture a sample of the child's language as it occurs under ordinary, everyday conditions.
Inevitably, the very fact that someone has decided to try to record the child's language makes this ideal unattainable.
With modern recording equipment and careful preparation, so that all the participants have been acclimatised to the recording procedure, the intrusive effects of recording can be considerably reduced.
However, one dilemma remains.
In order to be able to understand the child's language, it is usually necessary to have a detailed knowledge of the context within which that language occurred.
This can be most easily achieved by an observer who is present while the recording is being made and who can make a full transcription within a few hours.
But the presence of an observer is likely to be even more intrusive than the recording equipment, and thus any transcription will fail to reveal natural language.
A number of solutions have been put forward to try and overcome this problem.
The most implausible of these simply involves telling the adult caretakers to carry on as normal and to ‘do what you would normally do’.
In spite of the confidence and frequency with which researchers report this technique, it is easy to imagine the constraints on the behaviour of both adults and children which occur during periods of recording:
The mother was instructed to remain in two adjoining rooms with the child, to ignore the observer, and to avoid having visitors, telephone calls, or the television on during the observation.
The observer, equipped with a cassette tape-recorder, earphone and coding sheets, stationed himself so that he could observe the mother-child interaction in either of the two adjoining rooms.
(Forehand and Peed 1979, cited in P. J. Harris 1986:173–4)
An alternative is to try and utilise the participating adults as observers who might subsequently be able to provide sufficient contextual detail to support interpretations of the transcribed speech.
This involves either going through the transcript with the child's caretakers and inviting comments and interpretations on specific utterances, or playing the recording back and making detailed notes about movements and activities of the participants during the recording period.
Although this procedure removes the contam-ination of the observer, it is far from clear to what extent adults are able to reconstruct the context of their previous linguistic encounters with children, and how far post hoc interpretations regarding what was said and what was meant are subject to distortion.
These limitations and practical difficulties do not remove the value of recording children's speech in relatively natural settings; they do, however, emphasise that it is extremely difficult to obtain objective and accurate information on which to base an assessment of a child's linguistic abilities.
Transcription
The purpose of preparing a transcript is to present, in print, as complete a record of the taped material as is required for the particular assessment: ‘It provides the foundation of; 11 subsequent analyses and, as such, its importance cannot be over estimated’(Crystal 1984).
At one extreme, it is  possible to try to commit everything on the tape to paper.
This would include at least the following:
1
a transcription of everything the child said, using phonemic symbols to represent non-conventional pronunciations and unintelligible vocal-isations;
2
a gloss in traditional orthography of the observer's interpretation of what a child intended to say;
3
a transcription of any adult utterances;
4
a detailed account of the non-linguistic context surrounding each utterance.
Crystal (1984) makes a strong case for providing a detailed transcription of the language of all those who are candidates for assessment.
He argues that, given our present state of ignorance regarding the classification of linguistic disorders, descriptive detail is necessary, both as a prelude to intervention and in order to increase our basic understanding of language development.
Since language is a coherent system, it is important not simply to focus upon specific areas which, at first glance, suggest errors, but to examine the whole system in the expectation of discovering interrelationships between the different levels of linguistic functioning.
To this end, he recommends that transcripts be used as the starting-point for the generation of assessments which address structural, semantic and functional language characteristics.
In spite of this ideal, for most of us time is short and the benefits of an exhaustive transcription of recorded speech must be balanced against other professional commitments.
It may, therefore, be expedient on certain occasions to utilise taped material in a more selective manner.
For example, an assessment of a child's command of phonology may focus on the child's use of certain problematic contrasting phonemes, and it may only be necessary to transcribe phonemically those words in which particular contrasts normally occur.
Similarly, if there are good reasons to target the assessment of the child's command of specific grammatical structures or certain functional aspects of language, it may be sufficient to scan a tape for examples of these structures or functions, or for contexts in which they might reasonably be expected to occur.
It may also be helpful to consider analysing transcripts using well-established procedures.
A selection of these is considered in the next section.
Procedures for the analysis of transcripts
Mean Length of Utterance
In Chapter 1 it was suggested that Mean Length of Utterance (MLU) measured in morphemes provides a useful summary of the normal child's  mastery of grammatical structure.
Brown (1973) provided the first set of guidelines to be widely adopted for the calculation of MLU, thus making it possible to use this measure as a basis for comparing language performance across children.
The instructions for calculating MLU listed below are those originally proposed by Brown with some minor adjustments introduced by Chapman (1981).
The Mean Length of Utterance is found by dividing the number of morphemes, in a consecutive sequence of utterances from a speaker, by the total number of utterances.
Thus, the longer the utterances are on average, the higher will be the MLU.
At this point it may be noted that there is no completely satisfactory definition of ‘an utterance’.
However, listener's intuitions based upon such cues as pauses, intonation and stress contours and turns within a conversation are normally reliable.
Morphemes may be identified on the basis of the following rules.
1
Begin with the first page of the transcript and count the first 50 utterances which fulfil the following conditions:
(a)
Use only fully transcribed utterances.
(b)
Include all full repetitions, but not hesitations and stutters preceding a final pronunciation of a word.
(c)
Do not include fillers, such as‘mm’, ‘oh’, but do count ‘no’, ‘yeh’, and ‘hi’, as separate morphemes.
2
Count as single morphemes:
(a)
Compound words such as‘birthday’ and ‘milkman’.
(b)
Irregular past tense verbs.
(c)
Diminutive forms such as‘doggy’ and ‘mummy’.
(d)
All auxiliaries such as‘have’, ‘can’, ‘will’, ‘would’, ‘must’.
(e)
Catenatives such as‘gonna’, ‘wanna’, and ‘hafto’.
(f)
Inflections such as possessive (s), plural (s), third-person singular (s), regular past (ed) and progressive (ing).
A second measure which Brown and his colleagues found useful was the length of the longest utterance in a speech sample, referred to as the ‘Upper Bound’.
Together, Brown argues, these two measures provide a reasonably accurate picture of grammatical complexity until MLU reaches 4.0 (Brown 1973).
MLU was used by Brown as a basis for dividing early language development into a series of stages.
As he admits, the divisions are arbitrary, but they have the advantage of making it possible to refer easily to the level of grammatical complexity in a speech sample, and to group children on the basis of language complexity.
It is mainly for these reasons that MLU and the stages identified by Brown have subsequently found such wide accept-ance among academic researchers and practitioners (see Table 7.1).
However, it is worth emphasising that the stages and the measures on which they are based are derived from a grammatical description and that, in the case of children with language difficulties, it cannot be assumed that structurally based measures are predictive of functional skills (Blank et al .
1979).
Taking this approach one step further, Miller (1981 a) has provided a table which details the relationship between age and MLU to be expected in   normally developing children for each three-month interval from 18 months to 5 years of age (see Table 7.2).
Since chronological age and MLU do not correspond perfectly, the table includes an indication of the range of MLU scores to be expected in children developing normally.
This gives the range of MLU scores which accounted for the middle two-thirds of the 123 children studied at each age level.
In other words, a child with an MLU which falls below the bottom of this range is relatively unusual in so far as her MLU is lower than about 85 per cent of ordinary children.
In conjunction with other evidence, this kind of statistical information can be extremely useful in communicating with parents and other professionals, and in making decisions about further assessment and in designing treatment programmes.
Miller comments that in the case of children with learning difficulties, including mentally handicapped children, it may be helpful to calculate mental age using a development test or a standardised test of intelligence and to compare the MLU predicted by chronological age with that predicted using the child's mental age.
In particular, use of mental age will indicate the extent to which the child's language is in step with other aspects of social and cognitive functioning.
Language Assessment Remediation and Screening Procedure (LARSP)
This procedure was first introduced by Crystal and his associates in 1976 to provide a structure for the analysis of spontaneous speech transcripts obtained from either children or adults.
It aims to provide the teacher or  therapist with a pro file which represents strengths and weaknesses in respect of syntactic skills, although some consideration is also given to discourse skills (initiations versus responses) and functional speech characteristics, such as the use of commands, statements and questions.
Crystal et al .
recommended that the procedure is applied to spontaneous speech samples of about 30 minutes' duration, although there is no reason why this should not be varied.
The analysis begins once the sample has been transcribed.
Analysis is designed to determine how advanced any adult or child is in respect of learning the grammatical rules for the generation of complex sentences.
The aim of the exercise, then, is to hypothesise a set of syntactic stages through which children pass in their progress towards the adult language, and to classify the structures and categories which operate at each stage, thus providing a syntactic profile chart of development.
(Crystal et al .
1976:61; original emphasis)
The stages described by Crystal are different from those described by Brown (1973) and are determined by the level of grammatical complexity evident in the transcribed utterances.
Stage 1: Sentences composed of single elements.
Stage 2: Sentences composed of two elements.
These may be analysed in terms of sentence structure and in terms of their phrase structure.
Stage 3: Sentences composed of three elements.
These may be analysed in terms of sentence structure, phrase structure and clause structure.
Stage 4: Sentences composed of four elements or more, analysed in terms of sentence, clause and phrase structure.
Stage 5: Sentences incorporating recursion — for example, by using co-ordinating conjunctions such as ‘and’ or ‘so’.
Stage 6: Evidence of the full range of grammatical sentences.
At each stage, LARSP seeks to provide a means of establishing how far the child's utterances are consistent with normal development, and to what extent there are gaps in the child's understanding of grammar or evidence of abnormal constructions, which might impair subsequent developmental progress.
In order to obtain a profile which summarises the child's grammatical strengths and weaknesses, it is suggested that the teacher or therapist carry out a total of eight scans of the transcript.
Each scan deals with separate aspects of the analysis and is recorded on a pro file summary sheet:
Scan 1: Identification of unanalysable utterances (for example, those that are unintelligible, those that are onomatopaeic sounds and obviously deviant sentences), incomplete utterances and syntactic-ally ambiguous utterances.
Scan 2: Identification of spontaneous utterances versus responses.
Responses are further classified into those which are full, major sentences, elliptical sentences and minor sentences.
Spontaneous utterances are divided into those which are ‘novel’ and those which are self-repetitions.
Scan 3: Identification of sentence connectivity.
Scan 4: Analysis of sentence structure.
Scan 5: Analysis of clause structure.
Scan 6: Analysis of phrase structure.
Scan 7: Analysis of word structure.
Scan 8: Analysis of syntactical problems.
There is no doubt that LARSP provides a useful approach to the description and analysis of linguistic disability.
However, there are a number of constraints which are likely to influence anyone considering its use.
First, although it may not take very long for a trained and experienced therapist to analyse a transcript using LARSP, the procedure itself is relatively technical and is likely to take some time to learn from scratch (Connolly 1979).
Second, LARSP places considerable emphasis on grammar, with relatively little attention to phonology, semantics or functional characteristics of language.
While this may not present a problem if the child's difficulty is perceived as one of understanding syntax, it does emphasise the point that, although LARSP is very detailed, it is not necessarily the best assessment for every child.
A third point is that the pro file indicates the child's ability to control aspects of the emerging adult grammatical system and therefore makes the assumption that, for children, language learning is about the acquisition of that adult system.
Chapter 1 discussed the criticisms of this kind of approach and the available research evidence.
While this issue is as yet undecided, it is certainly not one which should be forgotten.
On the positive side, LARSP does make it possible to summarise an enormous amount of information in a highly principled way, and to generate useful hypotheses about strengths and weaknesses which have direct implications for remedial intervention strategies.
Developmental Sentence Analysis
This is another method of making a  grammatically based analysis of recorded speech samples.
In fact, Lee (1966, 1974) suggests two related strategies; one referred to as Developmental Sentence Types (DST) is designed to help the teacher or therapist classify pre-sentence utterances, while Developmental Sentence Scoring (DSS) is a method of quantifying the ‘grammatical load’ which is carried by complete sentences.
Lee suggests that this analysis requires a sample of at least 100 different utterances recorded during a single session.
If a child is not able to meet this criterion, then the method is not appropriate.
The analysis begins with the   separation of the child's speech into separate utterances and, in the case of DSS, into separate sentences.
A minimum of 50 complete sentences from the total corpus of 100 utterances is needed for Developmental Sentence Scoring.
The analysis for Developmental Sentence Types involves classifying each utterance in respect of number of words and grammatical category.
The grammatical categories selected are shown in Figure 7.3.
From these examples, it can be seen that while the classification of single-word utterances is relatively straightforward, this process becomes much more problematic with two- and three-word utterances.
However, Lee has taken considerable trouble to provide detailed instructions and many examples to help clarify this issue.
She has also provided some normative information based on a study of 40 normally developing children between the ages of 2 years and 2 years and 11 months.
A similar approach is adopted for the analysis of complete sentences (DSS), with the addition of a quantitative scoring system.
Each complete sentence can be scored for the inclusion of nine possible grammatical features.
Apart from the first item, which is solely concerned with whether the whole sentence conforms to the rules of the adult grammar, each grammatical feature is assigned a score which reflects its developmental complexity.
For example, main verbs — such as ‘I see you’ and ‘He is coming’— score one point; irregular past verbs — such as ate and saw — score two; while the use of have with a past tense verb (‘I've eaten’) scores seven points.
The eight grammatical features which Lee scores are shown in Figure 7.4, with examples of highest and lowest scoring items.
In addition to these categories, Lee suggests that one point be added, to the total score, for every utterance which meets all the grammatical criteria for acceptable adult sentences.
The mean Developmental Sentence Score (DSS) is derived by adding the total sentences score for a sample of 50 utterances and dividing the total by 50.
As with the Developmental Sentence Types, Lee provides normative data, from 160 children of normal intelligence between the ages of 2 years 0 months and 6 years 11 months.
Indications of language delay may be estimated by comparing actual DSS scores with age group means.
Not surprisingly, Lee reports strong positive correlations between MLU measured by Brown's (1973) formula and DSS scores, and between MLU and the frequency of complete grammatical sentences in a language sample.
While both LARSP and Developmental Sentence Analysis are well-established procedures for assessing a child's command of grammar from transcripts of naturalistic recordings, they are both restricted in the extent to which they provide the teacher or clinician with systematic information on other aspects of a child's linguistic ability.
It is therefore necessary to consider other methods of analysing spontaneous speech samples.
Classification of language uses
Building on the work of Halliday (see Chapter 3), Tough (1976, 1977) has provided a set of broad descriptive categories for classifying young children's language uses, together with illustrative strategies ‘by which the child reveals the purpose of his talk’(Tough 1976:81).
The framework set out in Figure 7.5 is provided by Tough as a guide for teachers when identifying uses of language ‘which they are probably already fostering, either intuitively or with some deliberation’.
The seven functional categories presented in Figure 7.5 have been derived empirically from classroom observations and for this reason it is not clear how they match up with Halliday's interpersonal, ideational and textual  functions (see Chapter 3).
However, they have been widely used by Tough and by many of the teachers she has worked with and thus, from a practical point of view, they seem to have been well tried and tested by practitioners.
In spite of the considerable popularity of Tough's framework, she has not subjected the specific strategies to a rigorous examination of reliability and, when other researchers have attempted to replicate her work, they have not always been able to demonstrate good agreement between different observers (Wells 1979).
In some ways this is not surprising, given the similarity between many of the strategies described.
For example, is the utterance ‘It's raining and we'll get wet’ an example of reporting and recognising related aspects of experience, or is it an example of recognising causal relationships under logical reasoning?
Thus, while Tough's work may  provide some interesting ideas for dealing with functional aspects of spontaneous speech, it may be less than entirely satisfactory as a means of obtaining reliable and objective assessment information.
Cognitively based language assessment
While Tough has attempted to provide a set of categories which reflect a broad range of language functions, Blank and her colleagues (Blank 1973; Blank and Franklin 1980; Blank et al .
1978) have focused on the relationship between language and higher-level intellectual processes.
In particular, they are concerned with those aspects of language which are implicated in observation, identification of attributes, classification, anticipation, and inductive and deductive reasoning (Blank et al .
1978).
They provide a set of descriptive categories, many of which are similar to some of those presented by Tough.
However, Blank's categories differ in two distinct ways.
First, they represent a putative developmental sequence which reflects the child's gradual mastery of language for dealing with abstract ideas and, second, they have been shown to generate high levels of inter-observer agreement (Blank and Franklin 1980)(see Table 7.3).
Developmental charts and checklist
Developmental charts and checklists are an attempt to provide a simple, non-technical procedure for gathering information about a child's language.
he charts are composed of a list of items, each of which describes a specific linguistic skill or ability.
The items may be grouped into sections dealing with similar aspects of language — for example, items concerned with vocabulary — or they may be ordered in terms of a putative developmental sequence.
The teacher or therapist is required to indicate whether or not each item characterises the target child.
In some charts a distinction is made, in terms of the reliability of the child's performance, so that the practitioner is required to indicate whether the child regularly demonstrates the particular skill or only sometimes.
Thus, the child's language is not sampled directly but, as it were, by proxy in terms of what the teacher or therapist is able to recall of the child's performance under everyday conditions.
The accuracy of the assessment therefore depends upon the observational skills of the person completing the checklist.
In practical terms, a checklist may take only a very short time to complete, providing that the teacher or therapist is familiar with the child being assessed.
Checklists are not appropriate for people who do not have inti-mate knowledge of a child over a period of some weeks.
Similarly, checklists completed by a teacher may not provide reliable information  with respect to the child's use of language at home and information provided by a parent, on the basis of the child's abilities at home, ought not to be taken as an indication of the child's performance in other settings.
Checklists may be used not only to determine a child's current level of functioning, but also to establish the focus for subsequent intervention.
While some checklists may simply identify a list of ‘useful linguistic skills’ which may serve as a selection menu with few constraints on the sequence in which separate items are taught, those which are based on a developmental sequence place strong constraints on the selection of teaching objectives.
If the items truly reflect a developmental sequence, then, it is argued, the items immediately following the last items ticked, for a given child, provide the best focus for intervention.
The rationale for this is that intervention cannot replace natural developmental processes, but only complement them; it is therefore necessary to ensure that structured attempts at intervention and ‘natural developmental processes’ are working in unison.
The value of any checklist will be determined by the quality of the items employed.
Item quality can be summarised briefly.
First, those items which make it difficult to recognise specific abilities in a child will be of less value than those which provide descriptions that can easily be applied.
Second, if a checklist claims to provide a developmental sequence, the validity of this claim will affect the utility of the scale in practice.
Third, for any checklist which claims a developmental sequence, the larger the ‘developmental space’ between items, the less the checklist will discriminate levels of linguistic ability, and the less accurate it will be.
If the checklist is to be used as a basis for intervention, large ‘developmental gaps’ between items will require that the teacher or therapist is able to devise suitable intermediate objectives to bridge the gap between items.
Other factors influencing the developmental space between items are the sensitivity and knowledge of those completing the checklist, and the conditions under which they are able to observe the target child.
Examples of language items from three checklists are given in Figure 7.6.
In summary, language checklists may provide a very practical and relatively quick form of assessment which can be used for a variety of purposes described at the beginning of Chapter 6.
They also have the advantage of being able to integrate the assessment of structural, semantic and functional aspects of language by including a variety of different kinds of items, or by employing items which examine more than one aspect of  language performance.
Perhaps most important of all, checklists draw upon the knowledge of people who have experience of the child under ordinary, everyday conditions.
They are therefore designed to indicate to what extent and in what ways the child uses language in naturalistic settings.
However, their utility is constrained by a paradox which arises from their underlying rationale.
To be useful to the ‘non-expert’ professional, they must include items which are easily understood and which translate easily from relatively casual observation of the child.
Such items are used exten-sively in both the Gunzberg Progress Assessment Charts and the Vineland Adaptive Behaviour Scales — for example, ‘Constantly asks questions’, ‘Listens to a story for at least five minutes’(see Figure 7.6, A and B).
However, such items are liable to some variability in terms of how they are applied by different people and, furthermore, they convey little in terms of specific information about a child's command of language.
The alternative would be to provide a set of much more specific items which relate directly to specific language skills.
Examples of this approach are evident in the checklist provided with the Early Language Training Programme (see Figure 7.6, C).
While these items closely reflect developmental research on the child's mastery of two-word utterances, it seems unlikely that even an experienced therapist or teacher would be able to complete the checklist without spending a considerable amount of time with each individual child being assessed.
Specificity and detail are bought at the cost of ease of understanding and speed of completion.
At least one study has found a positive and statistically significant relationship between maternal ratings of children's command of specific vocabulary items and performance on a formal language test (Cunningham and Sloper 1984) and this provides some support for the validity of checklist assessments.
On the other hand, very few checklists have been systematically evaluated in relation to the formal criteria which are normally applied to language tests (see Chapter 8).
Checklists are seldom employed to assess phonological skills, but are much more frequently applied to grammatical and functional language abilities which may be relatively difficult to elicit during a formal assessment session.
Standardised tests of children's language
Introduction
In line with the continuing strength of the psychometric tradition within clinical and educational psychology in Britain, and more especially in the United States, the largest category of language assessment instruments is formal tests.
While language charts are specifically concerned with the way in which a child uses language on a day-to-day basis, language tests are much more concerned with what a child can do or say under optimal conditions.
All tests rely upon some combination of the elicitation strategies described in Chapter 7.
To the extent that tests provide a standard form for the administration of these strategies, they are referred to as ‘standardised tests’.
In addition to employing specific elicitation procedures, some tests seek to quantify the data obtained so that numerical comparisons can be made between individuals and with respect to the same individual at different points in time.
While some tests provide summary scores which reflect success and failure on different items, other tests make it possible to derive a numerical score for the whole test which reflects an individual's test performance relative to that of other individuals.
These kinds of tests are often referred to as ‘normative tests’, since they involve comparisons with scores from a ‘normal’ group of children.
The numerical score may be either an age equivalent or a standardised score.
Both of these are derived from the performance of large numbers of children on the same test.
The age equivalent indicates the age at which a sample of children without identifiable language handicaps obtain the same score as the target child.
Thus, a child aged 8 years experiencing language difficulties might perform on a particular language test at the same level as a group of ordinary children of 6 years of age.
This information may help to give an impression of the severity of the child's difficulties, with respect to the areas of language sampled in the test, and an indication of any change in performance over time.
Standardised scores
Standardised scores are derived from the distribution of scores for children of a similar age to the target child.
Tests are constructed so that, for any item, some children will succeed and some will not.
Similarly, for any group of items which are intended to measure the same aspect of linguistic functioning, there will be a range of scores for children of a similar age (see Figure 8.1).
The technical process by which items are selected and tried out on a large group of children is referred to as the process of standardisation and the group of children is referred to as the standardisation sample .
(This procedure provides a second meaning for ‘standardised test’.)
A sample is simply a group of individuals selected from a much larger group.
The larger group may be all the children in a county, all the children in a country or any other clearly defined population .
If the sample is carefully selected, then the pattern of scores obtained by the sample ought to provide a close match for the pattern of scores which would be obtained if the whole population of children were to be tested.
It should then be possible to select any single child from the population (whether or not that child was included in the standardisation sample), and, after testing, compare her score to the pattern of scores obtained from the standardisation sample.
By comparison with the scores from the sample, the child's performance can then be judged as high, low or average, and, by inference, high, low or average in respect of the population at large.
Unlike the construction of age equivalents, in the generation of standard scores it may help to include children with linguistic difficulties in the standardisation sample, since the test's items will be designed to discriminate these children from children who are not experiencing language difficulties.
Inclusion of children with known language difficulties will ensure that items which most effectively identify language difficulties are included in the test.
Many tests develop a system of numerical scoring which makes it possible to make precise comparisons between the scores obtained by different individuals.
This is done by taking the distribution of scores for children in the standardisation sample of a given age, and imposing on this a numerical scale which has clearly defined characteristics.
The new scale will assign an arbitrary mean score to those children with average scores, and children performing above and below the mean will be assigned higher and lower scores on the new scale.
Any new children in the original population (from which the standardisation sample was selected) can then be tested and, on the basis of their age and test performance, they can be given a test score which reflects their performance relative to the standardisation sample.
This gives rise to a number of advantages for the teacher or therapist.
First, if a number of subtests are used as part of a larger test, the conversion of the subtest scores to a single standard scale will assist in the interpretation  of the subscale scores.
It is obviously much easier to compare scores if they are all represented on a single scale, rather than on four different scales with different distributions and different mean values.
Second, it is possible to derive a single overall measure of test performance from all the subtest scores, once they have been converted to a common scale of measurement.
Third, the common practice of using a mean of 50 or 100, and a standard deviation of 15 points, makes it easy to compare a child's performance on different tests.
Fourth, providing the standard deviation of the test scale is known, it is relatively easy to estimate the extent to which a child's score is extreme (either high or low) in relation to the scores obtained by the standardisation sample, and therefore the extent to which further testing and possible intervention is appropriate.
The importance of this information is considered again in the discussion on the evaluation of language tests.
Test evaluation
Because of the claims made by test constructors in relation to the numerical scores which can be derived from tests and the very considerable technical demands required to meet these assessment objectives, it is necessary to evaluate language tests against a number of well-established criteria (McCauley and Swisher 1984).
Some of these criteria are described below.
Choice of target group
First, as already indicated, normative tests are those tests which are designed to facilitate comparison between the performance of the child being tested and the distribution of scores from a large sample of children.
It is therefore necessary for the tests to include information regarding the size and nature of the standardisation sample so that the teacher or therapist may judge whether or not it is reasonable to use the distribution of sample scores as a basis for evaluating the performance of particular individuals.
For example, it may not be appropriate to use a test standardised on a sample of children in North America to evaluate the performance of a child in Britain.
The reason for this is that the linguistic, social and educational environments of the two countries may be so different as to provide different opportunities for language learning.
If a British child scored relatively poorly in a North American test, this could only be interpreted in terms of the child's ability relative to that of North American children.
It would not be clear whether the child's low performance was associated with poor linguistic ability in relation to British children, or whether it simply reflected the different experiences available to children in Britain and the USA.
In addition to the nationality of the children included in the standardisation sample, it is also useful to know whereabouts in a particular country they  live, their socioeconomic status and the extent to which the sample was screened for children with linguistic, sensory or learning difficulties (McCauley and Swisher 1984).
Reliability
Any instrument used in language assessments needs to provide reliable measures.
A reliable measure is one where variations which occur between one occasion of use and another are due solely to variations in the characteristic being measured.
Unfortunately, all language tests are subject to some degree of unreliability.
There are two main sources of measurement error which reduce reliability.
The first is concerned with differences in the way in which the test is administered.
It is extremely difficult for any practitioner to administer a test in exactly the same way on two occasions, even if the same child is being tested.
Additional variation is likely to creep in when different children are tested at different times of the day and possibly in different locations.
These factors will affect the external reliability of the test.
Another source of variation comes from the interaction of the test items with the child's linguistic ability.
Linguistic ability cannot be measured directly, but only via elicitation procedures which attempt to make visible a certain aspect of a child's language.
Any elicitation procedure is itself subject to a degree of variation in terms of how successfully it stimulates a child to make a particular response.
Naturally, during the process of test construction, those items which are particularly unreliable are excluded.
A completely reliable item would be one which, on every occasion that it was administered, correctly differentiated between those children who do and those who do not have a particular linguistic ability.
In practice, no items are completely reliable and, as a consequence, any test will be subject to some degree of internal reliability error.
Because the reliability of a test is so important, it is usual to quantify it in some way.
External reliability can be measured by comparing the test scores obtained by one tester working with the same group of children on two separate occasions separated by a short time interval.
The interval must be long enough to avoid any carry-over practice effects between the first administration and the second, but sufficiently short so that it can be assumed that there will have been no change in the real underlying abilities of the children concerned.
This is called test-retest reliability.
Another way of measuring external reliability is to compare the scores obtained by different testers working with the same group of children.
This is referred to as inter-tester reliability.
To measure internal reliability, it is necessary to compare two sets of test items.
Some tests are constructed to give two versions; thus, there are two separate tests made up of different but equivalent items.
A comparison of  the scores achieved by a group of children on the two different versions of the tests would provide an indication of the internal reliability of the test.
On tests which do not have parallel forms, it may be possible to create two separate tests by selecting alternate odd and even test items.
The scores obtained by a group of children for the odd items can then be compared with the scores obtained by the same children for the even-numbered items.
Whether parallel forms or a split-half method is used, the agreement between the scores is used as a basis for an overall measure of agreement.
A statistical procedure called correlation is frequently used to calculate the agreement between two sets of figures.
In the case of reliability estimates, correlations are calculated from the two sets of scores obtained from inter-rater, test-retest or split-half comparisons.
Correlations are expressed in terms of a figure between 0 and 1, with 0 indicating no agreement between the scores and 1 indicating perfect agreement.
The precise interpretation of correlation co-efficients depends upon the size of the data-sets employed, but, as a rule of thumb, a correlation of 0.7 indicates that approximately half of the variation in the set of test scores is attributable to real variations in the attribute being measured.
The rest of the variation is due to unspecified error.
On this basis, it may be assumed that reliability estimates ought to exceed 0.7 if a test is to be regarded as providing ‘reliable’ scores.
Validity
An assumption underlying all tests is that they actually provide measures which reflect the abilities they purport to test.
Thus, it is assumed that a test of linguistic ability actually measures language as opposed to some other characteristic.
While such an assumption may seem so obvious as to be hardly worth mentioning, it is important that tests are able to substantiate their implicit claim to validity.
There are various ways of defining validity, only some of which can be quantified.
Face validity reflects the extent to which the test items appear to be concerned with the abilities in question.
When tests are given to adults, it may increase co-operation if a test has high face validity.
However, for tests which are designed for children, face validity is of relatively little importance.
Of much greater significance is construct validity — that is, the extent to which the test items are consistent with contemporary linguistic theories, and how far results are interpretable within the conceptual framework provided by those theories.
The descriptions of children's language in Chapters 1, 2 and 3 provide the basis for an evaluation of the construct validity of any language test.
Tests which are not based upon adequate linguistic descriptions must be regarded as lacking in construct validity.
Content validity is concerned with the test's content — that is, the way in which the items, both singly and together, provide information which is  relevant to the linguistic abilities in question.
The content validity of individual items may be determined by inspection by someone with expertise in the area of language assessment.
Even for a practitioner who does not claim to own such expertise, it is important to consider the extent to which items seem to call upon the linguistic abilities at which the test is directed.
This will improve the tester's familiarity with the test and gradually lead to an accumulation of knowledge of testing in general.
An alternative approach to measuring content validity involves the use of correlational procedures to determine the extent to which performance on each item is associated with the overall test score.
A good test would be one in which each item has a high correlation with the overall test score, since this would indicate that all the items tap into the linguistic ability which the test purports to measure.
However, it is also possible for items to correlate too highly with the total score.
The argument here is that a high correlation between an item and the overall test score means that the item contributes little new information which is not already tapped by other items.
This procedure is referred to as item analysis .
The most objective forms of test validity are derived from comparisons between the way in which children perform on a language test and some other independent measure of language ability.
This may simply involve calculating correlations between two sets of test scores.
If the new test is found to correlate highly with an old, established test, this may be used as evidence in favour of validity.
However, if the old test is obviously defective — for example, if it is based on out-of-date linguistic theories and thus lacks construct validity — this measure of concurrent validity will not be very meaningful.
Measures of concurrent validity must therefore be examined in order to determine whether the comparison measure is, in itself, a valid measure of the linguistic ability in question.
An alternative to concurrent validity involves comparing a test score at one point in time with another measure of language performance obtained sometime subsequently.
This indicates the extent to which the language test is able to predict how a child's language will change over time and is referred to as predictive validity .
Distribution of scores
In addition to the information with respect to reliability and validity, McCauley and Swisher (1984) suggest that, for the proper interpretation of test scores, the test user must have information regarding the spread of scores obtained from the standardisation sample.
This is necessary to interpret the significance of scores which may occur above or below the mean.
For example, if a child scores 40 on a test with a mean standardised score of 50, is this an average score, a poor score or a very poor score?
This can only be evaluated with respect to the distribution of scores obtained by the standardisation sample (see Figure 8.2).
If the scores are spread so that a  relatively large proportion of the sample attained a score of 40, then scoring 40 does not distinguish the child as having any particular difficulties.
On the other hand, if the scores of the standardisation sample were such that only a very small proportion — say, 5 per cent— scored 40 or less, then a child with this score may be identified as being in need of further, more detailed assessment.
The spread or distribution of the test scores (and therefore the significance of scores which are above or below the mean) is indicated by the standard deviation, or SD.
The smaller the SD in relation to the mean, the more scores cluster around the mean with relatively few high or low scores.
Alternatively, a high SD indicates that more scores from the sample were substantially higher or lower than the mean.
The shape of frequency distributions for sets of scores with relatively high and low SDs is shown in Figure 8.2.
From Figure 8.1 it can be seen that, for all tests with symmetrical distributions of scores (known technically, and rather confusingly, as ‘normal distributions’), any score which differs from the mean by two or more standard deviations will be unusual and therefore worthy of further consideration.
Appendix: review of commonly used tests of children's language
There are many tests of children's language which have been developed and marketed over a number of years.
A large number of these are reviewed by Longhurst (1977) and McCauley and Swisher (1984).
Here, only a small selection of those tests which are in current use in Britain will be described.
Since different tests are designed to assess different aspects of linguistic ability, they will be considered under four categories: tests of articulation or phonological ability; tests of vocabulary; tests of grammatical ability, including morpho-syntactical rules; and, finally, tests of more general aspects of psycholinguistic ability.
Articulation tests
The Edinburgh Articulation Test (EAT)
The EAT (Anthony et al .
1971) is designed as a screening procedure for children whose articulation of English consonants is retarded or otherwise abnormal.
In addition to the exclusion of vowels, it makes no attempt to assess other aspects of phonological skill, such as rhythm and intonation (Grunwell 1982) although these have been identified by Crystal (1984) as significant sources of phonological disabilities.
The test was designed to assess children's production of consonants as they appear in English words.
This indicated the need to consider consonant production in the following contexts:
1
Word-initial position — for example, can the child pronounce the ‘f in ‘finger’?
2
Monosyllabic words' final consonants — for example, can the child pronounce the final ‘t’ in ‘boat’?
3
Word initial consonant clusters — for example, can the child pronounce the ‘br’ in ‘bridge’?
4
Monosyllabic word final clusters — for example, can the child pronounce the ‘lk’ in ‘milk’?
5
Medial consonants between accented vowel and unaccented vowel in disyllabic words — for example, can the child pronounce the ‘r’ in ‘garage’?
6
Medial consonant clusters between accented vowels and unaccented vowels in disyllabic words — for example, can the child pronounce the ‘ng’ in ‘finger’?
7
Final consonants following accented vowels in disyllabic words — for example, can the child pronounce the final ‘l’ in ‘pencil’?
8
Medial consonants and post-syllabic consonants in disyllabic words — for example, can the child pronounce the ‘pl’ in ‘apple’or the ‘t’in ‘battle’?
9
Consonants in possible trisyllabic words — for example, can the child pronounce the ‘l’ in ‘elephant’or the ‘m’in ‘umbrella’?
A selection of commonly used naming words which incorporated consonants in the appropriate contexts was tried out with 130 normal children and 57 children of average or above-average intelligence who had already been identified as having retarded phonology.
Words which proved to be unreliable as stimuli for eliciting particular consonants were excluded, as were children who failed to respond to 15 per cent or more of the items.
The remaining items were compared in terms of‘Difficulty’ and ‘Discrimination’.
Difficulty was defined in terms of the numbers of children at each age level getting each item right.
Discrimination was measured in two ways, each of which produced a measure of test validity.
First, the relationship between success and failure on each item and overall test performance produced an item analysis with a correlation of 0.935.
Second, discrimination was examined in terms of the extent to which performance on each item differentiated between the normal and language-disordered children.
At each age level, those items which discriminated between the normal and speech-delayed subjects were regarded as being valid measures of articulation.
The test items were subsequently standardised on 510 children between the ages of 3 and 6 years.
Analysis indicated that when the children were grouped into six-month age bands, the difference between the scores from each age band was significant (p > 0.05).
This confirms the ability of the test to discriminate between the performance of ordinary children of different ages.
The raw scores were then standardised to a scale with a mean of 100 and a standard deviation of 15.
The authors suggest that any child who achieves a score of less than 85 should be regarded as in need of further  assessment and, possibly, structured intervention.
Estimates of reliability indicate that any test score can be regarded as within approximately 6 points of the ‘real’ score 95 times out of 100.
The procedure for administering the EAT is to elicit a series of 68 non-imitated words from the child in response to a set of pictures.
This normally takes between 10 and 15 minutes.
Normative scoring involves marking the child's performance on each item as correct or incorrect and converting this to a standardised score or an age equivalent.
Further quantitative analysis may be carried out for consonant structure, liquid confusion, lengthening, palatalisation and order of acquisition of consonants, although this requires the test to be tape recorded and can be successfully completed only by someone with a sound knowledge of phonemic analysis.
The Goldman-Fristoe Test of Articulation
Whereas the EAT relies upon a single elicitation strategy (word naming in response to a picture stimulus), the Goldman-Fristoe test (Goldman and Fristoe 1969) sets out to examine a range of different phonemes in both imitative and ‘conversational’ contexts.
The ‘Sounds in Words’ part of the test uses a picture-naming approach to elicit words which contain the relevant phonemes; whereas the EAT focuses exclusively upon consonants, the Goldman-Fristoe test claims to sample all consonants (except ‘measure,), all vowels and the majority of English diphthongs.
The sounds/h/, /w/, /wh/, /y/ and the final voiced/th/ are omitted from the test because of their relative low frequency of  occurrence .
The test claims that the sounds are presented in a developmental sequence, although no data is presented to support this.
Since a child's ability to produce a particular sound will vary according to the speech context (Ingram 1976), the Goldman-Fristoe test samples speech sounds in three positions within words (initial, medial and final) and also as they occur in sentences.
The sounds in sentences subtest involves the child being told a story which is illustrated with pictures.
The child is then required to retell the story, using the pictures as a guideline, in the expectation that the child will repeat the key words which contain the target phonemes.
The third elicitation strategy employed by the Goldman-Fristoe test is designed to provide an indication of the child's optimal performance when given both visual and oral support.
It is suggested that this might indicate those sounds which will be most suitable as a target for subsequent intervention.
The procedure works by asking the child initially simply to imitate a single sound — for example, /suh/.
For each item, the child is allowed a number of opportunities to produce a correct imitation.
If the child succeeds here, then the word (for example, ‘sun’) is modelled in a sentence and the child is given a number of opportunities to produce a correct  imitation.
Success with this form of presentation is then followed by opportunities for repetition of the sound in a complete sentence, ‘I had sun in my eyes.’
Whereas the test designers suggest that a teacher without specialist knowledge might give the test as a screening device to identify the existence of articulation problems, the analysis of the nature of the errors and the appropriate forms of intervention ought to be left for an expert in phonological analysis.
Qualitative analysis can be described in relation to the following parameters:
1
The position of a phoneme in a word (initial, medial or final).
2
Putative simplification strategies (see Chapter 1), such as substitution, omission, distortion or addition of phonemes.
3
The consistency of the child's phonological errors in single words and in sentences.
4
The distribution of errors in relation to the frequency with which sounds occur in English.
5
The place and mode of articulation difficulties — for example, are errors predominantly concerned with nasal sounds (‘thing’)?, plosives (‘peach’) or fricatives (‘these’)?
6
The extent to which the pattern of articulation errors reflects the difficulties experienced by ‘normal’ children and might therefore be considered as part of a developmental sequence.
The Goldman-Fristoe test reports test-retest reliabilities of between 94 per cent and 95 per cent for the ‘Sounds in Words’ and ‘Sounds in Sentences’subtests.
Inter-rater reliability ranges from 86 per cent to 92 per cent and intra-rater reliability (agreement for the analysis of errors from a single test made by the same tester on different occasions) is 91 per cent.
No information is available on the reliability of the third subtest, designed to examine the child's optimal performance.
The validity of the Goldman-Fristoe test is based on the authors' selection of the specific items and the fact that the ‘Sounds in Words’ subtest samples all but one of the consonants found in English.
The ‘Sounds in Sentences’ samples a smaller set of sounds ‘most likely to be misarticulated’, and the third, ‘Optimal Performance’, subtest examines those sounds ‘known to be misarticulated’.
This a-priori selection of sounds for more detailed analysis clearly restricts the scope of the test, particularly as no evidence is presented to support the selection of sounds for the two subtests.
Comparison of the EA T and the Goldman-Fristoe test
Both of these tests depend, to a great extent, upon the use of pictures to elicit key words from a child.
Children who, for any reason, have difficulty in recognising or naming pictures are therefore likely to have difficulty with both these tests.
In terms of sampling the sounds necessary for speaking  English, the designers of each of the two tests have taken slightly different approaches which reflect different priorities.
The EAT provides a more extensive assessment of consonants and consonant blends than does the Goldman-Fristoe test, but the latter is more systematic in that, for each consonant included in the test, articulation is examined with respect to three word positions and with respect to production within sentences.
Thus, the consonant/ dz/is sampled in all three word positions in the Goldman-Fristoe test (‘j ump’, ‘py j amas’, ‘orange’) but only in the third position (‘garage’, ‘bridge’) in the EAT.
A number of consonant blends — including /nk/ (‘monkey’) /nz/ (‘wings’) and/ns/ (pencil')— appear in the EAT, but not in the Goldman-Fristoe.
On the other hand, the blends/bl/ (‘b l ue’), /dr/ (‘d r um’), /fl/ (‘fl ag’) and/skw/ (‘s q uirrel’) are sampled in the word, initial position in the Goldman-Fristoe test, but do not appear in the EAT.
On the basis of these observations, it is not possible to say whether or not one of these tests provides a more useful assessment tool than the other.
This will depend upon the purpose of the assessment and how much is already known about a particular child.
An experienced speech therapist might find it useful to employ the EAT as an initial screening device, while reserving the Goldman-Fristoe for a more detailed assessment prior to devising a programme of therapy.
Teachers who do not possess the necessary skills for a qualitative analysis of phonological errors are encouraged, by the designers of Goldman-Fristoe, to use the test as a way of gathering systematic information about children whose articulation gives cause for concern.
In contrast, the EAT, while using a very similar strategy for both elicitation and scoring, is recommended for use only by qualified speech therapists.
Vocabulary tests
The British picture Vocabulary Test (BPVT)
The BPVT (Dunn et al .
1982) is a revised version of a well-established North American test which has been restandardised on a sample of British children.
It measures the extent of an individual's receptive vocabulary by requiring a subject to select one picture from a set of four in response to a verbal stimulus.
The test subject may respond by gesture or eye pointing.
Standardised scales are available for children as young as 2 years up to adulthood at 17 years 11 months.
The test designers recommend the test can be used for a variety of purposes and with different categories of children.
For pre-school children, it is suggested that the BPVT might be used as a screening instrument to identify children who may require some form of special or compensatory provision, and as a way of indicating a child's readiness for reading.
In view of the importance of language in education, the authors also suggest that the BPVT might be used to assess scholastic aptitude, although it seems unwise to rely solely on one test for this purpose.
The wide age range covered by the  BPVT, and the use of gestural responses, means that it may be particularly useful with children who experience difficulties with spoken language, including those who stutter, autistic children and children with cerebral palsy.
The test does, however, require a level of hearing sufficient to discriminate between single words and the capacity to recognise pictorial representations of objects.
The British standardised scales were obtained by giving 424 test items to 1,401 subjects aged 2 years to 16 years.
Each item is made up of a plate displaying four pictures, three of which are distractors.
Final selection of the plates to be included in the test was determined by a number of criteria: the percentage of subjects getting an item correct had to increase with the age of the children; the distractors at each age should attract responses, but not correlate with the total score; and the final items needed to be evenly spread across the ability range.
A set of 32 items meeting these criteria were selected for a short form of the test, and a larger set of 150 items was included in a long form of the test.
A much larger standardisation sample of 3,334 children was then tested with the short form of the test to provide the normative scales.
Test scores can be converted to standardised scores (mean= 100; standard deviation= 15) to age equivalents or to percentile ranks.
Split-half reliability for the BPVT is reported as between 0.75 and 0.85 for items in the short form, and between 0.70 and 0.95 for items in the long form.
Item reliability for all items varies from as low as 0.28 to 0.78.
On the basis of these figures, the authors suggest that any test score can be regarded as falling within seven points of the true score for the short form, and within five points of the true score for the long form of the test.
The content validity of the test is argued on the basis of the range of vocabulary items included, while, for construct validity, the authors rely upon the widely accepted practice of using vocabulary items in intelligence tests, and the justification for this practice put forward by Binet and Simon in 1905, and by Terman in 1916.
The concurrent and predictive validity of the BPVT is based mainly on the extensive research which has been conducted with the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT), and particularly the high correlations obtained when scores of the PPVT have been compared with scores from standardised intelligence tests.
Although the BPVT is a language test, it covers only a relatively narrow range of strictly linguistic abilities — that is, comprehension of single vocabulary items.
At the same time, successive items on the test do not measure changes in a child's linguistic ability so much as the development of conceptual abilities which underlie the acquisition of abstract vocabulary items.
The value of the BPVT in terms of the assessment of language is likely to be greatest when it is used in conjunction with other forms of assessment, so that a comparison between different aspects of linguistic and cognitive functioning is possible.
Tests of Grammar
The child's increasing mastery of grammar has proved to be the most attractive domain for test developers.
Numerous tests are available to assist in the systematic assessment of a wide range of grammatical abilities, only a small selection of which are presented here.
Word Order Comprehension Test (WOCT)
This test (Fenn 1979) was designed to determine whether a child who is able to understand single words can also understand the relationships which are expressed by different forms of word order.
The test requires the child to select one of a pair of pictures to go with a stimulus sentence.
The child's response may be either manual pointing or eye pointing.
The stimulus may be expressed orally, through signs, or in writing.
Since the test requires a knowledge of single words, but sets out to assess syntactical knowledge independently of vocabulary, a separate list of the words used is included.
The test consists of nine sets of items and each set has two practice items and ten test items.
Each set deals with the separate domains — for example, ‘on’, ‘under’, subject and object nouns, object pronouns, indirect object nouns and prepositional phrase nouns.
For instance, in the third set (subject-object nouns) the child is presented with a sentence — such as , ‘The duck is splashing the frog’— and is required to select from two pictures, one of which shows a duck splashing a frog, and the other a frog splashing a duck.
The different sets might therefore be regarded as providing criterion-referenced information with respect to specific grammatical sub-skills.
It is suggested that each subtest is scored separately and no overall test score is obtained.
Since for each item there is a 50 per cent chance of a correct response simply by guessing, children with scores of 8 or less on any set are regarded as in need of retesting, while very low scores (0–1) indicate that the child is systematically misunderstanding the meanings to be derived from word order.
The WOCT does not provide age norms, but it has been piloted with groups of normal and handicapped children, aged between 4 and 5 years 5 months, from lower social class backgrounds.
Success for the normal children ranged from 82 per cent to 100 per cent, and Fenn suggests that, as a rule of thumb, a child who fails the test should be regarded as functioning below the level of the normal 4- to 5-year-old.
Data from 100 deaf and mentally handicapped children showed considerable variability and performance was not related to scores from the Reynell Developmental Language Scales (see below) or the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (see above).
This suggests that this test has identified a linguistic skill which is distinct from the linguistic abilities required for success on these other tests.
This test is concerned with a specific aspect of linguistic ability and does not provide either standardised or age equivalent scores.
There is no  information regarding the reliability of the test items and the validity of the test depends upon the interpretation afforded the separate subtests.
However, on this criterion, content validity and construct validity would appear to be high.
These comments suggest that the test is unlikely to be useful as a screening instrument but, when used in conjunction with other tests or with children who have already been identified as having language difficulties, it may assist in the generation of a balanced assessment of a child's strengths and weaknesses.
If a child is found to be weak in one or more of the areas covered by the subtests, this information may provide a valuable guide for designing a programme of intervention.
The flexibility of both the mode of eliciting a response and the response itself suggests that the test may be particularly suitable for children with handicaps which make comprehension or production of speech difficult.
The Northwestern Syntax Screening Test (NSST)
As the name of this test implies, it is designed to be used as a screening device to identify children between 3 and 8 years of age who require further assessment and possible intervention (Lee 1969).
The test sets out to examine the child's command of a range of syntactic forms in terms of both comprehension and production.
These include ‘behind'/ ‘under’, ‘on, /‘in’, ‘he’ /‘she’, ‘is'/ ‘are’, ‘their'/ ‘his’, ‘play'/ ‘plays’, ‘this'/ ‘that’, ‘jumps'/ ‘jumped’, as well as interrogatives and agent-object contrasts.
For the comprehension items, the tester speaks the two stimulus sentences — for example, ‘The cat is behind the chair’; ‘The cat is under the chair’— and then requires the child to ‘Show me the cat is under the chair’ from a set of pictures.
For the expressive items, the tester asks the child to repeat two sentences (‘The baby is sleeping’; ‘The baby is not sleeping’) and then to say the sentence which goes with the picture indicated by the tester.
Any variations from the target sentence are counted as errors, and it is suggested that these are recorded so that they can be analysed prior to intervention.
However, the reader is reminded of the difficulties of interpreting errors in imitation tasks described in Chapter 6.
The test was standardised on 344 children, aged between 3 years and 7 years 11 months, who were ‘presumed by their teachers to have no handicapping conditions which would contribute to atypical language development’(Lee 1969: 7).
The children came from middle- and upper-middle-income homes where ‘standard American dialect was spoken’(ibid.)
Lee recommends that any child who scores below 2 standard deviations from the standardised mean should be identified for further assessment, although no reason is given for this.
She suggests that children who score low on both comprehension and production may be immature or mentally retarded, although no explanation is provided as to what she might mean by these terms.
Children with low comprehension scores but high expressive  scores are seen as having possible emotional problems, or as suffering from echolalia.
Once again, there is no elaboration of the reasoning behind these diagnoses.
Lee does, however, report that a group of 18 children, who had already been identified as having delayed language, showed a wide gap between comprehension scores which were in the ‘low-normal range’ and expressive scores which were ‘very low’.
No evidence is presented regarding the reliability of this test and there is no discussion of validity.
Validity can therefore be assessed only on the basis of the items which are included.
The sentence pairs are designed to reflect important grammatical contrasts but, without information regarding how the particular contrasts were selected and how far they are representative of the grammatical skills available to children of this age, it is impossible to determine how useful they are as test items.
Finally, although the test has been standardised, the sample of children used differs in important respects from British children.
This raises questions regarding the extent to which the standardised scores provide a useful basis of comparison for children born and brought up in this country.
Test for Auditory Comprehension of Language (TACL)
The TACL (Carrow 1973; Carrow-Woodfolk 1985) is designed to assess four distinct areas of grammatical knowledge.
These are form classes and function words (nouns, adjectives; verbs, prepositions, etc.), morphological constructions (e.g. noun + noun + derivational suffix ‘er’; verb + verb + derivational suffix ‘er’), grammatical categories (such as gender and number pronoun, number and noun, tense of verb) and syntactical structures (e.g. imperative mood, noun and verb agreement, modification).
During the test, the child is required to indicate a choice from a selection of pictures in response to a verbal stimulus.
Carrow claims that for normal children the test scores increase with age and that it differentiates individuals with known disorders, including deaf children and those with articulation difficulties, from ordinary, non-handicapped children.
A study of the test's predictive validity showed that test scores correlated (0.79) with the subsequent progress of dysphasic children.
On this basis, it is suggested that the test offers a valid way of screening for linguistic disorders.
Carrow also suggests that, for children scoring below their chronological age equivalent, the separate subtests can provide useful qualitative information.
Test-retest reliability is reported as 0.94 when children were retested within one week, while an item analysis indicated an overall measure of test consistency of 0.77.
The test's revised norms are based on test scores obtained from 1,003 American children aged between 3 and 10 years.
While this sample was designed to provide a cross-section of American children, and thus included children of black, Anglo and Mexican parents, it is unlikely that the  resultant norms provide an accurate basis of comparison for British children.
The test scores can be expressed as standardised scores, age equivalents or as percentile ranks.
Test for Reception of Grammar (TROG)
Like the TACL, this test (Bishop 1982) is designed to measure children's comprehension of a range of grammatical devices.
It can be administered to children between the ages of 4 and 13 years, and is recommended as being particularly suitable for children suffering from specific language disorders, deafness, mental retardation and cerebral palsy.
As with the other tests described in this appendix, the child is required to select, by gesture or eye pointing, one of two pictures in response to a sentence spoken by the examiner.
Since this provides the opportunity for the child to score correctly 50 per cent of the time simply by guessing, each grammatical contrast is presented in blocks of four items and the child is required to get all four items correct to pass on any block.
The test sets out to assess a wide range of grammatical understanding, including grammatical categories such as noun, verb and adjective; negatives; singular and plural personal pronouns; reversible active verbs; personal pronouns; singular and plural noun inflections; comparative adjectives; reversible passive sentences; ‘in'/ ‘on’; post-modified subjects; ‘X but not Y’ constructions; ‘above'/ ‘below’; ‘not only but also’constructions; the relative clause; ‘neither X nor Y’and embedded sentences.
Tense is not included as it was found too difficult to test within this framework.
For each pair of sentences the ‘incorrect’ picture contains either a grammatical distractor (e.g. ‘He is sitting in the tree’vs.
‘She is sitting in the tree’, for a picture of a girl) or a lexical distractor (‘He is sitting in the tree’ vs.
‘He is swinging in the tree’), and it is suggested that the extent to which a child shows sensitivity to one or other of these kinds of distraction may be useful in terms of assessment and the planning of intervention.
The TROG has been standardised on a sample of non-handicapped British children aged between 4 years and 12 years 11 months.
Children whose parents were non-native speakers of English, or who had resided in a non-English-speaking country for more than six months in the previous three years, were excluded.
Test scores can be compared directly with the scores obtained by normal children of the same chronological age.
A qualitative analysis of the various subtests can be used to identify specific difficulties with grammar and as an indication of whether the child is progressing in the same way as most normal children, or whether there are signs of deviant patterns.
Since no empirical data is presented, the validity of the TROG depends upon an analysis of the test items and the elicitation strategies employed.
In general, the items appear to be well selected to reflect a broad range of  grammatical abilities.
A split-half reliability carried out on the data from children in the standardisation sample between the ages of 4 years and 8 years 11 months produced correlations of between 0.64 and 0.84 for the different items.
Unlike the TROG and the NSST, the TACL has been standardised on British children and therefore age-based comparisons are likely to be much more useful for this group.
The Language Imitation Test (LST)
The principal innovation associated with this test (Berry and Mittler 1984) is that, instead of pointing in response to a word or sentence, the child is required to imitate a sentence spoken by the adult.
This strategy is based upon the work of Slobin and Welsh (1973), and upon the authors' own extensive research regarding the imitative abilities of mentally handicapped children.
No test materials other than the scoring sheet are required.
The authors suggest that the LIT is a test which is particularly suitable for use with severely and moderately mentally handicapped children.
The test is made up of six subtests covering the following areas:
1
sound imitation (items taken from the EAT);
2
word imitation;
3
syntactic control of active declarative sentences;
4
syntactic control of questions, negatives, passives and passive negative sentences;
5
word organisation control (imitation of telegraphic sentences with all functors deleted);
6
sentence completion.
Although the test has not been standardised, it does provide the possibility of numerical scoring on a scale from 0 to 173.
The authors provide a rule-of-thumb guide to interpreting these scores.
It is also suggested that the six areas provide important qualitative information with respect to a child's command of grammar and have particular relevance to the planning of intervention.
The validity of the LIT is based upon the existing research which supports imitation as an index of a child's knowledge of grammar and the high correlations obtained when scores on the LIT were compared with other measures of language production.
The authors also claim that the test measures are closely related to the teacher's ratings of a child's language.
Repetition of the test with a single group of children showed stability in the scores for each subtest, with the overall correlation co-efficient being 0.975.
The authors also report that a group of 12 teachers were taught to score the LIT with 90 per cent accuracy.
Although this test does not provide the statistical and normative data for making comparisons with the performance of ordinary children found in   some other tests, the use of imitation as an elicitation strategy makes it.
a valuable assessment tool for children who are unable or unwilling to co-operate with other testing procedures.
Tests of general psycholinguistic ability
The Reynell Developmental Language Scales (RDLS)
The RDLS (Reynell and Huntley 1985, 2nd revision) provides separate measures of language comprehension and language production which may be used independently or together to provide a comparison of a child's relative strengths and weaknesses in the two areas.
It sets out to cover the normal stages of language development between the ages of 1 and 5 years, although it is intended principally as a clinical tool for children with delayed and deviant language.
Two scales are provided for assessing language comprehension, one of which is specially modified so that only eye pointing is required.
The test is based upon an explicit model of the processes thought to be involved in verbal communication (See Figure 8.3).
Comprehension is seen as being dependent upon the ability to hear essential speech sounds, the ability to recover meaning from sound sequences and to interpret meanings in terms of abstract concepts and relations.
Speech production is seen as relying on the reverse process — that is, the ability to translate abstract ideas into speech sounds and to articulate those speech sounds in such a way that they are comprehensible to other people.
Whereas the other tests so far reviewed have been concerned with specific aspects of linguistic ability, the RDLS is much more concerned with the way in which the child's increasing mastery of language is associated with conceptual development and more sophisticated problem-solving skills.
The different items are specially  selected to reflect the child's increasing command of an abstract symbol system which can be used for manipulating abstract concepts and relations.
The comprehension scales begin with items concerned with the extent to which a child associates a word or phrase with affective or situational meaning, and proceed to a point where ‘ideational content goes well beyond the concrete evidence’— for example, ‘The little boy has spilt his dinner; what must he do?’
The majority of the test items require a  child to respond to a question or an instruction by pointing to, or manipulating, a variety of household objects and models.
For example, in Section 3 thy child is asked ‘Where is the dog?’
‘Where is the man?’, while in Section 8 the child is asked to ‘Put the pigs behind the man.’
After the age of 5 years it is suggested that language increasingly becomes a tool for higher intellectual functions and therefore is difficult to assess independently of other cognitive processes.
The expressive scale begins with an examination of the child's use of words to express emotional states and in response to specific situations — for example, ‘ta’ on taking something — and proceeds to explore the child's command of simple vocabulary items through picture naming and in response to requests for definitions — for example , ‘What is a shop?’
The final part of the language expression scale calls upon the child to describe pictures where scoring is determined by the number of ideas expressed.
The test has been standardised with 636 British children aged between 6 months and 6 years.
Children whose first language was not English were excluded from the sample.
Any test score can be converted to an age equivalent (a language age) for comparison with the child's chronological age and, if appropriate, the child's mental age.
Separate figures can be obtained for expressive and comprehension scales.
Split-half reliability for the expressive scales is reported as being between 0.84 and 0.96, while for the comprehension scales it varies between 0.60 and 0.96 on Scale A, and between 0.46 and 0.95 on Scale B
Various measures of test validity are presented in the test manual.
The comprehension scale (A) correlates positively with the expression scale, although this is much higher for the youngest children (0.67) than for the oldest (0.32).
This is interpreted as being indicative of the different functions which are served by comprehension and production with increasing age.
Concurrent validity is based upon the high positive correlations between RDLS scores and scores obtained from the Stanford, Binet and Wechsler intelligence tests and the Illinois Test of Psycholinguistic Abilities (see below).
Scores from the RDLS also correlated with performance in the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC) and the Word Reading Test after age 3 years, thus providing support for the test's predictive validity.
These figures give strong support for the view that the RDLS measures a child's increasing control of language for cognitive functions, but there is little evidence of the test's ability to identify specific areas of  language functioning or its sensitivity to changes in a child's command of specific language forms or other language functions.
The test may be used as a screening device, although it is relatively time-consuming to administer compared with other tests.
It is also likely to provide valuable information when used with certain children and in conjunction with other tests of language.
The use of the test as a prelude to intervention will depend very much on the extent to which it is regarded as important to direct remediation at the specific linguistic functions which this test addresses.
The Illinois Test of Psycholinguistic Abilities (ITPA)
Over the years the ITPA (Kirk et al .
1968) has become one of the best known and most widely used of all language tests.
Like the RDLS it is based on an explicit model of language production and comprehension.
Using Osgood's (1957a; 1957b) theoretical views as a starting-point, Kirk et al .
set out to provide an instrument to assess three dimensions of linguistic functioning: level of organisation, channel of communication and process (See Figure 8.4).
Organisation is divided into the representational level, which employs symbols to carry meaning, and the automatic level, where behaviour is highly organised and integrated but less susceptible to volun-tary control.
‘Channel’ refers to the medium by which messages are received or transmitted: comprehension of language may take place through auditory (hearing) or visual channels (reading print or signs), and production may be mediated via vocal (speaking) or motor (writing or manual signing) systems.
Processes are described as being concerned with reception (comprehension), expression (production) or organisation.
Although all the logical combinations of levels of organisation, channels and processes create the possibility of 16 subtests, only eleven subtests are actually included.
These are as follows:
Representational level
Receptive process (decoding):
auditory reception (‘Do dogs eat?’);
visual reception (the child is shown a geometric
shape and required to select one from an array).
Organising process (association):
auditory vocal association (‘A fish has…?’);
visual motor association (the child is required to find
a match for one object from an array).
Expressive process:
verbal expression (the child is requested to describe a picture);
manual expression (the child is requested to ‘Show me what we do with a…’).
Automatic level
Closure:
grammatical closure (the child is required to complete unfinished sentences);
visual closure (the child is required to identify a
common object from an incomplete representation).
Sequential memory:
auditory sequential memory (the child's ability to recall a random sequence of numbers);
visual sequential memory (the child's ability to repeat a sequence of non-meaningful figures from memory).
Supplementary subtests:
auditory closure (the child is required to identify a word when only parts of it are spoken, e.g. ‘tele — one’);
sound blending (the child is required to identify a word when its syllables are pronounced with half-second intervals).
The test was originally standardised on 1,000 children aged between 2 and 10 years from schools in Illinois.
Subjects with IQ scores below 80 and over 100 were excluded, as were children with serious sensory or physical handicaps and black children.
Although the test is intended to delineate specific abilities and disabilities in children so that remediation may be undertaken, it is clear that the restrictions placed upon selection of the standardisation sample limits the value of the standardised scores for the purpose of comparison (Weener et al .
1967).
Furthermore, the absence of a British standardisation raises problems for the use of the test with British children.
From a separate analysis of reliability, Weener et al .
(1967) comment that while measures of internal consistency (item analysis) are high, the test-retest reliabilities for the separate subscales are low.
The standard errors of measurement for many of the subtests are also unacceptably high, indicating that obtained scores might vary considerably from ‘real’ scores.
While it may be agreed that the different subtests assess different aspects of linguistic functioning, there is considerable controversy concerning whether this is a complete or representative set of subtests, and whether they do in fact tap the processes described by Osgood (1957a, 1957b).
The original validation of the test was carried out using 86 subjects, ranging in age from 7 years 4 months to 9 years.
Concurrent validity was determined by comparing scores on the ITPA with scores on existing language tests and  the linguistic portions of achievement tests.
Predictive validity was examined by comparing the ITPA scores with measures from the other language and achievement tests obtained after a time-lapse.
The concurrent validity co-efficients varied from 0.03 to 0.65, and the predictive measures ranged from — 0.19 to 0.53.
While different interpretations may be offered of these low correlations, the fact remains that the ITPA has only limited empirical support for its validity.
Weener et al .
conclude that the data from the studies of internal validity show that the test does not adequately integrate the eleven subtests, nor does it explain the relationship between the subtests or between subtest performance and other relevant behaviour.
In a review of 39 studies which used the ITPA or one of its subtests as a criterion for language improvement, Hammill and Larsen (1974) found little evidence to support the view that the psycholinguistic constructs measured by the ITPA responded to existing training methods.
However, two factor-analytic studies (Hare et al .
1973; Newcomer et al .
1974) provided general support for the concept of levels, processes and the auditory-vocal modality distinction.
Only the visual-motor modality was not substantiated.
Kirk et al .
(1968) argue that the test can be used in two ways: first, to compare a subject's overall score with the age-group norms from the standardisation data; and, second, to compare the subtest score with the overall mean score.
Here, it is suggested that a score of +10 or -10 points should be regarded as a discrepancy and worthy of further assessment.
Weener et al .
conclude that, although the overall score does provide a reliable measure, it is of questionable validity.
The reliability of the individual subtests is regarded as ‘too low for adequate prediction and diagnosis from individual profiles’(Weener et al .
1967: 377).
In the intervening two decades since Weener et al .
published their review, little has happened to improve the acceptability of the ITPA and, in terms of the developments which have occurred in linguistic theory and our knowledge of children's language acquisition, a great deal has happened further to undermine its theoretical foundations.
Discussion of language tests
Having briefly described ten tests of language, it is now possible to compare them on a range of criteria.
The criteria included here may be divided into two: first, those which are concerned with the content and manner of administration of the test; and, second, those which are concerned with their technical sophistication and adequacy.
While the former provide information regarding whether a test might reasonably be expected to facilitate the assessment of particular individuals and for particular purposes, the latter give information regarding the nature and quality of any information which is derived from the test.
For ease of reference by practitioners who may  wish to use these criteria to evaluate tests for specific purposes, the tests described and the criteria are presented in the form of a table at the end of this chapter (see Table 8.1, pp. 168–9).
Content and administration
Does the test measure comprehension or production or imitation?
This will influence the teacher's or therapist's decision regarding whether or not the test is likely to be useful for a particular child and for a particular purpose.
What kind of elicitation procedure is employed?
What kind of response is the child required to make?
These two criteria will determine the extent to which it is felt that the test can provide a meaningful assessment of children who may have additional articulatory, sensory or physical disorders, as well as possible linguistic difficulties.
For example, a child who has difficulty perceiving pictorial materials may be expected to have considerable difficulties with any test which uses pictures as part of the elicitation procedure for reasons other than poor linguistic ability .
Similarly, a test which requires a response to a spoken word or sentence should be used only for children who have reasonably good speech perception.
Test measures
Has the test been standardised?
What were the characteristics of the sample, and from which population (sample frame) was the sample selected?
This information is important if a child's test score is to be compared with information from the standardisation sample in order to make judgements about relative severity of a linguistic problem or language delay.
In cases where the standardisation sample is drawn from a different population from that of the child being tested (for example, the sample is North American children and the child to be tested is British; the sample comprises children from a different age group from that of the child being tested), it is inadvisable to make judgements based on comparisons with the standardisation data.
Where certain categories of children have been excluded from the standardisation sample, it is necessary to exercise extreme caution when using the test with any children from those categories.
Finally, it is necessary for the standardisation sample to be sufficiently large to provide a fair reflection of the variation to be expected in the population.
McCauley and Swisher (1984) recommend that 100 be regarded as a minimum number for an adequate sample.
In Table 8.1 information on sample size, chronological  age, sample frame and exclusions is included where these factors are described in the test manual or other publications.
Has the test been shown to be reliable?
This is a very basic requirement of any measuring device.
If the test has not been shown to be reliable in empirical studies, then there is no guarantee that any information obtained by using the test will provide an accurate reflection of any child's ability.
Information on two types of reliability is discussed here.
Internal reliability or consistency is concerned with the extent to which the individual test items provide measures that are accurate reflections of the overall score.
It indicates that the test items themselves are accurate.
However, since tests are always used by different people in different settings, it is also necessary to know something about the extent to which the same tester may achieve stable scores, when the test is given to the same person on different occasions, or the extent to which the scores from different testers would be comparable if they were to test the same individual.
This is referred to as ‘external reliability.
Has the test been shown to be valid?
This information is necessary if the test user is to be confident that the linguistic abilities which the test purports to measure are indeed the abilities that are actually measured.
While many tests may have high face validity — that is, they may look as if they measure a particular linguistic ability — this is not a sufficient justification for using test data as a basis for clinical or educational decision-making.
Test validity can be determined in different ways.
‘Construct validity’(C1) refers to the extent to which the test results are interpretable within the framework of contemporary linguistic theory.
‘Content validity’(C2) refers to the extent to which individual items can be shown to be measuring the same underlying skills or abilities.
‘Concurrent validity’(C3) is the agreement between the test scores and some criterion measure at the same point in time, while ‘predictive validity’(P) refers to the agreement between test scores and some criterion measure obtained sometime later.
Does the test provide quantitative or qualitative scores?
This is a particularly important criterion, since the kind of information recoverable from a test will constrain the ways in which the test can be used.
Quantitative scores may be more appropriate for research purposes, for evaluating the effectiveness of different forms of therapy, for screening large numbers of children, and for identifying whether or not a particular child is experiencing difficulties which warrant further assessment and possibly some form of placement or remediation.
Qualitative measures, on the other hand, are of more use for conveying information to parents and other  professionals, and are essential as a basis for detailed planning or remedial strategies.
Two forms of quantitative scoring are considered here: age norms, and standardised scores.
In addition, since no test is completely accurate (that is , all tests have a reliability co-efficient of less than 1), it is desirable to have information regarding the level of confidence which a test user can have in any obtained score.
This is usually given in the form of the probability that any obtained score will be within a given range of the true score.
For example, 95 per cent probability that any score will be within +5 or -5 points of the ‘true’ score.
Qualitative scores are of two kinds.
First, there are scores which are simply the quantitative scores from a set of separate subtests.
Where the subtests can be shown to be reliable and valid, such subtests scores may provide a useful profile of the child's ability in a variety of areas.
Second, qualitative scores may be obtained from a descriptive analysis of the child's performance across a range of subtests or across different items.
Once again, it is necessary that the separate items should be demonstrably reliable and valid, since specific interpretations may well be based not on the accumulation of correct and incorrect responses, but on the child's pattern of scores.
An important criterion for the use of tests involving a qualitative assessment is that the test user is fully familiar with the theoretical basis of the test and is competent to translate variations in test performance across items into valid generalisations about a child's linguistic ability and, if necessary, into recommendations for treatment.
Qualitative assessments depend to a greater extent than quantitative scoring on the skills of the person administering and interpreting the test.