

Part One — The Roots of Conflict
THE PART WE PLAY
No one escapes conflict.
The nicest and the nastiest all suffer from it.
However wise and fairminded we are, anyone can suddenly find themselves in a fight for which they've never bargained.
You drive on to a roundabout, another driver smashes right into your rear, you are determined to remain calm.
He hit you, no point in making a meal out of it.
But before you know it, you're right in there hammer and tongs, defending yourself against an onslaught of outrage and invective.
There's no immunity from conflict.
It gets us all in the end.
Its targets are wide, its pains prolonged.
Arguments, aggression, even complete relationship breakdowns can happen to anyone.
Regardless of the deftness we normally bring to our relationships, when conflict surfaces its power to overwhelm us can be deeply perplexing.
Yet what is conflict in its essence?
It's easy to recognise its surface symptoms: the anger, the panic, the shakes and the collywobbles.
None of us welcomes the unpleasant responses it stimulates.
But the working basis of conflict is confrontation, a clash of interests, an argument, perhaps an ongoing state of active and continuous dissatisfaction.
Its effects are both personal and global, touching the lives of individuals, families, whole organisations, even nations or groups of nations.
Conflict begins with matters of value, concern, action or philosophy.
It can end with agitation, anger, hostile action, even the termination of otherwise long-cherished human bonds of friendship and marriage.
Heated tempers
George and Helen have been married forty-five years.
They are not the sort you'd expect to quarrel, at least not violently.
Yet quarrel they did after George's retirement.
Helen used to have the house to herself.
Suddenly her preserve has been violated.
‘This is my house, too, you know, Helen.
If I want to move the television, I've got a perfect right to do so.
Anyway, I paid for the blessed thing.’
‘Well, George, if we are going to start arguing that way, who provided the money for the deposit on this house in the first place?’
‘Come off it, Helen, that was forty years ago.
I'm the one who's sacrificed my life paying for the house and its repairs and its decoration, and all the rest of it….’
And so it went on, neither of them hearing the real concern of the other.
Each of them getting more heated by the blow.
Until there was a sudden crash.
Helen swears it was an accident.
They told the insurance company the same.
The insurance men quite often have claims like that: a damaged television, injured by a flying flower vase!
Whose fault?
Conflict can take place anywhere.
It happens out on the streets, behind closed doors, in corridors of power, in the seat of government.
Wherever it is, who's to blame?
Whose fault is conflict?
Of course, it takes two to make an argument.
So there's always a role for someone else, active or passive.
Only inner conflicts fly solo.
Disputations don't come without sparring partners.
And when the sparring hots up, the blow can sting.
The effects of verbal abuse can be shattering.
Conflict, then, is at best uncomfortable, at worst highly destructive.
Whatever its form, most of us would never  court it.
The hurt, the fear, the affront, the sheer injustice of it all; if we do not run away altogether, we inwardly shrink from it.
Often those on the outside calmly suggest, ‘Why don't you talk it out, quietly and urbanely?’
If only we could.
Trouble is, we get caught off guard.
We are confronted and we confront back.
We switch on to autopilot.
Emotions quickly bubble to the surface.
The waters get muddied.
Whatever happened to my quiet life?
Before we know it, we are facing conflict…
Of course, there are factors within our conflicts with others that affect the purely external circumstances of our lives.
The neighbour who wants to block out my light by building his new garage, or the teenage son who treats my home like a hotel — all may spoil my day, negatively affecting the way I choose to conduct my life.
But these practical issues aside, there is a more subtle dimension to conflict which is almost always at work when interpersonal disagreements arise.
My role
When conflict does occur it's always their fault, isn't it?
My personal reaction may often be to see the problem originating with the attitudes, beliefs, or actions of the other person.
In fact, a most significant area for dealing with the problem, if not in some cases accounting for it altogether, is to realise a major part lies not outside ourselves (in them and their attitudes), but with me (in me and my attitudes — in my inner reactions, habits of mind, prejudices and habitual behaviour given certain threatening circumstances).
The person who has just sent me into an inner panic of humiliated pride, anger and singeing hurt may have less responsibility in the matter than I may be inclined to attribute to them.
Maybe I feel like throwing something in their direction, physically, verbally, or just under my breath.
They may have behaved  badly, rudely, aggressively, even unforgivably.
But what is my role in all this?
That's the question we all have to ask, and keep on asking.
What part am I playing in the conflict process?
The growth process
Conflict doesn't just happen, it has its own process of growth.
Anyone who has forgotten to take a glass bottle out of the freezer will know the shattering consequence.
But it takes quite a time for the liquid to solidify and the glass to splinter and fragment.
It's the same with conflict.
Conflict is a dynamic process; and its destructive and long-term effects depend upon a number of factors, not least of which is the inner you, the real person beneath the surface.
That is you with all your qualities, sensitivities and weaknesses; you with all your experience of growing up, living and growing older; you with all your joys and aspirations, as well as(like us all) your strong sense of individual identity and pride.
No doubles
As a human being, made in the image of God, you are unique.
There's no one quite like you.
They say we all have our double, and it can be fascinating and sometimes puzzling by chance to see someone on TV, in the paper, or in the street who looks in every sense your mirror image, your stand-in should you ever become a star of stage and film.
But when it comes to our emotional profile, to our below-surface identity, then there are no longer any doubles.
You are the only candidate for the role, since so much, remembered and unremembered, has made you what you are.
The catalogue of personal influence which has lent you your unique inner identity is simply enormous.
The personality response
What you are under the surface plays an important part in how you respond to a variety of human circumstances.
There are many examples.
We all have different likes and dislikes, different tastes in food, music, films and clothes.
We may like or dislike different activities with particularly strong feelings involved.
Some men are mad keen on football.
Others can't stand the game.
Some women love dressmaking or knitting.
Others hate the very thought of them.
These simple levels of personality illustrate a significant element.
Likes and dislikes cannot be put down to pure genetic inheritance alone.
We are not pre-programmed machines, though we all carry with us important biological inheritances which as much affect the colour of our eyes as our purely human gifts and abilities.
Many of our basic likes and dislikes probably have some explanation in the long chain of experience, if only we could piece the jigsaw together.
There was some laughter at a dinner party when one of the guests admitted she had eaten and enjoyed a plate of spinach for the first time in twenty-five years.
As a youngster she had detested the Popeye cartoons on television.
She'd firmly resisted her mother's oft-repeated efforts to tempt her with the power-packed vegetable which she'd seen the singing sailor-man so often greedily guzzle straight from the can.
Not until her mid-thirties did she find her taste change, and even then by chance, as good manners constrained her to eat what she had for so many years quite strenuously resisted.
We have all inherited personal preferences in one shape or form by a variety of different roots; some of those origins are clear, others of them are lost in the entanglements of time and circumstance.
Likes and dislikes apart, the inheritance which matters most for our thinking at this stage is more to do with what has fashioned our inner responses, especially the  responses which cause us discomfort, anger, anxiety or conflict.
Fire down below
Suppose someone you know has recently accused you of an uncaring hypocritical attitude.
You're not sure why this criticism comes so vigorously your way.
What you do know is that it has caused you considerable hurt and pain.
Perhaps you're not a person to take criticism lying down and you have had some sharp exchanges with your friend.
You may not have behaved too badly under the circumstances (though we all have a limit to the length of our inner fuse); but how much of the conflict was contributed by the part of you over which you seem to have less control, the fire down below, the lesser-disciplined arena of your own strong inner responses?
Let's say your friend misinterpreted your motive for acting as you did.
You may have cancelled an appointment, disappointing your friend, who now complains loudly and aggressively that you are an uncaring suit-yourself sort, whose commitment to friendship is purely selfish.
Maybe he is over-reacting.
But is the resulting conflict really all his fault?
After all, some people confronted with the same issue might smile quietly and respond gently and constructively until the issue blew over.
Pre-programmed?
Conflict is personal in that it affects different people in different ways.
One man's conflict may be water which flows unceremoniously off another's back; no sweat, no hassle.
Clearly personal reactions provide important personal clues.
Machines we are not, but perhaps after all there are hidden ‘pre-programmed’ factors within  us which are also part of the story, which affect our response to conflict.
Take the broken appointment with your friend.
Is it the first time, for instance, you have been told you only enter into relationships for what you can get out of them?
When we come to consider the importance of our individual life stories, we'll see more clearly the significance of these echoes from the past.
It may hurt to hear accusing comments like this — for highly-charged emotions are often linked to equally-highly-charged events, or a series of events, from our past.
These, as we shall see later, can also be tied into all kinds of empowered emotions, such as anger, fear, hate and loathing.
It is a fact that the issues and situations of conflict which most unsettle, pressurise and perplex us have their roots deep within our inner selves.
For though conflict arises often from the aggressive attitudes of others, it feeds not so much on this as on the learned and unlearned responses of our inner world.
Our responses are triggered and not always caused by these confrontations.
Deep wells
Our inner responses to conflict are often dredged up from deep and sometimes murky wells within us.
They may be conditioned by behavioural and emotional experiences from our early life and learning.
We can, of course, overdramatise the interior elements in conflict.
If someone stupidly backs into my car because they were chatting away to their passenger, I have a right to be cross.
I'll soon calm down, and so should they.
All the details will be sorted out, and their action may continue to be an irritation until the car is repaired and the claim settled.
But the conflict is now over.
I hardly need to be too soul-searching to understand my reasonable response.
More deep-seated conflict is by definition more complex to resolve.
It is often the negative power I perceive  within myself that is so difficult to account for, or control.
You can be in good shape, mentally, physically and spiritually, yet suddenly find yourself in a situation where destructive power from within seeks to engulf you.
You can certainly repress your feelings, but sometimes they simply will not lie down and be forgotten or ignored.
You might expect Christians to be the last group of people to be involved in strong confrontations.
Yet the New Testament is full of evidence of the squabbling of the early Church.
The Christians in the Roman colony at Corinth were notorious for issuing lawsuits just to resolve bitter disputes between one Christian and another (cf. 1 Cor.
6).
This made for strong teaching from the Apostle Paul.
But it remains a fact that then, as now, even those highly motivated to peaceful living often find that there is a power working against them from within.
And self-knowledge at this point is of inestimable value in strengthening oneself against the conflict response.
Everything just so…
Julia is an attractive and intelligent woman in her early thirties.
She works in a local newspaper office, normally manages well with her work and often tells others how enjoyable she finds it.
But recently Julia has been encountering difficulties.
Her major problem is to do with two new girls who have just joined as WP operators.
They are both in their late teens and they appear to do far less than their fair share of the office load, often leaving important copy work uncompleted at five o'clock, so that Julia has to authorise overtime payments for them.
It seems that Julia's irritated remarks have been heard once too often by Karen and Sarah, and some angry comments have recently been made.
‘You want everything to be perfect, Julia.
You're always bossing us about.
Anyway, you're not so perfect yourself….’
Such remarks would not be so noteworthy if they had not sent Julia into a frenzy of concern and inward panic.
She feels a barrier has gone up between them, that her comments to the girls were perfectly justified and that the whole thing has been thrown back in her face.
It has come down to personalities and Julia is very disturbed by it all.
When Julia confided in her husband, his response was carefully considered.
Those who are close to us can sometimes possess an objectivity about our makeup which we sometimes fail to perceive ourselves.
Without communicating criticism, David was able to convey to Julia something which helped her to see herself through the eyes of others.
‘I found it so insulting, David.
Anyway, why shouldn't I expect high standards from them?
I keep a very high standard.
They should too.’
David was quiet in his response, not arguing with Julia as she was still pretty keyed up.
‘There's no reason at all why you shouldn't expect good quality work, Julia,’ David said calmly.
‘But that's you, isn't it?
You've grown up that way.
Your father always insisted on everything being just so.
Didn't you say that he'd expect you to tidy your bedroom every day before you went to school and at night before you went to bed, that everything had to be perfectly in place?
I wonder what that did to you, especially the daily nagging and complaining until you got it right.’
Julia's attention was caught.
‘You know, Julia, perhaps you sometimes ask too much of those girls.
I know they take liberties.
But it's your response to them that's really the issue here.
Being told in a spiteful, truculent way that you're not perfect rings louder bells for you than it would for most.
I'm not surprised you were upset, the resonances go deep, don't they?
It makes you feel you are not acceptable as a person…’
This caused Julia to pause and think, especially David's final comments on the matter.
‘Do you think your dad's attitudes actually left their mark?
After all, you make the same unrealistic demands on me sometimes, and I'm not perfect either — only I've never confronted you with the unreasonableness of it all.’
Facing up to self
In any situation of conflict, whether serious or trivial, the complexities of our inner self are likely to be of equal, if not more significance, than the role of the other party.
Each individual is responsible for who they are, for what they say and do.
We are responsible for our own unique reaction.
Any attempt to help us overcome the weakness we may feel when encountering conflict must allow for this fundamental element in conflict management.
At the same time the other party, or parties, involved will have their sensitivities too, and understanding them will be another key to successful conflict management.
We'll need to ask what we have contributed to the conflict which elicits the frustrated, rankled response from our friend, colleague, or neighbour.
Behaviour which seems innocuous to one person can be a red rag to another.
We can all be extremely ‘annoying’ and not realise it.
There will also be deep-seated reasons why certain types of behaviour elicit strong responses in others.
These also need attention if we are to live peaceably with those close to us.
But self-understanding comes first.
The transformation principle
It would be only too easy to dig up fifty tips for overcoming conflict.
We all love short cuts.
But serious conflict cannot be managed by way of instant solutions.
Simplified, formula-like techniques are inconsequential when compared with personal growth as a means of  overcoming difficulties.
It's all very well telling someone to bite their tongue and not fight back.
It may be wise and sensible advice given certain circumstances.
But it will never deal with the seething frustration which causes you to kick the cat and spend the rest of the evening in a foul and truculent mood.
Good tips are fine, but only when the more serious issues are given due attention.
The New Testament never deals in simplified formulas.
Its teaching declares that God is concerned for our personal growth and transformation.
The quality of our lives is not meant to be static.
Far from it.
Those who seek to follow Jesus Christ, and in doing so to know the power and purpose of God in their lives, are called to a life of transformation.
That transformation comes about by the renewing of our individual minds, a change wrought from the inside, so that all that is weakest, pained and most fragmented within us becomes strengthened and renewed by the truth and love of God (cf.
Rom. 12:2).
How else can we progress to this high point of the Bible's expectation of sanctified behaviour?
‘Bless those who persecute you; bless and do not curse’(Rom. 12:14).
That's Biblical conflict management.
But to reach that point in our dealings with others a great deal needs to have taken place within us.
This teaching on relationships in Paul's letter to the Romans comes as the climax of a detailed treatise expounding Paul's gospel, the peace which God makes between man and himself.
The consequence and outcome of such work enable us to develop relationships of peace with one another.
Paul always adds a practical and pastoral application to his theological teaching in his letters.
And so his words, ‘Bless those who persecute you; bless and do not curse’ sound like a counsel of perfection only if we fail to realise the process of transformation which is needed to enable us realistically to respond in this way to aggression from others.
For such a response to become our regular practice implies much personal reordering, discipline and growth.
The principle Paul is expounding applies to all  human differences.
For we may not be able to control the behaviour or attitudes of others,but we can modify our own responses .
For the Christian this will mean entering into a dialogue with God's word as it touches on issues requiring change, which we shall be investigating later.
In situations of conflict, we often have to ask ourselves, ‘Why do I find this such a hard situation to manage?’
Such a question can be highly revealing.
The question may have an obvious answer at a superficial level: anyone might complain loudly when faced with argument, abuse and aggression.
Yet conflict may be handled more effectively if what is going on within is taken into account as well as what is going on at the surface.
The worst times of my life
This would be a good point to stop and remind yourself of the kinds of situations and issues which have caused you conflict in the past and may be doing so at present.
This conflict inventory could help you to see whether there are any patterns or connections to the concerns you have found most difficult, both past and present.
Naturally there will be memories of matters you felt were entirely the fault of others.
But even in these situations, is there anything to be learned from your own responses?
Keep these findings by you for you'll need them later on.
A pencil and paper will be useful as you go through the various exercises in this book.
What are your worst memories as far as conflict is concerned?
Is there any kind of conflict which upsets you more than others?
Can you think of reasons in others which account for the way you react as you do?
Some people say certain responses in others make them see red and they are guaranteed to be upset, even though for the sake of peace they may repress their anger or hurt.
Do you have any reactions like that?
Can you work out why?
Do you think you have habits of speech or behaviour or any regular ways of behaving or responding, which cause others frustration or annoyance?
If you do, why do you think these cause such irritation?
Are there any kinds of conflict situation which you strenuously avoid, and why?
Are there any kinds of conflict situation in which you find yourself often (or even court!) and why?
It may be that I find a situation hard to manage because I am apparently unable to prevent myself from reacting with paralysing anger when spoken to in this way.
‘If only I could control my responses, but I seem unable to do anything about them.’
Like Julia's situation (p. 20ff), even if the explanation is not as deep-seated as hers, the initial problem lies within myself; something hidden exerts a controlling influence and disables my ability to manage my reactions maturely.
It's the ghost in the machine needing to be unmasked and disarmed.
We've already seen that just as we have different tastes, so we all have different sensitivities.
Without being overcomplicated or analytical, many of our sensitivities are due to early life and subsequent experience.
That's why we should now make a start on reminding ourselves of the relevance of our own particular life story.
Identity, self-image and personal history
Who we are now is a mixture of what we let others see of ourselves and what we hide away.
Our hidden self may be purposely concealed from the outside world, or  something we keep from our own waking mind as too unsettling for conscious thought.
The hidden and the unconcealed both belong to history.
What we are in all our shapes and sizes has been fashioned and contoured through both inheritance and experience — the comprehensive impact upon us of our parents, childhood and upbringing, and with it those joys, dramas and significant experiences which contribute to what is sometimes called our adult self.
Biography time
How much do you know about yourself?
You should be an expert.
Surprisingly, many of us know about the events of our lives without always seeing their significance, singly or cumulatively.
We are, therefore, going to spend some time getting to know the real you.
Conflict cannot be managed effectively unless the conflict manager is fully in possession of his or her own potential contribution to any conflict.
So here is an opportunity for ‘abbreviated’ interpretative biography.
It takes far less time than full-scale autobiography, for we are looking for a profile of the significant events that have made you the distinctive person that you are (warts and all, as they say).
If you are really concerned to manage conflict better, don't skip this pen and paper exercise.
If you wish, you can always read on and come back and do the exercises later.
Start by imagining a meeting between yourself and a total stranger, such as a new family doctor or a church minister.
They know nothing about you but, because of their profession, you can completely trust their confidentiality.
Your task is to tell them about your life and what makes you the person you are today.
Take your time, it is really the highlights they are after.
What would you tell them?
Imagine yourself making a few notes before the meeting.
What would you write down?
You may be quite used to talking about yourself but you may be less used to finding connections in your experience.
Whatever your skill:
Can you say what stands out in your childhood as a positive contribution to your life now?
Can you say what stands out in your childhood as a negative contribution to your life now?
Describe one happy childhood memory.
Why was it happy?
What do you consider to be the most formative experiences of your life so far, the painful as well as the good?
Describe one unhappy childhood memory.
Why was it unhappy?
Can you now describe the kind of person you are as an adult?
What words would you use to describe your emotional characteristics?
Are you outgoing, shy, optimistic, gloomy, etc?
Try and find as many characteristics as possible.
Are you particularly like any member of your family?
Emotionally and behaviourally, how do you think you are like or unlike your mother and father?
You should answer separately for each of them, or for those who took their place in your childhood.
What impact, if any, did a brother(s) or sister(s), or being an only child, have upon you?
Draw two large circles.
In the first write all those events and relationships from childhood which seem most significant to you as you think about them now.
Use summary phrases.
In the second write in those childhood events or aspects of relationships which have most significantly influenced and perhaps continue to influence your present experience.
You could end up by making a picture, abstract or in some way representational, which shows the connections of your childhood to your mature adult life.
This last drawing exercise is a summary of the simple process of thinking which leads us into a deeper appreciation of how we have come to be what we are.
Much of how and why we react as we do is based on such factors.
There may well have been some particularly sensitive elements in what you have thought about.
In particular, when we have been wronged, certain kinds of inner energy responses are set up.
These energies often lie dormant till triggered by some unforeseen event or response.
Doreen's Dad
She always called him ‘Father’ as far back as she could remember.
Doreen was brought up abroad.
Her father had been a tight-lipped rather unloving man who had apparently taken little interest in Doreen.
His marriage to Doreen's mother, who was the epitome of affection and kindness to her only daughter, was a stormy affair.
After her mother's untimely death through cancer, Doreen's father returned to England where he put the eight-year-old in the care of an au pair and hardly ever saw her, except to exert some strong-handed discipline when Doreen had done something to displease either the au pair or himself.
Yet Doreen's aunt and the au pair, who was quite a caring sort, did much to sweeten the latter part of Doreen's childhood.
But, as might, be expected, there is some negative legacy from the past in Doreen's adult experience.
Doreen sometimes finds herself in conflict situations which she finds unusually difficult to manage.
Typical was the day when she had another disagreement with the headmaster at the local primary school.
He simply would not accept that her two children should be allowed any further time off school for the purpose of family holidays.
Doreen was convinced he was being unreasonable, but she could not account for her intense feelings of rage.
She ended up being very rude to the man.
Doreen knew her anger wouldn't help matters at all.
It didn't, and she was shown the door.
As she drove back home through the traffic, memories of her father's authoritarian presence, vigorously admonishing her for the sinfulness of some childlike request, filled her mind with pain and loathing.
Then came the longing for her mother's warmth and comfort.
As it did, a car hooted behind her.
The traffic lights were green.
Doreen stopped day-dreaming.
She'd write that headmaster a strong letter.
She'd tell him a few home truths about his condescending, heartless, authoritarian attitude.
She'd fight back.
It made her feel better.
Know your story
Doreen's story is unique to her.
Doreen is not ‘neurotic’.
Like many, she has her own stock of painful experiences which sometimes affect her present life.
Not everything in the past works that way.
The fact that as a teenager she had a series of complicated operations for a badly broken leg does not seem to have affected her at all.
She tells her children to be careful on the swings, but that's not unusual.
We need to beware of thinking a psychoanalyst's couch would give us enough excuses either to blow away all our adult responsibilities, or to explain in detail every feature or peculiarity of our present thoughts or behaviour.
It doesn't work like that, for the past is past for most of us.
Nonetheless, the past does exert its moulding influence upon us.
Just as a tall building is constructed in layers, so our personalities, emotional characteristics and complexities are built up with the present as the top storey.
But there can be shaky elements at any level.
There may be issues left unresolved, old hurts or fears.
The nearer the foundations, the more likely they are to unsettle or destabilise the whole structure.
It is often observed in  helping those with complex personal problems that childhood and adolescent experiences are the most important in understanding adult difficulties.
Pause for thought
So what have you discovered about your own story in relation to your experience of conflict?
If you haven't yet discovered anything of particular significance (as long as you are sure you have been thorough and answered the questions honestly), don't worry.
There's no point in looking for problems when problems don't exist.
You will still have been able to describe your emotional characteristics and personality, and that's important in its own right.
Most of us should have some clues as to why we are as we are.
And it is important to know your own story.
We are all sensitive creatures, however we may seem on the outside.
In this respect experiences matter far more than appearances.
Let's remember that God wants to help us with our experience of conflict.
He wants to provide us with the insight from his word and the power from his Holy Spirit that our lives should be transformed.
Dwell for a few moments on these words of Paul, and when you have a moment of quiet use the prayer that follows, either in your own words or as it stands, as a way of bringing to God your thoughts and feelings both on what you have discovered through these pages, and any particular concerns you may have at this present moment.
Do not grieve the Holy Spirit with whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.
Get rid of all bitterness, rage and anger, brawling and slander, along with every form of malice.
Be kind and compassionate to one another, forgiving each other , just as in Christ God forgave you.
Be imitators of God, therefore, as dearly loved children, and live a life of love, just as Christ loved us and gave himself up  for us as a fragrant offering and sacrifice to God (Eph. 4:3–5:2).
Heavenly Father, thank you that as I come to you with my concerns about the conflicts in my life I come to a God who understands my humanity completely because you shared this experience fully in the life of your Son.
Help me, Lord, to have insight into what has made the person that I am today.
And please help me too, Lord, to begin to overcome my weaknesses in this area of conflict with others.
Father, you know the powerful elements at work within me.
Please help me to know that transforming power of your Holy Spirit to overcome these difficulties, and please forgive me for all that has been wrong and selfish in what I have said, thought and done.
In Jesus Christ's name.
Amen.
OUR POWERFUL PAST
Conflict is not all the other person's fault.
Another figure may be responsible for drawing us out, eliciting all kinds of pained and disagreeable reactions.
But the presence within us of pockets of tender vulnerability is a normal part of humanness.
Everyone has sensitive areas.
The acquisition of these veins of-tenderness is an inevitable and legitimate part of our progress towards adulthood and maturity.
Yet the existence of such inner ‘hot spots’ colours and often complicates our reaction to the process and outcome of conflict.
Inner dread
If Frances had not been so low with a cold, maybe she wouldn't have reacted so strongly to Andy, her boyfriend.
But when Andy announced he wanted to cool their relationship a little, Frances felt a panic and dread inside which caused her to lash out in unexpected anger.
Andy hadn't meant any more than his pressing need to stay in for a few weeks till he had made more headway with his revision.
But for Frances the impact of those few words felt like a cold and heartless rejection.
It stung her deeply and she recoiled at once.
Andy was surprised at Frances's reaction, particularly as she was normally quite quiet and shy.
There was an insecurity in Frances to be sure.
Her adoptive parents both feel they have been unable to make up fully for  Frances's childhood abandonment by her mother.
As an eighteen-year-old, she still seems to fear rejection.
It can make her lash out, sometimes quite irrationally.
Past and present
Frances's past makes a vivid contribution to her present experience.
Whatever our past experiences, whether they be noted landmarks or modest signposts, they are always worth considering where conflict is concerned.
What we are now has much to do with the way we have steered round or even collided with the obstacles of our lives.
So we'll be staying with the subject of the past and the roots of conflict.
Later we shall come to look at the practical areas where conflict is most often experienced and what can be done about it.
But at the moment it is essential that we work on what we bring with us when we enter these conflict situations.
The fact is our unique sensitivities travel with us wherever we go.
We cannot ditch them, for we cannot change our past.
Our past and present belong together like two sides of the same coin.
What we can change is our future.
We can change the way we let our past experiences affect us now, so that we are better equipped to handle the impact on us of all kinds of pressure which would otherwise unsettle and upset as time goes on.
Our aim will be to understand and, where appropriate, to modify the potency of these feelings and the way we let them affect us when conflicts arise.
Such feelings belong to a whole realm of events and reactions often stretching back many years to our earliest days.
Many, indeed, are well forgotten by our waking minds.
To work hard to clear up any emotional untidiness of this sort is not only beneficial to relationships, in many ways it is essential for healthy living.
Given the right circumstances, unattended emotional debris dating from our past can prove quite a stumbling-block.
Looking back and sorting out are  essential if we are not to experience the pantomime dame's discomfort.
Everyone but Widow Twankey sees it coming.
She sits down flat and firmly on the pin placed purposely for her displeasure on the bench in the wooded glade.
The complaint rings loudly, ‘It hurts, it hurts, boo-hoo, it hurts.’
We're not surprised at her exclamations.
If only she'd looked behind her, she'd have seen how to avoid the discomfort.
Sharp feelings
Our emotional hurts may not always be quite so simple to circumvent.
But the sharp and painful reactions we experience in conflict sometimes do have a definite link with experiences of time past.
And looking behind us in an emotional sense can be of great preventive value.
It's wise to be aware of all the factors which can influence our reactions, and indeed to protect ourselves where possible from needless pain.
These tender areas need a good and close scrutiny, if only to avoid the piercing, stinging effects of an unwelcome invasion upon them.
We all cope with past hurts and grievances in different ways.
Some have learned to let go and not to dwell on what simply cannot be changed.
Others continually hark back.
Others still In past wounds so haunt their waking world, they are continually finding emotional parallels in everyday experience, their anger and bitterness becoming recognisable as a definite and unattractive personality characteristic.
Others cope with inner pains by building a wall around them.
They never let themselves be drawn into any kind of situation where conflict may arise.
Escape measures
Jenny's home had been one of constant arguments and rows.
She was an only child and hated her parents'  heated exchanges.
She would run and hide as her parents' altercations so often got out of hand with plates crashing and books thrown.
At first, Jenny took refuge with her dollies and their little friends.
Later, as a teenager, under the same stressful circumstances, Jenny would.run for her Walkman, drowning the sound of argument with the throbbing beat of rock music.
As an adult, Jenny admits to the same way of coping.
She cannot stand conflict: it relives all those half-remembered feelings of fear and dread from years back.
It is an escape strategy and she knows it.
She runs.
She runs as hard as she can from any situation where conflict may arise.
This means that she sometimes appears as a person who backs off from intimacy; you never know what Jenny is feeling.
She certainly never shows her feelings.
Even when her parents eventually divorced, Jenny's closest friends were struck by her apparent calmness and lack of concern.
Others might have shown some sadness, regret or even heartbreak.
Evasion tactics
It is both consciously and unconsciously that Jenny uses escape measures to prevent present conflicts from resurrecting old hurts and pains.
Escapism isn't just limited to dipping into science fiction or a romantic novel.
Evasion of this kind, though most understandable because of the hurt at the root of things, is potentially very dangerous.
It not only leaves a catalogue of unresolved hurts, it surfaces in an apprehensive and unrealistic way of coping with present difficulties.
It is a constant fear and flight response.
Such learned behaviour is heavily ingrained in many of us.
We do not always realise what is at the root of our original fears, or that we habitually cope with conflict in this way at all.
Numerous are the unresolved hurts which lurk in many of us, years after their first appearance in our inner world.
As we have already seen, these can be triggered when  we are least aware of their presence.
Some of us cope by pushing our feelings down, like packing earth firmly into a small flower-pot.
But emotions don't like that; they love to have their say.
Indeed, they may surprise us.
Undealt with ancient hurts may insist on standing up and being noticed.
Because conflict often involves the awareness of being wronged in some way, unresolved past experiences of unfairness, injury or maltreatment can have a powerful effect as we react and respond to more contemporary occurrences.
The wronged self
Peter is the middle child of five.
His family were not poor, but in a large household all available resources were fully used in providing for the children.
Peter grew up to know the value of money, and was taught by his caring, careful parents to save and be prudent in financial matters, and cautious of whom to trust in business.
‘Neither a lender nor a borrower be’ was often heard in Peter's house.
Peter didn't really shine at school.
He was bright, but a late developer.
At sixteen, his father encouraged him to take an apprenticeship in the local handmade furniture shop.
Against his father's advice, Peter opted instead for business.
He didn't tell his father at the time, but he longed to help his parents financially with his younger brother's and sister's education.
He stuck with his ideas, and for a year did all kinds of manual work as a casual labourer till he eventually had amassed enough money to start a grocery business with a friend.
Peter and his partner worked hard together, starting first of all with a stall in Berwick Street market in London's West End.
Within twelve months they had bought an old but clean and respectable grocery van to take around the roads of the South London suburbs.
Again, this worked well for a while.
But when Julian had some money left to  him, they decided to pool their resources and go in for something far bigger.
Peter thought it all out very carefully.
He decided the wisest course was to pool all he had made over the last two years, enabling Julian to purchase the lease of a high street property.
This would enable them to set up a business on a more settled and permanent trading basis.
Before long they opened a grocery-cum-delicatessen in a good position as far as passing trade was concerned.
Peter's investment was not misplaced.
The business did very well with the two lads greatly appreciated locally for their hard work and quality of service.
The range of goods they were able to carry was welcomed in the area, as well as lunchtime sandwich facilities which had previously been missing in the neighbourhood.
Success was the fruit of some three years' strenuous work.
But it was more than a shock when Julian admitted to Peter that he had been running up huge debts with their bank.
Peter knew that Julian gambled, but he hadn't expected him to gamble to that level, and certainly not to use the shop as security.
With continual borrowing over two years, the bank had blown the whistle.
Everything was gone.
Julian was bankrupt.
Even if they'd had a formal partnership, which they didn't, it would have made no difference.
Peter lost all he'd made, and with it his chance to help his parents and his younger brother and sister, Toby and Laura.
Peter was heartbroken.
His father had said all along: ‘neither a lender nor a borrower be’.
Peter had found out the hard way.
But as his mother observed, he was the same Peter, he'd pick himself up somehow.
Once again, Peter was resolute.
He made up his mind he'd never make the same mistake twice.
It wasn't just the money or the hard work, though the waste of that was difficult enough to accept.
Peter had been working a debt of love.
He'd done all this for his parents, particularly for his father, whose dedication to his children had always impressed Peter and moved him deeply.
And now it had all come to nothing.
Peter had wanted to make a response in kind to his parents.
As a result, he didn't feel stupid, or incapable in what he'd done.
He felt wronged.
Deeply, deeply wronged.
How could Julian call himself his friend all this time and let him down so badly!
It was almost a betrayal.
All the more so for, when faced with the facts, all Julian could find to say was, ‘Yes, but think how much I've lost.’
Doing the dirty
All of us have things we would like to change from the past.
If only I hadn't said this, that or the other.
Peter often felt like that.
He nursed his regret for years.
He was only nineteen when it all happened.
Julian never paid back the money, even though he started up in business again and eventually did all right for himself.
Peter never went near him after the bankruptcy case.
A few years later Peter married, settled down and had a family.
In the event, he did make some contribution to Toby and Laura's education.
It was a great satisfaction to him that they both did well, Toby at teachers' training college, and Laura at polytechnic.
It gave him even more pleasure in their latter years to see his parents' joy at their children's happiness, Peter's included.
The angry father
But our interest in Peter's story is represented by a relatively small but important matter which in a negative way affects the happiness of Peter's home life.
The question is, what makes Peter such an angry father?
Jean, his wife, cannot understand it.
His family can't fathom it either.
Normally loving and full of fun, Peter can explode with passionate anger at James and Mary, their fourteen-year-old twins.
It's usually trivial, like things not being put back in their right place, or borrowing without asking.
One day Mary asked her father for money for  a pop concert which she had already booked up with a friend without consulting him.
The balloon really went up.
Mary didn't get hit, but she is adamant that her father threw the tray of cups and saucers to the floor and they didn't just fall.
It's been like this over a number of issues ever since the children were small, but it's got worse since they've been teenagers.
Yet in casual conversation with the wife of a working colleague, Jean discovers that-Peter is just the same at the computer business where he now works as a systems manager.
It was a relief to Jean to know that it isn't just the children after all.
It appears that Peter often finds himself in conflict.
‘He seems so untrusting, so unwilling to let other people get on with things on their own.
When someone uses their own initiative, Peter can come on pretty strong.
He can seem so threatened, so undermined sometimes.
It's almost as though he's afraid they are going to cheat him out of something, or do the dirty on him.’
Alarm bells
The steps of causation in Peter's example are clear enough.
But it took a deal of probing when he sought help to ascertain exactly what was the pressure inside Peter, bursting to get out when suitably triggered.
Like those alarm systems which are set off when you get too close, Peter could hear the bells' frenzied ringing, but at first he wasn't too clear exactly what posed the threat.
The wrongs we store away are many and varied.
There are times in our lives when we are particularly vulnerable and can easily be hurt.
School-days mark important growing times in our development.
But even in the care of school, emotional traumas are often caused.
What may be laughed off by one child may send another into a panic of embarrassment, leaving a legacy of permanent caution in later years.
Put a man down
Ian was not over-bright, but he happened to be popular with the other boys as he was a good footballer and did quite well at sports generally.
The eight-year-old Ian had been talking in class all through a painting lesson.
His teacher thought he needed a mite of discipline.
Though it was not a particularly good painting, as it happens, Ian had tried especially hard at it; very hard in fact.
But to show Ian the detrimental effects of talking when you should be working, Mrs Britten held up Ian's painting in front of the class and systematically ridiculed his efforts; this with Ian standing beside her going redder and redder with every word.
Can't take criticism
It's true that this was not the only experience of ridicule that Ian faced in childhood.
And it has to be said that most of us are likely to have some kind of experience when our ego is deflated; and that can often have a beneficial not a negative effect.
However, in adult life, Ian finds he cannot take criticism.
It stings him.
He comes over well as a person, with all the outer confidence you'd expect of a company representative.
But he needs constant reassurance.
In subtle ways, he seeks praise and affirmation from those he knows it's safe to trust.
But when there's criticism of him or his performance, or indeed anything which is linked with him (like his company's products), from customers, his bosses, or even casual acquaintances, Ian finds he cannot cope.
On the one hand he feels he wants to run away; on the other he feels his face reddening, and anger welling up.
He stops listening to whatever reasonable points might be made.
All he can hear is a voice inside him saying, ‘Just look at his work.
Ian is a lazy, stupid, good-for-nothing.’
Except he doesn't hear those words precisely, he just has a feeling — the emotional impact of an unsteady self-image; unsettled at a formative stage by ridicule and embarrassment.
What's in your catalogue?
There are many issues which affect us.
We are all different, and we all react in different ways.
When Ian told his wife about the school experience just detailed, Katy said she could hardly believe it mattered that much.
And certainly if it had happened to Katy, it probably would have made no impact on her at all.
But we are all different in the makeup of our personalities.
We all respond in our own unique ways.
So what's in your catalogue of known wrongs?
Those memories of yours which cause you pain to think of them.
Those injustices, fears, embarrassments, or violations of one kind or another.
Is there anything of significance in your past which could in any way contribute to your present reactions in the face of conflict?
Take some moments again to think about this.
Note your findings and see what you can discover.
Can you think of any time in your life when you have been the victim of what you considered to be an injustice, grievance, outrage, or any other kind of wrong?
Spend some moments thinking over one or more examples of what you have noted, and if you can remember what it felt like at that time.
Has age mellowed you, or do you still feel something of the vigour of the same emotions?
Note as many examples now as you can remember where you feel you have been wronged.
Irrespective of their magnitude, whether they are big or small, in  each case think about the emotional weight you once gave and still give to them.
Now build a potency list.
With the scale 1 to 10 (10 representing the strongest negative emotions you still feel when you contemplate those occurrences) put a number by each of the events you have listed.
The next question to ask is about any which have scored 5 or over.
Have the 5s and over any connection with what you know of your responses to conflict?
Do these issues influence your judgment, trust, concerns or feelings towards any other person, type, or situation?
Have anxiety, fear, guilt, anger, personal embarrassment or ridicule played a significant part in what you have just been analysing?
The contact points
The connection of past events to present experience of conflict is really crucial.
Ask yourself again if there are any contact points between the hurts or wrongs of the past and your present difficulties.
In Peter's case, the whole sad business with Julian had made him jumpy to say the least.
Peter is now an extremely suspicious person.
He has made himself so by resolving never to make the same mistake twice.
He longed to change the past.
If only he'd learned the lesson his father had taught him when he taught him,before it all went wrong.
But he was not passive.
Instead, he decided to nurse his anger.
That would keep the memory bright.
He would never forget, he would never forgive.
And this time he would stay in control.
Nobody would get the better of him.
This is why Peter gets so steamed up with the sales people from the software houses.
The cardinal rule in the computer world according to Peter, is: don't trust new programs any further than you can throw  them.
And that is why Peter's office decided long ago that he was not the person to be first to hear news about the latest software products.
Peter had decided in advance that the software houses were likely to rip off his organisation.
He therefore gave every enquiring company, irrespective of their experience or worth, very short shrift indeed.
Not really the thing for good intercompany relations.
In every other way, Peter is a fine upright and likeable person; he is involved in the Church and is liked and respected locally.
But this streak of obsessionality, deriving from his loss-all those years ago, not only haunts him, it's made him a remarkably untrusting person even towards his own children.
It's the way his past interfaces or connects with the present.
We can see exactly the same connections being drawn in the case of Frances, Jenny and Ian.
Frances feels constantly vulnerable to rejection.
She is never sure that she is loved.
It was learning at an early age that her natural mother had abandoned her which sent the shock waves vibrating through her childhood, adolescence and early adulthood.
In Jenny's situation, the dread of violence and the potential disintegration of her parents' marriage has made her flee from any potential aggression.
She even switches off the soap operas on the television when the emotional thermostat gets turned up.
Flicking the switch on the TV is one thing, but such reactions are more serious when it comes to real life situations.
With Ian, his inner sensitivity has a negative effect mainly in his working environment.
He's very likeable as a person, and this certainly gets him orders, effectively increasing the company's business in the North of England where he lives.
But the flip side of that effectiveness is quite clear when things go wrong.
When items are faulty, not delivered on time, or more rarely where Ian has by his own fault succeeded in botching an order, then he goes on the defensive.
If the customer  pushes the point, he fights back.
And as a result, he has recently lost two small but important customers, and his sales manager is wanting to know why.
Past hurts and present conflicts
What are the contact points, if any, in your experiences of past hurts and present conflicts?
Are there any ways in which you react now to conflict situations which have been affected or constrained by something you have learned from the past?
You may not have anything of significance which you can discover, but you should at least give some thought to it; for what we are doing is to clear through, in order to clear away, some of the accumulated emotional jumble of the years.
All these elements can exert an influence in some manner or other.
What you can do about them is another matter which we shall deal with.
The first step is to check what is there in the first place.
Use these questions to stimulate your awareness:
Think back to some recent experiences of conflict.
Did any involve the experience of anxiety, fear, guilt, anger or embarrassment within you?
Now ask what you found most threatening.
Can you find a link with something in particular that you found intimidating or menacing in the conflict, to anything of significance in your past?
Do you feel you have fully resolved that situation?
If not, make a note to work at it, using later exercises in this book.
Who are the people that you blame for bad things in your life?
In a conflict situation, have you ever behaved badly towards anyone else; intentionally or unintentionally heaping upon them the blame you attribute to any of the figures you've just thought about and identified?
Have you ever created a conflict situation yourself with someone you consider responsible for hurting you in some way, perhaps even years before?
Provoking conflict
You would think that most reasonable people would not choose to provoke conflict.
We may well not choose to, but if we could be cool, calm and collected and stand back objectively, we might just find that in some conflict situations, to our surprise we may be the unwitting agent provocateur .
In families, close friendships, and in well-established relationships, this element of provocation can be dearly seen.
Winding the spring
Trevor goes to see his sister about once a month.
They usually end up arguing, but they still love each other.
Trevor wanted to get married, but never found the right girl.
Alison is widowed now and lives on her pension.
Trevor winds his sister up.
He gets irritated by he–fussiness.
You see, big sisters sometimes mollycoddle little brothers.
Trevor has often wondered whether this made him grow up with silly fussy habits which irritated the girls with whom he would like to have been involved.
Alison probably did pamper Trevor, but not as much as he thinks.
Their mother was often ill, and Alison, being ten years Trevor's senior, was an enormous help and influence in Trevor's upbringing.
Maybe Alison still treats Trevor as though he wasn't a full-grown adult.
Mind you, if you saw the state of his shirts, you might agree that a little mollycoddling was in order.
But it makes Trevor simply furious, although he's not a person to show his rage.
So like an old-fashioned clock, Trevor simply winds the handle.
He doesn't fully realise he does it.
But anything he does  not like, he criticises.
First it's everything being so neat and tidy.
‘I don't see why you've got to keep this place as a show house, Alison.
I suppose you're frightened of me messing it all up for you, with my dirty boots and all that….’
Then it's Alison's insistence on doing the washing-up straight after the meal.
‘Can't you just relax for a minute, Alison.
You get me all twitched up.
Why has everything got to be so squeaky dean as soon as the meal is finished?’
Then it's the one that's bound to annoy.
‘You're not going to that church tonight?
You practically live in the place.
Anyway, Alison, that vicar of yours sounds a real attention seeker.
I reckon he's more interested in personal publicity than telling people about God.’
Fully wound, Alison's smoke alarm is triggered.
She explodes in a verbal attack on Trevor which momentarily he finds quite a relief.
Until, that is, he realises what he has done, and feels cross with himself for walking into an emotional trap of his own unconscious devising.
Have you ever been in a situation even remotely like this with family, friends, or working colleagues?
Ask yourself if you remember feeling angry yourself, before the other person showed anger.
If you were, how did you rub things in?
Are there any situations where you do this habitually?
Like Trevor, when the other person's tension breaks and the anger bursts, do you feel any satisfaction or relief within yourself, even for only a few moments?
If you provoke anger in others in this way, part of the explanation is that it is possible to use provocation as a means of releasing your own tension by way of another  person.
You may not feel able either to explain or express your own anger.
The issues may be too delicate to handle or too difficult to put your finger on precisely.
So you pass the responsibility, in an almost unconscious way, to the other party.
It becomes their responsibility to release the pressure and tension within you.
They now become responsible for your anger.
It is one of the devious ways in which we all can behave at times.
It's not a mature way of behaving.
Yet many otherwise mature adults will often behave in this way, mainly because of failure on a long-term basis to deal with anger properly.
The anger response
Anger is not wrong in itself.
Indeed the repression of anger can be positively harmful.
One psychoanalytic theory of depression is that anger unexpressed and turned inwards is the basic cause of clinically depressive states.
But anger has its perfectly acceptable face.
This can come as surprise to Christians who have grown up in homes where the expression of anger was frowned upon as being unworthy and sinful.
These attitudes, unfortunately, weren't just those of pious Victorians; their presence in many Christian homes today means that youngsters are growing up having to unlearn unbiblical and emotionally unhealthy ways of responding.
Anger in perspective
To get anger in perspective, it helps to see how many positive references there are to anger in the Bible.
God himself gets angry.
There are references to God's anger throughout the Old Testament.
Indeed Psalm 7:11 says that God is angry with the wicked every day.
In the epistles of the New Testament, Paul often reminds his readers, as he does in Colossians 3:6, that human sinfulness itself occasions the wrath and anger of God.
In the gospels, Jesus's wholeness as a man is illustrated both by physical and verbal anger on a number of occasions.
The expulsion of the money-lenders from the Jerusalem Temple and the overturning of their tables was not expunged by the gospel writers as an unworthy, improper or inappropriate response from Jesus.
It was an authentic deed in both senses of the term.
In the very strongest language, which can rightly be called anger, Jesus expresses his seven woes against religious leaders who put religiosity before worship of the true and living God (cf. Matt. 23).
Matt.
23).
So what do we make of the anger response?
The unnatural but popular division between righteous and unrighteous anger can get many people in a theological and practical muddle.
This is particularly so when you take into account that most people feel they are in the right when they are angry, whether they are or not.
Yet how can you tell the precise grounds.of righteous or unrighteous anger?
Our motivations when angry are never wholly pure.
How could they be, given the fragmented and fallen nature of our humanness?
Of course, there are matters we can get angry about which seem far closer to God's concerns than others.
But any minister of even a few years' experience of Christian leadership will be able to tell you of Godly issues which were debated in his Church with a bitterness and rancour totally out of harmony with their subject.
Expressing anger
The object of our anger is, of course, important.
We can be angry about the wrong things.
We can also fail to be angry about the right things, neglecting issues, say, of Justice and truth in our world.
But a more important distinction for our purposes is not so much what we are angry about, but how we get angry, how long we remain angry and what our anger response involves.
We learn this lesson, as we are surely meant to, from the model of Jesus.
His example shows us that it matters how our  anger is expressed, and that it should not be left to simmer unattended.
As James says, anger that is left unresolved ‘does not bring about the righteous life that God desires’(Jas. 1:20).
But when it is said, ‘Do not let the sun go down while you are still angry’(Eph. 4:26) the insight and directive there is immensely practical.
Paul's comment is based on a quotation of Psalm 4:4, ‘In your anger do not sin’.
In speaking to these early Christians Paul is implying that when they came to follow Jesus, they did not suddenly shed their deepest emotions.
If at conversion Christians castoff their ability to be angry, they would shed the whole panoply of their emotional world: their joy, their love, their sense of wonder and awe.
Our emotional world is a complete package and it has not been jettisoned.
It is, however, meant to be transformed.
Paul has just that transformation in mind when he tells the Ephesians to put off the old self, be made new in the attitudes of their minds, and then put on the new self, ‘created to be like God in true righteousness and holiness’(Eph. 4:20–4).
His steps for transformation are very practical.
God does the transforming, we do the co-operating — by letting our lives move in conformity with God's plan for us.
Transformation steps
In using the expression, ‘You were taught with regard to your former way of life, to put off your old self….’
(Eph. 4:22) Paul is using imagery derived from the picture of changing your clothes.
Just as we might buy a new outfit, then take it home and change out of the old and into the new, so Paul likens the complete change needed if we are to live as followers of Christ.
We are new people inside, so our outward garments should reflect that.
And it is our behaviour which is the visible expression of our new life in Christ.
Conscious decisions to live in ways which are consonant with God's will need to be made.
Paul gives some consideration to our attitude to communication within relationships.
‘Therefore each of you must put off falsehood and speak truthfully to his neighbour, for we are all members of one body’(Eph. 4:25).
Although this refers to a Christian's relationships with other Christians, it is legitimate to extend Paul's principles to all human relationships.
What is desirable and wholesome in Christian relationships reflects God's ideal for all.
Paul says, ‘Put off your old self, put on the new’(vv. 22,24).
The first application of his principle is relational.
The putting off involves ‘falsehood’.
The putting on involves ‘speaking truthfully’.
All this is set in the context of conflict.
For in the very next verse (V.26) Paul says, ‘In your anger do not sin.
Do not let the sun go down while you are still angry.’
What does this tell us in practical terms?
Certainly the references to truth and falsehood can be taken at the simple level of telling the truth and avoiding lies.
But the context of the anger response gives Paul's words a deeper dimension still.
How many people do you know who never show on their faces or reveal in their words what they truly feel?
To smile when you are angry can be a normal physiological reaction.
But how many people do you know who smile broadly at you, and speak in a calm and controlled manner, when all along they are fuming inside and never show it?
That, according to Paul, is ‘falsehood’.
He's not saying we should explode on the slightest provocation.
But i n relationships where there are continual small issues which divide, if there isn't some truthful (albeit controlled) expression of the difference, that is how resentments and  potential fury can be built up.
Those who like Jenny in our case-study find themselves avoiding conflict at all costs, never facing up to issues, never expressing hurt or anger for fear of what it might release in others, need to do some work on this point.
Jenny often feels anger, but doesn't show it.
And unexpressed anger can cause notable personal problems.
Untangling the past
So what should Jenny do?
She should become aware of the pressures of her past which have formed her behaviour in these circumstances.
That kind of insight can free her from the constraints of the inner voice which effectively commands her, ‘Turn right here.
Left here.
Stop.
Reverse.
Quick.
Run.’
You can say no to that inner voice if you know where it comes from and why it says the things it does.
That applies to whatever kind of experience you've been through, and whether you're a Frances, a Peter, a Jenny, an Ian or a Trevor.
Paul's point about anger is that anger needs to be expressed and controlled.
The context insists that the right object of anger is the one who is its truly justified object.
So kicking the cat, biting a towel or pounding a pillow aren't really much use, except for letting off steam.
However, if you think your anger is going to get the better of you, then you'd better be realistic and responsible.
It's far better to ruin a feather pillow than let yourself overflow in violent behaviour.
Coping strategies which are sometimes suggested, like making a mental agreement with yourself or even an actual arrangement with the other party, to stand over an arm's length away and promise not to move from your spot, are sensible if the temperature really soars.
The objective, however, is never to left our anger blow up to that extent.
‘Do not let the sun go down while you are still angry, and do not give the devil a foothold’(Eph. 4:26–7).
Anger  needs expression and resolution within a manageable framework of time.
Otherwise resentments build up, and anger eventually consumes us with loathing, violent behaviour in words or actions, or destructive decisions towards others.
In such ways the devil wheedles his way into human relationships with highly damaging effects.
Dealing with the debris
What should you do about old hurts, the catalogues of personal dramas we have been unearthing in this chapter?
The simple directive must be to say ‘let go’.
Research has shown that the mechanisms in the human brain go through the anger response in less than a second.
Of course, we are all too aware of the physiological symptoms which result from anger and which take much more than a second to show their effect and presence: the forehead bunched in a frown, the staring eyes, the constricted pupils, the clenched mouth and fists, the jaw thrust forward, the reddened neck or face and enlarged arteries due to the increase in the blood supply to the skin.
But these reactions are a later development when anger has begun to take the system over and commandeer all its ways of expressing displeasure.
There is always a moment in time when we can make a decision whether or not to vent our anger.
If we bypass the decision we simply move into autopilot and the red alert comes into play.
The brain manages the anger response so quickly because a set mental process is involved.
We should not suppress or repress our anger feelings.
The reasons we feel hurt or aggrieved (in Paul's terms, the truth of the matter) should be faced head on.
But the mental process allows us to filter our response to avoid undue rancour.
Anger responses can quickly degenerate into self-pity, self-indulgence or self-righteousness; a desire to teach the other person a thing or two — even an exaggerated desire to show that I am right after all, and I told you so!
The balance between self-control and the realistic expression of emotion is difficult to maintain.
As we have discovered, to speak falsehood means to suppress feelings as well as truth.
Those who go quiet and coy even when offended need to work on this.
If we teach ourselves to say what we feel, we'll become known as plain speakers.
But be warned.
There are many people around who call a spade a spade, but who do so in such a rude, offensive way, that this kind of plain-speaking becomes something to be avoided.
Most of us know, or have encountered in some way, an example of someone who speaks his mind, and does so with such gentleness and grace he rarely alienates anyone.
If you know someone like that, it's worth observing and studying his or her use of language, manner, and what his body language says to you, even if it is someone you only ever see on television.
Similarly, if you ever notice someone having a ‘good’ positive argument, even if they seem quite passionate, if you are allowed to listen, try and see what keeps it all on the straight and narrow and allows a beneficial and not destructive outcome to be the result.
Letting go of past hurts will be dealt with more fully when we come to Chapter 9.
Turn to that chapter now if there are issues you need help with right away.
For the moment, ask yourself the following questions.
Have I discovered there are past hurts within me which still have a dominant role in the way I cope with conflict today?
With the insight into them which I am developing, am I prepared to let go of my anger, pain and hurt, so that God can heal me of their pain and destructive effects?
Meditate on the words of Paul in Ephesians 4:17–29, asking the Holy Spirit to impress upon your mind where  he wants you to make changes to co-operate with him in this work of transformation.
Now use this prayer in any form you wish to bring your thoughts and findings to God.
Thank you, Lord, that you know me through and through.
You knew me before I was born.
You watch over my coming and going.
You've promised you will never let my foot slip.
Thank you that the painful experiences I have been through are no surprise to you.
You saw them happen, and in your wisdom you allowed them to take place, even though you have deep compassion for my suffering.
Help me Lord now to let go of those things where I still nurse anger and resentment, And, loving Father, please bring your gentle healing to my sensitive and painful inner world.
Help me to grow and progress from this point on in the way I understand, respond and conduct my relationships with others.
For I ask it in the name of Jesus, who himself was not afraid to express anger, but who has taught and shown the world the supreme nature of love.
Amen.
THE WAY WE SEE THINGS
What I am today is the result of a long process.
That process involves a mixture of the interplay between inheritance and learning.
It's said that Beethoven had green eyes.
If he did, the probability is that his genetic inheritance played its part somewhere along the line.
Parents with young children are constantly prey to the comments of well-meaning friends and relations convinced that little Freddie's or Jemima's nose, cheek or chin is the spitting image of some great-aunt or other.
Whether or not these family resemblances are accurately identified, this kind of inheritance is now firmly established by experience and science.
The sharing of genetic coding is very much a family matter.
Family inheritance
The extent to which personality characteristics are passed on in this genetic way is less certain.
Whatever may be the degree of transference between generations, what is much more clearly established is the high proportion of attitudes and behaviour characteristics unconsciously learned by children and taken right into their adult experience.
They say Anthony looks just like his father.
Anthony can never work out why.
He has his mother's characteristics, if anyone's, and his mouth and nose are a different shape altogether.
But what people notice about Anthony is the way he holds his head down, that he'll hardly  ever look you in the eye, and the manner in which he will suddenly turn his whole head away if ever there is disagreement or he is challenged in some way.
That's what makes friends who knew his father notice the resemblance.
It's the behaviour characteristics which are most striking.
Add to those characteristics the meticulous almost fussy ways which Anthony has picked up from his father, and you have a close family likeness — yet to Anthony they are almost completely unacknowledged and unrecognised.
It is common that learned attitudes and behaviour patterns may never be questioned by the grown-up child.
Though should such attitudes give rise to negative responses in others, they may then be challenged and with adult maturity undergo some real and positive modification.
What we have inherited will play an important part in our dealings with others, at least as important as the actual experiences we have been through.
If my mother was the constantly anxious sort, always worrying unduly about ‘what will happen if….’, then I may turn out to have learned this way of response myself.
That learned attitude in its turn may make me uncomfortably edgy and aggressive when situations.
of uncertainty arise.
The aggression may spring from the threat to my inner peace and well-being brought on by the anxiety which I impose unconsciously on the situation.
Anxious moments
My grown-up children are on their way to see me, and in order to do so are having to travel a two-hour journey on the motorway.
I am the worrying sort.
Without my being in any position to know their movements, they stop off for lunch half-way through their trip.
They perhaps take a little longer than anticipated, so when they eventually arrive an hour later than expected, the  anxiety has been building up, and I am in a steamy temper.
‘I've been so worried.
Anything might have happened to you.
You can't imagine how anxious I've been.
Why didn't you phone?’
I am cross and irritable.
I bark at anything in sight.
And when a few moments later the telephone goes, and the gas man says that he won't after all be coming today to service the boiler, he gets his head bitten off!
Under the circumstances, he's unfairly given short shrift.
My window on the world
If I should behave like that, however neurotic and intolerant it may seem, there is nonetheless a consistency and logic to my behaviour.
I should have modified my responses and learned to be more in control of my thoughts and tongue.
But my reactions were consistent with my learned responses and under-surface fears.
Many of our learned perspectives, the way we see things, can have a negative effect; attitudes, preferences and prejudices all play their part in the conflict process.
The way we see things is our window on the world.
It is bound to affect the way we handle real and potential conflict situations, as much as dislike of fresh air and exercise may contribute to deciding for a family camping holiday or not.
It's natural to have likes and dislikes.
It's just as natural to have learned patterns of reactions.
These are accumulated over many years and may vigorously colour the way we respond to all kinds of situations today.
So we are continuing our analytical path of unearthing as much as is constructive of the part we play in the workings of conflict.
We have already looked at some aspects of what makes each one of us the distinctive, uniquely individual people that we are.
We've learned of those features of our life stories which potentially contribute negatively to conflict situations.
We've also remembered again the sometimes potent hurts of time  gone by, realising that the passing years do not always lay to rest the stretched emotional reactions which those experiences once forced upon us.
In all this, we've discovered a definite link between what has made us what we are and the unsettling elements which we now bring as responses or even confrontations when conflict arises.
Personal philosophy
But it is not just the events of the past which exert their influence on our relationships with others.
Everyone has some kind of world view.
We all look at things in different ways.
A personal philosophy is something which all people have no matter what their background, class, or educational attainment.
The ‘grand’ world view is the presence or absence of a religion which we openly or privately espouse.
That belief system will be accompanied by values of behaviour and culture, which we are likely to accept and practise to a greater or lesser degree.
For some, politics and political thought and action can be an important element within their ‘grand’ world view, and may be part of their religious or humanist convictions.
But one step down from this grander world view at a more personal level, we all have a simpler way of seeing things which still vigorously affects the shape and colour of our personalities and what contributions and responses we bring to our relationships with others.
These ways of seeing, though possessing many positive characteristics, when robustly held can provide a fertile seedbed for the growth and development of conflict reactions and responses.
Strong-minded
Muriel had applied to a firm of insurance brokers for a job as an administrator-cum-personal assistant to one of  the three senior partners.
Now in her early fifties she may find her age an advantage for the stability, maturity and experience she could bring to the position.
There were ten applicants for the job, all with suitable qualifications, some much younger than Muriel.
After some careful sifting on the basis of ability and experience, Muriel was eventually short-listed with two other applicants.
Though she'd never worked in insurance, her potential employers thought her smiling manner and evident efficiency would equip her well for the task, particularly as she appeared a quick learner, and did well in the practical assignment they gave her during the period of the interview itself.
Muriel had the impression she was a strong contender for the position.
So when the personnel officer told her she'd be hearing from them in the next two days, Muriel went away optimistic.
The firm took up references on all the candidates interviewed.
Those handling the interviews did not have the chance to discuss their observations of the candidates till later that day.
All three candidates were acceptable on the face of it.
Muriel, probably because of her years and the fact they were looking for a more mature person, was by a hair's breadth the front-runner, ahead of two younger girls both with experience of the insurance business.
Muriel was favoured by all three partners, but the comments of her present employer turned out to be of particular importance.
The personnel officer read out the relevant paragraph:
Muriel is a hard worker and does well when working on her own.
Her initiative, efficiency and intelligence are beyond question.
She has achieved a great deal, and made a valuable contribution to our company's efficiency over these last seven years.
In many ways we shall be very sad to see Muriel go.
But you asked me to comment on potential weaknesses, and this is one area which you may consider to be worthy of some serious attention.
Muriel is a single-minded person.
This is one of the reasons she works well with tasks she has to achieve on her own.
But when working with others she may appear a little inflexible.
Someone here once commented that she gives the impression she always seems to know best.
For this reason I have to say we have not been too happy with-her work on joint projects.
She has definite ideas on how she thinks things should be organised, and sometimes she is right.
But she does not take kindly to criticism.
She also seems to think some of the younger girls in the office have no right to thoughts of their own.
I don't think it has anything to do with her age, for I think it is just part of her personality.
Though this following comment may not affect her work performance as such, Muriel is a person with strong views generally, particularly about religion.
She is as honest and upright as they come, but has landed like a ton of bricks on younger members of staff whose behaviour she doesn't approve of.
If I tell you she is known by some here as ‘Aunty’ Muriel, you may get the picture.
I'm afraid on more than one occasion, she's had one or two of the girls in tears.
But that said, Muriel is a good person and a hard worker.
If you want her to work closely in a team, you may wish to give some thought to the matters I have mentioned.
There are some aspects of our personalities which may not come over in the brief span of an interview, but which those close to us know only too well.
Family, friends or working colleagues see us more clearly than we realise.
We may keep certain parts of ourselves well hidden from view, but our behaviour can speak volumes about attitudes, preferences and prejudices, some of which can be important when it comes to dealing with disputes and differences of opinion or possible action.
Unfortunately, what may appear obvious to all but ourselves, even our best friends don't tell us.
Maybe it is feasible for you to find someone who knows you well enough to comment (friend, family or colleague) and to give you some personal insights.
You'll have to be brave to do it, but what you may learn from this will be well worth the effort!
We are going to analyse responses to people and ideas.
As an illustration of what we are trying to unearth, let's go back to Muriel's situation again, and think of her in relation to this exercise.
Muriel (who didn't get the job) holds strong views.
As her employer said, she is a person of very significant worth.
But this is the time to think of the weaker side.
Muriel's attitude to others in a working environment gives little credit to anyone else for practical intelligence or reliability.
This shows in the way she bustles around at coffee time, often scowling (though she doesn't realise it), peering over the work of others, like a strict teacher in a class of rowdy twelve-year-olds.
Out of the office, Muriel's preferences are for classical music, a quiet existence, with knitting, visiting the elderly and church on Sundays pretty well top of the list.
Muriel opposed planning permission for the new community centre opposite her flat.
But despite her strenuous objections, the building went ahead.
They have an open youth club with a drop-in disco once a week on a Friday night.
Muriel really can't abide the sound of pop music, and she has managed to get the club to agree that the music must finish at 10 p.m.
The community-centre members are conscious of the need for good relationships with their neighbours, and have bent over backwards to accommodate Muriel.
Yet the two local authority community workers know the sharper side of Muriel's tongue.
If the music should go on past 10 o'clock for even a minute or two, Muriel is out and about.
If only she could see the good work they are doing there among young people.
But Muriel writes off these youngsters with their strange clothes and weird hairstyles as if they were a lower kind of creature altogether.
As someone who came  from a happy, steady home, she might be able to offer help in some small way to some of these disadvantaged youngsters, a few of whom hardly know what it is to be loved at all.
As it is, she has resisted all attempts of the club to involve local residents in these community-related activities, even when they offered to clean her car and windows free!
Gaining insight
When Muriel didn't get the job she'd hoped for she talked it over with her present boss.
She had been completely open about testing the waters as far as a change of job was concerned.
She asked her head of department if he could think of anything which might have acted against her.
Sensibly, but with some sensitivity, her boss made the same points to Muriel as he had made in his reference, asking her at the same time if these conflicts had ever arisen out of the office with family friends or neighbours.
Before long Muriel spoke of these strains with neighbours and other personal tussles in her life.
Her employer commented frankly, but with great gentleness, on his observations of Muriel's way of handling-others, particularly when conflict arose.
Some years later, Muriel admits that this conversation was the making of her.
These were aspects of herself which she had only half perceived.
She had neither been in control of them, nor was fully aware of their erosive influence on her relationships with others.
It took a fuller self-knowledge to do something effective about them.
Make a list of what you believe to be your own specific, characteristic and strongly held views in terms of attitudes, preferences, and prejudices.
For each of these you should mention responses to people and ideas.
Some of your views and personal characteristics will be positive.
What are they?
Some of your views and characteristics will turn out to be negative.
What are they?
Before moving on to the next step, write yourself a character reference for a job.
Be frank, truthful and uncompromising.
What would you say about yourself, supposing that you write as an objective outsider who knows you well?
Now ask a friend to do the same analysis of your attitudes, preferences and prejudices.
Ask them to be as specific as possible,— and not hold back on any areas, even if they seem embarrassing.
Say something like, ‘I promise not to get cross if you hit on the truth!’ and encourage honesty, as well as sensitivity.
Compare your findings together, asking your friend to explain how they have noticed these aspects of your personality in practice, and what they consider the most destructive, damaging elements in what they have described (if any) and why.
Then show the reference and see if they recognise the real you in it.
The distortions of prejudice
Attitudes represent the way we see things; preferences the way we like things to be; prejudices the way we potentially distort what we see.
Prejudice is by definition a strongly held view, often lacking flexibility.
Prejudice may therefore contribute to conflict in many different ways.
The lives of countless millions of people have been made a misery through the conflicts arising from prejudice.
And in recent history the existence of prejudice has led to both large-scale violence and genocide, as the Holocaust so dreadfully illustrates.
Yet the distortions of prejudice can have subtle effects on people's behaviour.
There are times when prejudice only contributes to conflict in the narrow band of outlook and experience where that prejudice exists.
Check-out girl
Phyllis is in active retirement, a fit, energetic and well liked sixty-seven-year-old.
She's well regarded, except at times in her local supermarket where Phyllis occasionally undergoes something of a personality change.
Phyllis is very particular about cleanliness, which is why she always shops at the new branch of Safeways.
Ever since she gave up full-time employment where everyone touched their cap to her, she's found the loss of identity difficult to cope with.
She finds it warming that the check-out girls give her a smile and a ‘Good morning, Mrs Evans’ when she passes through.
Her insistence on cleanliness made her work as a director of a local laundry extra successful, and the company did well with her important contribution.
But a check-out line is not the place for the kinds of confrontation senior management might need to have on the shop floor!
When Safeways was particularly busy ‘one Friday lunchtime, Phyllis popped in for a packet of chops for her husband and herself.
The check-out clerks normally pack the already neatly wrapped fresh meat for you in a plastic bag.
As it happened, the chops were beginning to drip, and there was a long line of people waiting behind Phyllis.
Phyllis had never seen the check-out girl before.
She looked Asian, the only Asian on the check-out that day, and she was taking her time as she was still learning her way around.
Phyllis didn't like the look of her.
And when she didn't wrap the item in a bag, Phyllis was furious.
It was just the excuse she needed to get stroppy.
Her racially prejudiced views didn't help the matter, but it was what she was thinking rather than what she said which added flame to the fire of her anger.
While everyone waited irritatedly behind her, Phyllis insisted on calling for the supervisor.
She wanted an explanation.
She wasn't going to move till she got one.
Why had the item been left unwrapped?
She made quite a fuss.
She was listened to very politely.
She certainly got her apology from the supervisor.
The mystified check-out girl was understandably hurt.
Other people's prejudices are not difficult to discern, even though they may not come right out with it.
The other customers were almost as hot under the collar as Phyllis, but for very different reasons!
Phyllis enjoyed telling all that had happened for some days.
But in spite of her enthusiasm, she never tumbled to the silent response which greeted her each time she told the story.
Such incidents happen with greater or lesser degrees of seriousness at regular intervals in all our lives.
It is easy to be critical of prejudice in the lives of others, particularly when it is as small minded as that of Phyllis.
But there may have been incidents where we have been involved.
We may be ashamed of what we've said or done.
Prejudice may lead us into aggressive attitudes towards some person or group.
Spoiling for a fight
The desire for aggression is a significant factor in conflict.
Some people simply love a fight.
They want to be vindicated.
They want to be proved right.
They can't bear to lose.
They'll be like a dog with a rag, tugging away at it, with growls and grunts till you loosen your hold and let them have their rightful trophy.
Can you think of examples of how something like this has happened to you?
What part was played by your attitudes, preferences and prejudices?
What kind of person are you in conflict situations?
Do you rise to the bait?
Are you the sort who can't bear to lose an argument, or to be proved wrong; or do you mentally creep away from the conflict and experience all its discomfort within yourself.
Why do you think you are like this?
Are there elements in your upbringing, or the character of your parents or others close to you from whom you have learned, which help to explain or cast light on who you are and how you behave and respond, given certain circumstances?
Many of us laugh at prejudice when it is presented to us in someone else.
Even Phyllis's racial prejudice might have had a touch of the humorous about it, if it weren't so offensive and pathetic.
Why is it that prejudice is sometimes a successful vehicle for comedy?
Dame Edna Everage, the outrageous creation of Australian Barry Humphries, is the epitome of prejudice.
She is as bigoted as they come, but the laughter is deafening.
Perhaps the reason for the comic success of such characters is that they help us to recognise the prejudice which exists in all of us at so many different levels about so many different things.
Out in the real world, if these things weren't so serious, they would indeed be laughable.
First-century perspectives
The New Testament describes the presence and effects of prejudice, and in strong terms describes the way in which it can contribute to conflict.
Because of the existence of such prejudice among the early believers, it should not surprise us that prejudice will, and does, exist in churches today.
Christians are no more immune to the subtle influences of prejudiced attitudes than they are exempt from inclinations towards selfishness, greed or envy.
Prejudice is another human weakness, and like our emotions does not disappear at conversion.
Luke, the writer of the gospel and the book of Acts, is at pains to expose prejudice, especially religious prejudice, and to show the difference the transforming work of  Christ makes on the mind where issues of prejudice are at stake.
The Gentile conflict
The book of Acts is about the spread of Christianity after the resurrection and ascension of Jesus, through the giving of the Holy Spirit, empowering Jesus's followers in making his good news known.
A turning-point in the book comes in Acts, chapter 10, where the mission of making Jesus known turns a corner, and the non-Jewish world, the Gentiles, are included in God's salvation plan.
In this chapter, there are two visions.
In the one, Cornelius, a Roman centurion, is prompted by God to seek out the Apostle Peter.
And in the other Peter is taught by God that he is no longer to abide by the old Jewish distinctions of clean and unclean.
Even Gentiles are included in God's dealings with mankind.
Cornelius and his whole household are Gentiles.
They respond personally to Peter's message about Jesus, the Holy Spirit comes on them and they are baptised.
The family of Cornelius are therefore the first non-Jews to become known as followers of Christ, and this was a highly significant moment in the life of the early Church.
It occasioned a great deal of comment and controversy at the time.
For Peter to get himself involved with Gentiles was not only a controversial act, it required a full and sufficient explanation to his outraged critics.
Peter's explanation of his actions is against the background of conflict and prejudice.
‘The apostles and the brothers throughout Judea heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God.
So when Peter went up to Jerusalem, the circumcised believers criticised him and said, ‘You went into the house of uncircumcised men and ate with them’ ' (Acts 11:1–3).
There is a real sense of surprise embedded in the way that Luke deals with this issue of conflict, taking two whole chapters to expound it.
The surprise would have been obvious to his original readers.
For the Gentiles to  receive the word of God, at this point in history, was a truly extraordinary thing to happen in the eyes of those who had been used to years of prejudice against the Gentiles.
Up to this point, all the earliest followers of Jesus were Jews.
The Pharisees had taught that Gentiles were anathema and an abomination to God.
It took some getting used to the idea that Gentiles were fellow-heirs in God's kingdom, brothers and sisters in the same family, for there was a great deal of prejudice against the Gentiles.
The Gentile prejudice
Gentile simply means non-Jewish.
In the Old Testament, Gentiles are regarded very positively.
God has a definite plan for the Gentiles.
Isaiah declares that God's servant, whom Christians recognise as Jesus Christ, will be ‘a light for the Gentiles’ and that God himself ‘will ‘beckon’them, calling them forth to be part of his purposes of salvation to the ends of the earth' (Isa. 42.6; 49:6, 22).
But human attitudes can harden, and beyond the Old Testament we see those human prejudices taking shape.
By the time of the New Testament, those hardened attitudes are positively-aggressive; so much indeed that ‘Gentile’ in itself actually becomes a term of abuse.
Today we find the equivalent in talking offensively and insultingly about coloureds, niggers, fuzzy-wuzzies, chinks, yids and so forth.
The Gentile threat
For Peter this prejudice erupts into a situation of conflict.
‘When Peter went up to Jerusalem, the circumcised believers criticised him and said, ‘You went into the house of uncircumcised men and ate with them’ ' (Acts 11:2–3).
‘Uncircumcised men’ is another way of referring to the non-Jewishness of the Gentiles.
But the accusation of eating with the Gentiles has been heard  before, for Luke records the Pharisees' earlier complaint about Jesus, ‘'This man welcomes sinners and eats with them’ ' (Luke 15:2).
For Peter the change in understanding was critical.
‘I now realise…that God does not show favouritism but accepts men from every nation who fear him and do what is right’(Acts 10:34–5).
Prejudice is a strange and irrational matter.
The fact that both Jesus and Peter upset their critics by eating with Gentiles is comprehensible in terms of the violation of Jewish law.
But law apart, why were people so threatened when Jesus and Peter associated with non-Jews?
Twisting truth
As we have already discovered, many of the problems we face are related to the way we see things, our world view.
Those who have a strongly held ‘grand’ world view, with a convinced belief in God and a set of related moral values, are vulnerable at this point.
Strong world views, such as strong religious beliefs, imply strong sets of associated values.
When truth gets distorted so do the values that go with it.
The Pharisees who appear in the gospels in Jesus's time seem to have some distorted ideas about God.
In spite of all the evidence from Abraham onwards, they apparently believed that God writes off anyone who does not belong to the actual nation of Israel.
It's like the attitude that you have to be good and religious, think the right thoughts, wear the right clothes, believe the right things, come from the right background, if you are in any way to be acceptable to God.
The Jewish Christians had just as distorted an idea of God and by consequence had run into problems in their relationships with these brand-new non-Jewish converts.
These distortions are the very essence of prejudice, and it is hardly surprising that conflict with Peter had arisen.
Righting the record
Peter's manner of dealing with conflict is itself instructive.
His response is not one of evasion or confrontation, but of explanation.
He faces the issue and chooses to explain the vision he had received which led to his actions in making himself known to these despised Gentiles.
In a Christian response to conflict, the embrace of right doctrine should eventually lead to right action.
For the truth of God in the power of the Spirit can shed light and liberate where the simple recognition of fault or personal deficiency lacks power for transformation.
‘Peter began and explained everything to them precisely as it happened’(Acts 11:4).
He unfolds the vision.
That which once was unacceptable as far as the old Jewish food laws were concerned, can now be accepted.
The voice from heaven declares, ‘Do not call anything impure that God has made clean’(Acts 11:9).
It is stated three times, driving the message home.
When God's word on some matter comes to us in repeated form in different ways, it is worth reflecting whether we are really attending to the influence it is intended to have upon our beliefs and behaviour.
Peter clearly took to heart what must have been a challenging and potentially testing message.
He must have known the looks of bewilderment, horror and disbelief that he would receive from some, and even the militant hostility that might await him when his visit to the Gentile, Cornelius, was discovered.
The prejudice of several centuries is about to take a tumble.
If as the vision had suggested, non-kosher food can no longer pollute, neither will contact with non-Jewish people pollute.
That is the main thrust of the vision.
But if you were Jewish, and had grown up in a strict kosher home it might be difficult to accept, even if you now had a broader view through your conversion to Christ.
Imagine yourself in that position.
You are told that all these ritual practices have now come to an end, for the coming of Jesus makes all ceremonial redundant.
Practices which  have characterised the details of your daily living from the cradle upwards are dealt a swift and final blow.
Too old to change?
You might start complaining that all these changes are happening too rapidly for comfort.
Human beings do not like change, especially as they get older.
Certainly to change the patterns of a lifetime is bad enough, but what about changing your beliefs?
Peter says that the Holy Spirit has come upon the Gentiles.
From Luke's description of the response, some thought of that as an outrage.
Aren't the Gentiles condemned by God's law?
Peter's initial step in correcting this prejudice is to correct the doctrine, the way his fellow converts thought about God and his ways.
The fact that the Holy Spirit has come upon the Gentiles is a sign from God that the Old Testament plan for the Gentiles is coming to fulfilment after all.
After a lifetime of distorted thinking, it is not easy to change your prejudices.
Peter's approach is highly instructive.
When Peter saw the evidence that the Holy Spirit had come upon the Gentiles, the words of Jesus came to his mind.
‘’ Then I remembered what the Lord had said: ‘John baptised with water, but you will be baptised with the Holy Spirit.’
So if God gave them the same gift as he gave us, who believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I to think that I could oppose God?’'
(Acts 11:16–17).
Unseating prejudice
The prejudiced often write off whole groups of people as being unacceptable.
The excuse is often a religious one: they are unacceptable to God.
That's the position of many white South Africans.
Some South African Dutch reformed theologians claim Scriptural support for the outrageous assertion that blacks are an inferior race of  people.
It's been their justification for apartheid.
The arguments are specious, yet all the more odious, because the gospel of Jesus Christ actually deals with prejudice in a very deep way.
God's truth is meant to have a powerful effect in changing even the most deep seated of our attitudes, even attitudes like those of the early Jewish Christians towards the Gentiles which had centuries of cultural back-up to support them.
When Peter makes the point that the non-Jews have received exactly the same gift of the Holy Spirit as the Jewish Christians, the logic is inescapable.
This is the true gospel, the love and acceptance of God is for all people, irrespective of their background or history.
It is for the good, the bad and the ugly; the religious, the pagans, and the don't-cares.
Slow learners
Why does Luke spend two whole chapters in the Acts of the Apostles bringing considerable weight to this matter to make his point?
In the early Church the evidence suggests that Christians were slow to come into line with God's actual purposes in the gospel.
Some years after these events, at Galatia, Colossae and Corinth, there are clear indications that those in the Church prejudiced against Gentiles tried to impose circumcision and other aspects of the Jewish law upon new converts.
They weren't too quick to give up their prejudices, for part of the reason for the existence of prejudice is that our intolerance is directed against those who form some kind of threat to us.
The emotions of prejudice therefore run deep.
The fears they embody need dealing with just as much as the wrong thinking they exhibit.
It is one matter being told you should deal in a different way with the person you dislike or despise, yet another to know what to do with strong emotions you experience in relation to these people.
Fighting fear
So what can we do about fears in relation to prejudice?
The New Testament declares that perfect love, Cod's perfect love, drives out fear from within (1 John 4:18).
The problem was then, as it is today: many only pay lip service to what the love of Cod actually means.
We impose conditions on others where the love of Cod would impose no conditions at all.
We do it in every realm of life, but it can be more clearly seen when it happens in community groups of one kind or another.
Churches are places where these prejudices are particularly noticeable.
Our congregations demand from every new member not only a conversion but also a change in culture.
He has to abandon some of his contemporary behaviour and to accept the older patterns prevalent among the majority of the congregation.
The new Christian has to learn the old hymns and to appreciate them.
He has to learn the language of the pulpit.
He has to share in some conservative political opinions.
He has to dress a bit old-fashioned…
In brief, he has to step back two generations and undergo what one may call a painful cultural circumcision (God's Lively People, Fontana, 1971).
These biting and critical words come from those writing from within the Church, and the fact they were written some twenty years ago has not, lamentably, altered their truth and pertinence.
We can smile, yet at the same time feel the sting of such a recognition of discrimination, intolerance and bigotry.
Dame Edna Everage may make us laugh at prejudice, but are we smiling or laughing at ourselves?
Many of us fail to realise just how prejudiced we can be, for our prejudices can take on very subtle forms.
The Church of today has problems with prejudice in both subtle and blatant ways.
In the time of Acts, real and deep-seated prejudice was dealt with by a clear commitment to the terms and truth of the good news  of God as God himself declares it to be.
After Peter explains the equal spiritual standing of the non-Jewish Christians, this is the response: ‘When they heard this, they had no further objections and praised God saying, ‘So then, God has granted even the Gentiles repentance unto life’ ' (Acts 11:18).
Whatever the inner pressures within us to hold on to a prejudicial attitude, when a Christian maintains a prejudice and fails to aim for its resolution, the problem may well be a conflict with God's truth, of actually resisting God's will.
What me, prejudiced?
The question ‘How prejudiced am I?’ is a hard one.
It searches my attitudes not just to blacks, gays, AIDS victims or the lepers of our society, like the down-and-outs, drug addicts and others.
It also challenges my attitude to the more superficially respectable, whom we simply do not want to get on with, and strive earnestly to keep at arm's length.
Some people ignore and ‘send to Coventry’ individuals they disapprove of.
Others will only ever maintain the minimum levels of civility in their dealings with certain individuals.
Then there are those who always have a harsh word for another.
All these attitudes are based on deep-seated prejudice and cause conflict.
The silent feud
Janet, Audrey, Elizabeth and Max were a happy and united family.
They grew up together, though Elizabeth was considerably younger than the other three.
Their father died some years ago, leaving their mother a widow, though well provided for.
When, some twenty years later, she became ill and eventually died, there was some unfortunate squabbling over the will.
Elizabeth had lived with her mother all these years.
She was the only one of the children never to have married.
It came as a blow to her that her eldest sister, Audrey, and brother, Max, had sold off many of their mother's belongings without so much as a by-your-leave.
This left its mark, with squabblings about the will and its terms taking their toll in many bitter arguments.
For years to come, Elizabeth was almost ostracised by her two older sisters.
It took the death of Max to bring them together again on speaking terms.
Even then the old resentments weren't far from the surface.
Janet's comment to Audrey gave some insight into the feud.
‘What Elizabeth doesn't grasp is that none of us can stand the fuss she makes.
She can be so vindictive in what she says.
I'd rather run the mile than face Elizabeth in one of her tempers.
She really frightens me.’
Resolving prejudice
To resolve such attitudes, in the end it has to be a question of transformation.
Every one of us has prejudices of some kind in varying degrees.
Some result from experiences or preferences, and are reactions to our fears or those we feel are some kind of threat to us.
To be free of such fears we need to let God's love drive that fear out.
Is there any person or persons against whom you feel a real or active prejudice?
Can you say what it is about them that threatens you?
What are the emotions that you feel as you think about them?
There may be some family conflict, some ongoing difficulty with a relation or one-time friend.
Are you prepared in the light of God's desire for your wholeness to let go of whatever negative emotions you have towards them?
There can be no doubt that God wants to help you deal with these conflict-producing attitudes.
The wilfulness of human nature can be deceitful, and we can hang on to old ways like cherished thoughts or possessions.
That's not God's best for you.
Ask the Holy Spirit to give you the strength and resolve to follow God's will in whatever he has been revealing to you.
You may like to think quietly for a few moments, then read these words from the first letter of John.
There is no fear in love.
But perfect love drives out fear, because fear has to do with punishment.
The one who fears is not made perfect in love.
We love because he first loved us.
If anyone says, ‘I love God,’ yet hates his brother, he is a liar.
For anyone who does not love his brother, whom he has seen, cannot love God, whom he has not seen.
And he has given us this command: Whoever loves God must also love his brother (1 John 4:18–21).
After you have had time to think over John's words in relation to yourself, use this prayer to help you deal with any of the negative attitudes and prejudices you have discovered within yourself in this chapter.
Father in heaven, I thank you for your great love which banishes fear from my life.
Your word speaks powerfully to me not only of your love but of your will.
I now bring before you all the attitudes I now realise to be wrong.
Please forgive me these things and the people I have wronged.’
Lord, you understand why I have been as I have.
Help me to know a new start and a new strength as I seek to repair the wrong I've done.
And I do so in the desire to serve you and in the power of the Holy Spirit.
In Jesus's name.
Amen .
Part Two — Interpersonal Conflict
FAMILY RELATIONSHIPS
Won't be a minute…
‘Sarah, what are you doing in that bathroom?’
‘I'm washing, Mum.
I'll be out in a minute.’
‘Sarah, I'm going to be late for my meeting.
Please hurry up.’
‘All right, Mum.
All right.
I won't be long.’
‘Sarah, what on earth are you doing in there?
It's not your bathroom, you know.
Why don't you think about others for a change?’
‘I told you, Mum, I'll be out in a minute.’
‘Look, Sarah, I'm late.’
‘M-u-m.
Just hold on a bit, won't you?
I said I won't be a minute.’
‘Sarah, I need to get washed.’
‘Sarah?–
‘Mum, I'm doing my best.’
‘Sarah, if you don't hurry up I'll have to get your father to get you out of there.’
‘Sarah.
Will you answer me?
Sarah.
Sarah.’
A moment's silence.
Then a crash.
Wood hits plaster.
The bathroom door flies open.
Sarah flounces out.
Then the truth.
‘Mother, why is it you're always hassling me?’
Frustration
Families can be very frustrating.
In the above scenario the frustration is not so much about who uses the bathroom first; that's just the surface issue.
The real gut feelings go far deeper.
‘Mother, why are you always hassling me?’
That's the frustration which got to Sarah.
Frustration lies at the heart of many of the arguments, squabbles and difficulties which families experience.
So what can snappy families do to resolve the frustrations in their interpersonal relationships which may give rise to verbal fights, bitter conflicts and destructive hostilities?
Parental modelling
In the first section on interpersonal conflict we are going to concentrate on the mutual relationship of parents and children.
Childhood provides a vital formative stage for development.
As we discovered in Part One, many of the initiators of conflict in later life are learned and impressed upon us at this vital period.
One reason for the New Testament's concern for the quality of family life is that our development into mature humanness relies on a complex and subtle learning-process.
This process involves the combination of love and discipline in a secure and balanced family environment where both parents are present to contribute to a child's development into maturity.
In Britain some 14 per cent of families with dependent children are headed by a lone parent, and figures for one-parent families are on the increase in Britain and the USA.
Families in these situations need particular understanding and support, for it is not easy for wider family and friends to act as effective substitutes for the role of the missing parent.
Much of the controversy which has raged over the issue of AID (Artificial Insemination by Donor) revolves around this issue.
The question of the absolute right of a woman to bear a child needs offsetting  by the right of a child to a balanced upbringing.
That balance is achieved best with the presence of both role models, not only for psychosexual stability, but also for the learning process of which harmonious and healthy conflict management is a part.
Parents and children
It is not difficult to see the reasons for the Bible's crucial emphasis on right parental modelling.
These are some of the clearest concerns of God for our lives, running uncontradicted through Old and New Testament alike.
In one central passage the Apostle Paul brings together the essence of this teaching from both Testaments, and with some clearly articulated principles lays down teaching which has many straightforward and practical applications for the frustrations and conflicts which many families experience today.
Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right.
‘Honour your father and-mother’— which is the first commandment with a promise —‘that it may go well with you and that you may enjoy long life on the earth.’
Fathers, do not exasperate your children; instead, bring them up in the training and instruction of the Lord (Eph. 6:1–4).
Family life is hard work.
It may be full of happiness for those who are fortunate to have the right conditions at play in their lives, but there is no doubt how stretching it can be to live in close proximity to your relations.
Mother and daughter
A family doctor often finds himself a father confessor as much as a physician.
On Tuesdays, Dr Jacks takes both a  morning and an afternoon surgery.
There'll be a whole range of needs, many uncomplicated, others requiring the most careful attention.
This particular Tuesday Georgina Taylor came in looking tired and drawn.
At fifty-three she has had some minor medical problems, but is usually fit and healthy.
‘Will you check my blood pressure please, doctor?
I've been feeling headachy and dizzy for a few days now.’
The blood pressure was checked and yes, it was a little higher than last time.
Not too much to worry about though.
‘Is anything bothering you, Georgina?’
After a moment's pause, Georgina feels her emotions getting the better of her.
‘It's Mandy.
She's so rude and ungrateful for everything we do.
She's going out with this man who is thirteen years older than her.
He's nice enough, but she won't be fifteen till next month.
And she just shouts and screams and upsets everyone.
All she seems able to say is, ‘Don't tell me what to do, I can look after myself.’
Well, all I can say is that the strain is driving Jim and me to distraction….’
Points of view
It just so happened that Mandy turned up at the afternoon surgery.
Dr Jacks decided his first task was to listen to Mandy independently and find out the reason for her visit.
Mandy had come because she was worried about her parents and she didn't know who else to turn to.
But what a difference a change of view makes.
‘You see Mum and Dad don't stop nagging me.
They issue continual threats.
‘If you don't do as we say, we'll stop your swimming coaching.
If you don't stop seeing Mark now we won't support you when it comes to further education.’
And it's not just my boyfriend.
My dad is always goading me.
He doesn't like the way I dress.
He doesn't like my friends.
He doesn't like the places I go at weekends.
He doesn't like the music I play in my room.
I can't do anything to please him.
The mad thing is I love him.
I love them both.
But you wouldn't think so from the arguments we have.
I sometimes want to throw things at them.
I did this morning.
It was just a plate.
I threw it on the floor.
It bounced.
But it could have been a whole smashed-up dinner service for the row it caused.’
Snappy families
Arguments, rows, temper tantrums, thrown objects.
This is the lot of many families.
It is hardly surprising when the pressures of growing up are considered.
But it is easier to cope with these pressures if we go back to first principles.
It is important in any situation to understand the purpose of any activity in which you are involved; then you can make decisions more clearly in line with that purpose, and develop strategies consonant with its goals.
So to understand the overall purpose of family life, we must gain an understanding of its principles, and this in turn will help us to cope with its inevitable pressures and conflicts.
Family goals
The Bible refers in many places to the importance of the home environment.
Rather than the carpets, curtains and video, this refers to the quality of relationships which should exist between parents and children.
That quality is not inherent in us, like being born with beautiful blue eyes or a lovely skin, so that some people naturally have good relationships and others equally naturally do not.
The quality of relationships the Bible speaks of in terms of the home environment is learned and therefore needs  to be practised.
Like the difference between phrase-book French and fluent speech, it is largely a matter of hard work, learning and regular application.
The relationship between parents and children can never be taken for granted.
Harmonious family life requires regular maintenance, and adjustments of understanding as one phase of development gives way to another.
Thus the simple but overall goal is that children should grow up properly equipped for adult life.
The learning relationship
This essential learning process is relational, for adult life and behaviour are lived out in a wide range of relationships.
Thus the learning context of any child must initially be the loving home where relationships can be tried out in all kinds of ways, mistakes made, lessons noted and adjustments effected.
This process is Paul's main thought behind each of his directives.
He speaks to children with a principle, a command and a promise.
The principle
When Paul says in Ephesians, ‘Children, obey your parents for this is right’, he is referring, as he often does, to a creation principle.
That principle is implied in the expression ‘for this is right’, meaning that obedience is part of the maker's instructions.
It is ‘right’ in the sense of being a natural part of the way we have been made.
On all kinds of goods these days you see a manufacturer's endorsement, ‘Success only guaranteed if maker's instructions adhered to.’
According to Apostle Paul that kind of guarantee applies equally to growing up.
Obedience is part of the maker's instructions, and there is no guaranteed success without it; for obedience is a God-created way of ensuring that we learn the right  habits of living in our early years.
To use Paul's word, it is ‘right’ in the sense of being natural for our human development.
Victorian values?
For some, of course, the whole idea of obedience is old-fashioned, Victorian and irrelevant.
Certainly the demand for obedience can be open to abuse.
But just because something can be used wrongly doesn't mean that it is wrong in itself.
Parents can abuse their right to expect obedience.
Parents can be wrong in the obedience they ask for.
Mandy's parents had been understandably concerned at her friendship with Mark, but their demands on her had been bordering on the unreasonable.
Their attitude had certainly contributed to, not lessened, the family conflict.
But there are different kinds and qualities of obedience.
The obedience envisaged by Paul is not the obedience of a slave.
It is the obedience of willing co-operation.
Family demands
Janice and Ken have three children.
Ken's job in the library often leaves him tired and touchy at the end of a day.
The family strategy is that Daddy mustn't be disturbed when he comes in at six.
The news is on TV, the cup of tea made.
No one speaks till the news is over and Ken's cobwebs have been well and truly blown away.
Janice works too.
She only does part-time at an estate agent's, but audio typing is demanding on concentration.
With all the work at home — cleaning, washing, mending, ironing — Janice too feels stressed at the end of the day.
Alistair, Wendy and Anna come in for the worst of it.
Except at weekends and on holidays, their parents have got into the you-snap-first-and-I'll-snap-back syndrome.
When Janice and Ken aren't snapping at each other(a level of conflict they seem to have got used to), they are snappy at the three children.
This usually involves demands of various kinds.
‘You're not going up to your room till you've washed up the supper things.’
‘No you're not going out to the cinema tonight.
Your mother needs help with the washing.’
‘Over my dead body, young man.
I don't care whether you have got the money.
Mopeds are dangerous.
And if I can walk to work, you can walk to school.’
There are ways of communicating perfectly reasonable requests and views which win acceptance, and others which create conflict.
The transition from child to adult is a sensitive matter to handle on both sides.
Just because a child may lack wisdom and finesse does not mean that he or she lacks either intelligence or sensibility.
Parents have no right to demand servile obedience from their children.
‘You do this.
You do that.’
There has to be some kind of learning principle behind what they are asking.
In their turn, children have no right to neglect their responsibility to co-operate willingly with what their parents ask of them.
It is back to first principles again.
The purpose which lies behind the call to obedience is of first importance.
Wait till you're my age
Richard, a man in his late thirties, spoke of an argument he had with his mother at about the age of sixteen.
Richard's mother thought it unreasonable that he had stayed out all night at a party.
He had not told his parents where he was.
He thought his mother was being unreasonable in complaining about it.
But he commented that he has never forgotten what she said.
While Richard was fuming away, his mother calmly informed him that he would probably only understand when he had children of his own.
She advised him that-parents sometimes do know best, and to  ensure the best they sometimes have to insist that children do as they say.
Richard records that he always found the advice, ‘You'll understand when you are grown up’ really infuriating.
But the reason for the discussion was that recently, he had found it to be true.
He has only come to appreciate properly the importance of loving discipline and the need for obedience since he and Maggie have had children themselves.
Their two boys of three and five would be eating Jaffa cakes for breakfast, lunch and supper if their parents didn't insist that they eat up most of what is put in front of them.
They have to learn.
Scream and shout
Those who have never lived through it can hardly imagine the fuss that little children can make if they do not get their own way.
Fights, tears, screams and shouts.
All over biscuits!
Richard and Maggie love them dearly, but sometimes discipline is necessary otherwise nothing would be learned.
The arguments are a way of reinforcing the necessity for obedience.
Without the imperative of obedience, albeit lovingly enforced, the child may come to conclude that if he holds out for long enough, demanding his own will, he'll get his own way in the end.
That is a sure way to develop an adult with a strongly manipulative personality, which can arouse devastatingly negative reactions in the lives of others when the child comes of age.
Stop and think
Let's pause for a moment and think about this issue of arguments and the learning process.
If you have children, of whatever age, ask these questions of yourself and your partner.
What kinds of argument do you have with your children?
Do they cover any repeated areas of concern?
Do you have arguments which are largely the result of a clash of views, or do you use arguments to clarify actions or values?
How often do your arguments contribute to the learning process, or how much are they destructive?
How steamed up do you get, and why?
We'll come to a strategy for coping with these differences in a moment.
But if we want to adopt an approach to family life which is Christ-centred in its essence, we must ask how we are to glorify God in the relationship of parents to children and children to parents.
The command
A clue is contained in Paul's command, ‘Children, obey your parents, in the Lord’, which is bracketed with the quotation of the fifth commandment, ‘Honour your father and mother’(Eph. 6:1–2).
In these words, Paul turns from the principle of the learning process to the command.to glorify God in our relationships.
Obedience is now seen as part of our responsibility to God himself.
Paul says we are to obey our parents ‘in the Lord’.
And we are to honour our father and mother.
Hindu disciple
An Indian boy of Hindu parents was strongly influenced by Christian friends and himself became a committed follower of Christ.
His parents, who were fair and liberal-minded people, were nonetheless confused and upset, and while giving Rajiv freedom to follow  his convictions, they forbade him to be baptised until he had come of age.
This caused Rajiv a great deal of turmoil, particularly as others of his friends had been baptised by immersion in the local Baptist church.
An important change took place in Rajiv's experience.
Someone brought to his notice the fifth commandment, to honour your father and mother.
After thought and prayer about its implications, Rajiv decided to co-operate and submitted to his parents' wishes.
Rajiv was nearing adulthood.
As it turned out, this act of obedience became a powerful witness to his parents of his transformed character clearly emerging since making his commitment to Christ.
When he eventually turned eighteen his father told him he had no further objection to his being baptised, a decision based more on Rajiv's co-operative attitude a year before than on his recent coming of age.
The impact of obedience
There is a principle here for children and teenagers who live in non-Christian homes.
Obedience to parents can be a powerful witness to the reality of life in Christ.
God still requires obedience to parents even if they are not Christians.
The principle ‘obey your parents…for this is right’ is drawn from creation; it applies to all people, Christian or not.
That being so, are there circumstances where you have to draw the line?
Rajiv, the seventeen-year-old Hindu boy, was right when he decided his baptism could wait.
In any case, he knew that when he came of age he would be able to obey God's commandment to be baptised.
But what if his parents had forbidden him to pray and read his Bible?
Then.the command to obey his parents ‘in the Lord’ would set a different limit on that obedience.
His baptism could wait.
But he couldn't deny Christ by ignoring his basic relationship with him.
Anything that will ultimately be displeasing to God is included in the idea of ‘obeying in the Lord’.
Because ‘obedience in the Lord’ reminds us we have a higher allegiance than that of purely human dimension.
This can apply to moral issues and anything which runs counter to the Bible's teaching.
God holds us responsible for our actions.
Unreasonable demands
How should we counsel young people to respond when a parent seems unreasonable in a particular demand or request?
Jamie, a bright, outgoing sixteen-year-old member of a church youth group, was planning to go to its meeting following the Sunday evening service.
When his mother heard that the subject was sex before marriage, she refused to let him attend.
His mother clearly did not approve of the subject as being suitable for a teenager of Jamie's age!
It is obviously very frustrating when something like this happens.
It could just as easily have been a refused request to come home late or stay the night at a friend's house.
When you are at this age and you come up against a brick wall, you do sometimes feel like screaming with frustration.
But Jamie's attitude in this case was right.
He was prepared, even though reluctantly, to do what his mother required.
No parent is perfect.
Even when parents get it wrong, Paul's point is that if you are Christian, your obedience is in the Lord.
And that emphasis and focus release you.
When you obey, you are honouring God by what you do.
So when counselling young people on this point we have to say that providing it is not contradictory to God's will, ‘be obedient’.
Not because your parents are right, but because your obedience is to Christ; your obedience is in the Lord and you are therefore honouring God by so  doing.
But obedience is not the same as servility.
The motivation for the call to obedience is not always easy to discern.
But where servility and not obedience is called for, then the command to obey clearly does not apply.
When the relationship of parents and children is at this low ebb mutual love and respect need careful maintenance and rebuilding, for the principle of honouring one another contributes importantly to love, trust and self-worth.
Giving honour
There is a double emphasis on honouring in Paul's teaching, for the fifth commandment itself, ‘Honour your father and mother’, contains the emphasis on honouring parents.
To honour someone means openly to acknowledge their worth.
Have you noticed how often when relationships go wrong we are focusing on people's weaknesses and not on their worth at all?
There seem to be two ways of focusing on someone's weaknesses.
One is in your mind, by what you consistently let yourself think about someone.
The other is by what you say, either to them directly or behind their backs.
Honouring someone, by contrast, means putting their weaknesses on one side.
So, however young or old we may be, there is an important implication contained in the commandment.
To honour our parents is, not an option, it is a commandment from God.
At whatever age, whether your parents are alive or dead, do you regularly think or speak negatively about them?
Has this become a habit of mind?
What are your first dominant thoughts on contemplating your father or mother?
Why do you think in this way?
In the light of the fifth commandment should you be modifying your response in some way?
Think about your reaction to these questions and pause for a moment, before you continue reading, to assess your response.
The promise
The issue behind these questions becomes clearer when Paul speaks of what is promised to us.
He has spoken of the principle and the command.
Here is the promise: ‘Honour your father and mother that it may go well with you, and that you may enjoy long life on the earth.’
Ask yourself if within you there is any resentment to one or both of your parents in some significant way.
Do you see that the promise of things going well with us is attached to keeping the commandment to honour our parents?
Many people who seek professional help for problems of depression, anxiety, stress, relationship difficulties and related issues have discovered the importance of problems they have experienced in connection with their parents.
But so often, though the parents may have done stupid and unwise things, the problem lies with the reaction of the child.
It is possible to let resentment and hurt linger on for years, when it should have been released long before.
Forgiving father
Joyce, a lady now in her forties, had a father who consistently underappreciated her.
She can't remember ever being shown any affection as a child.
He died ten  years ago.
Yet she still finds herself full of frustration and anger towards him.
She feels deeply rejected by a man who was in fact very shy, and apparently found it extremely hard to express himself affectionately.
It is only after a long period of counselling that she has at last realised that she has to drop her charge against her father, and to forgive him for not being the person that she longed he should be.
The years of resentment had caused a great deal of inner pain.
Joyce has now learned to honour her father's memory and to see his worth.
As a result, she is no longer frustrated or angry deep within herself.
Honouring someone does not mean turning a blind eye to weakness.
It means putting weakness on one side, and openly acknowledging the positive worth of the person.
Not ignoring the bad side, but dwelling positively on the good side.
Reassessing attitudes
If you have realised that you resent a parent, living or dead, in some significant way, will you reassess your attitude towards them?
You may have good grounds for your negative feelings, but those feelings will not do you any good.
In fact they can well do you harm.
Bitterness, anger and resentment can act as emotional cancers, eating us up inside.
And there is another angle.
Some of us have to learn to forgive our parents for not being the people we might have wanted them to be.
We have to drop the charge and put the painful memories on one side.
The honouring of our parents through our attitudes and actions plays an enormously important part towards our mental and spiritual health.
This is a God-inspired principle.
It has been rediscovered by dynamic psychology in the twentieth century, but it is an ancient insight and has been in the Bible all along.
‘Honour your father and mother that it  may go well with you, and that you may enjoy long life on the earth.’
Stop goading them
Paul's direction to parents is contained in the words, ‘Fathers, do not exasperate your children; instead, bring them up in the training and instruction of the Lord’(Eph. 6:4).
The words apply to fathers and mothers because the context and the Greek original text both suggest this interpretation.
The New English Bible recognises this.
‘Parents, don't goad your children into resentment.’
Paul is recognising the sensitive nature of children themselves and of family relationships as a whole.
Checkpoints
So what should we do when the balloon goes up?
How should you respond when there are squabbles and arguments; when you want your own way and no one wants to give it to you?
Here are some guidelines, derived from the New Testament's teaching on these matters (cf.
Eph. 6:1–4; Col. 3:20–4; Titus 2:1–8).
Parents should not have wrong expectations of their children.
The expression of wrong expectations is the cause of an immense amount of anger and frustration in the lives of children of whatever age.
It is so important to accept people as they are.
Beware of your own frustrated ambitions.
Frustrated ambitions can contribute to wrong expectations and fuel the fire of anger and resentment.
It is selfish to try and live out your frustrated ambitions through the life of your child.
It is cruel.
And when your children fail to live up to the hopes you have for them, you imply they are not acceptable people in their own right.
Negative expectations, often expressed by comparisons of one child with another, get under the skin and stay there.
They irritate, inflame and sometimes explode with pained and affronted venom.
Wrong expectations from parents lead to enormous frustration.
Argumentative families thrive on them.
Beware of projecting untrue parental images.
Parents are not omnicompetent, and it is important that children know this.
When our daughter Rebecca was three she came to see me in my office one day and said, ‘Daddy, you're the leader of the church, and you know everything .’
It was a charming comment.
She is older and wiser now.
It is important that Christian parents are honest, open and real to their children.
Let's be honest about our failings.
That doesn't mean we have to tell children every little embarrassing detail about ourselves.
It does mean not hiding things which are important in the life of a family.
It is vital that children know that their parents make mistakes and are just as much in need of God's forgiveness as they are.
Equally, it is also important for parents to apologise to their children when they have wronged or harmed them in some way.
Without this experience of reconciliation in the home there is little chance to learn models of mutual forgiveness and the reinstatement of love.
Do make the effort to encourage openness in your family.
Children can help parents in this respect.
Sometimes children need to break the conspiracy of silence.
Maybe there is a marriage problem, for many otherwise healthy marriages have their ups and downs, and many others run into serious trouble.
Sometimes even little children can help resolve problems when they are explained openly and simply.
Children can sense when things are wrong.
Many private problems need airing in the family.
Not all marriage problems can be aired by any means, and some are best resolved privately.
To involve children in levels of conflict they cannot understand can be upsetting and bewildering for them.
It may be far better to have an open argument than a family where no one tells the truth about how they really feel.
Encourage openness, and you'll encourage emotional and spiritual health as well.
The family conference
In a fast-moving world, family members may be so busy that they hardly see one another individually, let alone together, from one week to the next.
Those who believe that the family is a major force for good in our society should strive to move against this social trend.
For when there is little actual communication, barriers soon go up, and with them come misunderstandings, conflict and anger.
The family conference is a valuable strategy for coping with family conflict.
It encourages open communication, and learning about processes of living in mutually beneficial ways.
A family conference is a regular get-together where issues needing attention can be sympathetically dealt with, and given time, attention and constructive  understanding.
Family conferences are best conducted in as natural a manner as possible.
If they take place from the children's earliest years, they'll be seen as a natural resource in family interactions.
When appropriate, members of the family can pray for each other, not as a matter of form, but as a genuine response to Christ's centrality and reality in the life of the family.
Every family needs to find its own best time or times.
There are no rules about this.
It is simply a matter of maintaining communication in the family unit.
A meal when everybody can be present is a good time for such a family talk and get-together.
Some families with otherwise complex patterns of activity make an effort that everybody should be present to gather at breakfast time, say.
Like a marriage, the important matter is to be talking and remain talking.
The ‘conference’ is the sympathetic review of family plans, objectives, differences of opinion, and any issues which might be ready to emerge full blown into a conflict.
Sometimes this happens spontaneously and regularly in a family without the need for extra organisation.
Otherwise such times can be worked out in advance and become a first call on everyone's schedule.
When families talk in this way, a number of different benefits accrue.
Children learn how to take part in discussion, not just in the making of statements.
The child's contribution is recognised as being valid and worth while.
A child can be encouraged to express feelings in words, and his or her constructive contributions are recognised and appreciated.
This is a valuable arena for a child to experience the defeat of a cherished idea.
Explanation can be given, recompense can be paid.
It teaches a child to let go of his own will for the sake of others, with whom he has to live and let live.
A child may have right, misunderstood, or as yet unheard of ideas for his parents and siblings to listen to.
These open family meetings provide a focus for debating your own view, while learning to listen and give way to others.
Families which function well together need to take time with each other.
Conflicts themselves take time to unravel and require the investment of a great deal of commitment and effort.
Such an awareness is, as it is designed to be, a training for life itself.
Training within the home in an informal ‘conference’ situation greatly benefits the development of the awareness that time to listen is one of the greatest gifts we give to those we love.
Such meetings provide the experience of security within the family.
When topics of concern at all levels are being regularly opened up, there will be a consistency of treatment for all.
The family as a whole cares about the decisions made and the matters discussed.
The fact of meeting together emphasises the commitment of the family to the family and to the individuals within it.
Reconciliation
As you have been reading these thoughts, have you come to the decision that you need to be reconciled, to members of your family?
Parents to children, child to parents, brothers or sisters; whatever the relationship may be, do you need to be reconciled?
Do you need to say sorry?
Do you need to change your attitudes, your thoughts or behaviour?
Snappy families, like all other families, need to grow in love.
Love means learning to accept one another.
It means thinking before you speak, trying hard not to get all steamed up and confrontational.
It means talking things through.
It means not being too proud to admit you are in the wrong.
That is the way forward for snappy families.
It is a learning process.
It is not just-children who are learners, it is parents too.
And families need to help each other because, in the end, it's all about learning to love.
Do you need to be reconciled?
Should you be acting as the peacemaker in your family, or the one who breaks the conspiracy of silence?
A personal conversation, a telephone call or a letter may be all that is necessary to break the ice and start the work of reconciliation.
If there's something needing to be said, don't shirk it.
You owe it to your family, and to God.
Spend some moments in quiet, look back over the pages of this chapter, reconsidering what you have learned and the thoughts which have come to you.
Bring your thoughts to God in prayer, and then take any action necessary.
WORK RELATIONSHIPS
Work relationships are often perceived in terms of conflict.
Yet there is nothing inherent in the nature of work to produce such responses.
We bring to our working relationships the same potential for disordered conduct as we bring to any other area of our lives.
Conflict is common to all human situations.
It is as natural to find conflict present in the work environment as it is in the family, marriage, or any other human context.
Lead stories
While recognising that conflict is something we bring to a relationship and is not inherent in the substance of the relationship itself, the circumstances of those relationships can nonetheless bring enormous pressure to bear on the responses we may make.
In all industrialised nations such strained relationships are no more publicly evident than in the regular conflicts between workforce and management, where poor industrial relations are so often manifested in disputes and-strikes.
Bitter accusations, unwillingness to listen, disregard for justice, the breakdown of negotiations, the withdrawal of labour — all these are issues of continual attention and fervent debate for politicians, journalists, and public alike, and regular copy for lead stories for the media.
Only the names of the participants in these daily dramas need be changed.
The wearying scenario of disregard for  human sensitivity, industrial rights and the need for consultation, endlessly repeats itself with disappointing and frustrating frequency.
Ethical imperative
We have already established that conflict is best handled not by clever lips for healthy friendships, but by self-understanding, well-practised interpersonal skills for listening and the resolving of differences, and the careful application of God's principles for the specific areas of life and experience in which we find ourselves.
Our need to look more closely at the working relationship is not that strife and strikes are an issue of constant interest, nor that work conflicts are part of the distressing experience of vast numbers.
The effort to apply our faith in Christ to our working situations, with the many practical and ethical difficulties implied by such a concern, is part of our overall responsibility to God.
The command that Christians should be salt and light in whatever aspect of society they function (Matt. 5:13–14) is part of God's general strategy in the world, and the responsibility, therefore, of all Christians.
Gospel images
The salt-light picture used by Jesus was immediately clear to his followers of the first-century world.
To be engaged in the same strategy, we need to be clear that we have fully entered into this same understanding.
Salt was used in Jesus's day both for flavouring and preserving.
The implication is clear: Jesus's followers are to stem the tide of godlessness and prevent the sourness of decay in practical ways in the working world.
Christians should show forth the light of the transforming power of the gospel in their lives.
Transformed living
Such considerations should bring encouragement to anyone concerned for the cause of Christ.
Any serious attempt at Christian living, however small in scope, makes an important contribution to the overall effect and impact of the salt and light strategy envisaged by Jesus.
Whether we work in the public or private sectors, or are self-employed; whether we work as operators, managers, supervisors or directors; whatever our field, the effective application of faith to work can be a challenging, stretching and sometimes frustrating task.
The stakes, however, are high.
Given that so many of our waking hours are spent working, this is where the task of establishing the ethical claims of God's kingdom are most needed.
Storm tactics
Janice is a primary school teacher in North London.
St Matthew's School has gone through a difficult patch in the last few years.
It is surprising how quickly rumours spread.
But rumours are all they were.
There was a general feeling among the local community a few years ago that academic standards at the school had slipped, and many parents opted for other schools in the area for their children.
This left St Matthew's with a reduced pupil-teacher ratio, which in time led to staff cuts and lower funding.
A new head teacher has made much difference in the last two years and the school is beginning to pick up in many ways.
However, all the teachers have been working under strained conditions and many are tired and overworked.
Stress is quite a problem among the teaching staff since they are still overstretched, and it takes very little extra pressure to produce a minor crisis.
Such a crisis happened in the stormy weather of a particularly difficult week in February, when everyone  was feeling just a little touchy.
All the additional effort to repair wind damage, and coping with the extra demands of old buildings in poor weather, didn't help to relieve the pressures, especially as some of the boys had been rather overexcited and badly behaved.
Many of the teachers feel that firmer discipline is needed in the school, although the head has a freer approach not always shared by Janice and some of her colleagues.
But when Janice put her convictions into practice, she was shocked at the response.
Janice believes that children should know when they are going beyond what is acceptable and that a clear framework of conduct is necessary for a child's proper development.
Eight-year-old Peter comes from a home where he receives very little discipline.
He is a pleasant child, but often rowdy, disobedient and rough with others.
One Tuesday Janice noticed that Peter had been pushing and shoving Laura during singing.
When Laura complained at breaktime that Peter had done the same again, pushing her towards the broken tiles which had recently been blown off the junior hall roof, Janice felt that Peter needed to be shown that what he had done was dangerous and unacceptable.
Peter received some firm words and was made to stay inside during breaktime for the next day.
On the Wednesday morning, Peter's father sought out Janice.
He felt that the discipline was cruel and unnecessary.
He said so in no uncertain terms.
Peter's father complained to the head teacher, who quite surprisingly immediately took the parent's side.
As it happens, Peter's mother is a governor at the school, although this should have had nothing to do with the matter.
However, there had been a number of complaints from parents about the increasingly firm discipline in the school.
The rumours had begun to spread, and the truth had been distorted.
Janice was to be made a scapegoat.
Her head teacher preferred to keep the parents happy, and keep the numbers up.
It was an act of pure convenience to tell Peter's father that his son had been treated  insensitively and perhaps unjustly.
It was an easy way of keeping a potentially difficult parent quiet.
As a result, Janice was wrongly accused of victimisation and excessive punishment.
How things blow up.
Janice herself received a few firm words.
She was amazed and hurt.
All this when her only motivation was to go the extra mile under all circumstances.
The staff were all under pressure.
This was the wrong time for a confrontation.
Janice felt like chucking it all in there and then.
When you are stretched, it doesn't take much to snap you apart.
Janice was certainly helped by the sympathetic understanding of her fellow teachers, but the fact that she stayed and weathered the storm had much to do with her deeply held conviction that work must be seen as service.
Janice believed that misunderstanding or mistreatment in themselves, though undesirable, should not necessarily deflect you from your course.
Working principles
The principles which underlie the working relationship are as important for our understanding and behaviour at work, as the principles which underlie any other area of life.
Janice might have quit but for her strong conviction, as a Christian, that the service element is a high part of the calling for anyone in employment.
It is not surprising that the New Testament has important principles to offer concerning working relationships.
One place where these principles find expression in their most cogent form is in Paul's letter to the Colossians.
In the practically orientated conclusion of the letter, Paul's directives are highly relevant, touching on principles of mutual conduct, controversy, and our need for fulfilment and satisfaction in what we do.
Paul at Colossae
Slaves, obey your earthly masters in everything; and do it, not only when their eye is on you and to win their favour, but with sincerity of heart, and reverence for the Lord.
Whatever you do, work at it with all your heart, as working for the Lord, not for men, since you know that you will receive an inheritance from the Lord as a reward.
It is the Lord Christ you are serving.
Anyone who does wrong will be repaid for his wrong, and there is no favouritism.
Masters, provide your slaves with what is right and fair, because you know you also have a Master in heaven (Col. 3:22–4:1).
A superficial reading of this passage might suggest little practical relevance for present-day dealings in employment situations.
The talk of slaves and masters sounds out of date, an anachronism in relation to conflicts experienced today.
The subject of Paul's directive also raises questions of moral acceptability.
Does the Bible condone or even promote slavery?
If it does, that only reinforces the irrelevance of Biblical teaching to the relationships of workers and bosses today.
If this passage does have central and significant relevance to contemporary working relationships, we must begin by clarifying in what ways the issues touched upon by Paul's words address themselves to current situations and concerns.
We need to be sure of the relevance of the circumstances Paul is describing if we are to seek to apply his principles to our lives now.
The Colossian heresy
As a letter, Colossians is a response by Paul to an actual living situation.
Paul never explicitly describes the heresy he seeks to expose at Colossae, though from his statement it is possible to piece together the evidence of what had been such a destructive influence.
As Paul writes to this  leading city in Asia Minor (present-day Turkey) around the year AD 60 he makes many statements in opposition to the false teachers who–e influence has apparently been so prevalent.
In particular, it appears there was a specific leader at Colossae who had come to a position of authority.
His understanding of Christ and Christianity had become badly distorted through a kind of super-spirituality.
This may have been characterised by a mystic other-worldliness which had little time for the concerns of this world, and the working out of faith in relation to the everyday challenges of life.
For Paul the issue which dominates the whole letter is one of the truth of the gospel, and its consequent implications for practical Christian living.
He responds to the Colossian heresy by spending exactly half his letter reminding the Colossians just how magnificent, supreme and totally adequate for every aspect of life Jesus Christ truly is.
And then, with his foundations once more rightly in place, he continues in the second half of his letter to spell out the specific relevance of faith in Christ for daily living, particularly in this arena of relationships.
The Lord of life
So in the second part of the letter (from Col. 3:18 ff.)
Jesus is seen not only as Lord of the world, but also as Lord of all human-relationships.
He is Lord of family life — for husbands, wives, children and their parents.
Then as we shall see (from Col. 3:22–4:1), he is Lord of the working environment, the true basis of all working relationships for those who are committed to him.
It is important to understand this context of Paul's teaching, for a deep understanding of the adequacy of Christ is the setting in which these relationships are meant to function and grow.
This is the foundation for a true theology of the working relationship, without which there are no practical principles to which Christians can appeal to make their approach to work  (and its conflicts and difficulties) any different from the non-Christian world.
Slaves and masters
Slaves and masters were the workers and bosses throughout the Greek-speaking world of the first century.
The relationship between these two groups defines the working environment to which Paul is referring.
Before we establish that it is proper to equate slaves and masters with the association between employee and employer today, an important question of Biblical background and ethics needs to be addressed.
Status quo theology?
By these words (and the similar statements of Eph. 6:5–9) isn't Paul condoning slavery?
Doesn't he seem to be content with the status quo?
Isn't he rather lax in calling for social change?
Could the implication be that today the Christian at work is quietly to put up with any kind of abuse or ill-treatment?
Should Janice suffer in silence in the face of continued unfair treatment by her head?
Is it a modern myth that workers have rights — a wicked concoction of trade unions?
When Paul says ‘slaves obey your earthly masters in everything’, is he not in fact reinforcing the outrage of social divisions for many centuries to come?
Isn't Paul himself, more than any other, responsible for the scornful words of Karl Marx, that religion is the opium of the people?
Contextual thinking
These are reasonable questions, but the answer in each case has to be ‘no’.
As ever, context is important, particularly the wider context of New Testament teaching.
The words of Jesus help to illuminate the theology of Paul, especially when the context of Paul's words is taken  seriously into account.
Jesus said, ‘I have come that they may have life and have it to the full’(John 10:10).
Just before his words on slaves and masters, Paul refers to this abundant life which in itself is a central gift of the gospel.
‘Here there is no Greek or Jew, circumcised or uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave, or free, but Christ is all, and is in all’(Col. 3:11).
That is a revolutionary truth, and far more revolutionary than that of which Karl Marx ever dreamed.
Paul declares that a freedom from the old inequalities, those divisions in society which have alienated man from man in a whole variety of ways, is available now through the gospel.
In experience it will be a growing reality.
But since those divisions are abolished in Christ, in experience we must aim to abolish them in practice.
This is the basis of Paul's theology of the social freedom inherent in the gospel.
Theological practice
It is true that Paul could not preach that freedom without fairly being asked how the theology works out in practice, especially where the inequalities of society, at least on the surface of things, remain unchanged.
The nature of the times sheds important light on this.
It would have been humanly impossible for the early Christians to alter the economic base of the whole Roman Empire.
To expect Paul to call for the abolition of slavery at this point in time is to be guilty of unhistorical thinking.
Yet with all this taken into account, as both the little letter to Philemon and the teaching found in Colossians and Ephesians show, Paul's theology of work was highly radical.
It was so radical that in later centuries it did lead to the abolition of slavery in the Western world.
Whatever our working situation, whether we view ourselves as being in a position of unique privilege or even perhaps severe disadvantage, Paul has something fundamental and life-changing to say to us in terms of principle and practical application.
A dual relationship
Maybe you are absolutely bored to pieces at work.
Are you like Oscar Wilde, who said, ‘I love work, I can sit and look at it for hours’?
Perhaps you're the boss they love to hate.
Maybe you do an ordinary job, and you wonder how to do it-as a Christian?
Perhaps you experience conflict with other workers, or are working in a variety of situations seeking to bring peace where there is strife.
However you fit in, Paul enunciates one fundamental principle which characterises all other aspects of working relationships and practice.
The principle involves what it means to be a follower of Christ, for as a Christian all your relationships relate as much to God as to men.
This dual relationship is the principle and key to all Paul's teaching on work.
Paul is careful to emphasise that relationships relate both to God and man by the statement which comes immediately prior to, and also introduces, his section on the full range of relationships in which Christians will be involved.
‘Whatever you do, whether in word or deed, do it all in the name of the Lord Jesus’(Col. 3:17).
This implies there is not one single corner of our lives in which Jesus does not have an interest.
As Christians, our lives are to be seen primarily as service offered to the Lord.
That must mean that whatever we are involved in is conditioned by one overall fact: whatever we do is either to the service or dis service of Christ.
There is a parallel with actors in a play.
Actors don't just exist to please themselves, to have a good time, to act as they choose, either well or badly.
They exist to please the audience looking on.
It is the audience for which they and the play exist; that is their whole reason for being.
And, put simply, followers of Christ exist for Christ, to please him, as he ‘looks on’; for whatever we do in word or deed, we are to do for the honour of Jesus Christ the Lord.
Workers and bosses
Paul provides two directives.
Our way now should be clear to accepting the propriety of applying these principles to the modern-day working environment, calling the slaves, workers and the masters, bosses.
The workers provide the largest group, and the first directive is addressed to them.
Service of Christ
A Christian is in the Lord's service.
‘Whatever you do, work at it with all your heart, as working for the Lord, not for men’(Col. 3:23).
I don't know how a first-century slave would have taken this directive to regard work as service to Christ; but I can imagine some twentieth-century slaves thinking such sentiments run sharply against the grain.
Is Paul saying, now you are a Christian, you may be in a dead-end job, but you'd better grin and bear it?
Is Paul just spiritualising the everyday drudgery?
Can't we smell the opiate of the people again?
Is this his way of keeping the masses down by spiritualising their lot?
Dead-end job
Jack is a plant manager.
In his case, that's an up-market name for a caretaker.
He does more than an ordinary caretaker would do at the small plastics company where he has worked for years.
But Jack is bored with what he does.
At his age, and where he lives, he doesn't really have much hope of getting anything more advanced, though he is certainly intelligent and able.
The trouble is, he lets his frustration get the better of him sometimes and snarls and snaps at anyone who is not too much in authority over him.
For the last year or so he's gained a reputation as ‘Jack the sniper’.
He hasn't told anyone how frustrated he is.
But the conflicts he generates have much to do with his job dissatisfaction.
Jack has often wondered how the  Bible can really say, ‘Whatever you do, work at it with all your heart, as working for the Lord, not for men.’
Jack knows his heart is not in it.
He's relieved he can pay his bills and keep body and soul reasonably well together, but that's as far as it goes.
Two-level challenge
It is surprising how much energy it is possible to use up in inner conflicts.
That feeling that you are not where you are meant to be.
Sometimes that inner frustration is an important precursor for change.
Other times it can indicate a lack of understanding and acceptance of this important spiritual principle.
A Christian is in the Lord's service.
It would be easy to caricature Paul's teaching on work, but what he is doing is to challenge at two levels.
He wants Christ to be brought clearly into the picture of working matters, not for Christians in the working world to secularise their task so that Christ is absent from their thinking.
So the two levels he proposes are what we do and what we feel about what we do.
We might describe these, therefore, as the issues of performance and job satisfaction.
Performance — go for quality
‘Slaves, obey your earthly masters in everything.
And do it not only when their eye is on you and to win their favour, but with sincerity of heart and reverence for the Lord’(Col. 3:22).
The word ‘obey’ settles unpleasantly and suspiciously on twentieth century ears, but Paul means by it what it says.
Many aspects of twentieth-century living have made us distrustful of authority, and when authority is abused that is understandable.
Nevertheless, by ‘obey’ Paul is not referring to servile obedience to an authoritarian master, but an injunction to workers to carry out the job an employer has for them to accomplish.
Paul means  that workers should do in practice what the employer requires.
He is saying go for quality, do a good job, and be aware of the presence or absence of an underlying spiritual motivation.
Extra care
If you want to hear complaints about service industries, the quality of garage maintenance is a regular target for consumer watchdogs and grousers.
However, when our car was serviced at a small back-street garage which we had never tried before, what really impressed us was not only the mechanical quality of the service, but the extra care taken.
Someone had take the trouble to remove all the children's sweet papers from the ashtray, and clean underneath the mats as well.
It doesn't usually happen.
It was more than was strictly required.
But this is exactly the kind of quality of which Paul is speaking.
You just seem to do the job well while the boss's eye is on you, but you don't really care about genuine quality in what you do.
According to Paul, you are functioning in a substandard Christian way.
Our Christian motivation is to honour Christ in all we do, including the quality of our work irrespective of whom we work for, whether they are good employers or not.
In a sense, there is a resemblance here to doing something like dusting.
Some people do the bare minimum, just the surface that shows.
But when you dust behind and underneath, as well as on the surface, then you are taking both care and the right kind of pride in what you are doing.
That kind of thoroughness can be given in service to Jesus.
Working standards
Going for quality not only means the way we do our work, but the standards with which we conduct ourselves at work.
Are you sure your boss doesn't mind your using the telephone for personal calls?
Should you really be using the photocopier for your own use?
What about letting your lunch hour run on so often?
Should you be more diligent in the way you apply yourself to the tasks in hand?
What are the issues which affect the standards of your witness to Christ at work?
What other standards should you be vigilant about?
Christ does care about the details of how we conduct ourselves in all these situations, because the standards we have at work either honour him or dishonour him.
The emphasis of Paul is clear, we are to go for quality both in our performance and in the way we conduct ourselves in the workplace.
Our service is first to Christ, not to man.
Job satisfaction — work wholeheartedly
What we do is important in its own right, but what we feel about what we do is also critical.
Our feelings so often determine how well or otherwise we shall choose to perform, and will also affect the quality of our work relationships.
‘Whatever you do, work at it with all your heart, as working for the Lord, not for men’(Col. 3:23).
There is much discussion in all quarters on the importance of job satisfaction.
Many people regard job satisfaction as getting the formula right.
Matching our gifts and preferences to the job and its opportunities.
‘A man  can do nothing better than to…find satisfaction in his work’(Eccles. 2:24).
However true that may be, many people don't have that privilege today, but have to face repetitive, uninteresting patterns of employment.
So when Paul issues the principle, ‘work…with all your heart as working for the Lord’ what does he actually mean, and how does it relate to those in this category?
Paul's major concern must be the consequence of being delivered from drudgery.
What are the most enjoyable aspects of your work?
What aspects of your work do you really dislike?
What are the most stimulating elements of what y–u do?
Are there certain elements you find intolerably dull and boring?
What effect do the more negative aspects of your work have on you and your relationships with others?
Boredom and drudgery
Many people hate certain aspects of their work.
Even the most interesting of jobs will have its fair share of dull moments, for there is drudgery in every job.
Are you one of those in a completely dead-end job?
Are you frustrated by the dull monotony and lack of prospects?
Being bored and frustrated is a problem for many people; even for those with positions of responsibility and influence, there can be a lot of drudgery involved.
Yet we need at this point to take in deeply what Paul is indicating.
He is saying our true master is in heaven.
Part of our difficulty with concepts like this is that we are quite used to being told we are servants of Christ.
Perhaps a fresher way of seeing the truth here is to turn the whole statement around.
So it then says, Christ is our employer.
We can be proud to work for him.
Dick Lucas  comments: ‘Such is our work and dignity in Christ, that any task undertaken for our master, however menial, is fit to be part of our service to the Lord of glory’(The Message of Colossians , IVP 1984).
Rethink
Can you learn to think of yourself and your work in this way?
It is powerful when you do.
It is the secret of peace and contentment.
That is why one of the greatest minds of the ancient world, the Apostle Paul himself, could find contentment in sewing tents for a living.
And yet he went to some lengths to press home the validity of this attitude.
‘I have learned to be content whatever the circumstances’(Phil.
4:11).
Learning to be content is the great secret of life, for every aspect of our jobs, however boring, can become fulfilling when we work at them wholeheartedly, as serving Christ.
But simplistic claims have to be swept aside.
It means a revolution in our attitudes.
What real difference will it make to you to rethink this aspect of your employment?
What effect will it have on any strain you are experiencing in any of your relationships?
Pressure points
Stress and conflict belong together, and the way we feel about what we do makes a great deal of difference to our inner store of pressures.
When the pot begins to boil and the bubbles rise quickly to the surface, it doesn't take much to make it boil right over.
Our emotional temperature can so easily make itself felt to others.
We may be cross and short for no other reason than that we are frustrated and dissatisfied.
Inner striving and resentment at what we do  has no solution unless we move on to something else, or change our attitude.
And the changing of attitude, important as it is when staying where you are, is also just as important if God is going to move you on to something new.
The motivation must be right if we are to be effective in the Lord's service.
Of course, there's no point in doing something intrinsically dull just for the sake of it.
But Paul is claiming that attitudes are everything, and ongoing dissatisfaction can be a very ungodly outlook.
Christians are under obligation to be constantly watchful on this point.
We are not employed just for work — dull, boring, monotonous work.
We are employed for service, wholehearted service to Christ; and the world needs to see it, to realise that Christians are different because of who our Lord is.
Fair teals
Injustice at work is one of the prime sources of conflict, especially in annual pay rounds, but also in many other ways.
Paul's teaching has sometimes been unfairly caricatured as being on the bosses' side.
But in no sense can that be true.
Paul makes it clear that there is no partiality when it comes to God's judgment on the employee or the employer.
‘Anyone who does wrong will be repaid for his wrong and there is no favouritism’(Col. 3:25).
He tells the employers to ‘provide your slaves with what is right and fair, because you know that you also have a Master in Heaven’(Col. 4:1).
Slave rights
To recognise the full force of this injunction, we must remember that the slave in those days had no rights.
The slave was nothing in the eyes of the law.
He had no right to marry or to father children.
When he was past work, he was thrown out to die.
He certainly had nothing even resembling pension rights.
Paul's teaching  must have come with all the more force to his original hearers.
There were no trades unions in those days, and there was no recourse to justice in any form.
Yet here it is said, the slave must be freely given what he cannot claim for himself; what no one would even claim for him.
Maybe in Paul's time, given these social conditions, this brief command was even harder to carry out than anything asked of the slaves.
You can imagine the kind of impact and consternation Paul's teaching must have made.
Slave owners who became Christians revolutionised their treatment of slaves, giving to them the justice and the fair treatment that hitherto had been unknown in the ancient world.
Them and us
That being so, how much more should Christian employers work for justice and the fair treatment of their workforce.
So often in working relationships there is a them and us mentality.
The management versus the unions.
A confrontationalism which we have learned from modern politics.
That may be the way the world does its business, but it is not to be the way the Lord's people should do theirs.
‘Bear with each other and forgive whatever grievances you may have against one another’(Col. 3:13).
This imperative applies to both employers and employees as much as to those Christians at work in a secular context.
It doesn't matter whether you work alongside non-Christians, as most do, or with Christians, as is the experience of a minority.
In either situation the above approach is the way Christians should contribute to managing industrial relations.
That's all very well, you may say, but not if you've got a boss like mine, or your office has a filing clerk like ours.
That union has cost us thousands with its needless disputes.
My supervisor has made my life a misery.
Conflicting interests
So how do we resolve conflicts of interest?
The first step is to see things as others do.
Try putting yourself into the other person's shoes.
You are going to have to work hard at it.
Forgiveness and acceptance, and all the other positive attitudes Paul requires and prescribes, are always going to cost you something.
The cost of discipleship often fails to be spelt out in Christian teaching.
But if anyone said that Christianity wasn't going to cost you anything, they were not telling you the full story.
The truth of Christ is meant to touch our working lives, whatever our situations.
Of course we must be concerned for justice, and for where justice is violated.
Paul is not asking us to be passive.
He is asking us to remember that the wrongdoer will be paid back for the wrong he has done, by someone who is a better judge, someone more in possession of all the facts.
Ultimate judgment is from God himself.
Is there a relationship with an individual or group at work where this principle applies to you?
What practical action can you take to bring this situation into line with Cod's standard as described by Paul?
In Christ, our human relationships have a vertical and horizontal focus.
All our relationships relate to God as well as operating on a human level.
Paul enunciates these two imperatives.
Employees, regard your work as service to Christ.
Employers, respond to your workers as a servant of Christ.
There is here a true conversion taking place in values, attitudes and motivation.
Biblically the word conversion means a turn-round, and that is exactly what we have here.
Paul is prescribing a true turn-round in the whole arena of  relationships at work.
This is what Paul's theology means in practice.
The worker is now taken up with his boss's needs.
And the boss with the worker's needs.
If you are employed, is your boss getting the quality of labour he has the right to expect?
If you are an employer, are your workers getting the reward and the conditions and the treatment they have the right to enjoy?
The worker and the boss, the employee and the employer are both to be regarded as servants of Christ.
In the truest sense, Jesus Christ is our employer over all, and we are ultimately responsible to him.
The Lord will understand our weaknesses.
He will forgive our failings.
But he will not in the end tolerate injustice and unfair treatment on either side.
He calls Christians on all sides of industry, and in any working situation, to bring honour to the name of Christ, to deal with the real and potential conflicts of our relationships by applying the principles of service in all we are and do.
That is accomplished by remembering, applying and living by this truth: at work, whatever our standing, we are servants of Christ before we are servants of any earthly master.
MARRIAGE RELATIONSHIPS
Like the proverbial horse and carriage, conflict and marriage go together.
That is not the way Alma Cogan originally conceived her lyric.
But in the lives of many people today love and marriage, though ideals, swiftly give way to conflict, strain, unhappiness and divorce.
The figures for marriage and divorce from both sides of the Atlantic support this oft-perceived decline in the quality and longevity of marriages today.
In the latest figures for the United Kingdom, in 1987 398,000 marriages were contracted.
Of these, 260,000 were first marriages for both partners; 32 per cent of all marriages for that year represented a remarriage where one or both partners had previously been divorced.
Divorce figures have been growing steadily in the UK since 1971 when the Divorce Reform Act 1969 came into force.
They peaked in 1985 when a record 191,000 petitions for divorce were filed.
The Matrimonial and Family Proceedings Act of 1984 had a startling impact on the state of new but troubled marriages.
The Act allowed couples to petition for divorce after the first anniversary of their marriage, instead of after three years as had been upheld previously.
After the immediate impact of this change, the figures for 1987 show a total of 165,000 divorces for England and Wales, a fall of 6 per cent since 1985.
Yet this still represents over double the figure of 80,000 which was the divorce rate in 1971.
(Source:Social Trends , the Central Statistical Office.)
For better or worse
Why is it that marriage should be a relationship of such potential closeness, joy and fulfilment, and yet for so many end up in such unhappiness and hurt?
In 1987, 9.3 per cent of those who divorced had only lasted one to two years of marriage; 28.6 per cent of those divorced did so after five to nine years of marriage.
Statistics suggest that those whose marriages last beyond this period seem to have learned the secret of how to stay together in a stable relationship.
Of those who have been married thirty years or more, only 4.3 per cent divorce.
We shall need to deal with some of the questions raised by the sad and painful fact of marriage breakdown and divorce later in this chapter.
For the moment we should merely note the high level of dissatisfaction which the general marriage and divorce figures imply.
Liberal divorce
There was much opposition inside and outside Parliament in 1984 when the law was changed allowing divorce petitions after just one year.
At the time, many questioned whether it is really possible to make a marriage work after such a short period.
Legislators were clearly concerned for those who had entered marriages where they were being harmed and mistreated by their partners.
They wished to provide a way out in case of emergency.
Yet the liberal interpretation of divorce laws appears to have led to the alarming trends already observed.
If, as many testify, marriage is the most richly rewarding of relationships, it must also be the most testing, with the greatest potential for conflict and pain.
The fact is, the closer you get, the sharper you clash.
The build-up of intimacy in marriage has potential both for richness of growth, and a destructive explosion.
It all hangs on how we manage the communication process.
Like a horse  and carriage, love and marriage do go together; but selfishness and self-seeking and the anger generated by violated sensitivities and unmet needs are so often the outer evidence of an increasing inner barrenness.
Such barrenness is the inevitable outcome where two people are growing apart and out of love.
Nothing more sad and painful can be experienced or witnessed.
Worlds apart
Barry and Helen sat opposite each other.
They had sought help from the marriage counsellor a little late in the day.
Their marriage had been under strain for some years and they had never been brave enough to admit it to a third party.
Recently matters had come to a head.
Barry became involved with another woman.
It had happened in a way he never expected.
Barry had always frowned on those who had affairs.
As a Christian, he knew it wasn't right.
But nor was his marriage right.
He and Helen had both felt the tensions for some years now.
They'd felt them, expressed them, but never seriously aimed to resolve them.
In Barry's view, Helen was the moodiest person on earth.
Yes, they had been in love once, that was before they had children.
They did not need to have a row for Barry to feel constantly undermined by Helen's attitudes, spoken and unspoken.
You wouldn't think it was possible for a middle-aged department store manager to simply crumple before the withering scowls of his wife.
That, as Barry explained to the counsellor, was exactly what Helen did to him.
Anyway men have physical needs, he complained.
Hadn't Helen kept him at arms' length for months now?
Not once had she made any attempt to respond to his initiatives.
No, Barry had never meant to get involved with Christine.
He knew it was wrong, but it is the first experience of real love and tenderness he has known in years.
‘But what about me, Barry?
You can't just discard me like an empty cigarette packet.
I'm a person, too.
It's all right for you.
You've dragged me along to all your trade shows and staff socials over the years.
You've expected your shirts to be perfect, your home dean, your food prepared, your guests fawned over, a woman to keep your bed warm.
But what about me?
You never consider whether I have feelings.
You've never considered whether I might be bored stiff meeting your work colleagues.
You're not interested in the things I like.
You never play tennis with me because you say I'm not fast enough.
You're never in early enough to have an intelligent conversation.
And when you are, you hide yourself in your office or get glued to the video.
And quite frankly when we are in bed, I might as well be anybody.
You do your thing and roll over.
No holding.
No warmth.
You behave sometimes as though I'm an embarrassment to you.
So what can I do?
What can I do that makes me into an acceptable human being?
I suppose this Christine has everything I don't have.
Well, I'll tell you one thing.
She hasn't had three children.
That makes some difference to your life.
That's something you men never seem to understand….’
Reaping the whirlwind
These kinds of exchange are heart-rending to witness.
They happen all too often.
Acute marriage conflict occurs to all kinds of people.
You don't have to be bad, irresponsible, or wickedly maverick, to have a marriage difficulty, or have to face divorce.
Such conflict is not beyond our control but, left unattended, it can often take control.
Then it's like a whirlwind, reaping havoc where peace once reigned.
In the end Barry and Helen did separate and eventually they divorced.
Their relationship had become conflict-ridden to the point where each of them was desperately unhappy.
The catalogue of hurts which had built up over  the years was considerable.
There is a kind of laziness or weariness which seeps into troubled marriages.
After some periods of discouragement, attempts to put things right and make the effort needed to achieve the kinds of adjustment required for mutual happiness are often postponed, then shelved.
The catalogue grows, and without mutually purposeful work to reduce the strain, the weight of accusation and blame increases significantly.
In Barry and Helen's case, it wasn't that their problems were insoluble.
Their load had increased so profoundly, they could muster neither resolve nor desire to do anything lasting about them.
At least, Barry couldn't.
It does, of course, take two to make a marriage and most often two to contribute to a conflict.
But final breakdown and divorce can be the initiative of one ‘unwilling’ partner.
Difficulties may be mutually contributed, but the unwilling partner is the one who for whatever reason has passed the point of no return.
No desire to mend remains.
Two for change
In all my professional experience of giving support to troubled marriages, I have never met any couple who were not able to make considerable strides forward if both were genuinely willing to give attention, to the issues underlying their discomfort and conflict and make the changes necessary for health and growth.
But where there is resistance to change and unwillingness to mend the troubled relationship on behalf of just one partner, understandably the chances of improvement are meagre, and final breakdown, if not inevitable, is certainly threatened.
If you are married, how much attention do you and your partner give to managing your conflicts?
When did you last sit down and talk about priorities for your own relationship?
Do you know what issues really matter for your partner at present?
How much time each week do you give to finding out what your partner is thinking and feeling over matters which concern him or her?
When did you last make a considerable personal adjustment to fit in with some deeply felt need your partner has articulated?
Have you learned to talk naturally and unembarrassedly about sexual matters, with sensitivity and understanding?
Service schedule
All marriages need their regular running maintenance.
No car owner can neglect to check such basic safety features as tyres, brakes, oil and steering.
If a car is to remain on the road, basic checks and adjustments need to be made regularly.
Marriage maintenance is necessary too.
Many people do this naturally.
Their effectiveness depends on a number of factors, including personality, sensitivity, their parental and other models of marriage (good and poor), and their understanding and level of commitment to each other.
Whether this ongoing maintenance is spontaneous or planned, it will always imply the careful management of conflict.
For conflict in marriage can go both ways.
Conflict should not be regarded as a purely negative issue.
Conflict has a duel capacity.
It can certainly tear down and destroy.
It can also reveal areas for growth and work, aiding progress and maturity.
The conciliation principle
A powerful recognition of this tenet comes in the fifth chapter of Paul's letter to the Ephesians.
Paul introduces his teaching on marriage with an insistence on conciliation in relationships.
‘Submit to one another out of reverence for Christ’(5:21).
Having established the overall principle that conciliatory attitudes provide a prime dynamic for strengthening relationships, Paul then goes on to spell out how in each case male and female partners are to work this out in practice.
‘Wives, submit to your husbands as to the Lord’(5:22).
‘Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her’(5:25).
To submit means to yield your rights.
That is exactly what Jesus did by becoming man, travelling the road which led eventually to the cross.
He did not cling to his rights (Phil.
2:6).
In Paul's concept of the marriage relationship the injunction to man and woman are the same.
Neither must cling to their rights.
The husband's love must be characterised by loving sacrifice and servanthood.
So indeed should the woman for she is to submit to her husband as she would to the Lord himself.
Conciliation is a key concept in the maintenance of marriage equilibrium.
Two people pulling in opposite directions have a tug-of-war.
They either end up in stalemate, or one of them gets dragged over the line.
They cannot both succeed in attaining their mutually exclusive goals.
By contrast, when Paul envisages a relationship of conciliation in marriage, a working together for common goals, the practical out-working involves both partners in constantly adjusting to the needs of the other.
The marriage vows of the Church of England reflect this principle.
Each takes the other, ‘To have and to hold, from this day forward, for better, for worse, for richer, for poorer, in sickness and in health, to love and to cherish, till death us do part’(The Alternative Service Book , CUP, 1980).
The declaration of intent which precedes these vows implies a similar level of commitment and flexibility.
It calls on each partner in turn to love, comfort, honour and protect; and forsaking all others, to remain faithful as long as both shall live.
All the historic churches have fashioned marriage vows which echo the teaching principles of Paul.
His practicality which has been so readily distilled into such words is drawn from a theology which he describes as ‘a profound mystery’(Eph. 5:32).
The mystery is a quotation from the creation narrative, ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh’(Eph. 5:31 quoting Gen. 2:24).
Leaving and cleaving
The one-flesh relationship provides a practical unified view of marriage where man and woman are seen as deeply complementary to each other.
This is a relationship closer even than that of child to parent.
Children eventually become independent of their parents, whereas husband and wife belong together ‘till death us do part’.
The leaving and cleaving principle implies a progress into an exclusive, mature and enduring relationship whose closeness and bonding exceeds all others.
Man and woman are not, however, incomplete without each other, for that would devalue singleness, of which Jesus himself was a prime exemplar.
But in marriage a kind of new creation takes place.
The one-flesh nature of the relationship does not just refer to the sexuality of marriage; although sexuality in marriage is both an expression and symbol of that oneness.
The one-flesh relationship refers to an enhanced humanness, which is the ideal of marriage.
That is why Paul likens marriage to the relationship between Christ and his Church.
Significantly, the Biblical picture of the Church perfected in heaven is of the outward beauty of a bride  adorned for her husband, a beauty symbolising all that is pure and wholesome (cf.
Rev. 21).
That beauty is not just the goal for the Church; it is terminus ad quem of marriage.
Making it work
It is all very well to talk in ideals, the question is how can this enhanced human experience be worked at and given the tenderness of feeling which such a closeness of relationship implies?
What are the particular building blocks for a stable and happy marriage, which both overcomes and makes use of conflict constructively and positively for growth and fulfilment?
Foundations are important in many realms of life.
Marriages need them as much as buildings.
In his teaching, Jesus points out the importance of firm foundations for the stability of our lives.
He who hears his words and obeys them ‘is like a man building a house, who dug down deep and laid the foundation on rock’(Luke 6:48).
Marriage is designed by God to be a lifetime's commitment.
No one should embark on it without the most careful consideration.
But for all the desirability of the help that may be given in careful marriage preparation, the experience of marriage itself brings to, life many personal challenges.
The importance of good foundations is clearly seen when dealing with the growth process which must inevitably take place if marriages are to survive, let alone flourish.
The foundation of love
When a couple get engaged and married, you would hardly think that anything could come between them.
The loving glances and the warmth of affection of a  couple are touching to see.
But romance is one thing, living together without discomfort is another.
It is important that a relationship continues to be built on love as the marriage grows and progresses.
Not everyone experiences it in a heady way, but the chemistry of love can be gloriously overwhelming.
Apart from the obvious enjoyment of this extended honeymoon stage, it does mean that the actual hard work of the relationship can be delayed, for nothing the young lovers do could ever spoil the bliss — at least for a short while!
But chemistry has to give way to physics.
The actions of love are just as important as the feelings.
How can the feelings (and responsibilities) of love be converted into action?
Love in action
From the example of Jesus in the gospels, we learn the particular importance of forgiveness and acceptance.
When applied to marriage these two ‘inward’ actions provide an approach to the marriage relationship which is powerful and constructive when present, and undermining and destructive when absent.
Forgiveness
Jesus taught the priority of forgiveness.
In the Lord's prayer, he teaches us to pray, ‘Forgive us our debts as we also have forgiven our debtors’(Matt. 6:12).
In the parable of the unmerciful servant which (not without reason) comes immediately before Jesus's teaching on divorce, Jesus strongly emphasises the responsibility to forgive from the heart (Matt. 18:35).
Even if someone should sin against you seven times a day, Jesus says you should forgive those seven times (Luke 17:4).
Seven is a Biblical number of completeness, here implying complete forgiveness.
Yet should there be any misconceptions of Jesus's seriousness on this matter, when  asked by Peter if he should forgive seven times (perhaps interpreting Jesus as putting a limit on forgiveness) Jesus replies, ‘I tell you not seven times but seventy-seven times’(Matt. 18:22).
The call to forgiveness is a priority which needs constant attention, partly because in marriage the closer you get to each other the greater will be the likelihood of hurt.
Hurt happens in all relationships.
It is, therefore, only natural to experience some pain when two different people from different backgrounds, with a different make-up and personal history, get together.
No one is immune.
A long-held piece of advice to couples is to keep short accounts, and to get the differences sorted out right away.
The ways of doing this vary and it depends on your personal skills.
Some prefer to have a regular time when they purposely sit down and talk about themselves, their feelings and their hurts.
Others manage better in a more spontaneous fashion.
Whatever the manner of approach the fact that attention is given in this area is the most important factor.
The following stages need working through.
Acknowledging anger
If an issue arises where one or other marriage partner is saddened, hurt or affronted by the other, the most important initial agreement is to communicate this to the other partner as soon as it is acceptable to them both to do so.
Grand confrontations in restaurants or at other people's dinner parties are thus excluded.
The important factor is to ventilate the anger.
Anger is like a red light at the traffic lights.
It tells us to stop.
Danger is ahead.
Red lights are for our benefit.
Anger in a relationship can be viewed positively.
It is the responsibility of the angered party to communicate successfully and reasonably why he or she has felt anger.
It is a dual responsibility, for the one  who has caused the anger needs to show his or her commitment to putting right the anger reaction in some way.
Thus if both partners have a commitment to listening and responding swiftly when conflict strikes, the permission to express emotion will be a healthy safety valve for the relationship, and a vital part of its ongoing maintenance.
Controlling anger
The next stage in this strategy for expressing the strains which give rise to hurt and resentment concerns a mutual agreement not to hurt, attack or retaliate.
Slanging matches rarely achieve anything positive, and other anger responses can be even more destructive.
Clearly there needs to be some measure of self-control in these situations, but it is easier if there has been a clear and prior agreement that disputes will be handled in this way.
This in turn frees a couple to listen sensitively to each other.
We all have different learned responses to anger.
Those who tend to retaliate need to work on ways of coping with the way their immediate strong feelings cause them to behave.
If you do get heated, agree with each other to stand or sit far enough apart not to be able to push or shove.
If you tend to throw things, put objects away or go out into the garden.
You should, of course, learn to modify your responses, but realism demands you do something practical like this if you are a physically demonstrative person.
This aspect of the strategy is just as purposeful and beneficial in the management of conflict as the agreement not to say hurtful and aggressive things.
If you tend to express your anger with your actions, by seeing your committed efforts to modify your responses, your partner will be that much more encouraged to speak openly with the belief that he or she will receive a real and fair hearing.
Resolving anger
When the matter under discussion has been aired, the final element in this strategy is to agree to work the issue through together.
It does not matter who is aggrieved, the issue belongs to both parties, and the owning, sharing and resolution of the matter brings great strength and sense of purpose to both parties.
In a close relationship, the anger of one is a function of both.
Paul's principle of conciliation comes into play at this point.
Like a pressure cooker in danger of becoming overheated, once the steam is released all is safe and well, and the cooking process can continue.
When the steam is taken out of a tense marriage using this process of ventilation, work can continue on resolving the differences and building the quality and richness of the marriage.
In fact, the conflict itself, properly handled in this way, should contribute positively to the relationship, for each partner will be closer to the other with greater mutual understanding and adjustment than before.
Creative tensions
Marriage tension is inevitable, but this kind of tension can, and should, be creative.
Marriage conflicts are opportunities for growth.
The creative way of handling tensions is to be prepared to forgive right from the beginning.
This pledge of forgiveness lends great strength to marriage.
It enables couples to grow and creatively overcome those painful moments which are part of every marriage.
Forgiveness helps you steer round the obstacles, to grow more together.
You don't run up a backlog of mutual resentment when forgiveness is present.
Keep short accounts
Keep talking 
Keep listening — to feelings as much as words
Keep on forgiving
When you forgive — forget
There you go again
There is a special danger in marriage conflicts.
The catalogue of unforgiven wrongs simply grows and grows, as we saw in Barry and Helen's case.
When we forgive, we have a model of forgiveness in Jesus.
Our sins are completely dealt with.
They are never brought up again to taunt or accuse us.
Forgiveness is one of the most important parts of the marriage foundation.
We can and should learn from this model.
The Lord's Prayer teaches us that we should forgive in the same measure we have been forgiven.
It also teaches us to realise how much we ourselves require God's forgiveness, and cannot claim self-righteousness.
All this means the letting go of someone else's past.
It means a commitment not to keep on bringing up, either in your mind or in conversation, the painful hurts of the past.
Let them go.
That is what forgiveness is about.
It means never hearing yourself say, ‘There he goes again'; ‘There she goes again'.
Loving acceptance
All this implies a very deep acceptance of each other.
This acceptance is the psychological dimension of the unity of the one-flesh relationship.
Some people try to force their partner to be the person they want them to be.
Yet in its essence love means acceptance.
Love implies the acceptance of each other as you really are.
Acceptance enables you not to have to hide things about yourself and to find freedom to be yourself.
When there is the experience of acceptance like this within a marriage, when you know you are truly loved and accepted, then there is the possibility of change and growth.
Many couples enter into marriages with the highest intentions, and while the chemistry is most potent the intentions are more easily converted into action.
The important decision is never to give up working for each other 's benefit.
We all need to work at forgiveness and acceptance right into our dotage.
The foundation of commitment
Love is a depends-what-you-mean word.
It is all very well to talk about love, but it depends what you mean by it, for love is one of the most devalued terms and concepts in our language.
Towards the end of his first letter to the Corinthians, Paul challenges the Corinthian Christians on the quality of their love, and in doing so has provided us with a bench-mark of quality as far as the practice of love is concerned.
The famous words of 1 Corinthians 13 are all about commitment.
Paul speaks of love in terms of behaviour, in fact as a commitment to behave in a certain kind of way.
Paul shows how love can be practised.
‘Love is patient, and kind; love is not jealous or boastful; it is not arrogant or rude.
Love does not insist on its own way; it is not irritable or resentful; it does not rejoice at wrong, but rejoices in the right.
Love bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things’(1 Cor.
13:4–7 RSV).
If that sounds like a counsel of perfection, it is not meant to be, for Paul is showing the practicalities of love when put into action.
This foundation of commitment means a decision to behave according to certain standards of conduct towards another person.
These standards of conduct can be applied to marriage, for they are central to Paul's ethical understanding of the outworking of love.
Paul begins his ‘definition’ of love with the examples of patience and kindness.
These both imply the importance of listening, not only to what the other says in words, but also to what the other feels.
Some of us are not good at listening to feelings.
Feelings sometimes are ignored.
They are not always heard.
Learning to listen to feelings is essential in any area of experience.
It is a learning process.
Especially in building a marriage of two different people with two different ways of looking at life.
Felt needs
We all have deeply felt needs beneath the surface.
And we need kindness to respond to those deeply felt needs.
Marriage makes us vulnerable.
So time is needed for good listening, and the formation and expression of kindness and love.
As marriages develop, couples can find themselves busier and busier.
It is a fatal mistake to skimp on time for each other.
For marriage is a commitment to maximise the happiness and the fulfilment of the one by the other.
Patience, kindness, learning to listen to feelings as much as words: all such are needed in the foundation of commitment.
‘Love is patient and kind’.
What can you and your partner do to put this into practice towards each other at the moment?
‘Love is not jealous or boastful’.
Are there ways in which you should adjust your attitudes to.
your partner?
‘Love is not arrogant or rude’.
How, practically, can you apply this principle to your marriage relationship, especially when there is conflict?
‘Love does not insist on its own way’.
Can you find some practical ways of conciliation which will benefit your relationship at present?
‘Love is not irritable or resentful’.
Have you let a catalogue of hurts and wrongs build up?
What are you going to do about it?
‘Love does not rejoice at wrong, but rejoices in the right’.
Are you aiming to bring encouragement and esteem to your partner?
In what practical ways can you do this?
‘Love bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things’.
When you are under pressure, do you really trust that God will uphold you?
Will you decide now to make every effort to improve your marriage, however difficult?
The foundation in God
All couples face hurdles.
As the divorce statistics imply, most couples face their fair share of hurdles–in the first two years of marriage.
But facing up to conflicts and difficulties throughout marriage, be it in the early years or later, is the way of growth and strength.
According to Jesus, it is not possible to consider real foundations in marriage and in life without also considering the spiritual dimension to our lives.
This involves more than just values, but where you are going, your direction, your knowledge and understanding of God's purposes for you personally.
This may be why it is said that couples who pray together, stay together.
It is not as simple as it sounds, but a shared openness to God in life and in marriage makes every difference.
It is not so much a matter of praying together (good though that is), but of being one in purpose and spirit.
It is possible, however, to start off with good intentions, but to slip back on all these important elements once the pressure of circumstances begins to dictate.
Yet Jesus is insistent.
No building can stand without firm foundations, and neither can a marriage.
The person who hears his words and obeys them ‘is like a man building a house, who dug deep, and laid the foundation upon rock; and when a flood arose, the stream broke against that house, and could not shake it, because it had been well built’(Luke 6:48 RSV).
What can you do to start rebuilding the foundations of your marriage?
Ask each other what one manageable action you can perform which will bring the other happiness.
Try doing it!
Do you know what pleases your partner most?
Try finding out.
But don't be hoodwinked into thinking that gifts and other offerings are the way to bring lasting happiness.
Gestures help.
But it is the way you treat each other which matters most.
Try asking, ‘What can we do together that you would like to do?’
You both need to do this to work at the principle of conciliation.
Work on ventilating long-term resentments or hurts by asking, ‘In what area would you like to see me change and why?’
Keep to the rules of the three-stage strategy for resolving anger and conflict outlined earlier.
Keep cool.
Work it through.
Do it together.
Breaking the bonds
As we saw earlier, attitudes to marriage are changing fast.
An American handbook called Divorce — how and when to let go confidently affirms the easy destructibility of the marriage bond.
‘Yes, your marriage can wear out.
People want to experience new things.
Change is part of life.
Letting go of your marriage, if it is no longer good for you, can be the most successful thing you've ever done.
Getting a divorce can be a positive, problem-solving, growth-orientated step.
It can be a personal triumph.’
We are in a rapidly changing world as far as marriage and divorce are concerned.
Between the years 1715 to 1852 the average number of divorces was less than two per year.
When the psychiatrist Jack Dominian wrote his influential book on marital breakdown in 1968, that figure had soared to some 30,000 divorces every year.
In 1986 in the United Kingdom, there was one marriage every 80 seconds, and a divorce once every 175 seconds!
From 1989, with around 165,000 divorces per annum, we are getting on for almost one in two marriages ending in divorce.
Marriage crisis
We live in a world where there is an enormous pressure on the stability of marriage.
Clearly there is much unhappiness.
It is not putting it too strongly to say that marriage is in crisis not only in the UK, but throughout the Western world.
Most of us know someone who is unhappy about their marriage situation.
We are either in the situation ourselves or we are likely to know someone who is.
It is therefore important to look at the Biblical teaching on the painful question of divorce.
Too many too easily turn to divorce to solve their difficulties of conflict.
But for some, however much we wish it to be otherwise, grounds for divorce seem pressing in the desperate unhappiness and pain either or both partners appear to be experiencing.
Jesus and divorce
‘Some Pharisees came to him to test him.
They asked, ‘Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any and every reason?’
(Matt. 19:3).
The arguments were raging even then about marriage and divorce, and the matter was put to Jesus in a situation of controversy, for the Pharisees were playing politics, trying to get Jesus to take sides in the debate.
Two schools of thought, led by influential rabbinic teachers, Shammai and Hillel, disagreed vehemently on their interpretations of a key Old Testament passage dealing with divorce.
The issue concerned the opening statement: ‘If a man marries a woman who becomes displeasing to him because he finds something indecent about her….’
(Deut. 24:1).
The conservative, Shammai, argued that ‘indecent’ referred to adultery, which alone was grounds for divorce.
The liberal, Hillel, focused on the words ‘a woman who becomes displeasing to him’.
He concentrated on the woman becoming displeasing in general, not in the particular sense of adultery.
Hillel advocated a whole range of displeasing behaviour as grounds for divorce, including spoiling the dinner; speaking to other men in the street; wearing unbound hair; speaking disrespectfully to the husband's parents in his presence; even if the wife's voice was so loud it could be overheard by the neighbours!
Hillel's followers made the situation even worse.
Later Rabbi Akabar ruled that ‘a woman who becomes displeasing’ meant a man could divorce his wife if he simply found a woman he liked better and considered more beautiful.
Jesus and first principles
‘Haven't you read,’ Jesus replied, ‘that at the beginning the Creator made them male and female, and said, ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh’?
So they are no longer two but one.
Therefore what God has joined together, let man not separate' (Matt. 19:4–6).
Jesus insists on clarity concerning the nature of marriage.
It is not enough to say, ‘Divorce if your marriage doesn't suit you,’ for marriage is a one-flesh relationship.
And Jesus adds his own comment on the Genesis passage from which the one-flesh teaching is taken, ‘What God has joined together, let man not separate’(Matt. 19:6).
Jesus emphasises that marriage is a unique work of God.
It is not simply a contractual relationship which can be ended at will, for what God has joined together cannot be ended lightly.
Although a contract or covenant is involved,marriage is a state of being, not just of belonging .
That thought is contained in the word ‘wedding’ which refers to this Biblical idea of being indissolubly ‘wedded’to each other.
Marriage is intended as a bond for life, and Jesus's appeal to first principles provides us with a high view of marriage, a vivid contrast to liberal teaching then and now.
Jesus and the human situation
‘Jesus replied, ‘Moses permitted you to divorce your wives because your hearts were hard.
But it was not this way from the beginning.
I tell you that anyone who divorces his wife, except for marital unfaithfulness, and marries another woman commits adultery’ ' (Matt. 19:8).
The Pharisees had asked why Moses commanded that a man give his wife a certificate of divorce.
(Matthew 19:7.)
Jesus's reply displays great concern for what Moses actually said: ‘Moses permitted you….’
(Not ‘commanded you’.)
The difference is of immense importance.
The certificate of divorce was a simple but eventually abused means of effecting the divorce procedure.
The woman had no rights in the matter, for by Jesus's time all the man had to do was to write out the words ‘I divorce you’ and the divorce was effected.
Jesus points out that Moses did not command this.
Moses permitted divorce because of the human realities involved, for it was meant to be a protection for the woman against the possibility of physically aggressive acts from the husband.
There is no sense in which Moses commanded divorce.
As Jesus says, it was permitted because of the hardness of men's hearts.
Human realities are recognised, but in Jesus's teaching the lifelong marriage deal is nonetheless firmly upheld.
Jesus and the grounds of divorce
Remember Jesus was asked about the legality of divorce.
His reply was authoritative, clarifying, and decisive.
Jesus is clearly telling the Pharisees that a libertarian attitude to divorce is not acceptable.
We do not have the freedom to do just what we like.
Because marriage is a state of being, not just a contract, and it is ordained by God himself.
Marriages cannot be ended at will or whim.
Jesus is also recognising the realities of human experience.
It is possible so to violate the state of marriage, specifically by adultery, that in those circumstances divorce is conceivable and permissible.
Thus Jesus is not countering the Pharisees' arguments with a new legalism of his own.
Jesus's words, like Moses, are a concession and not a directive.
Jesus understands the hardness of the human heart, and has compassion on those in marriage relationships who find their lives in turmoil and pain.
Paul's view
Our examination of the Biblical material needs also to listen to the teaching of Apostle Paul.
Paul speaks of the pastoral situation of a Christian man or woman being married to someone who is not a Christian.
Such a situation would have been very common then, and is increasingly common now.
Paul's counsel to those in such a situation is that they should not divorce if the other partner is willing to stay.
But note Paul's qualifying words, ‘If the unbeliever leaves, let him do so.
A believing man or woman in such circumstances is not bound’(1 Cor.
7:15).
Here then we have another concession.
Notice that Paul does not tie himself legalistically to the details of Jesus's words.
He would certainly have known the Lord's teaching on this important matter.
But he doesn't say, ‘Jesus says there is only one ground for divorce, and that is adultery.’
By implication, he goes to the heart of  what Jesus has been teaching.
Sadly, a marriage of two people can be violated at the deepest level of trust and union.
This must be Paul's reasoning as he applies Jesus's principle to another area of experience.
If this were not so, Paul's words would have contradicted what Jesus teaches.
Paul is applying a principle rather than a precept.
The background to Paul's conclusion is not complicated.
Paul counsels that believers should not knowingly be married to those who are not followers of Christ.
But where that is the case, however the marriage has been contracted, divorce and remarriage are both possible, if divorce appears the only option.
That will only be so if the unbelieving partner is to leave, because at that point the values and foundations of the marriage are shown to be violated and at odds.
So taking the overall position of Scripture on this matter, it is clear there is no Biblical set of rules and regulations for divorce and remarriage as such.
What we do have, however, is one supreme foundation principle.
Marriage is designed and intended to be a lifelong one-flesh relationship.
Moses, Jesus and Paul all recognise the human realities involved.
Marriages can fail, and divorce is sometimes necessary.
But in spite of what is often claimed, there is no such thing as a dead marriage.
There can be failure, hurt, violation and muddle.
Some marriages can appear practically lifeless with little hope.
Yet change is possible where there is willingness that progress should take place.
Marriage under pressure
If you are one of the unfortunate ones facing misery in your marriage, let me say with sensitivity and understanding that God does and will sustain those in deeply unhappy relationships, especially those in marriages where one partner simply refuses to do anything to help the situation.
All our efforts and prayers should be directed  towards getting both partners to co-operate in finding help.
Marital pathology is fully recognised by those who give support through marriage counselling.
It means that we bring our disordered lives right into marriage more than we do in any other kind of relationship.
That is why the assistance of a trained, skilled and sympathetic third party is of such help when marriage conflict gets out of hand.
Selfishness is one of the biggest problems in marriages.
‘If each partner comes to regard marriage as primarily a quest for his or her self-fulfilment, rather than as an adventure in reciprocal self-giving, through.which parents and children grow into maturity, then the outlook is likely to be bleak’(John Stott,Issues Facing Christians Today , Marshalls, 1984).
It is really worth saying to all who are married or who will be one day, and particularly to those who are maintaining painful relationships, you must work at being generous to your partner.
That means giving yourself, and giving yourself, and giving yourself, over and over again.
You have to pick yourself up when you get rebuffed for the thousandth time, and despite the discouragement, don't lose heart.
After all, if you have hurt each other, your husband or wife may take quite some convincing that you truly mean it when you say you are really going to change.
But give yourself you must, for selfishness must be conquered.
Taking stock
All this takes time and a great deal of patience and application.
It means taking stock of what is important in your life.
It means taking practical decisions about the use of time.
Those who put their work or other considerations before their family life often live to regret it.
It means soul-searching and prayer.
It means not going it alone.
It requires the love and support of close family and friends.
What are proper grounds for divorce?
As the law stands in England and Wales there is only one ground, namely  that the marriage has irretrievably broken down.
In order to demonstrate this breakdown, proof is required for one or more of these five facts:
That the respondent has committed adultery and the petitioner finds it intolerable to live with the respondent.
That the respondent has behaved in such a way that the petitioner cannot reasonably be expected to live with the respondent.
That the respondent has deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of at least two years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition.
That the parties have lived apart for a continuous period of at least two years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition and that the respondent agrees to a decree being granted.
That the parties have lived apart for at least five years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition.
A petition for divorce cannot be presented until one year has elapsed since the marriage was formalised, whatever the circumstances may be.
Judicial separation proceedings can be started at any time should the full protection of court proceedings be required.
These are the pure legalities of divorce proceedings.
But what is the case from a Biblical and Christian perspective?
Some would say that only two ‘facts’ exist: adultery, and the desertion of an unbelieving partner.
Others will say there are further matters which can destroy the very heart of a marriage and lead to irretrievable breakdown.
Both Jesus and Paul will say that marriage is designed to be a one-flesh lifelong relationship, but they both recognise the human realities.
It is only when everything else has genuinely been tried that divorce can ever be  contemplated.
Jesus's words are intended to put a stop to liberal divorce practices, and an all-too-easy acceptance of failure when more can be done.
Facing facts
If you have been through a divorce, you must have asked yourself, what if I'd handled things differently?
How would things be today?
The answer is you cannot change the past.
God takes us as we are.
The Lord who says, ‘I hate divorce’(Mal. 2:16) also affirms ‘I will heal their waywardness and love them freely, for my anger has turned away from them’(Hos. 14:4).
We believe in a God who offers complete forgiveness where there has been failure, and new strength for the future day by day.
We all have a responsibility to help those who are married, as well as upholding with sympathetic love those whose marriages have failed.
The pressures today from our society are enormous.
Housing, money, unemployment, family and in-laws, religion, sexual expectations and sexual difficulties.
All these add to the pressure.
Above all the drift to a self-seeking, self-satisfying, self-fulfilling approach to relationships is where the rot is really setting in.
If you are facing the facts in your relationship or that of someone close to you, be encouraged.
There is forgiveness and a new start for all those who follow Christ.
There is a power and strength available from the Holy Spirit which means it is truly possible to change in reliance on him.
We should look with deep understanding and compassion upon those whose relationships have failed or are in danger of failing.
But let's also resolve to do something to help.
Prayer makes such a difference.
And there may be something you should be doing to help your own situation or the situation of someone else.
As a Christian, as you observe the lives of others, perhaps you are in a situation of stability.
Do give thanks, but remember this; it is always a case of there but for the grace of God go I. 
Review the lessons you have learned in this chapter.
What are the most important insights you have gained?
Work out a personal timetable for putting these thoughts into practice.
What can you do to help yourself and your partner?
What can you do to help someone else?
Work through the marriage vows.
Think about their implications for you and for your partner.
Then work at them together.
You may want (and need) to choose a suitable time to reaffirm these vows again to each other.
‘I (your name) take you (your partner's name) to be my wife (husband), to have and to hold, from this day forward, for better, for worse, for richer, for poorer, in sickness and in health, to love and to cherish, till death us do part, according to God's holy law; and this is my solemn vow.’
Spend some moments working out on paper the most important issues you need to pray about.
Now meditate on these words of Paul, thinking about what they tell you about the grace and love of God in your own situation or that of someone close to you.
Use this knowledge of God's care as you spend some moments praying through the issues you have isolated in the points above.
‘Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of compassion and the God of all comfort, who comforts us in all our troubles, so that we can comfort those in any trouble with the comfort we have received from God’(2 Cor.
1:3–4).
CONFLICTS OF SPIRIT
Conflict affects us in a variety of ways.
Conflict doesn't just involve us in disputations with others.
Conflict often takes place within ourselves.
It is felt as a tussle of will, a powerful urge to transgress standards of thought or behaviour which only a part of us declares as inviolable.
It is something akin to a child's musing choice to disobey a parent, ‘Shall I or shan't I?’
Inner conflict involves the experience of temptation, the seduction of ambition and often a struggle with God, perceived or unrealised.
Our inner world
Inner conflict has as much potential for good as it does evil, for the conflicts experienced provide opportunities for mature choices, as well as self-luxuriating indulgences.
Conflict and the potential for growth therefore belong together.
In this chapter, we'll be looking at the conflicts of our inner world in relation to God's purposes for the development of our wholeness and maturity.
The struggle for freedom of mind and spirit is always linked in the Bible with the embrace of God's will for our lives.
That it is a struggle is evidenced both by the substance of God's commandments to his people, and by the experience of those who are held.
up to us as examples of the kind of living faith which overcomes the pressing difficulties of inner conflict of these kinds.
Wouldn't it be lovely…
Imagine yourself in your favourite shopping street.
It's a lovely sunny afternoon.
You have money in your pocket, a cheque-book on you and one or two credit cards as well.
It is a strange sensation, but many sense it from time to time: a consuming desire to part with money.
That reckless spending feeling has gripped you.
On your walkabout, you notice that your favourite department store have their sale on.
It's their thirty-second sale of the year.
How do they do it?
But just look at that suite of furniture.
Only £5,000.
Save £4,999.
It has to be a bargain!
Your heart starts beating faster.
Your mind begins to race.
But just feel that adrenalin as you walk farther along the road.
Look at that latest low-light video camera in the photo store; the striped green leather moccasins in that new rather up-market shoe shop; the new designer range of clothes next door.
To say nothing of the cut-price Caribbean cruise, the satellite-TV dish and the fully computerised Cosworth car at a cool £25,000 from the newly opened Ford dealers.
As you come to the end of your Saturday afternoon stroll, your mind is full of enticing possibilities.
Enjoy now, pay later
Wouldn't it be lovely to be rich?
Maybe it would.
But the dread disease of covetousness afflicts even the very wealthy.
A strange fact about those of us who live in the West is that we always seem to want more than we have.
Such an attitude provides the inner experience of conflict for many.
It is enthusiastically fuelled by the advertisers and made respectable by successive governments of all countries who make consumerism into a summum bonum .
Yet covetousness goes farther than material things alone.
It touches some very deep questions as to what we are as people, and how we react to a variety of inner desires  and temptations.
It's not just the excitement of going shopping and using your plastic flexible friends to enjoy now and pay later.
You shall not covet
The tenth commandment raises this issue in a most searching and relevant way.
‘You shall not covet your neighbour's house.
You shall not covet your neighbour's wife, or his manservant or maidservant, his ox or donkey, or anything that belongs to your neighbour’(Exod. 20:17).
Since these words are of such great antiquity, recorded some three and a half thousand years ago, how are they still relevant today, especially in relation to the inner conflicts of our lives?
To discover the impressive contemporary relevance of such imperatives, we need to establish what we mean when we speak of covetousness, and what is envisaged in the Bible by the idea of coveting.
Entertainment value
Many of the TV soap operas exploit covetousness.
Dynasty is one of many and has enjoyed some huge ratings.
In one episode, the usual cliffhanger excitement was almost literal at the end as Alexis and Dex went hurtling over the balcony.
But whatever had happened to unsettle their dignity, they had spent the whole episode in usual fashion (along with Blake, Jeff, Adam, Sammy Jo, Fallon, Monica and Sable and the rest) all scheming away, trying to get each other 's money, destroying each other 's reputation and jumping into bed with those they had no right to.
It is all done very cheerfully, and you can hardly believe in the characters as real people, though these personality weaknesses are very-real and recognisable.
It is noticeable how Dynasty ,Dallas , and many other soaps on TV tend to focus on this kind of human  weakness, often exploiting covetousness.
The impulse to covetousness provides much of the subject matter for the human battles of their story lines.
Plastic and unbelievable though the characters may be, yet realistic and true to life are the human temptations and struggles involved.
The power to destroy
What happens when the coveting feeling takes a hold?
When people covet it makes them greedy.
Covetousness can cause stealing.
Such greed can drive people to sacrifice the well-being of others.
It can lead to murder in extreme cases.
Covetousness affects relationships.
It gives rise to lust.
The kind of lust which can end up in adultery, extramarital sex, or unsought pregnancies.
It can lie behind much human unhappiness, including dissatisfaction, depression and divorce.
Covetousness is comprehensive.
It can be directed towards objects, money or sex, as well as inner feelings.
It can lead people to lie about themselves, destroying trust and love.
It can be an attempt to gain wealth, power, prestige or praise.
Above all, covetousness has enormous power and potential to destroy.
To destroy us and others.
Old sayings
There is a logic to the ancient tenth commandment, ‘You shall not covet your neighbour's house…wife, or his manservant or maidservant, his ox or donkey, or anything that belongs to your neighbour’(Exod. 20:17).
It is because God loves us and desires the best for our humanness and growth that he declares a law against covetousness.
The enticement to covet is like the attraction of an enchanting perfume, one which turns out to be a delicious, attractive, sweet-tasting poison.
It is highly beguiling, but it has power to stifle and to kill.
Every nation and culture has sayings and proverbs about covetousness.
It is often said, ‘The grass is always  greener on the other side of the fence.’
There is a Scottish proverb which puts its point delightfully: ‘The covetous man will never have enough — until his mouth is filled with mould.’
A Hindu proverb is just as vivid: ‘If you mention money, even the corpse opens wide its mouth.’
There is a widespread recognition of the reality of covetousness.
Yet despite that recognition, only in the Bible do you find the true nature, extent and solution to covetousness clearly spelt out.
The Bible recognises covetousness; it also has a solution to it.
And no other culture, no other religion in the world, goes so deep.
The nature of covetousness
Though much of the Bible deals with the outworking of the dangers of coveting in practice, the tenth commandment is the place where the matter is dealt with starkly and specifically, and with deeper insight into its inner workings.
All the other commandments involve specific actions.
Don't do this.
Do that.
But the tenth commandment is different from all the rest.
The tenth commandment is not about an action, it's about an attitude.
It's inward rather than external.
It forbids an attitude rather than an action.
This teaches that covetousness is a state of mind and heart.
It introduces into the Bible the idea that wrong thoughts and wrong desires precede wrong actions.
That lays a foundation for the teaching of Jesus many years later, ‘For out of the heart come evil thoughts, murder, adultery, sexual immorality, theft, false testimony, slander’(Matt. 15:20).
The principle we can distil from this is that thoughts precede actions.
Can you think of times when the desire to covet has gripped your thoughts?
What specific areas were you coveting, and why do you interpret this as coveting as such?
How did the thoughts take hold of you?
What did you do to let the thoughts remain or to rid yourself of them?
There are fifty-nine references in the teaching of Jesus to the importance of the heart in this respect.
His teaching is clear that wrong desires precede wrong actions.
In working through the whole question of the handling of desire, the commandment deals with the power of the attitude itself and not just the power of deeds which provide the allurement and attraction.