

The Politics of Variation: Sex Differences of Language (I)
INTRODUCTION
Although this chapter and the next are about sex differences in the use of language, they should not be treated as an exhaustive catalogue of research findings on that subject.
Rather, they have two concerns: the first, which they share with Chapter 5, is with the sexism of linguistic science, as expressed in various assumptions and practices; while the second is with the political significance of sex difference itself.
Throughout this discussion I will be emphasising the idea that the study of sex differences cannot help having a political dimension, because the male/female difference is so important for the organisation of the societies in which studies of difference are done.
This was true even before the current wave of feminism (Virginia Woolf in 1929 and Simone de Beauvoir in 1949 both marvelled at the huge volume of material on the subject); contemporary feminism has just made the political implications easier to see.
Historically, a lot of sex difference research was done specifically in order to provide a scientific account of an already-assumed female inferiority — taking comparative measurements of male and female brains, for instance, as a way of explaining why women were weaker intellectually than men.
Even when this was not the overt purpose, research results have been used to justify particular aspects of women's subordination: thus even today it is sometimes said that girls don't become engineers because they lack spatial ability, or that their relative lack of aggression makes them less effective leaders.
Of course we can contest this kind of sexism by arguing about the accuracy of particular scientific findings.
If a finding is incorrect, then the conclusions drawn from it are discredited at once.
For instance, the generalisation that women are physically weaker than men has been qualified; in some areas, like endurance, they may be much stronger than was thought and capable of outperforming men in certain tasks.
But this is to allow the opponent to set the terms for debate, accepting assumptions that feminists ought perhaps to question (for example, that women should be treated equally only to the extent that they resemble men) and thus conceding a vital part of the argument.
Inaccurate or biased research deserves our criticism, but it is just as important to ask the prior questions of why researchers have chosen to study sex differences so intensively in the first place (why does no-one study ‘sex similarity’?
There is plenty of it, after all) and why they have interpreted their findings in particular(and sexist) ways.
It is because of these broader questions that an honourable feminist tradition has arisen, especially in the social sciences, of directing attention to the way sex difference has been described and explained, rather than to the content of difference itself.
This feminist critique is aimed at exposing the hidden political agenda of social science, its underlying motivation for the endless ferreting out of differences.
Curiously enough, though, this has not been the major concern of feminist work in the social science disciplines of linguistics and speech communication.
Feminists studying language have in general been more interested in furthering the study of sex difference than in criticising it, and though it is acceptable to sneer at long-dead commentators like Jespersen, whose work we will shortly come to, a thorough critique of modem sociolinguistics has been very slow to emerge.
Why should this be so?
I would suggest that feminist linguists have two main motives for studying sex differences.
One is positive : the quest for an authentic female language, whether this is taken to reflect some deep-seated cognitive difference, or the existence in many societies of a distinctive female subculture.
The other is more negative : to identify the sexual power dynamic in language use, the conventions and behaviours through which speech reflects and perpetuates gender inequality.
Both motives can be discerned in today's feminist linguistics; they are not necessarily totally opposed, though it must be said, at times their coexistence is rather uneasy.
Whichever motive is uppermost for them, feminist linguists engaged in sex difference research do not seem to find the idea of  studying difference problematic in itself.
They agree, too, that the differences they study are social rather than innate.
They are products of, on one hand, women's own activities and values, or on the other, their oppression by men.
By studying the differences and the ways in which they arise we can arrive at an understanding of how language relates to gender.
This is all very well.
But it needs to be acknowledged here that the feminist concerns just mentioned have something in common with nonfeminist and even anti-feminist concerns in studying sex difference.
Although they favour differing explanations, the feminist and the sexist share a belief that linguistic behaviour is one of the keys to understanding the nature and status of women.
While this agreement is not altogether surprising — feminists cannot entirely avoid fighting on already established ground, and the cultural importance of sex difference is deeply entrenched — its consequences have sometimes been regrettable.
I propose, then, to look at how sex differences in language reflect, or are said to reflect, the natures or roles or statuses of women and men.
As well as pointing out biases and gaps in the way these ideas have been applied, I will be trying to demonstrate the more general point that it is always problematic to treat language use as a direct reflection of social identity.
In different ways, both pre- or nonfeminist linguists and feminists themselves have very often done just this.
I want to suggest that it is ultimately unsatisfactory, both on intellectual and political grounds.
My discussion will be divided between this chapter and Chapter 4.
In this chapter, I focus on cultural beliefs about the language of women and men: that is, what linguists call ‘folklinguistics’.
I will examine both the lengthy tradition of comment on sex differences that existed prior to this wave of feminism, and the newer tradition of feminist folklinguistics exemplified both by some linguists and by some ‘feminists in the street’.
Oddly enough, these two traditions are not antithetical.
They are, in some ways, similar.
It is obviously of interest to ask why this should be, and in the light of the resemblance whether feminist versions of folklinguistics serve any useful political purpose.
In Chapter 4, I will deal with the ‘scientific’ alternative to folklinguistics: sociolinguistics.
This progression from one to the other will not be presented as a journey from darkness into light.
On the contrary, it will become clear that scientific investigations are thoroughly imbued with the very same assumptions we find in  folklinguistic speculation.
In many cases, the conventions of academic discourse force researchers to make these assumptions even more explicit and specific.
Together, these two chapters constitute an attempt to address the question I consider to be of overriding importance, which is not whether male/female differences exist (they do), what they are or what causes them, but what they mean : what significant social uses are made of them, or more accurately of discourse about them.
This is an important and also a difficult point, so let me try to make it clearer.
It goes back to the question I posed above: what motivates people to study sex differences and to place such emphasis upon them?
In an article called ‘Woman's Time’, the philosopher and critic Julia Kristeva once put forward a three-stage model of feminism.
The first stage was for women to demand equality with men (‘liberal’ feminism).
The second stage was to reinterpret difference so that women's own activities would gain social value even though they were different from men's (‘radical’ feminism).
The third stage — Utopian at this point — was to transcend gender divisions altogether.
The male/female difference would not necessarily disappear, but it would become socially insignificant, as many human variations (height, blood group) are now.
Kristeva's model is not intended either as a concise account of feminism's recent history nor as an orderly, linear chronology for feminists to follow (though she does seem to think that each of her stages represents an improvement over the one before).
The best way to understand it, in my view, is as a way of separating out the different impulses represented in today's highly varied feminist thinking.
This is not to say that all the stages are equally well-represented and well-understood.
Most contemporary feminist politics is somewhere between the first and second stages, that is, it oscillates between deploring and celebrating difference, between the negative and positive motivations I outlined above, without realistically expecting — yet — to transcend current gender divisions.
At this stage, as Kristeva implies, an interest in, even a fascination with sex difference is very much a fact of our lives; and it is certainly not a neutral fact.
One way a visiting alien would be able to tell that the male/female difference is not just an insignificant human variation is by observing how obsessively, how incessantly we talk about it.
As long as Kristeva's third stage is present in our thinking only as a Utopian dream, feminists cannot simply refuse to  get involved in this endless discourse of difference; people who claim that this is a postfeminist era are living in a dream world.
But we do have to face the paradox implicit in our contributing to the discourse, which is that every word we say on the subject of difference just underlines the salience and the importance of a division we are ultimately striving to end.
If we want studies of sex difference to work towards our liberation rather than perpetuating our subordination, we have to take this problem very seriously.
What that means, among other things, is that feminists who engage in this kind of research must refuse easy answers, answers that can easily be accommodated within the system as it is now.
We must criticise explanations of difference that treat gender as something obvious, static and monolithic, ignoring the forces that shape it and the varied forms they take in different times and places.
Such explanations are simplistic and pernicious, because whatever their intentions, they tend to end up just like non-feminist research, by giving an academic gloss to commonplace stereotypes and so reinforcing the status quo .
What I am trying to say is that merely paying attention to sex difference — affirming that women exist and are different from men — is not in and of itself a feminist gesture.
It can just as easily fall back into anti-feminism.
Even to celebrate what is distinctive about women does not, in my opinion, automatically qualify as feminist.
Feminism begins when we approach sex differences as constructs, show how they are constructed and in whose interests.
We underestimate at our peril the difficulty and danger with which the ‘politics of variation’ are fraught.
DELIMITING THE FIELD: WHAT IS SEX DIFFERENCE?
So far, I have been using the term ‘sex difference’ without explanation.
It may seem a strange usage, too, because feminists usually make a distinction between sex (anatomical, biological) and gender (social, cultural).
The differences we are concerned with here are clearly of the social type.
Let me clarify, then, that sex difference in these two chapters is intended to mean (social) difference between the sexes; because gender is also a technical term in grammar, linguists have tended to signal an interest in women rather than word-endings by speaking of ‘language and sex’ where feminists in  other fields would prefer ‘language and gender’.
(I have used ‘gender’ myself in contexts where there is no risk of ambiguity.)
It might seem that every question about language and sex is a question of sex difference, but for linguists the concept is more limited.
It goes back to the distinction between langue and parole , the system itself and the use of the system in actual social contexts.
Sociolinguistics, the study of language variation, does not concern itself with what is in the language: how many and what sort of pronouns or terms referring to women, for instance.
Rather it studies the choices speakers make from the options available to them.
If a linguistic feature (like rising intonation or the word darling ) is used more by one sex than the other, or if norms and standards differ from one group to the next (for instance, it is less acceptable for women to swear) then we are dealing with a sociolinguistic sex difference.
Sally McConnell-Ginet has pointed out, in my view quite correctly, that this is a somewhat partial and simplistic approach to the interaction of gender with language use.
She observes, for example, that gender may affect language use in a given situation not just as a property of the speaker but also as a characteristic of the addressee; the determining factor might be who is being spoken to rather than who is speaking.
This (and other similar over-simplifications) need to be borne in mind.
Nevertheless I will follow common practice in using ‘sex/gender difference’ as short-hand for difference that correlates with the sex of the speaker.
It can be seen from this explanation that sociolinguistics is basically comparative , comparing the usage of one group (for example women) with another (for example men).
One problem with this is that comparisons have a tendency to set up one group covertly as the norm; in the case of sex, it is men who are the norm.
This immediately makes it more likely that women's ‘deviant’ linguistic behaviour will be explained in stereotypical and sexist terms.
But it is not entirely fair to blame this tendency on sociolinguistic methods alone, since sociolinguists dealing with gender-related variation are only the heirs of a lengthy sexist tradition in the study and lay discussion of male and female speech.
This tradition, usually called ‘folklinguistic’ or ‘anecdotal’, represents the speech of subordinate groups first as different, then as deviant.
In the case of women's speech it goes back to antiquity, and its legacy has proved hard to get rid of.
THE ANECDOTAL TRADITION: WOMEN AND FOLKLINGUISTICS
In any society, we find beliefs about language that are simply accepted as common sense.
These beliefs not only explain to the ordinary language-user things she might have observed for herself, they also regulate linguistic behaviour.
For example, it is widely believed in English-speaking cultures that women are good listeners.
But ‘are’ also has a certain flavour of ‘ought to be’: a lot of oral and written advice to women (for example, in the problem pages of women's magazines) urges us to make use of this supposed talent.
In this way, a tendency which is real but slight may become exaggerated; or one which is not real may come into being.
It is therefore difficult to make a clear separation between folklinguistics and linguistics proper (in this chapter and the next, I will give several examples of the interaction between them).
Even so, one could argue that it is necessary for sociolinguists at least to attempt such a distinction between  folklinguistic stereotype and linguistic fact: particularly when the stereotypes in question are both ludicrous and contemptuous of women speakers.
All too often, linguists — not excluding feminist ones — seem to overlook the folklinguistic roots of their supposedly ‘value-free’ observations.
It would be an exaggeration to claim that all anecdotal observations about sex differences in language are sexist in the sense of insulting women.
Sometimes they are sexist only in the subtler sense that they reinforce the idea of an absolute, all-pervading sex difference.
Everything is given a metaphorical sex, and never shall the two sexes overlap.
In 1712, for example, Jonathan Swift claimed in his ‘proposal for Correcting, Improving and Ascertaining the English Tongue’, that some sounds (‘hard’ consonants) were typical of male speech, others (vowels and liquids) of female speech.
Since vowels are not better nor worse than consonants — indeed Swift explicitly says that language needs both masculine and feminine tendencies — this is a relatively non-misogynist stereotype.
Nevertheless it is pernicious because it trades on the pernicious habit of labelling things or qualities (hard/soft, consonant/vowel) masculine or feminine (a habit we must return to in Chapter 5).
It is also, of course, rubbish.
Contemporary readers are apt to be startled that Swift, an intelligent man, should have said, still less actually believed, anything so silly.
It bears pointing out, therefore, that silliness on this whole subject was not put to rout by the coming of a more formal and scholarly type of linguistic study.
Feminists have rediscovered with astonishment, for example, the work of the Danish grammarian Otto Jespersen, who published in 1922, more than two centuries after Swift, a book grandly entitled Language: its nature, development and origin , and containing a chapter called ‘The Woman’.
(This, by the way, is a good example of setting one group up as the norm and treating others as deviant.
As many commentators have noted, there is no chapter in Jespersen's book called ‘The Man’.)
Without adducing any real evidence (he refers sometimes to the dialogue given to women characters in novels or plays by men), Jespersen tells us women speak more softly and politely than men, have smaller and less varied vocabularies, use diminutives like teeny weeny , construct their sentences ‘loosely, and leave them unfinished, all the while jumping from topic to topic.
These characteristics of women's speech were evidently not chosen at random and are not value-free.
Jespersen is caught between his fantasies (soft-spoken, retiring child-women) and his prejudices (loquacious yet bird-brained women) to produce a stereotype that is both old (think of Shakespeare's comment that a low voice is an excellent thing in woman) and yet contemporary.
Popular culture gives us plenty of female verbal incontinence (cf the Andy Capp joke: ‘when two wives get together, who has the last word?’) and illogical women who can't keep to the point (as a character in the soap opera Coronation Street comments, ‘you might as well try to knit fog as follow what's in a woman's mind’).
Stereotypes, however false, tend to persist for as long as the social differences and inequalities they reinforce.
So long as women are subordinate to men, their language will continue to be stereotyped as indicating natural subservience, unintelligence and immaturity.
So long as men dominate women in conversation by restricting their talk, our folklinguistic beliefs will include the idea that women talk incessantly.
Nor does it matter that the stereotypes are internally contradictory.
As a male student once pointed out to me in a moment of inspiration, it doesn't make sense to say both that women's talk is trivial and that it is ‘deep’ compared to men's.
Yet both these things do continue to be said.
Linguistically this might not make sense.
Politically however it does.
Even feminists have not always subjected linguistic stereotypes to the scrutiny they require.
The first book to alert linguists to the political implications of sex differences, Robin Lakoff's 1975 work  Language and Woman's Place , is remarkable for creating a stereotype of its own — and one not so very different from its overtly chauvinistic precursors.
According to Lakoff, there are two styles of speech: ‘neutral language’ and ‘women's language’(another example of norm-and-deviation thinking, though Lakoff is more self-conscious about it).
The latter is characterised by a lack of forcefulness.
Women use more tag questions (‘approval-seeking’ constructions like ‘that'll be all right, won't it?’), more ‘uncertain’rising intonations, more intensifiers (so, really, very ) and more qualifiers (not exactly, a bit ), more exaggerated politeness and less offensive expletives than men.
This is a subservient way of talking in which everything is hedged about and nothing asserted outright.
Lakoff is a feminist, and her explanation of women's language is not like Jespersen's, however much the language itself may seem to be.
She explains that women are socialised to hedge their meaning in language for fear of giving offence to men.
But her account is still an anecdotal one, and has not always been borne out by empirical research.
Dubois and Crouch, for instance, tested the hypothesis that women use more tag questions than men.
In their sample, on the contrary, it was men who used more.
Other recent researchers, like Janet Holmes and Cameron, McAlinden and O'Leary have found women and men using roughly equal numbers of tags.
Yet the idea that this is a ‘women's form’ persists: it is as though people want to believe Lakoff because her account fits so well with prevailing ideas.
Why do stereotypes like this persist not just in folklinguistics but also in modern scientific linguistics?
In Lakoff's case, it might be a reflection of her training in the Chomskyan tradition, which urges the analyst to examine her own intuitions rather than collecting a corpus of data.
This method is not very satisfactory when the point is precisely to make generalisations about group behaviour, as in the case of language and sex research.
That is one reason why most feminists in this field work within the paradigm of sociolinguistics, which we will look at more closely in Chapter 4.
But Lakoff's particular academic training cannot be the whole story.
Feminists who are not linguists also have strong folklinguistic beliefs about women's speech, and they are — once again— reminiscent of the beliefs of anti-feminists, though of course the feminists interpret them differently.
INVESTIGATING FEMINIST FOLKLINGUISTICS
I have attended many feminist seminars, workshops and group discussions about language, and there are certain folklinguistic assertions that I have heard over and over again from the (nonlinguist) women present.
From those assertions I have put together a feminist folklinguistic profile of women's speech with the following features.
1.
Disfluency.
Women have trouble communicating in a ‘male’ language and the result is hesitations, false starts, and so on.
2.
Unfinished sentences.
3.
Speech not ordered according to the norms of logic (or to put this another way, ordered according to women's differing notion of logic).
4.
Use of questions, including statements couched as questions.
5.
Speaking less than men in mixed groups.
6.
Using co-operative and supportive strategies in conversation, whereas men are more competitive.
This is how many feminists believe women speak, and there is a tendency to make these attributes the basis of an authentic ‘women's speech style’ which should be positively valued.
Feminists claim the right, in language as in other spheres, to do things differently from men without this being seen as indicative of inferiority.
They propose to ‘revalue’ women's distinctive way of talking.
As a general political strategy, there is nothing wrong with revaluing women's traditions.
Indeed there is every reason to believe that society in general would benefit from it.
But on this particular question of language, I think we should proceed with caution, because the feminist folklinguistic profile raises a number of problems.
The most obvious problem is, do women really talk this way?
For it seems pointless to revalue a tradition that exists only in the feminist folklinguistic imagination.
And a second problem is, supposing women do use the features listed above, what does this actually mean?
Does it mean what feminists think it means?
Is it a straightforwardly positive thing or is it — as Lakoff might suggest — a disadvantage in many situations?
To put matters in more concrete terms, what exactly is the linguistic evidence for such impressionistic labels as ‘logic’ and  ‘cooperativeness’?
And supposing we identify particular features we judge as exemplifying these things, what is the evidence that those features don't mean something else entirely?
For instance, it is not difficult to think of linguistic features that could be defined as disfluencies.
We could take a piece of data and quantify the hesitations, false starts, repetitions, pauses and so on.
But linguists have long debated the issue of what disfluency means.
Some believe pausing is the hallmark of a careful or thoughtful speaker, planning her next utterance.
Those who pause rarely are thoughtless and unintelligent.
For this reason, ironically, Jespersen claimed that men pause more than women.
Others believe hesitancy indicates errors in language processing, while yet others claim it is a stylistic device that conveys a message to the hearer that the speaker is uncertain, or perhaps reluctant to offend.
So if we find a sex difference in disfluency, we are still left with a problem of interpretation.
The question of unfinished sentences is problematic in a different way.
It would not surprise most linguists to find them in women's speech, because they are absolutely normal in all speech.
The ‘finished’ sentences with which they are implicitly contrasted are an artefact of writing .
Literate societies have a strong tendency to take writing as the norm of language.
But a moment's thought will show that this is somewhat perverse.
Speech, especially face to face conversation, uses resources (intonation, pausing, gesture, gaze) that writing does not permit.
It is therefore much less important to use ‘perfect’ sentential syntax.
Unfinished sentences in speech are not an indication that the speaker is uncertain, incompetent or alienated.
Logic in language is a particularly broad and difficult notion.
One question that immediately arises is whether it refers to the content of speech or to the form — the sequencing of utterances, for instance.
Another is, in either case, what exactly would constitute greater or lesser logic (since I take it no-one is claiming that any speaker communicates in propositional calculus).
In relation to the ‘content versus form’ issue, it is perhaps worth mentioning a possible link with the more general debate about what is called ‘moral reasoning’.
In one of the most influential pieces of feminist research on sex differences ever produced, the psychologist Carol Gilligan argued that women and men tend to use different criteria and reasoning procedures in coming to moral decisions.
To  put her claim in drastically simplified terms, men base decisions on a form of blind justice: abstract, depersonalised reasoning procedures which apply the same rules in the same way to every case.
Women's moral reasoning is more ‘relational’: they tend to think about how a decision would affect particular persons in a concrete situation, and make their choices accordingly.
Gilligan relates this difference to the differing social roles and relationships of men and women.
Though some feminists have criticised Gilligan's work on both theoretical and methodological grounds, and its point should therefore not be taken as unquestionably proven, it is worth discussing because it has had enormous influence.
Like Lakoff's book about women and language, it captured the imagination of feminists both inside and outside the academy.
As we shall see in Chapter 4, its ideas are echoed in many studies of women's preferred conversational style.
For the moment, however, it suffices to point out that our usual conception of logic — reasoning things out from abstract first principles — resembles the behaviour of the men in Gilligan's study rather than that of the women.
(Which is not to say that women are illogical, rather that our notions of logic may be androcentric.
Carol Gilligan's book is nonjudgementally titled In A Different Voice .)
If the feminist folklinguistic belief that women are less or differently logical than men is a matter of content , it could be that this is the sort of thing feminists have in mind.
It is difficult to say, however, what formal linguistic correlates (if any) the difference Gilligan proposes might have.
In spite of her title, she does not pursue in detail questions about the language in which men and women reason.
And the feminist folklinguistic discussion of logic does seem to imply that difference lies not only in what women say, but in the way they say it.
It is helpful at this point to introduce some examples of real speech.
My data here come from two conversations: one between two men, recorded for the Survey of English Usage, a large corpus-based project on the structure of educated British English, and one between two women — feminists — which I recorded for purposes of comparison.
(1) B: I must say I tend to be…
I mean I…you know I do talk quite openly to my pupils which is a little daring of me because the situation in Cyprus is a little different from here…
I mean  people are a bit narrow in this respect you know they don't like people to talk about it too openly — but I do because I think it's important but the trouble is that — erm — that's not really systematic in the sense that I do it but how many other people do it you see.
A: Yes it's — er — it's an enormous problem actually because as soon as you start to make a special thing about it then immediately I think you're creating the wrong atmosphere, especially for sex.
(2) C: I'd sell my soul to get nuclear weapons out of Britain
D: Well I don't think you're ever going to get it except by civil disobedience because it's part of what a government's all about, they have to defend the country.
I don't think getting the Labour party to resolve for unilateral disarmament changes anything…they just won't put it into practice they can't…you look at the record of governments there's no way they can stop defending us
C: I think that there's some hope now with the Labour party because they've — um — compromised themselves politically so far that they wouldn't…
These extracts, I hope, show just how common disfluency and unfinished sentences are in the speech of both sexes.
What, though, do they show about logic?
One could make a case that the women's conversation is more logical than the men's.
The structure of extract (2) could be shown like this:
C asserts that nuclear weapons should go (opinion);
D says the only way to do it is civil disobedience (counter-opinion);
because governments have to defend the country, so you can't believe promises parties out of power make to disarm (justification of stated opinion);
look at the record of governments (evidence for justification);
C disagrees: there is hope in getting the Labour party to commit itself (opinion);
because it would be politically counterproductive to break promises made to their constituency (justification).
This argument has many features of logical debate.
The women justify their points carefully and bring in evidence to support them.
They state their opinions and express disagreement explicitly.
The sequence of remarks is an unbroken chain of assertion and counter-assertion.
Extract (1), in which two men discuss sex education, is much less simple.
Let us try to reduce it to a set of propositions as we did with extract (2).
B asserts: I talk to my pupils about sex (statement);
this is daring (evaluation);
because in Cyprus they frown on openness (justification of evaluation);
but I think it's important (justification of first statement);
the trouble is I don't do it systematically (evaluation of first statement);
but then no-one else does it at all(re-evaluation);
A agrees: sex education is a problem (opinion);
because making a thing of it creates the wrong atmosphere for talking about sex (justification of opinion).
Although this conversation too has sequences of opinion and justification, it does not proceed in a linear fashion.
Speaker B keeps returning to the same point, his first statement, dealing with it in a variety of ways, and we get three different and slightly conflicting evaluations of his action in discussing sex openly with his pupils (it's daring, it's unsystematic, it's something anyway).
To make matters more confusing, although A starts by saying yes , indicating he agrees, it becomes clear that he doesn't entirely agree and is off on another tack.
His contribution asserts not that sex education is important or daring, but that it is problematic, because education is a poor context for open discussion of sex.
It would, however, be rather contentious to describe the men's conversation as illogical, since it makes perfectly good sense.
It would also be contentious to claim, on the basis of these two extracts, that men in general are less logical than women in general.
What I would prefer to say, and what I think these extracts illustrate, is that there are different kinds of logic in conversation.
They have less to do with gender per se than with context, formality, subject matter, the relationship between the participants and their shared background assumptions.
In a famous paper on logic and conversation, the philosopher H. P. Grice proposed that conversationalists acknowledge the existence of a ‘cooperative principle’ which requires them to give as much information as is needed, to be truthful, relevant and not vague or ambiguous.
People do not always observe the principle, of course, but where a speaker flouts it, the hearer will suspect she has a reason.
For instance, someone who expresses her opinion of a friend's appearance very vaguely may be suspected of doing so in order to be polite (saving others' face is a common motive for vagueness, untruthfulness and withholding information).
Someone who tells me an apparently irrelevant fact may well want me to deduce a hidden inference in it, a proposition they prefer not to make explicit.
In Grice's theory, logic in conversation is not just a matter of explicit surface connections between utterances.
We are all reasoning out unstated propositions and analysing the probable intentions of our interlocutors every time we engage in talk — but various social and contextual factors influence the amount and the kind of reasoning required.
It's also important to note how important the affective, as opposed to merely informational or propositional component of conversation is.
An enormous amount of meaning would disappear if speakers and hearers did not make heavy use of affective cues — like tone of voice, hesitating and hedging.
When speaker A in extract (1) says ‘Yes, it's an enormous problem’, speaker B does not have trouble understanding the reference of it even though this is not spelt out; nor is he perplexed by the use of yes followed by a totally different point.
He realises that A is expressing general solidarity, acknowledging his contribution.
To sum this up, the ‘rules’ of talk are not like the rules for solving equations or constructing syllogisms.
People talking do not only exchange information, and sometimes they exchange no real information at all('nice day, isn't it? ').
They also use talk to construct social relationships.
Any discussion of ‘logic’ must bear this point in mind.
So, what is the source of the persistent folklinguistic belief that women are less logical or use a different kind of logic than men?
There are several possibilities we might consider.
One possibility is that women tend to be less involved than men in formal and public speech events where the appropriate or customary style is especially explicit, where logical connections  are made on the surface and where information and argument are more important than interpersonal solidarity.
As extract (2) suggests, women engaging in abstract political arguments are perfectly capable of marshalling this kind of logic.
But a number of feminists have suggested that women in many cultures and many situations are partly or even totally excluded from this kind of formal discourse.
A second possibility is that women talking to other women can leave many things more implicit because they assume a great deal of shared knowledge and cooperation.
This arguably reflects women's socialisation to be attentive to and concerned about what others think and feel.
(We must return in due course to this argument that women are cooperative conversationalists, which has been quite influential in feminist linguistics.)
It might be observed, too, that men and women do not have the same degree of knowledge about one another.
Perhaps, then, men find women's conversation difficult to follow, and since they are the powerful group, they can deal with their incomprehension by defining women's behaviour as deviant and wrong —‘illogical’ is just their word for that.
Cheris Krarnarae suggests that women are more attuned to the dynamics of male conversation than vice versa, since subordinates are dependent for survival on a good grasp of their superordinates' behaviour.
A third possibility that should not be overlooked is that the stereotype is just a stereotype and has no real correlate in women's behaviour.
It is rather suspicious that the label ‘illogical’ has been used to disparage other subordinate groups' language as well as women's.
Educational psychologists of the 1960s and 1970s pursued with great vigour the idea that working class and Black children used an illogical language that caused them to lag behind in school.
In particular, American Vernacular Black English was labelled ‘a basically nonlogical form of expressive behaviour’.
But it seemed the educators in question had simply failed to understand the structural rules of nonstandard grammars, and as linguists success-fully argued, their claims were meaningless.
They were rather like saying that French was less logical than Russian.
The illogicality of Black and working-class speech is a myth that has now been exploded: perhaps the illogicality of women's speech is also mythical and should be allowed to go the same way.
Let us return to our feminist folklinguistic profile.
For the moment I will leave on one side the question of women's use of questions and their tendency to speak less in mixed conversation.
These claims are  less vague than the logic claim, because a question or a speaking turn is easy enough to identify with precision.
Furthermore these are claims that have actually been supported by empirical sociolinguistic research.
As we shall see, however, when we review that research in the next chapter, there remains a problem of interpretation and evaluation.
Finally, then, let us consider the stereotype of women as co-operative and men as competitive.
This is so ingrained and so influential, I shall have occasion to come back to it many times.
Here I want to point out — as I have done with other features in the feminist profile — how difficult it is to identify the linguistic correlates of competition and cooperation.
Suppose for instance we hypothesise that cooperative conversationalists would ask others for their opinion very frequently and regularly express agreement.
How can we allow for the possibility that someone might request an opinion antagonistically, by picking on someone who does not want to speak?
Or that people often express agreement (as speaker A in extract (1) does when he says ‘Yes, it's an enormous problem’) as part of a more general disagreeing strategy?
What I am arguing here is that the meaning of a linguistic feature cannot be determined outside its context.
From Jespersen to Lakoff to the feminist in the discussion group, people who talk about women's language have a regrettable propensity to overlook this problem.
Reams of paper have been used to debate what tag-questions, for instance, mean.
Are they approval seeking, supportive or a put down (as in ‘you're not really going to wear that, are you?
‘) My answer would be, it is impossible to say in advance.
Tags have all these functions and more, and only the context can narrow the field in any specific case.
It is possible and indeed likely that context is more important than gender in determining how cooperative or competitive speakers are.
For instance, the women speakers in extract (2) are less cooperative than the men on a number of quite plausible measures.
They interrupt more, disagree more and give less hearer support (yes, mm ).
This is because they are having an argument about the politics of disarmament, whereas the men are discussing sex education in a much less polarised way.
Once again, we must ask where the stereotype of competitive men and cooperative women comes from.
Certainly it is reinforced in expert linguistic studies, both feminist and nonfeminist.
Classic ethnographic studies of all-male interaction have tended to focus on  street gangs and ritual verbal performances, whereas studies of all-female interaction are more likely to focus on small, intimate groups.
As well as producing data on the two sexes that is not directly comparable, this is surely simplistic, suggesting as it does that men don't have intimate conversations (and women don't have large scale confrontations).
Indeed, it leads me to suspect that subconscious folklinguistic beliefs have influenced sociolinguists’ choice of settings for data collection.
What of the specifically feminist folklinguistic belief in women's cooperative speech?
Are feminists just repeating old stereotypes?
Are they romanticising women's fabled lack of aggression and equally fabled listening skills?
Perhaps so.
But I think there is one other factor that should be taken into account.
Contemporary feminism has deliberately institutionalised a very cooperative speech style.
When you attend a feminist group or meeting, you soon learn that interruption, talking too much, raising your voice, vehemently disagreeing with others, expressing hostility and so forth are not acceptable behaviour.
On the other hand, it is desirable that you express solidarity, give way to other speakers and tolerate long silences if they occur.
There are good political reasons behind this style.
It was painstakingly worked out as a way of preventing some women — usually those whose privileged access to higher education had given them confidence and articulacy in public speaking — from dominating and silencing others.
Many women in early second-wave feminist groups had belonged previously to leftist organisations where the prevailing style of discussion was hierarchical, forceful and oratorical; they had found this offputting and were determined not to repeat it.
That the style they replaced it with is specifically a feminist style is suggested by the comments made to me when I interviewed feminist women about how they thought feminists talked.
Women recalled their early experiences in feminist groups:
I had a lot of trouble not interrupting.
I felt like everyone was thinking I couldn't keep my mouth shut.
It struck me the minute we started, all the silence and letting people finish.
On the other hand, I found some feminists justified this style as something that ‘suits women better’ or ‘gets away from male ways  of speaking’.
The often painful political processes by which feminists arrived at their anti-elitist linguistic norms has already been erased, and the norms themselves have been naturalised.
This is an example of folklinguistics regulating real linguistic behaviour.
In my opinion, too, it is rather depressing if feminists are starting to forget the reasons for speaking in one way and not another.
Surely we should not cease to remind ourselves and the world in general that the use of language is deeply political.
To insist that on the contrary it is a fact of nature is to fall straight into the classic folklinguistic trap.
CONCLUSION
Although folklinguistics is often dismissed by linguists as unscientific and inaccurate (both of which it usually is), it is certainly not without interest for a feminist linguistic theory.
Feminists must pay attention to beliefs about male and female speech, because prejudice is often more powerful than fact.
But the feminist study of sex differences in language must also, of course, pay attention to the empirical facts, whatever they may turn out to be.
How do men and women (of different ages, classes, races, cultures) use language (in different contexts and situations)?
Can any generalisations be made about this?
And what are the implications?
When we ask these questions, we enter the domain of sociolinguistics.
In Chapter 4, I will attempt a critical survey of sociolinguistic findings about gender-linked variation.
Sex Differences in Language (II): Empirical Sociolinguistics
INTRODUCTION
In Chapter 3 we looked at the ‘politics of variation’ in a general sense: we asked why feminists would want to study male/female differences in language, and we also looked at the anecdotal tradition of (often sexist) comment feminists in the field have inherited — in some cases rather uncritically.
The question which hung over this whole discussion, though, was how beliefs about linguistic behaviour relate to the observable facts.
In this chapter, therefore, I want to look, still critically, at the actual research findings of feminist and non-feminist sociolinguists.
For convenience I will split the sociolinguistic field into two, examining first the ‘quantitative paradigm’ in which variations of pronunciation and grammar are studied using statistical analysis, and then the more ‘holistic’study of communicative strategies which usually goes under the general name of ‘discourse analysis’.
Both these enterprises are open to criticism on three fronts.
Firstly, we may be critical of the way the field is set up, so that men and their behaviour are implicitly the norm and women's behaviour becomes a deviation needing explanation.
Secondly, we may be suspicious of many actual findings, asking how far they are distorted by theoretical or methodological bias.
Thirdly, and this is the most important thing, we must take up in some detail the matter of interpretation — what observed differences mean.
For as I observed in Chapter 3, the underlying meaning of both folk and expert discourse about sex difference is a political one.
It underlines male/female as a significant social division.
In many cases, as I shall try to show, it also rationalises and perpetuates sexual inequality.
SEX DIFFERENCE RESEARCH
The quantitative paradigm
Sociolinguistic surveys
The best established approach to social differences in pronunciation and grammar is the quantitative sociolinguistic survey.
Either a representative sample of the population being studied or a judgement sample (that is, chosen for a particular purpose rather than at random : often it is an already-existing peer group or network of people who know each other ) is interviewed, and recordings of speech are analysed.
Linguistic features (for instance, how often speakers drop their g's in words like playing ) are correlated with social characteristics like age, ethnicity, gender and class.
This sort of survey has been done in many communities since the 1960s when it first became popular.
In Britain for example there are detailed studies available of sociolinguistic variation in Norwich, Tyneside, Reading, Dudley and Belfast.
By replicating the sociolinguistic survey in various different places, sociolinguists have been able to identify a number of patterns that recur very frequently.
One of these is a social stratification pattern.
Typically, in any variety of a language there are items that can be expressed more than one way.
Many New York speakers alternate, for instance, between two pronunciations of words like that : ‘that’ and ‘dat’.
Many speakers of English on both sides of the Atlantic have two ways to construct negatives — for instance, ‘I haven't got any bananas’ and ‘I aint got no bananas’.
In each case one variant is standard and the other nonstandard.
The social stratification pattern illustrates the fact that the proportions of each variant in a person's speech relate very clearly to the person's social class.
The higher the class, the more standard the speech.
It is also true that speakers in all classes use more standard variants in formal than in casual speech (this is known to sociolinguists as styleshift ).
There is also a recurrent pattern related to gender.
Women use more of the standard variants than men of the same social class.
While this is not universally true — there are exceptions on record — it is true often enough that sociolinguists expect to find it in each new situation they study.
The feminist linguists Jenkins and Kramarae have criticised the sociolinguistic approach, arguing that 
Both the theory and the methodology are based on the implicit assumption that the communicative experience of white middle class males is prototypical…the experience of women, other ethnic groups and classes are treated as deviations…
Gender, ethnicity and class are seen as ‘demographic variables’ which can be controlled and accounted for, often by using ad hoc explanations based on cultural stereotypes.
This comment was made in the early 1980s, around the time when sociolinguistic methods were undergoing some changes.
Because of those changes, I do not in fact any longer agree with Jenkins and Kramarae that white middle-class speakers are taken as the norm in sociolinguistics.
Recently such speakers have tended more and more to disappear from sociolinguistic studies for a variety of reasons.
One of these reasons is the growing popularity of a type of survey that does not attempt to study representative populations, preferring to focus on the more ‘natural’ peer groups or social networks which speakers establish.
Such ‘network’ surveys are less vulnerable to ‘norm and deviation’criticism, since they usually eliminate major social variables like class and ethnicity (that is, group members studied are all one class and race), so that the group itself becomes the norm.
Network theorists are interested in questions like which individuals conform most closely to group norms, who innovates and who resists innovation, and how changing social conditions at the local level — rehousing or factory closures for example— affect the group's linguistic habits.
This focus on the micro level of social or community structure discourages stereotypical generalisations.
I do think, however, that Jenkins and Kramarae are still right about the treatment of women.
There is in sociolinguistics an implicit assumption that where women's speech differs from men's, it is the behaviour of the women rather than the men that requires explanation; men are the norm from which women deviate.
Furthermore the phrase ‘ad hoc explanations based on cultural stereotypes’ is still excruciatingly applicable to many sociolinguistic discussions of women's speech.
It is at the level of explanation that the sexism of sociolinguistics is most blatantly on display, and I want to concentrate on it in the remainder of this section.
Let me begin, then, by identifying some general tendencies that are seen within anthropology, ethnography and sociology as well as in the specific case of sociolinguistics.
The explanation of sex differences; women's roles
Sex differences in linguistic behaviour are, I would argue, more vulnerable than other differences to ‘norm and deviation’ approaches.
There are several possible reasons for this.
One is that sex differences are taken for granted, naturalised.
We are programmed to look for them, and also, when we find them, to treat women as ‘the sex’, the ones who are different.
Conversely we are not sensitised to the possibility of sociocultural differences between the sexes, because they seem to share a culture and a history in common, living as they do in close proximity.
Unlike workers or minority ethnic groups, women in most cultures do not form a separate community (particularly not a publicly visible one).
So the culture and history of any community is likely to be conflated with the culture and history of men.
These two tendencies — looking for natural difference and failing to see cultural difference — reinforce one another, causing men to be studied and women to be stereotyped.
In terms of language, this makes women a very different case from, say, Afro-Caribbeans or Lancashire mine workers.
These groups have an acknowledged and often flourishing traditional linguistic culture, which is easily understood as arising from their particular history as geographically and socially segregated communities, and not from ‘natural’, ahistorical difference.
To put what I am saying in more concrete terms: the dialect poetry of the Lancashire miner, say, is taken as a product of his particular cultural experience, which is different from the experience of public schoolboys or Rastafarians.
The domestically-oriented, nurturing talk of the miner's wife, by contrast, is more likely to be taken as a product of her nature or her role than as a culturally-determined genre, and it is seen as something she shares with all other women.
If it turns out that she is not like her husband linguistically, the difference is not treated like the difference between miners and public schoolboys.
It is usually addressed in terms of overall, general differences between all women and all men.
That said, there is a serious question about how far we can speak of ‘women's languages’ or ‘genderlects’in the same way we talk of ‘Lancashire dialect’or ‘Jamaican creole’.
It is reasonable to acknowledge that women and men within one community do share a historical and cultural experience to a much greater extent than the miner and the public schoolboy.
What I question is whether sex differences are different in kind from other differences, and  should be treated in such general and stereotypical terms as they often are.
Linguists agree that sex differences are pervasive.
And in some cases they take a form sufficiently extreme that investigators have been led to speak of separate languages or varieties for the two sexes.
Whereas most differences are of a sex preferential kind — that is, certain forms are used significantly more by one sex than the other — a number of languages have what are called ‘sex-exclusive markers’: forms that are used only by women, or only by men.
It is interesting to look at how the more extreme case is explained.
Seventeenth-century travellers reported, for example, the case of the Carib Indians of the lesser Antilles, claiming that the sexes in this community spoke different languages.
The explanation that they gave was that the Caribs had been conquered by the neighbouring Arawak; Carib men were exterminated but the conquerors took the women in marriage.
Each sex continued to use its original language and to pass it on to their same-sex offspring.
This account is no longer accepted by linguists and anthropologists.
The sex exclusive markers which do indeed occur in some languages are superficially striking, but on closer inspection they can be seen to result from a few regular and predictable rules acting on the same basic structures.
So a dramatic story like the one told about the Carib is clearly not adequate: it over explains what is really a rather small difference.
Nevertheless the problem remains of explaining why sex differential rules arise and are followed in a language at all.
One explanation invokes the notion of sex or gender role .
Jespersen discussed the Carib case in these terms, illustrating his point with a description of ‘primitive society’ in which men, out hunting, develop a language of sparse, economical remarks designed to coordinate activity while women indulge in idle chatter by the village fire.
It is scarcely necessary to point out the inadequacy and sexism of this picture — in which women's own collective labour as gatherers or tenders of gardens is entirely overlooked — and its inapplicability to many of the cultures in which sex-exclusive linguistic markers are found.
But many less naive commentators would agree with Jespersen's focus on the sexual division of labour, which produces a high degree of sex segregation and a considerable difference in the day to day activities of women and men.
The anthropologist Susan Harding has an account of why women and men in a Spanish village use different styles of discourse which  depends on the idea that the sexes have differing roles.
Among her informants, Harding says that speech styles are learned and practised by the two sexes in distinct contexts: for men, in political meetings and other decision-making situations, for women in negotiating interpersonal relations.
(This has a certain similarity to Carol Gilligan's argument about moral reasoning, which I mentioned in Chapter 3.)
Each sex is virtually excluded from the domain of the other, and each learns a mode of speech appropriate to its own domain.
This finding — that men dominate the public domains of speech — is echoed by many other ethnographic studies in a wide range of cultures, though it is not absolutely without exception.
Even in less overtly sex-segregated cultures, as researchers like Marjorie Goodwin have argued, it is still usual for children to develop their communicational skills within single sex peer groups, and if these are organised differently to do different things, the speech norms girls and boys acquire may well be different too.
There seem to me to be two problems with this line of argument (which is essentially that speech is ‘role-appropriate’ and that gender is a major determinant of role).
First of all, it is not obvious to me that the speech strategies needed for typically male and female roles are so totally different and non-overlapping as is often implied.
For instance, men are said (by both Harding and Goodwin) to be more skilled in confrontation and argument, while women are better conciliators.
This supposedly reflects the different contexts in which they learn the linguistic skills — public debates versus private relationships.
Yet surely conciliation is a skill politicians have to learn, and equally there is confrontation within personal relationships.
I do not deny the findings of researchers like Harding, but their explanations seem inadequate: I question whether such discrete speech styles flow seamlessly from particular social roles.
It seems to me that their gender appropriateness must be reinforced in other ways.
Secondly, it is important not to conflate ‘role’ and ‘gender’automatically when linguistic features are correlated with the social characteristics of speakers.
Consider for example the distinctive variety that used to be known as ‘motherese’(now usually called ‘caretaker register’ or ‘child-directed speech ‘).
Used to young children, this variety is formally distinctive, with a special vocabulary, high pitch, loudness, slowness and exaggerated intonation contours.
It is also sex preferential, used much more by  women than men.
But what it correlates with is not a gender role but more specifically a child-rearing role.
Men who do childcare may use it; women inexperienced with children may not.
It is true, of course, that women do more childcare than men.
But feminists should beware of naturalising that fact or implying that childcare and its specialised language are somehow essentially feminine, part of a female gender role.
The point of this example can be put in more theoretical terms.
It is easy to assume that any significant, gender-linked difference should be attributed to the general operation of gender roles.
But gender roles are not a thing; gender itself is not a characteristic women and men just ‘have’.
Rather, what we call gender and gender roles are the observable effects created by a complex system involving, for example, sexual divisions of labour, the exclusion of women from public domains, and so on .
Gender should never be used as a bottom line explanation because it is a social construction needing explanation itself .
We need to look, then, for the specific practices that produce gender roles rather than stopping at the roles themselves.
Restrictions on and beliefs about language may be part of the construction of gender rather than a simple reflection of it.
Another reason to be wary of explaining linguistic differences as products of gender roles, and leaving it at that, is that such a proceeding just encourages stereotyping.
For instance, the finding that women are ‘cooperative’ or ‘conciliatory’speakers may be explained, as we have seen, in terms of women's activities and peer-group norms.
When applied to women universally this becomes a stereotype, overgeneralised and just a step away from the sexist argument that women are ‘naturally’ caring.
Instead of looking carefully at the specific conditions in which particular women live, we are frequently tempted to appeal to some common denominator of female experience (domesticity and motherhood are the commonest choices) that is false to the facts of many women's experience and — to the degree that we wish to eliminate such common denominators — politically counterproductive as well.
Explanation in the quantitative paradigm
In quantitative sociolinguistic studies, we find an emphasis on using general (and stereotypical) notions of ‘women's role’ to explain the common finding that women use more standard variants than men of a similar social status.
During the 1960s and 1970s, three explanations in particular gained credence: conservatism (men  innovate, women stick more closely to traditional forms); status consciousness (women are more sensitive than men to the social meaning of speech and more concerned with elevating their own status through speaking ‘properly’); and feminine identity (women are expected to talk like ‘ladies’, that is, like middle-class speakers.
Conversely, men associate working-class speech with masculinity).
More recently a fourth explanation has been put forward: that men have stronger community ties than women and this favours men's more nonstandard speech.
In at least three of the four cases it is the notion of ‘gender role’ that ultimately underpins the explanation.
Taking each of these explanations in turn, I want to ask whether they are adequate accounts of the observed facts; whether they embody covert value judgements downgrading women relative to men; and whether alternative explanations are possible.
Conservatism
The idea that women are more conservative than men is manifestly inadequate to account for all the observed facts, at least in the cultures sociolinguists have studied most intensively, and it is rarely advanced nowadays as an explanation of sex differences.
One fact that contradicts it immediately is that women are often in the vanguard of linguistic change towards the standard variety.
Clearly, using standard forms is conservative only for the high-status women who traditionally use them.
For women in low-status social groups, speaking the standard is innovative behaviour.
It is interesting that women are said to be conservative only at times and in places where this trait is not valued.
For example, in the eighteenth century (which did value it) women were often accused of wanton innovation in vocabulary.
By Jespersen's time, the 1920s, innovation was considered good: Jespersen claims that where vocabulary is concerned, ‘men are the chief renovators of language’.
Among the Malagasy, by contrast with Western European cultures, conservatism continues to be valued highly.
According to Elinor Keenan, women are not considered competent public speakers on the grounds that they do not maintain traditional forms of speech.
All in all, then, claims about women's conservatism are stereotypical, sexist and in many cases just plain wrong.
Status consciousness
The idea that women are more status conscious than men is supported by some very influential sociolinguists, including the  US researcher William Labov and the British researcher Peter Trudgill.
Taking their work together, two main reasons for women's status consciousness emerge, each one related to the supposed gender-role of women.
First, women do not derive their identity and self-esteem from paid work in the same way men do (either because they do not have paid jobs or because they regard these as less important than their role in the family).
They therefore invest more in other symbols: possessions, appearance, speech.
Second, women are primary child-rearers and are concerned to provide their children with models of ‘correct’ speech.
Trudgill and Labov obviously make certain assumptions here that feminists would criticise — for example that the category ‘women’ is coextensive with the category of housewives and mothers.
Even in the 1960s this was not self-evidently true.
But the main problem with the claim that women are status conscious is the lack of real supporting evidence for it.
In 1972 Trudgill published a paper about sex differences in Norwich English.
He reported that women, when asked by the researcher to assess the standardness of their own speech, tended to overestimate their use of prestige forms (he checked their assessments against taped samples of their actual talk).
Since people's self-assessments tend to reflect the way they wish they spoke, Trudgill took it that women wished to identify themselves with a higher social class, and thus that their status aspirations were higher than men's (with male informants he found the opposite tendency, which will be discussed later on).
But surely it is possible that the women's assessments might just as well have reflected their awareness of sex stereotypes and their consequent desire to fulfil ‘normal’ expectations that women talk ‘better’.
The status consciousness argument really needs more convincing evidence than this experiment before we can take it as proven.
Furthermore the finding itself — that women in each class use more standard forms than men — is not without problems.
It may be at least partly an artefact of the methodology used to assign speakers to social classes.
Women, particularly married women, are often categorised with men (fathers or husbands).
Certainly this was Trudgill's procedure where married women were concerned: the husband's occupation defined the class of the wife (along with other criteria such as what kind of housing they lived in).
The theoretical assumption here is that the family is the unit of social stratification, and the crucial factor is the occupation of its ‘Head’.
The sociologist Christine Delphy has argued that this assumption is not simply a mistake or a reasonable rule of thumb that has now become outmoded, but an ideological manoeuvre which obscures the real workings of patriarchal societies.
The point of it is to place men and women in the same class so that partners in marriage will appear to be equal.
If you look at things from a feminist perspective they are, in fact, not equal.
Economically the wife is typically dependent (or at least, could not sustain her lifestyle or support her children on her own earnings) and her household labour is exploited.
Delphy points out that if one jettisoned the idea of the family as unit of stratification, using economic criteria to classify individuals instead, most wives would come out below their husbands.
If, conversely, one used educational and type-of-occupation criteria to classify individuals (and these are highly relevant to the question of how standard a speaker's language is), it is probable that many wives, especially those of working-class men, would come out above their husbands.
Data from the US census of 1970 showed that a significant proportion of younger working-class women had more education than their husbands.
Sociolinguists should therefore keep in mind the possibility that some women's more standard speech could reflect the fact that class categorisation assumes parity between married couples, whereas in certain relevant ways they do not have parity.
Of course one might argue that working-class women's tendency to stay in education longer is itself a sign of their status consciousness.
But there is a more convincing case to be made that what it really relates to is the differing opportunities for men and women in the labour market.
To put this briefly, women who are not part of the tiny professional elite (doctors, lawyers, executives), which is to say, all working-class and most middle-class women, need more education than men in the same position.
Unless they can enter traditionally male ‘craft’ jobs, which is still extremely difficult, these women will find their opportunities are best in the so-called ‘pink-collar ghetto’(clerical and secretarial work, service industries, nursing and school teaching).
The important thing about pink-collar jobs is that they pay less than ‘male’ jobs yet require skills and qualifications, often including some degree of ‘well-spokenness’.
This is the argument put forward by Patricia Nichols in an excellent sociolinguistic study of Black women and men in South Carolina, USA.
The island community Nichols studied traditionally spoke Gullah, a creole variety developed from the African/English  pidgin of early slave plantations.
Gullah survives only in the small area of the American South where Nichols worked.
And in fact certain parts of the community are even now shifting toward a more standard American English.
Most noticeably, young women are making this shift.
This is not because young women are status conscious.
It is because young people of both sexes are increasingly seeking work on the mainland, instead of participating in the precarious agricultural island economy as their elders continue to do.
The mainland economy has only recently opened up with the growth of tourism: nor has it opened up to women and men (or indeed Black and white workers) in an exactly similar way.
Black men get jobs in the construction industry, whereas Black women get jobs in the service sector.
This places different pressures on women and men's language.
No-one cares how a construction worker talks or whether he has much education.
But a service worker or secretary is in contact with a wider public; she is obliged to modify her speech (and also has opportunities to hear more standard speech from others).
The upshot of all this is that families encourage young women to get as much education as possible — men can make a reasonable living without it, but women cannot — and women are more advanced in the shift away from Gullah.
In the older generation, incidentally, it is women whose Gullah is more pronounced, probably because women were less likely than men to leave the island in order to trade their produce.
This study shows up a lot of the over-simplifications in the ‘status consciousness’ argument.
On a basic level, it shows that all women are not the same.
The shift toward standard English is associated with young Black women — not older Black women or white women (who do not, of course, speak Gullah, but do speak a strongly nonstandard variety).
Clearly, any explanation based on the idea of women's domestic role giving them certain personality traits, like status consciousness, is unable to deal with the fact that different women behave differently.
Women and men respond to material pressures on their speech, and these pressures are different because — outside a tiny elite anyhow — women and men participate in different status hierarchies which are not readily comparable.
For example, a secretary may seem to be of higher occupational status than a builder's labourer (the blue collar/white collar distinction).
Her job is less dirty and requires more qualifications.
But the labourer earns more, because construction is a male job and typing a female one.
How then do we decide which class to assign a couple to where he is a builder and she is a secretary (not that uncommon a scenario)?
Are they both unskilled workers or is she in a higher class than her husband?
In terms of the lifestyle her wage will support, the secretary is not really middle-class; yet in other important ways she does differ from the builder.
Neither solution seems entirely satisfactory.
It would surely be better to recognise that class stratification is cross-cut by other social divisions, such as gender and race.
Status consciousness, as applied to male/female speech differences, is a construct that tries to squash everything into the one-dimensional framework of class; to the extent that other things are relevant it therefore fails.
I have spent so much time on the status  consciousness explanation because it has been very influential, and because Nichols shows how it can be reinterpreted with more satisfactory results.
But no one explanation will suffice for all women in all communities, and we must therefore proceed to the other suggestions that have been made.
Femininity, masculinity and covert prestige
The ‘talking like a lady’ explanation is a mirror-image of Peter Trudgill's suggestion — which is based once again on his Norwich informants' responses to self-evaluation questions — that men give ‘covert prestige’to working-class nonstandard speech, associating its roughness with masculinity.
Men in Trudgill's study under-reported their use of the standard whereas women over-reported the same thing (see the discussion of status above).
And this might lead us to suspect that there is a cultural association, certainly for British English speakers, between femininity and middle-class language on one hand and masculinity and working-class speech on the other.
Associations of this kind do seem to be made folklinguistically.
Swearing and taboo language, for instance, are strongly linked to both class and gender in exactly the way you would predict.
Robin Lakoff suggests that the prohibition on women using language forcefully extends to nonstandard pronunciation as well.
For feminists, one interesting implication of the idea that Trudgill puts forward, and of his findings, is that gender allegiance seems to be at least as powerful for men (in the attitudes they express, if not in their behaviour) as class allegiance.
Nonstandard speech is  appropriated to signify masculinity by even middle-class men.
It is also interesting, though, that this tends to place working-class women in a contradictory position: their working classness disappears or is represented in a negative way as a threat to their femininity.
Language does play a certain part in rendering comic or grotesque the stereotypical working-class woman of media representations.
This woman is loud and foulmouthed (like Roseanne Barr) and has difficulty using words correctly (like Ethel on East Enders ).
Her working-class male counterpart is not usually ridiculed or disapproved of in this way, as someone whose language is inappropriate.
In considering how far this might constitute an explanation of the observed facts, though, the obvious question is whether folklinguistic beliefs relate directly to behaviour.
Unlike a lot of linguists, I would not dismiss the possibility.
Especially in the area of gender, wishful thinking about how women ought to look and act can easily acquire prescriptive force, with the consequence that real women try to live up to the ideal.
Many feminist linguists have unearthed for our edification great piles of conduct and etiquette books telling women what they should talk about, when, how and to whom.
Nor does women's pronunciation and vocabulary escape this sort of scrutiny.
But to investigate the connection between folklinguistics and behaviour remains difficult; it is an area where caution must be recommended.
Community ties
The most recently popular explanation for women's tendency to use more standard forms comes from the social network approach within sociolinguistics.
This approach has found that in close-knit, working-class urban and rural peasant communities (the types it has usually studied to date), an individual's use of nonstandard forms correlates well with their degree of integration into the community or ‘network strength’.
This finding reflects the commonsense idea that people are influenced in their speech by the speakers around them.
Thus when I went to Oxford University, my (markedly northern) speech soon became noticeably more standard, as a result of contact with so many standard speakers.
For people from less mobile social groups, the question is more one of continuity than change, however.
The more a person is integrated into a close-knit social network, the more time they spend speaking to the same group of people and the less  they spend in contact with others who might change their speech.
Thus in a working-class network, well-integrated speakers have high nonstandard scores.
Someone who is poorly integrated — say because she is living and working away from friends and kin — will have lower scores, because her ‘vernacular’ is not being reinforced.
There are differences, then, between individuals within one community in terms of the strength of their ties to that community.
There are also group differences.
For example, most middle-class people do not belong to close-knit networks at all .
Typically they are geographically mobile, living relatively far away from kin, work and friends; they separate work from leisure and do not always socialise with the same group of people who all know each other.
(Members of the British aristocracy, on the other hand, may well belong to very tight-knit, though geographically dispersed, networks.)
The other most obvious example of group difference concerns differences between men and women in the same community.
From the point of view of social network studies, sex differences in language use are likely to arise from two sources.
One of these is the pervasive sex-segregation of traditional working-class culture and of most workplaces.
Men mostly interact with men and women with women.
By the time they marry and live together, they each have well-established networks that are sex-specific.
The second source of difference is that in many network studies (not all) men have been found to have stronger community ties than women.
If, as linguists argue, the strength of these ties correlates with the degree to which speech reflects nonstandard (vernacular) norms, the finding that men are more nonstandard than women makes perfect sense.
The positive thing about this approach is that it can deal with exceptions to the overall pattern.
For example, the sociolinguist Lesley Milroy did research in three closeknit Belfast communities.
In one of these, the Clonard, she found that younger women used more nonstandard forms on certain variables than did young men.
She explains this by pointing out that young Clonard men have been hard hit by unemployment, and this has weakened their networks.
Young Clonard women are working, so theirs are stronger by comparison.
Network studies have given us various instances of groups of women who are less standard speakers than comparable groups  of men.
(Though if one simply considers ‘all women’ as against‘all men’, such a finding invariably fails to emerge; which only goes to show that lumping all women together masks important and interesting facts.)
This reversal of the usual pattern always coincides, however, with a situation in which women have the strongest community ties.
We might go on to ask, then, why such a situation is, or is considered, exceptional.
The most obvious conclusion to draw here once again goes back to women's domestic role, and in particular their tendency not to work outside the home, or to work part time, or to work in isolation (home working, cleaning and so on).
Arguably this cuts down on women's contact with other people.
Certainly, measures of ‘network strength’ like the one Milroy uses put a lot of emphasis on paid work alongside other community members.
But it is important not to assume this connection a priori .
For example, Karen Bennett studied a community in Granada, Spain, where women had traditional roles.
Using a Milroy-type measure she found their network ties rather weak.
But this, she felt, was a distortion and would fit badly with her linguistic findings.
The women actually had rather strong ties, since they spent much of their time doing household tasks communally outside.
Bennett solved the problem in a way feminists would approve: by counting housework as work.
Somewhat similarly, Beth Thomas noted that older, non-working women in the Welsh-speaking community of Pont-rhyd-y-fen preserved a vernacular Welsh feature that men had lost.
Since these women too had traditional gender roles, how was their greater use of this vernacular feature to be explained?
On inspection it turned out that the women had strong community ties through their membership of the local chapels.
Thomas made participation in chapel activities an important criterion for network strength.
The moral common to these stories is one I have been emphasising throughout this discussion.
It is misleading and inaccurate to generalise about women and men and the linguistic correlates of their roles.
Sociolinguistics is most successful in explaining sex differences when it looks very carefully at the conditions of particular communities' lives and at what the people themselves consider the most important influences on their behaviour.
It is least successful when it makes stereotypical assumptions about women: that they behave in certain ways because they are mothers, or because they don't work outside the  home, for example.
Stereotypes like this flatten out important details: they disguise the exceptions to the ‘women speak more standard’ rule, or else are unable to account for them.
Whereas by looking at these exceptions we are able to perceive that the pattern itself is complex and produced by multiple factors.
It is not just an automatic reflection of gender.
Discourse analysis
The differences studied in the quantitative paradigm are of a particular and limited kind: they are socially, but not linguistically, meaningful.
(To pronounce ‘that’ as ‘dat’or substitute ‘aint’for ‘isn't’does not change the meaning of your utterance.)
Discourse analysis deals with a more general speech style in which the different choices speakers make can be described in functional as well as formal terms.
Interest in sex differences at this level of language was stimulated by Lakoff's Language and Woman's Place .
We may recall that this was not a work of empirical investigation but an example of feminist folklinguistics, though informed by the author's linguistic training.
The studies which followed it were more scientific: but unlike most of the quantitative studies discussed above, they were also explicitly feminist.
With hindsight it is possible to generalise about the two main directions in which this kind of sex difference research has developed since Lakoff.
Although it was not a linear, chronological development and neat labels as always ‘tidy up’ a complex phenomenon, I find it helpful to distinguish two currents: a ‘dominance’current and a ‘difference’current.
Lakoff had described ‘women's language’(its main characteristics are reviewed in Chapter 3) as a variety girls learn in the course of early childhood socialisation.
They are encouraged to use it, rewarded for using it and disapproved of as ‘unfeminine’ if they fail to use it.
This speech style urged on little girls is, however, a way of preparing them for their subordinate place in adult society.
Talk couched in women's language lacks authority, thus unfitting those who use the language for any position in which they might exercise authority.
Adult women will have the unappealing choice between rejecting women's language and so becoming ‘less than a woman’, or embracing it and thus acquiescing in their inferiority — becoming ‘less than a person’.
Lakoff's claim is that women are denied access to ‘powerful’ styles of speech, those that confer authority and credibility on a speaker.
This is one version of the dominance current.
Another version puts things differently, arguing that men's way of speaking is not intrinsically more credible/authoritative, what happens is simply that men can use their socially dominant position to claim linguistic privileges.
The two versions need to be distinguished because their practical implications are different.
The first version suggests that women can gain authority by using men's linguistic strategies, while the second is more sceptical about this; linguistic strategies are after all chosen within particular social contexts and relations.
Either way, however, it remains the case that — in the trenchant phrase of Sally McConnell-Ginet —‘conversation is not an equal opportunity activity’.
Inequality of conversational opportunity has been uncovered in a number of areas.
For instance, researchers have documented sex differences in floor apportionment, that is , how speaking turns are allotted and to whom.
In a famous study, Zimmerman and West found that whereas same sex dyads (pairs) share the floor equally and interrupt each other rarely, in mixed sex pairs there is a marked asymmetry.
Men interrupt women.
West has gone on to show that this pattern applies even to dyads where the woman has more status her example is talk between women doctors and male patients.
Nicola Woods found that in a business setting, gender was a better predictor than status of who would interrupt whom.
Women were interrupted less as bosses than as subordinates, but overall they were still interrupted more than men.
Men are also able to gain the lion's share of the floor in cross-sex talk because women provide them with ‘hearer support’ in the form of minimal responses (like mhm, yes ) and questions — when you ask someone a question you cede the floor to them.
Men do not reciprocate this support.
The matter of women's support strategies is taken up in a number of papers by Pamela Fishman.
Whereas some researchers had treated women's supportiveness as a straightforward sign of their socialisation into powerlessness and deference, or as signs of what Lakoff would term ‘insecurity’ or ‘approval seeking’, Fishman considers supportiveness a creative and skilful strategy women use in order to have some kind of control in conversation with men.
If women ask questions and give cues like ‘d'you know what?’, men are obliged to engage in talk.
As Fishman notes, though, such strategies are only necessary because men in fact have the upper hand.
Their often recalcitrant behaviour forces women to do the ‘interactional shitwork’ if they wish to interact at all.
The obvious comparison is with housework: if women want to eat and live in pleasant surroundings they have to cook and clean.
The smooth conduct of interpersonal relationships is one more chore for which women are responsible, not because they are powerful but because men are unwilling and refuse to do their share.
The ‘difference’ current accepts these findings, but reinterprets them.
Researchers in this current are interested in Lakoff's suggestion that there is a women's language, but they criticise her negative evaluation of it.
They propose that it is not, in fact, inherently dysfunctional and should be valued as something positive and authentic: different, not inferior.
A good example of how this perspective works takes us back to Pamela Fishman's studies of ‘interactional shitwork’.
Fishman acknowledges the skill involved in this and indeed the necessity for someone to do it; but she sees it as something women are coerced into.
‘Difference’ researchers by contrast see it as evidence of women's more cooperative, more person-oriented style.
Perhaps women choose this style because it fits with their own, perfectly valid interactional or social goals.
In support of this notion, researchers like Elizabeth Aries and Jennifer Coates point out that women use support features like minimal responses not only with men but among themselves, in all-women conversation where gender hierarchy is not a factor.
Here it is hardly ‘shitwork’ since it is shared: its purpose is to promote the kind of intimacy women enjoy and men often lack.
Some of the features Lakoff discusses as markers of powerlessness or insecurity are reinterpreted in the ‘difference’ current as variants of the support structure.
Janet Holmes for instance argues that some tag-questions are really support structures.
Lakoff had labelled as ‘illegitimate’ those tags — allegedly very common in women's speech — that call for confirmation of facts or opinions for which the speaker is the only real authority.
Why for instance say ‘that's a good book, isn't it?’ rather than just ‘that's a good book’, if you have any confidence in your own judgement?
Holmes replies that such a tag functions not to undermine the speaker but to engage the hearer, reassuring her that the speaker cares about her opinions too.
Like certain other ‘women's language features’, such as qualifiers, intensifiers, hesitations and so on, tags are hedging structures which qualify the force of an assertion so as not to intimidate, offend or exclude other points of view.
This could be interpreted as weak and lacking authority; it could equally be interpreted as polite and considerate.
Holmes is equivocal on the question of whether women are coerced by social expectations and the behaviour of men into using support structures, or whether these represent positive choices.
Other researchers, like Deborah Jones and Jennifer Coates, are less equivocal, viewing women's cooperative speech as arising from distinctive and valuable female subcultures.
For someone of this persuasion, who does not want to attribute everything to the workings of power, the problem obviously arises of why the sexes should have distinctive linguistic subcultures at all.
Here we are back to the ideas about roles and spheres which I discussed earlier in this chapter (the work of Harding, Goodwin and so on).
In a very influential paper, Daniel Maltz and Ruth Borker have placed particular emphasis on the fact that girls and boys play in single sex peer groups where they learn different styles of speech.
Boys tend to play in large groups organised hierarchically; thus they learn direct, confrontational speech.
Girls play in small groups of ‘best friends’, where they learn to maximise intimacy and minimise conflict.
According to Goodwin, whose work I have referred to already, this difference has linguistic correlates.
She studied the use of directives — speech that gets someone to do something — among working-class Afro-American children in Philadelphia.
She found that in the boys' peer group, powerful members used direct imperatives like ‘gimme’ and ‘get off’.
In the girls' peer group there was more use of consensual suggesting forms like ‘lets’.
From this kind of data Maltz and Borker conclude that the sexes come to have very different ideas of what constitutes ordinary friendly conversation.
This can cause misunderstanding and conflict when in later life they talk to one another.
Men may feel women don't make their intentions clear, while women may feel men are too direct and not sympathetic enough.
But in fact each sex is acting in good faith, unaware — as one might be with a foreign speaker of one's own language — that the other is following different rules and acting on different assumptions.
In Chapter 3 I observed that most feminists have been more interested in studying linguistic sex differences than in critiquing or questioning this activity.
I explained this as a consequence of two main motives: on one hand, the desire to show how gender inequality enters into everyday talk, and on the other hand, a desire to uncover an authentic women's speech that can be positively valued.
These motives are obviously relevant to the discourse analysis I have been describing here; indeed it will be clear by now that the two motives correspond, respectively, to the ‘dominance’ and ‘difference’currents.
I want to discuss each of these currents now in a more critical way.
While I do see value in each of them, from the point of view of the politics of variation I also see certain problems in both.
Dominance and difference: a critical comparison
The ‘difference’ current has some cogent criticisms of the ‘dominance’approach.
For instance, difference theorists dislike the implication that everything about women's behaviour can be traced simply to their subordination, and this resistance has a lot to recommend it.
Even more laudable is the awareness of many difference researchers that the problem of women's speech is not so much how it is as how it is valued .
Here we need make no distinction between ‘real’ differences and folklinguistic stereotypes: we can bring the two together to produce an integrated account of what linguistic sex differences mean in our society.
We may consider, for instance, the fact that women are discriminated against in certain areas of life ostensibly because of the way they speak.
Women who want to work in broadcasting, or who are required by their jobs to speak frequently in public, encounter strong prejudice against their ‘shrill’ or ‘tinny’voices.
Assertiveness training courses and the pop versions that appear in magazines routinely recommend that women consciously attempt to lower their pitch and moderate their ‘swoopy’ intonational range.
In Mrs Margaret Thatcher British women have a real-life example of someone who took this advice.
Phoneticians like Caroline Henton have shown in painstaking detail that the stereotype of women as ‘shrill’ and ‘swoopy’is actually — on average — false.
That is useful information for a feminist to have.
But the real political question is what this stereotype means.
Does the association of low pitch with authority and high pitch with lack of it have any reasonable basis, or is it  simply a sexist prejudice through which everything that marks a speaker out as female becomes a cause for complaint and a proof of inferiority?
To put it another way, is it a case of high pitch giving rise to sexist prejudice, or does the prejudice cause the reaction to the pitch?
I have been criticised for coming down on the side of the second alternative.
David Graddol and Joan Swann for instance suggest that high pitched voices will lack authority as long as there are squealing children and low, growly dogs.
In other words they believe that sexism in this instance is built on some ‘natural’ foundation.
I still do not believe it.
Women do not actually sound like children, and men sound even less like Great Danes — except in the light of a culturally-mediated analogy that already trades on sexism.
It is not a natural similarity but rather sex stereotyping that prompts the comparison between men and fierce animals or women and helpless children.
And it is hardly a coincidence that women here are on the negative side of the comparison.
As the saying goes, ‘a woman's place is in the wrong’; and this is as true of language as it is of anything else.
The difference theorists are more suspicious than their colleagues in the dominance current of traditional value-judgements about the way women talk.
They insist over and over again that women's supportiveness, for example, is a positive rather than a negative attribute.
This might seem to show a strong awareness on their part of the workings of power: it is relative power that determines what is or is not socially valued.
But paradoxically, in many versions of the difference approach power unaccountably disappears from the conception of gender and of difference itself.
Gender becomes an innocent cultural distinction, a matter of differing (but equally valid) customs and values.
It does not seem any longer to be a system of dominance and subordination.
Apart from the general doubts and suspicions this shift away from power may raise in feminist minds, it also raises internal questions for the difference theorists themselves.
Consider for instance Maltz and Borker's thesis that the problems of mixed sex talk arise out of cultural mismatch rather than power imbalance; childhood experience has made men and women diverge in their expectations.
Even the Zimmerman and West finding that men interrupt women can be re-read in these terms.
Men's more direct conversational style comes into conflict with women's expectations of support, and each sex misunderstands the other's intentions (this might explain why the pattern is much more marked in mixed sex than in all-male talk).
But this whole account depends on the argument about children's single-sex peer groups, an argument which just pushes the problem back a stage.
Why are girls' and boys' peer groups so different, and why in these particular ways?
Does the difference really have nothing to do with the construction of a dominant identity for males and a subordinate one for females?
Can we imagine a culture in which the peer group characteristics of boys and girls are reversed, boys being cooperative and other-oriented, girls being direct and confrontational?
If not, why not?
Furthermore it is legitimate to ask how far adult behaviour patterns are built on a childhood foundation — is the child father to the man, or mother to the woman, in the absolute and simple sense Maltz and Borker appear to believe?
For after all children and adults do not participate in exactly the same social relations.
The tendency to see childhood socialisation as the most important gender-constructing process has always been strong in the social sciences, but it has also been criticised on theoretical and political grounds.
Theoretically it is static, ignoring the way any one person is constantly positioned and repositioned through social interaction.
Politically it leads to inertia, since it suggests that our childhood experiences have made us what we are: there is no urgent need for us to examine (and change) our own behaviours and relationships.
The best we can do is raise our own children differently (a project that will fail, ironically, to the extent that children model themselves on the unreconstructed adults they encounter!)
If we believe, as many difference theorists seem to, that the best way of understanding gender relations is to study children, this saves us from having to address some very difficult practical issues which affect us in the here-and-now.
We can conveniently neglect the question of what happens to all the assertive little boys and cooperative little girls when they leave the arena of childhood play and enter the adult world.
Yet this, surely, is a crucial question.
However we evaluate the two styles morally — and we may certainly want to agree that supportiveness is a positive good — it is evident that instrumentally they have political consequences.
They reproduce what we might call Harding's ‘Spanish village syndrome’ or Carol Gilligan's ‘different voice’, constructing women to function best in the private domain and men in the public one.
Without undervaluing the private sphere itself, we can still say that this arrangement works to the advantage of men.
As Fishman has argued, using  empirical evidence Maltz and Borker do not match, men are able to use a particular conversational role to underwrite their dominant position in heterosexual relations.
Where they are disadvantaged, women make up the difference.
This does not happen the other way about.
There is an irritating theme in some difference work of stressing the damage gender roles do to men, as if we are all similarly oppressed, our sufferings opposite but equal.
(I think of this as the ‘Women can't vote/Men can't cry’ argument; needless to say I find it trivial and banal.)
Feminists should be extremely wary of this well-intentioned but politically counterproductive move.
As Jack Sattel has observed, the fabled ‘inexpressiveness’ of men cannot usefully be described as simply a correlate of their masculine gender role.
Once again, if we look more closely we will see that this particular role, whatever its disadvantages, has considerable utility in maintaining men's power.
If one wants to be powerful, it is useful to appear invulnerable; such things as crying, showing emotion and expressing intimacy connote weakness.
That, Sattel claims, is the deeper reason why they are forbidden to men.
What about the argument that male and female speech styles should be conceptualised separately from the workings of power because these styles appear most clearly in single-sex interaction?
Jennifer Coates suggests it is a mistake to treat single-sex and mixed-sex interaction in the same terms.
The implication is — again drawing on the ‘children's single-sex peer groups’ argument — that all-women talk might be a kind of bottom line for descriptions of women's speech styles; this is the ‘natural’case, existing prior to and outside the power effects observable when women talk to men.
Again, I feel that this argument has not been properly thought through.
For women there is no paradise into which the serpent of sexism does not intrude.
The context in which we develop our speech styles and identities is one of omnipresent patriarchal relations.
For members of socially subordinate groups, subordination remains salient even though superordinates are not immediately present.
This leads me to be critical of the entire project of finding and celebrating an authentic ‘female verbal culture’.
This project is exemplified by Deborah Jones's article ‘Gossip’.
Jones sets out to document and to praise the distinctive historical and contemporary modes of women's speech, ignored by linguists and trivialised culturally by terms like gossip (which Jones proposes to reclaim).
But  if there is a distinctive female verbal culture — and here we need to bear in mind that women themselves are not a homogeneous group — I would argue that it has been shaped by patriarchal conditions, including the restrictions placed on women's lives and words.
If so, it makes little sense to speak of ‘authenticity’, though feminists might wish to celebrate women's talk as an aspect of their resistance to oppression, a demonstration of skill and creativity with the limited materials at hand.
In a similar way, the writer Alice Walker celebrates the quilts and the gardens made by Afro-American women under conditions of extreme racist oppression.
But Walker's mother's garden is not more authentically female or Black than Walker's own essay about it.
It would not be right to celebrate a society in which Afro-American women could make quilts and gardens but not write essays, and indeed Walker condemns that society even as she evokes the value of the gardens and the quilts.
Feminist linguistic researchers must observe the same caveat.
THE POLITICS OF VARIATION: A REPRISE
The title of Chapter 3, ‘The politics of variation’, was intended to underscore the central point about sex difference research: that it is always undertaken for political reasons, and has traditionally been used to justify sex discrimination and exclusionary practices, making them seem natural and inevitable.
Thus it would be perfectly possible for a sexist to argue from the very findings reported in this chapter that women make poor leaders and high-pressure salespersons because of their lack of assertiveness, whereas they make good carers (nurses, home helps and so on) because of their sensitivity to the needs of other people in conversation.
The use of feminist linguistic research for such overtly sexist purposes may seem unlikely; but even now there are indications that something more subtly worrying is happening.
The May 1990 issue of Glamour , a widely-read US women's magazine, has an article called ‘Girl talk, boy talk’ about a book on male/female communication by the linguist Deborah Tannen.
In the article, Tannen's findings are presented as advice to women on how best to communicate with men: for example, ‘Speak in a straightforward way to male subordinates.
Women shy away from blatant orders but men find the indirect approach manipulative and confusing’.
This is a fairly obvious gloss of Maltz and Borker's discussion of Goodwin's findings on directives, but the Glamour presentation of it does two things the linguists do not do, or at least not to anything like the same extent.
First, it makes the differences seem natural and inevitable — rather than questioning where they come from and what social functions they serve, readers are urged to accept and adjust to them.
Secondly, it treats male/female differences as a problem for women .
Women become responsible, as usual, for the ‘interactional shitwork’ of facilitating effective communication.
(I doubt that men are reading magazines which counsel them to modify their style in order‘to communicate better with all the women in your life’!)
A recent issue of American Cosmopolitan had an even more blatant example: an article (patronisingly titled ‘Why not speak like a grown-up?’) listed various things for women to avoid when speaking in work settings, including tag questions, rising intonation and high pitch, because these things undermine a speaker's perceived authority.
Readers will doubtless be able to identify the source of this advice as the work of Robin Lakoff: work which is highly contentious because of its speculativeness, lack of supporting evidence and hostility to nonaggressive speech styles.
The effect of repeating Lakoff's observations as prescriptions is to endorse them as true (which they may not be) and to reinforce the value Lakoff places on particular features (which is disputed, and arguably sexist).
Linguistic research which was meant to help women understand and change their reality is being used here to hurt them, if only by creating in the mind of the female reader one more problem, a linguistic inadequacy for which she must blame herself.
It is perhaps even more worrying that this kind of advice also turns up in assertiveness training texts and manuals used to train women in business.
A typical American text called Leadership Skills for Women counsels: ‘Use strong, direct language and stand firm when you are interrupted.
Statistics show that women allow themselves to be interrupted 50 per cent more often than men.
Don't contribute to those statistics’.
Apparently, the authors have concluded from published research that women get interrupted because they ‘allow themselves’ to be (does this ‘contributory negligence’argument remind us of anything?) and if they want to succeed they must emulate male speech.
This is the dominance approach carried to an extreme even Lakoff might shy away from.
And though this manual,Glamour and Cosmopolitan are moderately ‘feminist’ publications and clearly mean well, in the end I see little difference between the kind of advice they peddle and the more obviously sexist 1950s books of advice to brides or wives on how to talk to their husbands.
It is surely nothing to celebrate when sociolinguistic descriptions of behaviour are turned into folklinguistic prescriptions about (women's) behaviour; but given the realities of history and power it is also nothing to be surprised about.
Unfortunately all studies of sex difference in every field whatsoever carry this kind of danger.
And I want to conclude by examining various ways for feminists to respond to it, apart from simply recommending that women eliminate difference by learning to behave more like men.
One possible response is to deny that the purported differences apply to all women, or to all situations.
Just because Ms Average is a cooperative rather than competitive speaker, we cannot assume that Jane Smith who is sitting in front of you will not deliver the goods.
In any case, Ms Average is a product of her sexist society.
Since sexism is unjust you should make it a point to put women in positions where they have a chance to overcome their historic powerlessness.
In terms of Julia Kristeva's model, which I introduced in the last chapter, this would be a first stage, liberal equal-rights-and-opportunities response.
Or alternatively we can accept the differences and reject the conclusions drawn from them, stressing instead the value of women's ways of doing things.
Someone sensitive and caring might make a better leader or salesperson than someone more competitive.
This would be a second stage response.
Finally, we can reverse the terms of the argument, insisting that women's difference from men is not the cause of sexism but an effect of sexism; social practices like not hiring women in certain positions or allowing them to become leaders have the effect, over time, of producing the very differences which are then used to justify the original discrimination.
While a feminist linguistics will probably want to make strategic use of all these responses, it is this last one, in my opinion, that is most radical theoretically, and most resistant to the danger that research into male/female differences will be co-opted to serve the existing sexist system.
SUMMARY
These two chapters about sex differences in language use have examined not only the linguistic (how women and men talk) but also the metalinguistic (that is, how they analyse and talk about talk, either in folk or in expert terminology).
I have suggested that there is an important connection between the linguistic and the metalinguistic, since the important thing about sex difference is not what it is so much as what it is made to mean.
In Chapter 5 I propose to look at a different aspect of metalinguistic politics: the way in which grammarians and linguists have projected a male/ female dichotomy on to the languages of the world, and their attempts to use grammar as a tactical weapon in the battle of the sexes.
False Dichotomies: Grammar and Sexual Polarity
INTRODUCTION
In Chapter 4, we examined the meaning of sex differences in linguistic behaviour.
But the stereotypical interpretation of those behavioural differences is only one example of a much more pervasive cultural phenomenon: the tendency to classify anything and everything in terms of the opposition masculine versus feminine.
Yin and yang; animus and anima; the pairing turns up so often, not surprisingly it is sometimes taken for a universal principle of human thought and categorisation.
Jack Rosenthal reports a ‘thought experiment’ in which people were presented with the following pairs of words:
Knife/ fork
Ford/Chevrolet
Salt/pepper
Vanilla/chocolate
and were asked to say which word of each pair was masculine and which was feminine.
Strangely enough, people were able to perform this bizarre task without difficulty.
Even more strangely, there was near total agreement on the ‘right’ classification.
Knife, Ford, pepper and chocolate were masculine, while fork, Chevrolet, salt and vanilla were feminine.
This phenomenon is called ‘metaphorical gender’, and there are three interesting things to note about it.
First, it obviously has nothing to do with the actual gender of the words, since all of them refer to ungendered objects or substances.
This seems to indicate that the concepts ‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’are infinitely detachable from anything having to do with ‘real’sexual difference.
Second, the classification does not seem to obey any single, logical principle.
Rosenthal speculates that pepper and chocolate are classed as masculine because they are stronger flavours than salt and vanilla , while Chevrolet is feminine because of its sound (it's a longer word than Ford , has an open vowel at the end, connotes ‘Frenchness’) and knife is masculine because of the association with aggression.
But the more pairs one adds, the more different dimensions one has to invoke to explain their classification.
This suggests that the concepts ‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’operate conceptually at a highly abstract level, subsuming a number of lower-level contrasts such as‘strong/weak’and ‘active/passive’.
In other words, we are dealing here with a tightly-woven mesh of metaphorical oppositions.
Third, and perhaps most important of all, the attribution of gender is relational : it depends on the contrast between two terms.
If someone were asked, ‘is salt masculine or feminine’, they would be at a loss; the question only makes sense if they are asked to compare salt with pepper.
And if the comparison is changed, the gender may change as well.
For example, if people are given the pair spoon/fork instead of knife/fork, they will say that fork is masculine.
If fork is feminine in relation to knife and masculine in relation to spoon , clearly there is nothing inherently masculine or feminine, even at an abstract and nonliteral level, in the work fork itself.
This ‘relational’ aspect of metaphorical gender suggests something very interesting which feminists of the twentieth century have placed great emphasis upon.
The terms masculine and feminine do not refer to ‘essences’, definite, unchanging qualities which exist independently.
If there were no concept of femininity, there could be no concept of masculinity either.
In fact, as the reader may have noticed already, the two terms behave exactly like the classical Saussurean sign discussed in Chapter 2, defined not by their essence but by their difference .
In societies organised around sexual differentiation (which means all known societies) we are led to believe that masculine and feminine are simple categories of the natural world, like plants and animals or lions and tigers: the two classes exist and can be defined.
Feminist theorists have argued that this is a mistake; or less politely, a con.
The only thing that is constant is the assertion of difference.
One of the earliest and most famous discussions of this was the anthropologist Margaret Mead's study Sex and Temperament .
In it Mead pointed out that every society designates some qualities  and activities ‘masculine’ and others ‘feminine’; but the qualities and activities themselves may be different, and even opposite, from one culture to the next.
One group of people consider fishing men's work and weaving women's, while two hundred miles away it is women who fish and men who weave.
Or, it might be added if we wish to consider history rather than geography, medieval Europeans represented women as sexually insatiable, while the Victorians represented them as naturally frigid, engaging in sex only as a marital duty.
Mead makes another important point.
Whatever is thought masculine is also valued more highly than whatever is considered feminine.
In other words, and this again has been emphasised in more recent feminist theory, we are dealing not just with a (constructed)difference , but with a hierarchy .
Another way to put this is that men, the more powerful gender group, impose their own definition on the masculine/feminine opposition.
As Simone de Beauvoir argued in her book The Second Sex , man has constructed woman as ‘the Other’, as the one who is not oneself.
Whatever characterises men, in their own view, women are defined as the opposite.
If men are active, women must be passive; if men are rational, women are emotional; if men represent good, then women must represent evil.
In other words, all the negative characteristics of humanity as men perceive them are projected onto women.
The feminist thinker Hélène Cixous has pointed out that this is a longstanding tradition of Western thought.
The Greeks — who are usually taken as founders of the Western philosophical tradition — conceptualised the universe in terms of various ‘binary oppositions’, that is, either/or dichotomies.
These included limit/infinity, light/ darkness, reason/unreason, mind/body, good/evil, and masculine/ feminine.
The terms on the left of the opposition are identified with one another and are ‘positive’ for Greek thinkers.
The terms on the right are also grouped together, and represent the dangerous ‘negative’.
Once again the oppositions are really hierarchies.
And once again their metaphorical structure places women in the realm of all that is negative, evil and dangerous, in need of control.
This brings us to an approach recently fashionable in critical theory and denoted by the term deconstruction .
Deconstruction is an approach, most closely associated with the philosopher Jacques Derrida, in which the critic exposes the hidden workings of a binary opposition.
The opposition is normally used to make distinctions, to argue that X and Y are polar opposites, X one thing and Y another.
The deconstructive critic points out, however, that the logic of the argument is faulty, since actually one cannot define X without invoking Y and vice versa .
It is impossible to define things in absolute terms and pin down their meaning, because all meaning is relational and therefore shifting (like the metaphorical gender of fork).
Furthermore there is a covert hierarchy between X and Y, which the distinction depends on though it does not explicitly say so.
In the hands of feminists like Cixous or Luce Irigaray, deconstruction poses two questions about the masculine/feminine dichotomy and the associated oppositions (such as good/evil or reason/ emotion).
First of all, is it sensible to think of masculine/feminine as polar opposites?
Luce Irigaray, for instance, has argued that it is totally reductive to define the feminine as the not-masculine in relation, say, to sexuality.
Freud was guilty of this reductionism.
In his system, men have a penis and women have no penis.
Irigaray points out that whatever Freud may say, women in fact possess sex organs of their own — they are different, but not opposite, to men's.
A binary opposition, penis versus no penis, rather obviously fails to capture the reality of sexual difference.
The second question concerns the value placed on feminine as opposed to masculine terms in an opposition.
As we have seen, femininity is associated with darkness, infinity, the body, emotion or unreason and so on.
All these things become negative.
But perhaps they are devalued precisely because of their association with femininity; and perhaps it is therefore one important task of feminism to revalue them, even to celebrate them.
Feminists should question, for instance, the way Western thought has downgraded the body relative to the mind, the emotions relative to reason.
(We will look at this point again in Chapter 8.)
What has any of this to do with language, more precisely with the ‘grammar’ of this chapter's title?
On a fairly simple level, it is obvious that the masculine/feminine opposition pervades the English language and its conceptual metaphorical structure.
The experiment with word pairs demonstrates that clearly enough.
But on a more elevated theoretical level, it is also true that the masculine/feminine dichotomy has entered very deeply into the system of linguistic analysis we call grammar.
Gender is a basic grammatical category in the languages of the world.
As we shall see, this fact has consequences for the discussion of gender more generally.
In addition— and I will begin with this point — linguistics has given a special status to the kind of binary opposition masculine/feminine exemplifies, and of which deconstructionists, including feminists, have been critical.
LINGUISTICS AND THE BINARY OPPOSITION
The reader will recall that Saussure placed special emphasis on the principle of contrast in language structure.
For example, the sound/p/ differs in one salient particular from the sound/b/.
That particular is what phoneticians call ‘voicing’, the vibration which is present in/b/ but not in/p/.
We can contrast the two sounds (and indeed, many other pairs of sounds) in terms of a binary opposition,[+ voice]or [-voice].
Students of linguistics are taught early on about the importance of binary oppositions like this one, and are encouraged to look for two-term contrasts, x and not-x, in the linguistic data they analyse.
They may even be taught that the mind is organised around this kind of contrast, which is ‘natural’ in language and thought.
Two questions arise here.
One is whether binary oppositions exist in language to be discovered, or whether they are constructed as a convenient method of analysing language.
Are they natural to language structure, or natural in the sense of coming easily to the analyst?
The other question is: if we do tend to think in oppositions, is this an innate tendency or a learned one?
There is also a third question.
Whatever the answers to the previous questions, are they equally applicable to every level of linguistic analysis?
Let us suppose that binary oppositions are natural in the sound system of a language, that because of the physical properties of our auditory apparatus it is easier for us to distinguish x/not-x-type contrasts.
(There is some plausibility in this suggestion, because infants and certain animals appear able to perceive things like the presence or absence of voicing.)
Does this mean the oppositions are also natural in the grammatical and semantic (meaning-related) components of a language?
There is a model of word-meaning (called componential analysis) which depends on binary oppositions.
The aim of this approach is to reduce the meaning of a word to a series of so-called ‘primitive features’ which are expressed as [+ x]or [-x].
For instance, the word animal has the features [+ animate]and [-human].
It has been argued  that the primitive features are innate, and the tendency to make binary oppositions is natural to human cognition.
The trouble is, very few differences of meaning are genuinely of the [ +/;— x]kind.
Animateness and humanness are arguably ‘real’ either/ors, but what about a pair like old/young?
Componential analysis would handle these as a single feature, say [+ old]or [-old], but this would be somewhat unsatisfactory because although old and young are dictionary antonyms, age is a continuum rather than an opposition.
And what of the masculine/feminine dichotomy?
Anatomically speaking, it is an either/or.
In componential analysis it is usually taken as an obvious primitive feature, so that a word like wife would have the feature [-male].
The idea that femaleness is part of the definition of the word wife seems relatively reasonable; but questions arise when one considers that — as we noted above — gender seems to be a conceptual component in many unrelated lexical items; and that oppositions often function covertly as hierarchies, which means it may not be a neutral fact that this system represents women as the negative of men.
Plus and minus male: negative semantic space?
In her book Man Made Language , Dale Spender takes aim at the componential analysts.
She takes their practice of representing a feminine gendered component of meaning as [-male]as a sign of the fact that women in language are relegated to ‘negative semantic space’.
In my opinion, Dale Spender here has made an error: the error of failing to distinguish between a bias in the language and a bias in the analytic system used by linguists.
Certainly, the [-male]convention is sexist.
The only rule in componential analysis is that every opposition must be classified by plus or minus values on a single dimension;[ +/;— female]would be equally valid, and the fact that the analysts chose the other alternative doubtless reflects their (predictable) perception that men are the norm of humanity.
But Spender makes a leap in the argument, saying: ‘One of our fundamental rules for making sense of the…world is…that the male represents the positive while the female, necessarily then, represents the negative’.
One of whose fundamental rules for making sense of the world is this?
From the evidence of componential analysis, it is one of certain linguists' fundamental rules; and  extrapolating a little with the observations of Mead, de Beauvoir and Cixous in mind, it is a fundamental rule among sexist Western thinkers down the ages.
But that does not mean that the rule is built into our language itself and as such must eternally be every speaker's rule .
In suggesting the rule is an inalienable part of the language, Dale Spender ironically assists those she criticises in making their sexism look natural, when she ought to be exposing it as a cultural construct.
Spender implies that linguists are passively following a sexist rule of English grammar; I suggest they are actively creating one.
This is all part of the same project described by Simone de Beauvoir and Hélène Cixous, a project of defining gender in a particular way and trying to make it look like an essence, something real and unchanging and natural and necessary.
Let us go back to the claim that the binary oppositions of componential semantics are natural and innate.
I would want to counter this by arguing that on the contrary, few things are more obviously cultural and learned than lexical opposites.
They are like the metaphorical gender attributions we examined at the beginning of this chapter, in that they follow no single principle, they do not remain constant from one context to another and they vary from culture to culture.
Most readers will probably recall being explicitly taught the concept of the antonym at school (I seem to recall that antonyms figured in the late, unlamented 11 + exam).
Among the pairs children learned, at least in my day, were items like black/white (which only make sense as antonyms if you have studied physics), north/south (ditto), day/night (though in the context of fashion, the appropriate opposition is day/evening) and long/short (like old/ young, a continuum or pseudo-opposite).
The fact that these pairs were so assiduously taught seems to suggest that they are not innate.
And indeed the logic of their oppositeness is so variable and opaque, it would surely be amazing if these particular pairs were inborn.
Arguably the urge to dichotomise is a product of indoctrination and not a native habit.
It is prized in cultures which use second-order systems of logic and dialectic to reason about the world.
We can sum up the thread of the argument here by saying that binary oppositions, such as masculine/feminine, are not themselves the first principles of semantics and human cognition, they are a system grafted on in the attempt to analyse those things.
Their content is determined by cultural considerations, rather than natural  facts.
Furthermore they are not very successful in capturing the complexity of language.
None of this means, however, that their existence can simply be disregarded.
Feminists resist the idea that the masculine/feminine opposition is natural, because only if it is cultural can it be criticised and changed; but in the meantime it would be foolish to underestimate the real effects of pervasive cultural beliefs.
In the case of language, there is obviously an interaction between the first order system — the language itself — and the second order system of grammar, in which language is represented to its users.
We can see this very clearly if we consider the grammatical category of gender.
THE CASE OF GENDER: GRAMMAR AND IDEOLOGY
Gender in language is probably the most obvious and familiar example of a masculine/feminine linguistic dichotomy.
It has inspired centuries-worth of discussion and analysis.
And oddly enough, that discussion and analysis has always been coloured by the extra-linguistic ideology of sexual difference and male superiority.
Defining gender
The term ‘gender’ as applied to grammar originated, as did many other grammatical terms, in the linguistic scholarship of ancient Greece — it is usually credited to protagoras.
The word is derived from a word meaning ‘class’ or ‘kind’, and it referred to the division of Greek nouns into three different classes, traditionally labelled ‘masculine’, ‘feminine’and ‘neuter’.
Greek, like many other Indo-European languages, has what is known as ‘grammatical gender’.
In a grammatical gender language, nouns are placed in classes not according to their meaning but according to their form — for example, the patterning of their inflectional endings — and the way they behave when it comes to the agreement of adjectives, articles and pronouns (the technical term for this is ‘concord’).
Masculine, feminine and neuter are labels for formal properties and have nothing to do with what a word actually means.
For example, the Latin word for a table is mensa .
The ending, -a, signals that this word is feminine; it will take feminine forms of the adjective, for instance.
But the meaning of the item mensa (table) clearly includes, in the terms of componential analysis, a [-animate]feature, ruling out any semantic feminine element.
Latin and Greek had three genders (as does modern German); there are also languages with two (such as French) and languages which have a much larger set (African Bantu languages, for example).
All these possibilities exemplify the phenomenon of grammatical gender because items are classified according to their form.
English, by contrast, has developed a different kind of gender (I say ‘has developed’ because in its earliest form it had the Germanic three-way grammatical classification).
In English, gender is determined not by form but by meaning: the word table , unlike mensa , would always be neuter in this system (the correct pronoun would be ‘it’) because it refers to an inanimate object.
Whereas any word referring to an entity with a biological sex would be either masculine or feminine.
There is also a large group of words which can refer to either sex — words like driver and friend ; they are said to have ‘common gender’, and the question of concord is decided in each specific instance (that is,driver will sometimes be she , other times he; there is also the problem of the unspecified, generic driver, the appropriate pronoun for whom is a major linguistic headache for today's speakers).
The name for this meaning-oriented classification is ‘natural gender’.
English speakers do indeed find it natural, and complain mightily about the bizarre foreign habit of assigning gender to anything from a turnip to a sideboard.
(In the light of Rosenthal's experiment, perhaps these chauvinists would be wise not to push the point too far!)
What I have just summarised is the ‘standard account’ of gender to be found in grammatical textbooks.
In practice, though, the system does not work quite this way.
Feminists in particular have had reason to express their puzzlement.
For instance, someone contemplating a sentence like the following (from an issue of Women's Journal ) might be excused for suspecting that so-called ‘natural gender’ is natural only if one happens to be male:
Man is unique among the apes in that he grows a long beard, and it is to this that he owes his superior intelligence
By contrast, Germanic philologists of the nineteenth century laboured long and hard to prove that grammatically masculine and  feminine words have semantically as well as formally gendered qualities.
All of which might prompt us to ask the question, what is the real connection between gender and sex?
Investigating grammatical gender
Grammatical gender is supposed to have nothing at all to do with sex.
You might think, therefore, that feminists could dismiss it with relief as a non-issue.
English-speaking feminists have indeed paid little attention to it; but European scholars have felt obliged to take it up.
This is because, in the words of the German feminist Marielouise Janssen-Jurreit,
For two thousand years there has been an unresolved question: whether word endings of nouns and pronouns, as well as articles, are an extension of the qualities regarded as male or female.
Linguists today would consider this question a silly and misguided one; while according to John Lyons, author of a wide-ranging introductory reference text, gender often reflects some kind of semantic criterion, he insists that the crucial factor is ‘not necessarily sex’.
It is clear, though, that scholars from protagoras to the nineteenth century would not have agreed with this.
For them it was important that gender should reflect sex, even if on a highly metaphorical level.
Doubtless this wish was at bottom an ideological one, inspired by the same mania for dividing the world into masculine and feminine that is still at work today.
Protagoras found gender assignation in Greek inconsistent and illogical — for example, there were cases when two words referring to the same thing had different genders — and he went so far as to advocate reform (he was ridiculed for this by Aristophanes, and the attempt was unsuccessful).
Later scholars contented themselves with trying to find an abstract basis on which gender might turn out to be logical after all.
And the logic they sought was the logic of sexual difference and male superiority.
The nineteenth century Germanic philologist Jakob Grimm believed that grammatical gender was in some sense a more advanced form of natural gender.
Whereas natural gender was based on the brute fact of biological sex-reference, grammatical gender was based on the more abstract divination of masculine and feminine qualities in the meanings of words.
Grammatical gender developed, therefore, when speakers passed to a higher level of reasoning in terms of general principles.
Grimm spelled out these principles as they applied to gender.
‘The masculine’, he explained, ‘means the earlier, larger, firmer, more inflexible, swift, active, mobile, productive; the feminine the later, smaller, smoother, the more still, suffering, receptive’.
Some writers, according to Janssen-Jurreit, turned Grimm's thesis around and took the grammatical gender of a word as evidence of whether what it denoted was masculine or feminine.
Theodor Hippel wrote that women were not rational on the grounds that the German word for reason was grammatically masculine.
(presumably this means that in France, where raison is feminine, matters were precisely the other way about!)
We may generously assume that Hippel did not really believe what he said, but was merely putting a rhetorical flourish on a widely-accepted piece of wisdom.
Yet there are always some rhetorical flourishes too imbecilic even to be considered; it tells us something that this, apparently, was not one of them.
In these analyses linking grammatical gender with sex, it was taken for granted that the three genders — masculine, feminine and neuter — embodied a hierarchy of value.
Some languages quite openly exploit this belief: Janssen-Jurreit notes that in Konkani, a language of south India, there is a distinction between married women (who are referred to by the feminine form) and young or widowed women (who get the neuter to mark their lesser status).
Bernard Comrie also points out that where languages mark degrees of animacy by means of case inflections, as is done in Slavonic languages, gender is sometimes a relevant factor distin-guishing high from lower degrees of animacy — that is, women may be designated as of ‘lower animacy’ than men.
Comrie observes of a Slavonic form marking high animacy that historically it ‘was used only for male, adult, freeborn, healthy humans, i.e. not for women, children, slaves and cripples’.
While Comrie goes on to add that this particular phenomenon is relatively rare, it is nevertheless suggestive, fitting a broader pattern in which grammatical distinctions map on to and express social ones.
In case anyone thinks this sort of thing is confined to earlier times and feudal societies, it is well to consider some more recent debates in European societies like France, Germany and Italy where grammatical gender languages are spoken.
In such languages, titles for women often bear a feminine ending such as the German —in or Italian —essa .
As women enter traditionally male positions of power, this has led to new coinings like Stadtssekretärin and dottoressa .
However, many women in this position do not like having a feminine title.
In some cases, there might be reasonable grounds for the objection; for instance, German —in has traditionally been used to denote the wife of the man with the title, and it is not surprising that women who hold positions in their own right prefer to make that clear.
Grappling with this problem, feminists who want to draw attention to women's presence rather than simply adopting male titles have sometimes proposed completely novel words (for instance Italian dottora , a feminine coining for ‘doctor’ that flouts the rules of Italian word-formation).
But in many cases women object to any feminine title whatsoever, on the grounds that the feminine gender inherently downgrades any office to which it refers.
As Anne Corbett has observed of Frenchwomen, ‘the successful Madame prefers to be le Docteur, le Professeur, l'Ambassadeur and le Philosophe, even with the succeeding il which is required in formal texts’.
Observations like these suggest that there is, in fact, a felt connection between grammatical gender and sex, and that speakers perceive a covert hierarchy between masculine and feminine, mirroring (also, of course, reproducing) the social hierarchy between them.
Whatever the true origins of grammatical gender, it cannot be true that it has nothing to do with sex.
A long tradition, expert and lay, which linked the two together, is still affecting attitudes and behaviour today so that the formal distinctions of grammatical gender systems can be used to mark social distinctions as well.
Natural gender
For centuries, as we have just seen, commentators argued that grammatical gender really did relate to the immutable realities of sex difference.
Today this notion is largely discredited among linguists and students of the European languages.
On the other hand, commentators on English have recently come up with a startling reversal: they have begun to argue that natural gender, traditionally defined as a classification based on sex reference, is really a grammatical phenomenon.
This is not a coincidental development.
It goes with a new eagerness to protect the English language from the criticisms of feminists.
At Harvard University in the 1970s, women protested against the use of the generic masculine — that is, the pronoun he and its variants used to refer to sex-indefinite or sex-inclusive referents — in the context of theological discussion.
Seventeen members of the  linguistics faculty wrote to the college newspaper, the Harvard Crimson , to put the women straight about what they wittily dubbed ‘pronoun envy’.
Many of the grammatical and lexical oppositions in a language are not between equal members of a pair, but between two entities one of which is more marked than the other….
For people and pronouns in English the masculine is unmarked and hence is used as a neutral or unspecified term….
The fact that the masculine is unmarked in English (or that the feminine is unmarked in the language of the Tunica Indians) is simply a feature of grammar.
In a language where classificatory distinctions are formal rather than semantic, the unmarkedness of the masculine gender might well fail to excite attention.
But in a language like English, where gender distinctions are meant to be semantically-based, the Harvard faculty's claim is startling enough to deserve further scrutiny.
We may begin by looking at what the two terms ‘marked’ and ‘unmarked’mean.
Markedness theory is related to the Chomskyan search for linguistic universals (see Chapter 2).
Most claims about markedness involve comparisons across languages; for example, a particular word order might turn out to be much commoner, less unexpected than the alternatives in the languages of the world or of a certain language family.
Or there might be a recurring relationship between two vowels, say/u/ (as in boot) and/y/ (as in the French lune ).
It is generally true that/u/ may occur in languages that do not have/y/, but if a language has/y/ it normally has/u/ as well.
/y/ is therefore ‘more marked’ than /u/.
The unmarked form of something is the form you expect to find.
The Harvard linguists seem not to be making this kind of claim, however.
They state that while masculine is the unmarked gender in English, feminine occupies the same place in Tunica.
So this is a statement not about language universals, but about the structure of single languages.
In that case, what determines that a form is unmarked?
Linguists commonly make use of several criteria.
One is whether a form is morphologically basic, or whether it needs extra material added by way of an additional rule.
If that sounds confusing, it can be illustrated simply; the singular number of the English noun is unmarked with respect to the plural, since the singular form is basic  and to make the plural you have to add a suffix.
This criterion does not apply to the pronouns he and she (don't be fooled by the fact that she has more letters; it still has only two sounds).
They are separate forms, neither one made out of the other.
A second criterion is precisely a form's ability to be used generically; the unmarked form subsumes the marked one.
In the case we are concerned with, though, this does not help us because it is circular.
He is generic because it is unmarked, but if we ask why it is unmarked we are told, because it is generic.
A third criterion for labelling something unmarked is relative neutrality of meaning.
But in the case of gender, what can that be except a social value judgement?
To whom does he seem more neutral, and why?
Finally, there is the criterion of frequency.
If one form occurs more than its alternants, that is a reason to suspect it is unmarked with respect to them.
In the case of English gender, this is not very useful, because gender is supposedly fixed by sex reference.
He occurs whenever there is a male or indefinite referent;she when the referent is female.
The relative frequency of these instances is an extralinguistic question rather than a linguistic one.
It depends what speakers happen to be talking about.
I do not know which of these criteria, if any, the Harvard linguists would use to justify their comments.
But none of them is very compelling.
Furthermore there is independent evidence that the Harvard faculty was wrong in stating that the English generic masculine is simply a feature of grammar.
That evidence is historical.
Scholars of the development of the English language know that generic he has been the undisputed standard usage for less than two centuries.
Earlier texts — including texts by canonical writers like Jane Austen — suggest that so-called ‘singular they' , as in ‘if someone's stolen my pen will they please return it’ was also used as a generic, perhaps even more than he.
But grammarians intent on prescribing rules of correct usage preferred he over they and stigmatised the latter as incorrect.
Of course many speakers have continued to use it casually, and in some spoken contexts almost invariably, but they tend to prefer he in writing.
This change has been brought about by the activities of prescriptive grammarians and educators, not — as the Harvard account implies — by some mysterious property of the language itself.
Our friends from Harvard might reply that there is still nothing sexist about the convention, and the triumph of he might even reflect  its ‘naturalness’ for the function the prescriptivists laid down for it.
In that case, we would have to refer them to Ann Bodine's excellent essay ‘Androcentrism in prescriptive grammar’.
Bodine not only documents the prescriptivist promotion of he over they , she also quotes extensively from the passages in which grammarians give reasons for their choice.
It is evident from this quotation that the grammarians were mainly motivated not by considerations of linguistic naturalness or logic (for example, the clash of singular and plural implicit in the use of they ; and as Bodine points out, why in any case is number concord more important than gender concord?) but quite explicitly by sexism.
They referred to the masculine as ‘the worthier gender’, asserting that as the male is superior in nature, so this should be mirrored in grammar.
In the same passages that enjoined readers to use he, grammarians called for other changes, changes which were related ideologically, but not linguistically, to the pronoun question.
For example, one sage quoted by Bodine railed against the custom of saying that X and Y were married, or worse, that Mr X was married to Miss Y. Propriety would be better served, he pointed out, if this fact were always expressed in terms of the woman being married to the man, since it is the woman who is passed from father to husband and loses her identity.
Another writer objected to phrases like ‘Mrs X and her husband are not at home’.
He argued that reference to a male should precede any reference to a woman, again reflecting the order of nature.
In the face of this kind of thing, it surely becomes impossible to maintain that the workings of gender in English are untouched by sexism.
It is true that today's speakers, not knowing the origins of generic he , may regard it as just a feature of grammar.
But historical scholarship gives this notion the lie: since the form was originally prescribed for sexist reasons, feminists who find it sexist are hardly projecting some novel and bizarre interpretation onto an innocent and neutral rule.
The affair of the Harvard linguists illustrates not only their own sexist prejudice but also their faithful adherence to the more questionable tenets of linguistic science.
They built a vast edifice of mystifying theoretical explanation on the assumption grammar is a ‘natural’, autonomous system that cultural practices play no part in shaping.
Unfortunately for them, the assumption in this case was false.
CONCLUSION
One cultural tendency feminists must be critical of, and ultimately indeed try to eliminate, is the tendency to impose the categories ‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’on every aspect of life, so we see them as natural categories instead of what they are, restrictive and unequal constructs.
It is obvious that the gender-dichotomising tendency goes deep, and that our languages are implicated in it (males and females have different given names, different address titles, different pronouns…) but it is perhaps less obvious that our metalanguages — the systems we use for talking about language, including grammatical categories — are implicated too.
One reason why the ideological premises of grammar so often remain hidden is that linguists deny their existence.
Partly this is a matter of protecting their expertise: any fool can claim generic he is sexist, but only the linguist can explain it is really ‘unmarked’.
Partly, too, it reflects the investment linguists have in scientific objectivity.
To admit that even some aspects of linguistic analysis have political implications is, in the eyes of many professionals, to undermine the status of linguistics as a science.
Linguists therefore choose to distance themselves from questions of politics and ideology.
Theoretical concepts like Saussure's langue help to reassure linguists that they are not dealing directly with speakers who inhabit the real world of social and power relations, but only with a pure, decontextualised system.
Hence we get what would otherwise be an absurdity: the spectacle of linguists telling speakers off for wanting to make ‘unnecessary’ changes in their language, which is seen, oddly, as something that exists independently of the speakers who use it.
Another distancing strategy linguists use is the technique of forgetting or ignoring history.
For the history of linguistic analysis in the West is overwhelmingly a prescriptive and overtly a political one.
Any thoughtful linguist must wonder from time to time if such a legacy can have been shaken off completely in the relatively short time during which scientific linguistics has existed.
It needs to be admitted that linguistic science does not begin on a tabula rasa .
Just as linguists today use traditional categories like ‘gender’ or ‘case’, so they also inherit traditional value judgements and myths.
Even when it eschews prescriptivism and presents itself as science, grammar/linguistics remains a branch of patriarchal scholarship which is guilty of perpetuating sexism.
Though earlier I criticised Dale Spender for confusing two different things, in fact it is not always easy to make a clear-cut distinction between sexism in language and sexism projected on to language by systems of linguistic analysis.
The two are always interacting.
There is consequently some overlap between this chapter and the next one, which deals with the broader ‘sexist language’ debate and discusses some feminist proposals for reform.
Making Changes: The Debate on Sexist Language
INTRODUCTION
The sexism we looked at in Chapter 5 was expressed in both lay and expert systems for analysing language.
It is one of the arguments of this book that the metalinguistic practice of talking about language is as susceptible to feminist theoretical discussion as any other kind of linguistic practice, and just as important.
I have also argued that feminists should be careful not to confuse the linguistic and the metalinguistic, even if the boundary between them is often fuzzy.
In making this point, though, I did not intend to suggest that metalinguistic discourse is the only legitimate target for feminists.
What, then, of the sexism that seems to be built into language itself?
The topic of sexism in language is probably the best known of all feminist linguistic concerns.
Since I assume that readers will be familiar with the problem, this chapter will not be a straightforward restatement of it or a listing of offensive usages.
Instead it will deal with two more theoretical questions.
What makes sexist language problematic?
And what can be done about it?
DEFINING SEXIST LANGUAGE
The term ‘sexist language’ immediately raises a problem of definition.
The word sexism originally was coined to refer to ideas and practices that downgrade women relative to men.
Nowadays, though, it is often used to refer to ideas and practices that treat either sex ‘unfairly’, or even just differently.
On this definition, sexist language might not mean only expressions that exclude, insult or trivialise women, but also those that do the same thing to men.
Indeed this ‘gender neutral’ definition of sexism has become so prevalent even since the first edition of this book was written, it is necessary in this revised edition to be much more explicit about my use of the term.
One recent writer has pointed, for instance, to the ‘sexism’ of expressions like ‘innocent women and children’in reports of war or terrorist actions.
He notes that male civilians may also be injured and killed in combat.
He also objects to the now-common term ‘mothering’.
Why assume, he asks, that men are not interested in caring for their children?
Why not use a neutral term like ‘parenting’?
Why indeed?
The answer is not that feminism, or society in general, has set out to discriminate — linguistically or otherwise — against men.
The usages objected to as ‘anti-male’ are certainly sexist, but not for the reasons some men seem to think.
In fact they follow the logic feminists identify as sexist because it assumes women's subordinate position.
The phrase ‘innocent women and children’ is not so much a slur on men as a way of infantilising women — classing them, with children, as helpless and passive victims incapable of political agency or moral judgement.
The word ‘mothering’ is sexist in many contexts because it reinforces the ‘natural’connection of women with children and childcare — a connection that feminists have criticised, since under our present social arrangements it has the entirely sexist consequences of defining non-mothers as non-women, restricting women's opportunities to do other things if they wish, exploiting their unpaid labour and in some cases causing them to be seen as less important than the children they give birth to.
The idea that sexism, in language as well as other spheres, can ‘cut both ways’ is attractive to many men and indeed to many women.
Since most Western societies are liberal in outlook, cherishing the proposition that ‘we're all individuals’, it is not surprising that the early, uncompromising identification of sexism with women's oppression was quickly challenged and replaced with the notion of individuals being oppressed by their restrictive sex roles.
In my opinion however this is a red herring.
Sexism is a system in which women and men are not simply different, but unequal; as I noted in Chapter 4, this is the origin and the function of ‘sex roles’.
Sexism in language is one manifestation of the system, and it works to the disadvantage of women, not men.
APPROACHING SEXIST LANGUAGE
In this discussion, I will confine myself to discussing examples of sexism from the English language, though of course it exists and has been analysed in other languages too.
Feminists have noted that the lexicon and grammatical system of English contains features that exclude, insult and trivialise women.
Some of them have posited underlying mechanisms of language change to account for this; some have been more interested in relating it to social realities, treating language as a sort of cultural key rather than as a self-contained system with its own particular dynamic; others have seen it as their main task to suggest linguistic reforms that will modify or eliminate offensive usages.
It is really this last concern that has given feminist objections to sexist language their public visibility, since feminists have demanded concrete changes in speech and writing.
Under this pressure, conventions have indeed changed.
Newspapers feel obliged to permit expressions like angry young men and women where twenty years ago angry young men would have sufficed.
References to chairpersons and spokeswomen no longer excite much comment.
Even pronouns are on the move.
But this is not to say that sexist language is not alive and well in English-speaking communities.
There is always room in the newspaper for an amusing (and sometimes invented) item about earnest left-wing council proposals to rename manholes ‘access chambers’ or — even more hilarious —‘personholes’.
But what is interesting is that even die-hard sexists have had to change their argument in defence of traditional usage.
They do not on the whole deny a male bias in conventional English, but they pretend to object to change on purely linguistic grounds — for instance that one should not tamper with grammar, that nonsexist forms are unaesthetic or even, as a last resort, that willed changes in language destroy freedom of thought and usher in totalitarianism.
As Stephen Kanfer trumpeted in 1972 in Time magazine,
The feminist attack on social crimes may be as legitimate as it was inevitable.
But the attack on words is only another social crime — one against the means and the hope of communication.
Poor, poor language, attacked in its innocence by feminists intent on destroying its virtue.
Lucky for language that so many men are eager  to protect it.
Is this veiled rape imagery coincidental, I wonder?
Men have often personified language as a woman.
Tillie Olsen quotes W.H. Auden describing the poet as a father, ‘begetting’ poems on language.
He is, of course, to be master over her.
Olsen points out that this sort of imagery is alienating for poets who happen to be women; I would point out in addition the rather sinister implication that men are somehow masters of language, so that they and not we are entitled to decide her fate.
In any case there is something absurd about the notion that language or words can be attacked independently of their users.
There is also something disingenuous about it, since by setting language up as a thing, a monolith, it stops us asking whose words, images and traditions will be under attack if the conventions are changed.
Kanfer's assertion that words are, in the end, worth more than the ‘legitimate’ social grievances of feminists is, to say the least, a weak and unconvincing argument.
The fact that so many people object so strenuously to the feminist ‘attack on words’ suggests, to me at least, that this issue of sexism in language is not the trivial diversion it is often made out to be.
But the question remains: why is it important?
Is sexist language just an offensive reminder of the way the culture sees women, as nonentities and scapegoats?
Or is it positively harmful in and of itself?
Can it be reformed, and if so, should it be?
These are questions of theoretical importance, and feminists themselves do not agree on the answers.
Most feminists agree, of course, that sexist language exists and is a bad thing: but on the question of why, they are divided.
A particularly important division is between those who regard sexist language as a symptom and those who regard it as a cause .
Sexism in language: symptom or cause?
The ‘symptomatic’ camp considers most instances of sexist language — things like generic masculine pronouns, the word ‘man’, special titles for women and so on— unintentional rudeness stemming from people's ignorance and carelessness.
These faults can be cured by a determined reformer who (a) draws people's attention to the offending forms, explaining why they offend, and then (b) suggests an alternative form that people can use instead.
Casey Miller and Kate Swift, the authors of a useful Handbook of Nonsexist Writing , are typical representatives of the symptomatic  tendency.
For them, the major problem with sexist language is that it is outdated.
It persists only as a matter of ingrained habit, not ideology.
Most people are accustomed to follow linguistic rules more or less slavishly, but in this case they would be glad to change if only someone gave them a new set of clear rules to follow (an earlier work by Miller and Swift was subtitled ‘New Language in New Times’: it seems they take the optimistic view that we are living in a postfeminist world).
The reason why changes ought to be made in language is to bring it into line with the way things really are.
It is the business of language to represent reality, so to the extent that it is stuck in a vanished world where woman's place was in the home, and so on, language is misleading us and failing to do its job.
In the words of Miller and Swift:
The public counts on those who disseminate factual information…to be certain that what they tell us is as accurate as research and the conscientious use of language can make it.
Only recently have we become aware that conventional English usage…obscures the actions, the contributions and sometimes even the very presence of women.
Turning our backs on that insight is an option, of course, but it is an option like teaching children the world is flat.
Sexist language distorts the truth: realising this, right-thinking people will proceed to self-criticism and reform.
Purged of prejudice, our language can be used ‘conscientiously’ to disseminate ‘accurate’information.
The work of Miller and Swift has been enormously useful to feminists working for practical reform.
It is detailed, concrete and enables even the most unimaginative writer to eliminate gross bias without gross inelegance.
I do not therefore wish to belittle or.
dismiss it.
On theoretical grounds, however, it leaves much to be desired.
In this chapter, I want to be very critical of the ‘theoretical reformism’ this kind of work represents, and the assumptions about language that underlie it.
‘Theoretical reformism’ can be defined as the belief that fairly minor changes in the surface forms of words are sufficient to solve the problem of sexism in language.
It is words rather than meanings that are problematic; in fact, the point of reform is to ensure that words express what speakers ‘really mean’ rather than unfortunately  conveying something speakers do not intend.
For example, when a speaker discusses a ‘manpower problem’, she probably does not intend to convey that all her employees are male.
By choosing a different word —‘staffing’ or ‘personnel’, say — she could avoid this implication.
This assumes that words have clear, fixed meanings and that the purpose of language is to represent states of affairs accurately.
I will argue later, though, that such assumptions are simplistic.
In fact the reformism of the symptomatic tendency has been criticised by other feminists almost from the outset.
Dale Spender, for example, is a well-known representative of the alternative idea that language is a cause of oppression, and not just a symptom of it.
For Spender, it makes no sense for reformists to restrict themselves to a small set of targets like generic pronouns and man .
All words embody sexism because their meaning and usage is fixed by men from an antifeminist perspective.
This whole question of symptom versus cause is linked, of course, with the question of linguistic determinism, language and reality.
I want to examine the debate on that issue in Chapter 7, and therefore I will not enter into it fully here.
Rather I will draw out my criticisms of what I am calling ‘theoretical reformism’ to the point where the need for more radical approaches like Spender's can be appreciated more clearly.
I will also focus on the strategies feminists have used to resist sexism in language over the last two decades, which are more varied in their aims and effects than the discussion so far might suggest.
This is both an interesting topic in itself and a theoretically important one; for one of the questions I will ask about linguistic reform is what constraints and limitations there might be on its effectiveness.
ANALYSIS AND RESISTANCE: FEMINISTS FIGHT BACK AGAINST SEXIST LANGUAGE
As I have already observed, feminists are concerned both to draw out the implications of sexist language and to consider changes in linguistic practice that might mitigate the effects of this particular form of sexism.
Analysis is always a necessary prelude to resistance, and in the following discussion I will not attempt to separate them.
In the interests of clarity, however, I will look at sexism in linguistic practice from two slightly different angles.
Some of the sexism feminists have identified in (English) usage is of an ‘everyday’ type — for example, conventions for addressing women and vocabulary available to insult them.
This kind of sexism can be (and has been) noted, but it is hard to get rid of because it occurs in ‘unregulated’ contexts: nobody has made or written down a rule saying that women can be addressed as ‘dearie’or referred to as ‘bitches’.
In these cases, analysis may have to suffice, or feminists may have to be content with informal, guerilla-style resistance.
There are other sexist conventions of usage, however, which — although they are reproduced in everyday speech and writing — are ultimately sanctified by the authority of grammar books and dictionaries.
(The infamous generic masculine pronoun is an example.)
Here it is much more feasible for feminists to try and intervene more formally by criticizing existing sources, and by creating their own alternatives.
Sexism in every encounters
Small insults: terms of endearment
Languages generally have developed systems of address — what you call a person when you talk to them face to face — which reflect the salient social distinctions of the culture (kin versus nonkin, intimate versus nonintimate, higher/lower status, to mention some very common ones).
For example, as a teacher I assume the right to call my students by their first names; they have to ask me if it's permissible to use mine.
If my sister called me ‘Ms Cameron’, though, I would be surprised and perhaps upset.
The norms concerning this are complicated and sometimes hard to work out.
For instance, if I have a student in my class old enough to be my mother, is it appropriate to call her by her first name?
Feminists have noted that it always seems to be appropriate for men to treat women as if they were intimates or subordinates.
Women — like children — tend to be called by their first names where men would not be; and they are also recipients of endearment terms like love, dear, honey, pet, hen and so on.
Of course women use these terms too — with each other and with men.
But if a woman calls a man dear she is normally either older than him or intimate with him.
A man can choose to call any woman dear unless she is directly in authority over him (thus my male  students do not call me dear , though every other male on the planet may do so).
It doesn't matter if the woman is older, of higher status or a total stranger.
Men may still presume familiarity and superiority in their choice of address forms.
When women complain about men calling them by endearment terms, it is often thought rather silly — the men are just trying to be friendly, after all, they do not intend any sexist slur.
But there are two reasons to suspect this argument of being less than compelling.
The first is the lack of parallel between the treatment of women and than of men.
If a male customer my age is addressed as sir while I am love , that surely says something about the relative respect in which we are held.
But secondly, what do endearment terms mean?
As I have suggested already, they connote intimacy.
When used by stran-gers, therefore, they are inherently disrespectful.
They are a unilateral declaration by the man that he need not trouble about the formalities expected between non-intimates.
This is all of a piece with the way some men assume they may stare at women, stand close to them and invade their physical space by touching.
The other group of people whose space and autonomy we routinely violate in this way are children.
(Nor should we forget the widespread convention in racist societies that Black people are addressed by whites as boy and girl .
Is this just a way of expressing friendliness?
Hardly: it is a way of denying the adulthood and the dignity of a subordinated group.)
What can feminists do about this?
In the case of titles, of course(that is , markers like Miss and Mrs ) there have been attempts at reform, and in some countries — though not in Britain — they have been very successful.
In the United States,Ms is now the unmarked choice of address form for women in professional contexts, and dental receptionists do not ask that irritating question, ‘Is that Miss or Mrs?’
But whereas institutions can be forced to change their behaviour — I can, for example, request that my bank address me routinely as Ms rather than Miss , in everyday encounters unregulated by institutions, matters are less clear-cut.
Feminists can only challenge individual men on a case-by-case basis, and go on trying to make clear why particular usages are insulting.
In Berlin, for example, I heard of a woman addressed as Fräulein (‘Miss’, literally ‘little woman’ and widely regarded as a put-down, so that many German women have abandoned it in favour of Frau ) by a male bus driver, who said ‘Danke, Fräulein' when she tendered her fare.
The woman replied, ‘Bitte, Herrlein' (you're welcome, little man).
The man was obviously angry.
He did not find the woman's endearment term endearing.
Not-so small insults: ‘street remarks’ and verbal violence against women
It has been noted by sociologists that in urban settings there is a ‘norm of civil inattention’ whereby unacquainted people typically refrain from approaching and addressing one another in public.
There are of course exceptions to the rule: you can ask someone the time, or for directions; you can expect to attract comment if your behaviour is somehow deviant, for example you are hopping down the street dressed in a clown suit.
In addition, however, whole classes of people are what the sociologist Carol Brooks Gardner calls ‘open persons’, fair game for comments from anyone, anytime.
Obvious cases include children and people with certain disabilities: but women too are ‘open persons’, open to casual comments on their appearance and behaviour.
Gardner points out that some street remarks, like endearment terms, are ambiguous: in some circumstances it is acceptable and even kind to greet or compliment another.
Thus women are caught in a double bind: if they take a ‘compliment’ at face value they confirm men's right to treat them as ‘open persons’, while if they ignore the remark or reply negatively they may be accused of rudeness and/or showered with abuse.
Once again, it is important to note that women do not have reciprocal rights to treat men in a similar way.
The most important effect of street remarks, though, is that they are a way of controlling public space and defining women as intruders within it.
All women, including those who find street remarks ‘flattering’, are aware of being watched and assessed in a way men are not, and it makes women self-conscious in a way men do not need to be.
At times, self-consciousness can shade into actual fear; for many street remarks are not ambiguous but clearly hostile.
Many commentators have noted that more words are available to insult women than men, especially in sexual terms, and that words for women's bodies are more taboo than those for men's (compare prick and cunt ).
Whole classes of words — for instance those denoting women as sexual prey, like ass,tail and crumpet — have no male analogues.
Nor do words like slag, nympho, ballbreaker and pricktease .
Many insults applied to men are insulting because they connote homosexuality (arsehole, bugger ).
This reflects not only homophobia but also sexism, since gay men are stereotyped as effeminate, too much like women.
Obviously this linguistic phenomenon is connected with more general matters, most noticeably the sexual double standard.
Women should have no sexual desires whereas men should be insatiable; if women get out of line by expressing autonomous desire or refusing to cater to men's, they will be censured.
On the other hand, no group of women is more vilified than prostitutes, whose job exists precisely to cater to men's desires.
Julia Stanley observes, after scouring the Oxford English Dictionary and finding 220 terms for women as prostitutes, that the prostitute for English speakers is the ‘paradigmatic woman’.
Male prostitutes have no such richness of terminology associated with them, nor is that terminology extended to men in general.
Prostitutes, it seems, are not paradigmatic men.
Once again we see here that contradictoriness is no barrier to the maintenance of sexist stereotypes.
There are insult-words for women who have too much sex (slag ) and women who have too little (pricktease ); women can be tasty and at the same time cunts .
The same behaviours engaged in by men are described admiringly (a male ‘slag’ is a stud ).
Muriel Schulz suggests that a systematic process is at work in the history of English, which she calls ‘the semantic derogation of women’.
She points out that many insult terms for women developed from originally unisex words (thus harlot once meant ‘a young person’) or endearments (tart was once as ‘innocent’ as honey or sweetie ).
But when words become associated with women, they take on negative and often sexual connotations.
This kind of asymmetry can even be seen in pairs of originally parallel male and female terms, like bachelor and spinster or courtier and courtesan .
In each case (others would include governor/governess, master/mistress , even tramp (homeless man/loose woman)) the masculine term remains neutral while the feminine form undergoes derogation.
Schulz considers a number of explanations for the phenomenon she describes, and concludes that it arises from men's prejudice against women and their fear of women's ‘natural’ power or biological superiority.
Other feminists, myself included, find the idea that men consider women biologically superior bizarre (though all powerful people to some extent fear their subordinates; this is a  fear of the unleashed anger of those who have reason to bear you a grudge).
A more prosaic explanation would be that the derogation of women reflects a reality in which men regard us as inferior and define us above all in terms of our sexual attributes.
Yet the feminist analysis of insults, from the small to the truly gross, would miss something if it stopped there.
The linguistic practices we have been considering have a function over and above simply ‘reflecting cultural beliefs’ about the inferiority and sexual nature of women.
Nor are they amenable to the analysis put forward by Miller and Swift, that they somehow ‘distort reality’.
For women, these practices create a certain reality in and of themselves: they are, in fact, a form of social control and definition.
Let me explain and illustrate this point.
Insults as a form of social control
The sociologist Sue Lees has investigated the culture of young women, paying attention to the role of words like slag, slut , and so on in their lives.
It seems that young women fear having the terms applied to them (by men and also by one another), and they police their self-presentation and sexual behaviour to avoid being labelled slags.
In other words, the proliferation of terms that function as sexual slurs on women's reputation is used as a weapon to keep women in line.
And — crucially — women have no such linguistic weapon to turn against men.
Suppose a young woman wants to criticise a man for allegedly ‘sleeping around’, and suppose the man cares: what can she call him?
It is seldom pointed out that the use of verbal insults is almost always an integral part of incidents in which women are physically and sexually assaulted.
Not only the acts of a rapist or batterer but his words too are experienced as terrifying and humiliating.
And violent men use the resources of language to define situations in particular ways.
They may use gross insults to intimidate, and endearments to redefine what they have done as consensual sex or love instead of rape, assault and battery.
While the availability of suitable terms presumably does reflect prevailing myths about sexuality and rape, there is nothing abstract about it: the language itself constitutes an act of violence and actively recreates the same cultural beliefs.
In many cases, verbal violence is the ‘main event’.
Terms like cunt and slag are bandied about even more often than the cock and the fist, and once again, women do not have a parallel powerful language with which to hit  back.
In practice, this matters.
The popular notion that words do not hurt you is by no means endorsed among women survivors of male violence.
In discussions of this problem, feminists have asked how to cope with verbal violence.
One solution that has been proposed for some words is ‘reclaiming’— investing a negative word with a more positive meaning.
This has happened to some extent with dyke , a disparaging word for lesbians, and with spinster , less disparaging but still pretty negative, which is Mary Daly's term of choice for women who refuse to accept patriarchal society, preferring to ‘spin' their own reality.
Recently a volume of stories about sex was published under the title Macho Sluts , clearly intended among other things as a reclamation of the word slut (and of the promiscuous sexuality it denotes).
Some women have suggested reclaiming cunt , pointing out that the word has connections with cunning (knowledge, magical power), or simply that it denotes a powerful and female area of the body.
Two problems arise here, though.
One is a problem of content: it is appropriate for feminists to celebrate their diverse sexual choices (lesbianism or spinsterhood, for instance) but not, perhaps, to reduce ourselves to body parts (I would have problems referring to myself approvingly as a cunt , or even as a slut , since I would rather challenge the necessity for a linguistic category of ‘unchaste’ women than embrace it with joy).
The second problem concerns intent.
The meaning of words is contextually variable, and depends partly on what the hearer takes the speaker to have intended in using it.
A man who calls me dyke intends contempt rather than solidarity.
(In the same way, the rappers NWA — Niggas With Attitude — are entitled to protest at the racism of other uses of nigger by white people.
Whether to reclaim or reject this term has been a matter of some debate in Black communities.)
The point is, we cannot simply change a word's meaning for the whole community by fiat .
‘Reclaiming’ can make meanings (and thus cultural beliefs) less monolithic, but it is a continuing struggle.
Recognising this, some feminists have used the alternative strategy of deliberately playing with words rather than attempting straightforwardly to redefine them.
This might be called a ‘metalinguistic’ strategy since it involves self-conscious reflection on words — their history, their etymology, even sometimes their spelling.
Metalinguistic strategies: reclaiming her story
A number of feminists — Mary Daly is a good example — find it useful to subject words to a kind of archaeological excavation, turning to the etymological dictionaries to find out where a particular word came from, what it meant and how it has changed.
For instance, returning to that problematic word cunt , I once took part in a discussion in which a woman explained that she did not use that word because for her, its connotations were unrelievedly pornographic.
She preferred to use vagina — until she looked it up in the dictionary, which gave its etymology (vagina is Latin for ‘sheath’, as in where you keep your sword).
This seemed so offensive, she had abandoned vagina as well.
She felt she had learned something new about sexism from the history of the word.
At other times it is more effective to ignore history and etymology in order to make a feminist point.
The word history is a good example: feminists often respeak or write it as herstory .
This reflects the notion that history means ‘his story’, so that‘her story’ would be the female equivalent.
As various pedants have pointed out, the word history actually derives from Latin historia , story, and has no connection with the English pronoun his .
Similarly, some feminists spell women as wimmin or womyn to avoid including the element men — even though that is not the true etymology and indeed, the element is not even pronounced.
Linguists and prescriptivists find this kind of thing irritating (Goddess help anyone who tries to start a herstory course at Harvard!).
But why shouldn't feminists play with language for political ends?
Herstory is an excellent word, pointing out with wit and elegance that history has too often been the story of men's lives;wimmin might be applauded as a useful piece of spelling reform if someone other than feminists had invented it.
(Incidentally, in this case men have not been above etymologising the word to suit them: Dennis Baron documents the very prevalent early etymology of woman as meaning either ‘womb-man’ or ‘woe-to-man’!)
Creative use of word structure, word spelling and word history is a feature of feminist writing both in the radical tradition and in the more postmodern, semiological tradition.
Mary Daly's classic work Gyn/Ecology is a good example of radical feminist wordplay.
Daly invents new words, breaks them up in provocative, punning ways (as with the title; and therapist becomes the-rapist ) and plays on obsolete meanings, as with glamour (originally ‘possessed of magical powers’),haggard (connected with witchcraft) and spinster (one who  spins a new thread).
Daly points out that the development of these words has tended to erase the female power once latent in their meanings.
She asks why women cannot by the same token ‘wrench back some wordpower’.
It is a good question, and I will come back to it, as well as considering Daly's own more recent attempts at word empowerment.
The work of writers like Daly, and still more of the ‘semiologist’ writers like Hélène Cixous, raises a problem for some feminists, that of elitism.
Punning, coining and wordplay are not immediately accessible to many readers; and as sustained devices, they can only be used in written texts, not in everyday speech.
For all that these strategies can cause irritation, though, their value lies in the implication — a world away from the commonsense views of Miller and Swift — that the surface meanings of words are only the tip of a massive iceberg.
The alternative meanings and the linguistic creativity our culture represses cannot be suppressed altogether; and if feminists choose to uncover these submerged elements of language, that is a form of resistance to the status quo.
It shows that people who insist ‘that's not what it means’ or ‘you can't say that’rest their case not on the facts of language, but on the arrogance of power.
Institutionalised sexism in language: dictionaries and grammars
Earlier I drew a distinction between sexism that occurs in ‘unregulated’ contexts (like the use of endearment terms to women) and that which has acquired the force of a rule by being written on the linguistic equivalent of tablets of stone, the dictionary and the grammar book or usage guide.
(The technical term for this engraving of linguistic norms is ‘codification’.
Insult terms are mostly uncodified, pronoun usage and word-spellings are examples of codified usage.)
It is in the case of this institutionalised or codified sexism that feminists might seem to have most chance of changing the rules.
I want now to turn to the reforming efforts made by feminists, first in the domain of the lexicon (and the dictionary, which is the ‘official record’ of the lexicon) and then in the domain of grammar.
Spreading the word: the gatekeepers
Feminists have often reminded those critics who complain about women changing the language that the language changes by itself, and this process cannot be halted.
Of course this is not quite accurate language does not exist independently of speakers, and it is they who introduce innovations — but the point is well taken.
Our vocabulary and semantics cannot remain fixed for all time, as some commentators, even today, might prefer.
New words are coined or borrowed or made out of combined parts from existing words; the meanings of old words gradually shift.
Word meanings are especially liable to change because people learn them by hearing them in context rather than by looking up the ‘standard’ definition, and the inferences they draw can vary.
For example, in the Falklands War, Mrs Thatcher accused the Argentinians of ‘prevarication’.
Some people recoiled in horror from this strong language, since prevaricate is defined in dictionaries as meaning ‘to lie’.
But Mrs Thatcher could equally have meant (and probably did mean)‘to stall for time’.
A lot of speakers think this is what prevaricate means; it is rather like procrastinate (put off until tomorrow) and the ‘stall’ meaning makes sense in most contexts where the word is actually used.
If enough speakers draw the conclusion that prevaricate means ‘stall’, and use it accordingly, the meaning ‘lie’ will become obsolete.
There will be no point telling speakers they are using prevaricate wrongly, because usage is the main criterion for meaning.
On the other hand it is unwise to be too democratic about this.
Some people's usage is more powerful than others'.
Whether new words and new meanings are accepted can depend to some extent on what means exist to disseminate them.
Educational practices can retard changes, or stigmatise them (this is relevant to the question of generic he, which is often still insisted on by teachers); publishing and the mass media can popularise a word, or conversely, fail to legitimate it (quality newspapers, most famously the New York Times , for years refused to print the word Ms , even if the woman being written about preferred it).
The dictionary, too, has a role to play in making some meanings and words more acceptable than others.
So whether changes in sexist language are a ‘natural’ outcome of women's changing experience, or whether they are deliberate, conscious reforms, they are not just left to take their chance in a linguistic free market.
This particular market is regulated by ‘gatekeeping’ institutions: education, publishing, media, lexicography, grammar.
To be acceptable in the public domain of language use (official documents, the TV News) feminist innovations have to  pass the gatekeepers.
And the gatekeepers are, of course, far from neutral; they too are political institutions.
One way of intervening here is to question or subvert the authority of those institutions themselves; and the most obvious target is the dictionary.
Over the last decade or so, feminists have moved progressively from attempts at nonsexist dictionary-making to attempts at feminist lexicography which radically question the nature of the whole enterprise.
Feminists and lexicography: ‘we need a dictionary, not a dick-tionary
Lexicography, like linguistics, claims to be descriptive rather than prescriptive, recording people's use of words without fear or favour.
This is a blatantly implausible claim, of course: why would I look a word up in the dictionary to see how I use it?
I reach for the dictionary when I want to know how I should use it.
And this is fortunate, because like most speakers, I find some dictionary definitions remote from my own usage.
For whom, for instance, does woman mean ‘weak and lacking in vigour’?
Who defines the clitoris as ‘a rudimentary sexual organ in females, analogous to the penis’?
If unfeminine means ‘not characteristic of women’, then why is the body hair almost every woman has called ‘unfeminine hair’?
I took these definitions from the dictionaries I happened to have in my house when I was writing this.
And my point is, they betray a certain bias.
Nor is this entirely avoidable.
Since it is impossible to sample the usage of every English speaker, English dictionaries are necessarily selective.
The problem is, they will not own up to their selectivity (perhaps because in most cases, it is so biased as to be indefensible).
Instead they expect us to believe that they are describing some consensual, authoritative standard of use.
Authori-tarian might be a better word.
The most important bias of dictionaries is to the written rather than the spoken word.
The quest for usage does not begin in the pub or on the bus, but in libraries.
Even then it tends to be restricted to middlebrow fiction and nonfiction (nowadays, especially in North America, periodicals have replaced literature as the most favoured source, but even these tend to be rather upmarket ‘general interest’ magazines — not comic books, or photoromances, or political pamphlets, or the scripts of TV soap operas).
You will not find words like skive and naff in most dictionaries (or if you do they will be marked ‘dialectal’ or ‘colloquial’), though you will find words like scrolloping , which a famous writer used once.
And apart from certain  specialised domains (the lexicon of skateboarding or knitting for example) you will also find few words whose source is a text written by somebody working class, or black, or for that matter female.
In one sense this is not surprising.
Since dictionaries are in fact prescriptive, whatever they may claim, there is no point in their including non-prestige usages and words like fuck which everyone knows the meaning of (though the Oxford English Dictionary did finally capitulate and put fuck in, as a gesture toward inclusive scholarship).
But it is a problem for feminists if dictionaries include sexist definitions and examples, if they refuse to include feminist terms or define them in contentious ways.
Dictionaries have authority for most speakers, however little they may deserve it.
In an article called ‘The making of a nonsexist dictionary’, Alma Graham describes her feelings on discovering how sexist were the standard dictionaries used in schools.
The definitions and examples were sexist, and the sources were overwhelmingly male.
Graham felt that this sent a powerful if implicit message to school students that men were more important than women, and she embarked on a project to make a less biased, more representative dictionary.
This involved looking for female as well as male sources, and avoiding sexist definitions.
(A few years later, a similar clean-up was performed for Roget's Thesaurus by a female editor.)
Other feminists have gone further, however.
A Feminist Dictionary , compiled by Cheris Kramarae and Paula Treichler, is not just a nonsexist version of the standard dictionary, but an attempt to break down the monolithic authority of dictionaries in general.
There is no attempt here to tell us how we should use words; instead we get quotations from the work of various women which show how varied and creative definition has been, and how differently certain words appear from a feminist perspective.
(The playful heading, ‘we need a dictionary not a dick-tionary’ is taken from A Feminist Dictionary .)
The entry for ‘home’, for example, defines it in several ways, including a sense few male lexicographers would ever consider: most women's place of work.
The entry also quotes Betty Friedan's definition: ‘a comfortable concentration camp’.
One might say, of course, that this is not what a dictionary should do.
Would anyone be able to figure out the ‘real’ or ‘basic’meaning of home from such bizarre references?
To this it might be retorted that no-one linguistically advanced enough to look up a word in a dictionary could possibly require a definition of the word home .
But in any case, what — other than the dictionary itself — makes us so sure that words ‘have’ basic meanings that apply in every context?
What makes one meaning more ‘real’, or less biased than another?
The best thing about A Feminist Dictionary , I think, is its overt acknowledgement that speakers do not agree on what words mean, and that sometimes this is an important matter of political debate.
The word ‘feminist’, for instance, is a disputed term even within the group of people that claim it for themselves.
Kramarae and Treichler quote Rebecca West's witty remark, that she isn't sure what a feminist is, she only knows men call her that whenever she does or says anything that differentiates her from a doormat.
Again and again these feminist lexicographers refuse and indeed poke fun at the authoritative pronouncements of mainstream lexicography.
One suspects that in the end, they see no real use in either ‘dick-tionaries’ or dictionaries: a feminist orthodoxy is not much better than a sexist one.
Another recent foray into feminist lexicography is Mary Daly and Jane Caputi's Webster's First Intergalactic Wickedary of the English Language .
To appreciate this fine title, it is useful to know that Webster's is the authoritative dictionary in the US, and is called after the patriotic scholar Noah Webster; but that the name Webster itself means ‘woman weaver’(-ster being a feminine suffix in English, as in spinster ).
Daly and Caputi take us on a mystical journey through a web of words and meanings, skilfully woven by and for women.
Again, the point of this is to suggest that words have possibilities beyond what their ‘standard’ definitions and common uses suggest.
Daly and Caputi are especially preoccupied with reclaiming the spiritual powers women were once invested with — powers hinted at in the etymology of words like glamour , as noted above.
Even more recently a book has been published under the title Womanwords which acknowledges the Marxist critic Raymond Williams's Keywords .
Williams put forward what is still an admirable rationale for politicised lexicography, and it is worth quoting him:
This is not a neutral review of meanings.
It is an exploration of [a]vocabulary…which has been inherited within precise social and historical conditions and which has to be made at once conscious and critical — subject to change as well as continuity — if the millions of people in whom it is active are to see it as active: not as a tradition to be learned, nor a consensus to be accepted;…but as  a vocabulary to use, to find our ways in, to change as we find it necessary to change it, as we go on making our own language and history.
Feminist lexicography at its best makes meanings ‘conscious and critical’ for women while also suggesting the possibility of change.
Feminists and grammar: the myth of neutral language
The best known aspect of sexism in English is what some feminists have called ‘he/man’ language, that is, the generic use of masculine pronouns and the term man (kind ).
A great deal of effort has gone into making changes in this area, since many feminists consider pronouns an important subliminal influence on perception.
Miller and Swift, for example, say that ‘what standard English usage says about males is that they are the species.
What it says about females is that they are a subspecies’.
This is not a trivial thing for standard English to convey, and reformists like Miller and Swift believe it should be corrected by the use of nonsexist language.
What they mean by nonsexist here is neutral or gender inclusive language.
It involves recasting sentences so that they clearly do not exclude either women or men.
For instance,mankind could be replaced by humanity, craftsman by artisan, forefathers by ancestors, spaceman by astronaut and so on .
Pronouns can either become disjuncts (he or she , her or his) or the singular they may be used (no one would use sexist language if they could help it).
Alternatively, the pronoun problem may be avoided by recasting a sentence (for example, ‘pick up baby when he cries’ might become ‘always pick up a crying baby’) or by pluralising (‘pick up babies when they cry’).
In the years since this book was first written, there has been considerable movement toward recommending, if not requiring, this kind of nonsexist language in business, education and publishing (especially academic publishing).
When Ann Bodine in 1975 surveyed the grammar and usage texts used in US schools, she found the generic masculine advocated unproblematically as an arbitrary rule of the English language.
(Two hundred years earlier, as she demonstrates in her article, it was not seen as arbitrary, but prescribed quite explicitly on the grounds that the masculine was the ‘worthier gender’ and must take precedence in grammar as it did in nature.)
Nowadays things are less unproblematic.
Fifteen years, on from Bodine's survey, the books are much more likely to advocate nonsexist strategies, especially pluralisation.
In an  interesting study of recent US college writing handbooks (which are especially good indicators of changing standards since they are revised extremely frequently) Sharon Zuber demonstrates that the authors of these influential texts have moved from noting feminist objections to generic he , to suggesting nonsexist language as an option writers might consider, to recommending it — or at least some forms of it — as a norm.
It is notable, however, that many of those who form the audience for these books have continued to regard generic he as ‘just a rule of grammar’ which should not be altered to suit the transient whims of feminists, though they may feel under some pressure from certain quarters to use nonsexist forms in their writing.
What is interesting about this is that they clearly do not know the history of the form; they are unaware that the rule was made so rigidly in the first place to suit the whims of anti-feminists.
Although Bodine observes, accurately in my opinion, that Americans are more pedantic about these matters than the British, it does seem that below the institutional level (handbooks, grammar texts, publishers' guidelines) there may be a fair amount of resistance among English speakers to feminist reforms.
One reason for this resistance might be the common idea that language is ‘trivial’, so linguistic reforms are not worth the trouble they cause.
Arguments addressing this objection may be pitched at two levels, stressing either the symbolic value of linguistic choices (sexist language is insulting to women) or — more controversially — their cognitive implications (sexist language is inaccurate and misleading).
Most feminists would probably want to argue both ways, and would see the two as connected.
The idea that sexist language is inaccurate and misleading is emphasised by reformists like Miller and Swift, as we have noted already.
There has also been a certain amount of experimental work by linguists and psychologists which supports the hypothesis that for current speakers of English, generic masculines are interpreted as masculine rather than generic — though it has to be said the results of this work are not entirely clear-cut, except perhaps in the case of generic man .
Since my own view of language is one in which meaning is fluid and context-dependent, I attach less importance than some feminists might to such attempts at pinning down what he or man really mean.
I am more interested in the varying symbolic functions they fulfil.
And indeed I will argue shortly that ‘accuracy’ in language is beside  the point; feminist reformers who make it central to their analyses have inadvertently made clear its very serious shortcomings.
What, then, of the ‘symbolic value’ approach to grammar?
In a witty ‘person paper on purity in Language’, Douglas Hofstadter illustrates by analogy the idea of sexist language as symbolically insulting to women.
He does this by systematically replacing the terms man and woman with white and black .
Suppose, he says, that Neil Armstrong's famous words when he stepped on the surface of the moon had been ‘one small step for a white; one giant leap for whitekind’.
Would we not have perceived this as blatant, shocking racism?
Why does the same not apply to the exclusion of women in generic masculine language?
It is not, of course, invariably helpful to make analogies between sexism and racism.
But in this instance a reasonable point is being made: that however an individual actually interprets it, generic man is symbolically an affirmation of male supremacy.
By using nonsexist language we can at least avoid the overt implication that males are the standard and norm of all humanity.
Whether we can at the same time make people think explicitly about women is a more difficult question.
A striking illustration of the difficulty here appeared in July 1989 when the US Supreme Court upheld a Missouri state law restricting women's abortion rights.
The pro-choice organisation NARAL took a full-page advertisement in the New York Times .
It read:
ON JULY 3, AMERICANS LOST A FUNDAMENTAL LIBERTY.
Now it's up to you to win back your right to choose.
The text continued:
The Supreme Court's ruling…has given politicians the power to intrude on the most personal decision an American can make — whether or not to have an abortion.
Clearly NARAL made a deliberate choice to avoid the word woman and prefer, throughout the advertisement, the sex-neutral term American .
The context makes clear, though, that American refers exclusively to American women, since it is only women and not men for whom this is ‘the most personal decision an American can make’.
And my point is, this rhetorical strategy is effective because of its shock value.
One aim of it is to make opponents of abortion appear  unpatriotic and out of tune with American values; but the main message being conveyed implicitly here is that women are Americans too: they should not be deprived of the rights and liberties guaranteed to all American citizens by the US Constitution.
This linguistic strategy would not work if the term Americans automatically conjured up a picture of women.
NARAL is asking readers of the New York Times to see a loss of women's rights as a loss of Americans' rights, thus implying that this is a novel way to look at the matter.
It implicitly suggests that the Supreme Court ruling itself rests on a failure to identify women as members of the class ‘Americans’.
If American and American woman were fully and automatically equivalent, the message of this advertisement would be superfluous.
(A few months later, president George Bush underlined the non-equivalence of ‘women’ and ‘American citizens’: explaining why the US saw fit to invade Panama, he said he could not tolerate assaults on ‘the wife of an American citizen’.
I have looked in vain for any evidence that the woman concerned was not herself American.)
The NARAL advertisement is an example of nonsexist language being used apparently as the norm, but in reality to make a point, to make people think of women in a context where ordinarily they might not (as the inheritors of constitutional rights).
Had the topic not been abortion, unambiguously a women's issue, the correct inference might not have been drawn.
For as the George Bush example shows, by contrast, neutral terms (for example,citizen ) need not always be nonsexist.
While neutral language may be less overtly offensive than the kind it replaces, there is reason to suppose that it is often ineffective, in the sense that it does not really bring women into people's mental landscape at all.
The reformists feel that words like spaceman have a special place in the lexicon of prejudice, because it incorporates the element man .
Whatever that element may once have meant, in contemporary English it suggests a male referent.
If you got rid of it — for example, by using the word astronaut instead — it would be easier to conceptualise a woman in space.
But what would happen to the reformist's theory if astronaut too were used by English speakers as if it were masculine, in spite of the fact it has no surface gender marking?
Because, as George Bush's remark so neatly illustrates, this is in fact what tends to happen.
And I want to stress that this is not to do with facts about ‘reality’, for example that most astronauts are men and it's a macho kind of  occupation.
Many non-neutral uses of gender-neutral words (like citizen ) cannot be explained in terms of speakers' commonsense assumptions that men do certain things and women other things.
The only assumption that explains them is the same assumption that leads Miller and Swift to criticise the generic masculine: that the norm of humanity in just about every sphere is a man.
If the oratory of George Bush does not convince on its own, consider an extract from the Sunday Times magazine: it is about conditions in a refugee camp.
The lack of vitality is aggravated by the fact that there are so few young adults about.
They have all gone off to work or to look for work, leaving behind the old, the disabled, the women and the children.
Or this one, from a court report in the Guardian :
A coloured South African who was subjected to racial abuse by his neighbours went berserk with a machete and killed his next-door neighbour's wife, Birmingham Crown Court heard yesterday.
Examples like this could be multiplied indefinitely, and they are not just reflections of a sexist reality.
For example, nobody could possibly observe as a matter of fact that most ‘able bodied young adults’ are male, because half of them are female.
It makes perfect sense that old, disabled and non-adult persons should be excluded from the reference of this phrase, but no sense that women should be excluded — unless the word adult really means adult male .
And in the second case, presumably the murdered woman lived next door to her attacker.
Why then is she not referred to as ‘his next door neighbour’, instead of‘his next door neighbour's wife’?
It is all very well to say that terms like astronaut and artisan conjure up, for understandable reasons, male rather than female associations.
But what are we to make of it when the same is true of words like adult, neighbour and citizen ?
Evidently, cosmetic changes like getting rid of man do not entirely work.
There are no guarantees when it comes to linguistic ‘neutrality’.
In this connection, we might also consider the short, sad career of the sex-neutral suffix ‘person’, as in chairperson, spokesperson .
This item was expressly designed to replace generic man .
Instead of being recuperated to the masculine gender, though, as has happened to  words like astronaut, person has become a kind of euphemism for woman .
It is hard to recall any instance — in speech, anyway — of its applying to a man.
On this point, the Sunday Times is once again instructive: it tells us that
Of course, full justice to a steamed pudding can only be done by a true trencherman.
The term is used advisedly, for I have never encountered a feminine trencherperson whose curves could easily expand to accommodate a second helping.
Here we have speakers using the letter of a feminist reform against the spirit.
(‘So the girls don't want to be called men.
OK, let's call them persons if that's what they insist on’).
And this just reinforces the ancient sexist perception that the word woman is somehow embarrassing and offensive (as it was to the Victorians, who associated it with sex and low class status).
Instead of being men and women, we are now men and persons.
If we believe that words can be ‘reclaimed’, then woman ought to be at the top of the list.
A similar thing has happened to Ms , especially in Britain and Australia: instead of replacing Miss and Mrs it has been added to the system to make a further distinction, referring in many people's usage to older unmarried women, divorcees and ‘strident feminists’— in other words, to ‘abnormal’ and ‘unfeminine’women who have not been able to get — or keep — a man.
What cases like these show is not just that reform measures are often ineffectual, it is that — as with word meanings — their reception and transmission cannot be controlled by the people, in this case the feminists, who proposed them in the first place.
Struggles about language are long drawn-out: speakers cannot always be brought to see the point of innovations, still less the virtue in them.
As feminists resist sexist language, so many speakers have resisted the alternative.
But to a theoretical reformist, this must surely seem very puzzling.
As we have seen, reformists like Miller and Swift regard neutral, nonsexist language as a necessary corrective which will make our speech and writing more accurate .
‘The point’ they say, ‘is not that we should recognise semantic change, but that in order to be precise, in order to be understood, we must’.
Surely, then, it is perverse and inexplicable behaviour on the part of so many English speakers to take words (like adult or person ) that are not inherently misleading, or are meant to improve linguistic precision, and deliberately make them misleading and imprecise.
Don't these speakers want to be understood?
The mistake the reformists make is a common and fundamental one: they assume that language is — or should be — a faithful representation of reality, a ‘mirror of nature’.
But as Saussure warned, this is not the case.
Sign systems do not name the world so much as order it.
And they do this in accordance with cultural belief systems which are not always themselves orderly, or even rational.
One such belief system is, of course, sexism.
If people were unable to tolerate massive contradictions between what they observe and what they believe, sexism would collapse tomorrow.
For instance, how many people have watched a woman carrying a load of shopping and a three year old child, or cleaning up after an incontinent elderly relation, and still been able to maintain that some jobs are too heavy and dirty for women?
How many times have we heard women who themselves are single parents saying that equal pay is wrong because men have families to support?
Talking as though adult and neighbour were exclusively masculine terms is no less conventional (and no more senseless) than this kind of thing.
To criticise language for being ‘misleading’ as to the state of affairs in the real world is to tilt at windmills, because language is not so much a limpid pool through which we are to glimpse the truth as a muddy pond full of the debris of history and ideology.
Miller and Swift believe that language change is threatening because it ‘signals widespread changes in social mores’.
This seems to me to be only half the story.
What institutional language reform really signals is an agreement on the part of the powerful to recognise a new way of ordering the world (the question of how closely this conforms to reality is at best secondary).
This is disturbing because it challenges the appearance of immutable truth previously enjoyed by the old order.
The cause of many people's conservatism is only partly antifeminism.
Miller and Swift do not point out the important fact that conservatives care for language in itself, and not just as an indicator of social mores.
Resistance to linguistic change is related to the way people think of language as a fixed point in the flux of experience, and cling to the certainties they feel are embodied in language.
The word itself is sacred, and to suggest otherwise is blasphemy.
It might surprise us to find such superstitious attitudes in modern society (though of course, conservatives set their face to the past).
But historically speaking, this reverence for language is deeply ingrained and persistent.
The Chinese sage Confucius had a doctrine  of ‘the rectification of names’ which held that the thing should conform to the word.
For many cultures, the ‘right’ linguistic formulae have a sort of supernatural power: thus Sapir once spoke of ‘that virtual identity of word and thing which leads to the magic of spells’.
Maybe this attitude lingers on in advanced Western societies, explaining why some people still wax so lyrical about arcane grammatical rules, the Oxford English Dictionary and all the other magical authorities, and why they are so indignant about feminists ‘tampering with language’.
They are afraid that in tampering with language, feminists may be able to tamper with reality.
And as we shall see in the next chapter, a number of feminists would agree with them about that.
As the British conservative Roger Scruton rather inelegantly expresses his own indignation about feminist linguistic reform, ‘Each of us inherits in language the wisdom of many generations.
To mutilate this repository of human experience is to mutilate our most fundamental perceptions’.
Feminists have dared to suggest that the wisdom of many generations may not have been disinterested, or even very wise; that human experience is not identical with male experience; and that our (whose?)‘fundamental perceptions’ keep women in servitude.
But above all, some feminists have dared to question the monolithic status of language itself, its claims to neutrality and to absolute truth.
We should never underestimate the enormity of this challenge.
In the remainder of this book, I shall be addressing myself far more intensively to questions of the nature of language itself.
I shall argue that the conservative and the reformist are both misguided: their views are comforting to many people, but in the end they are untenable as a theory of language.
For feminists, therefore, the comfort they give is illusory.
CONCLUSION: CAN THERE BE A NONSEXIST LANGUAGE?
Languages and their histories are invaluable resources for feminists analysing the workings of patriarchal societies, and in the last twenty years feminists have drawn our attention to the sexist implications of usage in many languages.
Wholesale reform of language to eliminate sexism has proved more difficult, however; particularly when it has been based on simplistic accounts of what language is and how it  works.
We cannot simply appeal to ‘reality’ and ‘truth, as Miller and Swift do; we cannot root out prejudice by fiat nor make sexism disappear just by exposing it; we have even less power to control what people say or mean than the prescriptivist defenders of sexist convention.
In the mouths of sexists, language can still be sexist.
Does this mean we should sit back and do nothing?
In a review of the first edition of this book, Sara Mills took issue with me for pessimistically implying that linguistic reform is impossible; she pointed out, and I think with some justice, that my analysis risks leaving women with no way to hit back when they are confronted with sexist language, at least until after the revolution.
Since women's clay-to-day experience of irritating and offensive usage is unrelenting, this is obviously problematic.
And in fact, I would not want to suggest that feminist resistance — from guerilla raids on men who call us darling to all-out war waged on institutional bastions like the dictionary — is valueless.
It would be ridiculous to claim that the resistance of the last two decades has achieved nothing, for on the contrary it has brought about significant, noticeable change.
Miller and Swift's Handbook is an extremely influential text; it and similar books are on all the best shelves nowadays.
I do think, however, that it would be better if feminists operated with a more hard-headed, political notion of what we are trying to do.
In my opinion we should be tampering with language not to tell the truth, but quite openly to shame the devil.
It is disingenuous to claim that the conventions we propose are simply ‘better’ than the traditional ones (more accurate, more precise), because really it is a question of political and ideological preferences — the traditional usage embodies one view of the world, the feminist alternative a different one, and we need to make clear that both these views are politically non-neutral.
We should therefore be honest enough to defend our tampering not in terms of its purported linguistic merits, but in terms of its political utility for raising consciousness, denouncing sexism and empowering women.
Let me give a concrete example of what I mean.
In both editions of this book, I made a decision to use what some linguists have called ‘the visibility strategy’, or ‘positive language’, in which all generics are feminine:she , her.
Some readers objected to my choice, and from a reformist perspective stressing accuracy, neutrality, truth and fairness, it might well seem misguided and distasteful.
After all, the reformist might say, some of my readers will be men.
Certainly  some of the groups to which my feminine generics refer consist mainly of men (linguists, lexicographers, scientists and so on).
Referring to them as she detracts from the clarity of my work, since the reader is brought up short by the unfamiliar, inappropriate form.
And anyway, I wouldn't like it if a male author did it with he.
All I can say in my defence is that at this point in history, I find it useful to do two things with my own writing and speech.
One is to emphasise women's presence in the world.
As I have tried to show, ‘neutral’ language does not do this routinely; however ‘fair’or ‘accurate’it may be, it therefore fails in what I consider a crucial political task.
The other is to raise people's consciousness by confronting them with their prejudices, which are often unconscious.
I do not want my use of pronouns to slip by unnoticed: I want readers to think about it, and to act on their conclusions.
The prejudice against saying or writing she generically is extremely strong, and the habit of saying he deeply ingrained.
I remember, for instance, a conversation about whether to use she in academic writing.
One student said it was not appropriate for her, since her field of study was theology.
On being asked by someone else whether she saw God as male or female, she replied ‘Neither: I see him as an absolute supreme Being!’.
We all laughed, but it was a perfect illustration of the need for consciousness-raising on this point.
One day, perhaps, consciousness will have shifted and generic she will lose its shock value.
At that point my invariant use of it will have served its purpose, and I will reconsider my position.
Meanwhile I regard positive language as akin to positive discrimination: it is a stopgap measure, a necessary stage on the long historic journey toward liberation and justice.
Other writers will make different choices, and that in itself does not particularly worry me.
Since none of the available usages are politically neutral, I see no value in prescribing one over the others.
Rather, what I hope for is a linguistic universe in which people will accept that they must consider the alternatives and then make their own choices, instead of relying so heavily on authority — even some hypothetical feminist authority — to tell them what is acceptable or ‘correct’ linguistic usage.
That highly educated people who question every other kind of authority are often obsessed with it in matters of language is a constant source of wonder to me, and also of concern.
So, what is to be done about sexism in language?
I would say, whatever is most effective in making people think about the  implications of the expressions they use.
(Many of the resistance strategies discussed in this chapter are extremely effective in that respect.)
Finally, I believe that it is less important for feminists to establish a particular set of nonsexist conventions as ‘standard’ than to make people aware of the non-neutrality of language.
In the next chapter, I turn to the work of radical feminists for whom the neutrality of language is indeed an illusion, and who suggest that, far from embodying an accurate or inaccurate picture of the world, language is the means whereby our world is created.