

…
NEWS…
editorial
PRESSURE from individuals countrywide has at last enabled the matter of Vulcan XH558 to be brought into the new Parliamentary session.
Just how effective this will be remains to be seen.
Certainly the groundswell from the voting public has been noted and much more consideration relating to the disposal of the aircraft (and perhaps future retirements?) might now be expected from the Ministry of Defence (MoD).
David Oliver, Editor of our sister journal Airforces Monthly, has been probing inconsistencies in MoD replies relating to the retirement of the Vulcan.
Equally, he has been monitoring petitions organised by various bodies and puts the signature level at above the 100,000 mark.
David notes that it is interesting that currency flying on the Vulcan — see news item — has been maintained.
This keeps more options open for XH558.
There is, however, a worrying trend that is perhaps best put down to enthusiasm.
At least two ‘campaigns’ are now up-and-running offering to fill the place held by the demised Vulcan Association (VA).
The tale of the fall at the last fence by the VA can be told one day, but for now talk of fund-raising, sponsorship, sale of merchandise etc etc by keen, but necessarily overnight, groupings of enthusiasts will only serve to muddy the waters.
If — and it is a big if — MoD ‘recognises’ another supporters' operation, it will be in the form of a well-constituted and long-established body, taking the Vulcan under its wing.
MoD has yet to show its cards relating to the reconsidered future of XH558 if there is to be one.
Letters to MPs and petitions are still valid pressure, even at this apparently late stage.
My advice to readers wanting to know about the status of support groups for '558 is that there is no officially-recognised, or even  tolerated , body.
No matter how emotive the subject, now is not the time to make donations.
Coins dropped into a muddy pool are likely to be lost forever.
We say goodbye in this issue to Kevin Chevis who has beavered away in Key Publishing's Photo Department and whose work has graced the pages of FlyPast for the last three years.
We wish him well!
Bar-Belle expansion
BAR-BELLE AVIATION'S fleet of four aircraft, Invader N7079G, C-45 N8389H, Harvard IV G-BRLV and Maule M.6–235C G-MOUL, has expanded further with the recent addition of Piper J3C-65 Cub G-BTUM, formerly based at Crowfield, reports Geoff Jones .
Bar-Belle's Len Perry says that it may be converted to an L-4 Grasshopper, or it may be painted pink and called Tinker-Belle!
News on the A-26 front is good, with the crack in the aircraft's main spar having now been repaired.
It was planned to fly the bomber to Southwind Aviation at Brownsville, Texas, during November for its 100 hour check and winter overhaul.
Bar-Belle Aviation are also hoping to establish their own airfield with a 1,000 metre grass runway ‘somewhere’ in Oxfordshire, with a view to basing most of their fleet as well as it becoming a centre for warbird and historic aircraft.
Other plans in the Bar-Belle melting pot are the acquisition from the USA of a Fieseler Storch and the building of a full-size replica Messerschmitt Bf 109, from plans drawn by Marcel Jurca.
Two-seater ‘defects’
GRAHAM HINKLEY, undertaking the restoration to flying condition of a Polish-built MiG-15 at Shoreham Airport, Sussex, and featured in the September FlyPast (page 16) has succeeded in bringing a second aircraft into the country.
This is also a two-seater, but purely a conversion trainer, making 1A-09008 an SBLim-2 (Soviet equivalent MiG-15UTI).
The aircraft arrived by road at Shoreham on October 12, after some delays at the German border.
Polish technicians were at work assembling and checking it out during mid-October.
Graham has no plans to fly this aircraft at present and will put it to one side as soon as assembly and testing is complete.
Work continues apace at Southern Air on the restoration of the first aircraft, for which the civil registration G-OMIG has been reserved.
Co-operation by the UK Civil Aviation Authority has been excellent and MiG operators around the world are lending a hand with their experiences.
Firefly project
REAR FUSELAGE section of Fairey Firefly I PP566 has been recovered by members of the South Yorkshire Aircraft Museum (SYAM) at Firbeck.
Rescued from Meikle Bin, near Kilsyth in Scotland, it is hoped that in the long term this substantial section of rear fuselage may be restored and mated to the Firefly AS.5 front fuselage and cockpit section currently on display at the Manchester Museum of Science and Industry, owned and restored by Colin Waterworth.
Still flying
DESPITE the Ministry of Defence's (MoD) statement that no more check-flights would be undertaken on Vulcan B.2 XH558 — enabling the flightcrew to stay current should the decision to ground her be reversed, or she be flown to her next owner (FP November, p26)— the mighty Vulcan flew again from Waddington, Lincs, in October and was due to fly again as this issue went on sale.
Certainly the extent of response from the public in lobbying their MPs and sending petitions to Parliament or the MoD has been above and beyond anything that the mandarins could have expected.
The check-flights will keep the airframe ‘live’ and allow a ferry flight to another destination, if the RAF do give up the aircraft, to be a much more cost effective proposition than the notion of dismantling her.
No formal invites to tender had been issued as FlyPast closed for press.
There are hopes that the aircraft may receive a reprieve so that it could perform during the celebrations to mark the 75th anniversary of the RAF in April next year.
On the move
DOWNBIRD UK, prolific movers of retired aircraft, are still busy moving airframes to all parts of the UK — and beyond.
Three jets recently handled include Sea Vixen FAW.2 XN685 from the British Aerospace Apprentice School at Hawarden, which was moved to the Midland Air Museum, Coventry, and a pair of Folland Gnats T.1s, XP511 and XS109, which were moved from RAF Halton initially into a storage area at Portsmouth, and have since been exported to Seattle in the USA.
Tiger turn-around
WINDMILL Aviation at Spanhoe Lodge, Northants, have completed another Tiger Moth restoration, to the high standard proprietor Carl Tyers and his team have set themselves.
First air-tested on October 7, G-ALNA has been painted in the black and red markings of Brooklands Aviation at Sywell for Ian Castle.
The rebuild took just a year, the aircraft having previously suffered an accident at Clacton in January 1986.
Planes of Fame events
CHINO-BASED Planes of Fame Museum have arranged an impressive list of special events for the 1993 season.
Timed to keep in step with commemorations of wartime anniversaries, it is hoped to tie-in flying activities with each of the events throughout the year.
January 2 : First US aerial offensive against Germany, featuring the P-38 Lightning.
February 6 : 50th anniversary of the combat debut of the F4U Corsair.
March 6 : 50th anniversary of the operation to shoot down Admiral Yamamoto, featuring the A6M5 Zero and P-38.
April 3 : 357th Fighter Group reunion, featuring the P-51 Mustang.
May 1 : 50th anniversary of the 56th Fighter Group's first Ramrod operation, featuring the P-47 Thunderbolt.
June 5 : 50th anniversary of the first combat mission by the Tuskagee Airmen, with the P-40, P-51 and B-25 Mitchell.
July 3 : Aerial photographic reconnaissance.
August 7 : The Grumman F6F Hellcat will display to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the fighter's combat debut.
September 4 : Pioneering jet aircraft.
October 2 : 50th anniversary of the formation of the 15th Air Force, featuring the P-40, P-47 and P-51.
November 6 : Night fighters, with emphasis on the 50th anniversary of the first US Navy night fighter intercept, with the F4U Corsair.
December 4 : 50th anniversary of the start of Operation Crossbow will be commemorated with a special display centred around the V-1 flying-bomb.
AJD's Pup
PROLIFIC REPLICA builders AJD Engineering recently  rolled out their latest masterpiece, a Sopwith Pup constructed for American World War One aircraft collector Javier Arango.
Fitted with an original 80hp Le Rhone rotary engine, ‘A635’ has been shipped out the USA and flown successfully.
An order from an American museum for a full size replica Sopwith Camel is the next project to be embarked upon by AJD.
From underground
A LUFTWAFFE JUNKERS Ju 88, shot down on August 13, 1942 has been unearthed in a sugar beet field and still included some remains of the crew.
After the remains of the crew were removed, bomb disposal experts from RAF Wittering were called in to make sure the wreckage and the surrounding earth did not contain unexploded bombs.
After full recovery it is hoped to ascertain the identity of the aircraft and its crew.
An aviation archaeologist in Normandy has dug up the remains of what is thought to be a Seafire, naval version of the Spitfire fighter, buried some 20 feet deep in a maize field near Rauville-la-Place.
Believed to have crashed in October 1942 after a dogfight with a Luftwaffe fighter over occupied Normandy, the pilot is thought to have been a Fleet Air Arm Lieutenant.
Duxford news
RESTORATIONS OF TWO classic aircraft are well underway at the Imperial War Museum, Duxford.
Lancaster B.X KB889 is now standing on its undercarriage with its two inboard Merlins fitted, wearing the codes ‘NA-1’ of 428 (Ghost) Squadron, RCAF, Westland Lysander G-LIZY now wears the colours and markings of V9300 ‘MA-J’of 161 Squadron, based at Tempsford during 1942.
The latter is being restored for the IWM by the Duxford-based Aircraft Restoration Company.
Arriving at Duxford from 56 Squadron at Wattisham, Suffolk, on October 13 was Phantom FGR.2 XV474.
Flown in by AVM John Allison, this aircraft — in John's hands — led the 16-ship Phantom formation flypast over London on June 13 to celebrate HM The Queen's Official Birthday.
This FGR.2 joins F-4J (UK) ZE359 already on display at Duxford.
Being dismantled at Duxford during late October/early November was DH Comet 4 G-APDB — which undertook the first-ever trans-Atlantic jet airliner passenger service in October 1958 — also preserved at Duxford, by the Duxford Aviation Society, the C.2 has long bee regarded as duplication.
Offered for disposal to other groups, no-one was forthcoming as heavy corrosion in the main undercarriage units put restoration beyond the means of all but the richest of concerns.
Flown in from Wyton, Cambs, in January 1975, XK695 is a classic example of how quickly a big jet can decay.
IWM offered XK695 back to the RAF and the fuselage will go to Newton, Notts, to supply much-needed airliner-type training to security personnel and dog teams.
Waterlogged Tomahawk
TWELVE YEARS AGO, Weymouth wreck historian and marine archaeologist, Selwyn Williams discovered a P-40 Tomahawk on the seabed off the coast.
Moves are now being made to lift the aircraft from its watery grave and preserve it locally.
For many years it was thought that the wreck was a Spitfire, but after delving through archives at the RAF Museum along with information gleaned from various specialist publications, it was discovered that the aircraft was a Curtiss P-40 Tomahawk flown by a Canadian pilot, Harold Fraser-English of 400 Squadron, operating out of Weston Zoyland.
Whilst on a formation training flight on November 8, 1941, the pilot flew through a hailstorm and lost his reference to the horizon, crashing into the sea.
The pilot survived the crash, but further investigation found that a month later he had been shot down by enemy fighters 12 miles off Etaples, Northern France, again flying a Tomahawk.
His body was never found.
Selwyn Williams, who discovered the wreck all those years ago is now seeking assistance to recover this rare early mark of P-40 series aircraft.
The wreck consists of the wings, machine guns, oleo legs and wheels and the two oil radiators.
The fuselage has broken off behind the pilot's seat, the propeller shaft and gearing, having fallen away from the engine on impact, lie nearby.
An aircraft engineer, currently servicing this type of aircraft, has offered his services for such a recovery.
Further details and offers of help are to be directed to:,.
Hampden progress
CANADA'S Museum of Flight and Transportation (CMFT) have moved their Handley Page Hampden restoration to Jerry Olsen's facility in East Vancouver.
Progress on the difficult rebuild is progressing well, although more help would be welcome, labour being a major problem with any large rebuild project.
CMFT; have announced that their next major restoration will be the Fleet (Fairchild) Cornell CF-FLY, which will be restored to British Commonwealth Air Training Plan colours and markings.
MUSEUMS OF THE WORLD
Science Museum
On October 17 the Science Museum opened to the public its new aeronautics exhibition, simply entitled ‘Flight’.
The new gallery tells the story of flight from the earliest attempts to the ‘Jumbo Jet’.
USED FLEETINGLY in the military manoeuvres of September 1912 near Cambridge, Cody Biplane No 304 was presented to the Science Museum the following year.
It had about 150 minutes flying time to its credit.
As such it became the Science Museum's first aircraft and the first aircraft to be entered into a museum in the UK (if not the world) at the same time.
Founder member of the National Aeronautical Collection, the Cody Biplane set against the excellent World War One era supporting display.
This airframe was the founder member of what became known as the National Aeronautical Collection (NAC) and the bulk of the airframes presented in the new gallery are from that grouping.
Within the NAC fall such aeronautical milestones as A V Roe's second Triplane (first flown on July 13, 1909); Leon Levavasseur's Antoinette monoplane of 1910; Alcock and Brown's Vimy IV (see page 37); Amy Johnson's immortal Gipsy Moth Jason of 1931; the Schneider Trophy winning Supermarine S.6B along with the trophy itself and the Gloster E28/39 — Britain's first jet aircraft along with an example of the Whittle W1 engine.
Within the massiveness of the Science Museum, the Aeronautical Gallery can be found on the top floor and it was up here that the careful replanning and reshaping of the exhibits and display space took place.
Several airframes had to be placed into store to allow for a less cramped-looked and these left via the small side door through which the new exhibits arrived — witness the tight fit of the HS.125 that was squeezed in on June 28.
The aim of the new Flight gallery was to provide a more cohesive view of the advances in aviation and to make the whole presentation more accessible to the public.
Planning started several years back as exhibits were re-assessed and others found to fill ‘gaps’ in the story of aviation, but the rework of the gallery itself was one of the quickest revamps the Museum has ever undertaken with work starting in January this year.
Now exhibits are arranged in a chronological form.
As an entree to the main Flight hall, visitors will come through FlightLab, the excellent inter-active area devoted to the mechanics and science of flight — designed for kids, but equally enthralling for kids of bygone times!
Dominating this is a faithful Cessna F.150F which can be sat in and the controls worked.
Nearby is a windtunnel containing three model aircraft in line-astern which show the operator the effects of control inputs from the different flying surfaces.
It may be that some visitors will get no further than this area!
Into Flight itself and the first area holds a stunning array of pioneer aircraft and artefacts.
Beyond this the visitor turns a corner to be presented with the length of the main hall running from a balloon basket and the Cody Biplane to the HS.125 executive jet and an air traffic controller's desk.
Along the ‘inner’ wall can be found a staggering array of models, components, uniforms and all sorts of artefacts charting the progress of aviation in a similar timeline to the airframes.
The level of presentational skills used here is of the highest ilk — totally absorbing.
With respect to this presentation, many eyes will be drawn off the ‘window’ wall where a series of ‘stacker’shelves has been cleverly employed to present a ‘three-dimensional’array of aero engines running from ABC and Gnome to Avon and RB.211.
This has to be seen to be appreciated, engines can be viewed from several angles, compared with one another, or taken in in one awe-inspiring vista.
Of the airframes, the bulk of the NAC are so well documented that they need not be spotlighted here.
Instead, we shall zoom in on the ‘new boys’ two of which are far from new and have not seen the light of day for many a long year.
In this category comes the Weiss glider of 1905, a bird-like device built and flown by artist José Weiss and tested at Amberley Mount in Sussex.
Weiss later collaborated with Alexander Keith to produce an ornithopter, or flapping wing machine.
An intriguing example of an ornithopter is also on show, this being the second example made by E P Frost and covered by silk and real feathers!
Both have been held by the Science Museum in store since the 1930s.
The other ‘new boys’ are of a much latter epoch and include the Pitts S-1S that the late Neil Williams flew during the World Aerobatic Championships outside Moscow in what was then the USSR.
A modern day, composite construction, sailplane is also on show, a Schempp-Hirth Standard Cirrus, which makes for hefty comparison with the Weiss.
Previously on show at the RAF Museum, Hawker P.1127 prototype XP831 was brought into the gallery on May 31.
It is mounted in ‘VTOL’ mode above an example of its Pegasus engine.
It would have been impossible to have brought an airliner into the gallery — they must remain at the Museum's ‘out-station’ at Wroughton, Wilts, but the next best thing was achieved.
This is the HS.125 which to all intents and purposes is a mini-airliner exhibiting much of the technology required for a 1960s jetliner.
Beyond the bizjet is a mighty Rolls-Royce RB.211 turbofan, representing the engine advances that made the widebody airliner era a possibility.
On the wall beyond this huge engine can be found another, stunning exhibit.
This a fuselage cross section from Boeing 747-SR46 N747BN that once served with Japan Airlines as JA8118.
An early aircraft it was returned to Boeing at Everett for structural testing to destruction on April 5, 1988 and the Science Museum were lucky enough to secure a cross section, including the upper deck.
Seats and other fittings will be installed in due course to give the already huge exhibit even more scale — how small mankind has become alongside its creations!
The Alcock and Brown Vickers Vimy at South Kensington.
Our two-part feature on Jack Alcock concludes on page 37.
Tight fit.
Carefully edging in the fuselage of HS.125–1/522 G-ASSM as the jig-saw of the new gallery came together earlier in the year.
SE-5A G-EBIB. has been faithfully returned to its Savage Skywriting colours, complete with extended exhaust pipes.
It flies beneath the excellent engine ‘stacks’.
Skeeter AOP.12 XN344 in the background.
One of the ‘new boys’, the prototype Hawker P.1127 jumpjet with its nozzles deployed downwards.
Hurricane and Spitfire ‘fly’ in unison with the Me 163B in the background.
A view of the Flight gallery looking back in time, from the HS.125 in the foreground, to the Westland/Hill Pterodactyl and Supermarine S.6B in the background.
what's new
First, take the lens cap off…
Aircraft enthusiasts are constantly striving to achieve better photographic results, be it in the form of updating their camera equipment or their knowledge.
A Guide to Aviation Photography (Arms and Armour), 96pp, illus, sbk, £9.99) by T Malcolm English certainly is a step in the right direction.
Arranged into convenient sections that deal with equipment, accessories, technique, composition, air-to-air, museum, selling, research etc, it gives a reasonable overview into the art of taking aircraft pictures, a difficult art at the best of times.
Considering that this book purports to educate the reader on how to improve his photographic capabilities, the quality of the black and white photograph reproductions leave something to be desired, with some subjects looking fuzzy and over-exposed.
However, for a very reasonable price this book will be helpful to many enthusiasts who are seeking to learn more about their hobby.
Masterwork
To review Frank Wootton: Fifty Years of Aviation Art (David & Charles, 96pp, illus. sbk, £35) we asked our illustrator,Pete West , to ‘guest’:
‘My first introduction to the paintings of Frank Wootton was in 1977, when I bought a paperback book of his paintings.
Ever since then I've been a great admirer of his work.
At long last a hardbound volume of the history of his works has appeared — by the man himself!
It's hard to believe that he started painting in World War Two and is still painting today.
The first section of his book gives a brief life history supported by a collection of his superb pencil sketches.
The following pages show, on large colour plates, the versatility and sheer brilliance of an artist who has managed to catch not only the feel and technical accuracy of aircraft but also the mood of nature, in every painting.
It's impossible to pick out any single painting for praise, except that 24 Hour Inspections, Normandy 1944 took only three hours to do!
This book is a must for both enthusiasts of aviation art and aircraft.
People and planes
Unobtainable in the UK for 30 years,My God, It's A Woman!
(Angus and Robertson, 216pp, illus, sbk, £10.75) is the autobiography of Nancy Bird, one of Australia's pioneering women aviators.
Learning to fly in the 1930s, Nancy flew all over Australia in her Gipsy Moth and Leopard Moth and this book chronicles some of her escapades.
Airmen Anonymous (Merlin Books, 45pp, sbk, £3.95) by Trevor Holman is one man's story of life in the RAF as a member of the groundcrew.
Comprising mainly of personal anecdotes, it floats between RAF history and social history.
The Invisible Thread, A Spitfire's Tale (Ramrod Publications, 200pp, illus, hbk, £15.95) by Dilip Sarkar is the story of Spitfire R6644 of 308 (Polish) Squadron which crashed in flames near Malvern, Worcs, after suffering an engine fire on May 11, 1941.
The pilot, P/O Franek Surma steered the stricken aircraft away from the built-up area before bailing out and leaving the Spitfire to its ultimate fate.
The Author has taken this one crash and delved deeply back in time to reveal the stories of 25 pilots that are known to have flown this particular Spitfire.
Some 46 years after its fiery end, the remains of Spitfire R6644 were excavated by the Malvern Spitfire Team, the parts restored and a memorial to the pilot erected.
The James Brothers (Pembrokeshire Aviation Group, 36pp, illus, sbk, £4.00 inc p&p) by Paul Williams is not a reference to the infamous Jesse and Frank James of cowboy legend, but tells the story of Howard and Hebbie James from Pembroke, two of Wales’ aviation pioneers.
The early years of ‘British’ aviation feature heavily here, and stories abound of Boxkites, Caudrons and the like.
One of the Many on the Move (Merlin Books, 94pp, illus, sbk, £5.95) by Jim Burtt-Smith, is the Author's recollections of his childhood experiences, including witnessing the Victory Parade of World War One, joining the RAF and flying Wellingtons on operations, only to get shot down and ditch in the sea, spending the rest of the war as a PoW.
Post war he has had several diverse jobs and is currently Chairman of the Goldfish Club, a society for men and women who have over the years ditched in the sea.
WAAF With Wings (GMS Enterprises, 137pp, illus, sbk, £7.99) by Y M Lucas is essentially about learning to fly, but the difference is that all those budding pilots included within the pages are women.
It is an account of 17 WAAFs during World War Two.
A Span of Wings (Airlife, 202pp, illus, hbk, £18.95) is the autobiography of Sir Archibald Russell.
Starting work in the drawing office of the Bristol Aeroplane Company on his 21st birthday in 1925, the Author retired 44 years later as the Managing Director of the British Aircraft Corporation at Filton.
This book is far from just a story about budding aircraft, it reveals the human squabbles, foolishness and chicanery that goes hand-in-hand with all undertakings involving industry and governments, plus the double-dealing that occurs in international commercial competition, let alone in politics.
The mixing of aircraft development and behind the scenes political chicanery makes for a very interesting and revealing read.
Telling the story of America's three aviation pioneers, Wilbur Wright, Orville Wright and Glenn Curtiss,Pendulum (Arsdalen Bosch & Co, 409pp, illus, sbk, $20 inc p&p) by Jack Carpenter throws new light on the early years of American aviation.
Dominated in the history books by the Wright brothers, this book brings to the fore the many other people, Glenn Curtiss and Alexander Graham Bell among them, who were making significant progress in the brand new world of aviation around the same time as the Wright brothers.
A highly detailed and absorbing read, it contains much to interest the student of early aviation.
Time to Tell (Merlin Books Ltd, 86pp, illus, sbk, £6.95) by Norman Cordingly OBE is the Author's own story of his involvement with the Air Ministry and the development of Britain's radar system during World War Two.
Mixing personal family stories with service in the RAF Technical Branch and the Directorate of Radar, this is a very personal look at the pioneering days of radar, a facility that today is taken totally for granted.
Touch and Go (Published by the Author, 128pp, illus, sbk) by R G Fletcher is the story of one particular Telegraphist/Air Gunner (TAG) course, No 35, which began training in late 1941 and qualified a year later.
The course consisted mainly of volunteers for ‘hostilities only’, most of which were only 18 years of age.
The primary job of the TAG was communications, a vital factor in the conduct of the operation of the Fleet and its aircraft around the oceans of the world.
This book describes their course of training and goes on to relate personal recollections of their wartime service, bringing to the fore the relatively unknown part played in World War Two by the TAG.
Brief Encounter
F/O Nicholls-Palmer's shoot down of a Ju-88 in August 1943 is recreated atmospherically by M A Kinnear and is the subject of a very low print run (100 only) entitled Brief Encounter from Artistic Flight.
The print is excellent value at £38 including p&p but the 100 purchasers will then be put into a hat and one of them will win the original oil painting!
All your own work
Building and Flying Your Own Plane (PSL, 288pp, illus, hbk, £20.00) by Geoff Jones, lays out in great detail all the whys and wherefores in building and flying a homebuilt aircraft.
For the Fly/Past reader, its greatest appeal will come in its charting of the history of the achievements of homebuilds and their creators, from the earliest enthusiasts like the Wright Brothers (their Wright Flyer could of course be classed as a homebuilt!) to more recent feats like the non-stop, around-the-world, un-refuelled flight by the Rutan Voyager.
Keep her flying!
With the Editor's name on the cover, it is not easy to be objective about Sally B — A Very Special Lady (Midland Counties Publications, 48pp, illus, sbk, available from B-17 Preservation Ltd) but as all the contributors have given over their royalties to keeping Sally B in the air, we can slip a ‘plug’ in.
Lavishly illustrated, it takes in the full history of Sally B , the Great Warbirds Air Display and the personalities that have kept the UK's largest privately-operated warbird going.
For the researcher
Two more highly researched titles have recently been released by Air-Britain.
The Hornet file (148pp, illus, hbk, £13.50) by is without doubt one of the most detailed studies of this twin — engined fighter ever produced.
Dealing with this ‘second generation Mosquito’, the author has delved into the design and development flight testing reports, which give the reader a feel of what this sleek aircraft was like to fly.
Individual aircraft histories are provided for all production Hornets and Sea Hornets, along with chapters on Hornet trials at the A & AEE Boscombe Down, the type's conversion into the Sea Hornet, service with the Far East Air Force, along with sections on RAF Training and Support Units and Royal Navy Second Line Squadrons and Support Units.
Royal Air Force Aircraft PA100–RZ999 (Air Britain, 176pp, illus, sbk, £15.00) compiled by James Halley is the last in the monumental series of 23 registers of RAF aircraft between J1 and WZ999, spanning a period of over 60 years.
This volume covers final wartime production aircraft and new types used in the immediate post-war years and includes batches of Meteors, Hornets, Lincolns, Brigands, Messengers, Martinets, Tempests and Horsa gliders, to name just a few.
An invaluable source of reference for the aircraft historian, and a worthy addition to the bookshelf.
Coasting along
Sign language are offering a set of six stainless coasters for £11.95 inc p&p illustrating the following: Beaufighter, Hurricane, Lancaster, Mosquito, Spitfire, and Wellington.
The pack comes in a presentation case and purchasers can elect to go ‘all Lancaster’ or any mix-and-match combination they wish.
Also available is a 10″ bone china plate depicting the 617 Squadron Dams raid — more details from Sign Language.
Germans fighter duo
JG54, Aces of the Eastern Front (Airlife, 167pp, illus, hbk, £16.95) by tells the story of Jagdeschwader 54, one of the Luftwaffe 's most potent fighter forces.
In combat from Poland to Stalingrad, from the Channel coast to Finland, JG54's pilots ended the war with a kill tally of almost 9,000 aircraft.
Wearing the unmistakable green heart emblem on their Bf 109s and FW 190s, JG54 fought the Allies for nearly six years, flying from some 200 different airfields.
Intruders over Britain (Air Research, 206pp, illus, sbk, £11.95) by Simon Parry tells the story of the Luftwaffe 's night fighter offensive 1940–1945.
Starting with the creation of the German night fighter force the author makes good use of eyewitness accounts from former Luftwaffe pilots, and goes on to portray a vivid account of what life was like serving on a night fighter unit.
Gratifying to see this side of fighter operations getting the coverage it deserves.
Blackbird in focus
A product of Lockheed's famous Skunk Works , the SR-71 Blackbird captured the curiosity and imagination of the public wherever it flew.
Sled Driver (Midland Counties Publications, 151pp, illus, hbk, £19.95) by Brian Shul pays homage to this amazing aircraft.
Lavishly illustrated with some stunning photographs this book does not purport to be a detailed history of the type, nor to include a mass of facts and figures about the aircraft.
Instead it is a detailed view of the Sled from the pilot's viewpoint.
Going through this book the reader is put firmly into the cockpit of this awesome aircraft and is given a fascinating insight into an SR-71 sortie.
Flying at 2,000mph and at an altitude of 80,000ft crews often saw more of the world in one day than most people see in their lifetime.
Reading this book that statement is fully believable!
Boxed off
Ulrich Steinhilper's trilogy,Spitfire on my Tail ,Ten Minutes to Buffalo and Full Circle have been reviewed in these pages before now and make stunning reading of the life and times of a Luftwaffe fighter pilot through his experiences as a prisoner of war.
Now independent Books have presented all three as a boxed and signed set for just £34.45 inc p&p.
Local history
A reproduction of a pamphlet first published in 1910 has recently been re-issued by Huntingdon Local History Society.
Huntingdon, The Aviation Centre (24pp, illus, sbk, £3.00 inc p&p) puts the promoter's case for the establishing of an aviation course in the Huntingdon area.
As such it presents an authentic record of early aviation in the local area, and although of limited general interest, it fills a gap in the country-wide documentation of aviation history in the UK.
With the closure of 1 Tactical Weapons Unit at RAF Brawdy on August 31, a souvenir brochure detailing the Station's history has recently been published.
Brawdy Remembered (C I Thomas Printing Services, 32pp, illus, sbk, £1.50) will prove in years to come to be an interesting souvenir of a well-known RAF station.
Dark Peak Aircraft Wrecks 2 (Pen and Sword Books Ltd, 192pp, illus, sbk, £9.95) by Ron Collier tells the stories of 26 out of the 50 aircraft that have crashed in the Dark Peak area of the peak District National Park over the past 60 years.
The text almost serves as a history of aviation in the UK from the 1930s onwards.
The book is comprehensively illustrated with both contemporary and modern photographs, backed up with maps giving the locations of crash sites, which will be of invaluable use to hill walkers/aircrafts historians for generations to come.
Bircham Newton (GMS Enterprises, 22pp, illus, sbk, £3.95) by Peter B Gunnis number five in the Airfield Focus series and details the history of this lesser-known airfield on the north Norfolk coast.
Command and Combat (Tri-Service Magazines, 58pp, illus, sbk £3.00) edited by Paddy Porter, a regular contributor to the pages of FlyPast , gives a brief but interesting history of Headquarters, 1st Air Division of the Eighth USAAF (Brampton), and the 457th Bomb Group, the Fireball Outfit, based at Glatton.
Shellfire Memories (North Kent Books, 44pp, illus, sbk) complied by David G Collyer, is very much a book of personal reminiscences of East Kent from September 1938–June 1940.
With particular emphasis on Dover and the surrounding area, known as Hellfire Corner , the book draws upon many first hand eyewitness accounts about living under the threat of bombs, land mines, shells, V-1s etc.
All types
Windsock Datafiles from Albatross Publications continue to detail World War One types:Sopwith Pup (40pp, illus, sbk, £12.95) is edited by that master of early aircraft, Jack Bruce.
Rumpler C.IV (16pp, illus, sbk, £5.45) by Peter M Grosz is No 35 in the popular series.
Both are lavishly illustrated throughout with period photographs and technical drawings.
The first turbine-powered airliner to carry fare-paying passengers, it is now more than 40 years since the prototype Vickers Viscount flew.
Classic Civil Aircraft 4: Vickers Viscount (Ian Allan, 112pp, illus, hbk, £14.95) by Alan J Wright is a worthy tribute to this much-loved airliner.
Giving a comprehensive history of the development and operation of the type, the book also includes a comprehensive listing of all airlines that operated the aircraft on a regular basis.
Mustang, The Operational Record (156pp, illus, hbk, £16.95) by Robert Jackson is yet another book on North American Aviation's most famous product.
This tome concentrated on the operational side of the type's history, not just during World War Two, where the aircraft was undoubtedly the best long range fighting aircraft that served on all sides of the war, but through all the other conflicts in which the P-51 participated.
An interesting point is raised at the end of the book, where it estimates that out of 210 Mustangs that survive worldwide, 112 are reported to be airworthy.
Surely a tremendous tribute to the great interest in this classic fighter.
Campaign trail
Courage in the Skies (Stanley Paul, 208pp, illus, hbk, £18.99) by AVM Johnnie Johnson and W/C Laddie Lucas two distinguished World War Two pilots, brings to life the many characters that have played a prominent part in aviation combat history, along with the many amazing developments in aircraft technology from the days of World War One to the more recent Operation Desert Storm in the Gulf.
Featuring an exceptional collection of photographs, informative illustrations and maps, this book combines first hand accounts along with historical facts and figures relating to air combat over the past 78 years.
Doodlebugs and Rockets (Froglets Publications, 208pp, illus, hbk, £16.95) by Bob Ogley highlights the rocket campaign waged over southern England just after the D-Day landings.
Many hitherto unpublished photographs accompany details of the parts played by the Royal Observer Corps, Civil Defence, Fire, Police and Ambulance services, plus the men and women who worked in the anti-aircraft emplacements, ATS, Balloon Command, and of course the RAF, who played a major role in photographing and bombing the manufacture and launch sites.
Exploits of the men and machines of Bomber Command during World War Two never cease to amaze and astound.
Air Battle of the Ruhr (Airlife, 220pp, illus, hbk, £16.95) by Alan Cooper concentrates on the major offensive against German industry in the Ruhr.
Defining the importance of the Ruhr area, this book describes in meticulous detail individual raids.
their targets, the aircraft used and the German defences.
Providing copious statistics for the numbers of bombers dispatched, those that reached their targets and those that did not for one reason or another, this book is a complete overview of a major aspect of the air war against mainland Germany.
Staying with the night-time air war,Night Intruder (Airlife, 184pp, illus, sbk, £11.95) by Jeremy Howard-Williams is a day-to-day account of the life of an RAF night fighter pilot during the years 1941–1945.
After a tour of operations with the famous John Cats Eyes Cunningham, the Author went on to fly with the Fighter Interception Unit and was the Author of our Operational Flying Club series in the April, May and June 1992 issues.
You've read the series — now read the book!
Desperate Venture (Hodder & Stoughton, 365pp, illus, hbk, £18.99) by Normal Gelb lays out in detail the story behind one of the most crucial campaigns of World War Two.
It is an account of Operation Torch , the Allied invasion of North Africa.
Whilst not strictly an aeroplane book, it nevertheless gives the reader an overview of how land, sea and air operations were co-ordinated during the last world conflict.
Warbird survey
Gallant Warriors (published by the Author, 32pp, sbk, $10.95) by Dennis D Bergstrom is a survey of propeller driven warbird fighter and bomber survivors around the world.
Over 1,000 World War Two era aircraft are listed with their military serial number/civil registration, status (airworthy, being restored or in storage), current owner and location, plus a numerical listing of the examples of each type that are on permanent display.
Including such aircraft as: P-38, P-40, P-51, Beaufighter, Blenheim, Firefly, Hurricane and Spitfire, He 111 CASA 2111, Bf 109/ Buchon among many others, this book is primarily a source of reference for aviation and warbird preservation historians.
Good journal guide
Flightlines is the official magazine of the Canadian Warplane Heritage (CWH), based at Hamilton, Ontario.
This quarterly publication, available to members of CWH is full of news updates on the aircraft of the CWH Museum along with articles of an historical nature.
Squadron News is the house magazine of the North Weald-based Squadron , home of the Harvard Formation Team and the Great War Combat Team.
With news of all the events organised throughout the year by The Squadron , along with news and views of the varied historic based aircraft, this publication is issued free to all Squadron members.
Final touch-down?
L & K Aviation Art are presenting a reproduction of the flight map used for the ‘last’ flight of Vulcan XH558 on September 21 into Waddington (see page 8 for more on that!) with a special edition of their print Vulcan Thunder .
Hendon's classic
The RAF Museum's calendar is now a well-established classic.
For 1993, £10.95 will secure you 12 Michael  Turners for your wall.
Reproduction is excellent and the value for money it offers is phenomenal.
Here we feature May and an ambulance configured Airspeed Oxford.
The other subjects are: Thunderbolt, Lancaster, Sunderland, Spitfire, Gladiators, Hampdens, Me 163/B-17s, Dakota, Beauforts, Wellington, Dornier Do 17.
Hurry, while stocks last…
Sharkmouth story
The American Volunteer Group (AVG), known the world over as the Flying Tigers achieved fame under the leadership of Claire L Chennault fighting alongside the Chinese in their pre World War Two struggle against Japan.
Ding Hao (Pelican Publishing, 502pp, illus, hbk, £18.95) by Wanda Cornelius and Thayne Short tells the inspiring story of men against odds.
This is a weighty tome, dealing in depth with a well-known, but not precisely documentedera and theatre of conflict.
Your own hero
Baron von Richthofen in Sterling silver plated English pewter is the first in a new series of 12 figures entitled Heroes of Aviation from Anthony Slocombe.
The Red Baron stands just over 4″ tall and comes complete with a hand-turned mahogany base, limited edition certificate, biography of the ‘hero’ and numbered and dated by the sculptor.
With a run of only 1,000 these are attractively priced at £32 inc p&p.
Next off is Mick Mannock.
Videos in view
Airshow action
There are an increasing number of airshow videos on the market today.
RAF Manston Air Day 1992 (Production Partnership, 57 mins, colour, £12.99) is one of the better ones.
A varied and interesting selection of aircraft old and new are featured in the film, which has an authoritative commentary provided by Raymond Baxter.
Love him or loathe him, at least he knows what he is talking about.
Star of the show is the Vulcan and viewers are treated to a tour around the cockpit with S/L Paul Millikin.
The RAF Aerobatic Team, the Red Arrows always hold the crowds' attention wherever they fly,Classic Manoeuvres (Columbia Tristar video, 40 mins, colour, £10.99) follows the team on their tour of North America during 1983.
Narrated by the team leader S/L John Blackwell and the team manager S/L Eric Steenson, this video shows the behind the scenes logistics of getting the team out to the ‘States with their ten crimson-painted Hawks in time for the Bicentennial celebrations at Andrews Air Force Base.
Just part of a massive flying programme at Andrews, the Reds take the crowd by storm with their immaculate formation routines.
Great Airshows of the World (Aviation Week Video, 52 mins, colour, £12.99) is an overview of four major airshows during 1990–1991.
US Air and Trade Show at Dayton, Ohio in 1990 was one of the first public appearances of the F-117A stealth fighter, it also saw performances by the MiG-29, YF-22 and XV-15.
EAA Oshkosh 1990 features P-51s en masse , Boeing Stearman, the two CAP French connection team, DC-3, Constellation, Concorde, MiG-21 as well as the multitude of homebuilt types that frequent this major event.
Farnborough 1990 is featured with some interesting in flight cockpit shots of Su-27 and MiG-29, plus the Russian aircraft that dominated the 1990 show, the Antonov An-225.
A brief look at the Topeka, Kansas, airshow includes an exciting in-cockpit sequence of the F-15's display showing just what the pilot sees during his demanding performance.
Then it's the turn of Paris 1991 which features the CL-215T, Tucano and Rafale C. Static shots of the F-117A are supported by film of the SR-71 Blackbird at Paris during 1989, A-40 Albatross, Airbus A300, MiG-31 Foxhound and the S-76 helicopter demonstrator all are shown giving their respective displays.
With a patriotic commentary the viewer is well aware that this video is an American production.
Great Aerobatic Teams of the World (Aviation Week Video, 52 mins, colour £12.99) looks at some of the military aerobatic teams around the world that thrill airshow audiences each year.
Red Arrows,Patrouille de France ,Frecce Tricolori , Snowbirds, Blue Angels, Thunderbirds, all are shown going about their normal airshow business.
Fleeting glimpses are given of the Roulette team from Australia, Team 60 from Sweden and Esquadrilha da Fumaca from Brazil.
From Bungle to Barrel Roll (Makin Communications, 53 mins, colour, £9.99) looks at this year's PFA International Air Rally, held at Wroughton.
Looking behind the scenes at the organisation of this annual event, the video explains the history of the Popular Flying Association.
Much use is made of air-to-air film, obviously shot prior to the actual rally weekend, for the aircraft in question are seen flying in blue skies!
A varied selection of different types are shown, including Tiger Moth, Vari-Eze, Pitts S-2A, Speedtwin and Sparrowhawk.
Airliner duo
Great British Airline Classics Vol Two (PenTan Video/British Airways Archive Collection, 51 mins, colour/b&w £14.95) is a must for those with an interest in airliners over the years.
Volume Two of a 10 volume series, this particular video contains two films,Watch and Ward in the Air a 1937 film showing the basics of air navigation for land based aircraft with special considerations given for flying boats.
Navigation training is seen taking place in an Avro 652 during a cross country flight from Southampton to Plymouth and then onto Croydon, whilst Empire flying-boat crews are seen undergoing seamanship courses in SARO Cutty Sark G-ACDP and Short S.8/8 Rangoon G-AEIM.
All this training is put into practise during film of Short S.23 G-ADUV whilst en route to the Middle East.
SkyPort is the second film on the video and this shows London Airport during the late 1950s.
Footage of Viscounts, Dakotas, Convairs, Stratocruisers, Constellations and DC-7s abound in this interesting film which takes the viewer back to the days of piston-engined airliner flying.
Basically a tour around London Airport this film shows various aspects of the airport's services, passenger check-in desks that look very uncrowded, airport police and their various duties around the airport, repair and maintenance facilities and air traffic control and radar services.
All in all, a nostalgic look back at London Airport at a time when airliners had their own individual characters.
Lockheed Constellation (DD Video, 50 mins, colour/b&w, £12.99) should delight all lovers of this superb airliner.
Tracing the history of the Lockheed company, illustrating the various aircraft types produced, the video makes copious use of archive colour film which is a joy to watch.
Detailing the design features that gave the Connie its unique shape the film goes on to show the various changes and marks of the Connie that enabled it to become a flying legend in civil and military use.
Although the first variants suffered from numerous teething problems, the aircraft became one of the most successful products ever built by Lockheed and seeing the various types all filmed in glorious colour certainly makes this video a must for all Constellation fans.
Stars n Bars quartet
History of the United States Air Force (DD Video, 42 mins, b&w, £12.99) is a compilation of four one reel official USAF films of the 1950s.
Showing the history of the USAAF/USAF from 1931 to 1953 it shows the early development with B-10 bombers helping out during the flooding of 1935, film is included of the first B-17s, a type that was delivered in 1937, the expansion programmes of the late 1930s show the tremendous build up of men and machines.
The Flying Tigers , Pearl Harbour and the Dolittle raid on Tokyo are all featured, as are the war in Europe, Far East and Pacific theatre warfare, ending the wartime section with Japan's defeat and the cessation of hostilities.
Post War, B-36, P-80, F-86 are all shown in action and in 1947 the USAAF became the USAF.
Due to its short running time, overall details of aircraft and events are not given great depth, but to the collector of archive aviation films this tape will be a welcome addition to the home library.
Target Pearl Harbor (DD Video, 75 mins, colour/b&w, £12.99).
The day that will live in infamy is graphically portrayed with extensive use of on-the-spot archive film footage, which is interlinked with film of the various locations as they are today, giving the documentary a ‘then and now’ feel.
Filmed interviews with American and Japanese historians outline the lead up to the infamous attack on December 7, 1941.
One survivor says: ‘When I saw the first bomb fall, I knew that it was going to be a bad day for America’.
It turned out to be a devastating day for America.
Today, the USS Arizona and USS Utah still lay where they were sunk, as a lasting memorial to the servicemen who died on December 7, 1941.
The Remarkable F4U Corsair (Cord Video, 64 mins, colour/b&w, £16.95) is the story of Chance Vought's famous bent-wing bird .
Starting with a look back at early aircraft carrier landings, with a fair amount of aircraft coming to grief, the film includes interviews with the likes of Boone Guyton, Corsair test pilot and Don Jordan, Pratt & Whitney engineer.
These two personalities, along with several others put the viewer in the pilot's seat of the large naval fighter, giving a taste of what the aircraft was like to fly and go to war in.
Recent film of restored airworthy Corsairs in America is also included, but the main source of interest in this video is the combat footage which has all been taken from official US Navy film archives.
Over There (DD Video, 51 mins, colour/b&w, £12.99) is a film by Roger A Freeman and is firmly in the Stars n Bars mould.
This fascinating video takes a then and now look at various ex USAAF 8th Air Force airfields 50 years later.
Excellent archive aviation footage contrasts nicely with the film shot of the airfields as they are today.
The video is a tour de force for USAAF airfields of World War Two, with Grafton Underwood, Molesworth, Shipdham, Hethel, Earls Colne, Debden, Thorpe Abbots, Boxted among many others being featured.
Some of the airfields are remarkably well preserved and the viewer can easily equate the archive footage with the scenes shot recently.
Copious amounts of film of B-17, B-24, B-26, A-20, P-51B, P-47, P-38 and C-47 aircraft litter the video, bringing these old airfields to life once again.
British Built
Exercise Barfrost (RTV Communications, 15 mins, b&w, £9.99) is a rare one-reel film of a parachute drop by the 16th Parachute Brigade using Beverleys and Hastings of RAF Transport Command in the 1950s.
Whilst only a short film, it does show some interesting footage of these venerable RAF transport aircraft.
Lines of Bevs and Haystacks are shown being prepared and loaded prior to the exercise.
Stream take-offs by the Hercules and Centaurus-powered aircraft are followed by film of the aircraft en route to the dropping zone.
Exercise Barfrost is a unique view at RAF Transport Command aircraft during the 1950s.
Hawker Hunter (AVID, 60 mins, colour/b&w, £14.99) is an absolute cracker of a video, introduced by Bill Bedford, former chief test pilot for the Hawker Aircraft Company, starting with archive film of early jet aircraft, Me 262, P-80, F-86, Meteor and Vampire etc.
Designed by Sydney Camm, the Hunter was one of a long line of successful fighting aircraft from the Hawker stable.
On July 20, 1951 the Hawker P.1067 (Hunter) prototype, WB188, flew for the first time — see page 78.
The Hunter first saw RAF service with 43 Sqn based at RAF Leuchars and the video contains a large amount of colour film from the 1950s showing Hunters serving with the RAF along with footage of those in service with the Belgian Air Force.
The Black Arrows of 111 Sqn performing their famous 22 aircraft loop at the Farnborough airshow, plus some stunning film of Swiss machines flying through the Swiss mountain ranges, as well as film of Chilean examples all add to the enjoyment of watching this video.
For lovers of this classic British jet fighter, this video film is an absolute must!
War in the Air
The final volumes in the Hunters in the Sky (DD Video, colour/b&w, £12.99) series have now been released.
Assault on Fortress Europe (67 mins) deals with the daylight bombing campaign of the Eighth Air Force, and the integral part that the fighter escorts played in the overall effect.
The Allied force's superiority gradually gains the upper hand in Europe, North Africa and Italy.
D-Day sees the push into Europe with the Luftwaffe under pressure east and west.
Victory in the Pacific (50 mins) features much carrier-borne aircraft footage, with camera gun film of the airborne dogfights between Hellcats and Zeros .
Many surviving pilots recall the fierce air battles that ensued over the Pacific Ocean.
With the onslaught of Japanese Kamikaze attacks the American fleet suffered grievous losses despite heavy defensive anti-aircraft barrages.
Struggle for Supremacy (46 mins) highlights the race between the warring powers to build even better warplanes, which reached a crescendo towards the end of World War Two.
Bigger, better and faster was what everyone strove for, and the latter part of the war saw the early jet fighters enter the fray.
Although the Messerschmitt 262s and Gloster Meteors were used only in limited numbers, this was really the start of a brand new generation of aerial fighting machines.
All the videos in the Hunters in the Sky series feature many interviews with surviving aces fighter aces from the conflict, and these interviews contrast nicely with the archive camera footage taken ‘in the field’.
With all videos in the set put together, the series makes a very comprehensive and authoritative collection for the aviation historian to own.
Me Jane, you Ermintrude!
Shackleton AEW.3 WR963 is one of the stars of the 1993 Pilot's Pals Calendar.
Oh, sorry!
So is a very brave Jane Hollis who really should be covered from head to foot to cope; with even Lossiemouth's best day!
The Pals pay tribute to the passing of the Shack and 11 more lovelies can be found inside this classic stocking filler.
Pilot's Pals have also marked the closure of RAF Biggin Hill with a commemorative beaker in fine bone china with detailing in 22 carat gold in a limited run of only 1,000, just £24 inc p&p — SAE/IRC for application form.
Souvenir covers
The range of special souvenir postal covers from the Cambridge Stamp Centre grows and grows and grows.
Illustrated is Skies to Dieppe showing 175 Squadron Hurricanes on their way to the abortive Dieppe Raid of August 19, 1942.
The range is vast, send for details of a collector's delight!
Cut out and keep
Charles Lindberg's Ryan NYP Spirit of St Louis is placed in the history books as one of the great aircraft of all time, and quite rightly so.
Readers interested in the Spirit can now construct their own model of the record-breaking aircraft in card with a new ‘cut-and-assemble’ book just published (UK publishers Constable & Co, £7.70).
Armed with a sharp knife and a pot of glue, a faithful model of the aircraft along with a 1923 Ford truck, used to tow the aircraft, can be assembled.
For the desk
Collectors Aircraft Models are a range of hand-crafted wooden desk-top models fully finished in authentic liveries from Executive Display Models.
They come complete with stands and the B-24 illustrated, in 1/72 scale, retails at £99.50.
With over 200 models to choose from a browse through their listing is essential!
And you stick the pencil where??
Stewart Aviation always comes up with something new for gigglemas.
They now have a range of die-cast pencil sharpeners masquerading as F-14s, F-15s, F-16s, F-18s, F117s and SR-71s.
Just £2.60 each inc p&p.
If you are stuck for something to sharpen, then they can supply you with a set of four aircraft pencils for just £1.60 inc p&p.
Cut out and keep
Point 7 Design have come up with this superb ceramic jigsaw puzzle that will not only entertain, but as a ‘gift of worth’ doubtless become an heirloom in many families.
Currently available are Spitfire, Hurricane, Mustang, Kittyhawk, Bf 109 and Ju 87.
This heirloom will not break the bank at £33.65 inc p&p — a very different gift.
Final push
Gerald Coulson has created Night of the Hunter to raise the final funds needed to put a Blenheim back into UK skies by the late spring of 1993.
Released through Richard Lucraft Limited Editions the print shows the markings Graham Warner's will carry, those of W/C Max Aitken DSO, DFC flying Z5722 ‘WM-Z’ of 68 Squadron.
Measuring 24″ × 30″ this stunning print is available unframed with handcut mount at £95 or framed and delivered for just £145 (UK only)— a colour brochure is available on request.
A beautiful item for the study wall and a genuine contribution to putting the Blenheim into the air.
Premier 1
Corsair
Lindsey Walton, well-known warbird operator quietly clocked-up ten years of flying his Corsair this season.
This month, Britain's first ‘warbird’ Corsair also celebrates its 40th birthday.
LINCOLNSHIRE farmer and well-known airshow pilot, Lindsey Walton, celebrated ten years of owning and flying Chance Vought F4U-7 Corsair BuNo 133722/NX1337A this August.
This milestone comes in the same year as the Corsair's 40th birthday, 133722 was ‘born’ in Dallas, Texas, on December 14, 1952.
Man and machine.
Illustrating the size of this large single-seat, single-engined fighter, owner Lindsay Walton stands proudly in front of his ‘steed’ at this years Great Warbirds Air Display, held at Wroughton over the August Bank Holiday weekend.
It seems unbelievable that this particular aircraft has graced the British and European airshow scene for a whole decade, during which time the warbird movement in Europe has quite literally ‘taken-off’.
Lindsey was the first of the warbird operators in the UK to own and fly a Corsair, several more examples of the best wing bird have arrived from the USA since, with Britain's population of this impressive World War Two fighter currently standing (including Lindsey's and the static KD431 at Yeovilton) at five.
To discover why Lindsey chose this particular aircraft from among many other types that were available, one has to go back to 1967 and Lindsey's purchase of the ‘Me 108’.
In the early 1960s Lindsey's family aircraft was Miles Messenger 2A G-AKIR, a veritable piece of British aviation history.
After owning the Messenger for about five years, during which the Walton family used it to tour all over Europe, Lindsey felt the time was right for a change.
After looking at various different types, Lindsey found ‘108 — Nord 1002 Pingouin II G-ATBG languishing in the back of a hangar at Elstree, Herts.
Lindsey used Bravo Golf from the time of its purchase in 1967 until 1973 as the family transport, that was until he had a visit from the Airshow Coordinator at RAF Finningley in 1973 who asked him if he would like to be shot down by a Spitfire and Hurricane at the Battle of Britain airshow that year!
The Battle of Britain Memorial Flight (BBMF) were at that time based at Coltishall, Norfolk.
A pilot who would soon become a firm friend of Lindsey's, Wally Epton, was then flying with the BBMF.
After much discussion and some practise sorties a dogfight routine was worked out, as Lindsey recalls: ‘In those days dogfighting World War Two aircraft at airshows was a routine that the public had not really seen before and it was rather exciting for us pilots to re-enact the aerial combats of yesteryear.
At the time I had the only flying ‘Messerschmitt’ in the country and I ended up doing a lot of displays with the BBMF fighters and inevitably being the ‘baddie’.
I was always the one that was shot down, much to the delight of the watching crowds’.
with the 2,400hp Pratt & Whitney R-2800 two-row radial engine, oozing power, the Corsair runs down North Weald's runway during Fighter Meet.
For about 15 years Lindsey averaged 20 airshows per season with the ‘108, and the aircraft has probably participated in more airshows than any other UK warbird.
Lindsey reckons that he is the most shot down pilot in the world, after all, until the appearance on the UK airshow circuit of Spanish-built Messerschmitt ‘109s’(Ha 1112MIL Buchons ) in 1988, Lindsey had the only  German ‘fighter’ available.
Over the years of flying at almost every conceivable airshow location in the UK, Lindsey has had a few unusual requests along the way: ‘I can remember a certain airshow organiser, who was very active on the airshow scene then, but not now, coming up to me and saying ‘Lindsey, how much do you want to bail out at the end of one of these dogfight routines that you do?’,
I then replied, ‘Well, what about my aircraft?’, to which he replied: ‘It crashes doesn't it, that's the whole point!’.
Needless to say, Lindsey declined the offer!
Since purchasing his first aircraft at the age of 27, Lindsey's stable of aircraft has grown, with a second ‘108, G-ASTG, being acquired late in 1967, initially for the use of its engine as a spare for G-ATBG.
Tango Golf is now undergoing restoration by the Aircraft Restoration Company (ARCO) at Duxford (FP May, p58) and in years to come may fly alongside Bravo Golf , making a rare — if not unique —‘Messerschmitt’ pair in the air.
Whilst not depicting Lindsay Walton's Corsair, this action shot of F4U-7 133828 from the same unit, 15 Flotille , shows the type in service, operating off the French aircraft carrier La Fayette , during the 1950s.
With the Pratt and Whitney radial growling away, the late John Watts gets NX1337A airborne and tucks the gear up during Fighter Meet 1985.
With vintage aircraft becoming increasingly expensive to fly for purely pleasure, Lindsey purchased Piper PA-24 Commanche 250 G-ARFH in 1977 to replace the ‘108 as the family runabout.
Foxtrot Hotel is now also flown by Lindsey's two sons who, not surprisingly, have grown to share their father's interest in aviation.
During 1980 Boeing E75 (N2S-5) Kaydet G-THEA arrived from the USA and Morane MS.733 Alcyon G-SHOW came in from France in 1981.
The Morane stayed in the Walton collection for around three years, during which time Lindsey's thoughts turned to owning a larger, more powerful warbird type.
Lindsey had always had an interest in the Lockheed P-38 Lightning.
He liked the look of the aircraft and at that time it was a type that nobody else was flying in the UK.
He recalls the efforts he made to acquire a p-38: ‘A Lightning that I had been pondering about for some time was owned by a chap called Merril Wayne, who ran an airline called Wayne Airlines up in Anchorage, Alaska.
Wayne had a P-38 up for sale and I was very interested in purchasing it.
I flew out to Chino, California, where the aircraft was based, Merril met me and flew an impressive display in the aircraft.
At that time I had planned to acquire the Lightning with another well-known operator, who was at that time very active on the warbird scene.
After numerous discussion to purchase the aircraft, he decided against the idea.
This left me in a situation where I had to decide if I could afford to finance the aircraft on my own.
After many thoughtful considerations, which delayed things somewhat, I telephoned Merril Wayne in the USA only to hear that he had sold the aircraft 20 minutes earlier!
‘After missing the P-38, a friend in Fresno, California rang me up and told me of a Corsair that was being advertised for sale in the American journal Trade-a-Plane .
The advertisement said ‘F4U Corsair, the Cadillac of Warbirds’.
I rang the owner Gary Harris, and arranged with him to go out to the USA and view the aircraft, after which we came to an agreement and I purchased the Corsair.
Gary arranged for the well-known warbird pilot John Crocker to ferry the aircraft across the Atlantic for me, John being one of the few pilots at that time who could be insured to undertake such a flight.’
In the August of 1982 John Crocker departed Oakland, California, with the Corsair bound for Minneapolis, Minnesota.
This first leg of the long trans-Atlantic flight was the longest, being some 1,500 miles.
Three days later, with several stopovers en route, he arrived at Prestwick, Scotland.
After clearing customs, John flew the Corsair down to Alconbury, the venue for its first UK display booking, where Lindsey Walton and John Allison were waiting to greet him.
On arrival John Crocker taxied past the waiting Walton and Allison and pointed towards the Corsair's tail, which bemused them somewhat.
It transpired that whilst setting the Corsair's electrically-operated rudder trim for take-off, it stuck in the full right position.
Upon getting airborne, Crocker decided to continue the trip which meant flying with two feet on the left rudder pedal in order to keep the aircraft straight, for the whole flight at a reduced speed of 150mph.
Hence the gesticulations towards the tail!
After the offending rudder trim was repaired, John Crocker was able to convert John Allison to the large World War Two fighter.
John already had considerable experience on big piston and tailwheel aircraft during his time flying Spitfires and Hurricanes with the BBMF.
This made him the ideal choice to fly this naval fighter.
Crocker had to fly back to the USA the following day, so there was limited time to convert John Allison with the airshow being held the following day.
Concentrated ground training was conducted throughout that evening inside one of Alconbury's hangars.
On August 14, John Allison, considering the short hangar time he had on the aircraft, flew the Corsair in a beautiful aerobatic routine, and the following day he flew across to Coventry Airshow, Warks, to display the aircraft at the RAFA Airshow there.
With the Corsair now in the UK, Lindsey had to find an operating base for it.
It was not really practical to operate it from his airstrip at Sutton Bridge, where the ‘Me 108’ and Stearman were based, although the Corsair could easily be flown in and out on an occasional basis.
John Allison was at that time based at Coningsby and seeing as he would initially be carrying out all the flying on the aircraft, it seemed an obvious choice to base it there.
In the autumn of 1982 John was transferred from Coningsby to become Commanding Officer at Wildenrath in West Germany, and so the Corsair was moved from Coningsby to Duxford, becoming one of the first privately-owned warbirds to be based there.
At that stage, Duxford was undeveloped as a warbird centre and having the Corsair based there was an additional attraction for the Imperial War Museum.
Now, some ten years later, the airfield is bulging at the seams and is considered by many to be the warbird centre of Europe.
With John going to Wildenrath, Lindsey decided it was as good a time as ever to be converted onto his aircraft and in October John converted Lindsey onto the Corsair, and in doing so, Lindsey went from 230hp in the ‘Me 108’ to 2,400hp in the Corsair, a horsepower-leap that must be the largest anyone flying warbirds has ever done.
In times of war it was standard  practice for pilots to gain experience on a medium powered aircraft, such as the Harvard, before climbing into anything as powerful as the Corsair.
Lindsey recalls that his first flight in the Corsair was, to say the least, interesting: ‘On the morning that John and I had arranged to do the conversion, the weather was decidedly bad with poor visibility.
It was essential to get as much flying time as possible, for John was off to Wildenrath the following day and it would have been almost impossible to arrange another date to carry out the all-important conversion.
After John had given me a thorough brief on the ground, I took-off from Duxford and ten seconds later I was in thick cloud.
I had to keep the wingtip in sight of the ground to avoid getting disorientated.
It had been planned to take the aircraft up to 5,000ft and carry out some general handling checks, but I never got up that high, consequently I ended up doing a figure of eights over Duxford at 300ft.
The, to add insult to injury, it started raining heavily.
Meanwhile, up in Duxford's control tower, John Allison was anxiously waiting.
I landed back safely and further flights were not quite so harrowing.’
With Lindsey's Corsair being the only one of its type in Europe, airshow organisers had to approach him if they wanted a Corsair in their flying display, and for the first few years John Allison and Lindsey flew all over Europe with the aircraft.
Tail-end shot of the Corsair at Biggin Hill in 1985 emphasises the poor view over the nose and the twin underwing long range tanks.
After having amassed around 200 hours on the Corsair since purchasing it in 1982, the novelty of flying this beast has not diminished: ‘Today I feel that every flight in the Corsair is as exciting as the first, mainly because with the Corsair you cannot afford to be complacent, as the aircraft will sometimes bite back, so I have to be alert all the time while I am flying’.
During Lindsey's ownership, pilots other than himself and John Allison have flown the aircraft.
In 1983 John Watts, then an up-and-coming warbird pilot, flew the aircraft at that year's Biggin Hill Air Fair, and later took the aircraft out to a display in Belgium.
After completing the airshow routine, John was on the homeward flight back to the UK when he ran into bad weather.
To make matters worse, some air traffic controllers in Belgium put him on course in a direct line with a heavy thunderstorm.
He immediately queried the instructions and eventually they gave him a new course to steer.
After confidently navigating his way around the storms, John arrived safely at Southend Airport, Essex, to clear Customs before flying on to Duxford.
He taxied in and show down the engine, where upon hit promptly seized-up solid, never to run again.
That winter, the Corsair was hangared at Southend, while a new engine was shipped over from the USA and fitted to the aircraft.
A few other pilots have flown Lindsey's Corsair — Ray and Mark Hanna of the Old Flying Machine Company,Hoof Proudfoot, Chief Pilot for The Fighter Collection, who flew it out for a display in Ireland this year.
John Romain, Chief Engineer and pilot for ARCO recently experienced his first flight on the aircraft, a flight that he told Lindsey he had waited to accomplish for many years.
Flying and owning a rare World War Two aircraft is a serious business, although the funny side of life does occasionally come to light, as Lindsey related to FlyPast : ‘I was preparing to fly to an airshow, when I was told that the fuel bowser at Duxford had somehow got water in it, rendering the fuel useless.
I then had a choice of going to either Cambridge or Stansted to take on fuel ready for the transit to the airshow the following day.
I spoke to Stansted, Essex, on the telephone and asked them if the would accept a cheque for the fuel, to which the reply was ‘Yes’.
I flew the Corsair down to Stansted and after landing the chap in charge of fuel allocations asked me if I had a cheque card.
I said yes and gave it to him.
He looked at it and said, ‘Well, you can have 20 gallons’.
This was £50 worth, the value of the cheque card.
It had however taken me 40 gallons to fly from Duxford down to Stansted and I felt that somehow I was on a loser here!
‘Eventually we came to a mutual understanding whereby I would fill out five forms to cover each £50 cheque and I actually ended up signing 25 forms and five cheques to obtain my fuel.
When I eventually arrived back at Duxford, I had exactly the same amount of fuel on board that I flew out with!’
The F4U-7 Corsair used anything from 80 to 100 gallons of fuel an hour at cruise power settings.
Depending on how the aircraft is flown, if the mixture is leaned right off, fuel burn will go down to about 80 gallons an hour, but at maximum take-off power the aircraft will burn almost 300 gallons an hour, which at one gallon ever 12 seconds is quicker than one can get water out of a household tap!
Lindsey runs the Corsair at about 80/100 gallons an hour, but during a display, from engine start, warm up, taxi, seven minute display, land and taxi back, about 50/70 gallons of fuel have been consumed.
To fill fuel tanks of the F4U-7 costs on average £1,000, which probably explains, along with other overheads like, insurance, hangarage, maintenance, why it costs airshow organiser so much money to ‘book’ warbird type aircraft for display appearances.
This is of course reflected in increasing public admission costs to airshows.
Speaking on the general handling of the Corsair, Lindsey commented: ‘It's an exciting aircraft to fly.
It is nor particularly heavy on the controls, but it does tend to fishtail at bit, due to the massive engine up-front and a relatively small fin and rudder at the rear.
One cannot fly the aircraft ‘hands off’ because after a short while it starts to wander off course’.
Initially the Corsair was maintained by Americans Frank Golding and Kirt Heilbronner.
Lindsey now places the aircraft in the very capable hands of ARCO at Duxford, who undertake the general maintenance and major servicing.
Lindsey celebrated the tenth anniversary of owning this large aircraft in August and on December 14 the F4U-7 celebrated its 40th birthday.
Rolling off Vought's Dallas production line, BuNo 133772 was one of 94 new-build aircraft that were to be supplied to the French Aeronavale , under the US Government's Military Defence Assistance Programme (MDAP), between 1952 and 1953 — the last Corsairs to be built.
Lindsey's Corsair was delivered in 1953 and served initially with 12 Flotille , coded ‘12F.22’ and later moving across to 15 Flotille , where it was coded ‘15F.22’, markings that it carries to this day.
After seeing action in the Suez campaign of 1956, it saw service with 57S in a training role, with the remainder of its service life being spent with 14 Flotille , the last Aeronavale unit to use the type, before being retired in 1964.
The aircraft was saved from the scrapman's axe when it was moved to Mourillan at Toulon in the south of France, for use as a training airframe.
During the mid 1970s Californian collector Gary Harris was looking for a suitable warbird to acquire and restore.
Word reached him of a Corsair in southern France, and after viewing the airframe, Harris purchased it from the French authorities for $1,000, and shipped it to San Francisco in early 1974.
Parts of the aircraft were missing when Harris purchased 133722, and over the following two years, the tail assembly, engine, engine mount, cowlings, and many other portions of the aircraft had to be located, acquired, modified or made.
A Pratt & Whitney R-2800 engine from a Grumman Tigercat came from Los Angeles and a propeller unit was found in San Francisco.
Along the way Harris completely rewired and hydraulically replumbed the airframe.
During the comprehensive rebuilt process, the aircraft's original paint scheme was discovered on the airframe whilst paint stripping was taking place, along with signs of active service in the form of several small calibre bullet holes.
Alter two long years of hard work, the Corsair took to the air once again on August 22, 1976 as NX1337A. and, after the required air test schedule, it was repainted in its original ‘15F.22’ markings, complete with the black and yellow Suez stripes.
BuNo 133722 became a familiar sight at most West Cost USA airshows over the years until Lindsey purchased it and had it flown to the UK.
Lindsey's Corsair remains to this day one of the most reliable and regular performers on the UK and European airshow circuit gaining many admirers, including an ex- Aeronavale pilot who proudly showed Lindsey his logbook proving that he flew 133722 off the French carrier La Fayette during the Indo-China campaign of 1957.
It has no doubt been seen by many thousands of enthusiasts and public alike, who never fail to be impressed by this shining example of Chance-Vought's bent wing bird .
Rotorcraft Pioneer
George (Mickie) Walker CEng, MIMechE, MRAeS, started his engineering career in the railway locomotive business.
Via G & J Weir he made the transition into rotorcraft and, when he teamed-up with Raoul Hafner, created some of the most imaginative applications of rotary-winged flight.
His career is the subject of a two-part feature.
Enjoying his retirement years in the sub-tropical warmth of south east Queensland, Australia, far from his English roots, is a man who has contributed greatly to the success of rotary wing development in Britain.
At his home in Brisbane, the Author has spent many enjoyable hours discussing the part that George Walker had played in helicopter design.
It was soon apparent that the man was a leader in his field, a pioneer in vertical flight technology.
As we talked, the names of his former colleagues rolled off his lips like the Who's Who of aviation.
George admits freely that life has been fortunate for him.
It seemed that as one job concluded another was readily available, even during the turbulent economic years between the World Wars.
However, as some employment situations became available by way of invitations to join various companies, it was clear that George enjoyed a reputation as a leading authority in rotary wing design.
George knew at an early age that he would like to pursue a career in engineering.
He applied himself enthusiastically to his studies, to the extent that during one term he was attending night classes after completing his normal day classes at Queensbury Highter Elementary School in Stoke-on-Trent.
His engineering classmates of an evening were typically aged in their 30s.
Such was George's remarkable capability that at age 14 he received a special award for his scholastic achievement.
Continuing his studies, in 1921 George set about establishing himself in his chosen profession.
He approached the railway locomotive construction company of Kerr Stuart in Stoke-on-Trent.
General Manager W H Good, recognised the potential that George possessed and invited him to join the Company as an apprentice.
In the years to follow he was able to gain a great deal of experience whilst working in all the workshop areas at that firm, eventually working in the drawing office.
Also serving his apprenticeship at Kerrs, in the railway wagon design team, was one Reg Mitchell — who in the coming years was to play a vital part in the Battle of Britain with his design of the legendary Supermarine Spitfire.
From Kerrs' George moved to W G Bagnall and Company, of Stafford, again involved in locomotive design.
During this time George continued his studies both by correspondence and at night classes until he achieved his ambition to get the letters AMIMechE after his name.
During 1932 he joined Douglas Motors of Bristol.
This company had decided to produce a 3/4 wheel car and a small van.
George was given the job of designing these vehicles using a two-cylinder, horizontally opposed, 1,200cc motor normally fitted to the Standard Bristol motorcycle.
The prototype proved efficient.
However, a change to the government road tax guidelines, which were now based on horsepower rather than the number of wheels, made the cost of vehicle registration prohibitive.
The Company decided to terminate the project, along with the jobs of the design team.
George returned to design work at Bagnalls.
G & Weir, the heavy engineering firm of Cathcart, Glasgow were feeling the effects of the tough economic times of the Depression years.
In a bid to diversify their business G & J Weir decided to move into light engineering.
In July 1933 Cyril G Pullin, Chief Designer at Weir's aircraft department approached George with a proposal to join the Company.
A liaison had been struck with Spanish designer Juan de la Cierva for G & J Weir to licence build his autogiros.
James Weir was Chairman of Directors of the Cierva Autogiro Company of London.
Thus George had begun what was to become the passion of his working life — rotary wing aircraft.
the TDS.3 unit, 1942. left to right, back row: L F Liscombe, H Hudson, O L Fitzwilliams, C Bradbury, L Reeve.
Left to right, front Row: G E Walker, R Hafner, S B Weller.
George explained that his colleagues in Glasgow objected to the name George.
Had he another name?
He said ‘Yes, Ernest, but he'd always been known as Johnny Walker’.
Neither of these names appeared to fit in Scotland but at that time the Mayor of New  York was Mickie Walker and forever after through the aircraft industry George was known as Mickie .
His first job was to design a new two-cylinder motor to power the autogiro.
This he did, with successful air tests conducted at Hanworth (London Air Park), near what is now Heathrow Airport.
Alan Marsh, Cierva chief test pilot, conducted these tests in a model W-2 autogiro.
(This machine still exists and is on show at the Museum of Flight, East Fortune.)
The W-2 overflying clubhouse at Hanworth, 1935.
Pilot is Alan Marsh.
Cierva was himself dissatisfied with the required forward run of the aircraft, he wanted vertical lift at take-off.
To do this a new fuselage, rotor and engine were envisaged.
Whilst Cyril Pullin and the team were busy redesigning the aircraft,Mickie was again required to design the new engine.
In this case four-cylinder, in-line, direct drive and air cooled.
The aircraft was designated the W-3 and initial flight tests were carried out at Abbotsinch near Glasgow on July 9, 1936.
First successful landing of the Rotachute using landing trolley.
The previous three landings attempted using the integral landing skid resulted in three sets of broken rotors!
Note the ‘soft’ barrage balloon tailcone which was subsequently replaced by a rigid tailcone.
S/L Ian Little at the controls.
It was soon realised that the W-3 had remarkable capabilities as demonstrated to the press on Hounslow Heath near London later in the month.
As Cierva visualized, the aircraft sat on the ground whilst the engine drove the rotors at zero pitch to overspeed through a near vertical shaft.
On declutching the rotors from the engine the blades automatically moved into pitch and the aircraft lifted vertically 15 to 18 feet, from where the airscrew promoted forward flight.
During the next few months Mickie spent much of his time in charge of flight tests on the development of the W-3 at Hanworth and the type testing in Glasgow of the four-cylinder, in-line, engine, later known as the Pixie.
At Hanworth he met a girl named Hanna Reitsch.She had just been towed across the English Channel in a glider.
Hanna was very interested in our latest developments for vertical take-off and Mickie says he spent some time discussing this subject with her.
It was not long after that news came through that she was giving demonstration flights of a Focke-Wulf side-by-side twin-rotor helicopter within a building at Templehof.
Encouraged by success in Germany, work was started in 1937 to build Britain's first true helicopter.
The engine was redesigned by Mickie eliminating the airscrew, reversing it in the airframe, and incorporating it into a modified model W-4 autogiro airframe.
Tests on this side-by-side, twin-rotor, configuration began on June 7, 1938, at the Weir grounds at Dalrymple and later at Cathcart.
Test pilot for these flights was Cyril Pullin's eldest son Raymond.
The success of the tests had not gone unnoticed at the Air Ministry.
An order for a two-seat model, the W-6, soon followed in October 1939.
This design, which was to be Mickie 's first contribution to the war effort, featured three blades per rotor and was powered by a DH Gipsy VI motor.
Unfortunately, as a result of other priorities following the fall of France in June 1940, the project was abandoned.
Meanwhile, another personality with whom Mickie would be later associated, was carrying out parallel research in autogyro design.
Well-known Austrian designer Raoul Hafner was lured to Britain to a privately-financed venture by Jack Coates, of the well-known cotton manufacturing company, to produce autogyros.
The AR.III Construction (Hafner Gyroplane) Company was thus born.
The first Weir helicopter, 1938.
The complete design team photographed before modification to give greater dihedral on the outriggers.
Left to right: Fred Hodges, Hames Bennett, Cyril Pullin, Russel Bowyer,Mickie Walker, Kenneth Watson.
Raoul Hafner's early attempts to fly AR.II.
Note the tethered aircraft is off the ground.
Autographed: ‘To Mickey Walker from Raoul Hafner.
The AR.III gyroplane featured the Hafner-devised ‘spider’ control built into the rotor hub, which gave cyclic as well as collective pitch control to the rotor blades.
This concept has since become accepted for helicopter control.
The AR.III was successfully demonstrated in May 1937 at the Royal Aeronautical Society Garden Party.
In this demonstration a technique known as the ‘towering take-off’ was used.
Here, by the use of the collective pitch control, not available to Cierva Autogiros, the aircraft was flown from a standing start at an angle of about 45°.
The aviation fraternity considered this preferable to the jump take-off since the pilot could ‘feel’ his way into the air.
The AR.III was not only demonstrated successfully but in February 1938 Raoul Hafner gave a paper to the Royal Aeronautical Society describing the design.
Mickie read this with great enthusiasm.
He found Raoul had introduced many unique features such as blades supported by flexible tie bars and he had used calculus, with which Mickie was already familiar.
He had used this in a practical way in solving problems with which the helicopter abounds.
Mickie told of some problems in helicopters, such as the pull on the blades at the hub of a Bristol-built helicopter in flight was equal to the draw bar pull of three main line locomotives.
Although the rotational speed of a helicopter is low, say three hundred rpm, the tip speed in forward flight of the up-wind blade becomes supersonic.
Helicopter blades were designed to give a minimum of bending stress in all directions of flight ie straight blades!
Mickie then and there decided that if the opportunity arose he would team up with Raoul on future helicopter design.
As a result of the outbreak of war, and being an Austrian national, Raoul Hafner was interned on the Isle of Man.
The war effort necessitated rational redeployment of workforce resources.
As such Mickie was transferred to the Rolls-Royce factory at Hillington, assisting with Merlin XX development, in particular overcoming problems in production.
He was asked by the Production Manager, J D Pearson, to redesign any part of the engine where the unskilled and semi-skilled staff were producing a high proportion of scrap.
One of the many design changes Mickie originated was in the exhaust valve, where many production batches had resulted in 100% scrap.
They had previously been produced and Coventry by what was called knife-and-fork methods — no jigs but highly skilled operatives.
The day after Coventry was blitzed Hillington had a telegram from headquarters at Derby.
The Rolls-Royce organisation relied on Hillington in future for all exhaust valves.
The already type-tested new design of valves was immediately approved and production went ahead.
The factory had 25,000 employees, turned out 50,000 new and reconditioned Merlin XX engines, 1,650 of them in one month in 1943.
Three view of the man-carrying Rotachute with the pneumatic or ‘barrage balloon’ tail section.
During the early part of World War Two, the Air Ministry had targeted three areas which required special attention.
Following the rout of the Allied ground forces with the fall of France, it was considered vital to perfect methods to assist rapid deployment of men and equipment to the future battlefields of re-occupied Europe.
To this end three units (Technical Development Sections) were set-up, known as TDS.1, ‘2 and ‘3.
TDS.1 was responsible for the development of glider aircraft for the rapid deployment of personnel and equipment, their work resulting in the Hamilcar and Horsa designs.
The second group, TDS.2, was involved with the development of parachute equipment and delivery techniques.
This included, amongst others, a project which determined how badly a parachute could be packed before it failed — using sandbag volunteers of course!
To the final group, TDS.3, the task of developing rotary wing aircraft was entrusted.
Initially known as the Central Landing Establishment (CLE) at Ringway, Manchester and later as Airborne Forces Experimental Establishment, the three groups were headed by former Cierva Company aerodynamicist Dr J A Bennett as Chief Technical Officer.
An invited team of specialists including Raoul Hafner (released from internment to participate in the project), S B Weller, Tom Nisbit and Mickie Walker himself became wartime boffins .
Supplies of silk for parachutes (synthetics, such as nylon, at that time were unavailable) could not match demand.
CLE was responsible for providing alternative delivery methods.
TDS.3 began development of what was known as the Rotachute in 1941.
The design resulted from an Air Ministry requirement for the rapid, accurate delivery of specialist troops and agents behind enemy lines.
The Rotachute was a simple yet functional design.
Not unlike the flight of the sycamore seed, the Rotachute was to be dropped from an aircraft, its folded rotors opening on release and autorotating during descent.
The design featured a two-bladed rotor of 15ft diameter and an operating weight of 285lb, including a 200lb allowance for pilot, kit and Bren gun.
Flight tests were conducted by F/L Ian Little, initially under tow behind a Jeep and later behind a Tiger Moth.
Take-off speed was around 30mph.
Stability problems were evident in the early development stage.
Mickie and the other design team members eventually eliminated these problems, to the point where it was anticipated that no control would be needed at all during descent.
Late test flights were conducted with strands of cotton between the control arm and the frame, the idea being to demonstrate that no control movement was necessary during flight.
However, a landing was never actually achieved without breaking the cotton, presumably the result of nervous reaction on the part of the pilot, rather than instability.
(Rotachute, P-5 still exists and can be found on display at the Museum of Army Flying, Middle Wallop.
Also at ‘Wallop is the original Hafner R-II — BAPC.10 — which was used by Raoul Hafner to perfect his rotorcraft ideas in Austria, he brought this pioneering machine with him when he moved to England.)
While the Rotachute was never used in action, the potential of rotorborne delivery systems was obvious.
TDS.3 was asked to set about considering a means of taking a Jeep (3,000lb) or even a Valentine tank (14 tons!) into battle under a detachable rotorhead!
They moved to Sherburn-in-Elmet and set to their new task.
The story of the Flying Jeep is featured in the January FlyPast — on sale December 17.
Paratroop training device.
Designed by TDS.3, the rotary wing section of the AFEE.
fifty YEARS
Kingcobra
Bell's chief test pilot, Bob Stanley, took the first prototype XP-63 Kingcobra, 41–19511, into the air for the first time on December 7, 1942, from Buffalo, New York.
While retaining the configuration of the P-39 Airacobra it was very much a brand new type, powered by an Allison V-1710-47 or 1,325hp.
The second of five RP-63A-11-BE Pinball target aircraft, 42–69654.
They were to act as trainers for bomber gunners and were armoured accordingly for these manned targets were to be shot at — with frangible bullets!
By far the largest P-63 user was the USSR, in all 2,397 of the production run of 3,303 were delivered there between 1943 and 1945.
France also used the type, with about 150/200 being P-63Cs being accepted for service.
The ‘C model featured a ventral fin to help damp down roll.
A series of two-seat conversions were undertaken, both for training and also to carry observers on test work.
NX41964 was built as P-63E 43–11728 and went on to serve in Honduras.
Bell acquired it in 1957 and undertook the two-seat conversion.
It is now on charge with the USAF Museum.
Two aircraft were involved in V-tail trials, one being former RP-63G drone 45–57300.
The other example (illustrated) does not have a confirmed identity.
Both were designated XP-63Ns.
A Manchester Lad
Concluding the life and times of John (Jack to his friends) Alcock, the Manchester lad who flew the Atlantic non-stop in 1919.
Sadly, he did not have long to bask in the glory of that epic flight, he was killed while delivering a Vickers Viking in France.
WITH THE SUDDEN ENDING of the War the aircraft industry was thrown into chaos, but there was a renewed interest in a £10,000 prize offered by the Daily Mail in 1913 to the first pilot to fly across the Atlantic.
There was much activity at Brooklands as people strove to get ready for their attempts.
Jack too, was interested in attempting the flight, perhaps he was more confident than anyone else, his long distance flying experience would certainly stand him in good stead.
A condition of the Daily Mail prize was that no serving pilot could win it, and so on March 10, 1919 Jack was demobbed, ending his service career with the rank of Captain, he was now free to pursue this latest flying challenge.
He approached Vickers and convinced them of his worth as pilot for their Atlantic crossing attempt.
As early as February 1919, Vickers had made it clear that it was possible to fly a Vickers Vimy across the Atlantic.
When a suitable pilot in the shape of the cheerful and very able Alcock appeared they were more than eager to make the attempt.
Brooklands had some war surplus Vickers Vimy aircraft under construction.
Jack chose the 13th model whose construction began on February 13, as Jack considered the number lucky for himself.
Under his supervision, modification of the Vimy began.
It had to carry enough fuel for over 20 hours airborne.
This was twice the normal endurance for a Vimy, but adding fuel tanks proved no problem once space had been found within the aircraft fuselage.
This was obtained by removing the forward and aft cockpits, leaving only the centre cockpit which contained enough room for pilot and navigator.
A fuel tank was shaped into a boat so that when empty it gave 600lb buoyancy in the event of ditching.
The tail section housed emergency rations and first aid kit.
Jack kitted out in foul weather flying gear ready for the flight across the Atlantic Ocean.
Arthur Whitten-Brown, the navigator, who by a twist of fate spent his formative years living in Chorlton, Manchester, selected and installed all the instruments.
The Air Ministry loaned a two-way radio, the Admiralty the navigational equipment.
Jack , having full knowledge not only of flying aircraft but also of their engines, liaised fully with the Rolls-Royce engineer supplied for the attempt by the Company.
There were many meetings and much paperwork to ensure the availability of petrol, oil, tools and crew to take over to Newfoundland for the attempt.
On Good Friday 1919,Jack test flew the modified Vimy, carrying 865 gallons of petrol and 50 gallons of oil — a four ton weight in all!
The Vimy with it 67ft wing span and two Rolls-Royce Eagle VIII 360hp engines became airborne in a very short distance.
Everyone was elated,Jack declared the Vimy as ready as she could be.
The Vimy was dismantled on May 4, 1919 and shipped to Newfoundland on May 8, 1919, safely installed on board the SS Glendoven along with the majority of the Vickers technical crew.
The Glendoven arrived in St John's on May 26, 1919.
The advance party comprising Alcock — pilot, Brown — navigator, Ernie Pitman — foreman mechanic, Bob Dicker — flying controls,Monty Montague — chief erector and Bob Lyons — Rolls-Royce engineer, had set-off from Southampton on May 4 on board the Mauretania , arriving in St John's by train before the arrival of the Vimy.
Jack running the engines of the Vimy outside the Vickers Works prior to test flying.
(See also page 10).
After much effort and assistance from local people and a team of horses, the Vimy was moved to a cricket field at Quidi-Vidi.
The Vimy was too large to construct a hangar around it and so, exposed to the elements, rebuilding work commenced with only a set of canvas screens for shelter.
The weather proved terrible, the team worked on.
Jack , however, was having little joy finding a suitable field for the take-off.
The special fuel tank, shaped as a boat, giving 600lb buoyancy in the event of landing in the Atlantic.
Eventually the local haulier, Mr Lester, offered Jack a field.
It was full of trees and boulders, but with a team of local men Jack set about getting the field cleared of rocks, fences and walls.
A clear run of four hundred yards was obtained after a few holes had been filled in.
The field was near Munday's Pool, and because of the haulier's help, the team renamed it ‘Lester's Field’.
June 9 saw the Vimy ready for a test flight from the field.
It flew well, however, the radio transmitter failed, this added to the mysterious contamination of the ground fuel supply, the actual Atlantic attempt looked as though it would be delayed.
Luckily for Jack , Raynham, who Jack knew from his Brooklands days, was grounded after an accident.
Raynham gave Jack enough fuel until the replacement supply could arrive from England.
Everything look alright again, and then the weather worsened and the attempt looked like it would never happen.
The Vickers team working to reconstruct the Vimy in Newfoundland.
The Vimy was constructed on February 13, it was No 13 of the batch, the Vickers crew numbered 13, the Vimy reached Newfoundland on May 26 (twice 13),Jack arrived in Newfoundland on May 13, and because 13 was lucky to him Jack wanted to set off on the attempt on June 13.
Newfoundland people followed the progress of the Atlantic aircraft with much interest, eagerly awaiting the take-off.
The second flight was on June 12.
Once again, the wireless failed, but the Vimy performed well.
Everything looked ready, if only the weather could improve.
The Vimy was ready to leave on Friday June 13.
The compass was swung, the wireless repaired, more elastic shock absorbers wrapped around the axles, the navigational instruments, food and emergency supplies taken on board.
During the final checks, the wheels were seen to be bent, and the flight had to be postponed whilst they were fixed.
Jack now planned an early start on Saturday June 14, but this proved impossible due the strength of the winds.
By midday the weather had improved, and with the help of the spectators the Vimy was pushed to the starting point at the far end of the field.
Seated under the wings of the large yellow aeroplane, Alcock and Brown enjoyed their last meal before setting off.
At 5.13pm (British Summer Time) the attempt was begun.
Alcock and Brown climbed into the cockpit, waved goodbye, to everyone and the Vimy set off.
Lurching slowly from side to side, becoming faster and steadier, the Vimy rose into the air followed by cheers from the spectators and smiles from the Vickers team.
Climbing to 1,000ft,Jack proceeded on course for Ireland, rapidly passing over St John's at a height of 1,200ft.
Visibility was good, but the Newfoundland fog bank could be seen ahead, and Jack was soon flying in between a bank of dense black cloud and fog.
Here, the turtle-back fairings over the 65-gallon petrol tanks can be clearly seen.
The famous Brooklands race track can be seen in the background.
They suddenly hit a clear patch in the clouds and Brown checked their position from a sight of the Pole Star, Vega and the Moon.
This lasted for half an hour; however, thick fog and bad bumps kept throwing them off course.
The Vimy was a heavy machine to handle and it took Jack all his strength to hold her steady.
The noise from the engines  was so great that the pair could only communicate by note.
The Vimy came to rest in the Derrygimla bog, Clifden, Ireland, June 15, 1919.
Local militia had to protect it against enthusiastic souvenir hunters.
Hitting an air pocket, the Vimy went into a spin, the airspeed indicator failed, the engines stalled and the Vimy began to plunge downwards.
Starting at about 4,000ft, the Vimy rapidly lost height,Jack fighting to hold the joystick, they came out of the mist about 50ft above the water and at a dangerous angle.
As soon as he saw the horizon,Jack centralised the joystick and rudder, getting back to level flight.
Throttles opened wide, the engines roared as they regained flying speed, the Vimy skimmed the waves so close that the spray beat underneath the wings.
Jack began climbing through thick, murky fog, at about 7,000ft they once more saw the Moon, but Brown could get no reading.
Jack kept trying to get above the cloud — daybreak still saw them shrouded in blackness.
For the next six hours this continued,Jack needed all his strength to move the flying controls heavy with snow, bombarded by hail and snow causing the radiator shutters to jam, hiding the petrol gauge and choking up the pilot tube.
The engines strained, feeling the weight of the ice and of the altitude.
They could fail at any minute unless the ice was removed from the intakes.
Brown released his safety belt and removed his gloves, and with a crippled leg from the war, scrambled onto the centre section of the fuselage and then onto the wing.
He began hacking at the ice on the gauges and the air intakes.
Jack used all his skill to keep the Vimy level, one bump and Brown would slip on the ice-covered Vimy and plunge to the ocean below.
Brown successfully climbed back into the cockpit after freeing both engines, but his ordeal was not over, he had to climb out five times more before the Vimy reached land.
Jack holding Lucky Jim , his mascot, whilst Twinkle Toe , Brown's mascot takes a well earned rest.
The first Trans-Atlantic passengers.
Jack continued climbing, hoping to beat the clouds, they finally saw the sun and Brown fixed their position.
Jack then decided to descend, flying close to the water for about 40 minutes, before seeing the two islands of Eeshal and Turk, the mainland was hidden by the rain.
It became visible when Jack flew directly above it, and then only hills could be seen.
In another ten minutes the mast of a Marconi wireless station could be seen.
Jack flew around these, firing Very signals, to which there was no response.
He carried on flying, looking for a place to land and so flew back to the wireless station and decided to land in a field next to it.
On touching down, after completing the first trans-Atlantic flight, the field turned out to be a bog, and the Vimy went in nose first.
Alcock and Brown were unhurt.
The wireless station operators came out, but had no idea who Alcock and Brown were until Jack told them.
They were brought into the station, offered hot drinks and blankets, and their safe and successful arrival in Ireland was broadcast throughout the world.
They had been flying for 16 hours 12 minutes, had survived two bad storms and had flown over 1,800 miles of ocean.
Jack and Arthur Whitten-Brown were both knighted for their remarkable achievement.
Brown married shortly after the flight and went back to engineering.
Sadly,Jack Alcock never lived to seen what effect his feat had on the world of aviation.
He was to fly a Vickers Viking I amphibian to the first post-war Aeronautical Show in Paris.
The weather was terrible and his friends tried to dissuade him from flying.
He was determined to deliver the Viking in time for the exhibition and was due to have a short holiday in Paris.
Flying over Normandy he descended to ground level to escape the fog and to find his bearings.
The Viking struck a tree and crashed in a field at Côte d'Evrard, near Rouen.
Jack was thrown clear, and lay on the ground unconscious, blood flowing from a head injury.
He died before he could reach a hospital and was later found to have a fractured skull.
He was buried with full military honours in Manchester.
There is no doubt that his untimely death robbed British aviation of one of its most distinguished names.
His achievements and contribution to aviation stand as his memorial.
In the north west his tombstone stands in Manchester's Southern Cemetery, Manchester's Town Hall has a wall plaque commemorating the flight, there is an Elizabeth Frink sculpture of the two men at Manchester Airport, and there is a blue plaque on the house in Fallowfield.
A permanent memorial stands at London Airport, and Aer Lingus have erected a memorial in the field at Cliften, Ireland.
The actual Vimy is on display in the Science Museum, South Kensington.
I dedicate this article to the memory of Eric Mosley who helped me so much in the early days of my research, to George Wyndham Parker for his encouragement, and to Jack Alcock, without whom this article would never have been possible, my only wish is that I could have met him in person.
Jack's final resting place in Southern Cemetery, South Manchester.
(All photos via Author)
‘Gentlemen — you have a race!’
And so the 29th National Championship Air Races at Reno were started.
This year Bearcat gave way to Mustang.
STEAD FIELD, Nevada, was the site of the 29th National Championship Air Races, which attracted more than 100 pilots who competed in four classes of air racing every day.
Held September 17/20, the races drew a record 160,000 spectators and offered a purse totalling $535,000.
While each race was launching or recovering, premiere airshow acts dazzled the crowd.
Sunday's crowd gathered to watch as Bill Tiger Destefani flying P-51 Strega did battle with six-time Unlimited Gold Champion Lyle Shelton in Bearcat Rare Bear .
Word from the pit crews of Race 7 Strega and Race 77 Rare Bear was to expect speeds in the 490s if both  racers' engines held together.
Steve Hinton, flying the T-33 Red Baron pace aircraft, led the racers down the ‘chute’ and on to the race course at about 400mph.
At 4.37pm Hinton proclaimed, ‘Gentlemen, you have a race!’.
The Unlimited Gold Race was underway.
As the racers flew down the ‘chute’ and on to the course Tiger Destefani and Strega jumped to the front of the pack as the pace lap began.
When the racers rounded home pylon to begin lap one,Strega was in the lead with Rare Bear right on his tail.
Brian Sanders flying Sea Fury Dreadnought was in a close third followed by Mickey Rupp in P-51 Old Crow , Bill Rheinschild in P-51 Risky Business , Kevin Eldridge in thee All Coast Super Corsair, Bob Yancey in his Yak, Race 101,Peristroika , Matt Jackson in P-51 Stiletto , and rounding out the field Gary Levitz in Miss Ashley .
The first lap was turned at 469mph.
Bob Yancey's much-modified Yak C-11 Peristroika .
During the second lap the pack began to thin out.
Dreadnought held on to third place about a second or so behind Strega and Rare Bear .
Rounding home pylon a battle developed between Mickey Rupp and Bill Rheinschild for fourth place.
Bob Yancey and Kevin Eldridge were flying neck and neck with Yancey soon to overtake Eldridge's Corsair.
Strega turned the second lap at 475mph, six miles per hour faster than the first lap and six miles per hours slower than Rare Bear 's 1991 winning speed.
Strega 's Merlin engine was holding together!
Rare Bear had fallen back a little.
Dreadnought held second place while Bob Yancey began to threaten Mickey Rupp.
Bill Rheinschild called a ‘Mayday’ on the backside of the course leaving Rupp in fourth place with Yancey closing fast in fifth place.
The silver and green Yak looked like a bullet!
Strega turned the third lap at 473mph, the fourth at 472mph.
Strega rounded home pylon about a second and a half ahead of Dreadnought now about five to seven seconds back.
Shortly after passing Pylon Three,Rare Bear pulled up off the race course smoking badly, saying ‘Go Tiger , Go!’
Bob Hoover in his yellow P-51 shepherded Rare Bear as Shelton put her safely down on a taxiway where he was forced to ground-loop, without damage.
Dreadnought moved into second followed by Yancey's Yak,Old Crow , the Super Corsair,Stiletto and miss Ashley ,Strega turned lap five at 473mph.
(Results in FP November, p49.)
From lap one the one to watch was Matt Jackson in Stiletto .
He put the coals to No 84 and passed the Super Corsair and Old Crow .
After Lyle Shelton pulled out Destefani backed off the power and held the lead for the next three laps to take the chequered flag at an average speed of 450.835mph.
‘It took me a while to find out he (Rare Bear ) pulled out because I couldn't hear that well on the radio.
When I came around the next time all I seen was smoke…and I knew we put the final bullet in him,’ Destefani said after emerging from the cockpit of his winning racer.
He said Strega ran good, handled well and had a lot more power left.
He was waiting for Shelton to make his move, but Shelton never did.
‘I wish he'd stayed in there because we wanted to beat him runnin', not broken.
We spent three or four of five years trying to beat the Bearcat.
We finally beat him, we didn't beat him the way we wanted, but we won.
We came across the line first, and that's all that counts.
Winner Strega takes the shade in her own ‘hangarette’.
Rare Bear had melted the piston in the No 2 cylinder and it looked like the rod in the No 1 cylinder had bent, tilting the entire jug about four or five degrees.
Earlier in the week, after qualifying at a record speed of 482.892mph, Shelton burnt a piston in the No 12 cylinder.
It took his crew 31 hours to change.
The Unlimited Silver saw Bill Rheinschild run away the race.
Rheinschild finished with an average speed of 398.881, 20mph faster the Dean Cutter Cutshall in P-51D Cutter's Capers .
The Unlimited Bronze race was won by David Price in his Mustang at an average speed of 379.535, 14mph faster than Rick Brickert in the Pond Racer.
Many in the crowd have written the Pond Racer off.
Don't sound them out just yet.
This is only the second time out for the Pond Racer.
Sure they have some hard work ahead of them.
But with former Unlimited Gold winner Rick Brickert at the controls and Steve Hinton leading some mighty good wrenches working under the cowling, it's a future-winning team.
Although he did not compete, David Morss qualified the Lancair IV at 286.269mph.
First day of racing saw five ‘Maydays’ in the Unlimited Silver Heat race.
Micky Rupp flying P-51D Old Crow won the race at 430.015mph, followed by Kevin Eldridge in the Super Corsair at 429.937mph.
Gary Levitz in P-51D Miss Ashley , pulled out during the first lap.
Delbert Williams in P-51D Pegasus and Jerry Janes in Sea Fury Cottonmouth both called ‘Mayday’ during lap three.
Bill Rheinschild also reported problems before landing.
Howard Pardue flying his Race 66 Sea Fury radioed a ‘Mayday’ after finishing the race.
Upon landing fuel samples were pulled from each racer as tempers flared.
Pardue's aircraft had metal on the oil filter screens as well as part of a piston ring.
Robert Converse who was not in this heat reported he could not pull the usual manifold pressure he uses when racing.
The problems of all five aircraft were thought to have been caused by fuel with a low octane level.
By Friday afternoon the results of the gas sample analysis were in and Reno Air Race Executive Director Thorton Audrain proclaimed the fuel ‘clean’ and promised to monitor the fuel.
Sea Fury Race 924 takes a turn with Mustang Race 39 The Healer .
En route to the air races Matt Jackson made an off-field landing near Bishop, California, after losing an engine.
During Friday's Unlimited Gold Heat race Jack landed Stiletto deadstick and was forced to ground-loop when he ran out of runway.
Aside from the engine failure Stiletto suffered a tyre blow out.
Tiger Destefani celebrates.
The AT-6 Gold race was again dominated by Race 27 Miss TNT owned and flown by Eddie Van Fossen.
Van Fossen finished 13 seconds and 6mph faster than number 75 Warlock flown by Al Goss.
Joe Hartung finished a close third in Boomer .
The Formula One Class races were once again sponsored by Southwest Airlines.
Three time Gold Race winner John Sharp added a fourth win when he brought the DR90 No 3,Nemesis , home to a Gold race finish at a speed of 238.175.
He was followed by Hep Porter in Wagner Solution,Sitting Duck , and 1990 Gold race winner Jim Miller flew to third place in JM-2 No 14 Pushy Cat at 231.012mph.
Jim Smith's Mong, No 88 Glass Slipper , has some pretty race Bob O'Hara-designed art on the tail — a rather voluptuous young lady is seated in a glass slipper.
Smith flew to a Biplane Gold win at 193.893mph with Earl Allen in hot pursuit only .03 seconds behind in Pitts Legal Eagle .
Patti Johnson brought Mong Twerpster across the finish line in third place only a fraction of a second behind Allen.
A very close race.
The country's top airshow acts kept the crowd's eyes glued to the skies.
Bob Hoover sponsored by Victor Aviation, flew the Shrike Commander in his famed ‘energy management series’ of engine-out manoeuvres; Pepsi sponsored Joann Osterud in her ultimate 300 Biplane as well as Susan Asbury-Oliver in the Pepsi Skywriter; First Interstate Bank brought Wayne Handley and his Raven to Reno; Sean Tucker's amazing aerobatics were sponsored by Randolph Sunglasses and Dreyer's Ice Cream; the Acme Duck and Airshow returned to Reno for a repeat of their funny comedy airshow act; Scott Hammack's Smoke n Thunder jet dragster was on hand to show what an afterburning J-34 jet engine can do for miles per hour versus miles per gallon; seven-time U.S. National Aerobatic Champion Leo Loudenslager flew the Bud Light 200 in a routine that demonstrated  why he is such a success in competition aerobatics; and Team America added precision three ship aerobatics to the programme.
Jimmy Franklin and Eliot Cross returned to Reno with their popular Duelling Wacos airshow act.
Franklin and wing-walker Lee Oman also performed a motorcycle to Super Cub transfer and then, with Oman suspended beneath the Cub, Franklin would pass above a ‘wall of fire’.
Delmar Benjamin's GeeBee Replica flew each day and made a few passes around the pylons.
How about a demo race with all of the 1930s era replica racers?
The US military brought the sights and sounds of freedom to the races.
The Nevada Air National Guard helped open each day's show with a formation pass of RF-4s followed by F-16s.
An unusual military demo was the US Army's flarecopter .
It was impressive during the day dispensing flares out both sides of the UH-1.
One can only imagine what it looks like at night.
A Castle Air Force-based B-52, a Travis-based C-141, and a Beale TR-1 spyplane each made high and low speed passes over the field.
Destefani won the Unlimited Gold in 1987, had disappointing years in 1988 and 1989, finished third in 1990 and a close second in 1991.
Is this the start of a winning streak for Destefani and his in-line powered Strega ?
You can bet the Rare Bear team will be back with a vengeance.
See what happens at next year's National Championship Air Races, September 16/19, 1993.
‘and an auction!’
RICK COLE AUCTIONS hosted the first Annual Reno Warbird and Classic Aircraft Auction on September 18 and 19 at the new Reno Hotel (formerly Bally's).
More than 40 antique and warbird aircraft flew in for the auction which coincided with the National Championship Air Races.
The aircraft landed at Cannon International Airport and were taxied down city streets to the auction site.
During the middle of the second night of the auction, one seller remarked, ‘It sure is a buyer's market.’
Reportedly only 14 aircraft were sold during the two-day event.
This may seem like bad news for the auctioneers and sellers, but for buyers many pristine aircraft sold at reasonable prices.
Shrewd buyers snapped-up a flyable 1968 Slingsby Swallow glider complete with trailer for only $4,100.
An immaculate 1954 Cessna 195B was expected to reach $65,000, yet sold for only $54,000.
Joe Kasperoff entered his beautiful 1947 Fairchild 24W.
This creampuff in an overall cream with orange stripes sold for just $25,500.
Numerous bidders expected this Fairchild to reach into the $35–45,000 range.
A pristine Globe Swift sold for only $28,500.
Best bargain of the auction was a 1967 Cessna O-2A Vietnam combat veteran.
This aircraft suffered seven hits in Vietnam and the owner had researched the aircraft's complete military history which included a video tape of this aircraft in action over Vietnam.
Expected to sell in the $85–105,000 range, a sharp bidder flew away with this historic aircraft for only $56,000.
A Beech G-17S was hammered down for $195,000, and Bob Pond purchased a Denny Lynch-owned Douglas A-26 Invader for $135,000.
Other aircraft selling included a Boeing Stearman PT-17 450hp conversion, $75,000; North American SNJ-5 Dress Blues with an R-1340 and a three-bladed prop fetched $137,000.
Nanchang CJ-6A N3104U was sold on the 18th for $40,000 and then the buyer re-entered the aircraft on the 19th auction where it did not sell.
Second thoughts maybe?
During the 19th auction a Piper Cub was hammered down for $17,000.
Then the auctioneers realised that the bidder was heavily intoxicated and could not afford the bidder's fee let alone the $17,000 for the Cub!
Bob Hoover's North American P-51D Old Yeller was put up for action, but with a $1 million reserve Hoover gets to fly it for another year.
This year's Oshkosh Grand Champion T-34 was bid to $175,000 but did not sell because of a reserve price reportedly in excess of $300,000.
Pre-auction press releases announced that Lefty Gardner's P-38 and a 1929 Ford 5-AT trimotor would be on the block but both aircraft were withdrawn from the sale.
The table lists the high bids for the aircraft at the Annual Reno Warbird and Classic Aircraft Auction.
Some reserve prices are shown to illustrate the differences between the owner's reserve price and what bidder were willing to pay.
A Mark of Service
From out of deepest Wales, Mary Denton has developed a unique method of charting the service history of a person, airfield or aircraft using a mixture of calligraphy and heraldry.
 FORMALITIES at the border were much smoother than anticipated.
We were through before there was time for nervousness.
This was to be a tip-and-run raid, penetrating only a short distance into the country.
There was no duty free…
A detail from the mark of service of John-Harrison which includes 22 carat gold leaf detailing.
We drew up in a tiny village called Pontrobert in Powys — a particularly beautiful part of mid-Wales.
It is a place full of tranquillity and, doubtless, inspiration.
Here works military heraldic artist Mary Denton.
With views across the valley from her studio window, Mary mixes the tranquil scene with rock music blasting away from her portable stereo to produce the best atmosphere in which to undertake her exact art.
Heraldry is a fascinating subject, one to which aviation enthusiasts are naturally drawn.
Squadron markings on aircraft frequently reflect the official badge and the accurate rendition of such markings is vital.
All such badges were approved by the College of Arms in exactly the same way as a noble family would have had their mark introduced.
Mary was born in the Netherlands and has been fascinated by heraldry since she was about 11.
With her parents, she moved to Wales at the age of 14 and served in the RAF — briefly — as a nurse.
She liked the RAF, but had chosen the wrong bit of it and left to become an animal nurse.
Then along came John, whom she married and the couple have four children, Emma, David, Claire and Ruth.
Looking after the ‘tribe’ is the number one priority, but Mary was always looking at ways of continuing her artistic leanings and it was to heraldry that she returned, this time with more than a hint of aviation to it!
Mary has always liked aircraft — her father served with the Dutch 320 Squadron, escaping to England after the fall of Holland in a Fokker Seaplane, rejoining his unit later and serving on, post-war, with 320 at Soesterberg.
Husband John Denton served with the Navy, transferring to the aircrew branch in the early 1970s flying in Wessex and later Sea King helicopters.
After this he joined the fire service and works today for the Shropshire Fire Brigade.
Mary and John are both artists.
John is a cartoonist/illustrator who likes to do what he calls ‘ten minute specials’ in water colours.
They can bounce ideas off one another and provide a mutual critique or one another 's work.
One rule they both rigidly adhere to is:never use the other one's equipment!
Undertaking the painting of heraldic devices such as squadron badges requires a licence from HMSO Crown Copyright as they are within the national domain.
Work must be precise and follow an exacting style and quality.
‘It's quite a science,’ observed Mary as she put the finishing touches to the 185 Squadron badge illustrated opposite.
Mary was at pains to point out that these are badges and that the off-quoted ‘crest’ is merely an element of the overall design.
She plans to emblazon each badge correctly and hopes one day to have done all of the RAF's badges, Squadrons, Groups, Wings, Commands, Stations — in all a staggering 2,500 plus!
Every time Mary does a new badge, she sends a copy to the College of Arms for their RAF file.
As well as emblazoning — painting — each badge, Mary also ‘blazons’ them — to write out a strictly-formatted style its description.
‘An amazing number of originals have been lost,’ sighed Mary.
It seems that somewhere along the line, the RAF did not get to keep the initial emblazon that was required by the College to turn a squadron ‘official’.
She urged anyone holding an original to get in touch with the RAF, or with herself, so that a full record of the badge could be established.
Mary can take any serviceman's record of service and turn it into a stunning gouache painting of unit badges, decorations and awards, supported by a beautiful write-up in calligraphy.
(And it need not be just RAF — FAA, RCAF, USAFF etc have all come here way before now.)
For this she naturally needs as much information as possible, but is always happy to guide families through what is needed, or to undertake research.
The end result is a lasting — and unique — record of an individual's career.
For readers looking on in envy but undertaking a sharp intake of breath as they feel as second mortgage coming on, this is far from the case.
A beautifully rendered unit badge can come from around £25 including calligraphy.
Mary will guide a potential client through a mix-and-match process whereby extra badges, command badges, campaign medals in the form of ribbons etc can be added.
Every commission includes a 20% donation to the relevant service association or benevolent fund.
Gouache is the medium Mary uses for her work, it is akin to watercolour but always provides the essential opaque quality.
Colour matching is not a real problem, heraldry has distinct tinctures laid down and these are adhered to, although Mary has had the occasional viewer saying that the badge was never that colour!
In that case, it is their memory and not the College of Arms that is off the mark!
Personal service histories are not the only possibility.
Mary has recently finished a huge work for the Imperial War Museum (IWM) at Duxford charting the history of the airfield with the badges of all units — other than those transiting — RAF and USAAF — faithfully produced.
This will be on display at Duxford in due course.
Mary has produced a stunning English Electric Lightning service ‘pedigree’ and the number of types that could be treated that way is unlimited.
An original of something like this would make an ideal basis for an association to make a poster.
Following on from the IWM's history of Duxford work, Mary is now getting her teeth into the service history of the IWM/Shuttleworth combined Sea Hurricane I restoration project.
This will chart all of Z7015's history, along with unit badges.
Mary Denton has found a way of bringing her love of heraldry into an area of aviation whereby individuals can achieve a lasting, lovely — and above all else unique — mark of service.,..
Mary Denton at work in her studio, with another unit badge underway.
The stereo cassette is an essential tool, with Queen blasting out at full volume while she produces her fine work.
The badge of 185 Squadron, plus descriptive blazon.
Mary plans to give every RAF unit such treatment.
Aircraft service histories are also Mary's forte, herewith a detail of the English Electric Lightning's service pedigree.
CLUES TO THE PAST
There are over 1,000 aviation memorials to be found in the UK and that figure is always expanding.
Of these, 300 plus relate to airfields and herewith a tour de force of those least well known.
UNFORTUNATELY the majority of memorial dedications tend to receive only a fraction of the publicity they deserve.
Organisers have an understandable desire to avoid a media circus and the sort of misguided demonstration which occurred when the Harris statue was unveiled.
For this reason few receive more than local news coverage.
A typical example if the stone commemorating RAF Edgehill , an obscure training bomber training base in the South Midlands.
It was the brainchild of Eric Kaye who lives in the area and had already published a history of the airfield.
Silverstone , the premier British motor racing circuit, was the site of another Wellington Operational Training Unit (OTU) which has now received permanent commemoration.
Over in South West Wales, the efforts of the Pembrokeshire Aviation Group members to mark the achievements of their local wartime airfields have gone largely unrecorded outside the district.
Coastal Command stations at Dale and Talbenny saw many casualties and Rolls of Honour have been placed in the church nearest to each of these long-abandoned aerodromes.
Angle has a plaque honouring its Fighter Command history and the same has been done for Pembroke Dock and its flying-boat squadrons.
Carew Cheriton was another Coastal station in the same area and it too has a commemorative plaque, although in the village hall rather than the church.
The latter, however, already has a link with the aerodrome; a stained glass window restored by contributions from Carew personnel after bomb damage.
A few damage to the north east at Robeston Wathen the village church has an RAF Memorial Chapel.
Little known elsewhere, it was the idea of the former curate who was chaplain to nearby RAF Templeton .
A number of plaques include one in memory of Coastal Command aircrew lost on operations from Pembrokeshire bases.
South Wales has gained two more memorials of particular note in the last few years.
One, the work of local historian Philip Davies, remembers that all who flew from RAF Llandow , a former fighter OTU and Maintenance Unit.
The other recalls what was for a long time Britain's worst air disaster.
It involved Avro Tudor G-AKBY which crashed in the Llandow circuit on March 20, 1950.
Up in North Wales, Shire Hall at Llangefni, Anglesey, has a very impressive plaque in memory of World War One airship station.
It depicts an outline map of Anglesey with airship SZ.234 superimposed, its trail rope hanging down and pointing to the location near Llangefni which is now part of RAF Mona .
Memorial window to those who served at RAF Thornaby 1937–1958.
Two new Scottish memorials have been unveiled in recent months.
The one of the Dallachy Strike Wing (FP November, p29) has been less publicised than its counterpart at Banff to the south, perhaps because it operated the Beaufighter rather than the more glamorous Mosquito.
The other was dedicated at the long abandoned RAF Skitten , near Wick, to the men lost on Operation Freshman .
This was an attempt to sabotage a heavy water plant in Norway vital to German atomic bomb development.
The writer takes modest satisfaction that his comments in Action Stations 7 , the Scottish airfields volume, about the lack of a memorial struck a chord with a survivor of Freshman .
The operation, a gallant failure, was mounted from Skitten by troops in two Horsa gliders towed by Halifaxes.
I have made a few similar remarks in my new book about glaring omissions in the chronicle of memorials.
Who knows what may result!
Just south of the border at Kirknewton, the church has two stained glass windows, one in memory of the men and women of RAF Milfield , the other of Lt Cmdr D R B Cosh, DSC, CO of 881 Squadron, Fleet Air Arm.
He was killed whilst on a course with the Fighter Leader's School at Millfield.
This is a good example of a local commemoration which almost slipped through the net, had it not been for the sleuthing abilities of north east enthusiast David Thompson.
David also rediscovered an elaborate but obscure memorial at Catterick to those of the local camp and aerodrome who fell in the 1914–18 war.
Yorkshire, in common with East Anglia, has an ever-growing number of memorials, many of them dedicated to Canadian squadrons of Bomber Command.
Perhaps the most striking is the bronze statue of an airman at Dalton-on-Tees which honours those who served at RAF Croft (FP November, p29).
I share the opinion of many that a similar figure would have been more appropriate than the controversial statue of Air Marshal Harris outside St Clement Danes.
Another Canadian unit, 405 (Vancouver ) Squadron, is the subject of a magnificent window in the church at Great Gransden in Cambridgeshire.
Incorporating Lancasters, searchlights and aircrew in the design, it commemorates the Squadron's 801 dead.
East Anglia is noted for its imaginative village signs.
RAF and American bases, past and present, are often linked strongly with the local community and this is often reflected in the design.
Barnham, Suffolk, for example, includes a stylised Tornado symbolising nearby RAF Honington .
That for Chedburgh in the same county illustrates the Lancasters flown by 218 Squadron from the local airfield.
(FP November, p61)
Still in Suffolk, the sign at Debach bears a plaque dedicated to the 493rd Bomb Group, which operated B-17s from the airfield of the same name.
The one at Marham in Norfolk incorporates a World War One aeroplane of unspecified type and that at Upwood the Canberra which has for so long been associated with the RAF station.
Another form of sign has been pioneered by North Kesteven District Council in their notable Airfield Heritage Trail in Lincolnshire.
To a standard format with RAF rondel, they bear inscriptions such as‘Former RAF Coleby Grange ’ and ‘Former RFC Anwick Landing Ground’.
Many aviation memorials tend to be stones with plaques attached, stark and simple and reflecting the high cost of even a basic design.
Not so some of the recent American monuments financed by large veterans' associations.
USAAF memorials have received much coverage in Fly/Past so I shall only mention a few.
Most aviation memorials tend to be stones with plaques attached, stark and simple and reflecting the high cost of even a basic design.
Not so some of the recent American monuments financed by large veterans' associations.
USAAF memorials have received much coverage in Fly/Past so I shall only mention a few.
Most impressive is probably the Mustang nose and propeller at what once was the entrance to Steeple Morden .
Similar propeller memorials exist at Mount Farm (Spitfire) and Bassingbourn (B-17).
Stones in the shape of aircraft parts include the composite Spitfire/Mustang/P-38 at Kings Cliffe , B-17 tail at Horham and B-24 fin and rudder at Old Buckenham .
USAAF memorials are not all well-documented, however.
I have for instance discovered the Stars and Stripes flag of the 405th Fighter Group at Christchurch , Dorset, where it hangs in the ancient Priory.
Presented by the Group CO when the Thunderbolts left for France, it is a memento of the Group's stay at the nearby Advanced Landing Ground (ALG).
Ashford in Kent was another Thunderbolt ALG and there is a plaque at Chilmington describing its location and the units which flew from there.
At Denbigh in North Wales a plaque on a wall in the main street recalls the period when  a US Army Field Artillery Battalion was based in the town.
Since the unit almost certainly operated some Piper Cubs, it could loosely be said to be an airfield memorial!
The memorial of RCAF squadrons stands outside Tees-side's Airport Hotel, the former Officers' Mess for RAF Middleton St George.
A 1992 commemoration — the Pathfinder memorial at Upwood.
The same could be claimed for a new memorial at Smoogro , Orkney, in honour of Squadron Commander Edwin Dunning, DSC.
Flying from a landing ground at Smoogro he made the first ever landing on the deck of a ship at sea on August 2, 1917.
Tragically he was killed five days later in a third attempt.
(FP October, p56).
Road names are a prolific form of aviation memorial but are often difficult to track down.
A perusal of street guides for areas close to active and disused airfields has produced a rich crop of them, ranging from aircraft names to personalities.
They are, however, not always very relevant to the local airfield.
Blenheim Way at Speke , Liverpool, recalls but adjoining Stirling Road has no connection whatsoever.
Airport roads are sometimes named in appropriate fashion, as at Luton where Percival products are the subject (Proctor, Provost and Prentice Ways, amongst others).
Heathrow 's Cargo Area has roads named after Stansted and Shoreham and, unaccountably, three Short flying-boats; the Solent, Sealand and Sandringham.
Just to the south at Stanwell the C-Class ‘boats of Imperial Airways, whose individual names were later adopted by the BOAC Stratocruiser fleet, are commemorated by such titles as Canopus Way, Cordelia Gardens and Clyde Road.
Some aerodromes, obliterated by housing or industrial development, have street names as their only memorial.
Meir , once Stoke-on-Trent's airport, remembers pre-war personalities in Cobham Road, Mollison Road and Kingsford Road.
Sole clue to the short-lived Cricklewood , London's first customs airport, is nearby Templehof Avenue, Berlin's Airport of that era.
Whitchurch , once Bristol's airport, is long gone but there is still an Airport Road and a Dakota Way.
Poor old Pengam Moors , the one-time Cardiff Airport which was originally known by the curious name of Splott, is also extinct and remembered only by a pub called The Old Airport .
Portsmouth is yet another defunct municipal airport.
It was bordered by Rat Lane which has since been renamed Norway Lane after Neville Shute Norway, the famous author and aircraft engineer who founded the Airspeed Company here.
Mousehold Heath was Norwich's pre-war airport but is now covered with houses.
It is not entirely forgotten as is proved by Avian Way, Aerodrome Road and several other names on the same theme.
Many World War One Aerodromes are little more than a folk memory kept alive by such names as Aerodrome Cottages at Hadleigh in Suffolk.
A similar site at Leighterton , Glos, is recalled by The Aerodrome Garage on the A46.
An unusually simple stone for the an 8th Air Force unit, at Sudbury, Suffolk.
Some airfield memorials are very unusual, such as Rose Cottage on the edge of Dunsfold in Surrey.
A plaque tells how it was once the wartime headquarters of 98 Squadron which operated Mitchells from Dunsfold.
The 500-year-old building was moved to its present position by Canadian Army engineers, who floated it on cement and rolled it a quarter of a mile because it obstructed a planned runway!
Another unique memorial can be found at Longside Church, Grampian.
It is the propeller salvaged from a Royal Navy Coastal Airship which is believed to have been shot down by a U-Boat in July 1918 whilst operating from Longside Airship Station.
Most sombre of all is the tomb over the mass grave of the R-101 victims at Cardington, Bedfordshire.
The airship's charred ensign hangs in the nearby church.
Penrhos in North Wales has the distinction of a memorial to a symbolic attempt to destroy it before it was completed.
The three culprits are depicted, Welsh Nationalists of otherwise impeccable character and one can only admire their somewhat misguided coup .
The inscriptions are in Welsh but my book has the translation!
Dave Smith is the author of Britain's Aviation Memorials and Mementoes , published by Patrick Stephens at £18.99.
Dave has spent some 20 years researching this fascinating subject and of the 1,000 or so entries there is a wealth of detail — much of which will be brand new to the reader and possibly just down the road!
It is by far the best single-source reference on this ever-growing subject available.
COLLECTAIR
ENCOURAGED, as always, by the constant flow of readers’ letters, I was led to believe that sooner or later this month something of unusual interest would turn up.
Turn up it did., when a collection of pre-Kaiser war memorabilia devoted to the career of an early German Imperial Air Force flying instructor came to light.
Sadly I know little of this aviator who it appears completed over 2,000 flights in Rumpler, Hansa and Etrich Taubes.
To readers of this column does the name Rosenstein ring a bell?
I reproduce here this surely heroic airman garlanded after his 2,000th flight in a Taube, the reverse of the picture is inscribed ‘Mein 2,000 flug auf Hansa-Taube in Hamburg 1913’(A ).
A companion photograph lists some of the officers and other ranks taught to fly the Taube by this intrepid airman.
This list includes Obit von Petten; Lt Kastner; Lt Wendler; Lt von Eckenbrech and many others.
Curiously, at precisely the same time as the Rosenstein archive slipped through the letter box at Collectair a really superb flying model of an Etrich Taube arrived fresh from being fully restored and re-rigged (F ).
There was yet more to follow as a further instalment of the Rosenstein collection of memorabilia included a truly splendid photograph of an early assembly of aviation collectible (C ).
Illustrated were no less than two aero-engines, one in-line, the other rotary, two motor-cycles, various fuselage insignia and other items, which only goes to show that there is nothing new in collecting such things.
What is certain is that the Taube in its various forms was a much-loved and respected aeroplane, safe and relatively easy to fly.
A letter from A Drinkall of Doncaster was accompanied by a photograph of an ashtray he has in his collection (E ).
The badges, now faded, appear to be from various air forces which fought during World War Two.
TAF probably is an abbreviation for Tactical Air Force — perhaps readers know better?
Mr Espin took the photo, but likewise knows no history of this unusual place.
The work of women in both the RFC and RAF (WAAF) has of course been fully documented, but little has been written on the subject apart from in propaganda and other official literature.
The glamorous side of aviation, flying, has of course been brought to the attention of the public over the years; but what of the ladies who drove staff cars, rode despatch motor cycles and undertook much arduous work often under enemy fire?
With a book in mind a close friend has begun collecting previously unpublished photographs, mostly borrowed from private albums.
A delightful photograph from this collection included here (H ) shows a lady driver of the Motor Transport Section, RFC with her Crossley landaulette.
Have you ever wondered what has happened to all those travel agents or airline display models seen behind plate glass windows in the high street?
My guess is that most have been discarded once an aircraft goes out of service, or even worse, confined to the skip when a travel agent or airline goes out of business.
My personal thoughts are of a collection of official Junkers models I once saw in Frankfurt, these included an F.13 and most unusual, a Ju52/3m floatplane all sectioned-off to show not only technical, but also cabin accommodation details.
Of course there are collections of these models and sometimes they appear at auction.
A group recently passed through Christie's at South Kensington and I reproduce them here (F ): the Stratocruiser was the obvious favourite, the Boeing 747 and Trident being of much more recent interest.
If any readers want to share their interest in these models hen please do write as once again this is a little-known subject; perhaps these models are just too big for the average collector to handle?
Posters continue to fascinate and so often depict one-off, rare or even imaginary aircraft.
The Heinkel He 116 is a case in point (D ) and one wonders why the company produced this fine poster of He 116A D-AJIE flying low over a Bavarian church spire.
The ‘116 was a most elegant machine, but must have been underpowered with its 240hp Hirth engines.
Fifteen aircraft of this type were built,Lufthansa using eight as mail carriers and the Luftwaffe employing six on photographic duties.
This poster is now exceedingly rare and its owner a lucky man.
While on the subject of Heinkels, a personal photograph album recently spotted in a bookshop produced a picture of an He 111 with dual controls (G ).
Interior shots of rare types are scarce, this Heinkel was apparently captured intact by the RAF but what happened to it is not recorded.
For collectors and aviation enthusiasts the early autumn of 1992 produced no less than four major auctions with an accent on matters aeronautical.
First away from the grid were Christie's at their jolly South Kensington base on August 13.
For collectors there was a splendid array of miscellaneous artefacts grouped together in sections.
As ever, the continuing disposal of Zeppelin material was a highlight, over £3,000 being paid for a Hindenberg coffee cup and saucer!
A collection of early aviation postcards failed to find a  buyer, but as compensation early space flight memorabilia such as the Union Flag carried by Al Warden and taken with him on Apollo 15 around the moon sold for an impressive £1,600.
There was an excellent selection of models in this sale including a rare Zeppelin ‘window-display’ which made £900, and a flying scale model of a Mosquito FB.VI which achieved a healthy £1,300.
A remarkable £3,800 was paid by a racing car museum for Bachem Ba 349 Natter replica, which came complete with transportation trolley.
Sotheby's sale at the Billingshurst outstation on September 19 (FP November, p30) included an interesting collection of material to accompany their continuing attempt (albeit largely unsuccessful) to sell full-size aircraft.
The catalogue was well prepared and the historical notes excellent.
Perhaps too much was written on the career of Mick Mannock, whose group of medals including his VC, DSO, and two bars, MC and bar were offered for sale.
Nonetheless, this astonishing aviator's medal group sold for a world record of £120,000.
Both Christie's and Sotheby's sales included RAF sector clocks, those at Christie's making over double those at Sotheby's — why?
For those interested in comparisons the four sector clocks offered varied in price: £1,600 and £1,200 (Christie's)’ £820 and £650 (Sotheby's).
On September 13, Onslow's held their sale at the Rendcomb Aerial Derby near Cirencester (FP November, p30).
Flight magazine Vols 1–8 sold for £500 and posters, so often featured in Collectair , received an enthusiastic welcome, some £460 being paid for an Imperial Airways HP.42 Travel in Comfort example.
Finally Brooks of Clapham included a varied and most interesting collection of aviation memorabilia in their sale on September 15.
Posters and photographs featured strongly in the catalogue and the general mixture was much the same as that in the other sales.
There were, however, some unusual items, such as a pair of Skyraider mainwheels (unsold), a Rolls-Royce Merlin cylinder head (£275) and a small, but good, selection of aircraft models, most which found buyers.
With four sales to cover in a short space of time your correspondent was left with the impression that there is no lack of interest in the subject, that the general standard of cataloguing is high, but prices remain depressed — except that is for anything related to Zeppelins and lighter-than-air aviation.
NEWS…
Californian update
PLANES OF FAME East's RP-63A Kingcobra 42–68864/NX163rp took to the air for the first time after restoration on October 2, in the hands of Steve Hinton of Fighter Rebuilders, at Chino, California, reports John Harjo .
The aircraft, one of only two airworthy Kingcobras in the world, had just finished a three year rebuild by the Chino-based Fighter Rebuilders (illustrated).
Commencing its restoration to flying condition in September was DH Sea Venom FAW.53 WZ944, one of two ex-Royal Australian Navy examples recovered by Dennis Sanders from Australia in 1989.
With the airframe in excellent shape, it is hoped to have this veteran British jet fighter back in the air early in 1993.
Airfield survival
AIRCRAFT OWNERS and Pilots Association (AOPA) continue their campaign to save threatened airfields, a campaign that is thankfully enjoying some success.
West Malling, in Kent, one-time home of the Great Warbirds Air Display for ten years is probably one of the better-known location to FlyPast readers and is a case in point, writes David Ogilvy .
When the original phase of the development of the airfield as an industrial park was revealed, the provision was for 150 acres, building was not to extend near to the valuable runway, but it was considered to be a deterrent to property sales, so the runway would be removed.
This terminal damage to the airfield met with the approval of many local residents, who gave their support to the project.
Then the truth emerged…
Kent County Council's real plant was for not just 150 acres of development, but for 647 acres covering the entire site, making it potentially the largest business park in England — decimating the largely rural nature of the locality, with an eventual coverage of 5 million square feet — or the equivalent area of 100 of the largest supermarkets.
In order to combat this spectre on the doorstep, in August the Save West Malling Airfield Group (SWAG) called a public meeting to which 13 personal invitation were issued to Kent Council councillors, of which not one attended.
Once appraised of the real facts, there was only one person that showed any opposition to flying taking place at the airfield.
Many people present realised that retention of the airfield was paramount if the unwanted development project was to be effectively stopped.
The result in the vote against the development and for the retention of the airfield was unanimous.
AOPA was actively involved throughout the campaign to save West Malling and has found that in several instances residents in the neighbourhoods of airfields have been opposed to flying, but when they were made aware of the horrors of what the possible alternatives would be, they then realised what a valuable green and friendly asset a local airfield could be.
It is still very unsure whether West Malling can be totally saved from the axe, but concerted efforts are being made behind the scenes by various parties, for not only West Malling but the other 72 threatened airfields in the UK.
Other airfields that have a spark of hope on the horizon include: Ipswich, Leavesden and Hullavington, although there are many more airfields where the future looks bleak.
Complacency cannot be given full rein, for the future of local airfields and light aviation in the UK is under threat.
More details on how to protect and campaign for the continuing use of UK airfields can be obtained from: AOPA, British Light Aviation Centre,.
Farewell to Bush
Final picture of the Old Flying Machine Company's Grumman TBM-3E Avenger.
Pictured at Ipswich Airport on October 2, the following day the aircraft was dismantled and loaded onto a low loader for transportation to Felixstowe Docks and from there was shipped to its new owners in New Zealand.
The Avenger flew from Duxford in the colours of Lt George Bush, later President and very recently,not President.
Make-a-Date
Register news
Aeronca 11AC : G-BULV (August 21) ex USA N3493E to owner in Southampton.
Auster J/1N Alpha : G-AHCL (September 10) restored to original marks, ex G-OJVC, G-AHCL for owner in Penmynydd, Gwynedd.
Also AOP.9 : G-BURR (September 28) ex instructional 7851M, Army Air Corps WZ706 to owner in Aldershot, Hampshire.
This aircraft was previously in use for ground instruction at the Royal Military College of Science at Shrivenham, Oxon, until moving into store at Netheravon, Wilts, in 1990 and subsequently being disposed of by tender.
Luscombe 8A Silvaire : G-BULO (August 13) ex USA N1489K to owner at Manningtree, Essex.
NA T-6G Texan : G-BRBC (September 4) ex Italian Air Force MM54099, USAF 51–14470 to owner in Chigwell, Essex.
This aircraft has been in the UK for some time, latterly at Audley End, Essex, and before that Rochester, Kent, and Duxford, Cambs, having been recovered from the fire dump at Decimomannu, Sardinia, Italy.
Piper PA-20 Pacer : G-BUOI (September 18) ex Denmark OY-ALS, Germany D-EHEN, USA N7750K to owner at East Winch, Norfolk.
Stampe SV-4C : G-HJSS (September 7) re-registered from G-AZNF, ex French F-BGJM, French Military, to London owners.
WACO UPF7 : G-WAKO (September 22) registration cancelled following sale in USA.
Accidents
February 18 C-46D Commando CP-1655 of Servicios Aereos Cochabamba destroyed in a landing accident at Jorge Wilstermann Airport, Cochabamba.
Fate of crew unconfirmed.
June 13 : T-28D Trojan VH-LAO/0–38320 badly damaged at Wangaratta, Victoria and registration subsequently cancelled as withdrawn from use.
June 19 : Grumman S-2F Tracker N451DF of Californian Department of Forestry crashed while fire-fighting near Railroad Flat, Calaveras County, California.
Written-off and pilot killed.
June 27 : Cessna 185C ZK-CVG destroyed in mid-air collision with AS.350D helicopter ZK-HEA over the Fox Glacier, New Zealand.
July 28 : Bell UH-1B Iroquois N89NW of Hawaiian Helijet written-off in crash near Hay Fork, California.
July 31 : Beagle D.5/180 Husky G-AVOD crashed after picking-up a banner at Crosland Moor airfield, Huddersfield, Yorks.
The pilot suffered only minor injuries but the aircraft was damaged beyond economical repair.
July 27 : Vickers 798D Viscount XA-SCM of Aero Eslava crashed into a mountainside at 10,000ft, 20 miles east of Mexico City while being ferried empty from Puebla to Mexico City in bad weather with rain and poor visibility.
All four crew on board were killed.
August 11 : Jodel DR. 1051 OO-JOA destroyed in crash at Lembeke, near Halle, Belgium.
August 19 : N1867Q was the Cessna 185F Skywagon II which crashed.
(FP October, p57).
August 24 : N67977 C-46 is confirmed as one of the two examples destroyed by Hurricane Andrew at Tamiami (FP November, p10), the other is now known to have been N625CL.
In addition, Jose Balboa Douglas C-54D N62433 and Bellomy Lawson DC-6BF N94BL were extensively damaged when blown into each other and into DC-7B N101LM which also suffered minor damage.
Octavionics DC-6BF N95BL was blown into Air Taxi International DC-6BF N37570 and two Conner DC-6Bs, N55CA and M93123 suffered minor damage, the former being hit by Boeing 727–214 N376PA and the latter being blown onto its tail.
September 21 : Cessna 185 floatplane lost power and crashed just after take-off from Gunn Lake, near Gold Bridge, 100m north of Vancouver, British Columbia, killing all four on board.
October 1 : DC-7B lost was TBM Inc/US Forest Service example N848D.
Location was near Lake Tahoe, Union Valley reservoir.
(FP November, p63).
October 8 : Avia 14–40 B-4211 of Wuhan Air Lines crashed near Dingxi, Gansu Province, north-western China, after the pilot reported engine failure 45 miles out on a charter flight from Lanzhou to Xian and was attempting to return to Lanzhou. 21 killed.
October 17 : CASA 1.131E Jungmann G-BACT force-landed in field north west of Shoreham, Sussex, and hit a bank causing substantial damage to wing, undercarriage, engine and propeller.
October 29 : NZ1075/VH-???
NA Harvard III crashed in flames near end of runway following air display in Australia.
Both occupants escaped serious injury but aircraft is a write-off.
November 5 : Douglas DC-7CF HI-599CT of Aerochago Airlines crashed into 15ft of water off Danra Beach after take-off from Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
Crew OK.
YAM under cover
YORKSHIRE AIR MUSEUM's aircraft display hall/hangar is now finished and open to the public.
This has enabled YAM's Halifax project to spread-out more, giving much great access to the fuselage, wings and other components.
On display are Flying Flea ‘G-AFFI’, Lightning F.6 XS903 and Buccaneer S.2 XN974.
Within the workshop area can be found SE.5A replica G-BKDT, built by Bill Sneesby and John Tetley.
This impressive aircraft is but a ‘try out’ for their current project.
The pair are hard at work on a ‘new build’ SE.5A, to be powered by an Hispano-Suiza.
Work is well on, but they are looking particularly for an Aldis gun sight for the project.
If anyone can help please contact the Editorial office.
Czech jet aero team
AMERICA'S FIRST five-jet aerobatic team look set to take to the skies in time for the 1993 airshow season, reports Bill Jesse .
Operating under the leadership of well-known aerobatic pilot T J Brown of National Air Shows, the team will be based at Fernandina Beach, Florida.
What makes this team different is the type of aircraft they will fly, for they are six Czechoslovakian-built Aero L39C Albatros trainers, the first of which, at the time of writing, was about to embark on its flight test schedule.
Named the Black Hawks, the team will fly five of the L39s in the airshow routine and use the sixth as a spare.
All six will be sprayed gloss black ready for the forthcoming season.
Owner is Dan McCue of Warbirds East who says that co-operation from manufacturers Aero at Vodochody was excellent and bodes will for other Eastern bloc aircraft being operated by civilians in the West.
Seen here at Dean Martin's facility at Burlington, Vermont, is the first of the L38Cs due for the Black Hawks team.
Built in 1981, it has less than 1,200 on the clock.
Coventry arrivals
THREE NEW EXHIBITS for the Midland Air Museum have recently arrived on site at Coventry Airport, Warks.
Sea Vixen FAW.2 XN685 arrived at the Museum on September 14 from the British Aerospace apprentice training school at Hawarden.
Second arrival was the nose section of Sea Vixen FAW.2 XJ579, last seen some time ago at Farnborough.
This nose section has been acquired to provide the visiting public with a ‘hands-on’ exhibit.
Third arrival was a Rolls-Royce Spey engine, which will complement the Museum's already varied engine collection.
Waterborne search
AN UNDERWATER SEARCH started on October 12 for the well-known aviator, Antoine de Saint-Exupery (FP September p45).
Using two miniature submarines carrying special underwater cameras, the French Ocean Research Institute (FORI) hope to find the wreck of his P-38 Lightning in the Baie des Anges, off the coast of Corsica.
Upon finding the wreck the FORI hope to be able to identify the serial plates on the engines of the aircraft, proving that this aircraft was the mount of Saint-Exupery, thereby laying to rest the many mysteries and rumours that have over the years surrounded his death.
‘Minnow’ hosts Council
BRITISH CLASSIC Aircraft Restorations (BCAR), based near Southampton, Hants, hosted the 102nd quarterly conference of the British Aviation Preservation Council (BAPC) on November 7.
BCAR Chairman Steve Challis welcomed delegates from museums and groups all over the UK to the meeting, explaining that he thought BCAR to be ‘probably one of the smallest groups in the BAPC’.
Despite this, BCAR have an Auster V operational from Old Sarum airfield, Wilts, with plans for it to visit the D-Day beaches in 1994 during the 50th anniversary celebrations.
BCAR are currently working on the restoration of two other Austers and delegates could tour their workshops.
Also underway is the restoration to flying condition of a Slingsby Cadet TX.2 glider.
BCAR's latest acquisition is the cockpit section of Armstrong-Whitworth built Hunter F.2 WN890, which will be restored as completely as possible.
The Hunter was acquired from the fire dump of the Aircraft & Armament Evaluation Establishment at Boscombe Down, Wilts, and moved to Chandlers Ford, Hants, on September 12.
(A full report on BCAR's activities will appear in a forthcoming FlyPast.)
Delegates could also tour the workshops of well-known restorer Ron Souch.
There are many classic and vintage aircraft proudly carrying the hallmark of a Souch restoration in the UK.
With a workforce of three, including himself, Ron's output in recent times has included a brace of DH.60 Moths.
Of Council matters, delegates discussed a wide variety of issues including the ‘listing’ of significant airframes held by museums and collections in the UK and the revision of the constitution.
Progress in getting buildings important to the history of aviation ‘listed’ was slow but sure and English Heritage were taking the matter most seriously when the Department of the Environment referred to them.
The ‘listing’ of RAF Hullavington (FP November, p64) was a significant breakthrough.
The Real Aeroplane Club, operating from Breighton, Yorks, were admitted to membership of Council.
Tony Dyer from the Wiltshire historic Aviation Group gave a presentation on their work to date and this was backed-up by the display of a wonderfully restored control column and seat/harness from Hurricane I P3554.
Also present, and hoping to apply for membership in due course, were representatives from the Shoreham Aviation Heritage Trust, who have been given 75 acres of land at historic Shoreham Airport to develop into a museum.
Cygnet to fly
DON CASHMORE'S full-size Hawker Cygnet replica G-Camm, has been completed and is awaiting suitable weather in order that its maiden flight, in the hands of John Lewis, can take place.
Currently at Hucknall, Notts, the aircraft's rigging, systems and  taxi-ing tests are complete.
Once successfully test flown, Don intends to sell the aircraft, as has been the case with previous replicas he has built — the Bristol M.1C and Sopwith Tabloid on display at the RAF Museum, Hendon.
Working Cat
CATALINA PBY-6A EC-FMC is still working for its living and is actively used as a fire-bomber.
Now owned and operated by ICONA, the aircraft was formerly C-FIZZ, part of the Canadian-based Avalon Aviation fleet (FP , October 90, p61), traces of its fire-bombing code ‘795’ can still be seen on the forward fuselage.
Caught here by Peter Chick on September 11, despite its age it is faring much better  than the much younger, but cocooned, Citation executive jet behind!
Print auction
A PRINT DEPICTING a pair of 229 Squadron Hurricanes flying low over a locomotive pulling passenger carriages to the Ashford to Redhill railway line in the Autumn of 1940 is being auctioned by forms of tender to raise funds for the RAF Benevolent Fund.
The print is Hurricane! by Bill Perring and currently on offer as a limited edition of 850 by the D'Arcy collection of Coulsdon, Surrey.
Pilot of the lead Hurricane depicted, Frank Twitchett, has signed every print, but the example being offered for tender has been personally signed by 22 former Battle of Britain fighter pilots.
Frank has organised this novel method of fund raising — final date for offers is December 14.
Bids can be placed by writing or telephoning Frank at:.
Spitfire on show
AS REPORTED in October's FlyPast (p57), Spitfire FR.XIV SG-57 formerly RM921) was placed on display in its purpose-built museum building at Florennes Air Base in Belgium on July 24.
The Museum was inaugurated on September 12 in the presence of Col Raymond Lallemant DFC and Bar, in whose markings the Spitfire is displayed.
Standard of restoration, including the cockpit and systems, has been to the highest levels.
A second building is due to be constructed to house the collection's other aircraft, which include F-84F, F-84G, RF-84F, Mirage V and an American cruise missile of the 485th TMW, deployed at Florennes until 1988.
Newsbreaks
EVERTS AIR FUEL of Alaska have acquired the last two French Securite Civile DC-6 fire-bombers.
F-ZBAC has become N4390F and staged through Shannon, Eire, on July 18.
F-ZBAD is due to follow.
FORMERLY held at RAF Abingdon, Oxon, Czech MiG-21 1304 was dismantled during April and exported to the USA.
FIRST OF THREE Yak C.11s under conversion in the CIS by the Yakovlev OKB is due to fly in December.
The finished product will closely resemble a Yak-3 from World War Two, but will be powered by an Allison in-line engine.
Two are underway for UK customers, the other for a US operator.
A CLUTCH of Russian-built aircraft have imported into the UK by well-known aerobatic pilot Mark Jefferies.
Available for sale and ready to view at Gransden airfield, Cambs are: Yak-12, Yak-18A, Yak-18T, Yak-50, Yak-52, L-9 Delfin, Mil Mi-1, Mi-2 and Polikarpov Po-2.
This interesting and varied collection reflects the numbers of aircraft being made available as Russia strives to get hard currency.
SOPWITH restorer and researcher Desmond St Cyprien died during August.
A zealot in many senses of the word, he was responsible for ferreting-out Sopwith Pups G-APUP (now at Hendon), G-ABOX (now at Middle Wallop) and Camel G-ASOP (now at Old Warden).
MOVED from South Kensington to allow room for the new Flight gallery (see page 10), the Science Museum (ScM) has placed Avro 504K D7560 on loan to the Museum of Army Flying at Middle Wallop, Hants.
Gnat T.1 XP505 has gone to the ScM's store at Wroughton, Wilts.
FAIREY BARRACUDA II forward fuselage DP872 has returned to the Fleet Air Arm Museum at Yeovilton, Somerset, following suspension of its restoration for the time being.
The FAAM are keen to hear from anyone with Barra components to help in this ambitious project.
MUSEUM of Berkshire Aviation at Woodley continue to make good progress.
They have taken on the single-seat Broburn Wanderlust sailplane stored since the mid-1940s at Farnborough, Hants.
CHARLES CHURCH (Spitfires) Ltd have sold three Spitfires to Florida-based collector Kermit Weeks, airworthy Mk IX PL 344/G-IXCC, Mk XIV MV262 and Mk IX TE517.
Pilatus P2-06 G-CJCI is also available for disposal.
Two-seater Mk IX PT462/G-CTIX is in trust for the family and will remain at the Winchester airstrip and be maintained by Dick Melton Aviation.
next month
One of the most beautiful airliners ever built, Lockheed's delightful Constellation celebrates its 50th anniversary.
We start our new series on US aircraft in RAF service with a look at the B-26 Marauder —The Widowmaker — in RAF service.
What was it like to fly?
Winner of the 1992 Fly/Past Twite Trophy was the Night Fighter Preservation Team with their Mosquito project.
We examine how determination brought a vision into reality.
Our 1993 wallplanner chart is available only in UK-distributed copies of Fly/Past .
A quantity have been put aside for overseas readers — just send an IRC to our Mail Order Department and we will send you one, while stocks last.
Stars 'n' Bars Spitfire
GATHERING at Rochester Airport on Saturday October 24 were a group of aircraft engineers and members of the Medway Aircraft Preservation Society (MAPS).
The purpose of this get-together was to enable a group photograph to be taken in front of the Society's latest restoration project, Spitfire PR.XI PL965/G-MKXI.
Rebuilt to full flying condition began in 1987 when Nick Grace, of Spitfire ML407 fame, brought the Mk XI back from Holland, where it had been displayed since 1960 at Overloon.
Nick, a members of MAPS, intended to restore the aircraft to airworthiness to go alongside his two-seat Mk IX, but tragedy was to strike, when on October 14, 1988 Nick was killed in a car crash near his Sussex home.
Undaunted by this tremendous loss, Chris Horsley, co-owner of the Spitfire with Nick, decided that the restoration should go ahead as planned and that MAPS should carry out the work.
Wings, tail unit, undercarriage, radiators and other sundry items were sent out to various workshops of the ‘warbird’ industry, but the team still needed a full time project leader.
This came in January 1991, with the arrival on the scene of licensed engineer Bob Eatwell, who admits that if he had known of the multitude of technical and administrative problems that he faced, would have walked out of the Rochester workshop, into sanity!
Nevertheless, Bob rose to the challenge and in January 1991 his first task was to replace hundreds of original magnesium allow rivets, which were good enough for a static rebuild, but not if the aircraft was to fly again.
Another early problem was to uncurl a twist in the fuselage due to the skins having been removed without the airframe being placed in a jig.
Bob commuted from Rochester and the Isle of Wight, to check on progress with the wing rebuild.
Late in 1991 they were completed and returned to Rochester and around the same time the Merlin 266 engine that had been rebuilt in the USA came home and was fitted to the airframe.
Spring 1992 and the Spitfire was wheeled out of the hangar and engine runs commenced, only to find that there appeared to be oil pressure problems until finally the engine would not start at all, in fact the Merlin was locked solid.
After the Merlin was inspected by Aviation Jersey it was shipped back to the USA for rebuild by Vintage V12, returning to the UK later in the year.
Painted to represent an aircraft that operated from USAAF Station 234, Mount Farm, the fighter is adorned with the correct shade of PRU blue and carries the US Star 'n Bar insignia of the 7th Photographic Group, with the aircraft's serial repeated in large yellow lettering across the fin and rudder.
The restoration of this historic fighter has been completed right down to the last detail, it carries a complete set of camera ports, although the cameras have not been fitted.
The distinctive deep chin cowling, a feature of the PR.XI, along with the enlarged oil tank beneath has been retained in this faithful rebuild and just about the only non-authentic concession made in the rebuild has been the fitting of a standard armour plated framed windscreen instead of the one piece wrap-around frameless example, the latter giving the pilot a somewhat distorted view from the cockpit.
Spitfire PL965 is a fine testament to the skills and devotion of the full time members of the rebuild team along with the dedication of the many members of the Medway Aircraft Preservation Society.
Once the test flying schedule has been completed by Mark Hanna the Spitfire will be operated on the airshow circuit by the Duxford-based Old Flying Machine Company, flying alongside their Eagle Squadron schemed MH-434.
'Boat in a boat
Caught by an airborne Nick Veronico on October 15 was the awesome Hughes HK-1 Spruce Goose on the deck of an enormous barge heading north off the shore of Pacifica, California.
Bound for the new Evergreen AirVenture Museum at McMinnville, Oregon, the Goose 's journey will be a complex one — see FP November p63.
The wings and tail feathers etc are stacked in the complex cradle structure behind the fuselage.
MORE LIFE WITH THE WASHINGTON
Paddy Porter's two-parter on the RAF's B-29 in the September and October issues got memories rolling…
Lucky Escape
May I congratulate you on your most informative articles in the September and October issues on Life with the Washington .
It is to my knowledge the first time that an ‘in-depth’ feature has been written about their service with the RAF and brought back many poignant memories for me for I was, to quote your September issue, ‘one of the batch of National Service gunners posted to RAF Coningsby’.
I looked, with particular interest, at the photographs on p20 of the October issue, because I was in the lead aircraft, WF556, which was being flown that day by G/C Tait, of Tirpitz fame, on Exercise Kingpin (Tait have taken over as Station Commander from Gus Walker).
Although it is 40 years since I was called-up, the memories of that part of my life are still vivid and I still have my flying logbook to refresh my memory.
With 115 Squadron at Marham, after doing the conversion course, I was part of the crew that took WF562 down to Odiham for the Coronation Review of the RAF, but what was not mentioned was the cleaning of the aircraft using tins of ‘Duraglit’ by air and ground crew before we went, only to fly through a rain storm on the way down and having to do it all over again, when we arrived.
There are stories of that event also, but it would make this too lengthy.
I also flew in WF560, with F/O Appleton as skipper, when the Squadron won the Laurence Minot Trophy in the Blind Bombing Competition on November 30, 1953.
However, the entry in the article which raised ghosts from the past was the section of Washington write-offs, in particular the entry concerning WF-495 that crashed in the sea on its way to the USA.
I was scheduled to be a member of that crew and had been issued with my kit, overseas bag etc and was delighted to have been chosen for the ‘jolly’, but someone ‘pulled rank’ and took my place, thus saving my life and losing his.
It has been an evocative experience reading these articles, rolling back the years to what was then the greatest adventure of my young life, and these experiences are just as vivid today.
These are two issues that I shall treasure.,
Disbandment party for 192 Squadron with a model Washington disgorging baggage over France, vividly illustrating the incident of February 1958.
RAFVR memories
Regarding the recent articles concerning the B-29 Superforts , or Washingtons, with the RAF I remembered flying them during my time in the post-war RAFVR.
Checking logbooks I note that on March 20, 1952 F/L Easter was airborne in Washington WF512 from Coningsby at 1330hrs en route for a practise radar bombing trip to Germany.
I went along as Central Fire Controller (CFC) however, I sat in the nose for take-off, which was very exciting!
For some reason, which I cannot recall, bombs were jettisoned on the way home — we landed back at base after a seven hour 30 minute flight.
Next morning, airborne at 1000hrs in Proctor NP228 as 2nd Pilot with F/L Newton to Mildenhall where we collected an Oxford, returning via Marham.
Back to Washingtons on the 22nd again with F/L Easter for Operation Bullseye — my last Bullseye was in a Lincoln ('J’) on March 29, 1957 — we did a seven hour night trip, bombing Heligoland from 18,200 feet — problems on the way back with controls iced-up prior to interception by night fighters off Cromer.
The skipper was S/L Cassidy, I rode the rear turret — very cold!
The Washington Bullseye was aborted due to unserviceable bomb doors plus compass trouble so we landed back after one hour 35 minutes.
A few quite days by F/L Newton gave me some circuits in the Oxford on the 25th.
Next day I did some air-to-sea firing from the Washington — 560 rounds 0.5″ CFC position.
My last Washington flight was on March 27 when we flew to Cherbourg for a Fighter Affiliation exercise.
F/L Foster, the skip , made me work hand on reporting fighter positions etc!
I recall most of the fighters were Supermarine Attackers.
My two weeks VR training finished, I returned to Blackpool the next day to start putting on the Ice Show at the famous Pleasure Beach — quite a change!
I continued flying from Woodvale when time allowed with the VR in Chipmunks/Oxfords/Tigers and Ansons.
I must say the B-29s were really wonderful for creature comforts in comparison to my wartime flying in Wellingtons, Whitley's, Warwicks etc.,
National Service
I was delighted by Paddy Porter's first instalment on Life with the Washington in your excellent magazine.
I was one of those ‘lucky’ National Servicemen who trained as Air Gunners and I served with 57 Squadron at Waddington (March 1952) and Coningsby (April 1952 to March 1953).
I must say that I really enjoyed my time in the RAF and I'm convinced that for National Serviceman, the Air Gunner's trade was the best way to complete the compulsory Armed Service requirement of the time.
Who could complain about spending at least 20 months as a Sergeant with the associated pay and privileges.
I recall that during my last six months service I had the magnificent sum of  £6/5/ (£6.25 now) to spend on myself.
It doesn't sound much nowadays but believe me it was a long time before I had to much disposable cash in civvie street.
There are one or two slight discrepancies in the article; for example every crew I flew with operated with four Air Gunners, more than half the co-pilots flight sergeant air engineers, one of my skippers was a Flying Officer and I'm sure that there were at least another four.
The regular aircrew treated us quite well as a rule but there were one or two time serving Air Gunners who seemed to be jealous of our youth and high spirits, and the majority of the skippers were real gents who appreciated that without the National Service contingent the Washingtons could not be crewed correctly.
As the article states, they were a pleasure to fly in and compared to the Lincolns they were indeed luxurious.
Carrying out pre-flight inspections on top of the Washington in bad weather was however no joke, and removing static locking sleeves from the bomb bay doors was always slightly nerve-wracking.
It was interesting to read about the Washington write-offs — WF555 was captained by a F/O Connolly who was very much an extrovert (with an extensive repertoire of bawdy songs).
Although this happened before my time with 57 Squadron one of the crew became a good friend before he remustered from A/G for pilot training and he was very proud of his Caterpillar Club membership.
I can vividly remember the tense atmosphere prevailing amongst all Washington crews during December 1952 and January 1953.
We were all very upset when WF570 crashed and doubly so when WF553 went in the January.
The old superstition that ‘these things come in threes’ was very much to the forefront of everyone's conversation.
When the freak accident wrote-off WF502 everyone was devastated at the loss of the full crew but it was not very long before remarks like ‘well that's the last one’ were being bandied about.
A slightly callous, but very practical attitude.
The photograph in the October issue of 57 Squadron line brought back vivid memories, because this was taken during the main exercise of Exercise Ardent in October 1952.
The reason for the photograph was that No 57 was the only squadron at Coningsby to have all aircraft serviceable for that particular exercise and I have one of the original photographs of this line-up in my own album.
The mention of the put-put brings back memories of trying to start the thing after a long cold night flight — it could be a swine but invariably started eventually.
I remember coming back from Exercise Jungle King in March 1953 on two engines, the put-put and windscreen wipers and the put-put some time to start that night.
With reference to the loss of WF-495 in the Atlantic I can recall some newspaper comment about a fishing boat skipper, whose boat had actually trawled up the remains of one of the crew, returning the body immediately to the deep without much thought for the relatives or friends of the deceased.
I did hear from friends, who were still in service at the time, that this caused a lot of bad feeling.,
Devoted to Dakotas
While the SAAF may dominate the Dakota world of the Republic of South Africa, civvie street also maintains its loyalty to the rugged workhorse.
Civvie Street
WITH THE ADVENT of the Professional Aviation Services Jet Prop DC-3 (FP November, p52), it may well be that the Dakota will see a resurgence in South Africa.
To date they have undertaken four conversions, with others reportedly underway.
Avia Air Charter (see below) has two such conversions in its highly Douglas-orientated fleet.
Sadly, Professional lost ZS-DHX shortly after take-off from Jamba, Angola, only August 31 — see the October issue, p57.
Their current demonstrator is ZS-LYW.
Dakota III 6888 in the hangar at Jan Smuts, shortly to fly again in the colours of South African Airways.
Forlorn DC-3A ZS-Kex at Lanseria.
Other DC-3 operators in the RSA include:
Avia Air Charter : Other than the SAAF, are the RSA's largest Dak operator.
Based at Pretoria's Wonderboom airfield, they have four ‘conventional’ Daks (ZS-GPL, ‘MFY, ‘MRU and ‘PTG) and two Jet Prop DC-3s (ZS-MRR and ZS-MRS).
For good measure, they also fly two DC-6 freighters, ZS-MTE and ‘MUL.
The two Jet Prop Daks are both ex SAAF and both founder members from the original 58 issued to 5 Wing, being 6879 (on charge March 1944) and 6839 (July 1944) respectively.
Both were with the SAAF through to at least the early 1980s.
Of the four recips, all have a varied history (but don't most Dakotas!) but ZS-MRU started life as US Navy R3D-1 BuNo 4703 in March 1942 and was used in the late 1970s as part of the Saudi Royal ‘fleet’, registered HZ-TA3 and used by Prince Talal Bin Abdul Aziz.
Bazaruto Air Charter : Based at Laseria, have used 1944 C-47A-90-DL ZS-LVR since 1990, having acquired it in the USA where it was last registered as N5000E.
Comair :(or Commercial Airways, based at Jan Smuts Airport, Johannesburg.)
Are in the final throes of becoming an all Fokker F-27 Friendship operation, with their last example, former Trans Canada Airlines (CF-TDO) and RCAF (FL615) Dakota III ZS-DRJ up for sale, having been with them, on and off, since 1963.
A previous Comair Dak which may be rebuilt to flying condition is ZS-EKK, which is steeped in African heritage.
Built for the RAF as Dakota III FD906, it was one of the ‘founding fathers’, joining the SAAF as 6802 in July 1943.
Then followed a string of airlines: Crusader Airways as ZS-DDV in April 1950; BEA as G-AJXL then G-AMGD from October 1950; then Autair, Continental Air Services, Air Links, Skyways, Autair again (but this time in Rhodesia as VP-YTT); National Airways as ZS-EKK, Swazi Air as 3D-AAV, Comair as ZS-IWL; Ethiopian Air Lines as ET-AIA and then Comair as ZS-EKK.
Directorate of Civil Aviation : Among a varied fleet of much more modern equipment, including Falcon 50s, the RSA's DCA have operated former SAAF Dakota III 6838 since August 1958 as ZS-CAI.
This is another of the SAAF's original 58 aircraft, being taken on charge in July 1944 and serving initially with 28 Squadron.
Inter-Air : Also at Lanseria, operate a single Dak, ZS-JMP, amid a host of plush executive material of a much more youthful nature.
This machine was built for Trans World Airlines as a DC-3–209B, entering service in April 1939 as NC14932.
Regional Airlines : Established only this year, and operating from Jan Smuts with a former SAAF ‘founding father’ Dakota III 6871 (on charge January 1944, on to SAA in November 1953 and Namibair in 1978) ZS-DIW.
Two Convair 580s (ZS-KEI and ‘LYL) are also used.
South African Airways : As mentioned in the November issue, SAA are preparing former SAAF 6888 for use again as ZS-BXF.
The interior of DASA's clubhouse.
On the wall is a surviving panel from 6843.
Rotting is a corner of busy Lanseria is another ‘all civil’ DC-3, the former African Air Carriers ZS-KEX, with the ‘Viewmaster’cabin glazing modification.
This was built for United Air Lines as DC-3A-197B NC 18942 in April 1948 and served with series of US operators until it found itself in the Sudan (as N8044) in 1976, before going to South Africa and joining Caprivi Airways in 1978 as ZS-KEX.
Daks are known to bounce back, but this one looks beyond recall.
Getting ready for Daisy
WITH SUCH A RICH HERITAGE of Dakotas, it will come as no surprise that there is an active and flourishing ‘fan’ club — the Dakota Association of South Africa (DASA) in the RSA.
Founded by Major Vic Fouche, DASA has a plush clubroom — crammed with Dakota memorabilia — within the SAAF base complex at Swartkop and enjoys an excellent relationship with both the SAAF and the SAAF Museum.
There are members all over the RSA and across the world.
A regular newsletter keeps people in touch and a whole series of social events are undertaken.
On the wall of the clubroom is part of the fuselage plating of Dakota IV 6843 — the bit with the serial number painted on it.
This served with 28 Squadron under 5 Wing and was later stored for a long time at 15 Air Depot at Snake Valley, adjacent to Swartkop before going to serve with the MEFS at Bloemspruit.
It was here that the aircraft was involved with a miraculous escape after an in-flight fire raged through the aircraft.
It made a successful and safe forced-landing, but little (other than the ‘number plate’) was salvageable.
Until quite recently this was the largest piece of Dak that DASA could contemplate as coming their way.
However, the SAAF have made a very good proposal to DASA that they take on 6886 in about a year's time, along with a very comprehensive spare package.
This is another former SAA aircraft — it served them as ZS-BXI and was briefly with East African Airways as VP-KNU.
A Dakota III, it flew with 5 Wing from February 1944 (as 6819), joined SAA in 1949 and rejoined the SAAF (now as 6886) in February 1971, serving with 44 Squadron.
DASA are now looking into how the money can be raised to acquire the Dak, then to operate her and where she can be realistically based.
All of this is looking more than hopeful and plans are to operate ZS-BXI Daisy (as she will be known) in the orange, blue and green colours of the DASA logo in due course.
A share scheme has been launched, allowing members to own a ‘slice’ of the aircraft while DASA will maintain a majority holding.
While the SAAF will be a ‘Super Dakota’ operator for a long time to come, DASA air to maintain a former SAA and SAAF Dak in ‘classic’format for as long as they can.
Details of membership and how to help demob a Dakota called Daisy can be hand from:,.
The Finest P-40?
‘Don't touch a thing, it's perfect.’
That's how the test pilot summed up the first post-restoration flight in Dick Hansen's Kittyhawk I. Once displayed on top of a filling station, the P-40 is now arguably the best there is.
I DON'T KNOW how long the Curtiss P-40 has been my son's favourite aircraft and I often wondered why.
The interest was a mystery because the fighter looked frightening to me — why wouldn't it scare a small boy?
Maybe this aircraft intrigues a child because, like a cartoon, it seems to have a face.
I believe that Robert liked to draw the teeth.
The drawings never stopped.
The other day, I ‘phoned Robert at college to tell him that I had photographed his favourite aircraft that morning.
He still wanted to hear every little thing I could remember about it.
Hmmmmmm.
This must be a long term love affair.
This certainly stuck a chord with the pilot whom I had just photographed as he flew his newly-restored P-40 for the first time.
Dick Hansen was also in love with this aircraft since childhood.
‘It began in third grade,’ said Dick…
‘I grew up in Batavia, Illinois, which is where I still live and work.
I drew that aircraft all the time.
I just believed for awhile that the dream had gotten away from me…
There were so few available, and completed aircraft were far too expensive.
I doubted that I would find one in time.
That I did had been a 45 year fantasy come true.’
Dick Hansen poses alongside his Kittyhawk immediately after his first solo in her.
Dick's plane was built in 1941 by the Curtiss Wright Corporation in Buffalo, New York, for the RAF as Kittyhawk I AK899 but was one of 72 transferred to the RCAF, becoming 1051.
(The various P-40 models were renamed a few times — the ‘A, ‘B and ‘Cs were called the Tomahawk; the ‘D, ‘E, ‘F and ‘Ks were known as the ‘Kittyhawk’; and the ‘L, ‘M and ‘Ns were christened Warhawk).
It was flown for six years by the Canadians before it was sold as surplus in late 1947 by the War Assets Corporation.
Fred Dyson of Seattle, Washington bought 1051 with 13 others for the purchase price of $each.
The P-40 was resold to Tony Dire of Everett, of Washington, who made a landmark of his purchase by mounting it atop his petrol station to attract customers.
As the years went by, some parts were removed to keep other P-40s flying.
Even the Allison engine was removed and used to power a hydroplane racer.
The powerplant wasn't missed by the public because an electric motor was installed to turn the Kittyhawk's propeller.
The plane was painted and repainted over the next 20 years with each change of ownership or brand of gasoline.
In 1968, the Kittyhawk was purchased with the intention of returning it to flying condition.
The project was sold twice more before it finally flew again as a modified two-seater, as N9837A.
It flew a total of 26 hours in this configuration before it was sold again and again and again, and then finally traded for a two-place P-51.
Through these sales the P-40 had found it way to Florida.
It was 1987.
Taking shape…
Outside the Blackhawk hangar, Janesville, Wisconsin.
Enter Dick Hansen from Illinois who was still thinking about that P-40 he dreamed about as a child.
A friend, Dick Wixsom, had heard about 1051, which was now advertised in Trade-A-Plane and he asked his son, Kevin, who was going to Florida on his spring holiday, to find the aircraft and to photograph what he saw.
After the pictures were developed, Dick Wixsom invited Dick Hansen to lunch with the words, ‘I think we may have found your P-40.’
At lunch, Dick Hansen decided that the pieces he could see (because it had been disassembled for shipping) from the pictures merited a closer look and so Dick called the owner to verify the price.
Hansen then flew Wixsom and mechanic Nick Quint to Florida for the purpose of inspecting N9837A and verifying that it was all there.
It was as it was represented, not rusty, and essentially intact.
Dick Hansen called the owner of the P-40 and negotiated the deal which he closed on immediately.
He added, ‘I paid top dollar, but it's a good thing I did, because there were two other people who were after the plane and I just moved quicker than they did.’
Dick Hansen hauled the pieces of 1051 to Blackhawk Aviation in Janesville, Wisconsin, where the restoration would be done.
Dick decided from the start that he wanted a ‘museum quality aircraft’ and his goal set the tone for the excellence that was to follow.
To achieve his end, the P-490 was completely dismantled, inspected, the parts honed to perfection or replaced and the aircraft rebuilt.
Dick's fighter was not without its problems, the primary one being that the fuselage had been modified with a hacksaw so that there would be room to put a second seat in the airframe.
He told me about the extensive work  involved in restoring the area behind the cockpit.
‘I had to call an automobile race car body manufacturer to make these double concave pieces which were very difficult to fashion from the second hand pattern we had.
Unfortunately, when they cut that area out of the aircraft, they discarded the unnecessary pieces.
If they had just kept the stuff they removed, it would have saved us six months of work.’
Dick described his part in the restoration project as ‘chase and race’—‘I wish I had the time to do the mechanical work, I like that, but I did the parts sourcing and chasing and telephone calls.
In fact let me show you my latest find, here is a ‘brand new’ 1940's original gunsight.’
I am impressed.
Atop the gas station at Everett, Washington State.
The many coats of paint helped to preserve the P-40 ready for the day when she would fly again.
The 20 years that 1051 spent atop the petrol station turned out to be a gift in disguise.
When the various coats of paint were stripped off, Dick and his crew discovered that there was very little airframe corrosion externally or internally, and the fact that the airframe was out of reach of the public meant that the fairings and the skins weren't dented at all.
The skin was perfect.
The job of locating or fashioning any questionably authentic of missing piece continued.
The Smithsonian Institute provided eight rolls of microfilm which contained nearly all the blueprints of the aircraft and its components.
These plans were an invaluable tool which increased the accuracy and the efficiency of the project.
If an original part couldn't be located, the crew would consult the prints and have Dick Mead, a retired machinist from Janesville, Wisconsin, recreate the component to match original military specifications.
The original fuel cells were rotten and needed to be replaced, so new cells and a support system were designed to make the replacement bladders easily accessible to a mechanic by removing the belly skins, straps and parts of the support container.
‘The old fuel cells were self supporting,’ explained Dick's mechanic, Nick Quint, ‘but to work on them, one would have to take the entire cell out of the fuselage.
We custom made a new containment system that is really functional.’
Packing the P-40 to send to Janesville, 1987.
With the original Allison engine — long since removed, the replacement powerplant was no more than adequate.
‘Adequate’ wasn't what this restoration was all about.
Amazingly a new Allison V-1710 was located and purchased.
This engine was still in the original crate and had only six hours on it as the result of run-up tests done at the factory in 1944.
The engine was rebuilt and was run four more hours on a test stand before it was mounted in the aircraft with then, ten hours total running time.
Fully painted up, N9837A glints in the sun.
Finding the missing parts has been a lucky blending of good fortune and good detective work.
In the pursuit of authenticity and while looking for original P-40 coolers, the reconstruction crew located a man in Alaska who, after the war, had dug up quite a bit of military surplus from land-fills in his State.
The coolers had been a stumbling block, an item that had been impossible for the restoration crew to find.
(Because this item is so scarce, several P-40 owners have resorted to using oil coolers and radiators intended for the Douglas DC-6.
These parts are, at best, inefficient in a P-40 and the result is overheating so their taxi time has to be kept to an absolute minimum.)
Wonderfully, the man in Alaska had original P-40E coolers in his collection of parts.
These coolers were obtained, restored and installed in Dick Hansen's Kittyhawk which has had its temperature in the  green ever since.
In the interest of safety, the hydraulic system and the prop were overhauled completely.
Also as a safety measure, modern radios and circuit breakers were installed in the cockpit.
These safety necessities are cleverly hidden behind panels which were made to look like original military equipment.
The cockpit is wonderfully authentic and reflects the tremendous amount of research and attention to detail that went into assembling the instrument panels.
Finally after almost five years of restoration, the P-40 was ready to fly.
Dick Hansen called test pilot Bill Dodds from Freehold, New Jersey.
Bill, with 18 type ratings, is one of the most widely experienced aviators in the USA.
He has been an instructor for 40 years and is an FAA examiner in eight different warbirds.
It was arranged that Bill would do the initial flight in early February and that he would give Dick Hansen his ground schooling for the aircraft.
Dick has a generous amount of time and experience in taildraggers like Staggerwings and T-6s but he wanted Bill Dodds who had broad P-40 for the first time so that he could compare the aircraft with others that he's flown.
This way they would find out if there were any quirks in the aircraft that could be ironed out before Dick strapped-in for the ride that would be his first solo.
Dick was generous with his praise for Bill's instruction.
‘He made it all simple,’ said Dick.
What did Bill Dodds think of the Kittyhawk?
Perhaps the best indication is that the initial flight, which was scheduled for 20 minutes, lasted well over an hour.
On Bill's second flight, he flew the P-40 to a red line dive at 385mph.
His report —‘Don't touch a thing, it's perfect.
It's the finest P-40 I've ever flown.’
That's quite an accolade coming from an instructor who has 500 hours of P-40 time in seven of the eighteen P-40s worldwide which still fly.
Bill couldn't say enough about this aircraft.
‘It's excellent, dazzling, and because of the original condition, it's practically a stock plane.
There's no other one like it in flying condition and I feel that it is the finest P-40 in the world today.’
Dick Hansen, like most P-40 pilots-to-be, found that his first ride in his aircraft would also be his first solo.
He described the event with humility.
‘I was a passenger for the first 15 minutes of the flight.
I was paying attention to everything in the airplane.
I didn't want to forget anything.’
Shortly after Dick  took off in his P-40, Bill Dodds and I joined him airborne in a T-6.
We watched from a distance.
listened to transmission from the Kittyhawk and Bill offered a few suggestions as Dick became familiar with his mount.
After 30 minutes of flight time, Dick felt comfortable enough to join up on our wing so a picture could be made which commemorated the moment.
It was a cold day to be photographing with an open canopy, but the P-40 looked like the  quintessentially classic without its war paint and the formation was so smooth that I scarcely noticed the temperature outside.
Dick Hansen on a cold day in February 1992, flying his P-40 for the first time.
We followed Dick back to the airport and watched him make a ‘grease job’ of a landing to conclude his solo flight.
Everything worked perfectly.
I asked Dick if there were any surprises for him about the aircraft and he mentioned that he was pleasantly surprised that this Allison machine ran so smoothly and that the power band was as wide and it was.
‘After flying the plane I have a lot of respect for the guys, who at 20 years of age and with only a limited number of flight hours in a T-6, soloed in this plane.’
The P-40, the most important American fighter in the first two years of the war, was produced until 1944.
This was more than two years after superior fighters had been added to the battle effort; however, the P-40 was so strong and had the reputation of coming home even with severe damage.
The aircraft was not so manoeuvrable as the Japanese Zero , but its strength far exceeded the Zero in a dive.
War accounts tell of Nippon pilots who tried to follow a P-40 into a high speed dive and they would rip the wings right off their Zero .
Attention to detail inside the cockpit.
Modern needs have been carefully installed so as not to spoil the authentic look.
Dick quickly got 15 hours in his aircraft and commented: ‘I can  hardly wait to get the 16th.’
He will have to wait because Bill Dodds flew the P-40 to New Jersey where it is being painted in the colours and design of General Robert Scott's first machine.
‘General Scott flew three P-40s, two ‘E models and a ‘K model, during his illustrious World War Two flying,’ explained Dick.
‘He was a highly decorated ace and no one to date has done his aircraft.
That's why I chose his paint scheme.
General Robert Scott signing autographs alongside N9837A at Oshkosh.
(All by Author unless noted.)
General Robert Scott is still alive and has sent Dick a hand written description of his first aircraft on the back of a photograph he had of himself with his P-40.
‘The paint,’ Scott noted, ‘was olive drab.’
Flat paint has always presented the problem of grease stains, oil stains and fingerprint marks to the meticulous aircraft owner.
Undaunted, Dick began to research paint and his finds will set a new course for warbirds with the latest in flat paint technique.
The paint is applied in a two-part process.
The first coat will be Sitkins, a glassy German automotive paint which is more commonly found Mercedes Benz and BMWs.
After that coat of paint has dried, a clear flat coat will be applied over the first that will produce a matt surface which will not fingerprint or stain.
(Dick reports that the paint is all that he had hoped it would be and more.
‘The rain rinses off all exhaust traces.
The paint just sheds dirt and oil!’)
The artwork has been researched and sketched with as much care as every other aspect of this restoration.
Every P-40 has a unique set of teeth and those teeth make or break the fearsome look which sets this fighter apart.
Dick wouldn't rest until he had the exact pattern that he needed for the teeth.
Last week I sent my son Robert a photograph for his dormitory room.
It was a picture of Dick Hansen over that frozen lake in his P-40.
What did Robert think?
A note came back immediately in response to the picture.
‘Please tell Mr Hansen to take very good care of that plane.
I'd like to buy it from him someday.’
Start saving Robert, Dick Hansen estimates that a restoration of this calibre would bring over £712,000 at auction today.
Several experts who I consulted tell me that he's being modest again.
Anyway the P-40 is not for sale.
POSTSCRIPT:
General Scott was at Oshkosh this year to see Dick Hansen's P-40.
He personally added his victory flags to complete the paint scheme.
After sitting in the cockpit, General Scott told Dick: ‘I've seen and sat in a lot of P-40s since the war ended.
Most were just not quite right.
This plane is exactly what I remember.’
Just hearing these words from General Scott was sufficient reward for Dick Hansen.
That was exactly what his goal had been about.
Many people were disappointed that Dick Hansen's P-40 was not chosen as Grand Champion at Oshkosh this year.
Dick was not crushed as he is not a trophy collector; however he was very pleased that the EAA's Golden Wrench Award, which honours excellence in aircraft restoration, went to his friends at Blackhawk Aviation in Janesville, Wisconsin, for their work on his Kittyhawk.
Dick Hansen already feels that he has had his reward, it's the P-40 and it is probably the best one in the world.
AIRSHOW 93
IT'S OVER…it's gone.
Yes, it was wet and windy, but we already miss it.
The UK airshow season for 1992 gave us all the things we love:
Fabulous food, and so cheap…
A chance to mingle with people of like minds (Who they?— Ed)…
And above all else, to marvel at the pilots and the daring-do they do daringly…
AND WE MISS IT ALL, BADLY…
SO, airshow organisers, air rallyers, fly-in-ists, air racers, balloonatics, all of you in the throes of planning the 1993 calendar — help to put tens of thousands of FlyPast readers out of their misery.
Give them something to look forward to…
We are now compiling the UKs most authoritative show calendar, ready for publication in FlyPast and Airshow 93 .
Keep a large audience informed of what YOU are planning and help to soothe the crisis-ridden brows of enthusiasts everywhere — send your details for 1993 to:,.
Stars 'n' Bars
the americans in europe 1942–1945
Fickle ‘Lora Lee’
The war in Europe came to an end on May 7, 1945.
But flying accidents were to take the lives of young airmen beyond that date.
One such sad tale was Lt James Ferris when his P-51B went out of control on June 19.
ON THE CLEAR BRIGHT morning of June 19, 1945, 1st Lt James J Ferris III awoke with excited anticipation of another day's flying.
Ferris was a young American fighter pilot from Englewood, New Jersey, attached to the 368th Fighter Squadron, 359th Fighter Group.
Today it was to be local aerobatics; the war in Europe may have ended, but he was eagerly hoping for a posting to the Pacific Theatre.
1st Lt James J Ferris III.
Following take-off at 0945 the wooded landscape around USAAF Station 133 East Wretham soon gave way to the flat fields criss-crossed with the dykes of Fenland, ideal for the purpose of the day.
Lt Ferris enjoyed his flying.
He was the son of a World War One Army aviator and according to his Squadron Commander Jim Parsons ‘he was an exceptional young man, very likeable but more aggressive than most’.
Probably this aggression had determined his choice of aircraft for the day's flying — P-51B model 42–106929.
The ‘B’ model was often preferred to the ‘D’because it was 5–6mph faster, not a vast difference, but enough when in combat.
Lt Ferris put the aircraft through his compulsory loops and rolls, probably hoping that a situation might arise which would add excitement and get the adrenalin flowing.
He would not have to wait long — in the distance he saw a flight of P-51s engaged in combat simulation, just the scenario for some ‘rat-racing’.
The exhilaration soon faded upon checking his fuel state, which he found to be low.
He had to return to base, but as he flew back the thought crossed his mind that if he could get refuelled quickly enough the opportunity might still remain.
He landed back at 1045.
At 1115, with throttle wide open, Lt Ferris lifted-off the East Wretham runway, once again on a supposedly local aerobatic flight.
Shortly after take-off he encountered Lt John Marrons' flight of three and, with the Flight Leader's permission, joined in No 2 position at about 1130.
At 1150 the flight encountered Jigger Green flight, also up from East Wretham.
Both flights started a climbing turn to the right.
Whilst in the turn Lt Ferris broke away from Lt Marrons' and attacked the second element of Jigger Green .
This element broke to the left and Lt Ferris followed.
No 4 pilot of Jigger Green flight saw an aircraft attacking from the rear and broke into it and engaged it in combat, but as Jigger Green 4 turned to rejoin his flight he saw an aircraft tumbling at about 8,000ft.
Lt Ferris was now fighting for his life in an aircraft totally out of control and descending fast.
Long gone the exhilaration of attacking another aircraft, now this feeling was replaced by the real struggle of man against machine.
Four times end-over-end the aircraft tumbled and then went into several spins, the spins being in both directions with mo complete recovery between them.
The situation was now irretrievable.
Lt Ferris had lost control, his machine had taken over.
Ferris took the decision to abandon the aircraft, which crashed at 1205 at Oxborough, Norfolk.
For James J Ferris the flight was over and so was his life, for his body was found very close to the aircraft crash site.
He had either bailed out too low or his parachute had malfunctioned.
What had gone wrong?
Lt Ferris had chosen 42–106929, a ‘war-weary’ machine.
The aircraft required a compass swing and had oxygen system leaks and because of this Lt Ferris had been required to sign for its release from maintenance, therefore accepting responsibility for his own safety.
There was no evidence of aircraft failure on the crash report.
Lt Ferris may have been caught-out by the P-51's undesirable characteristic that in a tight turn, will a full fuselage tank, the aircraft tended to tighten into the turn and stall out before the pilot could regain control.
It was recommended to burn off fuel in the fuselage tank to 30 gallons before combat if possible.
There the story remained until December 1988 when six members of the Fenland Aircraft Preservation Society (FAPS) organised a field reconnaissance and met with a local farmer who remembered the crash and took us along to the field.
Having already obtained an MoD licence and farmer's permission we set about trying to pinpoint the site.
Memories unfortunately fade and hopes soon waned when after 1 1/2 hours nothing was found in the area suggested.
Once the search area has been widened however, enthusiasm flooded back with a loud response from one of the metal detectors.
All we had to do now was satisfy ourselves that there was enough wreckage to warrant returning for a full-scale excavation.
Being on soft peat land, digging was easy and at a depth of three feet we found a two inch cylindrical piece of metal.
Widening the hole we found another, then another.
We had found the exhaust stubs of the Packard Merlin, pointing vertically out of the ground.
We would return.
January 28, 1989 was a cold, frosty day with mist across the Fens.
FAPS had 28 members in the field by eight o'clock, along with our usual differ driver Geoff Carnell, who would drive the JCB loaned by the farmer.
As we knew where the engine lay, topsoil was cleared briskly with the JCB until approaching the engine, when hand digging took over.
Once the engine was exposed on both sides, hawsers were placed around it and it was then lifted from the hole.
Work then moved to the rear, where the seat armour plate, battery, radio equipment and large remnants of the port wing were found.
Unfortunately virtually all of the cockpit had been removed by the recovery crew at the time of the crash.
The dig was now over, trailers loaded with wreckage headed for home, the diggers contented.
Now research and restoration would begin.
The engine was delivered to the home of our resident engine specialist — Ted  Drawbridge.
Ted is no stranger to the misfortunes of war, as Simon Parry's excellent book Intruders over Britain eloquently relates.
On the night of March 17/18, 1945, Ted was the flight engineer of a 550 Squadron Lancaster shot down by Feldwebel Rudi Morenz flying a Ju 88 of IV/NJG2.
Ted soon identified the Mustang's engine as a Packard Merlin V-1650-7 which at this stage was plastered with what appeared to be oil-soaked peat.
The engine seemed to be complete except for the obvious loss of the reduction gear and its housing.
Unfortunately, Ted's small workshop was crammed full of other assorted engineering tackle and as the arrival of a larger workshop was imminent we decided to sheet the engine side down outside until the new workshop was erected.
Foul weather with squally winds put paid to an immediate start on the building so it was several months before the engine strip-down could begin under the new roof.
By this time the engine's real state was becoming apparent.
The external peat had dried up and blown away, revealing no sign of the oily protective film that we thought so obvious on its arrival.
Instead, the allow castings were starting to oxidise in some places.
It was essential to get the engine to pieces as soon as possible to stop further corrosion.
Removal of the numerous pumps, valves, filters, motors, oil feeds and ignition harnesses that adorned the Packard Merlin was quickly carried out to clear the way for the problem of splitting the now obviously damaged engine.
Clearly, the aircraft had dived or spun into the ground on the port side; the starboard exhaust stubs were perfect while the port stubs had been wiped off.
The same contrast applied to the rocker covers and magnetos.
The overhead cam assemblies, supercharger unit and wheelcase came away fairly easily, the fuel intercooler unit having fallen off when the peat dried out!
The remaining lump now consisted of the crankcase, blacks, heads, inlet manifolds and fuel trunk.
The sump cover had already been removed and a quick look up into the bowels of the engine made apparent the enormity of the task.
Up she comes!
The remarkably integral Merlin.
Already several pallets in the workshop were covered by large chunks of engine, not to mention numerous trays of smaller items individually wrapped against further corrosion.
Scores of meticulously labelled tins containing sub-assembly fixings were stacked at the rear of the workshop.
Ted's assistant throughout the work on this engine was Jim Mitchell, a Kentishman now living in Southery, Norfolk, within a short distance of where the engine had been recovered.
It was Jim who had investigated the crash site and carried out the negotiations with the very helpful and understanding farming family on whose land the aircraft had crashed.
Ted and Jim now alternated their time between dismantling the remaining assembly and splitting and cleaning the sub-assemblies already removed from the engine.
Experience gained from previous Merlin stripdowns within FAPS stood the pair in good stead on this one.
It has always been to the Society's credit that preservation work undertaken on its Merlin engines has involved every nut, bolt and washer being removed, cleaned, treated and replaced so that when rebuilt the engine should stand every chance of lasting for many future generations.
It is not difficult to imagine that the impact of the crash caused damage to almost all the various spindles that make up the centre-pieces of many of the sub-assemblies.
Bent spindles would be a fairly good excuse for not completely stripping some of these units but Ted's single-minded attention to detail made sure that everything ended up with its proper film of necessary preservative.
With four Merlins now completed using this meticulous rebuilding technique (and two more under way) some thought had been given to methods of preserving clean and corroded surfaces alike.
For example, the oxidation of aluminium alloys found during this work and almost certainly made worse because the engine had Ian within three feet of the surface, could be melted and flushed out of the porous alloy be being sprayed with white spirit.
A liberal spraying of Waxoyl diluted by white spirit is then easily taken into the metal where it continues to preserve from within.
Ferrous metals on the other hand do not always stop ‘working’ despite the Waxoyl.
Ensis fluid, however, does the trick nicely apart from the unfortunate side effect of turning everything treated with it a rather rusty colour!
A Merlin III that Ted had preserved during 1985–1987 had penetrated deep into blue clay and had thus been cut-off from the damaging effects of oxygen.
Compared to this Packard-Merlin, the Mk III had been raised in immaculate condition and its rocker covers still gleam with the original black paintwork.
By now, many hundreds of man-hours had been put into the Packard Merlin and much had still to be done.
There are 14 tie rods which pass laterally through a Merlin crankcase; two through each of the seven main caps.
They were an extremely good fit and required a long drift to remove them.
The stainless steel split pins were then removed from the 14 castellated nuts and the main caps drawn off with a length of 1/2″ BSF threaded rod and a large section of channel.
Each main cap was tapped during manufacture for just this purpose.
The engineering quality of this Packard Merlin was every bit as fine as the Rolls-Royce variants that we had dealt with in earlier years.
If there was any criticism of the engine, it was that the aluminium alloys used gave the impression of not standing up the rigours of 40 years under the ground quite so well.
It is doubtful, however, that this was one of the criteria uppermost in the minds of the metallurgist during the engine's inception!
It was necessary to remove the stainless steel split pins from the big end nuts — easier said than done considering that the crank shaft was seized solid and the position of some of the big ends in relation to the crankcase wall made access to them almost impossible.
Time and patience won through and eventually all pins and nuts were removed.
With a fair amount of jiggling, the big end caps were all parted from the con-rods and the crankshaft was lifted from the crankcase.
Later, when the crankshaft's centrifuge covers were removed, great wedges of thick black tar-like oil gave rise to grave doubts as to the authenticity of the engine records which showed that only 81–1/2 hours were booked to this engine.
When checked for straightness, this crankshaft was found to have little or no distortion.
The main fuel trunk, which lies between the ‘V’ of the blocks/heads and delivers the petrol/air mixture from the supercharger via the intercooler into the inlet manifolds, was now removed.
The 28 main head stud nuts were undone and the heads and blocks lifted.
This job was made very difficult by corrosion which had grown adjacent to the brass tubes carrying the head studs.
This had forced the tubes inwards in places and as the head studs were dowelled at certain points along their length these areas would not pass through the constricted sections.
In the few tubes in which this had occurred there was no alternative but to sever the head stud.
(The tubes could not be drawn from the head/block for the same reason.)
Once both cylinder banks had been separated from the crankcase, the 12 pistons were drawn from the liners and boiled to free off the rings and gudgeon pins prior to their removal.
When the pistons were withdrawn it was discovered that two of the rings were broken.
It is surmised that this had happened during the initial fitting of the rings  as opposed to any stresses imposed during the crash.
Completed engine with the restoration team: left to right: Jim Mitchell, Ted Drawbridge, Andy Ketley.
Now heads were split from blocks, inlet manifolds from heads and the 48 valves and 96 valve springs were relieved of their 45-year tension.
Quite a lot of the clean-up work had been going on apace of the actual stripdown of the engine so when the latter was finished, the former was not far behind.
The clean-up method was the same throughout the engine for internal parts.
If an item was dry and free from grease but had signs of corrosion, it was put first to the rotary wire brush to remove as much of the corrosion as possible.
After this it was scrubbed in paraffin to clean and if necessary, degrease it.
Then all items received a good spraying with the Waxoyl/white spirit solution, and were touched up with Ensis fluid if there was any sign of troublesome ferrous metals within.
The rebuild went surprisingly well.
The engine had been recovered in January 1989 and we completed our preservation work in March 1991.
Ted and Jim had put well over 10,000 man hours into the project.
The rather elegant frame on which the engine is now mounted was designed by Ted and fabricated by John Welbourne, another staunch FAPS/FAM member.
Unfortunately, very few people will appreciate just how much time, effort and sheer innovative thinking has gone into making the engine look similar to how it would look had we merely pressure washed the outside and mounted it for display.
During the time that Ted and Jim were working on the engine, our chief researcher Bill Welbourne had been finding out a few details about the aircraft.
On contacting the 359th Fighter Group Association, we were surprised to find that 42–106929 did not appear in the Group's official history, which listed Lt Ferris's crash, but not his aircraft.
Confusing the issue still further, a piece of metal had been found during cleaning with the number 42–106918 clearly written on it in pencil.
When work started on cleaning the engine, several pieces of ‘nose-art’ were found — could we possibly find enough to establish the name of the aircraft?
Pieces were collected and laid out in what was thought to be their correct positions.
We had some complete letters but only parts of others.
We then decided to lay out the parts that fitted and draw the rest.
The name appeared to be Lora Lee 
We have obtained a photograph of Lt Ferris, the serial number of his aircraft and its name.
Through our efforts the 359th Fighter Group have found a missing aircraft.
All we need now is a photograph of Laura Lee…one day, perhaps.
Next time you visit Fenland Aviation Museum, make a point of looking at the photograph albums pertaining to the Merlin's strip-down.
Some have as many as a hundred photographs and captions describing the various stages of the project.
Along with these we have displayed all the recovered remains of the aircraft.
This is our tribute to a young and enthusiastic American fighter pilot from New Jersey, who now lies in Madingley Cemetery, England.
Fenland Aviation Museum is sign-posted off the A47 Wisbech by-pass, and is open weekends and Bank Holidays between March and September.
We look forward to seeing you.
If anyone has any further information concerning James J Ferris or the aircraft would they please contact ,.
Ted Drawbridge, FAP's engine restorer extraordinaire passed away early this year.
This feature is dedicated to the painstaking work of a gifted man.
Stars n Bars has proved so popular that the series will run-on into 1993, but on a bi-monthly basis, starting in the February 1993 FlyPast .
In the intervening months we will be featuring RAF experiences flying US-made aircraft during World War Two.
HIGH SPEED HANGAR
Tangmere Military Aviation Museum have achieved their goal of building a display hall — and in double quick time.
Now they have dedicated their hangar to high speed and in particular the record breakers that flew from this historic airfield.
TEN YEARS after its foundation the Tangmere Military Aviation Museum (TMAM) was ‘crowned’ in the manner now accepted as the route to maturity and to becoming a regional, and perhaps national, force.
This year marked the completion and opening of an £85,000 aircraft display hall and with it, TMAM took a quantum leap forward with a durable ‘crown’ for their collection.
TMAM's  President , Neville Duke, accepts part of the Mick Mannock collection on behalf of the Museum on October 16.
Recognising this achievement, the RAF Museum have honoured TMAM with the loan of two of its treasures, both record breakers and both steeped in the history of Tangmere itself.
With these highly significant aircraft and with a track record of only ten years from on site to ‘crowned’ TMAM's new aircraft hall is indeed a ‘high speed hangar’.
View of one of the exhibit halls.
Standard of presentation and variety of artifacts are excellent.
TMAM owes its origins to the Wealden Aviation Archaeological Group (WAAG), who were active in the 1970s recovering material from crash sites in southern England.
In 1974, one of WAAG's leading lights, Andy Saunders, firmly turned the sights on Tangmere as a suitable venue for the collection.
The RAF had left the historic airfield in 1970.
By 1980 Tangmere Memorial Museum Ltd had been formed, but it was ‘homeless’.
Fund raising was underway, in the capable hands of TMAM Chairman Jimmy Beedle, who had flown from Tangmere with 43 Squadron in 1940, was the author of the superb book The Fighting Cocks and Secretary of the 43 Squadron Association.
Sadly, Jimmy died in 1989, but all of the achievements owe much to this dear, departed, friend.
Joining forces with Andy and Jimmy as a co-Director at this time was Peter Dimond, who — along with Andy — continues to be very active in the direction and philosophy of the Museum.
It was in 1982 that TMAM finally moved in to the airfield, taking over two pre-fabricated huts that had been part of the Station in the late 1940s and early 1950s.
These were leased for a nominal sum from a very understanding Tangmere Parish Council.
Much work was needed to bring them up to scratch and the small band worked hard to ready everything for an opening to the public in June.
Most of the items to go on display were from the former WAAG collection, but a lot of money (courtesy of a bank and the founders using their homes as collateral!) secured the former London Air Museum collection and this enabled a wide spread of exhibits to greet the public when TMAM opened-up in June 1982.
First it was weekends, then it was Wednesdays as well.
There was a small ‘market stall’ then there was a full-blown shop.
And so the growth continued with visitor figures rising beyond the dreams of the organisers.
Andy and Peter are both happy to admit that TMAM started in the same way as most enthusiast-driven collections — with no collecting policy at all.
The obvious one of ‘Tangmere’ started early enough and is the central pillar of policy still.
During this time TMAM acquired former Danish Air Force Hunter F.51 E-412 from the BAe cache at Dunsfold and it currently carries 43 Squadron colours.
From the USAF handout former French Armee de l'Air airframes came T-33A 19252 and from the winding-down Wessex Aviation Society Meteor F.8 hybrid WA984.
When these were taken on, there was a worry that they would lead to the familiar ‘display and decay’ syndrome (to use Andy Saunders' words) that many collections have landed themselves in.
A fascinating exhibit is Bf 109E C4E-88, a veteran of the Spanish Civil War and salvaged in Spain by Robs Lamplough and is on loan to TMAM from him.
By the mid-1980s TMAM could boast 30,000 plus visitors per annum, swollen by the now well-established Aerojumble every autumn.
(For the first time 1993 will see TMAM staging a spring ‘jumble as well.)
By now it was painfully clear that an aircraft display hall was the route for the Museum to take, if it were to secure the long term.
The Tangmere Appeal Fund was launched and the result is impressive.
So impressive, that the RAF Museum agreed to lend two prize exhibits from the Aerospace Museum at Cosford — record breaking Meteor IV (Special) EE549 and Hawker P.1067 WB188.
Both had been flown from Tangmere while undertaking their world air speed record runs in 1946 and 1953 respectively.
Both aircraft have another element in common, in the form of TMAM's President, S/L Neville Duke, DSO, DFC.
Neville and WB188 are synonymous, but Neville also flew EE549 in the weeks prior to G/C Donaldson making his run along the Sussex coast to enter the history books.
In general, TMAM seeks to collect specific items relating to the general history of Tangmere airfield and it role in the Battle of Britain in particular .
The arrival of the ‘new’ Meteor and Hunter will enable the exciting theme of high speed flight to be pursued with vigour.
Neither Andy Saunders nor Peter Dimond shy away from the fact that a broader, more general aviation history needs also to be presented, lest ‘Joe Public’ be made to feel alienated.
Meteor Special EE549 during its stay on the gate at Innsworth — it carried a suitable inscription on the nose.
With these aims in mind the airframe ‘fleet’ is being reorientated.
The ‘old’ Hunter and Meteor were auctioned at the Sotheby's sale on September 19 (FP November, p30)— but failed to sell.
They will now be refurbished and placed as pole-mounted gate guardians at the entrance to the Museum.
It is planned for these to be joined in due course by fibreglass replicas of a Hurricane and Spitfire, a la RAF gate guardians.
Neville Duke at the helm of P.1067 WB188 — the prototype of what was to be called the Hunter.
A recent coup has been the handing over of a stunning collection of memorabilia relating to Major Mick Mannock VC.
Neville Duke accepted this material on behalf of TMAM on October 16.
Plans are underway as to how best to display this treasure trove.
TMAM is now open daily from February to November and 1993 looks set to be another important year in its history.
With Neville Duke as President and former Spitfire pilot Nick Berryman as Chairman and stalwart support from the Trustees prospects are good, although there is more room for volunteers, especially those who have skills to help in aircraft restoration.
Vividly signposted from the A27 road, in between Chichester and Arundel, TMAM is open from February 1 to the end of November 10am to 5.30pm.
Contact: TMAM, Tangmere Airfield,.
Both Andy Saunders and Peter Dimond impressed the writer with the depth of vision they hold about what TMAM faces in the future and the exact definition of the path it needs to take.
They made no bones about their over-riding aim — to make TMAM the south of England's leading independent aviation museum in terms of quantity, quality and general appeal.
If the first ten years are anything to go by, they are well on the way to their target.
A view of the new aircraft hall at Tangmere with Meteor IV (Special) EE549 in the foreground and Hawker P-1067 WB188 at rear.
Hunter F.51 E-412 in the colours of 43 Squadron RAF outside the new aircraft hall.
This Hunter is destined to ‘guard’ the new entrance to the Museum.
Neville Duke's P.1067 back at the airfield from which it made its record breaking run along the Sussex coast.
Duke is President of the Tangmere Military Aviation Museum.
FlyPost
Modern-day spin- off
We at Flight Refuelling Limited were very interested in Andrew Smith's article on Centrifugal Launchers in the October issue (p46) since we have been instrumental in recent years in developing the concept to routinely launch jet aircraft.
Mr Smith is quite correct to suggest that the experience for the pilot would be uncomfortable to say the least.
However, in our application, there is no pilot.
Our Falconet target aircraft uses a centrifugal launcher as its principal method of getting airborne.
The launcher, normally referred to in the trade as a ‘carousel’, is similar to the Pivotal Tower Type in Mr Smith's illustration, in that the aircraft travels on a circular ground track around a central pylon with a rotary head.
However, in our application, the aircraft, which has no undercarriage of its own, travels on a trolley which is itself tethered to the rotating pylon head.
The aircraft is released from the trolley by a semi-automatic system (manual command, only obeyed if certain safety parameters are within limits).
Lateral acceleration at release is 6–7g.
Falconet, originally known as ASAT (Advanced Subsonic Aerial Target), was designed as a highly manoeuvrable target for surface-to-air missiles such as Rapier.
It is 12.3ft long, 10ft span with a typical launch weight of 530lbs.
The current version is powered by a Microturbo TJA 24 engine, which gives it a maximum airspeed of 400 knots.
If not shot down, it lands by parachute.
Above: Panoramic view of the Flight Refuelling Falconet centrifugal launch ‘runway’ at Larkhill.
Below: Falconet target aircraft on its launch trolley.
(Both Flight Refuelling Ltd).
Although we were unaware of the wartime centrifugal launcher proposals, we have never claimed to have invented the idea.
As far as we know, the first practical application was for the American piston-powered Shelduck target.
Some of our personnel visited a Shelduck centrifugal launch site in Holland in 1979, when we were designing the Falconet system.
We do believe, however, that Falconet is the first jet aircraft to be centrifugally launched.
The first Falconet launch took place at Larkhill on February 14, 1982.
The aircraft has been fully operational since 1987 and to date has completed more than 650 centrifugal launches with a better than 98% success rate — not such an outlandish scheme after all!
The advantage of the centrifugal launcher for a target such as Falconet, which is operated from a fixed base week-in and week-out, is economic.
Although the capital cost of the launcher is not cheap (the Falconet launch track is 19.7ft wide on a mean radius of 188.6ft), this cost id offset by the very low material cost per launch.
The alternative Falconet launch method, from a fixed stand using rocket motors (Zero-Length Launch) has the advantage of mobility but is many times more expensive per launch.
Incidentally, we believe that Falconet was the first British-designed jet aircraft to be Zero-Length Launched, at Larkhill on January 9, 1985.
One final comment.
The idea of catching aircraft in a ‘glorified tennis net’ mentioned by Mr Smith also has its application in the field of unmanned aircraft, where a number of types are routinely recovered this way.,
Greenhouse visitor
You called for information on the glasshouse penetration accident by Buccaneer XK488 at Hatfield (FP November, p70).
The official record has the event occurring on July 24, 1961, it was the result of an unblown take-off when the aircraft refused to unstick.
The barrier was entered at 115 kts and the barrier cables broke.
The aircraft ran through a hedge before contacting the greenhouses 400 yards off the end of the runway, there were no casualties.
I believe these were the same greenhouses that suffered an attack later by G P Aird AFC when he ejected from Lightning XG332 on September 13, 1963 following a double reheat fire warning.
A famous photograph of a vertical Lightning and a horizontal ejection followed.,
The pilot of the Buccaneer is question was David Lockspieser.
He was on loan from Hawker Aircraft of Dunsfold to de Havillands, Hatfield, to fly the Buccaneer on engine and also, I believe, weapons trials.
When David came back to Hawkers a week  or so later, he found on his desk a very large can of tomato juice.
Who put it there, I wonder?
I remember the incident well as I was an ATCO at Dunsfold at the time.,
(Thanks also to Stephen Reglar of Worcester who points out that XK488 made its first flight on October 3 and not the 31, 1958 and was without wing-fold capability.
David Lockspieser went on to design and fly the LDA-01 canard freighter G-AVOR in the late 1960s.
In the mid-1980s this was revamped into the LDA-500 Boxer and registered as G-UTIL.
It was destroyed in a hangar fire at Old Sarum in January 1987. —Ed .)
Slow Dak to Palestine
The article on South African Daks in your current issue (November) awakened memories for me!
After training as a navigator in SA, I travelled up to the Middle East to OTU in Palestine.
The journey was by the SAAF shuttle service.
Day 1 saw me depart from Swartkop, dropping in to Sauerdale and Ndola before spending the night at Kasama, about 8 1/4 hours flying.
Day 2 I travelled to Kasuma calling in to tabora on the way,(about 4 3/4 hours.)
Day 3 saw me calling into Juba and Malakai before stopping overnight at Khartoum (about seven hours.)
Day 4, the final day saw a stop at Wadi Halfa, then into Almaza (about six hours).
Total time for the journey was close to 26 hours, from there I travelled by train through Gaza and into Palestine, but that is another story.,
Croydon ceremony
Our October issue (p50) included a feature on the ill-fated Monospar Croydon.
This shot from Les Hunt depicts the aircraft prior to departure, at Heston.
finals
Guide the Brush
OUR COMPETITION staged in the Stars n Bars special issue of FlyPast in which a lucky reader would be able to commission aviation artist Keith Hill to produce a one-off painting of the winner's choice was hard fought by a record number of readers.
Judging the competition has taken quite some time and was no easy matter.
Apart from the unique painting, the winner will visit Keith's studio to talk through the commission and the creation of the painting will be featured in a forthcoming FlyPast.
We asked three questions:
Q What was a YB-40?
A A bomber escort version of the B-17.
Q Name a female nose-artist A Anne Josephine Hayward.
Q Which Northamptonshire airfield was used for agent drops?
A Harrington.
Then came a tie-breaker.
In no more than 25 words explain what an original Keith Hill painting would mean to the winner.
The quality of entrants was exceptional — as we have come to expect!
In the end a second prize was created (a selection of USAAF books) and awarded to Gary Lines of Chippenham, Wilts.
Gary's line was ‘To act in the memory of the men I know, did know and wished to have known.’
But the overall winner of Guide the Brush was Tom Metson of Loughborough, Leics, who said ‘An original painting would mean a boy remembering the B-17s at Ridgewell and now understanding the sacrifices being made for us all in 1942–1945’.
Our many congratulations to Tom!
Bail out .
A 353rd FG Mustang falls to the guns of an Me 262.
A Keith Hill painting.
Keith will now set to creating a painting for a FlyPast reader.
We did meet again!
OUR AUGUST issue (page 22) carried a competition entitled We'll Meet Again as the 11th Great Warbirds Air Display loomed up.
First prize was print No 850 of the limited edition run of the same name — Michael Turner's rendition of Sally B hurled back in time to fly over USAAF Station 357 — Duxford.
First name drawn from the hat of those ordering advance tickets for the show was  .
Five runners-up received copies of the 10th Great Warbirds Air Display video and were:,.
Well done one and all!
TAILPIECE
It is THAT time of year again.
Time for the famous Tailpiece competition.
The scene depicted is not for the squeamish and was caught at RAF Finningley the other day.
The Jet Provost T.5 in question had just heard that it was to be shortly replaced by the Shorts Tucano and immediately took out its angst on a passing erk .
On a postcard — no letters please — we would like your idea of what the last thoughts of the erk were — plus of course your name and address.
The incentive?
The best five entries will receive a legendary FlyPast Goodie-bag each.
Within will be found at least £100 worth of books and videos backed up with a FlyPast hat and sundry other goodies — all wrapped in the widely acclaimed FlyPast plastic carrier bag.
The latter item alone is worth all that effort!
Send to ,.
Your postcards to reach us by Saturday, December 19, 1992.
Go to it!