

HAIR FLAIR 10 FREE sets of HEATED CURLERS OVER 200 GREAT STYLES SHELF TALK What's new in Shampoo WIN A WEEKEND FOR TWO AT CEDAR FALLS HEALTH FARM!
LOOK AHEAD Hair predictions for 1992 from top stylists around the country PERM POWER How to make waves and care for your curls Fab looks for hair Mail order winter woollies Cold comfort skincare Ideas for watching weight NEW YEAR, NEW YOU!
NEW YEAR, NEW YOU
— that's the message in this month's exciting magazine!
With no less than twelve action-packed issues for '92, we will keep you one big step ahead in the hair, beauty and fashion stakes.
Take out a subscription today and we'll enter you in our fabulous free draw — there are literally hundreds of prizes to win.
Turn to page 67 for details.
HAPPY NEW YEAR TO EVERYONE FROM THE HAIRFLAIR TEAM!
What's new
HAIR
BEAUTY
FASHION
Recent research by Pure & Simple has shown that today's women prefer the no-fuss approach to skin care.
These results have led Pure & Simple to redefine, formulate and repackage their range.
The new look range consists of six products, from £2.49 to £3.99.
EYE CATCHERS
When buying a mascara, chose one that has built-in conditioners and proteins.
Look for a soft, oval-shaped mascara brush, that will allow greater control and by separating the lashes with each stroke, make them appear longer.
Before going to sleep always remove all traces of mascara with a good eye make-up remover lotion.
When eyelashes are clean, brush on a conditioner that will stimulate the growth of healthy lashes.
Try new protein-enriched Actif Mascara (£5.15) with Eye-Lite Doublelash conditioner (£4.95).
Apply false eyelashes and really catch someone's eye!
Check out the Eylure range.
The aromatherapy experts at Tisserand have created a unique hair care range.
The collection contains wonderful healing and soothing Essential Oils and has been developed to treat your scalp.
The range comprises 4 shampoos (£3.90/150ml), 2 regular conditioners (£4.90/150ml), 2 intensive conditioners,(£5.40/50ml) and Hot Oil Pre-Wash Treatment (£5.60/30ml).
Ok, so you've had a great Christmas, but if your New Year's resolution is to get back into shape then you'd better check out Kathy Smith's new Workout videos.
She has just launched Starting Out — the real beginners' workout and Fat Burning Workout — to help you burn off fat and lose weight.
Both videos are now available in the UK at £10.99 each.
International haircutter Terence Renati has teamed up with Japanese craftsmen to create the Terence Renati Scissor.
Terence believes that every hairdresser should have two pairs of scissors, if they are  truly professional, and is offering a free pair to each of the first five orders received from Hairflair readers.
To order and qualify for your fabulous free pair of Terence Renati Scissors, send a cheque for £115 (inc p&p) to Terence Renati Limited,.
Get scissor happy today!
FRIENDLY ANIMAL ZONE
Animal lovers and greenies everywhere will be pleased to know that the Animal Defenders Shop catalogue has just made its first appearance.
For your free copy send a SAE to the Ad Shop,.
Your favourite Wella Shockwaves Gel-Sprays and Hairsprays are now in handy pump action bottles with a new advanced spray mechanism.
They cost around £1.99 for 125ml from chemists everywhere.
Our eyes and the area around them are the most expressive and sensitive part of our face and during the winter months need more protection than ever.
Synergie have introduced two new products.
Bio-Contour Eye Gel is a liquid crystal formulation with extract of pineapple and papaya to help reduce puffiness, lines and dark circles at £5.99/15ml.
Synergie Ultra-Gentle Eye Make-up Remover with extract of rose, is a light oil-free lotion with soothing properties, £2,99/200ml.
Look out for two great new styling products from Sebastian, the range favoured by professionals nationwide.
Liquid Shaper (£5.95/8oz) is a new shaping spray, ideal on wet hair for a sculptured look or on damp hair before blow-drying for a style with volume.
Their revolutionary new Moulding Mud (£9.99/4oz) is designed to allow you to create a variety of looks.
It has superb holding and shaping abilities and because it actually bonds your hair, it will enhance the natural movement, waves and curl.
Both products are available from Sebastian appointed salons or by mail order.
For your nearest stockist, call .
Danni and Kylie swear by them, they are the latest in hair accessories, they are called Flexi Combs and they are available from Boots at a mere 95p!
Now you know what they are, the next question is, what do you do with them?
1
To use it like an Alice band (the Danni and Kylie way), wrap your Flexi Comb around your head and as you push it back it raises the hair in front of it.
Simply lock the teeth together to secure.
2
To secure your ponytail just wrap the Flexi Comb twice around it.
3
To create a Chignon, tie your hair back with a band and put the Flexi Comb around the ponytail.
Taking small sections of hair at a time, pull your hair over the Flexi Comb and tuck under the edge.
Use pins to secure it if you need to.
making waves
If you think a perm means a head full of frizz, think again.
The newest, softest perms add body, waves or bouncy curls.
There's a perm to suit all hair types — transform lank, fine hair into thick manageable locks or long straight hair into a mass of tumbling curls.
How do perms work?
Perm lotion breaks down the natural structure of your hair, then a neutraliser resets it into a new shape around a curler.
It sounds drastic but today, perms are gentler on your hair than ever before.
Root Perms
For body and lift on short to medium length hair, go for a root perm.
This doesn't give curls but leaves you hair thicker and easier to style.
It's also an ideal way to re-perm your roots as your curls grow out.
Clynol Stylewave Gel (for your nearest salon 'phone ) lasts up to six weeks and also allows you or your hairdresser to tame difficult-to-style sections of your hair.
Weave Perms
If you want natural looking waves, a weave perm is perfect for you.
Your hairdresser takes sections of your hair — some are wound around thin rods and thick rods while others are left untreated.
Once your hair is loose, it gives a stunning tousled effect.
It's suitable for all hair types and lengths but because it's gentle, the waves will drop more quickly on longer hair.
Spiral Perms
The curliest of all perms is a spiral or corkscrew perm.
Hair is divided into sections and wound around rods.
It works best on long, straight hair but if it's very thick it'll probably take your hairdresser an afternoon to do the winding.
A spiral perm can cost over £100 but don't be tempted to try it at home to save money.
It's very difficult to get even curls and judging the development time is tricky.
Perms for highlighted and coloured hair
Perming highlighted or coloured hair used to be a definite no-no but it's now possible to have colour and curls.
Clynol pH 6.8 Acid Wave (for your nearest salon 'phone ) is mild and has a slow development time so you get perfect curls every time.
Garnier Permifique for colour treated hair £3.99 has a built-in self timing action which means once your hair's curled the process stops, so there's no chance of wrecking your hair.
Home Perms
If you want to experiment at home, it'll cost you far less than in a salon but you should get a friend to help put the rollers in to get perfectly even curls.
Choose a gentle formula perm with added conditioners like Poly Style Deep Care Perm, £3.79 — it's easy to use and comes in two variants — or Fashion Style home perm, £2.69, which is available in three variants.
Home perming kits don't contain curlers because the size of the curl is up to you.
Curlers in all different shapes and sizes are available in Boots — just remember the smaller the roller the tighter the curl.
Follow all the instructions and pay special attention to the recommended development time.
These days you can find home perms with added conditioners to maintain healthy hair
Poly's Foam Perm is available in two variants — one for body and wave and one for curls.
Environmentally Friendly Perms
A new idea from Wella is Novena, an environmentally friendly perm containing natural ingredients like rosemary, sage and wild birch to protect your hair during the perming process.
All packaging is recyclable, the ingredients are bio-degradable and haven't been tested on animals.
Another bonus is that it leaves your hair smelling of mint rather than yukky ammonia!
Novena is available at all Wella appointed salons.
Phone  for details.
Styling Your Perm
Permed hair is thicker and easier to style than untreated hair and you won't have to worry about frizz if you handle it with care and use the right products.
After washing, squeeze water out with a towel and leave to dry naturally for about 15 minutes.
This saves on unnecessary drying which can damage your hair.
Use a diffuser — the greatest frizz-beating invention ever — to dry your hair gently and evenly.
For volume, simply dry your hair upside down and grab handfuls at the roots, scrunching as you dry.
Spray with Paul Mitchell Freeze and Shine, £5.70 or Schwarzkopf Corimist Shine Tonic, £1.65 to make your curls glossy.
For a more defined curl, just rub L'Oréal Studio Line Gelling Curls, £2.55 through your hair.
The Bain de Terre Spa Perming system includes a comprehensive range of style products.
Phone  for stockists.
How to care for curls
Use a specially formulated shampoo for permed hair.
These keep the curls tight and the cuticle sealed.
Try L'Oréal Energance or Salon Selectives Revitalising Shampoo and Protective Conditioner.
Don't wash your hair for 48 hours after your perm.
The curls are still forming and washing makes them drop.
Never skip your conditioning routine and use an intensive remoisturiser once a week.
We like Finesse Intensive Conditioner, £2.19
Don't brush your curls — this causes frizz, just use your fingers or a wide-toothed Afro comb for styling.
If you hair looks dull and uneven, brighten the colour with a semi permanent rinse close to your natural shade.
Don't over-do it with styling products — the alcohol in them can make your hair dry and if allowed to  build up , make it look dull.
Head Turner
Like many of us, leading TV and Radio personality, Anthea Turner has fine hair and finds styling a nightmare.
Leading London hairdresser, Nicky Clarke, understands the problem.
‘In my experience, most women like to feel that they have thick, glossy, manageable hair.
In reality, this means that many need a little extra help from a soft permanent wave to give style support and volume’ says Nicky.
To do just that, he used Wella's Optaform perm on Anthea.
Its gentle formulation is ideal for fine hair and, as you can see, the results were stunning!
The Nicky Clarke Salon is at .
In my experience, most women like to feel that they have thick, glossy, manageable hair.
That may mean they need a little help from a perm says Nicky Clarke
Nicky directionally wound hair and used larger rollers at the front and top
To achieve extra softness around the face, a selection of rollers and flat pin-curls were used
At the crown, small rollers were used at the roots for smaller curls and larger ones towards the ends for more body
BEAUTY SPECIAL
saving face
Bite back at the big freeze this season with our winter skincare tips.
Wash your face at least half an hour before you go outdoors.
Cold air or icy blasts may cause chapping.
Drink lots of water throughout the day to replace lost fluids and flush out toxins.
If you work in a stuffy office, place bowls of water near the radiators or invest in a humidifier to keep the air moist and prevent your skin from dehydrating.
Don't sleep in an overheated room as this can cause fluid retention in your face and bags under the eyes.
Never come in from the cold and toast by a hot fire.
The rapid change in temperature can lead to chilblains and dry skin.
For your hands body and lips, the Neutrogena Norwegian Formula Range has three superb, high-performance moisturisers.
Look out for Neutrogena Norwegian Formula Hand Cream (£2.71/50g), Neutrogena Emulsion Body Moisturiser (£6.08/200ml) and Neutrogena Lip Care (£1.99/3g).
Protect your skin day and night with the comprehensive Skin Kindly range from Boots.
Its new easy-to-follow, colour coded packaging enables you to find products for your specific skin type — choose from Normal/Combination.
Dry and All Skin Types.
Rich Conditioning Cream (£2.15/85ml) will ensure maximum protection for dry skin, even on the coldest days.
If you suffer from dry skin conditions the E45 range of products will provide excellent, effective skin care.
Cream E45 starts at £1.50 and Wash E45 at £3.15.
Winter skin savers come by way of the RoC hypoallergenic skin care products for very dry skins and also a range for oily problem skins.
For a real winter treat, go along to the RoC counter in any Boots store for a complimentary make-up consultation or complimentary facial consultation.
STYLE COLLECTION
CURL GUIDE
STRAIGHT TALKIN'
HIGH & MIGHTY
CUT SHORT
MEN ONLY
Treat your hair the Wella Balsam way for ultimate shine and condition.
Simply select a shampoo and conditioner to suit your hair type and choose one of the six intensive conditioners as an occasional treat!
Available from salons nationwide.
NEW SHAPES •NEW COLOURS •NEW CUTS
HIGH & MIGHTY
Beautifully conditioned hair is the secret to high glamour styles.
Cream Silk was applied after shampooing and the hair was set to stun.
Roll up…large curls piled on top of the head by Mac & Co for high impact styling
Soft chignon wound at the crown for casual chic, styled with Redken products
Efficient styles for the modern girl are pretty and feminine.
This artistic design by Taylor Ferguson 
Amass of red hair is pinned up and left to fall in wayward waves high on the head.
Colour by Redken 
Stunning top knot, wrapped with a velvet band, and softened with a soft fringe by Sean Hanna 
Klownz went over the top with this style!
Large curls stacked high on the crown for maximum effect
Sweetly sophisticated small top knot sits forward from the crown.
Styling by RJ's 
Edwardian inspired style from Clipso for Schwarzkopf, rolled sideways over the crown.
Curl crazy style from Mac & Co with the hair pinned up in a small coils from the crown to the fringe
CURL GUIDE
A romantic mass of curls piled on the head for volume by the Terence Renati team
Unruly waves dressed for high definition by Anthony Licata at Mahogany U.K.
Sculptured curls for thirties glamour, nineties style created by Nicholas French 
Short flossy curls, finger waved from a side parting by the J Lajeunesse salon
Sixties inspired rollered hair for soft volume and shape.
Created by Zotos International 
Collections Hair Club make waves with this beautiful halo of colourful curls
Jazzy wave styled for height by Anthony Skito provided a soft frame to the face
Cute twenties curls dressed for a high gloss effect from NEO Hair Design , Manchester
Soft and glamorous waves created by using a Clairol Flexi Brush heated appliance
Long hair gets the soft treatment from the Wella System Professional range.
Highly polished waves a la forties filmstar.
SHORT CUTS
Forward sweeping style, closely cropped around the ears accentuates pretty features.
By The John Gillespie salon.
This short cut is achieved with long layers and is ideal for thick hair.
By Raffles 
This tousled style accentuates beautiful condition.
By John Peers for Schwarzkopf
Sleek, sculptured shape looks dramatic on blonde locks.
Hair by Rudi Kartal 
Hair has been straightened then graduated and layered.
By Splinters of Mayfair 
Heavily layered and texturised, this cut is suitable for fine or thick hair.
By Stage Door 
Soft, gamine look, perfect for a small face and features.
By Johnson & Murray , Coventry
An asymmetric cut, coloured with Schwarzkopf Igora Botanic .
By John Peers Hair Studio 
After removing 50% of the natural curl, hair was cut short and layered.
By Splinters of Mayfair 
Ring the changes with a short cut by creating volume and height at the crown
SHORT CUTS
Soft, layers styling on short hair with height at the crown.
By Nicky Oliver at Oliver:San 
Rich, vibrant colour achieved with L'Oréal's Dia Colour , shades of red.
By Quentin Crooks , Oldham
You'll never be too hot to rock with this fab style from Richard Thompson at Mahogany UK!
Razor cut style, coloured with Wella's Koleston 2000 Colorado Gold .
By Scissors Hair Group .
Sultry style by Chris Pearson at Pineapple in Guernsey, using Tigi professional styling products
Forward sweeping style by Scissors in Bournemouth.
Coloured with Wella Blonde and Colorado Gold 
Delicate highlights enhance and enliven short, textured layers.
Hair by La Moda 
High drama achieved by Nicholas French on ultra short hair.
Styling wax adds definition
Beautiful, sexy style created on well-conditioned hair.
By Michelle Flower at Level in Bournemouth
To create movement and volume, Paul Falltrick of Falltricks used Clynol's Salon Formula Forming Mousse .
STRAIGHT TALKIN'
Long straight hair has timeless appeal.
A fringe softens the look.
Hair by Schumi 
Nineties city urchin with long fringe brushed straight from the crown by Gianpiero at Toni & Guy 
A jaw length bob flatters a square shaped face.
Softly styled by John Peers for Schwarzkopf 
The classic bob gets the sixties treatment with a centre parting from Scissors of Cheshire
Straight hair is feather cut and brushed forward to softly frame the face.
By Stage Door 
Long blonde hair never loses its cachet.
Schumi styled this bombshell beautifully!
Asymmetric cheek-length bob, layered for fullness by Terence Renati
A stunning short cut brushed smoothly across the face and high on the crown.
By Terence Renati 
Scissors of Cheshire have glamour wrapped up with this unusual bandeau style fringe
A striking boyish frame achieved by smoothing hair down to follow the shape of the head.
Picture by Miss Selfridge 
Long hair has been divided and one half loosely swept up in curls.
Texture and shine has been achieved with an application of styling spray before styling and wax after styling.
Hair by David Roles at Neo Hair Design in Manchester.
Maximise the condition of permed hair with Flex Body Building Shampoo and Conditioner for Permed Hair.
Add the finishing touches to a style with their Perm Control Styling Mousse — its special protein complex extends the life of a perm by moisturising each hair.
Liven hair with wash in, wash-out-colour.
It will enhance condition, too, adding shine and making hair more manageable.
We used the Shaders & Toners range which cost just 59p per sachet.
Hair has been set on rollers to achieve loose curls.
Paul Falltrick at Falltricks used Salon Formula Volume Builder and Forming Mousse, both by Clynol, to shape the curls into this beautifully elegant style.
GLAMOUR
A touch of interesting Spanish glamour from the Carlos Galico team in Madrid
Huge, soft waves, rolled to perfection.
Achieved with products from the Wella range
The team at John Peers have used the versatile Schwarzkopf range on this style
A square bob, blow-dried for maximum shine.
By John Peers , using Schwarzkopf colour
Tina Rice at Marc Young Associates has created this ultra feminine style for evening
More innovative styling for long hair from Carlos Galico in Madrid, Spain
Hair by Bruce Hunter using Clynol's Sculpting Wax and Fixing Spray from the Salon Formula range
Beautifully sculptured curls created by the Level styling team in Bournemouth
Soft and elegant, this style is ideal for day or evening wear.
By Tina at Marc Young 
Maximum root lift and volume achieved on long, straight hair.
By Bruce Hunter using the Clynol Salon Formula range
MEN ONLY
Men get a free hand in styling for the New Year.
From rugged charm to seriously sleek from classic cuts to a new wave of nineties fashion….
A  suave and sophisticated style reminiscent of matinee idols if the thirties.
Hair by Scissors 
Boyish cuts retain their charm.
Hair is cut to the ears and the fringe finger ruffled.
Styled by Scissors 
Gel maintains its strong hold on styling as one of the essential hair products for men.
Hair by Burlingtons .
Donna Willoughby at Mahogany gives a long fringe a new masculine twist for '92
Short, corkscrew curls tumble in ‘fall about chic’ styling by Katjia Forner at Partners 
A gentle skin head by Ian Duncan at Partners!
The traditional crop is softened with a short fringe
For the man in control, hair is swept back in strong waves.
Styled by Avant Garde , Canada
Corkscrews get sculptured by Desmond Murray using Paul Mitchell systems styling products
The hair was brushed forward over the crown and textured in the fringe by Scissors 
Rebel crew cut with sideburns and fringe falling over the face.
By Taylor Ferguson , Glasgow
Rugged features softened with short wavy hair.
From the Gus Autumn/Winter collection
Carefree styling from Burlingtons .
Long fringe ruffled with gel for a tousled effect
Short cut with movement created by Katjia Forner at the Partners Hair Salon 
Hair cut short over the ear, with length in the fringe for thrown back effect.
By Wm Mackenzie 
Red alert from Ralph Kleeli .
Sharp colour and defined curls create dramatic impact
For a classic fifties look short hair is combed back from the face.
Hair by Jerry at Vidal Sassoon 
Inspired by Mods of the sixties, hair by Alison White & Ronnie Marshall at Dom Migele 
Q&A
This month, we asked Hairdresser of the Year, Trevor Sorbie, to answer your hair problems
Q I have layered, shoulder-length permed hair and it has taken me some time to grow it to this length.
I am always told they you should have a trim every 4–6 weeks to get rid of all the split ends but it seems difficult to grow my hair when it's constantly being cut.
A I would suggest you have your hair regularly trimmed to the length it is now until the layers grow down successfully without splitting, then you have a chance of growing your hair longer.
Try my Sorbie Cleane Shampoo for chemically treated hair and moisturise every few days with Sorbie Deep Conditioner.
Q Can you offer any advice on hair modelling?
I have always wanted to do this as I love my hair and can do a lot with it.
I have also been told I am photogenic and I love anything to do with hair and make-up.
A My advice would be to telephone around your local salons to ask if they are looking for suitable ‘house models’.
Large hairdressing groups usually produce their own hair pictures for publicity and in most cases are always looking for new faces with good hair.
Good luck!
Q My problem is that I've got very bad split ends but if I keep having my hair cut it won't grow.
My hair is only just  past  my shoulder and I'd love to have it down to my waist.
Can you offer any advice?
I am sorry to inform you that hair that splits excessively probably won't grow much longer.
Unfortunately, all the conditioning in the world won't alter the chemical make-up in your body.
An alternative would be to try hair extensions.
Call your local leading salon for advice and a consultation.
If you have difficulty, for stockists.
This process can work out expensive but you can achieve the look of long hair instantly!
In February, my sister is getting married and I would like a totally new style.
I've had the same look for the last 7–8 years and during that time I've put on some weight.
My face is round and a bit chubby and I want someone to tell me which styles would suit me.
Any ideas?
I see from your photograph, you have very nice eyes and interesting features which should be seen.
Keep your hair off your face, and avoid ‘flat’ styles.
Use styling products that are designed to add volume and try experimenting with heated rollers to add body and waves.
Help!
Can you recommend a strong holding, affordable styling mousse that gives control and body to difficult hair but that has been allergy tested.
I've tried loads of different mousses but most of them irritate my skin.
I don't like to recommend a product to someone with sensitive skin, but would suggest that before you apply any hair product to your hair, you try a simple skin test first.
Apply a small amount of the product the size of a one pence behind the ear and leave for 24 hours.
If the skin turns red or starts to irritate, don't use the product.
Even if you don't receive the warning signs, apply the product only to your hair, avoiding the scalp as much as you can.
I have read your magazine many times and always find it highly enjoyable and informative.
However, I can only look at most of the styles you feature with envy as I have been very silly and think I may have damaged  my hair forever.
Ever since I was a teenager, I have had the bad habit of pulling and twisting my hair.
I haven't been too bad over the past few years but I've certainly been left with the legacy of my habit.
The problem is mostly on my right side as I am right handed.
My hair falls out at the slightest touch, sometimes leaving little bald patches.
There are split ends on the split ends and worst of all, it doesn't seem to grow in some places any more.
It sounds to me as though your problem is medical rather than cosmetic and I would strongly recommend that you seek the advice of your G.P. There may be a simple remedy such as a special diet and vitamin supplements or perhaps he'll refer you to a hair specialist.
My hair is really getting me down.
It's about 1½ ″ below my shoulders and I am trying to grow it so that I can have a style that's cut straight across the bottom.
I have fallen in love with the classic straight/shiny/side-parted style.
When I went to my hairdresser (Wayne at Public Hair in Nottingham) he put a spiral perm in it.
He did an excellent job but I don't want curly hair anymore.
I'd like to try it straight to see how it looks and I've heard there is a shampoo that temporarily smooths out the perm.
What do you think?
To achieve a severe, straight style, I'm afraid all you can do is grow out your perm.
Don't be tempted to use a straightener or perm relaxer as they won't help the condition of your hair.
Be patient and use intensive conditioners to keep hair healthy.
HAIR HELPLINE:
If you've got a problem with your hair and you'd like an answer from an expert, write to us at Hair Helpline,.
HAIRFLAIR COMPETITION
look good, feel great!
Reduce your stress levels and get yourself in tip-top condition in this month's fabulous competition!
At the foot of the Quantock Hills in rural Somerset is one of the most luxurious health farms in the country.
Set in 44 acres of breathtaking countryside, Cedar Falls is the ideal place to unwind.
Listed for its architectural and historical interest, the Mansion House dates back to the 1700's and inside you'll find superb carved ceilings, oak panelled rooms and large open fires.
But it's not just nostalgia you'll experience here.
Features like heated swimming pools, indoors and out, whirlpool bath, hair salon and beauty clinics bring Cedar Falls right into the 90's.
Highly trained staff are on hand to pander to your every whim — whether it's at an exercise class, on a massage table or in the restaurant.
The emphasis at Cedar Falls is on stress management and you'll have the chance to learn specific relaxation techniques.
After a stay at Cedar Falls, you'll feel totally relaxed and invigorated and ready for anything!
A healthy body should be complemented with healthy hair which is why the fully equipped hair salon at Cedar Falls use Wella products on their clients.
Their brand new Lifetex range has been formulated with one thing in mind — naturally beautiful hair.
There are five gentle shampoos and six nourishing conditioners which leave your hair soft, manageable and in peak condition.
The Lifetex range is available from professional salons nationwide.
FIRST PRIZE
As our winner, you and a friend will spend a relaxing weekend at Cedar Falls.
You'll stay in an en suite bedroom equipped with colour television and telephone and all your meals will be included.
During your stay, you'll each have three complementary treatments per day.
3 HOW TO ENTER
Simply answer our three questions and send your completed coupon to: Cedar Falls Competition .
Closing date for entries is Friday 10th January 1992.
RUNNERS-UP
25 runners-up will each receive a set of Lifetex products from hair experts Wella.
Tick the appropriate box on the coupon and, if you're one of the lucky 25, we'll send you a set of Wella Lifetex formulations for your specific hair type and condition.
1.
In which county is Cedar Falls?
2.
In which century was the Mansion House built?
3.
How many shampoos are there is the Wella Lifetex range?
RULES:
1.
This competition is open to all readers in the UK
2.
No responsibility can be taken for entries lost, delayed or damaged in the post or otherwise.
3.
The employees of Hairflair and the companies sponsoring the competition are not eligible to enter.
4.
Winners will be the first correct entries drawn from the bag on 10th January 1992.
double take
Our regular look at ways to give your hair a new twist and express a different side of your personality.
See in the New Year with a versatile style that's twice as nice!
Hair swept into a chic chignon from just behind the fringe is let loose and combed close to the head.
Sophisticated, ‘Monroe’ style bob is curled for extra volume and glamour.
Soft, wavy hair looks beautifully in control.
For extra style it is swept up into a French Pleat.
The  Professional Designer was used to create both stunning styles.
Short hair stands out when gelled at the roots.
For softness, sweep the hair forward.
Sleek city style is waved and brushed back into a soft full shape for casual dressing.
Textured bob-length hair with full fringe is smoothed out into a chic wrap as an alternative.
Long hair swept up into a high chignon for classic glamour displays a rebellious streak!.
A mass of curls are controlled by sweeping hair back and pinning at the crown.
celebrity interview
SONIA
We met up with Sonia and she's looking great but then is it any wonder?
Be Young, Be Foolish But Be Happy was a smash, her great new single, You To Me Are Everything is bounding up the charts and her new album, Sonia looks set to do the same.
NAME:SONIA EVANS
AGE:20
WHO'S YOUR FAVOURITE HAIRDRESSER?:
A guy called Lino who works at a salon called  in 
WHAT HAIR PRODUCTS DO YOU USE?:
I use a lot of Lamaur products, they're only available from hairdressers.
I like their Nucleic A Proteplex Shampoo and Conditioner with Pure N.R.G.  Reconstructer .
I also like L'Oréal products.
WHO DO YOU THINK HAS GOT GOOD HAIR?:
Jane Seymour's got nice hair — so has the guy from ‘Who's the boss’— he's got lovely thick black hair.
WHAT DO YOU THINK OF THE CURRENT HAIR FASHIONS?:
I think a lot of them are just fads really.
I don't like the George Michael cut that Luke and Gazza have.
I think people should stick with what suits them, even if they've had the same thing for years.
If it looks and feels good they shouldn't drastically change their hair just because everyone else has.
WHAT IS THE MOST DISASTROUS THING YOU'VE EVER HAD DONE TO YOUR HAIR?:
I had really long hair once, it was way past my bum and when I got my first record deal they wanted me to have it all cut off — it was a total disaster.
It was easy to manage, but it felt like I'd lost a limb!
IS YOUR STYLE INFLUENCED BY ANYONE?:
I have a definite idea of how I want to look.
My make-up artist and stylist are very good so I usually listen to them unless it is something that I really don't like.
IF YOU WERE MAROONED ON A DESERT ISLAND WHICH MAKE-UP AND HAIR ITEM WOULD YOU BE LOST WITHOUT?:
I'd have to have my lipstick and my mascara and of course a brush for my hair!
DO YOU LIKE TO BUY EXPENSIVE HAIR AND COSMETIC ITEMS OR DO YOU THINK THAT CHEAPIES ARE JUST AS GOOD?:
Sometimes the cheapies are the best.
I find cheap mascaras good, I like the more expensive foundations, creams and powders though.
I often use Clinique.
ARE YOU HAPPY WITH THE WAY YOUR HAIR LOOKS AT THE MOMENT?:
Yes, it feels really natural.
I have the ends trimmed regularly and keep it in good condition.
IF THERE WAS ANYTHING YOU COULD CHANGE ABOUT YOUR LOOKS WHAT WOULD IT BE?:
I'd just like to be taller really.
HOW FAR WOULD YOU GO IN THE NAME OF FAME — WOULD YOU HAVE YOUR HAIR SHAVED OFF FOR A FILM OR VIDEO?:
If it was for a film and it was a good part, then yes I would.
You can always grow it back and there are some great wigs around at the moment.
HOW DO YOU KEEP YOURSELF FIT?:
I walk a lot — I like to have a good hour's walk each day if I can.
I do aerobics and basically just run around a lot!
YOU HAVE FAIR SKIN TONES, DO YOU HAVE A SPECIAL BEAUTY ROUTINE?:
No, not really.
Every night I take off my make-up with baby lotion then I tone it and put moisturizer on.
I make sure that I really condition my hair and that's about it.
WHERE DO YOU SEE YOURSELF IN FIVE YEARS' TIME?:
Hopefully still in the music business, or in films maybe.
I'd really like to take my singing on further.
HOW DID YOU GET YOUR BIG BREAK?:
I met Pete Waterman first, he was doing a live radio show at a club in Liverpool.
I just barged up to him a few times during the evening and in the end he said, ‘Alright then, let's hear you sing’ and he was impressed.
It's just gone on from there really!
NEXT MONTH: BELINDA CARLISLE
shampoo!
Some of us do it  every day , others just once a week.
Some like to take their time with an invigorating massage while others opt for a quick once over in the shower.
What are we talking about?
Shampoo of course!
Hairflair takes a look at some of the very latest products that can turn hair washing into a stimulating experience!
If you are a ‘two in one’ shampoo fan then look out for new Wella Balsam Wash & Care Plus — they've gone one better with the creation of their new ‘three in one’product!
It will cleanse, condition and also strengthen your hair.
Available in three variants — for dry hair, permed hair and for frequent use, new Wella Balsam Wash & Care Plus costs around £1.85 for a 200ml flip top bottle.
Haar Sana is a natural scalp treatment system.
The formula originates from a traditional Swiss recipe made from the extracts of 27 Alpine herbs.
The range will deal effectively with numerous scalp problems including dandruff, scalp irritation and hair loss and is now available in the UK from all good health stores.
For more details of this therapeutic range plus your chance to get your hands on a free sample, turn to page 54!
We have £200 worth of Haar Sana goodies to give away to readers!
Body Health has launched a new Natural Extract range, made with naturally derived washing and moisturising agents that encourage the hair to retain its own productive oils.
Within the Natural Extract range are four  variants of Shampoos, two Conditioners and a Protein Cream Rinse from around £2–£3.
With nature in mind, Inecto Botanicals have launched an affordable range of shampoos and conditioners.
There are no animal derived ingredients in any of the products which make them ideal for vegetarians and all formulations meet with  BAUV standards.
The Botanicals range comes in 250ml recyclable bottles in Peachnut, Avocado and Lemon Mint for only 99p.
As coloured or highlighted hair often needs special treatment to help prevent colour from fading, Wella have developed professional formula Lifetex Colorplus Shampoo, £3.35 for 250ml and conditioning Colorplus Balsam, £3.69 for 150ml.
Available at all Wella approved salons nationwide.
A poor diet, emotional stress, illness and chemical damage can all lead to dull, lifeless hair and in some cases even hair loss.
Specifically for this, St Ives Laboratories have introduced Swiss Formula Hair Thickening Shampoo at £2.95 for 200ml.
 It's a first aid treatment which thickens and fortifies damaged and thinning hair to its former glory.
A new family shampoo comes by way of Cuticura Medicated Shampoo, with an original coal tar formula that helps prevent dandruff.
Cuticura has a refreshing herbal fragrance, is mild enough for every day use and costs £1.99 for 400ml.
Lamaur introduce their latest product, Apple Pectin Plus Shampoo/Conditioning System in One.
A professional product that is available from Lamaur appointed salons at around £8.15 for 1 litre.
The formula does not contain silicone so it won't create build-up on the hair which can sometimes affect the result of chemical treatments carried out in the salons.
Tesco has launched Body Blitz, a new range of toiletries specially designed for teenagers.
Within the range you will find Apple and Melon Shampoo and Banana and Vitamin E Conditioner.
Crammed full of delicious ingredients, the shampoos and conditioners are reasonably priced at 99p for 150ml.
After extensive research into the needs of women with permed and coloured hair, Biopoint have formulated an Advanced Professional Treatment.
It is a general treatment programme for stressed hair and consists of Revitalising Shampoo (£2.75/200ml), Revitalising Extract (£5.95/15ml phials) and Repair Fluid (£4.95/30ml).
If you're into Aromatherapy then Tisserand Aromatherapy is for you.
Their range consists of four shampoos (£3.90/150ml), a regular conditioner (£4.90/150ml), intensive conditioner (£5.40/50ml) and pre-wash treatment (£5.60/30ml).
All the products in the range contain pure, Essential Oils and their cleansing and soothing properties are designed to treat the scalp as well as the hair.
HAIR PREDICTIONS — WHAT'S NEW FOR YOU IN '92
Will 1992 hair fashion set style history?
How will the woman of 1992 look?
We spoke to leading hairdressers up and down the country to find out just what they've got in store for you this year.
Set the scene with a set — that's the message for '92.
Expect to see lots of rollers being used to create this year's styles.
Sets, barrel curls and pin curling will be out in force to create the fabulous tumbling locks, reminiscent of Hollywood film stars.
Perms make a come-back, with the introduction of new rods, rollers and perming techniques, creating body and volume rather than masses of ultra-tight curls.
Long hair will be dressed perfectly in soft chignons, french rolls and gentle loops.
The key word here is femininity.
When down, long hair will be chunky and shiny — shaggy is definitely out.
For short and mid-length hair — anything goes —versatility is the name of the game.
Thick cuts with lots of soft movement and colour that can be transformed to achieve different looks.
Wigs, hair pieces and extensions will continue to play a big part in the way hair looks in '92.
Colour is in — warm, earthy colours, blended together to enhance the cut will be very popular.
Remember…whichever style you go for, your hair has got to be in beautiful condition.
Glossy, healthy  looking hair is a must this year.
CONDITION, COLOURS, CURLS — BUZZ WORDS FOR '92!
WHAT THE EXPERTS SAY:
‘In 1992, there will be a strong return to soft curly looks and wispy feminine styles so condition is all important.’
‘An essential basis for all hair in 1992 will be an awareness of condition and texture.
The hair must exude shine and healthiness.’
‘The clever adaptation of classical elegance and the return of the set will play a major part in the 1992 glamour look.’
‘Long hair will be dressed, with soft chignons into the nape as well as on top.
Gentle femininity, all the way.’
‘There will be a move towards unstructured, more natural-looking perms which ENHANCE the haircut rather than CREATE the hairstyle.
This goes for all hair lengths.’
‘1992 will see the return of a strong look, once created by the Punk movement.’
‘Hair will be nothing like in the past — the look will be new and very much to set history.
In the year 2025, people will be asking for the look of 1992!.’
‘Cuts are less rigid in '92.
Women will want a cut that they can cope with, a cut they can dress and re-style easily.’
‘Short hair is slightly longer for '92 with fuller, softer styles being preferred.
Dressing hair will be very important.’
‘Colours will blend together, complementing the cut, giving warmth, body and movement.’
‘1992 will be an inventive year when it comes to cuts, colours and perms.
Warmth and condition are important.’
‘There will be a very strong look this year.
The word for 1992 will be adaptability — being able to change your hair cut into several different styles.’
THE ESSENTIAL GUIDE TO healthy eating
Tucked into too much turkey?
Feeling flabby after all that festive food?
Don't despair!
Follow our practical healthy eating guide and New Year diet resolutions and you'll lose those extra pounds easily — not your will power.
DIET DO'S AND DON'TS
Every few months — and particularly after the festive season — many new ‘miracle’ low calorie or faddy diet plans are launched, but most experts agree that they won't really help you lose weight and keep it off.
Although you may drop a dress size or see the scales tipping in your favour after only a week or two, all too often the results are short-lived.
If you've had no success in slimming, remember that many diets are just too boring, set unrealistic targets and don't promise long-term weight loss.
What happens is that when you follow a strict diet, your body will adjust itself to the sudden reduction in the amount of calories you eat by simply slowing down your metabolism.
As a result, those calories are burned less efficiently, so once you start eating normally again, the pounds can pile back on.
Also, when you deprive your body of food, it prefers to derive the energy it needs from your muscle tissue as well as your fat stores — therefore any weight loss can be put down to loss of lean muscle, not just flab!
GETTING THE BALANCE RIGHT
The good news is that there is a simple and enjoyable way of getting in trim and keeping your weight within its ideal range without resorting to munching lettuce and drinking carrot juice all the time.
The secret is to follow what's called a balanced diet.
This doesn't mean you can have chips for dinner one day and a salad the next, but you should see it as more of a healthy eating approach — starting now!
By opting for the positive foods over the negative ones, you'll also be well on your way to keeping your calories  in check without really trying.
As an extra bonus, a balanced diet will ensure that you get all the vital nutrients, vitamins and minerals you need for glowing good looks.
So follow these New Year resolutions when buying and preparing your food:
Divide up your day's energy intake properly
Nutritionists recommend that about 30 per cent of your daily intake of calories should come from fat, of which not more than a third of those should be saturated (animal) fat; 11 per cent from protein and the rest from carbohydrates.
You also need about 25g/1oz each of sugar and fibre.
Say no to meat and two veg
This typically British feast is okay a couple of times a week, but use your imagination when planning main meals.
You can get all the nutrients you need from other dietary sources: treat yourself to pasta, wholewheat spaghetti, brown noodles, rice, couscous or a filled jacket potato.
Avoid too much red meat
It has a very high fat content, so eat more white meat and fish and take the skin off poultry.
Also, cut down on hamburgers, sausages, ham and hot dogs.
However, serve liver once a week as it's a good source of iron.
To boost your protein intake, choose lentils, beans and pulses, which are all low in fat too.
Eat at regular intervals
Your metabolism needs a kick-start in the morning, so always eat a healthy breakfast.
Cereal, yoghurt, fresh fruit and wholemeal toast will give you lots of get up and go.
Brown-bag a healthy lunch to school or work as well, rather than relying on fast foods.
Also, try Boots' range of healthy sandwiches, low-fat crisps etc.
Nutritionists believe that the metabolism reaches its peak at 12 noon, so try to eat the majority of your food before mid-afternoon.
Keep your main meal light and healthy, and try not to eat it late at night.
Balance acids and alkalis
Research has shown that the average Western diet contains up to eighty per cent of acid-forming foods, like meat, bread, eggs, and hard cheese.
Ideally, you should eat that percentage of alkaline foods instead.
Too much acid can cause digestive upsets, whereas an alkaline diet can help to decrease cravings for baddies, such as sugar, alcohol and ciggies.
Fruit, nuts, vegetables and seeds are good sources.
Eat more fresh fruit, vegetables and salads
Apart from being delicious and low in calories, fruit, veg and ‘greens’ are packed with vital vitamins and minerals.
They add bulk to your diet and make healthy between-meal nibbles.
Instead of piling up your plate with meat, eat more vegetables and salads.
Be careful how you cook
Trim excess fat from meat before cooking; grill, poach and steam food rather than frying it in fat.
Don't overcook your food as this can lower the vitamin and mineral content.
The water-soluble vitamins, B and C are particularly at risk and levels can fall even further if food is kept hot.
Save any vegetable water and use it to whip up a healthy cocktail or as a basis for gravy.
Don't forget that when food is processed, many of the nutrients are stripped away and not put back.
Eat as much fresh produce as possible rather than relying on tinned, packed and frozen foods.
Read the food labels
Many ready-prepared meals contain hidden fat, salt, sugar, preservatives and additives, so check the ingredients before buying.
Obviously, there's no need to give up favourite foods, but look for the healthiest options on the shelves: for example, low-calorie dressing rather than thick mayonnaise; reduced-sugar baked beans; margarine or spreads rather than butter; skimmed milk.
Eat less salt
Don't sprinkle it on to your food during or after cooking.
Most of us tend to eat far too much, which can lead to fluid retention.
Add flavour to your meals by using more herbs, spices and garlic.
Cut down on cuppas
Limit yourself to one or two cups of tea or coffee a day (without sugar) or why not try herbal tea or decaffeinated coffee?
Drink at least eight glasses of water a day to flush out your system.
Natural fruit juices are a healthier alternative to fruit squashes and fizzy drinks.
The odd tipple won't make it a bad habit!
All drinkers lose vitamins B and C, so make sure you eat lots of wholegrains, fruit and vegetables to replace lost nutrients.
Fill up on fibre
Fibre is not only vital for keeping your digestive system and bowels healthy, it can help to make you feel full up.
Good sources include brown rice, wholewheat, bran, barley, pulses, carrots and apples.
Choose the right carbohydrate
Carbohydrates provide a good energy supply for the body as they're converted into glucose, but make sure you're eating it in the right forms.
Cut down on refined white sugar, and white flour, and eat more wholemeal, granary and brown products.
Substitute honey for sugar in drinks and at meal times, serve fresh fruit rather than a dessert.
Face up to the fats
A certain amount of fat in your diet is good for you, as it provides energy and insulation, but too much of the wrong kind can be bad news for your figure and your cholesterol levels.
The most harmful type are saturated animal fats, found in meat  and dairy products.
Switch to vegetable, nut and seed oils in cooking, like sunflower, olive or corn oil, and look out for low-fat and fat-free dairy products and other foods.
They are just as tasty as the real thing!
FOOD FACTS
There's a lot to be said for the saying ‘You are what you eat’.
Given the choice, most of us would rather eat a choccy bar than a stick of celery, but good eating habits will pay dividends.
You'll look better, feel better and have strong, shiny hair, clear skin, and bright eyes.
Wise up to the health and beauty benefits of these vital vitamins and minerals:
Don't forget that you should get all the main vitamins and minerals, as well as the trace elements by eating a balanced, nutritious diet.
SLIM WITHOUT TRYING
Eat your meals off a smaller plate than usual.
Prepare and cook only the amount of food you'll eat in a single serving so that there are no tempting left-overs.
Don't shop when you're feeling hungry.
Drink a glass of water before a meal and you'll feel full up.
When you're feeling peckish between meals, take your mind off food by keeping active.
giftbox
LOADS OF EXCITING PRODUCTS AND WE'RE GIVING THEM ALL AWAY
10 FREE
Get ready to roll in the new year with style.
We've got ten sets of Clairol's Curl Control Setters, worth £29.95, to give away to Hairflair readers.
These snazzy rollers heat up in their own box which holds three different sized, colour-coded rollers.
Unlike the conventional heated rollers they don't have any uncomfortable spikes — instead they are covered with a special light rubber material which has the capacity to grip, making them easy to use and much kinder to your hair.
Send your name and address on a postcard to .
200 FREE
If you've read Page 44 then you'll know all about the fab, new three-in-one shampoos from Wella.
Wella Balsam Wash & Care Plus has been developed to clean, condition and strengthen your hair — all in one easy step.
Wash & Care Plus is available in three variants — for dry hair, permed hair and for frequent use, priced at around £1.35 to £1.99.
We are giving away 200 bottles, so if you'd like to try some, simply send your details on a postcard to;.
200 FREE
Hair repair is just what you need after all those Christmas parties — using loads of heated appliances and a ton of hair spray to secure your party style certainly take it out of your hair!
Hair Repair from St. Ives is an intensive treatment designed to restore damaged hair in just 2 minutes and we are giving away 200 of the new 25ml sachets.
Send a self-addressed label to;.
40 FREE
The Bain de Terre Spa Therapy Herbal products are formulated with therapeutic herbs, spring waters and natural botanicals.
From this superb range comes Ribbon Gel; a unique striped combination gel.
The green ribbon contains a blend of body-building products for strong hold and the white ribbon contains essences of Irish Moss, Clover Blossom and Bay Laurel to give a brilliant shine that is re-activated with brushing.
Priced at £5.25 from Bain de Terre appointed stockists  .
75 FREE
The skincare specialists at Oxy have introduced two new products to their spot treatment range.
Oxy Clean Duo Pads and Oxy Clean Duo Pads for Sensitive Skin are now available at £2.65 for 36 pads.
These medicated, double action cleansing pads have been designed with a rough side to clear away dead skin cells and unblock pores plus a smooth side to clean and remove oil and dirt.
We've got 75 to give away — send your name and address to;
200 FREE
It's great fun going out straight from work to dance the night away or for a hot date.
If you don't get the chance to really freshen up with a shower then Femfresh has the answer.
Femfresh are individually wrapped, mildly fragrant, moist tissues.
A perfect way to keep you feeling fresh and looking good, Femfresh are also dermatologically tested and gynaecologically approved.
We have 200 boxes of 12 sachets, worth £1.20 to give away..
50 FREE
If you've got permed hair or have been inspired by Making Waves on Page 8, then this great give-away is for you!
Perm Revitaliser from TiGi Linea is designed to counteract the relaxing effects that everyday shampooing can have on your perm.
You can use a Revitaliser to refresh your curls during the day or as a curl activator on those days that you don't shampoo.
Because Perm Revitaliser contain nutrients to condition and soften your perm, it can also help to fight the frizzies.
Normally only available from TiGi Linea approved salons at £5.50 for 8oz, we've got 50 to give away.
Send your name and address on a postcard to;.
25 FREE
Hair loss is quite normal and most of us lose between 100 and 150 hairs each day.
However, five million men and women in the UK suffer excessive hair loss.
The Haar Sana range of treatments has been developed to deal this and other scalp problems.
There are four products in the range, all made with nourishing Alpine herbs.
Super Activator 3 — to stimulate and delay the progress of hair loss, Protein Enriched Shampoo — to protect and nourish the hair and control scalp problems, Millet Concentrated Lotion — to nourish and prevent hair loss and Schuppexin Tonic — to treat all types of skin irritation.
We have £200 worth of Haar Sana products to give away.
Send your details to .
Don't forget to indicate which one you would like to try.
it's a snip
One of London's leading salons is holding the sale of the century this month.
Take advantage of bargain blow-drys, cut-price colours and discount perms at the exciting Andrew Lockyer January sales!
Throughout the month of January, there will be fabulous discounts on all hair services at the Andrew Lockyer salon.
In fact, you can save a staggering 50% on colouring and up to 60% on perming!
And if you can't make it into the salon, you can STILL save money.
Andrew is offering a 40% discount on his innovative Style Colour refresher — and it's available by post!
Look at our table below to see what you can save when you visit the salon.
Past styling innovations of Andrew's include the exciting Cracker Perm, Strayt Perm and the Style Perm.
STYLE COLOUR BY POST
If you fancy colouring your hair but don't fancy the idea of unsightly regrowth, why not send for Andrew's fabulous Style Colour?
It's a semi-permanent, non-ammonia , non-peroxide colouring solution that looks perfectly natural but adds beautiful shine, gloss and vibrancy.
Simply send a small sample of your hair (ideally from the roots through to the ends) which Andrew will then analyse.
He will look for the nine natural colours found at the root which is the healthiest part of the hair and combine them to produce your personal Style Colour.
During his January mark-down, there is a 40% discount on the product, so it will cost you just £6 (plus £1.50 P&P) instead of £15!
Andrew's very latest invention is The Swing, left.
By introducing a jagged edge to the classic bob shape, he has developed a hairstyle that requires virtually no after-care.
Whatever direction the hair moves, the shape remains strong and striking — just what you need for blustery weather!
For more details, contact the Andrew Lockyer salon at  
WINTER WOOLLIES
THEY'VE GOT TO BE BIG, BOLD AND BEAUTIFUL!
Whatever you're up to during the snowy season, a wonderful warm woolly makes the perfect winter wear.
We take a look at some of the most sensational sweaters around.
A brilliant, bright colourful design from the new Freemans Spring/Summer collection, £49.99
This winter white, crew neck sweater with bright abstract design is from the Kit Autumn/Winter collection, £29.99
Cream giant cable sweater in soft wool.
£47.99 from the Next Directory
Long sweater with bold motif and fringed hem.
£29.99 from the Kit Autumn/Winter collection
This gold roll edge sweater is 100% wool, and also available in cream.
From the Next Directory, £34.99
Below left: Crew neck sweater with strong shapes in chic seasonal shades of olive, ecru and cinnamon.
£25.99 from the Kit Autumn/Winter collection.
Above right: Cable knit sweater with pastel embroidery and soft fringing to the yoke — £27.00 from the Kit Autumn/Winter collection
FREEMANS  KIT  NEXT DIRECTORY 
winning style
Just who are the best hairdressers in the country?
The Hairflair team attended the 1991 Hairdresser of The Year Awards to find out!
The annual awards ceremony (hairdressing's equivalent of the Oscars!) took place on October 28th and, as usual, it was a glittering affair!
Anyone who is anyone in the world of hairdressing attended, and the ultimate accolade — British Hairdresser of the Year — was finally awarded to London stylist, Trevor Sorbie.
Here are some of the details of all winners plus an example of their work, proving that they really are the cream of the U.K. crop!
HAIRDRESSER OF THE YEAR
Trevor Sorbie of Trevor Sorbie London WC2.
MIDLAND John Peers of John Peers, Rochdale, Lancs
AVANT-GARDE Trevor Sorbie of Trevor Sorbie.
NORTHERN Gary Hooker of Saks, Newcastle-Upon-Tyne.
NEWCOMER OF THE YEAR Sacha Mascolo of Toni & Guy, London.
WALES AND SOUTH-WEST Christopher Dave of Sophisticut, Devon.
SCOTTISH India Miller of Charlie Miller, Scotland
SOUTHERN Colin Greaney of Mahogany, Oxford
EASTERN Joy Agar of Joy Agar, Northampton.
NORTHERN IRELAND Tom Mulrine of Gatsby International, Bangor.
ARTISTIC TEAM Toni & Guy, London
LONDON Trevor Sharpe of Toni & Guy, London.
HOT OFF THE PRESS
HAIR CARING
Fans of the exciting Paul Mitchell Systems range will be aware of the company's relentless campaign for a better world.
All haircare products are produced without animal testing and the company runs a solar energy farm in Hawaii, producing Awapuhi, one of the innovative ingredients in the range.
Founded by friends John Paul Jones Dejoria and the late Paul Mitchell, the company has gone from strength to strength, both in the USA and Great Britain and in memory of Paul Mitchell, a host of stars turned out recently for a tree planting ceremony.
If you happened to be in Hyde Park on October 21st, you may have seen celebrities like Gloria Hunniford, Lyndsey De Paul, James Coburn and Roger  Daltrey with spade in hand in aid of the Prince of Wales Trust (they're all devotees of Paul Mitchell products, I'm sure!).
And that's not all!
The company recently took part in the exciting Venice Simplon Orient Express Challenge — the Paul Mitchell Systems Car, driven by Simon Le Bon and Paul Stewart, managed to beat the train and arrived in Venice before the Orient Express!
All proceeds raised went to the Royal Marsden Cancer Research Appeal.
For Paul Mitchell Systems stockists, cal .
The active Paul Mitchell Systems team campaigning for a better world
DRIVING AMBITION
To celebrate its 50th anniversary, Oxfam has teamed up with Proton Cars in a bid to raise £1,000,000.
Every time you test drive a Proton, £5 will be donated to Oxfam plus your name will be entered into a fabulous prize draw with a chance to win a brand new Proton 1.3 GLS Aeroback!
You'll find promotional leaflets at all 870 Oxfam shops and 2000 Proton dealers.
Hurry along to your Proton dealer today — the prize draw takes place at the end of February!
Hairflair Editor, Sue Rouse, took a spin to raise money in the Proton Test Drive Campaign.
WORLD CLASS
England didn't quite make it in the Rugby World Cup but we did manage to fight rival bids from the likes of Sweden, Austria and Canada to host the prestigious Hair Olympics '94.
This international event will be staged at Wembley from 16th–19th April 1994 and over 50 countries will participate — over 45,000 visitors are expected!
Nations will compete for gold, silver and bronze medals and a hair and beauty trade fair will be staged alongside the hairdressing championships.
For details contact .
FACE 'N FASHION
The successful Salon '91 exhibition at Earls Court included the TRESemmé Face n’ Fashion Competition, sponsored by Hairdressers Journal.
After submitting a sample of their photographic work, finalists had 30 minutes to recreate that look in front of a live audience at the show.
The judges' panel included Hairflair Editor, Sue Rouse, and after much deliberation, First Prize was awarded to Derek Murray, co-owner of the Johnson & Murray Salon in Coventry.
ONE INTO FIVE
Angela stripe, co-owner of Clayton-Stripe International and a former member of Britain's World Cup team, took one Madonna look-alike and gave her five fab hairstyles!
She used TRESemmé's 4+5 High Lift Bleach plus Energising Shampoo and Conditioner, Styling Glaze and Gel Spray to achieve the variations.
TRESemmé products are available from professional salons nationwide.
ODD JOBS
It is hard to imagine what Sylvester Stallone, Cilla Black, Twiggy and Lewis Collins could have in common except a famous face that provokes stares from passers by.
In fact, they've all crimped and shaved to get where they are today!
Their early careers have made this motley bunch kindred spirits, as they have all at some stage earned a living through hairdressing.
Yes, it is difficult to believe that before Sly Stallone was blasting out showers of bullets, he was at one time more likely to be seen wielding a pair of scissors and blowing hot and cold with a hairdryer.
After being thrown out of 14 schools in eleven years, at the sweet and tender age of 16, the boy who grew up to be Rambo, side-stepped into his father's beauty parlour business.
Peace did not reign for long as he provoked the ultimate chop for himself by one day taking his scissors to all of the models' heads and cropping them.
This is just one of the mindboggling and humorous revelations made in a new book called First Jobs of the Famous.
Certainly if Twiggy had given up her day job as a Saturday girl at Vincent's of Queensway, she might never have become the face of the sixties and the household name she is today.
It was at this salon at the age of fifteen and a half, working for a day's wages of £1 plus tips, that she came in contact with Justin de Villeneuve, the man who suggested she should pose for some photographs and who later was to become her mentor.
During the same era of the early sixties, TV tough guy, Lewis Collins was earning a living as a junior ladies' hairdresser at Andre Bernard's salon in Liverpool.
One of his clients was Mike McGear, Paul McCartney's brother and together they got up to some hair-raising pranks like trying to give a client a beer shampoo but drinking more of the vital ingredients before it so much as touched a single hair!
Priscilla White was going to own a ‘lorra, lorra’ hairdressing salons if she had not changed her name to Cilla Black and become a singer.
Before hitting the big time, the closest brush she had with anyone famous was tinting Ringo Starr's mum's hair who used to treat her to tea afterwards — spam and chips.
It could quite easily have been the job connection that led to her life-long friendship with comedian, Jimmy Tarbuck.
He really loved the hairdressing profession as it gave him a captive audience to bounce his latest jokes off.
In First Jobs of the Famous, he recalls making an elderly lady laugh as he was cutting her hair but went on to snip straight through her hearing aid.
As she was still smiling, he just tied a knot in it!
The next time your having a trim it might be worth taking a closer look at the stylist snipping the curls around your ears and the junior getting you in a right lather at the backwash.
You never know, they could turn out to be Madonna of tomorrow or the heart throb destined to slip into Kevin Costner's shoes in years to come.