

SMILE!
…though your heart is breaking
RONALD RICKETTS
TINA WEAVER
BRAVE Princess Diana put two weeks of torment behind her yesterday…and beamed this smile of relief.
Diana, plagued by scandal during her tense Balmoral holiday with the Royal Family, finally headed home.
And — though the heartbreak of her troubled marriage still haunts her — she raised a grin as Prince Harry waved from their car in London.
Back in Scotland, where Prince Charles is staying on, a royal insider reflected: ‘She only looked really happy as she was leaving.’
Palace riddle of Di smear letter
STEPHEN WHITE
THE great whodunnit over the Di smear letter caused a right royal tizz yesterday.
And the question on everyone's lips was: Who DID write it.
Not me, said the publisher who sent the Mirror a copy.
Not me, said Di's biographer Lady Colin Campbell.
Not us, said Buckingham Palace.
The one-page note on Palace notepaper — revealed in yesterday's Mirror — claims Di ‘relished’ playing the ‘martyr’in a loveless marriage.
Robert Smith, who published Lady Colin's book on Di, said: ‘I had nothing to do with any sort of forgery.
I'd have to be insane or an imbecile to do such a thing.’
The Palace says the letter — allegedly from a royal adviser — is a fake.
But it WAS clearly written by someone with an intimate knowledge of the royal marriage crisis before it became public in Andrew Morton's controversial book.
A Palace spokesman said the notepaper used for the smear letter was printed ‘in house’, which anybody could photocopy.
Smith and Lady Colin say they both received a copy of the letter in the post from an anonymous source.
They are convinced it is authentic.
‘It proved to us there was a campaign against the princess.’
Romping
Lady Colin added: ‘It's preposterous to suggest we were behind this.’
A Palace spokesman said: ‘The letter is a forgery but we will not be pressing for a criminal inquiry.
It would be like looking for a needle in a haystack.’
He declined to comment when asked whether someone was trying to smear Di by faking the letter.
The mystery came as Di returned home from one of her worst-ever holidays.
She flew back to London with sons William and Harry after two weeks at Balmoral.
First there were the Mirror's exclusive pictures of Fergie romping with John Bryan.
Then Di was hit by the triple blow of James Gilbey's ‘love tape,’ rumours linking her to Major James Hewitt and finally that letter.
It is believed the Queen became even more remote from Di when the tape was published.
Charles is said to have behaved  coolly to his wife.
And Di became a virtual recluse.
Yesterday as she landed at Heathrow she looked glad to be back.
One insider said: ‘Di doesn't like Balmoral at the best of times.
This year it was a disaster.’
Yesterday's Mirror
SO GLAD TO BE BACK: Smiling Diana with Wills at Heathrow yesterday
HELPING HAND: Di loads her luggage before heading home, putting gloomy Balmoral behind her
GOING HOME: Di, Wills and a royal detective
Pictures: NIGEL WRIGHT and VICTOR CRAWSHAW
BANKS FACE PLOT STORM ON NEW FEES
DAVID BRADSHAW
BRITAIN'S banks were accused yesterday of secretly plotting together to bring back charges for customers in credit.
As fury mounted, Labour's consumer spokesman Nigel Griffiths demanded an investigation by the Office of Fair Trading.
He said: ‘It appears as though there has been collusion to fix these charges.’
Barclays, NatWest, Midland, Lloyds, TSB and Abbey National were said to  have been too scared to act alone.
But the OFT could outlaw the plan if it uncovers a back-door deal between the banks to penalise customers who stay in the black.
And Mr Griffiths said there was now evidence that the banks DID secretly work together.
He added that the new fees would be ‘hard to justify.
‘Bank charges are already very high and wide-ranging for people requiring overdrafts and other facilities.
‘And yet the banks already earn interest on customers' money on current account, which they do not pass on.’
Banks ended charges for people in credit in 1984 as they faced  competition from building societies.
But now they claim the cost of free accounts is too high.
MIRROR COMMENT
The last grasp?
BANKS should give up their High Street locations and move into the back alleys with the grubby little money lenders they increasingly resemble.
Their latest grasping proposal is to impose charges on current accounts which stay in the black instead of just those which run into the red.
That's heads you lose, tails they win.
The banks have any number of excuses for this further move away from being a friend to thrifty and sensible private and business customers.
The days when bank managers ranked with doctors in local communities because of sound advice and fair treatment of customers have long gone.
Easily
Banks today are little more than expensive money shops with remote managers and fewer staff at the counters.
No amount of expensive television advertising can disguise that.
Nor should banks be allowed to forget why they are in difficulties.
They lent too much too easily to unstable third world countries, private corporations built on sand and risky clients.
Now they expect responsible customers to pay for their folly.
There are demands for the Monopolies Commission and the Office of Fair Trading to be called in.
But Barclays, Lloyds, Midland, Nat West and TSB could face a greater threat.
Their greed will drive customers into the arms of the building societies.
And there is no profit in that.
ON POLICE BALE…
PROTECTION officers face the jibes of colleagues over their ‘flunkey’ duties for VIPs.
One Cabinet Minister wanted his bodyguards to help with the haymaking at his farm.
The wife of another leading politician asked an officer to rescue her dog from a lake.
In both cases, the detectives refused to be treated as lackeys — and were backed by their bosses.
ARGY WAR PAIR KILLED IN AIR STUNT
TWO Argentinian airmen who fought in the Falklands died yesterday when their plane crashed at a British airport.
The pair were practising aerobatics for next week's Farnborough air show when their £2 million military trainer stalled and plummeted to the ground.
The crash happened at Hurn airport, near Bournemouth, Dorset.
Witness Gordon Ansty, 27, said: ‘Something seemed to fall off the cockpit.’
The two men were named as Commander Juan Carlos Sapolsky, 48, and Captain Omar Dario Gelardi, 35.
Three people died and 10 were injured in a four-vehicle crash at Stonham, near Ipswich, Suffolk, yesterday.
Another motorist died and two were hurt when two cars collided near Steyning, Sussex.
DEATH SCENE: Investigators examine the wreckage of the Argentinian aircraft in which two Falklands veterans were killed
FINAL FLIGHT: The jet prepares to take off before the crash
Carnival is winner
THE Notting Hill carnival was hailed by police last night as one of the most trouble-free ever.
More than 300,000 people turned up.
But there were only 75 arrests, compared with 100 last year.
ROOKIE SOLDIER DIES IN ECSTASY RAVE TRAGEDY
Bank Holiday drug riddle of squaddie, 17
30,000 flock to all-night party
GEORGINA WALSH
A ROOKIE soldier died from a suspected overdose of Ecstasy at a huge Bank Holiday rave.
Private Robert Jeffery, 17 — who joined up when he was just 16 — was found shivering and incoherent as 30,000 youngsters left Britain's biggest all-night party.
He collapsed by the roadside after wandering off alone in a daze and died hours later in intensive care.
Police described it as a ‘tragic waste of a young life’.
A neighbour at his home in Southend, Essex, said: ‘He was a smashing lad who lived for the Army.
He wasn't the sort to take drugs.
His family are convinced his drink was spiked.’
The weekend rave at Popham airfield near Basingstoke, Hants, was planned for 20,000 teenagers.
But thousands more gatecrashed the party amid rain-lashed chaos.
Stewards worked alongside police to watch for drug dealers.
Roads around the site were sealed off.
Robert probably lay undiscovered for hours because there were no passing motorists to spot him.
Chaos
He was found beside the A303 Basingstoke to Andover road as people left on Sunday morning.
A police officer said: ‘He must have staggered off by himself totally confused.
In the chaos nobody noticed.’
A squad car took him to hospital where he died.
Robert, of the Royal Signals Regiment, was on leave from his barracks in Harrogate, North Yorks.
Rugby reveller drowns
A FATHER-of-two was believed drowned last night after falling into a river as he walked home from a rugby club dance.
Agricultural expert Graham Thomas, 38, left the marquee where the dance was held with his wife Julie.
They became separated near the river which had become swollen in torrential rain and gales.
His coat and wallet were discovered by the River Monnow, at Monmouth, South Wales, but no body was found.
Bad weather battered Britain again yesterday.
Five army staff windsurfing at Giltar Point, off Tenby, were thrown into the water after being hit by a squall.
They were rescued by lifeboat.
Hot competition
THREE and a half thousand people applied to Staffordshire Fire Service after it advertised just 24 vacancies.
I'll care for baby vowed priest
GEOFF SUTTON
RUNAWAY priest Father Chris O'Neill promised to support his love child two days after she was born, it was revealed yesterday.
But he never kept his word.
The shamed Roman Catholic cleric wrote a heart-rending letter to the parents of his mistress, teacher Monika Kocanek, who had just given birth to baby Jennifer.
He told them: ‘I was delighted and over the moon to hear that I was the father of a blue-eyed, black-haired baby girl.
‘I want to assure you that my concern is for the future happiness of your  granddaughter and I will do all within my power to provide the necessary support.’
Monika, 27, has not heard from the Bolton-born priest since the birth.
He is believed to be in Dublin.
She has revealed that another priest tried to pressure her into getting Jennifer adopted.
Monika said at her home in Bedford last night: ‘I don't know what's going on.
I wish Chris would pick up the phone.’
LETTER: O'Neill
MONIKA: ‘Sad’
Shampagne
CHAMPAGNE giant Moet et Chandon is suing a Japanese firm for allegedly selling bogus bottles of its bubbly.
Lotus beaters
VANDALS slashed the roof of Mid Staffs MP Michael Fabricant's £20,000 Lotus Elan sports car as he visited a new hospital in Cannock.
BT'S LIKELY LASS
ACTRESS Brigit Forsyth, who starred as Thelma in TV's The Likely Lads, is to replace Beattie in British Telecom adverts.
Brigit, 45, will be seen in the first commercial this week playing a mum worried about her daughter going to university for the first time.
Actress Maureen Lipman, who played a Jewish mother in the long-running  series of ads, said earlier this year she no longer wanted to play Beattie.
STAR: Brigit Forsyth
Holiday's too long for kids
BORED kids are fed up with the long summer holiday and can't wait to go back to school, according to a new survey.
Two-thirds of five to seven-year-olds and half of eight to 11-year-olds are looking forward to the autumn term.
More than half would rather have a shorter summer break and more holidays at other times.
Frank's car is a hot rod
PENSIONER Frank Marshall escaped electrocution yesterday after his car hit a lamp-post and touched live wires.
Frank scrambled clear as a massive charge surged through the wreck.
Police refused to touch it until the power was turned off.
After the crash in Taunton, Somerset, Frank, 78, said: ‘I suppose I had a lucky escape.’
Snobs snub bright kids
SNOBBISH universities are rejecting some of Britain's brightest pupils through their own ignorance, it was claimed yesterday.
A top-level report to the Engineering Council said admissions tutors, who vet applicants for places at university, were reluctant to accept design and technology A-level students because they knew little about the subjects themselves.
Killer caught making film
ESCAPED killer Edward Duffy has been recaptured — while filming a friend's wedding.
Police were tipped off that he would be at the wedding in Bradford.
Duffy, 43, escaped from prison officers in May after he was taken to visit his sister in Bradford.
He was taken back to Lindholme Prison, South Yorkshire.
Oh boy!
Au pair stays
A SWEDISH male au pair was allowed to stay in Britain yesterday after an 11th-hour reprieve by Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke.
Johan Egelstedt, 19, faced deportation because immigration rules say an au pair must be a girl.
He can now remain another month as a visitor.
The Leicester family who employed him vowed to continue fighting to change the rules.
FLOPPO '92 SINKS BRITJOBS
DON MACKAY
BRITISH workers have been laid off as a fly-the-flag mission to Seville's Expo '92 flopped.
UK firms queued to have their goods sold in the British Pavilion.
But trade has been so bad that organisers have had to shed at least half their shop staff.
And there are fears that counters displaying products from Marks & Spencer, Royal Doulton and other famous names may be cleared.
Premier John Major will make a one-day trip to Spain to tour the exhibition later this month.
VISIT: John Major
M-way monster attacks stranded woman
A TERRIFIED woman driver fled across six lanes of a motorway after a man tried to grab her as she sat in her broken-down car.
She hid in bushes while the fiend ran to the central reservation before losing sight of her and driving off.
The late-night attack happened as the 25-year-old woman waited for help in her car on the M62 between Tingley and Lofthouse, near Leeds.
The man pulled up 100 yards behind and walked up to her car, banging on the window and demanding to be let in.
Fled
The woman — a hotel worker from Wakefield — opened the window slightly and the man tried to grab her hair.
As he turned back to his car she fled across the motorway.
After her ordeal on Sunday she flagged down a couple, who drove her to police.
Yesterday West Yorkshire officers advised women to stay in their cars and wait for a patrol if they break down.
A spokesman said: ‘The motorways are policed intensively.’
The attacker was described as white, in his late 30s and stocky with hairy forearms.
Cheers, pet
WINE maker Johann Grimes, of Wotton-under-Edge, Glos, found his labrador legless after it had lapped up a bucket of his home brew.
Crying shame
MASS hysteria is being studied by psychologists at a village in Tripura, India, where singing, crying mobs have terrified other residents.
Hair loom
A DESCENDANT of one of Napoleon's guards has offered to replace a lock of the emperor's hair destroyed by an IRA bomb at Shrewsbury.
Wrong twin is sent off
SOCCER player Paul Pullen got away with a foul…his identical twin was sent off instead.
Brother Mick, player-manager of amateur side Bognor, was shown the red card after lookalike Paul got in a tangle with Diadora League opponents Dulwich Hamlet.
‘The ref called me over and gave me my marching orders,’ said Mick.
‘I told him it wasn't me.’
He added: ‘Paul saw the funny side.
But I'll make sure he serves the three-match suspension.’
Brits in jet scare
A BRITISH airliner carrying 228 passengers made an emergency landing in Brindisi, Italy, yesterday after the pilot reported engine trouble.
The Monarch airlines jet was flying from Athens to Manchester.
Nobody was hurt.
ROSEANNE'S RAGE
KEVIN O'SULLIVAN
HEAVYWEIGHT comic Roseanne Barr was seething with rage yesterday after being snubbed by judges at a top TV ceremony.
She failed to win a coveted Emmy award for her show Roseanne, America's most-watched sitcom over the past three years.
Almost bursting out of a red patent leather outfit with a flower tattoo on one breast, Roseanne, 39, strode furiously on stage at Pasadena, California.
She said bitterly: ‘I was going to come up here and bitch about never getting an award, even though mine is the best comedy show with the best writers and best ratings, but I thought that inappropriate.’
Three awards went to Murphy Brown, the comedy series attacked by vice-president Dan Quayle for featuring an unmarried mother and lacking ‘family values’.
SNUBBED: Roseanne heads for a bust-up at the TV awards ceremony
Too-busy couple only meet at cash n' carry
Rent fear splits Jim from wife
JIM OLDFIELD
FED-UP Jim Davies hardly ever sees his wife Elaine — because they are too busy running separate pubs.
Jim took over the Old Bells when he feared new sky-high rent would force them both to quit the White Hart 12 miles away.
Now he lives at HIS pub with son Ivan, 19.
And Elaine, 45, runs HERS while looking after their lad Gareth, 14.
The only time they normally meet up is when they visit the cash-n'-carry warehouse.
The two pubs are in different areas of Doncaster, South Yorks.
And Jim, 47, said yesterday: ‘We're just too busy to see each other.
We haven't been together for three months.
‘We keep our marriage going on the phone.
When we push our trolleys round the store, the staff sing Strangers In The Night.’
Rent
The split happened after a property company took over the White Hart and raised the rent from £20,000 to £37,000 a year.
Jim said: ‘We face eviction next spring because we just cannot afford that kind of money.
‘When the lease on the Old Bells came free I grabbed it, thinking whatever happened we'd have a job and home.’
Elaine — married for 23 years — said: ‘It's a blasted nuisance.
Apart from the obvious, I miss little things like his aftershave and his nagging.’
ELAINE'S PUB: The White Hart where she is living with son Gareth
JIM'S PUB: He snapped up the lease on the Old Bells to keep a job
RARE MOMENT: Jim sees Elaine
Hip, hip and away
TWO boozy Geordie dads were put on the next flight home from Majorca for having no papers.
But they later flew back after a Manchester airport official spotted the ‘missing’ passports in their back pockets.
POLICE ‘PLAYDAY’ BOY, 10 DUMPED ON THE STREET
He's alone for hours
PETER KANE
A BEWILDERED 10-year-old boy was left to wander the streets for hours after being turned away from a police-run sports centre.
Aaron Freeman's ordeal began after his mum dropped him outside and drove off to work.
The promising young gymnast was told there was no room.
Organisers pointed to a pay phone and said: ‘Call your parents.’
But the worried schoolboy couldn't reach his mum at her office.
He roamed Southend in Essex until he bumped into a pal's mother who took him in.
Aaron's company director mum Leah, 36, only discovered what had happened when she returned to the centre after work.
She said:
‘I simply can't believe that responsible adults allowed a child to wander the streets.
He phoned me and his grandmother but we were out.
I believed he was in safe hands.
I wouldn't have left him otherwise.
I was shaking with fright when I heard what happened.’
Youngsters attended sports sessions at six schools, organised by Essex police and the council.
Complaint
Southend sports officer Roger Clitheroe said:
‘We were not offering a babysitting service.’
Mrs Freeman, of Westcliff-on-Sea, complained and police promised an inquiry.
But a spokesman said: ‘She should have stayed with her child until he was booked in.’
Jump jet
SCIENTISTS are blaming a secret American spy jet for earth tremors that jolted northern Holland.
Sexier videos please
LUSTY lovers have one complaint about video sex guides — they do not go far enough.
Millions have tuned in to the tapes to spice up their sex lives.
But they want them to be more explicit, a survey by Channel 4's Check Out show reveals today.
Viewers also moaned about the lack of close-up shots.
Eighty per cent said they would not be offended if they were shown the most intimate moments of love-making.
A few reckoned couples in the videos are too good looking.
And 77 per cent admitted they still find it hard to talk openly about sex.
SPICY: Guides
Lamb horror
MORE than a million lambs died in the worst blizzards to hit New Zealand in 30 years.
TV BOB BRAVES YUGO BULLETS
KEN IRWIN
TV COMIC Bob Carolgees is flying to war-torn Yugoslavia with Spit the Dog to help buck up British troops who are serving with United Nations forces.
Bob, 43, who found fame as Cilla Black's sidekick in the TV hit Surprise, Surprise, is no stranger to danger.
He was one of the first showbiz stars to arrive in the Falklands during the conflict.
And he also entertained the troops during the Gulf War.
The comedian has got special permission from Army chiefs for a two-day goodwill trip to Croatia next week.
Bob said yesterday: ‘I'll be sharing a few gags with the lads.
And my pal Spit always comes along, too.’
BOB: Troops gig
YOU'VE NEVER HAD IT SO BAD!
SYDNEY YOUNG
THE Tory election agent who helped Harold Macmillan's grandson to become an MP has been sacked — because of the recession.
Premier Sir Harold once told the nation: ‘You've never had it so good.’
But for axed father-of-two Mark Mewse, the grim message was: ‘We've never had it so bad.’
Mark, 32, a key figure in the election triumph of Sir Harold's grandson David Faber, was told he had to go.
Doug Cantwell, chairman of West Wiltshire Conservatives, said yesterday: ‘We have to do our best to pull ourselves out of this recession and tighten our belts.
‘Our finances dictated a major wage-earner must go.’
Help
Mr Faber won Westbury, Wilts, with a 12,618 majority at the General Election in April.
Mr Cantwell said: ‘Mark Mewse did an excellent job for us.
‘His election campaign was highly successful.
We will do everything we can to help him.’
Neither Mark, who lives in Essex, nor Mr Faber was available for comment yesterday.
PREMIER: Macmillan
GRANDSON: Faber
Snake dash
SERUM was rushed 100 miles by police after Mark Taylor, 28, was bitten twice by his own deadly rhinoceros viper at Peterborough.
Ron has pension cut by 7p
ROD CHAYTOR
A DISABLED man's benefit has been cut by 7p a week — because his wife is now entitled to a 7p weekly pension.
Part-time cleaner Betty Woods, 60, paid full contributions for just four years before she wed Ron, 62.
She later began paying the married woman's rate.
Ron, of Gnosall, Staffs, who cannot work as a gardener because of a back injury, will now get £81.88 a week.
A Benefits Agency spokesman said: ‘The law doesn't allow us any room to move.’
Dumpling champ
A MAN ate a record-breaking 155 plum dumplings in Vizovice, Czechoslovakia.
Royal cousin ‘bust’
THE Queen's cousin — art-dealer John Bowes-Lyon — has been declared bankrupt in London's High Court, it was revealed yesterday.
It followed an application by the finance house, Lloyds Bowmaker.
Fifty year-old Mr Bowes-Lyon — the family name of the Queen Mother — has had assets, including a luxury apartment in Piccadilly, seized by the  Official Receiver.
AN antiques business owned by Channel 4 boss Michael Grade's sister and her husband, Linda and Arthur Davidson, has gone bust.
Land Rover hits overdrive
LAND Rover yesterday announced an increase in production of its £21,000 Discovery range by 550 a week — a rise of 10 per cent.
The healthy export market for four-wheel-drive vehicles contrasts sharply with the rest of the slump-hit industry.
HOW FUELISH!
A NEW map published by the EC shows where tourists can buy lead-free petrol…in war-torn Bosnia.
Fuel there currently costs more than £1 a litre — if motorists can find it.
The free guide, aimed at cutting pollution, also names green fuel outlets in other parts of eastern Europe.
Labour fury at 2.5m lost jobs
ANDY McSMITH
THE Tories were slammed last night for presiding over the loss of more than one-third of Britain's manufacturing jobs — 2.5 MILLION.
The number employed in making things has plunged from 7.1 million in 1979 to 4.6 million.
And Labour employment spokesman Frank Dobson said the lack of an industrial strategy was forcing the country ‘to its knees’.
He added: ‘What these people used to make we now have to import.’
Key
Manufacturing jobs have dropped 41 per cent in the West Midlands, 39 per cent in the south east and 37 per cent in the north west.
Key industries have also been harder hit by recession than anywhere else in Europe.
Output in cars, engineering and clothing is down nearly 12 per cent, says a Labour survey.
And Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown said industry could become too small even to ‘benefit substantially’ from an upturn.
ANGER: Mr Dobson
‘Probe the banks’ call to Lamont
CHANCELLOR Norman Lamont was under pressure last night to order a full-scale probe into High Street banking.
The demand from Labour was sparked by fury over plans to bring back charges for customers in credit.
Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown called for an ‘in-depth investigation’ into the banks' costs, charges and services.
Mr Brown said the planned charges were the last straw for customers already angry over banks' high-handed attitude.
Four out of five customers now stay in the black.
Bosses say they can no longer afford the free banking brought in eight years ago in an attempt to beat off competition from building society accounts.
But Mr Brown said: ‘Customers already facing rising charges can ill-afford to pay more.
‘I fear millions of hard-pressed customers are having to pay for past mistakes by the banks.’
PRESSED: Lamont
HARD-UP LORD BEAVERBROOK OWES A MILLION
KEVIN O'LONE /NICOLA BRIGGS
FORMER Tory Treasurer Lord Beaverbrook — who raised more than £38million for the party — is broke with debts of more than £1million.
The Royal Bank of Scotland is suing him in the High Court to recover the money, which includes a £500,000 overdraft.
Beaverbrook, 40, grandson of the founder of the Express newspaper group, has until November 9 to sort out his financial affairs.
A series of failed ventures based on his hobbies of collecting classic sports cars and aircraft led to his downfall.
He faces selling his priceless collection of Ferraris to pay off creditors.
His lawyer Gillian Benning said: ‘He owes a lot of money, mainly to banks.
‘He has been hit by the recession like everyone else.’
Tenants
Beaverbrook sold his mansion, Denchworth Manor, near Wantage, Oxon, 10 years ago.
He and his wife Susie live there as tenants with their four children.
BROKE: Beaverbrook
MIRROR COMMENT
Nought out of ten
IN any examination for consistency and co-operation, the people in charge of the education of our children would get nought out of ten.
Yesterday the Education Secretary, John Patten, ordered an investigation into a report by school inspectors that standards in this summer's GCSE had FALLEN.
Six days ago his Schools Minister, Eric Forth, had praised the record pass rate and triggered an orgy of self-congratulation about RISING standards.
The Government's examination advisers have already been told to see to it that marking is stricter next year.
But the examination board and head teachers say that standards have remained steady.
Change
Schools and their children have suffered change after change for more than a quarter of a century, especially since the Tories came to power.
Every change brought new promises followed almost immediately by fresh doubts.
What children, their future employers and the country need to survive is a system which isn't always being changed.
A system which offers extra help for the least academic, maximum encouragement for the average and the stretching of the brightest.
And a system in which everybody has total faith in exam results.
Our children are our future.
At least, we owe them that.
Doling out death
PREACHING about the dangers of the Ecstasy drug won't stop youngsters trying it.
Stiffer penalties on criminals who make it won't stop its manufacture.
On Page 6 today we show how deadly it can be.
Now let's have a nationwide campaign spelling out to youngsters how Ecstasy causes internal bleeding and brain damage.
Permanent, irreversible and fatal damage.
Tories' council tax nightmare
DAVID BRADSHAW
THE Government's own figures show that homeowners face £60 rises in council tax bills, it was revealed last night.
And it is Government miscalculations that are to blame.
Labour's local government spokesman Jack Straw said: ‘The Tories are now being caught in a trap of their own making.’
The blunder could mean a shortfall of £1billion to local council coffers.
Under the council tax — a replacement for the poll tax — homes are divided into eight bands based on the value.
Plummeted
But even as house prices plummeted the Government hopelessly overestimated the number of homes in the high bands.
It means people in lower bands — the vast majority — will have to pay more.
Tory MPs are worried that voters could face HIGHER bills with the council tax than with the poll tax.
Liberal Democrat Nigel Jones said Ministers had ‘a fetish for fiasco taxes’.
ATTACK: Jack Straw
At last…a wonder cure for  shrinking violets
SEXY SUZANNE BOOSTS BRA THAT PUTS OTHERS IN SHADE
MARCIA BRACKETT
CURVY Suzanne Younger burst into the spotlight yesterday as a colourful character from the undie world.
Suzanne unveiled a violet version of the bra that's Britain's biggest bust-booster.
And the way she figures it, the sexy new hue could outshine old favourites white, black and beige.
Suzanne was modelling the 1992 Gossard Wonderbra — a creation introduced back in 1968 to give even small-bosomed women breathtaking cleavages.
For decades the Wonderbra's charms stayed hidden.
But the violet number is expected to be a hit with larger-than-life stars such as Madonna and Kylie Minogue who like to give their unmentionables an outing.
Takings are already booming for the makers of the country's top-selling bra.
As Miss Younger unzipped a leather jacket to reveal her matching Gossards, executive Peter Herd said at a London Lingerie Week show: ‘Our age group has become younger.
The kids want more shape now.
It's a cult in the clubs.
‘This new generation has changed the face of the business.’
He added: ‘Our production is going up all the time.
We're buoyant.
By mid-October we'll be making 30,000 a week.
‘Our factories are stretched to the limit.’
Just like the customers' busts.
LOOKING SWELL: Wondermodel Suzanne yesterday in her matching violet bra (£13.99) and briefs (£5.99) Picture: HARRY PROSSER
POPPING OUT: Madonna's bra
POPPING OUT: Kylie Minogue's bra
Yacht a catch
FISHERMAN Robert Carlton made what could be a £100,000 catch when he salvaged a luxury yacht abandoned in a gale near the Channel isle of Alderney.
Quiz on crazed dogs
THE keeper of a pack of crazed dogs which savaged a schoolgirl was questioned by detectives yesterday.
Thirty of farmer Alan Gerrard's brutes were put down after the weekend attack on Beverley Hurst, nine.
Eleven more are also doomed — but Mr Gerrard wants to save four others, whose fate may be fixed by a court.
A police report on the case will go to Crown prosecutors.
Beverley — mauled near her home at Pickmere, Cheshire — was ‘stable’ in hospital yesterday.
VICTIM: Beverley
TERRY MARSH FLOORED BY HIS BROTHER'S SEX SWAP SHOCK
Call me Jilly says father of seven Billy
DAVID LEIGH
THE burly brother of former boxing champ Terry Marsh wants a sex swap op — and Terry is completely floored.
Six-foot father of seven Billy Marsh has been wearing high heels, padded bras and skirts, and has told his family: ‘Call me Jilly.’
Now he's preparing to enlarge his breasts and have a £6,000 operation to have his ‘thing’ removed…so his dream can come true.
But ex-light welterweight champ Terry is worried about his brother's children.
And Billy's mum, Maisie, is refusing to talk to him.
Billy, 40, stunned third wife Kim by coming into a room wearing one of HER dresses.
Then he revealed his secret desire: ‘I want to be your sister.’
Rocked
The couple's two children Scott, two, and Kayla, one, are now being told to call their dad Aunty Jilly.
Billy has been told his job with social services at Essex Council is safe — even if he becomes an Essex girl.
Social services chairman Joe Pike said: ‘We're trying to deal with this sympathetically.
‘In today's strange old world we have to face up to many unusual things.’
ON ROPES: Terry
PALACE SILENT OVER DI SMEAR
STEPHEN WHITE /DON MACKAY
BUCKINGHAM Palace still refused to come clean last night on the Di smear letter.
Top members of the royal household refused to name the person they believe wrote the ‘fake’ note.
But they hinted they knew who forged it.
The letter on Palace notepaper detailed plans to tarnish Di's image.
It claimed she ‘relished’ her role as a ‘martyr’.
‘We have nothing further to say.
It has no authenticity,’ said a Palace spokesman.
Asked if he knew who DID write it he added: ‘I don't intend to make further inquiries.’
Royal biographer Lady Colin Campbell — who received a copy — again denied she was behind it.
‘I don't think I would benefit.
It says some dreadful things about me,’ she told Sky TV.
A copy received by the Daily Mirror describes her as ‘a crashing snob’.
The Queen's press secretary Charles Anson is said to be facing the chop for saying Fergie was ‘unsuitable’ after her split from Prince Andrew.
Anne Robinson — Page 9 
TARGET: Diana
Sharon's luvver is a bruvver
TONIGHT'S the night, Sharon — and to hell with your husband.
This is the passionate moment when the Queen Vic landlady falls into the arms of her brother-in-law Phil in the love triangle keeping all EastEnders fans agog.
The will-they, won't-they teaser comes to a clinch this evening when Sharon's husband Grant goes out on the booze again.
Until now his brother Phil has just been a shoulder for his wife to cry on.
But one thing leads, well, to a bit of the other.
The family affair is just beginning, though.
Producer Leonard Lewis says: ‘The storyline will run right through the autumn.’
BR rap over death driver
BRITISH Rail will be rapped today for not doing an immediate drug test on a train driver after a crash that killed two and injured 500.
A test three days after the train hit the buffers at London's Cannon Street station showed traces of cannabis in driver Maurice Graham, 25.
A Health and Safety Executive report today blames Mr Graham for the crash, as well as blasting BR.
Last night Mr Graham said: ‘I don't want to comment.’
Neigh lass
A WOMAN barred from taking her dog into a shopping centre in Uxbridge, Middlesex, returned with a horse — and was thrown out again.
THIEF IS SUNK BY A BOAT
CHEEKY thief Robert Glenister scuppered himself when he stole a boat — by phoning the makers to ask how it worked, a court heard yesterday.
The £14,000 sailing yacht was the only one in existence of a brand new prototype.
Police traced him when he posed as a buyer to ask for brochures and prices.
Glenister, 30, hitched up the 19ft yacht and towed it to his home in Chawleigh, Devon, four miles away, Exeter magistrates were told.
When he took off the covers next morning he was shocked to find it was not a ‘small tub worth £100 or so’ but a sophisticated sailing vessel.
Glenister admitted stealing the boat and was fined a total of £445.
Blast at studio
THREE men were hurt yesterday when a keg of firework powder exploded in a special effects workshop at Pinewood Film Studios, Bucks.
Girl, 7 drowns in silo of grain
A GIRL of seven died yesterday after being buried under a mountain of grain in a farm silo.
Firemen dug with their bare hands to free Gemma Kitchiner from the storage pit on her parents' farm.
But it took 10 minutes to haul her out and attempts to revive her failed.
Fire chief Chris Large said: ‘It was like digging through sand.
‘Every time a hole was made, the grain just fell in again.’
Bike
Gemma was completely covered in grain after falling into the pit at Church Farm in Astwick, Beds.
Her father spotted her bike lying beside the pit and after reaching deep into the tons of grain was able to feel her arm.
But despite his frantic efforts he was unable to pull her free.
He and other rescuers jumped in and dug with shovels, buckets and their bare hands.
When they found her she was given the kiss of life.
But she was dead on arrival at hospital.
Gemma lived on the farm with her parents Elizabeth and Timothy.
An investigation has been launched by health and safety officials.
BROTHER No2 DIES
TRAGIC Christopher Rigney was found hanged in his garage — 11 days after his brother John died in identical fashion.
Police think Christopher, 42, of Birmingham, became depressed after the death of John, 53.
M-WAY SOS LAD ROBBED
A SCHOOLBOY was robbed of his mountain bike as he pedalled down the hard shoulder of a motorway to get help after his dad's car broke down.
The 15-year-old had just reached an emergency phone when a Ford Sierra swerved to a halt in front of him.
Then a man leaped out brandishing a Rambo-style knife with a six-inch blade, police revealed yesterday.
He grabbed the terrified youngster's bike, tossed it in his boot and then sped away.
The robber struck on the northbound carriageway of the M5 near the Golden Valley interchange, Gloucester, on Monday evening.
The red Sierra is believed to be either A, C or D-registered.
NO ESCAPING TV DES AS HE GOES WORLDWIDE
Chat-to-stars offer from US
KEVIN O'SULLIVAN
HERE'S the news that Des O'Connor-haters have dreaded…there could soon be no escape from him.
The comic, crooner and chat-show host — the favourite mickey-taking target in showbiz — is hoping to appear on TV in every English-speaking country in the world.
Des — whose easy talk on ITV pulls in 12 million viewers — has just made two ‘specials’ in America.
And bosses of giant broadcasting network CBS were so impressed with his handling of big name-guests such as Elton John, Whitney Houston and George Burns, they suggested he go worldwide.
Now 60-year-old Des is negotiating a deal with CBS for a  Hollywood -based chat show to be broadcast in the US, Canada, Britain, Australia and other English-speaking countries.
Recently divorced Des went to Los Angeles with new girlfriend, singer Jody Wilson.
Record
And at a reception to celebrate the success of the superstar specials to be screened on ITV in the autumn, Des said:
I came here to record a couple of shows for Britain — and I thought that would be it.
But some of the CBS people pointed out there is nothing like it on TV in America.
We got to thinking that if we came to Los Angeles regularly we could make these shows all the time and send them to English-speaking countries all over the world.
For whatever reason, I seem to be able to persuade big names to be on my show, so if we get this off the ground I'll aim to start with the true superstars.
Frank Sinatra and Michael Jackson are the first names Des has in mind.
He added: ‘It's early days, but I definitely think we're on to something.’
Des — also at No. 6 in the telly charts here with his Take Your Pick revival — talked about his relationship with singer Jody.
‘We get on very well, we are very good friends’ he said.
‘But it's far too early for me to talk about marriage.
I've only been divorced a few months.’
HOLLYWOOD HIT: Star Des at the CBS studios
Nags to riches
COUNCIL chiefs at Langbaurgh, Cleveland, want to replace dustbin lorries with horse-drawn carts to cut costs.
Danger of kids’ pills
NEARLY half of parents giving their children vitamin pills are unaware of overdosing dangers.
Researchers from London's Northwick Park Hospital say harmful effects can include bone problems.
I FEEL FINE SAYS LAURA THE SONG AND DANCE GIRL
Swap op tot's big thank-you
STEWART DICKSON
PLUCKY transplant toddler Laura Davies danced a thank-you jig for American doctors and nurses who saved her life.
Then the cheeky four-year-old showed off by singing her favourite song — the drinker's ditty Show Me The Way To Go Home.
Medical staff were entranced by her floor-show at Pittsburg Children's Hospital, Pennsylvania, where she underwent a 15 1/2-hour liver and bowel swap three months ago.
One official said yesterday: ‘She was delightful.
It won the hearts of everyone there.’
Dressed in shorts and a shirt, Laura playfully pushed her nose against TV cameramen's lenses.
She beamed happily: ‘I'm feeling well.
I like it in America.
Everyone has been nice to me.’
Recovering
Despite her choice of song — and although discharged from hospital — Laura will not be able to go home to Eccles, Lancs, for a while.
She and her parents, Les and Fran, will have to spend another few months in the US as the youngster receives more treatment.
Andreas Tzakis, who led the transplant team, said: ‘She is recovering quite well from the surgery.
She hasn't had much rejection, thank God, to this date and her liver is functioning normally.
‘We will want to monitor her health for the next month or two at least before letting her return to England.’
Mum Fran, who is expecting another baby in January, added: ‘We have been very fortunate.
‘We are so thankful that donor organs became available just 10 days after Laura arrived in America.’
Laura was unable to have her transplant on the NHS so Fran and Les launched an appeal which raised the £350,000 needed to pay for the operation in the US.
BACK ON SONG: Laura's delighted parents Fran and Les Davies watch as the four-year-old sings her favourite ditty for hospital staff in Pittsburgh
PEEK-A-BOO: Little Laura plays with a camera
That's rich
THOUSANDS of Chinese gold prospectors are hijacking government vehicles to get to a big new find on the Tibetan border faster.
Bogus bank bosses cash in
HOLE-in-the-wall users are being robbed by a bunch of bogus bank managers.
The gang prey on people whose cashpoint cards are stolen along with documents that reveal their home addresses.
The tricksters then look up their victims' phone numbers and call them — posing as bank officials who need to know the owners' personal identity numbers.
Maximum cash amounts are then withdrawn from the customers' accounts.
Credible
The phoney financiers have struck at least four times so far in Coventry, stealing three-figure sums.
One victim is a city housewife who revealed the PIN number of her husband's account.
Detective Martyn Lawrence said yesterday: ‘People should never give away PIN numbers — even to their bank managers.
‘These thieves sound credible because the cards really have been stolen.’
Drummed out
A LORRY trailer holding drum kits worth £80,000 was stolen from a lay-by at Chatham, Kent.
DUBCEK IN CAR PLUNGE
FORMER Czech leader Alexander Dubcek was seriously injured in a crash yesterday.
Mr Dubcek, 70, whose reforms were crushed by the Soviets in 1968, was being driven in a car which plunged into a ravine near Prague.
GET A GRIP MATTHEW
TV host Matthew Kelly stuck his neck out when he tangled with British Bulldog wrestler Davey Boy Smith.
And Davey, 29, grasped the chance to make a strong impression.
But, after a struggle, 41-year-old Matthew regained his poise.
He even smiled bravely as he carried on recording a show for the new series of You Bet, starting on Friday.
But then he always was game for a laugh.
Carnival cops hurt as ‘lynch mob’ riot
BRAVE police were attacked when they tried to save a motorist from a 1,000 strong ‘lynch mob’.
Violence flared when a car ploughed into a crowd after the West Indian Carnival in Leeds, injuring six people.
The mob tried to overturn it and drag out the driver.
Twenty bobbies threw a cordon around the car to save him — and came under a hail of bricks, bottles, concrete blocks, kicks and punches.
Teargas
Officers feared for their lives in the 20-minute attack.
They were saved only when riot police moved in with teargas.
Nine police were taken to hospital, one with concussion, and 18 others had minor injuries.
Chief Insp John Cowman, who had five  stitches in a face wound, said the driver would almost certainly have been killed.
‘One man got in and tried to strangle him but I pulled him off,’ he said.
Police said the driver was breath tested but not charged.
Gate escape tot is foiled
TWO-year-old Adam Rippon was freed by firemen after he got his head caught in the garden gate.
Grandad Terry Potter had only just installed it to stop Adam's bids to get into the street at Barnsley, South Yorks.
Running water
ZANY waiter Carlos Ferreira, 43, began a 190-mile run from Lisbon in Portugal yesterday clasping a tray with a bottle of mineral water.
Glenda's jitters
POLITICS is more fun than the stage, says Glenda Jackson — but more scary.
The Oscar-winning actress, now Labour MP for Hampstead and Highgate, told Hello! magazine: ‘My Commons maiden speech was the most frightening thing I have ever done.’
SCARED: Glenda
LICENCE DODGER'S TV CELL BAN
GORDON HUGHES
A PRISONER doing two weeks for TV licence dodging was banned from watching Porridge — by fellow inmates.
The kangaroo court decided the punishment must fit the crime and ruled that he stay in his cell during the jailhouse comedy.
They then barred him from watching Prisoner Cell Block H, before extending it to a total television ban.
A guard said: ‘He was quite put out, but there was one blessing.
‘At least he missed Eldorado.’
The blackout was imposed by overspill prisoners being held at York's Clifford Street police station.
A portable TV is kept in a corridor outside the cells for inmates to watch.
A Post Office spokesman said: ‘It shows what can happen if you don't buy a licence.’
It won't happen again pledges Lord of Longleat
FRANK THORNE
THE new Lord Bath yesterday banned the shameful trade in Longleat monkeys exposed by the Daily Mirror.
We revealed that monkeys from Longleat and Woburn safari parks have been sold for laboratory experiments.
The animal-loving marquess, who inherited the Longleat estate in June, carried out an urgent inquiry — and confirmed that our story was TRUE.
He said that in future ‘no animals will ever be sold for research purposes.’
Lord Bath acted as campaigners praised the Mirror for revealing the shocking truth behind the ‘family fun’ image of Longleat and Woburn wildlife park in  Bedfordshire .
We told how monkeys from the two parks have been sent to Shamrock Farms, near Brighton, for breeding — and have then been sold for medical research or slaughtered.
From his home in France, 60-year-old Lord Bath said yesterday: ‘I had no knowledge of this whatsoever until the Mirror contacted me.
‘I needed to check the facts for myself — and have done so.
‘I now know there is a case to answer.
I am appalled by it.’
Woburn's owners, Lord and Lady Tavistock, also pledged that no more monkeys will be sold for research.
Lady Henrietta Tavistock said they had demanded a meeting with the Chipperfield organisation which owns the monkeys at both parks.
She added: ‘We feel we have been duped.
A stop must be put to it immediately.’
Longleat safari park manager Roger Cawley, a member of the Chipperfield circus family and the man behind the deals with Shamrock, was ‘not available’ yesterday.
Two Woburn monkeys, Smiley and Ernie, are still caged at Shamrock.
Campaigners will now try to have the captive pair freed.
They are backing their crusade for the safari park monkeys with a ‘Now You See Them, Now You Don't’ poster.
Tory MP Andrew Bowden, national president of the Captive Animal Protection Society, said last night: ‘I would like to congratulate the Mirror on its fine investigative reporting.’
DOSSIER: The Mirror
DEALS: Cawley
WHO'S SLURRY NOW!
Angry farmer sprays muck on a council
‘I don't care if I hit the wrong building’
JAN DISLEY
THIS was how a furious farmer took sweet revenge on council bosses — with four tons of stinking slurry.
Battling Dave Cannon sprayed a whole trailer-load of the cow muck over a council building after plans for his retirement bungalow were turned down for the fourth time.
Startled staff dived for cover as the liquid dung splashed against outside walls, whizzed through windows and splattered on to desks, chairs, computers and carpets.
They wouldn't have minded so much if 63-year-old Dave had picked the right offices.
But the planners he hates watched unscathed as he mistakenly attacked the housing department 50 yards away.
Housing worker Sandra Clark, 48, said: ‘The muck hit the windows in sheets.
At first we just stared in disbelief.
‘Then there was a dash to shut the windows and pull down the blinds.
Horrible ‘But the muckspreader sent stones flying.
They broke the windows.
So the manure just shot through.
It was horrible.’
And housing boss Donald Gledson stressed: ‘We didn't find it very funny, especially as his argument is with the planning department.
‘There were members of the public in our reception who were visibly shocked.
It was scandalous.’
Dave was led away by police who arrested then released him without a formal charge.
Funny
Yesterday they were deciding whether he would face prosecution over the incident.
But the unrepentant former boxer was still in a fighting mood last night — if not exactly smelling of roses.
He said: ‘I couldn't help laughing.
It was funny to see all the shocked faces at the windows.
‘I must say I felt a lot better afterwards.’
Dave, a tenant farmer, began his wrangle with Castle Morpeth borough council in Northumbria seven years ago.
He asked permission to build a retirement home for him and his 63-year-old wife Mary on land two miles from his home near Ponteland.
But his application was turned down in 1985, 1986 and 1991.
And the latest rejection was the final straw for Dave, who claims he could now be homeless once he gives up his farm next May.
He said:
‘I don't care if I hit the wrong building.
I made my point.
Even if it costs us a few hundred quid, it's been worth it.
You have to prove your point.
If you don't make a noise, they won't take any notice.
What else can you do?
They won't listen to us any other way.’
Hysterical
Borough planning officer Tony Woodcock explained that Dave's applications had been rejected because he wanted to put the bungalow on greenbelt land.
‘This was obviously his way of expressing his displeasure,’ Mr Woodcock said.
‘He simply won't accept the council's decision.
‘It was a hysterical scene — unless you happened to be in the housing offices at the time.’
UNSCATHED: The planning offices that Dave missed
DING-DUNG BATTLE: Farmer Cannon blasts away with his muck spreader at the wrong target — and the council's housing department is covered with four tons of smelly slurry
FLURRY OF SLURRY: The liquid dung flies through the air as revenge-seeking Dave launches his attack
UNBOWED: Dave, led away by police, said later: ‘I made my point’
Visits denial
REPORTS that Di had visited her friend James Gilbey at a Norfolk farmhouse were strongly denied last night by Buckingham Palace.
GRANDAD'S HOME
GORDON AIRS
FREED prisoner Karl Maxwell-Smith flew home to Britain from Thailand yesterday — and met his granddaughter and her mum for the first time.
Two-year-old Jessica seemed a bit shy.
But his daughter-in-law Jane said: ‘It's marvellous to see him.
I've waited since my wedding for this moment.
And I'm sure Jessica will grow to love him.’
Karl, 62, was sentenced in Bangkok five years ago to a HUNDRED years for murdering his Thai bride-to-be, but was released under an amnesty marking Queen Sirikit's 60th birthday.
At Heathrow he was met by son Karl, and taken to the family home in Ashford, Kent.
The ex-Scots Guardsman claims Thai police framed him over the death of fiancee Pranon Sauychaisri, 30, who fell from the balcony of their flat.
He is seeking a pardon.
HELLO, STRANGER: Two-year-old Jessica with released captive Karl
Bell: I'll go back
BRAVE BBC newsman Martin Bell — wounded by shrapnel in the Bosnian capital Sarajevo last week — is ‘keen’ to return.
Bell, 53, aims to resume work on October 1.
‘I have no problems about going back to Bosnia,’ he said in London yesterday.
Serb siege guns around Sarajevo are now under UN control.
WOUNDED: Bell
New hope for babies
THE lives of thousands of premature babies could be saved by a new ‘early warning’ breakthrough, announced yesterday.
A simple cervical test between the 24th and 34th weeks of pregnancy would alert doctors, who could act to delay the birth.
‘Removal’ men strip home bare
IAN CAMERON
THIEVES posing as removal men stripped an unmarried mum's home bare — including the kitchen sink.
They took all her tables, chairs, beds, carpets, TV, stereo, cooker and fridge.
Even her two children's clothes disappeared.
Distraught Jackie Bendle, 25, sobbed: ‘They've left me with nothing.
How could they?’
Neighbours didn't suspect when they saw a team of men loading furniture into a van — because Jackie was waiting to be rehoused.
She was moving after asbestos was discovered at her home in Blaenymaes, Swansea.
A-levelled
GULF War raids and subsequent weapons checks have reduced Iraq's nuclear programme to ‘zero,’ a United Nations official said last night.
With this ring
CLOWN Oleg Popov, 61, wed his 30-year-old fiancee in Holland yesterday.
Now she wants to join him in the ring at  Moscow State Circus.
Firetrap schools scandal
MANY schools are potential firetraps with appalling safety standards, it was revealed yesterday.
One council has two full time fire officers — just to show teachers how to evacuate schools with inadequate fire escapes and alarms, said a report.
Pat Black, Cumbria's director of education, warns: ‘We are forced into working outside statutory regulations.’
The teachers' union NASUWT said: ‘Some schools wouldn't stay open if they had to meet safety standards in other industries.’
Cumbria council said more than £7 million had been spent improving safety in five years.
NODDY'S SEX SECRET
He's really a girl
TONY PURNELL
GOLLY, Big Ears, what have they done to your little pal Noddy?
They've got a GIRL to do his voice, that's what.
Actress Susan Sheridan will speak the part when the Toytown star bounces back on our screens from September 17.
Susan, 43, was chosen from a dozen contenders.
And jolly pleased she was, too.
‘I had to do a scene with an actor playing Big Ears and was thrilled when I was told I'd got the part,’ she said.
Noddy, last seen on TV 15 years ago, will star for thirteen weeks in the Beeb's £1 million cartoon series.
But he will no longer be the rude, racist chap he used to be.
Wicked golliwogs have been replaced by goblins and Noddy doesn't boss the girls.
He no longer feels gay.
Or a little queer, for that matter.
And does he still jump into bed with Big Ears?
Not on your telly.
Noddy is part of a £38 million package for kids' TV this autumn.
Former Top Of The Pops presenter Anthea Turner is joining the Blue Peter team and action girl Michaela Strachan will be hosting The Really Wild Show.
SUSAN: Noddy's voice
TV STARS: Toytown's lovable rascal Noddy with Anthea yesterday.
Picture: BILL ROWNTREE
Monster Maggie's on course for a flop
DAVID BRADSHAW
A COLLEGE course about former Prime Minister Lady Thatcher looks like turning into a giant flop.
Not one student has signed up for the ten weekly lectures under the title Margaret Thatcher — Fact Or Fiction.
The Brighton technology college course promised to examine if she was ‘myth or monster’ in her 11 years at No 10.
Horror
But last night lecturer Cecile Critchell admitted the £29 course may have to be scrapped.
Labour MP Brian Wilson quipped: ‘It must be the first time Maggie's had trouble getting people to sign on.
They'll be moving her out of Madame Tussauds next.’
Brighton's Labour leader Steve Bassam wasn't surprised nobody had enrolled.
He said: ‘I wouldn't want to relive an 11-year horror story.’
LECTURES: Maggie
HOW COULD THEY GIVE OUR MIKE 10 YEARS?
Fury at savage Saddam prison sentence on Brit
GORDON HUGHES
MARK DOWDNEY
THE family of jailed Briton Michael Wainwright were stunned last night after he was given a 10-year sentence in Iraq.
His sister Susan Priestley declared: ‘It's savage and we're all numb with shock.
We just can't believe it.’
Her husband Melvyn added at their home in Halifax, West Yorks: ‘We're devastated.
Our hopes were high this morning after the Red Cross said he was in good spirits.
‘But they were dashed when the Foreign Office told us he had been jailed.’
Michael's 61-year-old widowed mother, Iris, said as another daughter, Heather, comforted her: ‘I'm afraid I might never see him again.’
Straying
Michael, a 41-year-old carpenter, was imprisoned for entering Iraq illegally while on a cycling trek to Australia.
He claims guards allowed him in.
Only three weeks ago, catering manager Paul Ride, 33, from London, got seven years on the same charge after straying.
It is feared that Iraqi tyrant Saddam Hussein is using them as political pawns because of Britain's role in imposing a no-fly zone.
Paul's wife Julie, 31, phoned Susan last night and said later: ‘I know what she is going through.
I just told her things will work out.’
DEVASTATED: Heather comforts mother Iris
JAILED: Michael
16 held in £1million fraud raid
FRAUD Squad police investigating an alleged ‘ghost car’ insurance fiddle arrested 16 people yesterday.
Homes and offices in Lancashire, Merseyside and Cheshire were raided at dawn in a swoop codenamed Operation Ash.
Detectives believe that well over £1million has been netted in false insurance claims on policies with the Scottish based General Accident company.
They suspect that many third-party accident claims have been made through branch offices of the firm for phantom vehicles that never existed.
Lancashire police said later that the 16 people arrested had all been released on police bail after questioning.
Lionel richer in £15m deal
SOUL star Lionel Richie has signed a deal worth £15 million.
Richie — who topped the charts with Hello — will earn the money by making five albums for Polygram after being with Motown Records for 20 years.
STAR: Richie
CHUNNEL ‘PHOBIA’
MILLIONS of worried Britons are too afraid to travel through the Channel tunnel, it was revealed yesterday.
Fears of flooding, explosion, fire or a terrorist attack are just four reasons pointing to a big boycott when the tunnel opens in autumn 1993.
More than half the 500 people quizzed in a poll said they would not use the Chunnel.
The survey says: ‘Those people who are prepared to travel by tunnel may be outvoted by their wives and families, so there could be a knock-on effect.’
The report from the London College of Clinical Hypnosis puts flooding as the biggest fear (252 out of 500 questioned).
High on the list are a cave-in (248), being beneath water (233), delays in tunnel (210), explosion (182), drowning (181), fire (132), suffocation (117), terrorists (109) and darkness (96).
Compiler Dr Keith Hearne said fears could be overcome by a course of hypnotherapy.
But a Eurotunnel spokeswoman dismissed the findings as ‘intended to allow hypnotherapists to tout for business.
It proves only that loaded questions provide loaded answers.’
Mia shelves new tot bid
ACTRESS Mia Farrow is shelving plans to adopt her twelfth child until her bitter custody row with Woody Allen is resolved, it was revealed last night.
An agent said: ‘Mia just wants to survive.
She's very afraid right now.’
Star Woody wants custody of three children from his 12-year relationship with Mia and claims she is a bad mother.
TUG: Mia
INSURERS SET TO GO BROKE
SOME of Britain's top insurance companies face going bust if the recession goes on, an expert warned yesterday.
Andrew Paddick, director general of the Institute of Insurance Brokers, claimed that one in five were already ‘on the danger list’.
Companies are estimated to be paying out £6 million a day in household and commercial claims — £1.30 for each £1 of premiums they collect.
3 sacked for BT ‘quiz sting’
THREE British Telecom engineers have been sacked over an alleged 0898 cash-quiz fiddle.
They are believed to have ‘won’ up to £60,000 by fooling computers in general knowledge phone games.
The BT men at Kidlington, Oxford, left the phone off the hook for 36 hours at a time.
Computers believed their silences were ‘no’ answers — right half the time.
The engineers' free calls were worth up to £750,000 to BT.
Song of the sea
VOLUNTEERS who sang to a sick dolphin for 36 hours to calm it returned the mammal to the sea at Gwithian, Cornwall, yesterday.
Fair old age
FORMER fairground boxer Bill Ford — nickname Dynamite Dan — celebrated his 100th birthday yesterday at Tetney, Lincs.
Trains to get ‘black boxes’
TERRY PATTINSON
TRAINS are to be fitted with airline-style ‘black boxes’ following the Cannon Street station crash.
Two people died and 542 were injured in the London terminus accident.
A report yesterday blamed driver Maurice Graham for failing to brake properly.
But it went on to slam British Rail for using ancient commuter trains with parts dating back to the steam age.
Cannabis
Mr Graham, 25, was found to have traces of cannabis in his blood three days after the accident in  January last year.
And the report from the Health and Safety Executive demanded a crackdown on railmen taking drink or drugs.
As well as black boxes, it also called for:
AUTOMATIC braking systems to be installed at main stations.
BUFFERS to be improved at all London stations.
TRAINING for drivers in emergency braking.
FIFTIES style trains to be withdrawn in favour of safer, modern carriages.
SCHOOL FOR TV MIKE'S ORPHAN
THE orphan girl smuggled out of war-torn Bosnia by TV newsman Mike Nicholson started school yesterday.
Nine-year-old Natasha Mihaljcic joined other youngsters at St Bartholomew's in Haslemere, Surrey.
Headmaster George Jones said: ‘She is very bright and extremely enthusiastic.
‘She has already made new friends.’
He said he had told the other children about Natasha's ordeal in the former Yugoslav republic.
ITN reporter Nicholson said: ‘We want her to settle in like a normal British schoolgirl.’
SAVED: Natasha
Tut ‘n’ car moan
PRICELESS gems said to be from the tomb of the Egyptian king Tutankhamen were stolen from a car in south London yesterday.
£29,0009 LIFE SAVINGS NICKED FROM BACK OF A CAR
But victims saved 40p on the parking
SAMUEL JAMES
ODDBALL mum Doreen Reilly and her son Michael were robbed of a £29,000 nest-egg stashed in their CAR — after saving 40p on a parking fee.
The cash, in bundles of £50, £20 and £10 notes, was stolen while they spent twenty minutes shopping.
The eccentric pair had stuffed their life savings into two bags hidden under newspapers…because they don't trust banks.
They left their Nissan Bluebird locked in a free car park after refusing to pay the 40p fee at one nearby.
A man later found £3,000 dumped yards away in Taunton, Somerset.
But police warned last night that they had little chance of tracing the rest.
A spokesman said: ‘Someone must have been stunned and be on a massive spending spree at the moment.
‘It was the haul of a lifetime for an opportunist thief.’
Grabbed
Doreen, 68, and factory worker Michael, 40, saved year-in, year-out to build up their nest-egg.
They kept the money at their council house in Chard, but took it with them on the rare occasions they went out.
The police spokesman added: ‘It is incredible that someone should carry so much cash around with them and leave it in a car.
‘They told us they don't trust banks and always keep their life savings with them.
‘They were talking as if they had lost a £10 note.
‘I asked the son how he knew how much was stolen and he said he last counted it 12 months ago.’
The Bluebird was one of three cars broken into.
The thief grabbed the cash after smashing a window.
Police found the empty bags in a garden.
A neighbour of the Reillys said they lived like hermits.
She added: ‘They use candles all the time instead of electricity.
‘She always keeps herself hidden behind the curtains.’
Another neighbour described Doreen as ‘rather strange.’
She said: ‘She plays God Save The Queen on her piano every night.
‘She also plays Christmas carols all the year round.’
BLUEBIRD: The thief got away with a nest-egg
Tomato super
GARDENER Dennis Croft grew an 18-inch round 2lb 4oz tomato in Shepshed, Lincs, which made meals for him and his wife for three days.
QE2 ‘CARGO SHIP’ SAILS
THE QE2 sailed for repairs in Germany yesterday — classed as a cargo ship.
The luxury liner, holed when she ran aground off America, is heading from Boston to Hamburg under her own power.
Foot the bill
A CHEMICAL firm was fined £50,000 yesterday after people nearby in Houston, Texas, said it smelt like a thousand dirty socks in a gym.
Cheer up!
Summer's returning
SUMMER isn't over yet — and next week could well be a real scorcher.
Temperatures in the mid-80s from Sunday to Wednesday are predicted for parts of the South by professional independent forecaster Piers Corbyn.
And early September generally is set fair to be a good spell for holidays, says his latest bulletin.
Dual controls
TWIN brothers Damon and Adam Shilton, 17, of Oldbury, West Midlands, passed their driving tests at the first attempt on the same day.
Going For Gold may soon be going…
TONY PURNELL
THE game could soon be up for some of the Beeb's quiz shows.
Bosses are threatening to axe them — but keeping faith in Eldorado.
Director General Sir Michael Checkland put a question mark over favourites like Big Break, Telly Addicts and Going For Gold yesterday.
He said: ‘I don't think we have to have so many quizzes.’
Viewers
And he added: ‘I'm not satisfied with Eldorado at the moment, but I wasn't satisfied with EastEnders when it started.’
But quiz shows have been getting more viewers than Eldorado.
ITV's Family Fortunes, Take Your Pick and Wheel Of Fortune all draw over 10 million people.
Eldorado only averages 4.3 million.
An ITV spokesman said: ‘Quiz shows are winners.’
GOING HOME…
KID THEY SAID WOULDN'T LAST TWO WEEKS
JILL PALMER
LITTLE battler Matthew Costen is going home in triumph — after defying doctors who gave him a fortnight to live.
The courageous two-year-old has spent all his short life in hospital.
He had a kidney transplant, 16 other operations and almost two years on dialysis.
Now he is thriving just like any other toddler — thanks to medical staff at Guy's Hospital in London.
‘At last we can plan for the future,’ said devoted 24-year-old mum Karen.
When Matthew was six weeks old, Karen and husband Tony, 28, were told his chronic kidney condition was deadly.
Tony, of Maidstone, Kent, said: ‘The doctors advised us to take him home to die, we wouldn't take that.’
He went on dialysis at 10 weeks — the youngest ever.
A donor became available when a four-year-old girl died 10 days ago.
‘We'll always be grateful,’ said Karen.
TOT: Matthew and mum Picture: HARRY PROSSER
Ah, so dumb
A £1,000 talking computer stolen from an electronics firm in Milton Keynes, Bucks, only understands Japanese.
WE'RE WELL SUITED
TV beauty Catherine Zeta Jones takes a step up in the world — to get equal with her 6ft 4in boyfriend.
The Darling Buds of May star was clearly suited to Blue Peter presenter John Leslie as she arrived for a show on London's Capital Radio.
Both donned two-pieces to prove they're a match for anybody.
Picture: ALAN GRISBROOK
Still in love 72 years on
HAPPY couple Richard and Ethel O'Brien celebrated their 72nd wedding anniversary yesterday.
Their recipe for happiness?
Richard, 94, and Ethel, 93, of Malvern, Worcs., agreed: ‘We've never once thought about anyone else.’
Thirst aid for gasping Gulf Brits
BARRELS of bitter are being shipped to a Gulf state for the first time — after a plea by thirsty Britons living there.
Officials in Abu Dhabi eased their strict Islamic ban on alcohol to allow in thousands of gallons of draught ale.
The first consignment, from Cumbrian brewers Jennings Brothers, left London yesterday.
It will go to a rugby club, a golf club and four hotels which are licensed to sell liquor to the 5,000 ex-pats in the United Arab Emirates' capital.
Big shot
A BOX of 100 shotgun cartridges made for King George VI was bought for £880 by gun fan Tony Kennedy of Launceston, Cornwall.
GAS RAID ON PACKED PUB
POLICE flagged down a bus to take 35 people to hospital after a gas attack on a pub last night.
Passengers were ordered off as the double-decker picked up casualties from the Welcome Inn at Eltham, London.
I HAD A GOTTLE OF GEER TOO MANY SAYS VENTRILOQUIST
Wife lands him in dock
GORDON HUGHES
VENTRILOQUIST Mike Dennett had a drink too many after he got fed up with listening to his wife Gladys.
They had a huge row when he got back home early yesterday — and she called police to sort him out.
When PC Colin Gaskell arrived, Dennett, 50, told him: ‘Arrest me.
I just want to get away from my wife and get some peace.
She talks too much.’
Boozy Dennett — who earns £600 a week with his dummy Chick — added: ‘I have been for a walk to have a think and went back, but it's getting worse.’
When PC Gaskell refused to lock him up, Dennett became abusive.
He told the officer he would assault him to make sure he was arrested and taken to the cells.
PC Gaskell was almost lost for words — but he called for assistance and the entertainer finally got his way.
Bound
He spent the night in police cells — and his performance won him an audience of magistrates at Fleetwood, Lancs.
They heard how he talked himself into trouble in the early hours.
Philip Baker prosecuting said: ‘Dennett told the officers he had been drinking and his wife had called the police.’
Dennett admitted causing a breach of the peace.
He was bound over for 12 months in the sum of £100 to be of good behaviour.
He told the hearing: ‘I wanted to get away from her.
‘I am now having to find alternative  accommodation .’
After the hearing Dennett said: ‘I had had a drink.
‘It was one of those things and I don't want to say anything more about it.’
At their £125,000 detached home at Cleveleys, Lancs, Gladys was as tight-lipped as a ventriloquist about the incident.
She would only say: ‘I do not wish to say anything about anything.’
Dennett's agent said last night: ‘Mike's a busy man.
He's very successful, very funny and on his way to the top.’
WHAT A DUMMY: Ventriloquist Mike with Chick
Jail?
Yes please
OLD lag Paddy Marshall broke a window to get ‘home’ to jail, a court heard yesterday.
Paddy, 72, has almost lived in ‘his special cell’ in Mountjoy prison, Dublin since the 1950s.
The judge asked if he'd like 12 months.
Paddy said: ‘Please.
It would be very nice.’
Blind Edna beats thug with her white stick
BLIND Edna Miller gave a thug who attacked her sightless chum a good walloping — with her white stick.
The brave granny sprang into action when she heard Kathleen Wallace scream.
And the mugger fled after Edna, 60, told him: ‘Leave her alone — take my handbag instead.’
She said yesterday: ‘He was nothing but scum and I hope I hurt him.
He certainly groaned a lot.’
The attack happened as the widows, from Sunderland, were on a trip to South Shields.
Ached
They both had white sticks and guide dogs and detectives believe the thug thought he had picked an easy target.
Edna, blind since birth, said: ‘I must have hit him at least 12 times.
My arm ached afterwards.’
Kathleen, 63, was taken to hospital for treatment for cuts and bruises.
She said: ‘Edna was just tremendous.
‘I hope they catch this cowardly thug and lock him up for a long time.’
Champ ‘in pub brawl’
EX-heavyweight boxing champ Danny McAlinden tried to stop a brawl and was arrested, a court heard yesterday.
Police said he was wielding a piece of wood outside a pub.
McAlinden told Inner London Crown Court he took the wood from fighting youths.
The boxer, of Walworth, denies affray charges.
The trial continues.
ARRESTED: McAlinden
STREET STAR CHALKY DIES
CORONATION Street actor Teddy Turner, who played Chalky White in the popular soap, has died after a long illness aged 75.
Teddy, who also played Bill Whiteley in Emmerdale, died peacefully at his home in Horsforth, Leeds.
Teddy was written out of the Street in 1983 when Chalky emigrated to Australia.
Apart from his soap roles, Teddy's gravelly voice was familiar in the TV Hovis commercials.
He was well-known on the comedy club circuit and raised a lot of money for charity.
Teddy leaves a widow, Peggy, and a daughter, Jane.
TV ACTOR: Teddy
SOBER BOOZE-UP
RONALD RICKETTS
A BRITISH version of the world's biggest booze-up is to be staged next month.
But anyone who gets drunk at London's answer to the Munich beer festival is certain to be thrown out.
Marshals — and waitresses flown in from Germany — will make sure drinkers don't get too many steins of beer at the four day event.
There won't be sobering-up stations like the ones in Munich.
‘We hope we don't need one,’ said organiser Cindy Keen.
‘We want it to be a nice family affair.’
STEIN: Rationed
Lucky monster
ANGLER David Moor, 31, hooked a 64 pound carp — British record is 51 pounds — then threw it back into a French lake.
David, of Rotherham, Yorks., said: ‘I wouldn't hurt a fly.’
IQ king is tops in GCSE
A 13-YEAR-OLD maths genius with a Mensa IQ just one short of the maximum 178 has beaten 30,000 rivals to win a glittering prize.
Self-taught whizkid Marcus Fong scored the highest marks in gaining a GCSE maths grade A — and is the first pupil to scoop a solid silver medal for excellence.
He was given no coaching by his teachers or parents.
But, while 16-year-old pupils swotted madly, he studied casually at home in Roehampton, London.
‘It was easy really,’ he said.
‘I just looked at my books when I felt like it.
I only started work for the exam in February.’
The medal will be sent to him in Australia.
He is returning Down Under with his dad Michael, a Northern Territory education official who has been visiting Britain for a year.
Proud Mr Fong, 46, admitted: ‘He's way ahead of me at maths.’
SUM GENIUS: Marcus, 13, won a maths prize by teaching himself
WHAT A COCK-UP!
THE TIMES HAS A HUGH GEE REXSHUN…
NIC NORTH
SLEEPY staff at The Times were left red-faced by a prankster's naughty note.
For the joker slipped something saucy into the top people's paper yesterday — a Hugh Gee Rexshun.
All was revealed in the Births, Deaths and Marriages section.
Among the ‘new arrival’ announcements was:
REXSHUN — On August 31st, in Chicago, to Harry and Dolly (nee Onboat) a son.
Hugh Gee.
Advertising staff on the stuffy broadsheet only spotted the blunder after an eagle-eyed reader rang their HQ in Wapping, east London.
The caller told them to say the man's full name out loud.
Unfortunate
The Times's commercial director Jeremy Reed, 37, said last night that the £22 small-ad was ‘most unfortunate’.
‘A man rang up late on Tuesday night and placed the ad.
He paid by credit card.
‘Unfortunately the typist who took the ad did not realise the significance of the wording and neither did anyone else until it was too late.
‘It's all rather embarrassing for us, but I think we'll see the funny side in the morning.
‘We will be on our guard in future — you can be sure of that.’
BRITS' DRUG RAP
A BRITISH couple have been accused of smuggling cannabis worth £266,000.
Nurse Dawn Anderson, 24, and her boyfriend Maldin Thain, 25 — both from Leeds — are being held in cells at Ceuta, a Spanish enclave on the Moroccan coast, and could face eight years' jail if convicted.
Murder of ex-premier
A FORMER Polish premier and his wife were found murdered yesterday.
Piotr Jaroszewicz, 83, had been strangled at home near Warsaw after apparently being tortured.
Wife Alicja was shot.
He was premier from 1970-80.
With deep sympathy — get out!
IAN CAMERON
COUNCIL chiefs wrote to Andrew Jones to say they were sorry his father had died…then told him to quit the family home.
Andrew moved into the semi nine months ago to look after his wheelchair-bound dad Clifford, 71.
But the pensioner's death means that Andrew, his wife Janice and son Gareth, 12, face eviction as squatters if they stay in the house at Margam, South Wales, said Port Talbot council.
Jobless engineer Andrew, 38 — who has painted and redecorated the house — yesterday called the officials ‘heartless’.
BARRY GIRL'S SCREEN BREAK
NEWSGIRL Samantha Norman is set for TV fame just like her dad — film critic Barry.
Samantha, 29, has been signed up as a reporter for ITV's London news bulletins from January.
‘Dad was so pleased he brought me a big cup of tea — I don't drink champagne,’ she said.
Film ‘92 host Barry wouldn't mind if she became his successor one day — and why not?
PLEASED: Barry
How uncivil…
A MOCK Civil War battle between Cavaliers and Roundheads at Newark, Notts, put seven people in hospital yesterday.
KILLED FOR KICKS
Then ‘thug used bat for game of baseball’
DAVID LEIGH
A YOUNG thug killed a complete stranger with a baseball bat — then used it in a park game with his pals, a jury heard yesterday.
Mark Paul, 20, went ‘looking for trouble’ after going out drinking with his flatmate Andrew Christie, it was claimed.
They spotted Oxford graduate John Lavender, 28, who was returning to his nearby home after a meal with a friend.
When Mr Lavender turned into an alley the pair followed him, the Old Bailey jury was told.
Paul grabbed the bat which Christie was carrying hidden up his sleeve, ran behind Mr Lavender and hit him with a single blow on the back of his unprotected head, said the prosecution.
‘He probably never knew what hit him,’ said counsel.
Tap
Mr Lavender, an insurance agent who was studying for a master's degree, was found slumped on the ground in Battersea High Street, South London, by a group of youngsters.
He had emergency surgery on his fractured skull but died 12 hours later from brain injuries.
Paul was arrested after a tip-off.
In a taped interview which was played to the jury, Paul said: ‘I just thought it was like a little tap on the head and that he would be all right.
‘I can't even explain the reason why I did it.
‘He was just a bloke walking along on his own.’
Paul told police he had no idea why he and his friend had gone out armed with the bat.
He said: ‘I was just trying to be hard or something.
It was just because we'd been drinking.
I don't know.’
The jury was told that Paul admitted using the bat in a game of baseball in Battersea Park just a few days after the killing.
Paul, a jeweller's assistant from Battersea, denies murder.
The trial continues.
VICTIM: Lavender
24-HOUR GUARD TO SAVE BUTTERFLY
SAMUEL JAMES
MURPHY the butterfly is guarded round the clock — to stop thieves netting her.
She's Britain's rarest flier, worth £3,500 on the black market.
Murphy, real name Morpho Ppeleides, was a freak of nature when she was born at Butterfly World in Stockton, Cleveland.
She should have been electric blue.
But she turned out black and white with a bright blue stripe running down each wing.
Murphy, a native of Belize, could live for up to ten weeks.
Then she will be given to the Natural History Museum.
WORTH A FLUTTER: Murphy, our rarest butterfly
BATTLE TO GAG FLUNKEY
BUCKINGHAM Palace was last night poised for a tough legal battle to ban a tell-all book on the royals.
Lawyers acting for the Queen are set to try to block Living With The Queen before it goes on sale in the US next month.
The controversial book by former Palace servant Malcolm Barker is an ‘Upstairs, Downstairs’ expose of the royals.
A Palace spokesman said: ‘We will be taking legal advice.’
Marriage rift book rubbish'
GEORDIE GRIEG
THE former husband of royal author Lady Colin Campbell branded her book on Charles and Diana a web of ‘fantasies’ yesterday.
Lord Colin Campbell, a New York art dealer, said: ‘I know the bloody woman and she is a bullshitter.
‘She came over to America to promote her book pretending to be royal and it is all rubbish.
‘She is obsessed with titles.
The woman is a crashing snob.’
Lord Campbell — 46-year-old brother of the Duke of Argyll — had tried to ignore his ex-wife's antics since they divorced within months of marrying in 1974.
But he decided to break his silence following the row over her best-seller, Diana In Private— The Princess Nobody Knows.
Name
It claimed Di waged a war against Prince Charles by manipulating the media.
Lord Campbell went on: ‘I've been through the book and much of it is nonsense.
‘She has used my family's name to make such a horrible attack on the Royal Family and I would like to apologise for that.
‘If she is so proud of herself, why didn't she call herself by her original name?’
Lady Colin was Jamaica-born Georgia Ariana Zadis when they wed a week after meeting in New York.
Lord Campbell said: ‘I wasn't in love with the bloody woman in the first place.
‘If I'd been in cold sobriety I would never have married her.
‘I would no more look at her today than a bar of soap.’
AUTHOR: Lady Colin
BLAST: Lord Campbell
Fishy business
DIANA is referred to as ‘Little Squid’ in a translation of the mystery taped phone call being played on a Berlin hotline.
BEAUTY WITH A SECRET PASTA
MODEL Giovanna Fanelli proudly wears her sash after winning the title of Italy's Miss Lovely Legs.
But the 26-year-old was once a Mr Hairy Legs…she was born a man.
And she has now been booted out of the Miss Italy contest after admitting that she underwent a sex-change operation last year.
Mum's plea to Saddam
HEARTBROKEN Iris Wainwright, 62, wrote to Saddam Hussein yesterday begging for her son's freedom.
Michael Wainwright, 42, from Sowerby Bridge, West Yorks., has been jailed for ten years for entering Iraq.
Deputy Foreign Minister Tristan Garel Jones protested to Iraqi envoy Zuhair Ibrahim yesterday over the sentence.
HELD: Michael
Para horror
A PARAGLIDER was killed and another seriously injured yesterday when their chute was dashed 100ft to the ground by freak winds at East Prawle, Devon.
Rolls warning
JET-engine giant Rolls-Royce warned yesterday it may switch some production abroad because of Britain's currency crisis.
Slamming them back
A SHOT of Mexican liquor mixed with champagne and lime goes into potent tequila slammers.
It gets its name from being slammed against the bar-top and downed in one go.
FATHER BLAMES DRINK LAWS
GRIEVING father Daniel Meinertzhagen demanded a tightening up of the licensing laws after yesterday's inquest on his daughter.
He said: ‘Georgina and her friends were not just happy — they were roaring drunk.
‘You are not allowed to serve drinks to people who are already intoxicated and these young people were under age.
‘If the law has to have a proper effect then landlords and breweries should know that to serve young people like this, they are in danger of losing their licences.’
But wealthy Mr Meinertzhagen — a Lloyds ‘name’— said he would not be taking civil action against the bar.
He said: ‘Nothing can bring my daughter back.’
Credit bookmaker Mr Meinertzhagen, who is divorced from Georgina's mother, was a close friend of missing gambling peer Lord Lucan.
He said he realised it could be difficult for busy bar staff to tell the age of a mature girl who looked over 18.
Coroner Nicholas Gardiner said he would be writing to Oxford's Licensing Justices drawing their attention to the case.
STUDENT HAUNT: Oxford's Boar pub
£8.50 PRICE OF TEENAGE GIRL'S DEADLY TEQUILA BINGE
THE fun-loving niece of tycoon Lord Hanson plunged to her death after knocking back SEVENTEEN tequila slammer cocktails costing just £8.50.
TRAGIC: Georgina plunged to her death after a huge binge on tequila
ANGUISH: Paul was drunk when Georgina died
Hold-up gunman shoots 2
A COLD-BLOODED gunman shot a security guard and a young have-a-go hero yesterday.
The raider blasted the guard in the stomach and leg before snatching £15,000.
Shop cleaner Jamie Howard, 22, started to chase the gunman as he fled the Gateway store in Sudbury, Suffolk.
But the gunman suddenly turned round, took careful aim and shot Jamie in the chest.
Jamie staggered across the street and collapsed in a pool of blood.
He had emergency surgery last night at the West Suffolk Hospital in Bury St Edmunds.
The the guard, who has not been named, is critically ill.
‘Gissa job’ bid by axed chief
REDUNDANT finance executive Philip Rice has stuck hundreds of ‘gissa job’ notices on cars.
He targets top-range models in car parks in Bristol, Gloucestershire and Wiltshire and leaves a list of his qualifications — and his photo — under the screen wipers.
Philip, 46, of Malmesbury, Wilts, now eight months without a job, has already received phone inquiries.
Randy coach nets striker
A SOCCER trainer has been fired — for falling in love with his club's sexy striker.
Roland Eybe, 46, was determined to score with Anja Bresch, 23, in the women's team.
He got the boot after his wife walked out and half the players quit because he spent so little time trying to improve the side's miserable record in Delmenhorst, Germany.
Anja left to be with him.
Gran Mary is a carnival queen
GRANNY Mary Farley is to be crowned carnival queen — because local girls couldn't be bothered to compete for the title.
Mother-of-five Mary, 44, stepped into the breach at Hatherleigh, Devon.
She said: ‘They came to the conclusion that I'm better than nothing.’
Husband Anthony, 47, said: ‘I admire her guts.’
HOME LOSER!
NEW council housing supremo Arnold Phillips admitted yesterday that the market is so depressed he can't even find a home for himself.
Mr Phillips can neither sell his house in Cardiff, Glamorgan, nor find a suitable new one in Swansea, where he took up his post a few months ago.
So, instead of doing a 90-mile round trip every day, he has settled — temporarily, he hopes — in a B & B hotel near his office.
Driven potty!
BANNED motorist Andy Lewis, 25, mixed up his dates and hit the road again a month too early.
He took the car out thinking his six-month ban had ended — only to be arrested again.
Now he's been banned for another 12 months at Banbury, Oxfordshire.
TV ORPHAN IS CLASS ACT
SAMUEL JAMES
THE ORPHAN smuggled out of war-torn Bosnia by TV newsman Michael Nicholson spoke of her first days at a British school yesterday and declared: ‘It is good.’
Nine-year-old Natasha Mihaljcic flashed a broad smile and added in broken English: ‘I like school very much.’
Then she proudly showed off her new school uniform.
At first she had refused to wear the skirt, preferring her old jeans.
But ITN man Michael said: ‘Eventually she was persuaded to wear it and when she turned up at school and saw all the girls wearing skirts she was absolutely relieved.’
Christine McCracken, her teacher at St Bartholomew's school in Haslemere, Surrey, said: ‘She has a great hunger to communicate and understand.’
Taught
Natasha has learned essential words like pen, pencil and book.
And she has taught her new classmates a few words in Serbo-Croat.
Michael, 55, said: ‘She has settled down extremely well.’
LOTS TO LEARN: Smiling Natasha gets a helping hand from her teacher Christine McCracken
Turkeys on cheep for Xmas
A FARMER is doing a roaring trade — selling turkey chicks for Christmas.
Hard-up families are buying them at £3.60 each to fatten up at home.
And farmer Dennis Reynolds says the cost of making the birds plump enough for a feast is chicken feed — especially when supermarket meat can cost £1 per lb.
Dennis, 42, of Tonna, West Glamorgan, said: ‘They are quite happy in a back garden and are not fussy eaters.’
BIRD: DIY lunch
Anneka rap
ANNEKA Rice's new TV game show, Holiday of a Lifetime, was slammed last night as ‘indefensible extravagance’ by Labour MP Alan Williams.
He has asked BBC chiefs how much the programme, filmed in Jamaica, cost to make.
STAR: Anneka
Boozy bike ride on M27
TIPSY cyclist Jeffrey Maidment set off home after a night in the pub — and rode the wrong way down the M27 motorway.
Magistrates at Eastleigh, Hants, heard that when police stopped him he asked: ‘Where am I?’
Maidment, 22, was fined £40 for being drunk in charge of a bike.
62 KILLED IN WAVE TERROR
AT least 62 people were killed and 3,000 missing last night after an underwater earthquake sent 50ft tidal waves crashing into the coast of Nicaragua.
More than 227 people were injured in the disaster along the Central American state's Pacific border.
Survivors said families were swept away.
Many of the victims were children.
Others were tourists.
President Violeta Chamorro appealed to the US to release £58 million of frozen economic aid to help victims.
1,500 more jobs face axe
AT LEAST 1,500 jobs will be axed next spring by off-shore engineering giant AMEC at Wallsend, Tyneside if new orders are not won, bosses said yesterday.
HOLIDAY BOY SAVAGED BY A CRAZED DONKEY
He nearly loses arm
GEOFFREY LAKEMAN
A CRAZED donkey nearly tore the arm off an eight-year-old boy as he stopped to take a holiday snap.
The enraged animal charged into Christopher Rogers, pinning him to the ground.
Then, as the helpless youngster screamed in agony, it bit chunks from his arm, breaking it in two places.
Christopher was also bitten on the head, neck and body before his pet collie Waldo dashed to the rescue.
The dog gamely drove off the donkey by snapping at its heels.
Christopher, of Bognor Regis, Sussex, was rushed to hospital, where he spent five days recovering from his ordeal.
His parents have had to extend their North Devon holiday so he can have further treatment.
‘It was a terrible shock for him,’ said mum Judith.
‘He's still having nightmares about it.’
Christopher was crossing a field at Berrynarbor when the stallion donkey attacked.
Alec Davies, whose son runs the guest house where the Rogers family were staying, said: ‘The boy was left in a terrible state.
Sanctuary
‘His arm was hanging limply and I feared he might have lost it altogether.
He was screaming and covered in blood.’
The donkey had been moved from its Exmoor sanctuary to graze during the summer.
A sanctuary spokesman said such an attack was ‘extremely rare.’
ATTACKER: The donkey
Helpless epileptic mugged by gang
AN epileptic was mugged at knife-point as he lay semi-conscious after a crippling fit.
The 51-year-old victim collapsed in a car park.
As he groggily came round he found himself surrounded by three youths he thought were trying to help him.
Then he realised one was holding a knife to his throat.
The thugs stole £20 from his wallet before fleeing the car park at Reading, Berks.
Still dazed, the man eventually got himself home and called police.
Yesterday Sergeant Paul Cassell, of Reading police, said: ‘This is one of the most sickening attacks I've come across.
‘It makes you wonder how low people can get.
It's sick — and it makes me very angry.’
TUC rebels to rejoin
UNION leaders yesterday paved the way for the electricians to be readmitted to the TUC — four years after they were expelled.
They agreed on a procedure which will be debated at next week's TUC conference in Blackpool.
TV horse horror
TV GIRL Yvette Fielding was dragged screaming behind a horse when a stunt backfired.
Yvette, 23, was pulled round a jousting arena at Lamberhurst, Kent, wrapped in a sack while filming ITV's new show, What's Up Doc?
The star was left badly bruised.
‘It was terrifying,’ she said.
HURT: Yvette
Craig is saved by bossy big sis
LITTLE Miss Bossy Emma Gardner keeps a firm grip on her brother after saving him from the clutches of a child abductor.
Emma, nine, screamed at six-year-old Craig when she spotted him getting into a stranger's white Fiesta outside their grandmother's home in Speke, Liverpool.
Craig scrambled free and the driver sped off.
Their relieved dad Mike said yesterday: ‘Emma did really well.
She bosses Craig around and that's why he listened to her.’
The Beast seen again
THE Durham Beast, a huge black puma-like animal said to have stalked the county since 1986, was spotted again yesterday.
Heather Allinson, 26, of Barnard Castle, who glimpsed it by the roadside near Gainford, said it had enormous teeth.
Thugs beat up heart op Phil
A PATIENT waiting for a heart-lung transplant was beaten up by a gang outside a Chinese takeaway.
Phillip Portman, 21, has had black-outs since the attack.
But mother Christine Portman yesterday said: ‘Thank God they didn't kill him.’
Phillip was waiting outside the takeaway in Castleford, West Yorks., when one thug shouted: ‘Let's get this blondie!’
The gang pounced on him and knocked him to the ground — but he curled up into a ball to save himself as punches and kicks rained down.
Phillip has only one heart valve instead of two AND a hole in his heart.
He has been waiting two years for a donor and carries a bleeper everywhere — waiting for the call telling him one has been found at last.
Bowing out
VIOLINIST Nigel Kennedy gave his last public performance of the Four Seasons in heavy rain at an open-air concert in Edinburgh.
Supergirl saves sis
A SCHOOLGIRL turned superhero yesterday to save her sister's life.
Plucky Liz Dawson, 11, lifted a 180lb camping trailer with ONE HAND and dragged eight-year-old Lynnette clear with the other.
It had toppled on to her as she played in the garden at their home in Macclesfield, Cheshire.
DRIVER, 82, GETS LOST FOR 13 HOURS
PETER KANE
AN 82-year-old man who drove off to visit friends got lost for 13 hours — and finished up just 22 miles from home.
Police found the exhausted pensioner bewildered by the roadside.
He had started out at night to visit friends in Yorkshire, 150 miles away.
But he had travelled only a few miles when he lost his way among the dark country lanes near his home in Diss, Norfolk.
Stranded
And instead of heading north he simply went round and round in circles until he was found in Brandon, Suffolk.
Yesterday the man, who is not being named, was safely back home.
A police spokesman said: ‘We have asked him to think seriously before undertaking any further adventures at his age.’
3 DIE IN ‘CHICKEN RUN’ AT CROSSING
SHOW-OFF driver Neville Swales played ‘chicken’ once too often on an automatic level-crossing — and killed himself, his sister and his bride-to-be.
Swales, who was twice over the drink-drive limit, zig-zagged his Capri around the half-barrier at 70mph — straight into the path of a train.
The car was tossed 20 yards down the line and Swales, 27, his sister Louise, 24, and girlfriend Maria Garbutt, 28, died instantly.
Two other passengers in the car suffered serious multiple injuries in the crash at Moorends, near Doncaster, in April.
An inquest in the town was told yesterday that Swales, who had drunk six pints, had been seen at least once before trying to beat trains over the unmanned crossing.
Verdict: Death by misadventure on Swales and unlawful killing on the two girls.
All three shared a house at Moorends.
Kara-on, Kris
KRISANNA Collins, 18, of Brighton, won the panto role of Cinderella opposite Carry On star Barbara Windsor after a karaoke turn.
Fire?
It's a porkie
FIREMEN raced to a 999 call and found housewife Bernie Plank starting a hog-roast barbecue…at four in the morning.
‘It needed time to cook,’ said Bernie at her home in Blade Bone Green, Berks.
SACKED…
FOR SHOWING THIS PICTURE TO A WOMAN
BILL DANIELS
AWARD-WINNING salesman Nick Hughes showed this topless photo of a Russian hooker to a woman customer — and got fired.
For shocked managing director's wife Anne Bevins accused him of producing ‘hard-core pornography’ in her office.
And one of the firm's executives complained: ‘We don't want to do business with this man any more.’
But yesterday Mr Hughes, 31, a member of the Royal Photographic Society, told a Birmingham industrial tribunal he had only been showing Mrs Bevins his holiday snaps.
‘She was thrilled to bits,’ he said: ‘The pictures are innocuous and she never gave any indication she was unhappy about them.
I couldn't believe it when I was sacked.’
Mr Hughes' boss claimed Mrs Bevins had been ‘very upset’ by the pictures.
Sales director David Nelsey added: ‘She felt he had total disrespect for women.’
But he admitted he hadn't seen the pictures before firing Mr Hughes from his £22,000-a-year job with office equipment suppliers Fellowes.
Risque
The salesman, of Marston Green, who was at the hearing with girlfriend Sylvia Southall, claims unfair dismissal.
He said he warned Mrs Bevins there were ‘one or two risque’ photos of a Moscow prostitute called Sonja.
Afterwards, he added, they went out for lunch together.
The tribunal reserved judgement.
OVER-EXPOSED: The saucy ‘holiday snap’ of hooker Sonja
CAMERA BUFF: Hughes and Sylvia yesterday
Grieving girl raps car cops
SYDNEY YOUNG
A TRAGIC joyrider's fiancee last night blamed police for his death.
Belinda Hazel, 31, said: ‘Police shouldn't chase them at such speeds — then it wouldn't happen.’
Her boyfriend John Champion, 19, died at the wheel of a stolen Sierra which smashed into a wall at Bristol during a 100mph chase early yesterday.
A 16-year-old youth with him escaped with minor injuries.
Champion was a friend of two youngsters who died on a stolen police motorbike in July, sparking three nights of rioting in the Hartcliffe area.
And he was the second Bristol joyrider to die in a police chase this week.
Police said they had no plans to review tactics.
Llama excuse
MOTORISTS were made late for work yesterday by a llama which wandered from its farm on to the A22 at Forest Row, Sussex.
Jury see replay of death hit
SALESMAN
Mark Paul yesterday re-enacted for a jury how he killed a stranger with a single blow from a baseball bat.
Paul, 21, broke down in tears when he was asked at the Old Bailey if he intended to kill or seriously injure Oxford graduate John Lavender.
‘No, I did not,’ he sobbed.
‘It was a tap on the head, just to give him a headache.
It was showing off, being Jack the lad.’
Mr Lavender died 12 days after the motiveless attack in Battersea, South London.
Paul denies murder.
MATTHEW AND ALISON MANWARING
IN yesterday's Daily Mirror we published an article about the delay of the funeral of Alison and Matthew Manwaring.
We would like to make it clear that this delay was not caused by any default on the part of the defendant who is charged with their murder nor by his legal advisers.
POLICE SURGEON WAS MORE DRUNK THAN ME!
B-test man's fury as doc is banned for drink driving
GORDON HUGHES
A POLICE surgeon who blood-tested a suspected drink-driver was too drunk to drive himself.
Sean Thompson, 52, was more than twice over the limit when he was stopped on the way home from the station.
Yesterday he was banned for 18 months.
And B-tested Peter Davidson, a former police inspector, said later: ‘I thought at the time he'd had more to drink than me.
‘Having been a serving officer I know when someone's had a drink.
He spilt a lot of blood from the phials.
‘His condition was obvious and they must have decided to pull him on the way home.’
Mr Davidson, 47, of Norbury, Derbyshire, has not been charged.
But he vowed: ‘If I am, I will fight the case tooth and nail.’
His solicitor, Peter Fox, said: ‘We would call the doctor's suitability into question.’
Thompson, who works for the police part-time, was woken up to take a sample from Mr Davidson at Ashbourne police station, Derbyshire.
After leaving, he was stopped.
He was said to have refused a breath-test and was arrested.
Relax
Later, an intoximeter reading showed 75 microgrammes.
The legal limit is 35.
Thompson's solicitor told Ashbourne Court: ‘He'd had a drink to try to relax.
‘He may well have misjudged how much he'd had.’
Thompson was also fined £280.
A charge of refusing to give a breath test was dismissed.
SHAMED: Drink-drive Thompson
PIE IN THE SKY
EIGHT thousand pigeons which vanished during a 300-mile race could have ended up as pie fillings.
Fanciers fear they were killed after flying over shooting clubs.
The birds — worth £500,000 — disappeared on the way to Sydney.
Sam Beggs, director of the Australian Pigeon Fanciers' Association, said: ‘A lot of the birds may have been killed by gun clubs.’
But former Aussie cricket skipper and keen fancier Bill Lawrie said some fell foul of falcons.
BOXER GUILTY IN PUB BRAWL
EX-BOXER Danny McAlinden, 44, got a suspended nine months' jail yesterday over a pub brawl at Walworth, south London.
He denied affray.
Fair play
SNOOKER ace Terry Griffiths will play blindfolded against a sightless opponent to launch a book about sport for the blind.
Skids on the block
SIXTY per cent of union bosses are in favour of scrapping the trade union block vote at Labour Party conferences.
The shock findings, in a survey by the New Statesman journal, will boost growing demands for a fundamental rethink of the links between the party and the unions.
Change
Bill Jordan, president of the newly-merged Engineers and Electricians Union, is the most influential of the leaders backing change.
They want to see an end to the image of trade unions as Labour's paymaster and, by implication, policy-maker.
The survey reveals much greater support for reform than previously thought.
Get 'em off
A TV show featuring sexy home videos was halted after a flood of viewers' complaints in Sydney, Australia.
Son held by Navy ‘admitted murders’
MARK DOWDNEY
A MURDER suspect arrested at sea admitted killing his parents, it was claimed yesterday.
Roderick Newall, 27, was alleged to have confessed to his uncle at a Scottish hotel in July.
Police were told and tailed Newall but he gave them the slip and fled from Britain on a yacht he inherited from his parents, a court in Gibraltar heard.
Former Army officer Newall, whose mother and father disappeared from their Jersey home five years ago, was arrested last month when a Navy frigate stopped the boat off North Africa.
He is being held in Gibraltar pending extradition proceedings.
Shooting
The Rock's Attorney-General, John Blackburn Gittings, said Newall's uncle and aunt might be in danger if he was released on bail.
He claimed that after confessing to them, Newall had planned to flee to Brazil and told police he even thought of shooting his way to freedom after his arrest.
Mr Gittings claimed Newall said he killed his parents in October, 1987.
Defence lawyer Christopher Finch shouted:
‘You know he never said such a thing.’
Mr Finch revealed that Newall was on hunger strike in protest at jail conditions.
Bail was refused.
Daredevil Pat shot herself
CIRCUS target Pat King-Magee dodged bullets, knives and bull whips aimed by her husband for ten years.
But then she and husband Dave Flame went to a country and western night in cowboy outfits just for fun — and she shot herself in the leg.
Burned
The blank round ripped through her jeans, burned her leg and sent her sprawling on the floor on their night-out in Wrexham, North Wales.
Pat, 50, from Chester, said yesterday: ‘It was so embarrassing.
The pistol suddenly went off.
‘I've stood there blindfolded while Dave shoots balloons out of my mouth or throws razor-sharp axes at me.
I've never had a scratch — until this.’
Princess could be dragged to court as libel witness
STEPHEN WHITE
PRINCESS Diana may be forced to give evidence in court about her friendship with dashing Gulf War hero James Hewitt.
She could be ordered into the witness box if the The Sun fights a libel case being brought by the Life Guards tank commander.
Major Hewitt, 34, issued a writ yesterday because of‘the scandalous nature of false allegations against him’.
It followed days of frenzied speculation about his relationship with Diana and the state of her marriage to Prince Charles.
But last night The Sun claimed the major's ex-girlfriend Emma Stewardson had been the source of their story.
Leading libel lawyer Brian Hepworth confirmed that Diana could be called as a witness.
He said: ‘Only the Queen is above the law and could not be subpoenaed.’
But it is unlikely that polo-playing Major Hewitt would want to embarrass the princess by making her give evidence in front of the world's press.
Earlier, the paper's money-spinning 0898 phone number for callers to eavesdrop on the ‘Dianagate’ tape was banned.
Watchdogs ruled that the recording of an intimate chat between Di and her pal James Gilbey — during which Major Hewitt's name was mentioned — was ‘an unreasonable invasion of privacy’.
WRIT: Hewitt
ANDY PLEA FOR COP
SYLVIA JONES
PRINCE Andrew made a personal plea to save the job of the detective caught off guard at the pool where Fergie was snapped topless.
But the officer still lost his royal minder post yesterday — as exclusively forecast by the Mirror.
Sergeant Graham Ellery was pictured on a sunlounger at the villa in France where Fergie canoodled with Texan boyfriend John Bryan.
His Scotland Yard bosses were furious.
Prince Andrew feared daughters Beatrice and Eugenie — already facing the turmoil of their parents'  split — would lose another source of stability if Sgt Ellery was stripped of his post.
They are said to be ‘very fond’ of him.
But Yard chiefs decided he had to be moved.
Sgt Ellery will become part of a back-up team that supports officers guarding all the royals.
His partner Constable John Hodgkinson — pictured with him reading a book — keeps his post.
MOVED ON: Graham
Fury at Di bath
MPs last night urged a Commons probe into the scandal of Princess Di's £3,000 whirlpool bath — revealed exclusively in yesterday's Mirror.
Labour MP Alan Williams was ‘shocked’ by the luxury purchase on the taxpayer.
He said the public would not tolerate a ‘cover-up’.
An annual £25 million goes on the upkeep of palaces, with no checks.
A second Labour MP, David Winnick, said the bath was an extravagance.
Griffin's Eye — Page 6 
DOZY DOC PUTS FAKE ‘CASUALTY’ IN HOSPITAL
GP is fooled by disaster ‘game’
A DOCTOR fooled by a mock train disaster rushed to jab a ‘victim’ with painkiller — and put him in hospital.
Dozy Dr Bob Lambourn leapt into action when he stumbled across the training exercise.
It was staged to give the emergency services practice.
But all Bob knew was that dozens of people sounded in agony with horrific-looking wounds.
Grabbing his black bag the doc:
PUSHED his way through police cordons, CLAMBERED inside one of the mangled carriages and REACHED a screaming man who had a bone sticking out of his ripped trousers.
Dr Bob calmly injected a pain-killing drug into the man's backside.
And the awful truth only dawned when the ‘casualty’ stopped screaming and groaned: ‘Do we really have to go that far?’
Forgiving
He was taken to hospital and kept in overnight to sleep off the effects of the drug.
But he knew Bob meant well — and wrote him a letter forgiving him.
The £1,000 training session, at a level crossing in Choppington, Northumberland, featured 20-foot flames, helicopters, fire engines and ambulances.
Seventy ‘victims’— highly trained at feigning injuries — were supplied by the Guild of Casualties.
Spokeswoman Vera Robson chuckled: ‘It was a pure accident.
And the doctor was doing his level best.’
Merle Latham, from the local St John Ambulance, said: ‘The man was supposed to have lost a lot of blood and was covered in gory make-up.
‘The poor doctor wasn't to know that the great piece of bone sticking out was supplied by the local butcher.’
Northumberland's chief fire officer, Jeff Ord, said: ‘The doctor was being public-spirited.
If I was injured in an accident, he would do for me.’
Dr Lambourn, 35, said yesterday: ‘I have been advised professionally to make no comment.’
But colleague Dr Susan Williams declared: ‘He is a first-class doctor who stopped to help as a Good Samaritan.’
THE GOLDEN LADY
Cashing in…the woman who put millions on the dole
Thatcher gets £250,000 for three days' work
She rakes in £10 million over the past two years
Her pay is £55 a minute as jobless get £43 a week
DAVID BRADSHAW
FORMER Prime Minister Maggie Thatcher now pockets more every minute than the unemployed get in a week.
The woman who let Britain slide into the worst depression since the 30s was paid £250,000 last week for just three days' work on a lecture tour.
And she is believed to have banked £10 million since being booted out of Downing Street two years ago.
Last night Labour employment spokesman Frank Dobson slammed the ‘obscene’ earnings.
‘Thousands who lost their jobs because of her policies will be disgusted at the way she is lining her handbag,’ he said.
Amazingly, though, foreign tycoons pay through the nose to hear Lady Thatcher spout her economic theories — even though, back home, businesses and homeowners are still suffering because of them.
Maggie, who once said ‘Pennies don't come from heaven — they have to be earned on earth’, makes sure she gets first-class treatment during her travels.
During last week's trip to Taiwan, she stayed in a £1,000-a-night luxury hotel suite.
Chauffeured
Even husband Sir Denis's room, just down the corridor, cost £500.
And she insisted on being chauffeured round in a Daimler — just like the Queen.
All the bills were picked up by a consortium of local banks and newspapers.
Mr Dobson said: ‘At £80,000 a day, she's earning £55 a minute while millions are struggling on £43-a-week dole.’
£1.7m for pin-down victims
MORE than £1.7 million has been shared out among victims of a child care scandal.
The youngsters were all locked up for days in solitary confinement at children's homes in Staffordshire.
County council chiefs ordered a massive investigation after details of the ‘pin-down’ system were revealed.
Now their insurers have paid out between £500 and £41,000 to about 140 victims.
Last night Nicola Simms, 21, from Nutton, Stoke-on-Trent, told how she endured five weeks under the regime.
She said: ‘Even though I've received compensation, my memory of pin-down will never be erased.’
DI IN SMASH SCARE
KEVIN O'LONE
TROUBLED Princess Di had a smash in her £72,000 supercar last night — when she was rammed from behind by POLICE.
Di was just about to drop elder son Wills back at school when she braked sharply to avoid an oncoming motor.
Her police back-up Rover failed to stop in time and ploughed into her beloved cherry-red Mercedes 500SL.
At least one of the Rover's headlights shattered and Di's bumper was thought to have been damaged.
But neither the princess nor the police driver got out to inspect the damage.
Moments later Di dropped Wills off before heading on to London.
The shunt happened as she turned into the drive of Ludgrove School, at Wokingham, Berks.
One eyewitness said: ‘Di had taken the corner into the school a bit wide and had stopped to avoid a car coming out.
‘As she stopped, a car behind with detectives in ran into the back of her Mercedes.
‘There was glass on the floor, but she seemed to be all right and so did Prince William.
‘It was more of a bump than anything else.’
Diana bought the 157mph Mercedes in February despite fierce criticism that she didn't choose British.
Today, Prince Harry, seven, joins Wills at £2,100-a-term Ludgrove.
Charles and Diana are delighted with the school.
Lab monkey plea to Mary
TOP animal trainer Mary Chipperfield has been urged to buy back monkeys sent from safari parks for laboratory research.
The International Animal Welfare Alliance said Mary, whose husband is in charge of monkeys at Woburn and Longleat, is a director of a firm involved in the sale.
She was unavailable last night.
HOW CRAZY CAN YOU GET?
Train driver in ‘deep shock’ after he stares disaster in the face
500 in miracle escape
Maniacs put these two metal benches in front of a 90mph express
NIC NORTH
MANIAC hooligans prepared to kill hurled two iron benches in front of a 90mph express train.
The train, carrying up to 500 passengers in 12 coaches, ploughed into the heavy seats at top speed dragging them underneath for a mile.
But, astonishingly, it stayed on the track and no one was hurt.
Yesterday, teams of police and forensic experts launched a massive inquiry to find the mindless yobs.
The train driver was in such ‘deep shock’ he could not be interviewed and was being counselled by staff.
And horrified Superintendent Peter Edwards of British Transport Police, said: ‘We are very fortunate we are not dealing with a major disaster.
‘This is the worst attempt to derail a train that I've ever seen.’
The vandals struck on deserted Berkhamsted station, Herts, between 8.35 and 9 on Saturday night.
The bright red benches were attached to the ground by bolts set in concrete.
But, hell-bent on destruction, the hooligans — at least two strong men — are believed to have rocked the seats until the bolts snapped.
Then they dragged them to the edge of the platform and threw them on the track.
There were no other passengers about.
And the only railman on duty did not see anything.
At 9.01 the Liverpool-Euston InterCity carrying 350 Chelsea fans and 150 other passengers — including Shadow Environment Secretary Jack
Straw — came rocketing down the line.
The driver didn't see the seats until he was about 200 yards away.
Death
Horror-struck, all he could do was slam on the brakes and pray.
He thought he was staring death in the face.
By the time the 90mph train smashed into the benches it had lost only about 5mph.
But, incredibly, it stayed on the line and came to a halt a mile further on, dragging the mangled seats beneath the engine.
Mr Straw — who was with his children William, 11, and Charlotte, 10 — said: ‘It's a miracle the train didn't come off.
‘We weren't thrown about and we weren't injured.
The driver deserves high praise.’
Mr Straw is to write to Transport Secretary John MacGregor urging a probe to discover why the vandals weren't spotted and whether cash cuts were to blame.
The train had been due to arrive at Euston at 9.30.
Instead, another loco was sent to pull it back into Berkhamsted station where passengers waited for two hours before travelling on to London.
Checks
Yesterday 20 transport police were making house to house inquiries.
Other officers got on hands and knees to collect red flakes of the benches' paint from the track for forensic examination.
The seats were also checked for fingerprints.
Last night Derrick Fullick, leader of ASLEF rail union, said: ‘The more British Rail continue to cut staff at stations the more we will get incidents like this.’
Jimmy Knapp, leader of the rail union RMT, said: ‘This drives home the dangers of BR's programme of de-staffing stations which is gathering pace.’
But BR said it had employed 5,000 extra staff nationwide and invested an extra £85million on safety in the past year.
Chess king is humbled
CHESS wizard Bobby Fischer was beaten by old rival Boris Spassky yesterday — for the first time in 20 years.
The first-to-ten world title battle between the maverick American and the Russian is now all square after four games in Przno, Yugoslavia.
Lining up jobs
A JOBS agency is supplying volunteers to take part in police identity parades in Chatham, Kent — for £4 a time.
ITV PLAN ‘MINI SOAP’
A SEXY new mini-soap is to be launched on ITV in November.
Episodes will be just ten minutes long, slotting into Granada's This Morning programme.
The saga centres on the tangled love life of a 30-year-old woman, who fears she will be left on the shelf.
Insiders describe it as a ‘daily dose’ of the Gold Blend coffee advert.
Meanwhile, BBC chiefs last night dismissed reports that they plan to kill off their expensive new Eldorado soap as ‘wild speculation.’
21 killed in coach crash
TWENTY-ONE people were killed and 30 injured yesterday when a coach carrying elderly German tourists hit a car and overturned.
Rescuers sliced off the roof to reach victims of the crash near the Black Forest.
A child in the car was among the injured.
Family KO gun gang
THREE armed gangsters burst into a businessman's house demanding money — but were sent packing by FOURTEEN burly relatives.
The man was having a family gathering when the masked raiders, armed with a pistol and a knife, barged into his home in Knowle, Bristol.
They fled empty handed after a brawl.
Police said: ‘They were certainly surprised.’
Puppets show all
A PUPPET show featuring full frontal nudity, nookie and a bedroom torture scene is to be shown on Channel Four this autumn.
Producer Barry Purvis said yesterday he has designed the puppets ‘with all their intimate bits and pieces.’
His adults-only film, Screen Play, is just 11 minutes long.
‘So the puppets have to strip off and get down to it pretty quickly,’ Barry explained.
Kennedy girl ‘alive for 2 hours’
THE girl allegedly abandoned by Senator Edward Kennedy in the Chappaquiddick car tragedy lived for two hours afterwards, it is claimed.
The diver who found her body — John Farrar — broke a 23-year silence to claim that Mary Jo Kopechne was kept alive in an air pocket inside the senator's car.
Alarm
And he says on the US TV show Hard Copy that she did not drown but suffocated.
Senator Kennedy did not raise the alarm for ten hours after the accident.
Mr Farrar said: ‘If he had gone for help, it is beyond question we would have been able to save Mary Jo's life.’
The senator's Washington office said he would not comment on the claims.
Crowded baa
WALES now has a record 11.2 million sheep — more than four times its human population — a new census reveals.
Tip-off
POLICE are fingerprinting the tip of a 66,000year-old stalactite stolen from caves at Powys, Wales — after the repentant thief returned it by post.
FURY OVER BEADLE TV ‘BODY’ GAG
SAFETY experts have slammed prankster Jeremy Beadle for a Halloween TV joke which gave a man a shock from beyond the grave.
The unsuspecting victim was horrified when a ‘corpse’ leaned out of an open coffin to ask him for a takeaway pizza.
And the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents warned that he could easily have suffered a heart attack.
But despite the criticism, Jeremy still plans to screen the stunt on October 31.
Beadle's About producer Robert Randall giggled: ‘You should have seen the look on the guy's face.
It's about the best thing we've ever done.
He was so unaware of the joke and it was so professionally done that the result was absolutely incredible.
‘The man doesn't know what on earth to do.’
The victim is employed in a South London laboratory where people are frozen for up to 500 years.
He injured himself during the prank.
But show insiders said he laughed afterwards.
Husband murdered feeding the foxes
JOHN PEACOCK
AN animal lover went to the woods to feed the foxes — and was beaten and stabbed to death in front of his wife.
Robert and Sandra Wignall were watching foxes near their home in Addlestone, Surrey, when a three-man gang struck at the weekend.
The men asked if the couple had seen a boxer puppy — and when the Wignalls said they hadn't, they were abused and attacked, said police.
Sandra, who is in her forties, ran off screaming as 55-year-old Robert collapsed in a pool of blood.
Wicked
She hid in  undergrowth — and when she ventured out she found his body.
Distraught Sandra was yesterday giving police descriptions of the men.
Det Supt Pat Crossan, leading the murder hunt, said: ‘This was a wicked crime — unprovoked and completely motiveless’.
Robert, a painter and decorator, married Sandra at Christmas after their partners died of cancer, it was revealed.
And they met in the woods where Robert was murdered.
Neighbour Dino Guarisco said: ‘They used to walk their dogs, started talking and fell in love.’
Test tube tots say ‘thanks’ to pioneering doc
JILL PALMER
TWO youngsters cuddled up yesterday for a special ‘thank you’ to the man who gave them life.
Amanda Hornett, six, and newborn Sophia Pepperrell are the oldest and youngest children conceived through Professor Robert Winston's pioneering test tube techniques at Hammersmith hospital in London.
Six hundred youngsters gathered at a massive party to help raise cash for the clinic — now the most successful in the world.
The bash was organised by grateful parents to mark the 1,000th baby, due to be born this month.
Professor Winston said: ‘I'm thrilled to see them all here.
Many couples go through agony before they conceive but this shows that there are many successes.’
Picture: NIGEL WRIGHT 
CONKERS IDEA PLAIN BONKERS
A KILLJOY councillor wants horse chestnut trees chemically neutered — to stop kids playing conkers.
Kevin Hunt, of Middleton, Greater Manchester, said yesterday youngsters are risking their lives and damaging trees by climbing them.
But world conker champion John Bull, 70, from Peterborough, Cambs, said: ‘This councillor wants neutering.
He's round the twist.’
LAWFULLY CONFUSING
CONSTABLE Constable is now Sergeant Constable and Sergeant Sergeant is now Inspector Sergeant.
Promotions for Phil Constable, 30, and Steve Sergeant, 37, have just been announced by police at Winchester, Hants.
Bold school tie
PUBLIC school boys at Uppingham, Rutland, are to dump the sombre black ties they've worn since Queen Victoria's death in 1901 — and get snazzy new blue ones.
Freak wave kills pals
FISHING pals John Armstrong, 52, and James Scrimgeour, 62, drowned when a freak wave sank their boat near the shore at Cresswell, Tyneside.
COSTNER BOMB
MOVIES that are a smash hit at the box-office still end up losing millions.
Rain Man took more than 230 million dollars, but is 30 million in the red.
Kevin Costner's Untouchables is 20 million down, despite earning 100 million-plus.
And Who Framed Roger Rabbit? has similar losses on takings of 200 million.
Hollywood analyst David Robb blamed a ‘huge escalation’ in costs.
United we fall over
SOCCER chiefs have blown time on a Sunday afternoon league — because so many players turned up drunk after lunch-time pub sessions.
Now teams in the New Forest League, Hants, will play in the morning.
Mafia's No2 is seized
THE Mafia godfather believed to be behind the murder of two crimebusting judges was arrested yesterday.
Giuseppe Madonia — on the run for eight years — was thought to be No2 in the Sicilian hierarchy.
He was held yesterday as he drove to a villa in Longara, northern Italy.
He offered no resistance.
Judges Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino were blown up by car bombs in May and July.
Falcone had jailed a leading member of 46-year-old Madonia's clan.
£10,000 MEAL TICKET
JILL TURNER
GRANDMOTHER Phyllis O'Riley was cooking up a special present for herself last night after scooping the £10,000 jackpot on Mirror Bingo.
The maisonette in Plymouth which she and husband Gilbert share with two of their six children is to get a dream kitchen.
Phyllis, 59, called ‘house’ on number 27 in Game 227.
Today's Numbers — Page 13
Quackage deal
EMIGRATING Bob and Elaine Whibley want £57,995 for their home in Patcham, Sussex — with pet duck Howard thrown in for free.
I've found a gran thanks to advert
LONELY toddler Demelza Young cuddles for the first time the answer to her dreams — her new granny.
Demelza, whose mother is her only relative, wanted a gran so much she advertised for one in a Jobcentre.
Forty hopefuls replied, but none could match 52-year-old widow Jean Day who already has two grandchildren of her own.
Demelza, five, of Oakworth, West Yorks, said: ‘She's just what I've been looking for.
She's terrific — nice and kind and friendly.’
Jean, of Scarborough, North Yorks, smiled: ‘I'm just getting to know her.
I'm spoiling her rotten, but she deserves it.’
Mum Katrina, 33, added: ‘Jean just seemed right.
But I'm grateful to all those who offered.’
Demelza's ad, which she wrote herself, read: ‘Wanted, loving and caring grandparents for little Demelza to love and cherish this outgoing girl.’
Now Jean has made her day…
PARA NUT CRASHES INTO A PLANE…
AND HE LIVES!
Chute snags on wheels
CLIVE CRICKMER
MAD-KEEN parachutist Terry Wakenshaw cheated death when he was hit by his plane a second after he leaped out.
His parachute opened instantly and tangled in the aircraft's wheels.
Terry's right arm was shattered and his head and chest gashed as he was hurled like a rag doll against the Cessna 206 — flying at 7,000 feet.
Friends on the ground watched in horror as he was towed along for 20 seconds before managing to pull an emergency handle to free himself from the snagged chute.
Bachelor Terry, 34, fell like a stone for 500ft — then pulled his reserve chute open.
He was badly shocked and in great pain but managed to steer himself towards a field half a mile from the parachute club at Brunton, Northumberland.
Despite the pain fisherman Terry, veteran of almost 600 jumps in seven years, was reluctant to go to hospital.
Pain
He told club members who rushed to help him: ‘I'd rather go for a pint with my mates.’
Instructor Graham Marley, 33, said yesterday: ‘It was a freak accident but fortunately Terry kept his bottle.
‘He was in great pain but he used his skill and experience to escape.
‘It was a text book example of an emergency descent.’
Terry, from Longbenton, near Newcastle upon Tyne, was still in hospital last night.
His condition was described as ‘serious but stable’.
Riots ‘on the way’
THE riots that rocked Oxford, Salford, Bristol and Blackburn could be the first of many if the Government continues with its uncaring policies, president Rodney Bickerstaffe told the conference.
GRAND OFF A ROVER
ROVER is slashing car prices by up to £1,000 in a bid to kick-start stalled sales.
All models will be reduced by 7 per cent from today.
The cuts follow the August K-registration flop which hit all car-makers.
Only 373,804 vehicles were sold despite a massive £50million ad blitz by the industry.
A top-range Rover 420Gsi 16v will have £1,082 knocked off its £15,202 price tag.
Saving on a 1.3 Mini Mayfair — new price £6,415 — is £518.
FERGIE GOES 2nd CLASS
SYLVIA JONES
OUTCAST Fergie has been delivered the final insult by Buckingham Palace.
Her official stationery is now being used as scrap paper in the royal mail.
It's being sent out to the public through the post with no attempt to spare her pride or hide her name.
The card pictured on the right — clearly headed HRH The Duchess of York — was handed to the Mirror by a shocked reader.
It had been used to stiffen an envelope posted from the Palace which contained photographs of other members of the Royal Family.
Fergie's title has been casually lined through with a ballpoint pen.
And it is left obvious that the card had been printed for her aides to make notes for her forthcoming speeches.
But that was when the duchess was part of the charmed inner circle of royals, with an extensive staff to help her carry out official duties.
After the announcement of her separation from Prince Andrew in March, Buckingham Palace officials cancelled all her public appearances.
They went to considerable lengths to remove all traces of her from the offices and rooms she had used at the Palace.
But clearly the Queen's well-known frugal habits have rubbed off on staff.
They could not bring themselves to waste good paper — even if it was Fergie's.
And the unused stationery was stacked in a general office for use by lowly clerks.
HUMBLED: Fergie
WASTE: Fergie card
BOMB ROCKS THE HILTON
Massive alert as ‘IRA’ strike at West End
KEVIN O'LONE
A TERRORIST bomb rocked the Hilton Hotel in the heart of London's West End last night.
It went off in the gents' toilet on the ground floor.
But nobody was injured and damage was limited.
Minutes earlier, police sealed off Park Lane and Piccadilly after receiving a telephone warning that bombs were planted inside all hotels in swish Park Lane.
Park Lane boasts some of London's top hotels including the Hilton, Inn on the Park and the Grosvenor.
But the caller — who used a recognised IRA code-word — didn't reveal which hotel had been targeted and a massive security operation got underway.
Anti-terrorist officers evacuated guests from the Hilton lobby and coffee shop.
Ten ambulances and fire engines were sent to the scene.
Screams
Forty minutes later, at about 8.40pm, the device went off.
A receptionist said: ‘There was a big bang and everyone was screaming.
I was in a state of shock.’
Hotel duty manager George Ashou, who was only 10ft from the blast, said: ‘The bomb went off with a muffled crump.
‘Fortunately nobody was in the toilet and there were no injuries.
‘All our guests stayed in their rooms and most didn't even know there was an emergency.
‘The police said there was no need to make an announcement.
We did not evacuate the hotel because warnings like this are so common.’
Police carried out a controlled explosion of another suspect device in a nearby subway.
Officers also searched all cars parked in Park Lane.
The West End suffered traffic chaos.
Klaus Kabelitz, duty manager at the Inn on the Park, said: ‘Police came in and said they had received an alert with a bona fide code.
‘We searched anywhere where something might be hidden.
‘Later we were told there had been an incident at the Hilton and were asked to move all our guests away from the windows.’
Scotland Yard refused to comment on whether they believed the IRA were responsible.
Two people died and 62 were injured in an IRA attack on the 512-bedroom Hilton in 1975.
A bomb exploded in the crowded lobby at lunchtime.
HILTON: A suspected IRA bomb hit the ground floor — but no-one was hurt
INN ON THE PARK: On alert after code threat
DORCHESTER: Feared to be the terrorists' target
KEYS SCARE AT TOP JAIL
DAVID LEIGH
A JAIL claimed to be the most secure in Britain has spent £100,000 changing all its locks — because of fears prisoners copied the keys.
Jail chiefs have been told a prisoner snatched the keys from a warder who fell asleep on duty.
He made imprints of the keys in bars of soap before returning them to the sleeping prison officer.
The imprints were then smuggled out of London's Belmarsh Prison, which holds some IRA suspects.
A crooked locksmith is believed to have made copies of the keys which were then smuggled back into the ‘escape-proof’ jail.
The alert was started by another inmate who tipped off prison staff.
‘Locks were changed as a precaution,’ a Home Office spokesman said last night.
‘And an investigation is now underway.’
Belmarsh opened last July after IRA suspects Nessan Quinlivan and Pearse McAuley escaped from Brixton Prison.
ALL TOGETHER NOW
Diana and Charles link up on Harry's big school day
But not for the official photo
A shame the old man had to ruin it all
JAMES WHITAKER
CHARLES and Diana staged a brief display of togetherness yesterday — their son Harry's first day at boarding school.
But dithering Charles then messed it all up — by missing his chance to be in the official happy-family photo.
One critic said: ‘What a muck-up.
Charles had a perfect opportunity to show the world that the Waleses are a family reunited.
And he blew it.’
The couple, struggling to put marriage problems behind them, were pictured together only once — sitting on either side of Harry as he arrived at £7,500-a-year Ludgrove prep school in the back of a royal Jaguar.
They were welcomed by staff — and by Harry's ten-year-old brother William, a pupil at the school near Wokingham, Berks, since 1990.
Nattering
Harry, eight a week today, stepped from the Jaguar to be greeted by headmaster Gerald Barber, his wife Janet and joint headmaster Nichol Marston.
Diana told William, who had returned to school a day earlier: ‘I've got some things inside the car for you.’
So Wills went back to the vehicle with his mother and brother.
They got out a bag containing balloons and presents for Harry's birthday bash, which will be held without his parents.
Then the picture that will go into the Windsor archives was taken — while Charles disappeared from the historic scene, nattering.
But a Buckingham Palace spokesman said later: ‘There is a very simple reason why the prince is not in the photograph.
‘He was talking to the headmasters at the time and was not prepared to pose.
So the family group just didn't work out.’
But the family were together for a tour of Harry's dormitory, where the new boy — known at Ludgrove as a ‘squit’— will sleep with three pals.
After an hour inside the school, all four spent a few minutes in a room of their own before Charles and Diana said goodbye to their sons.
The couple — chatting and still smiling, though Diana looked tense — were driven home to Kensington Palace, where they spent the evening together.
Focus
Charles had earlier cut short two engagements in the Midlands to get to the school on time.
The Palace spokesman insisted: ‘Everyone was happy.
There were no tears or sadness.’
And a royal aide tried to put Charles's gaffe in focus.
‘That photo might not show that the prince was there,’ he said, ‘but everyone knows that he was.’
NOW you see him — Charles was with Diana and Harry in the car (above).
Now you don't — he went missing when the official photograph (right) was taken.
200 CUT DOWN IN DEMO MASSACRE
Trigger happy troops kill 28
MARK DOWDNEY
TROOPS in South Africa opened fire on unarmed black marchers yesterday, leaving at least 28 people dead and nearly 200 hurt.
For five murderous minutes, soldiers blazed away with sub-machine guns and automatic rifles.
Hundreds of bullets were let loose — followed by tear-gas and even mortar shells — as protesters were cut down without mercy.
The soldiers were from the black homeland of Ciskei.
And their targets were supporters of the African National Congress, which has vowed to topple Ciskei's military leader — denouncing him as a puppet of white South Africa.
The bloodbath will plunge the nation into a new crisis — and may wreck hopes of resumed talks on South Africa's future.
ANC leaders blamed President de Klerk's government for the massacre and said they would not respond ‘meekly’.
Mr de Klerk sent a company of his own troops to Ciskei to stop reprisals.
The slaughter happened as up to 50,000 ANC supporters crossed the South African border for a rally at a stadium in the Ciskei capital of Bisho.
They were led by secretary-general Cyril Ramaphosa, who had warned: ‘We are going to occupy Bisho.’
The ANC had a court permit for the rally — but Ciskei ruler Brigadier Oupa Gqozo had said they would not enter his territory in eastern Cape province.
His troops began firing apparently without warning, after young ANC supporters broke through a razor wire cordon.
Screaming marchers — Ramaphosa among them — dived for cover from waves of gunfire.
As the victims fell, a white policeman yelled: ‘Christ, the troops are out of control.
They're going mad.’
Bodies lay in pools of blood beside the wire.
Forces
Altogether, 196 people were wounded — most by bullets.
More than 30 of the  victims were women.
Ciskei's defence chief claimed his troops acted in self-defence.
Witnesses dismissed this.
Mr de Klerk stressed that his own forces were not involved.
Ciskei is among 10 ‘independent’ homelands hated by the ANC as symbols of apartheid.
They would be scrapped in the ANC's ‘new’ South Africa.
SCENE OF SLAUGHTER: A woman victim is carried to safety amid the terror of the massacre
DOOMED TO KILL
THE massacre raised the prospect of another catalogue of horror in South Africa.
‘If this is a taste of things to come, then God help us all,’ said John Hall, secretary of a multi-party peace group.
President de Klerk said it was ‘an unsubstantiated lie’ that his government was involved.
‘I did not start mass action, the ANC did,’ he added.
And his Foreign Minister Pik Botha said: ‘We are sending a message to the world that South Africa is a place where people only kill each other.
It's the most damaging thing we could do to ourselves.’
Heep good
WILD West researcher Donald Clerk has put a 30ft totem pole on his lawn at Zelah, Cornwall, to ward off evil spirits.
RUN FOR IT, STAB HERO TOLD WIFE
DEVOTED husband Robert Wignall sacrificed his life to save his wife when three thugs ambushed them, police said yesterday.
The father-of-three told his wife, Sandra, to run for it and bravely fought the teenage louts, who had confronted them in woodland just 50 yards from their home.
Sandra hid in undergrowth nearby as Robert was repeatedly stabbed in the chest and beaten by the gang.
After the thugs left, she found her husband dead in a pool of blood.
It brought a tragic end to a love story that began when they met as they walked their dogs after each had lost a marriage partner to cancer.
They married last Christmas Eve.
Sandra has told police: ‘I am very angry at losing someone I loved.
My husband was a good man.
We were so happy together.’
Police believe a cheap gold-coloured bracelet found beside Robert's body in Addlestone, Surrey, belonged to one of the killers and may help trace them.
Detective Superintendent Pat Crossan said: ‘Mrs Wignall must have gone over it 1,000 times in her mind but she can't think of anything that triggered the attack.
‘She is very distressed.
This was a real love story.
They meet, they chat, they find they have something in common which is their grief and eventually love blossoms.
‘This was a wicked crime that was particularly vicious and brutal.
The sooner we catch the killers the better.’
CID CHIEF: Pat Crossan
VICTIM: Brave Robert
Fit again Les takes it nice and kneesy!
CHIRPY Les Dawson was back in a dame's frock yesterday for a knees up with Linda Lusardi.
The fit-again TV funnyman joined a host of big names for a panto season launch in London.
Les, 61, whose wife Tracy, 40, is expecting their first child, has stopped smoking since the health scare that led him to quit a show last year.
He'll be starring in Dick Whittington at Plymouth.
Picture: BILL ROWNTREE
£3,800 for town hall boss to have a shower
IAN CAMERON
A HARD-UP council is forking out £3,800 on a SHOWER for its boss.
The luxury shower — costing more than Princess Diana's whirlpool bath -is part of a £26,000 spruce-up of Chief Executive Mike Smith's office.
And yesterday councillors at Barry, South Wales, condemned it as ‘absolutely crazy’ and called for an inquiry.
Councillor Brian Dixon fumed: ‘Paying all this money is just not on when we face spending cuts in our budget and have 270 homeless people.
‘It's way over the top to ask our citizens to pick up the tab.
‘Even if some refurbishment was necessary, anything more than £2,000 is unacceptable.’
Local sales manager Tony Gwyther, who is writing to his MP Walter Sweeney in protest, snapped: ‘Many people can't meet their mortgage repayments, yet we have a council spending on this criminal scale.
It is crazy.’
The £26,000 bill includes £14,000 for a consultant, £6,000 for decorations and partitions and £2,300 labour charges.
A spokesman for Vale of Glamorgan council said: ‘The Chief Executive holds a very important post and has a large number of meetings.
Role ‘It is only fitting that the standard of his office should reflect his role.
‘This is part of an improvement programme for the whole civic building which has not been redecorated in 12 years.’
The spokesman added that the shower would be available for all councillors to use.
He said: ‘The Chief Executive and Mayor have to don official robes so it helps if they can shower first.’
The Mirror revealed last week that tax-payers paid for a luxury £3,000 bath installed in Diana's private apartments at Kensington Palace.
Thug freed
VANDAL Andrew Christie, who saw his pal kill a man with a baseball bat, was freed at the Old Bailey yesterday.
He got three months’ jail but has served it on remand.
IRA own up
THE IRA yesterday admitted they planted the firebomb which damaged a toilet at London's Hilton Hotel on Sunday.
Patsy's a mum
LETHAL Weapon 2 star Patsy Kensit, 24, was celebrating at a London hospital last night after giving birth to her first child, a baby boy.
Boss in monkey scandal resigns
RONALD RICKETTS /FRANK THORNE
THE man exposed by the Daily Mirror for selling monkeys that end up in research laboratories quit his job at a top safari park yesterday.
Roger Cawley resigned as a director of Woburn Wild Animal Kingdom in Bedfordshire following a storm of protests.
Lord Howland, son of the Marquis of Tavistock whose family runs the safari park, said no more animals would be sent for research.
Mr Cawley was named by the Mirror as the man behind the sale of monkeys from Longleat in Wiltshire, where he is manager, and from Woburn.
The British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection said: ‘We are happy that Woburn acted so quickly.’
It said it was optimistic Longleat would take action when Lord Bath returns from France.
NAILED: by Mirror
RESIGNED: Roger Cawley
KING SCOTCHED
POP presenter Jonathan King was swamped by protests from Radio 2 listeners yesterday after knocking Scotland.
He said on the Brian Hayes Show: ‘It's an absolutely appalling place…they are covered from head to foot in freckles and have red hair.’
The BBC insisted: ‘It was all said in jest.’
JESTER: Jonathan
Bruce's £8m
STUDIO bosses want Hollywood heart- throb Bruce Willis to make Die Hard 3 — and are offering £8million.
MIRACLE BABY DIES IN DADDY'S ARMS
Final agony of crash husband
JOHN PEACOCK
A BABY girl born after her mother was fatally injured by a car died in the arms of her grief-stricken father yesterday.
Andrew Wolage, also badly hurt in the accident, was wheeled from his hospital bed to cuddle his critically ill daughter Hannah, who was just 37 hours old.
But as the ‘perfectly beautiful’ tot nestled in his arms she died, bringing tears to the eyes of watching medical staff.
For Andrew, 29, the anguish was almost too much to bear.
Hannah's mother Linda, 28, died immediately after her longed-for child was delivered by caesarian section.
And nine months ago, the couple's five-month-old daughter Alison died with three holes in her heart.
Last night Andrew was ‘distraught’ with grief and under sedation.
His mother Hilda, from Nottingham, said: ‘It's a terrible tragedy.
Hannah was so beautiful.
‘Doctors think Andrew will make a full recovery.
But it will be long and slow.’
Critical
Christine Williams, head of midwifery at Frimley Park Hospital in Camberley, Surrey, added: ‘Mr Wolage is extremely distressed.
‘He gave the baby the name Hannah just before she died in his arms.
‘She was in intensive care from the moment she was born.
Then her  condition deteriorated.
‘We took pictures of her as we do with every baby in special care.
‘Staff here have got very emotionally involved in this tragedy.
We are all devastated.’
Linda and Andrew were hit by a car less than 200 yards from their home in Blackwater, Hants, on Saturday.
Heavily pregnant Linda was fatally hurt.
Andrew suffered a broken leg, broken arm and internal injuries.
Both were rushed to Frimley Park where Hannah was delivered.
The driver, 47-year-old Jill Gunns, of Blackwater, has been released on police bail.
Police said Crown prosecutors would now have to consider Hannah's death in bringing any possible charges.
A spokesman said: ‘It is a legally complex issue.
‘The child was not born before the accident.
So can she be said to have died as a result of the accident?’
Soldier ban on sun isle
BRITISH troops on Cyprus have been banned from a resort while police allegations of assault and indecency are investigated.
Two servicemen are in custody in Ayia Napa and two others have been charged and freed.
The arrests followed a fight with Cypriots after a tourist was beaten, and a clash with police trying to arrest a soldier who stripped naked.
IRA parents slaughtered
THE parents of a top IRA bomber were found murdered by Loyalist terrorists yesterday.
Their daughters found Charlie Fox, 63, and wife Tess, 53, shot at their home in Co Tyrone after they failed to answer the phone.
Police think the killers targeted them after their son Paddy, 23, was jailed for 12 years recently for possessing a 1,200lb bomb.
Welly sensible
A WELLY bank to recycle kids' old boots has been set up in Gloucester by the local council and rubber firm Dunlop.
He's scene it!
FILM buff Gwilym Hughes, 47, of Dolgellau, North Wales has watched a world record 21,000 movies in 40 years.
Silly golf swing put ‘smuggler’ in irons
TOM MERRIN
BUNGLING drug smuggler Karl Melms bunkered himself…with a back-to-front golf shot, a court heard yesterday.
A suspicious customs man asked to see Melms swing his 6-iron when he arrived in Britain for a ‘golfing holiday.’
The German hotelier pointed the club-face the wrong way and swung in the wrong direction.
Minutes later cannabis worth £234,000 was found hidden in Melms's Audi at Newhaven, Sussex, it was alleged at Lewes Crown Court.
Handicap
The jury heard that he was rumbled by golf-playing customs officer Daryl Hickman.
Daryl, who gave the jury a demonstration of the backward swing, said: ‘I asked him what his handicap was and he didn't appear to understand.
‘He attempted to make a swing, but appeared to be  someone who doesn't play the game.’
The court heard that customs men later went to a Surrey hotel where they recorded several messages of people trying to contact Melms.
He denies drug smuggling.
The trial continues.
Coinci-dents
RED-faced councillor George Russell was in a crash going to answer complaints about accidents on the same road at Ferndown, Dorset.
The paper they give their right arm for
…we're read in high places
THE tip-top Mirror's still the high point of our readers' day…even when they're precariously perched 170ft 2ins above Trafalgar Square.
Essex steeplejacks Reg Dosell, Tony Pinch and Miles McCarthy took a break from cleaning up Lord Nelson yesterday to scan the columns of their favourite paper.
They couldn't put it down, of course— from our revelations of exalted David Mellor's earthy follies, our gem new £ million Diamond Bingo, through to our great 14-page sporting Fanzine.
If we'd been around in Nelson's day he'd have given his right arm for a copy.
And turned a blind eye to the sinking S**.
HEADLINERS: From left, Reg, Tony and Miles at the top of Nelson's Column yesterday
TOP JOBS: Steeplejack trio Pictures: HARRY PAGE
Pool tragedy
BRITON Christine Brown, in her 30s, was found dead in the swimming pool of our embassy in Cairo, where she worked.
She had a heart attack and drowned.
‘Spy’ man killed wife and toyboy
A JEALOUS husband stabbed his wife and her toyboy lover to death after spying on them through a chink in the curtains.
Father-of-three Leslie Tobutt, 42, told police he watched them making love in an armchair and added: ‘I went wild.’
He was jailed for seven years at the Old Bailey after admitting manslaughter.
Engineer Tobutt, of Harrow, stabbed wife Kathleen, 37, 15 times and 29-year-old bricklayer Noel Neville 35 times.
Police heard their dying screams because his eight-year-old daughter Clare had dialled 999 and left the line open.
‘6,000 to go broke by Xmas’
NEARLY 2,000 businesses went bust in the three months following the Tories' election victory.
And another 6,000 could collapse by Christmas, Barbara Bennett, of experts Trade Indemnity, forecast yesterday.
Builders also warned of disaster with 9 per cent fewer homes being built.
‘We are very, very disturbed,’ said the Federation of Master Builders.
‘We are constantly in touch with the Government demanding action to kickstart the industry but have had no answer.’
ELDORADO CLOSE IT'S SHEER EL LIVING HERE NOW!
Villagers' fury over soap flop
ROD CHAYTOR
BLOOMING ‘El…the Beeb's new soap is a real turn off to villagers in sleepy Eldorado Close.
For wisecrackers have been pulling their legs unmercifully ever since the sex and sangria saga hit the airwaves.
Now fed-up locals want the name of their quiet cul-de-sac in Studley, Warwickshire, changed — unless BBC chiefs drop the flop of a show first.
One resident, who didn't want to be named, moaned yesterday: ‘It's been called Eldorado Close for 30 years and we all used to like it.
It was a bit different.
‘But this is a nice spot.
We don't want to be associated with sunshine, sangria and sex.
Mickey ‘And people take the mickey when we tell them where we live.
It's very embarrassing.’
Neighbour Dave Ward added: ‘I hate the programme, even though I suppose it has put us on the map.’
‘But the jokes are beginning to wear thin now and a lot of residents have had enough.’
Eldorado Close got its name from a kind of needle that used to be made locally.
Parish council clerk Alan Harrison said: ‘If the residents are unhappy with the name, they can ask for it to be changed.
‘Perhaps we should rename the close Coronation Street or Brookside.’
JILL CASHIERED
FRANK CORLESS
BANK girl Jill Joyce was the victim of three bank raids in 18 months — and then got the sack.
Mother-of-two Jill was off sick for five months suffering stress and trauma after the last robbery.
But when she returned to work, NatWest bosses told her: ‘Sorry, you're surplus to requirements.’
Jill, 32, was among 700 employees made  redundant in a desperate attempt to cut costs and boost profits.
At her home in Reddish, near Stockport, yesterday, she said: ‘After all I've been through, I feel bitter and disillusioned.
‘They are being very callous.
But I won't take this lying down.
‘I intend taking my case to an industrial tribunal.’
A bank union official accused NatWest of being ‘totally heartless.’
But a NatWest spokesman said: ‘We apply the same criteria to everybody.
‘We don't look at special circumstances.’
JILL: Stress and trauma
BABY BORN AFTER MUM DIES IN CRASH HORROR
Dad hurt as mite fights for her life
JOHN PEACOCK
A BABY girl delivered after her pregnant mother was killed in a road accident was fighting for her life last night.
Tragic Linda Wolage, 28, and her husband Andrew were catapulted into a garden by a careering car as they returned from a day out at the zoo.
Linda died soon afterwards and Andrew — 29 yesterday — was seriously injured.
But ambulancemen, realising Linda was pregnant, rushed her to hospital where doctors delivered her baby by Caesarian section.
Last night the little girl was ‘critically ill’ in Frimley Park Hospital, Camberley, Surrey.
Heavily sedated Andrew, of Blackwater, Hants, knows he is a father and that his wife is dead.
But yesterday he couldn't bear to look at photographs of his new baby.
Neighbour Sue Read said: ‘He just can't face it.’
It is the second tragedy to hit the family in nine months.
The Wolages' first child, Alison, was born with three holes in her heart and died before Christmas aged five months.
The couple were mown down yards from their home by a car driven by 47-year-old Jill Gunns, who is believed to have had a row with her boy-friend.
Flying
Schoolboy Bobby Dennison said: ‘She missed me and my friend by inches and must have been doing about 60mph.
‘She hit a parked car, then hit the kerb and went flying round the corner.’
Linda and Andrew were hit before the car crashed into a lamppost.
Gunns had to be cut from the wreckage.
Neighbours rushed out and gave Linda heart massage and mouth to mouth  resuscitation .
Daisy Smith said: ‘We couldn't find her pulse at first.
Then my son-in-law managed to get her heart going again.
He probably saved the baby's life.’
Yesterday Gunns, of Blackwater, was released on police bail.
TRIBUTE: Flowers mark spot where Linda died
CHRIS TARRANT
Nipped in the byte
A TOTALLY pointless crime happened last week in Milton Keynes when office thieves made off with a computer — that speaks only Japanese!
Presumably, it's absolutely useless to whoever stole it.
Unless, of course, it just happens to be a Japanese burglar.
Then again, the chances of anyone travelling all the way from Japan and even managing to find Milton Keynes seem pretty slim.
In fact, really and truly, unless you live in the town centre, wherever that may be, there really is no point in even contemplating stealing anything from the place.
The Milton Keynes road system is so incomprehensible that you would be forced to spend the rest of your life driving round and round the ring road with a car full of nicked gear…
Mon dieu!
So crawl…
KENT has been invaded, and is now in the grip of a terrifying occupation, by little green monsters!
Before you think ‘Oh, it's only Tarrant trying to do an Orson Welles War Of The Worlds on us’, I have to tell you — it's true.
The good people of the South Eastern corner of England will testify — residential areas along the coast are over-run!
The creatures in question are 2in long, come from France and are in fact, hairy caterpillars.
Apparently they're the offspring of a few cabbage white butterflies which were blown across the channel, have hatched, and are currently munching their way through the garden of England.
It could be some secret Franco-Agricultural plot — first the mad French farmers hijack our lamb, now they send over caterpillars to spike our vegetables.
Being at one with nature, I decided to see one of these creatures for myself.
I saw a whole host of caterpillar tracks near the entrance of the Channel Tunnel, started to follow one on my hands and knees — and got promptly knocked down by a bulldozer…!
THE THINGS THEY SAY
I could make smaller movies, but after running in the Olympics why should I go back to High School?
Tom Cruise
I look all right.
I can sing all right.
People only relate to my ordinariness.
Kylie Minogue Is that before or after your party-time Ecstasy, Kylie?
Fail safe
KILLJOY educational inspectors have poured scorn on the breathtakingly high number of A-grade passes in this year's round of GCSE exams.
These faceless academics suggest that marking standards are falling.
If that's the case, I suggest anyone in the past who flunked an O-level exam writes to these people to demand that their E and F failures be upgraded to passes, with honours.
I personally failed biology — but with all my kids, I can hardly claim it held me back…!
I'm bowled over, Ken
WHAT would we do without mobile phones?
Johan Egelstedt, a Swedish male au pair, was saved from being deported last week by a last-minute decision from Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke.
Despite protests from the four adoring children Johan was looking after, immigration officials had ruled that an au pair had to be a single, childless WOMAN aged 17–27.
And he could be allowed to stay only by a direct order from the Home Secretary.
Luckily, this example of bureaucracy gone mad was stopped just in time by Kenneth Clarke, who was watching cricket at Trent Bridge and got a call on his mobile phone about Johan's case.
It was just as well Kenneth's phone wasn't engaged because, presumably, if he'd been chatting to John Major about the situation in the Middle East, or talking to David Mellor about fun, poor old Johan would have been chucked out of the country.
Perhaps it's as well that we no longer have death by hanging in this country — otherwise those last-minute reprieve calls from the Home Secretary might not happen in time…
Do ya ken, Ken?
Gear we go folks
IN these times of recession, the advice is DON'T PUT YOUR CASH INTO CARS — as any classic car owner who has seen his investment crash through the floor will tell you.
They've lost a fortune — Ferraris, Bugattis, Maseratis, Nissan Bluebirds.
Nissan Bluebirds?
Well, yes.
Thieves who broke into a Nissan Bluebird owned by 68-year-old widow Doreen Reilly and her son Michael found £29,000 under the car's front seat.
Such was their excitement that they dropped another three grand on the floor.
It seems the Reillys, who live in Dorset, stockpiled their life savings in the car because they didn't believe in banks or building societies.
But what puzzles me most is this: if you could lay your hands on 32 grand — in cash — why the hell would you buy a Nissan Bluebird?
TRAGIC BOY'S GIFT OF SIGHT
THE parents of a little boy who died after being knocked down while learning his Green Cross Code told last night how he made them promise to give his organs to suffering children.
Six-year-old Stewart Davies carried a donor card everywhere with him, heartbroken dad Brian revealed.
Sadly, drugs used in a desperate attempt to save his life made most of his organs unusable.
But surgeons at Frenchay Hospital, Bristol, were able to graft his corneas on to the eyes of another youngster who had been going blind.
Heartbroken Brian, who was at his son's bedside when he died on Saturday, said: ‘We promised him this.
‘It has given my wife and I a lot of comfort.
We know Stewart has helped someone, which is so typical of him.’
KILLED: Stewart
Rebecca's evil ways
HILARY BONNER
ANGELIC-LOOKING beauty Rebecca de Mornay revealed yesterday how she was lured into wickedness — to play the demon nanny in The Hand That Rocks The Cradle.
Rebecca, 31, said at France's Deauville film festival: ‘Evil has always been portrayed by men.
I was delighted to play an evil woman.’
The Hollywood blonde added: ‘It's such a powerful role that at first I was afraid.
But I couldn't get it out of my mind.’
Picture: PAUL SMITH
Newsgirl blackout
A RADIO announcer fainted while reading the news yesterday.
Radio Devon's Jacqui Wain told listeners ‘I'm sorry,’ then collapsed from the heat in the studio.
Last night, she was recovering at home.
Crock of gold
AN old £600 Corvette car stolen 21 years ago has been returned to its owner in mint condition in Missouri.
It's now worth £12,000.
‘Scandal’ homes in big probe
A FULL public inquiry was promised last night into allegations of sexual and physical abuse of children in council care.
Welsh Office Minister Gwilym Jones acted after claims that photographs of a badly-beaten child were filed away for at least six years without being passed to police by social service workers.
North Wales Police are investigating homes in Gwynedd and Clwyd after allegations that up to 200 children suffered abuse.
More than 1,500 statements have been taken.
The force confirmed allegations against police officers were also being investigated after a newspaper claimed four officers were being quizzed.
Mum crippled by ex-lover
A FURIOUS father crippled his ex-lover after she entered their son in a bonny baby contest in her name and not his.
The brutal attack by David Makka, 22, left Susan Lawson, 20, brain-damaged and close to death, a judge was told yesterday at Newcastle Crown Court.
Susan, who lives in Sunderland, can walk only a few paces with a stick, has lost the use of an arm and has impaired eyesight.
She can no longer care for their 18-month-old son herself and has suffered a personality change.
Makka, who admitted causing Susan grievous bodily harm, was jailed for five years.
A pot of bother
POOL player Stuart Townsley had to be rescued by firemen — after he got his arm stuck down a pocket.
They had to dismantle the entire table at the Highwayman pub in Berwick, Northumbria, to free him.
Lucky Tel aims for the sky
LUCKY to be alive skydiver Terry Wakenshaw vowed yesterday to go on with the sport which killed his girlfriend and almost claimed his life.
His parachute caught in the plane's wheels at 7,000ft.
He was nearly scalped and broke his arm and collarbone when he smashed against it.
But Terry opened his reserve chute to drift to safety.
It echoed the 1988 tragedy in which girl-friend Margaret Sowerby died when her chute failed.
But Terry, 34, of Longbenton, Tyneside, said: ‘This hasn't put me off jumping at all.
I'll go back up as soon as I'm fit.’
Baboon op man dies
A MAN of 35 who was given a new liver in the world's first baboon-to-human transplant has died 71 days after the historic op in Pittsburgh, USA.
Brush fire
RAIDERS burned down a dental surgery after stealing two toothbrushes at Driffield, Humberside, yesterday.
Greedy Mr Greed
A POTATO farmer named Greed was fined £150 yesterday for ‘stealing’ water during a heatwave.
Philip Greed, 71, piped water from a stream to save his crop, Exeter magistrates heard.
But though the stream rose on his own land, he had not obtained the proper extraction licence and so got the water free.
Afterwards defiant Greed said: ‘It's my water.
If I had filled a tanker I wouldn't have been prosecuted.’
Widow in gator ordeal
A WIDOW whose arm was bitten off by an alligator said yesterday she was sorry the creature was later killed.
‘I love animals and hate to see them killed,’ said Clara McKay, 81.
Clara, who lives in a swamp home outside Miami, was drawing water from a canal when the 7ft gator pounced.
She said she ‘hollered’ at it three times not to pull her in the water.
‘He stared straight in my eyes like he was listening to me…as if he was considering things.’
‘I was so happy when he kinda stopped chewing on me for a second.’
The alligator swam off with Clara's right arm in its jaws.
She staggered home and called help.
Florida game wardens later killed the creature.
My hell, by gutsy Taggart
TAGGART star Mark McManus talked for the first time yesterday about a heartbreak series of family tragedies.
But he vowed: ‘I'll battle through — I've been a fighter all my life.’
His two sisters and mum have all died within 18 months.
And his wife Marion, 37, has had a major cancer op.
Mark, 58, who tackles his 21st Taggart case on ITV next week, said: ‘I dwell on it sometimes.
Marion and I are living day by day.
But that's OK, that's fine.’
FIGHTER: Mark
MICHELLE'S DRUM ROLE
TV soap star Michelle Collins will have a bash at anything.
That's why the actress, who plays Cindy Beale in EastEnders, volunteered to appear as a drummer girl at an AIDS charity event in London.
As usual, Michelle, 29, proved a big hit.
Picture: DAVID ABIAW
Camp bans boozy Brits
BRITONS were banned yesterday from a campsite near the Munich beer festival.
Bosses claimed 5,600 drunken Brits last year stripped, had sex, vomited and defecated in front of other campers.
DUMPED!
TOYBOY, 38, WHO CHUCKED AN ASHTRAY AT HIS WIFE, 87
IAN CAMERON
AN 87-year-old woman ditched her toyboy husband after he threw an ashtray at her in a blazing row, a court heard yesterday.
Lillian Heath wrote to 38-year-old husband Michael in his remand cell to say: ‘I don't want you back.’
Heath blamed the 5ft 1in pensioner's constant nagging for his drunken outburst, Cardiff Crown Court was told.
A doctor called in police after Heath phoned him and said: ‘The old cow keeps nagging all the time.
I just wish the old cow would hurry up and die.’
Heath told police who arrested him: ‘That old bitch is always making up stories about me.’
The ashtray bruised Lillian on the back of the head.
Heath admitted harming her and affray and got 18 months probation.
Unusual
The couple met when Heath stopped to help at an accident outside her home near Pontypridd, Mid-Glamorgan, the court heard.
Despite the age gap, romance blossomed and they wed in 1987.
Heath's lawyer said: ‘It is an unusual marriage.’
After the case jobless Heath said: ‘I still love her and hope we can make it back together.’
He had now stopped the drinking which led to the row.
Lillian said: ‘I've had nearly five years of Romeo and I'm not having any more.’
She said the marriage was a ‘terrible’ mistake because of Heath's drink problem.
Now she wants a divorce.
Lillian added: ‘I hope he doesn't come back to trouble me again.
If he does I'll get the police.
London zoo gets reprieve
CLOSURE-threatened London Zoo has been given a last-minute reprieve because so many people want to visit it.
Booming attendances during the summer school holidays brought in an extra £500,000 at the turnstiles.
Now the hard-up zoo in Regent's Park is set to break even over the current financial year.
The Council of the Zoological Society of London had planned to shut down at the end of September.
But a spokesman said last night: ‘A gift of £1 million has also been  received from the Emir of Kuwait.
‘And several proposals for the zoo's future are now being evaluated.
‘A progress report will be made to the society's annual meeting on September 30.’
BY GEORGE!
THE BRAVE BOY LINEKER DONE GOOD
IT'S a shot Gary Lineker wouldn't miss for the world — his baby son George on the road to recovery.
The brave tot, who has been battling leukaemia since he was six weeks old, was bouncing with life yesterday as mum Michelle took him out for a treat.
They went to a restaurant near their North London home.
And 11-month-old George got the sort of hero's reception normally reserved for his soccer star dad.
A fellow diner said: ‘A lot of fuss was made over George.
A waitress picked him up and took him round the restaurant.
‘It was a delight to see him so fit and healthy.’
Former Spurs and England skipper Gary, 31, had been prepared to give up his move to Japan.
But chemotherapy seems to have worked so well that dad can now make firm plans for the New Year.
As football managers are fond of saying, it's early days yet for battler George.
But as they also say, the boy done good.
Pound on the slide
THE POUND took a new battering yesterday.
It tumbled against the German mark — ending perilously close to its critical floor in the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
Sterling was caught in the backwash of a run against the dollar.
A flop in K-reg car sales added to the gloom.
Vital figures for August, released yesterday, showed 373,804 were sold.
The recession-hit industry was hoping for 400,000.
DAD'S FURY AS SON IS SHOT
JOHN HICKS
A FATHER angrily accused soldiers of murder yesterday after they shot and killed his 18-year-old unarmed son.
Peter McBride, who has two young children, was hit in the back as he sprinted away from a Scots Guards patrol in Belfast's republican New Lodge area.
The killing came a month after Scots Guardsman Damian Shackleton, 28, was shot dead by an IRA sniper nearby.
The victim's father, also named Peter, said: ‘He was just murdered.
The wee lad had no involvement with anything.
I want the soldiers charged with murder.’
The Army admitted the shooting and promised to help an RUC investigation.
VICTIM: Peter McBride with daughter Kirsty-Lee
WIMPEY FURY AT £7M LOSS
WILLIAM KEEGAN
BUILDING giant Wimpey crashed more than £7 million into the red in the first six months of this year — despite earning £730 million.
The company which used to give £40,000 a year to Tory funds, launched a stinging attack on Government policies.
Wimpey boss Sir Clifford Chetwood predicted the recession would last five years but added: ‘There will be very few construction companies left then.’
He attacked the claims of Prime Minister John Major and Chancellor Norman Lamont that bringing down inflation would get Britain out of the recession.
He said there would be no confidence in the economy and no recovery until the Government restored confidence in the housing market.
‘Every day people see their house as a wasting, dwindling asset, the longer we put off a return of consumer confidence,’ he said.
Wimpey revealed that its building programme has slumped from 10,000 houses in 1986 to just 2,800 in the first half of this year.
‘Give the pound chance’
THE pound should be devalued and interest rates cut, two union bosses demanded.
John Edmonds, leader of the GMB, said: ‘The impossibly high exchange rate is turning Britain into a rust bucket economy.’
Alan Jinkinson, boss of the 760,000 strong NALGO union, said: ‘The Government's economic strategy must be reversed.
We must stop the slaying of our industries and the destruction of jobs.’
The pound fell almost a pfennig to 2.7880 German marks yesterday — just one pfennig above its floor in the ERM — sparking fears of new increases in interest rates.
‘Sack the butcher’
BLACK African leader Nelson Mandela yesterday demanded the removal of Ciskei strongman Brigadier Joshua Gqozo, who ordered the massacre of 28 ANC protesters at Bisho on Monday.
The Puppet — See Page 6
NHS bosses' pay up 900
ANDY McSMITH
THE pay bill for health service bosses has rocketed by NINE HUNDRED per cent in five years, it was revealed yesterday.
Top management now costs taxpayers £251.5 million a year — up from just £25.7 million in 1987.
In the same time the army of managers expanded from 700 to 13,200, the Health Department said.
Heads of health authorities saw their salaries almost doubled in 1991.
Their total pay bill went from £2.8 to £4.9 million.
Senior managers now take a bigger chunk of the NHS pay packet than the entire ambulance staff.
Labour health spokesman David Blunkett called the figures a ‘disgrace’.
The money should go on patient care, not bureaucracy, he said.
COHSE leader Hector MacKenzie said it was ‘a scandalous misuse of funds — instead of staff at the bedside, we have managers in offices.’
NUPE said: ‘Health care is a poor second to flourishing bureaucracy.’
But Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley said the NHS needed good managers to get waiting lists down.
SHE ISN'T SORRY
Fergie's not ashamed by scandal photos, says mum
Divorce from Andrew in 1994 She'll flee to Argentina soon
My Sarah will fight for kids
STEVE ATKINSON
DEFIANT Fergie is NOT sorry that she was pictured in topless romps with Texan John Bryan, her mother revealed last night.
In a sensational interview, Susan Barrantes also disclosed that Fergie has told her:
THAT her divorce from Prince Andrew will be finalised in two years' time.
THAT she plans to flee Britain within days to stay with mum in Argentina ‘for a long time’.
THAT she is sure, despite all the evidence to the contrary, that the pictures of her poolside frolics — published exclusively in the Mirror — were the result of a Royal Family plot to discredit her.
(But only the Mirror knows how the pictures were obtained — and we can tell you her claim is rubbish.)
Mrs Barrantes said in Biarritz: ‘Sarah made a mistake going to St Tropez with her children and Mr Bryan.
Character
‘I was the first one to say so and shout at her, ‘My girl, you have really created a huge problem.’
‘Sarah, however, is not upset that she was caught topless with Bryan.
‘Since she is separated from Prince Andrew, she is free to do whatever she wants.’
ON the duke, Mrs Barrantes said: ‘Andrew is a good-looking boy and has a heart of gold.
‘And he is generous to the point where he would be without money himself to help someone.
‘But he has not got any character — absolutely none.
If he had, maybe his marriage would not have broken up.
‘It was Sarah, I can tell you, who gave the orders in their house, not Andrew.’
ON the marriage breakdown, Mrs Barrantes said:
All mothers ask themselves ‘Why?’ when their children's marriages fail.
I believe Sarah and Andrew's marriage was undone by a lack of character and lack of willingness by them both to make it work.
But I must say, in the five years they were together I've never seen Sarah so happy and contented.
She phoned me in Buenos Aires to tell me it was all over, before the world knew.
I didn't believe her and said she was joking.
She replied without any emotion: ‘No, Mum, you know quite well I don't joke about personal things.
‘Unfortunately my marriage to Andrew has come to the end.
We just  cannot live together.
I know what I'm doing — I'm not stupid.’
I believe they will be divorced in the spring of 1994.
Sarah told me it will be in two years.
And would her daughter continue to be called the Duchess of York?
‘Yes, and Your Royal Highness — that's what Sarah told me,’ her mum replied.
Would Fergie keep the children, Eugenie and Beatrice?
‘My daughter is not a woman to give up easily,’ Mrs Barrantes said.
‘She has a character of iron, like me, and will fight to the last ditch.
‘She knows how to defend herself with her nails and her teeth to stop anything happening to her children.
‘She will never agree to be separated from them, not even for a moment.
I feel sorry only for Eugenie and Beatrice because they will suffer a great deal seeing their mother and father not living together under the same roof.’
Mrs Barrantes claimed the question of custody prompted a royal plot — acted out by the British secret service — to shame her daughter.
‘Someone wanted to get at her and put her character in a bad light,’ said Mrs Barrantes.
‘Once she was discredited throughout Britain, what judge would give her custody of her children?
‘And what judge would give her damages against Prince Andrew?
‘The scandal was definitely organised by the secret service to take the children from Sarah.’
But Mrs Barrantes admitted: ‘I have nothing to prove it, dearly though I'd love to.’
And she warned: ‘If Sarah does lose the children, she is prepared to tell stories that are not very pleasant about the Crown.’
‘She has suffered a great deal.
But in a few days she will leave England and follow me to Argentina.
She'll stay with me for a long time.’
CLOSE-UP TENDERNESS is the theme as Fergie and John Bryan share an intimate moment…watched by a long range camera
COVER-UP TOPLESS Fergie shields herself during her holiday in France with her Texan millionaire adviser and friend John Bryan
CHAT-UP TOGETHERNESS is an intimate chat by the pool for Fergie and Bryan.
But the eyes of the world will soon be on them
REVEALING: Susan Barrantes says Fergie has no regrets
A PEDIGREE CHUMP
AN angry woman served her boyfriend dog-food after he admitted having an affair, she revealed yesterday.
But he enjoyed the Pedigree Chum pie so much, he asked for seconds.
Jenny Bloor, 26, has kept her revenge a secret for six years.
But she finally revealed all on ITV's The Time, The Place show.
Jenny, of Willenhall, West Midlands, said she dreamed up the dish after she visited her boyfriend in hospital and found a strange girl at his bedside.
When he returned home, she fed him the pie then kicked him out.
After yesterday's show — all about problems in relationships — Jenny said: ‘I have never told him what the pie was but now he will know and I hope he is sick.’
DISH: A can of Pedigree Chum
DI COPS BACKED
SCOTLAND Yard bluntly denied yesterday that Princess Diana dispensed with police bodyguards to keep six secret dates.
It said the claim, made in a national newspaper, was ‘completely untrue’.
Royal protection chief Commander Bob Marsh also dismissed the paper's other claims that the Yard had received information from spy chiefs and been told by the Palace to reveal Di's movements.
The paper alleged that three of Di's secret visits were to former car dealer James Gilbey.
DI: Dates denial
Speculation that Princess Anne is to announce her engagement to Tim Laurence mounted last night when she cut short one engagement and cancelled another.
Knight to remember
HOW'S this for a knight out?
TV's former Minder Dennis Waterman tried to keep his armour up when he joined new partner Leslie Ash yesterday.
But lovely Leslie soon lifted the lid on her co-star's antics for the camera — and made it clear she was there in more than an ad-visor-y capacity.
Leslie, 32, has been signed up as the latest leading lady in Dennis's hit comedy Stay Lucky.
She takes over from Susan George and before that Jan Francis in the show.
Yesterday Dennis, 43, and Leslie were filming a pageant at the village of Nun Monkton near York.
Dennis's shield sported a reclining deer.
Bet no one could remember a stag knight like it.
Leg break
BOWLER Vic Macey joked he'd break a pal's leg if he hit him for four at a Paignton cricket match — then DID accidentally after the game.
BUSKER'S BLUNDER
JAMES WHITAKER
A BUSKER'S song about two lovers chatting on the phone had Princess Di trembling with pent-up emotion yesterday.
Nineteen-year-old songster Sebastian made his amazing gaffe as Di visited a centre for homeless youngsters.
Last month it was revealed that Di was taped speaking on the phone to bachelor James Gilbey, who told her ‘I love you.’
And yesterday the princess's lower lip trembled and she nervously turned away as Sebastian sang the poignant opening lines of the 1989 hit, Right Here Waiting For You.
They ran:
‘Oceans apart, day after day, and I slowly go insane.
I hear your voice on the line but it does not help the pain.’
Michelle Reilly, a helper at the London Connection Centre in Charing Cross said: ‘Throughout the song, the princess looked lost and her eyes kept wandering.’
But German-born Sebastian said later: ‘I certainly didn't want to embarrass her and hope I didn't cause any offence.
Some observers said the Princess's eyes seemed bloodshot
TAPE MAN'S GREED
THE eavesdropping ex-bank manager who sold a tape of Princess Di's lovey-dovey phone chat admitted yesterday that he did it out of greed.
But he said: ‘It has been the biggest mistake of my life.’
Cyril Reenan, 70, who used a radio scanner to pick up the call, told a newspaper: ‘Knowing what I do now, I think I would have tried to warn Diana her conversations were being overheard.
‘To all those who have felt upset and disturbed by my stupid actions, may I say I am sorry.’
Mr Reenan, of Abingdon, Oxon, confessed: ‘I cannot deny there was a greed aspect to it at first but I regret it now.
‘It was not as if I needed the money.
I'm not hard-up.’
He claimed that his life had been a misery since he sold the recording of Di talking to her friend James Gilbey.
‘Sadly our whole family has suffered through this,’ he added.
Mr Reenan, a former TSB branch boss in Abingdon, said he had been sent hate mail and would probably not use his £900 scanner again.
CROOKS' ARMS CO-OP SMASHED
SYLVIA JONES
A HUGE arsenal of weapons was seized by police yesterday when they smashed a nationwide ‘crooks’ co-op’.
Among the deadly arms were high-powered Kalashnikov rifles, explosives, sub-machine-guns, smoke grenades, shotguns, pistols and piles of ammunition.
Twenty seven men and women were arrested in dawn raids as Operation Mensa closed the net after ten months of undercover investigation into the London-based syndicate.
They were picked up in London, Essex, Hertfordshire, Bedfordshire, Bucks, Dorset, and Newcastle.
Police said the ‘co-op’ godfathers had offered to supply anything from guns to forged disabled drivers' stickers.
For years top cops have known that gangs of crooks were working together to provide each other with specialist help, arms and equipment.
But they were staggered by the size of the haul when officers raided 30 homes yesterday.
They uncovered:
TWO Kalashnikov AK47 rifles, three dozen other guns and NATO smoke grenades at a farmhouse in Dorset.
AN OLD German Schmeisser sub-machine-gun, shotguns and pistols in London.
MORE than £1.5million in fake £50 notes and a quarter of a million forged $100 bills and Danish kroner along with illegal printing plates and piles of false documents in another search.
A PUMP-action shotgun, piles of handguns and a mountain of ammunition for all the weapons.
Last night forensic experts were testing the guns to try and link them with crimes in Britain, Europe and America.
Police described the syndicate as ‘lifestyle criminals with vast amounts of money and no legitimate means of support’.
Explosives
They launched Operation Mensa after a supergrass reported the ‘crooks’ co-op’was offering to sell two tons of PE4 explosive for £3,000.
The gang produced a sample of two kilos of PE4 — similar to explosives used in the Gulf War.
But Commander Roy Penrose, who organised yesterday's raids, said: ‘We do not believe they had as much explosives as they claimed.
They were conmen.’
LAMP KILLS TOT
A POLICEMAN'S three-year-old daughter died after the cable from her bedside teddy bear lamp became wrapped around her neck in the night.
Rebecca Mossman was found dead in her cot in Sutton, Surrey.
Her mother Jane told an inquest yesterday: ‘I don't know how she reached the flex.’
Verdict: Accident.
BRITAIN'S DIRTIEST TAKEAWAY
£44,000 fine…but Mr Wong's stays open
SAMUEL JAMES
SHOCKED council officials found a mouse's head in the kitchen when they raided Mr Wong's Chinese takeaway.
There were also rat droppings and dead insects at the dirt-ridden August Moon restaurant.
And yesterday a record £44,000 fine was dished out by Newbury magistrates to the owners of the takeaway in Hungerford, Berks.
But last night the August Moon was open for business as usual.
A spokesman said: ‘We've had a bit of bother with the council but it's sorted out now.’
An environmental health officer said the owners had briefly shut the premises to make it rodent-proof.
He said: ‘We have no plans to close it down again although we have that power.’
Owner San Yau Wong and his son Wai both admitted breaching food regulations.
Inspectors told of finding a sickening harvest of leaves, grease and dead insects in cupboards and drawers.
One said afterwards: ‘There were numerous other offences such as preparing raw and cooked meat on the same surfaces.’
SHAMED: August Moon takeaway
Yaroo!
BBC bar Bunter the ‘racist’
TONY PURNELL
CRIPES, you chaps!
That overweight bounder Billy Bunter has come the most frightful cropper at the BBC.
The Owl of the Remove has been given the old heave-ho for being stoutist, racist and not in the slightest politically correct.
It had been hoped that the bespectacled Bunter, legendary consumer of cream buns and pop at Greyfriars School for the last 84 years, would have his own cartoon series on TV.
But the idea was turned down flat.
Bunter is undeniably overweight.
He also refers to his Indian classmate and close friend, Hurree Jamset Ram Singh, by the nickname Inky.
But Frank Hawkey, of Bunter's publisher, Hawk Books, said yesterday: ‘The BBC's objection is ridiculous.
Bunter is all about friendship.
Confident ‘Inky is not shunned, he is always welcomed and accepted as one of Bunter's group.’
Bunter, whose first appearance was in the Magnet comic in 1908, was last seen on television in the 1950s, with Gerald Campion in the title role.
Mr Hawkey added: ‘The critics may not have liked it but the kids did.’
Mikael Shields, of BBC Enterprises, said: ‘Children are far quicker than adults at spotting and rejecting cases of racism and stoutism.’
According to the BBC, the only chance Bunter has of getting on television again would be to update Greyfriars into something like a public school version of Grange Hill.
The thought sent a shudder through Penny Tackaberry, television agent for the estate of Bunter's creator, Frank Richards.
‘I can't see how anyone can object to Bunter,’ she insisted.
‘After all, his heart's in the right place.’
UNWANTED: Bunter
Hols firm alert
HOLIDAYS for 10,000 families are in danger after another travel firm ran into trouble.
Shares in the Mowat Group, which specialises in UK chalet and caravan holidays and property, were suspended yesterday.
A receiver is likely to be appointed today and he will decide if holidays booked with Mowat's Holimarine and Pennant Holiday parks will be honoured.
The company blames the property slump for the crisis.
W-winter's here, folks
SUMMERTIME Britain was given a FROST warning yesterday.
Much of the country was due to wake up to a teeth-chattering 4C (39F)— six degrees lower than average — with ground frost in many parts of the South, Midlands and Scotland.
IT'S SUPERCORPSE
STEWART DICKSON
BREAK it gently to Lois, but Superman is about to DIE.
The goody-goody hero from Krypton will be killed off on November 18 after 54 years of invincibility.
He may be faster than a speeding bullet but he's no match for a giant alien called Doomsday.
The beastly blob wipes him out in a story in America's DC Superman comics.
Doomsday cuts a swathe across the States and takes on Superman in a clash of the titans.
Editor Mike Carlin revealed: ‘There will be a lot of death and destruction around Metropolis because of the fight with Doomsday.
‘Superman is going to die at the end.’
Rival comics reckon it's just a ruse to boost sales — and that Superman will be resurrected.
Carlin insisted: ‘We never said we couldn't kill him.
We never say we wouldn't bring him back.’
VICTIM: Superman Copyright — DC Comics Inc
I HOPE YOU WEEP FOR THE REST OF YOUR LIFE
Mum's message to killer
SAMUEL JAMES
A SAVAGE thug who killed a stranger with a baseball bat for kicks collapsed in tears when he was jailed for life yesterday.
And as Mark Paul, 20, was led sobbing to the cells, his victim's mother said bitterly: ‘I hope he weeps for the rest of his life.’
Paul bludgeoned 28-year-old graduate John Lavender after drinking six pints of lager and smoking three cannabis joints.
He tearfully said he only wanted to give the innocent insurance agent a ‘headache’ and wept so much in court that police branded him the ‘cry-baby killer’.
But his tears failed to move John's 69year-old widowed mother Mary.
She said it was a year to the day since her son died.
And she added contemptuously:
I feel nothing for him, I despise him.
He is a low human being and deserves to be put away for ever.
I'd like to have ten minutes with him.
I want him to know he has my son's blood on his hands.
He should never forget that and I hope it haunts him forever.
It was such a pointless waste of life.
I can never forgive him.
But I can't hate him because he doesn't matter.
Paul battered John after going on a night of ‘louting’.
In the frightening new craze, youths take a cocktail of drink and drugs before going out to look for trouble.
With pal Andrew Christie, 21, Paul planned to smash up parked cars with the baseball bat.
Then they met John walking home through Battersea, South London.
Split
Going for the ultimate ‘thrill,’ Paul delivered a two-handed blow to the back of John's head.
The graduate's skull split apart into four pieces like a coconut.
A piece of scalp flew yards through the air.
Neither Paul nor Christie called an ambulance, the Old Bailey heard.
John was found on hands and knees in a doorway, mumbling and twitching.
He died 12 hours later.
Five days afterwards, callous Paul used the same bat to play baseball.
Paul, a jewellery salesman from Battersea, was convicted of murder.
He admitted manslaughter.
TRAGIC WASTE: ‘Killed for kicks’ victim John Lavender with mum Mary
BASEBALL BAT BRUTE SPACED out on drink and drugs, Paul used the bat pictured above to bludgeon John to death
Delight at the opera
DAZZLING Diana puts on an eye-catching show as she steps out of her car to go to the opera.
She wore a long black jacket dotted with outsize white buttons over a skirt of broad black and white stripes last night.
She waved to well-wishers at Sadler's Wells in London where she watched Carmen performed by the British Youth Opera of which she is patron.
Picture: KENT GAVIN
‘WILLIE WINKIE’ KID CAN'T SLEEP
FRANK CORLESS
LIVEWIRE toddler Vincent Molyneux is a real nightmare — because he just won't SLEEP.
Wide-awake Vincent has snatched a maximum of four hours a night shut-eye since he was born 3 ½ years ago.
And that's left mum Julie and her fireman husband Ray totally exhausted.
Julie, 32, said: ‘All he needs is a candlestick and he's a real-life Wee Willie Winkie.
He won't sleep during the day and he just never gets worn out.
‘We're absolutely shattered.
It's hopeless.’
The couple's daughter Victoria, six, is a real sleeping beauty.
But experts who monitored Vincent are baffled why he never needs much kip.
Julie, who lives in Llanbedr, near Ruthin, North Wales, added: ‘He comes into us asking if we're asleep when it should be the other way round.
‘Maybe he'll change when he starts school next year.
‘I can't wait for his first day — I'll spend it in bed.’
TIRELESS: Vincent
Ow!
Bob's bitten by spider in his flies
MICHAEL McDONOUGH
BURLY Bob Edginton was bitten by a deadly black widow spider…on his manhood.
Now Bob is suing the makers of the portable loo where it happened.
‘It curtailed his sex life,’ his lawyer said at Delray Beach, Florida.
‘Bob got divorced after this nightmare — and the incidents were related.’
Scared
The 41-year-old carpenter is claiming £200,000 from the toilet firm, alleging they failed to clean and maintain their equipment on a building site.
He is now scared to use outside loos and says he has lost work with bosses who won't let him go to find other facilities.
‘I just wish I'd kept my flies fastened that day,’ he said.
‘This creature put me in hospital.
The pain was torture.’
The bite of a black widow can kill humans.
KILLER: A black widow
Action line
VIEWERS donated more than £700,000 within hours of TV's Africa In Crisis appeal lines opening last night.
MARK DOWDNEY
The sinister forces behind the dictator who sparked a bloodbath
PUPPET ON A STRING
A FORMER prison warder with a liking for fancy uniforms was the public face behind the bloodbath that shook South Africa on Monday.
TV viewers worldwide watched in horror as hated tinpot dictator Brigadier Joshua Gqozo ordered his troops to open fire on an African National Congress protest march against his leadership of black homeland Ciskei.
But there were other sinister unseen fingers on the triggers that left 28 marchers dead and 200 wounded.
Because the small Brigadier they call The Ciskei Kid is little more than a puppet on a string.
In theory, he is the independent ruler of one of the 10 blacks-only homelands deliberately created in the 1980s as part of South Africa's hated apartheid policy.
In reality, he is the front man for the white rulers of Pretoria who keep him well supplied with cash, arms, and advisers.
He would not have dared to take the decision alone to order his troops to open fire on the ANC marchers massing on his borders.
He was set up as the triggerman for the massacre by those forces inside President F.W. de Klerk's administration determined to hang on to white power at all costs.
For them it was too good a chance to miss.
To have blacks slaughtering blacks puts back even further the day when there has to be real change in that tortured country.
It allows them to promote the false claim that the blacks are not fit to run South Africa when clearly they are still at each other 's throats.
Gqozo, 38, came to power following a coup in Ciskei two years ago.
All the evidence points to him having been selected by South Africa's white military intelligence arm as their puppet.
After working in the prison service, he joined the defence forces before becoming an intelligence agent.
Like many dictators, Gqozo is physically small, which has led to him being dubbed The Dwarf as well as The Ciskei Kid by his enemies.
But the ruler who likes to be driven around in a sinister black Range Rover with dark tinted windows casts a long shadow of fear.
His security police are no strangers to intimidation when it comes to striking fear into Ciskei's 850,000 poverty-stricken people.
Gqozo is accused of operating hit squads and permits no freedom of speech — the penalty for simply criticising Gqozo's leadership is five years in jail and he has banned all ANC activities inside the homeland.
The ANC controls most of the homelands which it wants abolished and returned to South African rule.
It sees them as little more than rural ghettoes designed by previous hated white regimes to keep blacks and whites apart.
But three of them — Ciskei, Kwazulu, and Bophuthatswana — are ruled by men who hate the ANC and have no intention of giving up their power.
ANC leaders decided to take on Gqozo because they figure he is the easiest to topple.
There have already been two attempted coups against him.
This power battle is vital to the ANC's future success.
Almost 17 million of South Africa's 28 million blacks live in the homelands and their support at the ballot box is crucial whenever they are finally given the vote.
But the ANC must also bear some share of the responsibility for the bloodshed in Ciskei.
Its leaders knew there was a serious risk of trouble if it took a mass march into Gqozo's lair.
But the path of political progress has become deadlocked following the breaking off of reform talks with de Klerk in June after the attack on the Boipatong township in which dozens of ANC supporters were hacked to death.
So the ANC has embarked on a programme of mass action to put pressure on the government.
Until Monday it had been peaceful.
But the organisation's militant wing has become increasingly restive and harder for ANC president Nelson Mandela to control.
It is reckoned no coincidence that leaders of the country's communist party, who are close ANC allies, were in the forefront of the march against Ciskei.
The massacre has sabotaged for the time being any resumption of negotiations between Mandela and de Klerk.
Many believed these were almost on the point of starting again following secret talks between the two leaders in recent weeks.
Both men know the only way ahead to avoid a national racial bloodbath is to get together and start talking again.
Mandela led mass demonstrations last month, some of the biggest ever seen in South Africa, and helped organise a two-day national strike.
In all this he managed to avoid a direct confrontation with the security forces.
So for him what happened at Ciskei is a massive setback.
It can only lead to the suspicion that there are dangerous men on both sides who believe violence is the only way forward.
The world can only pray that they do not gain the upper hand.
UNDER FIRE: Men and women flee the bullets at Ciskei
WE'LL BE FRIENDS FOREVER
10th anniversary date for Cheggers
JILL TURNER
MARRIAGE-split stars Keith Chegwin and Maggie Philbin pledged yesterday to stay friends forever.
And they said they were still planning an evening out together on their 10th anniversary.
The TV presenters, who have been living apart since May, sadly told of their decision to separate.
They insisted that no one else was involved and vowed to stay close for the sake of their daughter Rose, four.
Maggie, 37, said: ‘We feel very sad about this and wish it wasn't happening but we are friends and always will be.
‘We have known each other for 14 years and we just don't want to spoil what we have.’
Sky presenter Keith, 35, chipped in: ‘It will be nice to sort it out but it is more important if we can still remain friends for the rest of our lives.’
Maggie, who wasn't wearing her ring, was speaking outside a pal's home near Newbury, Berks.
She has been living there since leaving Keith in the family home a mile away.
She confessed: ‘We still feel a lot for each other.’
But she refused to speculate on a reconciliation.
‘You can't look into the future,’ she said.
‘I haven't a crystal ball.’
The couple, who met on Noel Edmonds's Multi-Coloured Swap Shop in 1978, said they had told Rose about the split.
Keith explained: ‘We have been very honest with her.
She starts school on Tuesday and asked us if we were still all going together, which we are.’
Maggie added: ‘Keith sees Rose whenever he wants, either by popping in here or she goes over to him for the day.’
Last year Keith spent five weeks in a clinic battling the booze.
But he and Maggie said this was NOT behind the split.
Yesterday's Mirror story
UST GOOD FRIENDS: Keith and Maggie pour their hearts out yesterday
What a cop class team
POLICE and Army officers are leading a rush of would-be school inspectors.
They head 600 volunteers who have already put themselves forward for 200 new Government teams which will be checking on classroom standards after September, 1993.
The teams must include at least one person with no working knowledge of education.
ELVIS TOUCH
KEVIN SMITH
ELVIS Presley's only child is bidding to become a rock star.
Lisa Marie has been secretly recording demo tapes of songs she has written.
Her manager Jerry Schiller said: ‘She has a terrific voice and can write.’
Experts who have heard the tapes, said: ‘You can hear the Elvis touch.’
But so far Lisa Marie, 24, daughter of Dallas star Priscilla Presley, has yet to find a studio who will pay the money she wants.
Schiller said: ‘We will get a good deal.’
TAPES: Lisa
‘Whipping’ death probe
A GANG of young thugs may be charged over the death of a pensioner who was allegedly whipped with bamboo garden canes.
Grandad Frank Sanderson, from Cottingham, near Hull, died five months after the alleyway attack.
Five youngsters aged between 12 and 14 were originally questioned and no action was taken.
But police have now reopened the file.
BONG!
THERE GOES ANOTHER NEWS AT TEN MARRIAGE
TV couples find heartbreak behind the scenes
TV editor runs off with ‘Wildcat’ Jackie
ALEC LOM
NEWS At Ten editor-in-chief Stewart Purvis has walked out on his family as the programme's marriage jinx struck again.
Bitter wife Mary, 44, revealed last night that she was suing for divorce on the grounds of his adultery with ‘Wildcat’ TV girl Jacqueline Marson.
She said: ‘I'm very sad because we'd been married 20 years.
‘But unfortunately these things happen quite a lot in this business.’
She added: ‘Stewart is parading this woman round ITN.
‘He's doing himself no good at all— just harm.’
Neither Purvis, 44, nor Jacqueline, 30-year-old director of independent production company Wildcat Films, would comment yesterday.
Stressful
But it is the third News At Ten marriage to hit the rocks in recent months.
BONG: First, veteran newsman Sandy Gall walked out on his wife after 34 years, although he's now trying to patch things up.
BONG: Then foreign correspondent Brent Sadler, 41, who quit ITN for CNN at Christmas, split with his second wife.
BONG: Now Purvis has left his family's four-bedroom home in Cobham, Surrey.
Blonde Mary, who has put the £255,000 house up for sale, said: ‘Maybe TV is always very stressful with long hours.
‘And maybe that makes it more conducive to all these women who let our female species down.
‘But if this woman believes in women's lib, then she's not exactly doing other women any favours.
‘I can't think she is a very nice person.
‘Of course I feel bitter, it wouldn't be natural if I didn't.’
Mary, who has an 18-year-old daughter, revealed she took an overdose the day her husband left.
I was in hospital for two weeks,’ she said.
‘But I've done enough crying.
We had a water shortage round here — not any more!
‘Now I just feel great regret at what has happened.
We're going ahead with a divorce on the grounds of adultery.’
Despite the break-up, Mary still celebrated her 20th wedding anniversary earlier this week.
She said: ‘I went out to lunch with friends and we shared a bottle of champagne.
At night we went to a restaurant.
But Stewart wasn't there.’
Purvis has had a meteoric career since joining ITN in 1972.
And he was credited with turning round Channel Four News after a disastrous start.
Mary said: ‘My ultimate concern is not to say anything that will damage Stewart's career.
‘He is good at his job and I don't want him to lose it because of something stupid like this.’
BONG: Stewart Purvis
BONG: Sandy Gall
BONG: Brent Sadler
Teacher is drowned paddling with wife
A BRITISH holidaymaker drowned as he paddled with his wife on France's ‘Savage Coast.’
Teacher Robin Gent, 49, was swept away by treacherous currents in the waist-deep water.
French bather Alexander Cassan, from nearby Bayeux, also drowned trying to save him.
Last night Mr Gent's heartbroken wife Jane said: ‘Today would have been our 27th wedding anniversary.
‘We knew the water was dangerous and had only gone in to our knees.
‘But suddenly the sea bottom just dropped away and it was waist deep.
‘We tried to get back but the waves were getting bigger.
‘Then Robin shouted ‘I'm not going to make it — go and get help’.’
A post mortem was held yesterday on Mr Gent, from Marlow Bottom, Bucks.
GP faces probe for working too hard
SYDNEY YOUNG
A DEDICATED doctor has been ordered before a special health authority hearing — accused of working too hard.
But he is unlikely to attend because he's too busy.
GP Sandy Jordan, 63, blasted the hearing as ‘victimisation’ after being asked to explain the number of night calls he makes.
Under health service regulations doctors are entitled to £45 for a night visit.
Dr Jordan, who has a one-man practice in Minehead, Somerset, said:
I only claim six night visits a week, although I usually do 60.
I don't make calls at night to make money.
Bleeding
In each case quoted the patient was either dying, in pain, had fallen out of bed, was bleeding or had suffered a heart attack.’
Patients at Dr Jordan's 1,530-strong practice yesterday described him as a ‘conscientious grafter’.
Somerset family health authority claim his night visits are five times the average.
But Dr Jordan insisted: ‘I'm not going to change to save the NHS money.’
ANGRY: Dr Jordan
It makes Lulu wanna shout!
TONY PURNELL
SORRY, Lulu, the prawn cocktail's off.
But try this fur starters…our speciality stuffed  raccoon .
It made the startled singer wanna Shout as loudly as her Sixties hit when it was plonked on her plate at a wedding feast by a mischievous magician.
The bride and groom, Legs and Co dancer Linda Johns and singer-songwriter Mike Moran, were still chortling hours later.
So was Lulu's fellow guest, actor Peter Straker.
And the sporty victim herself was all smiles, too.
If you want a beastly dull wedding party, don't bring Lulu.
Pictures: STEVE CHUBBS 
ALL FUR A LAUGH: Mike, Linda, Lulu and Peter
Midwife probe
THREE midwives suspended after a two-day-old baby died in hospital at Keighley, Yorks, will resume work on Monday after appearing before an inquiry yesterday.
Car for course
ROLLS-Royce is defying the recession to launch a £91,000 car, the Bentley Brooklands, named after the racing circuit.
Stone Ron court fury
ANGRY Rolling Stone Ronnie Wood stormed from a court with his minders yesterday after a jury cleared a youth of attacking his son.
Jesse Wood, 15, was kicked and slashed by a drunken gang at Richmond, London, last Christmas.
Ben Turner, 18, admitted knocking him down but said he tried to stop the others from piling in.
Trainee joiner Turner was acquitted at Isleworth Crown Court of causing actual bodily harm.
ANGRY: Ronnie
War hero murder charge
A FALKLANDS veteran was charged with murdering his wife yesterday — three months after she was found hanged.
Eddie Gilfoyle, 30, was arrested at a hospital where he was being treated for stress.
Paula Gilfoyle, 33, was found dead at her home at Upston, Merseyside, two weeks before her first child was due.
Her husband later told a news conference: ‘She was the best thing that any man could wish for.’
Medical Corps veteran Gilfoyle, who helped bombed Sir Galahad troopship victims in the Falklands, will appear in court today.
A bar on the Press
WHILE the Maxwells tucked into their lunch in the King William's oak-beamed bar, pot-bellied landlord Brian Penney kept reporters outside.
‘You're all shitehawks and muckrakers,’ the bearded publican bawled at them.
KOP ACES QUEUE TO SAVE BOY
LIVERPOOL'S soccer stars have lined up to become bone marrow donors in a bid to save a young fan.
The Anfield squad gave blood after a training session this week to see if they would be a suitable match for 10-year-old leukaemia sufferer Paul Mainwaring.
Paul's grateful father Bill yesterday said: ‘It's a wonderful gesture.’
‘Paul is absolutely thrilled that his heroes are trying to help him.’
Chairline
HARD-UP German airline Lufthansa is selling leather first-class passenger seats from its planes at up to £3,500 a pair.
FIREBALL MUM FREED
A MOTHER accused of trying to turn herself into a human fireball because she had been rejected by the boss she loved, wept yesterday as a jury acquitted her of attempted arson.
Jacqueline Bridger, 46, poured a can of petrol over her head in the office of Michael Sargeant, the man she claimed had been her lover, the Old Bailey was told.
Then she made 18 separate attempts to light the fuel.
The prosecution said it was a miracle she did not start an inferno.
But the jury decided she had not endangered other people's lives.
Mr Sargeant, from Farnham, Surrey, told the court Mrs Bridger became obsessed with him after he employed her.
But he denied they had ever made love.
He told the jury he struggled with her after she poured petrol over herself and managed to take matches from her.
Mrs Bridger, of Roman Way, Farnham, did not give evidence.
Wife's 40 penniless years…
PLUMBER Alfred Lange, 70, never gave his wife Gertrud a penny for housekeeping in 40 years of marriage.
They divorced after he strangled her dog for trampling on his tulips.
When they met to discuss reconciliation, the old skinflint stabbed charlady Gertrud 14 times, a court in Dortmund, Germany was told.
Lange was given a two-month suspended jail sentence for attempted manslaughter.
Plane crazy
A MAN parachuted from a packed passenger jet over Vietnam yesterday after forcing the Bulgarian crew to open an emergency exit.
LA brief's off
TV STAR Richard Dysart, 66, is to quit his hit LA Law role as Leland McKenzie.
Dysart, one of the mainstays of the show, says it has become too much bedroom nookie and too little courtroom drama.
OUT: Richard
TERROR OF RAID VICTIM
EVIL robbers beat up a businessman so badly with an iron bar that he was afraid to leave hospital last night.
John Glover, 53, was jumped by seven men as he opened the front door of his home.
Gagged
They battered him over the head and threatened him with a shotgun.
Then they bound, gagged and blindfolded him before beating him again.
The gang escaped with a £70,000 haul, including silver, paintings and a Mercedes car.
Divorced Mr Glover, of Kingsdown, Kent, was left with 17 stitches in face wounds, two suspected broken ribs and severe bruising.
His son James said: ‘I can't find words to express what I feel about the people who did this.
‘Father put up a fight, but he had no chance against seven armed men.
‘The house is like a bomb site and, understandably, he's very frightened about going home again.’
Beware of bets on nose
GAMBLERS may soon be spending more in betting shops and casinos.
US scientists have discovered a smell which drives punters wild.
One whiff — and they raise the stakes by digging deeper into their pockets.
Takings rose 45 per cent when the secret aroma was tested on Las Vegas fruit machines.
The inventors reckon they're on a winner.
A spokesman said certain scents have a ‘relaxing effect’.
BUT HONESTLY, OFFICER!
I REALLY AM NIGEL MANSELL
What boozy driver told cop after crash
GORDON HUGHES
A BOOZY L-driver in a motorway crash told police at the scene: ‘I really AM Nigel Mansell.’
Sceptical officers thought he was trying to pass himself off as motor racing's world champ.
But after checking his credentials they found he was a prize chump — forklift driver Nigel Mansell, from Byran-cum-Sutton, West Yorks.
Banned
And yesterday he was banned from driving for two years and fined £900.
Short-sighted Mansell, 26, came to grief on the hard shoulder of the M6 near Pontefract, West Yorks.
First his Y-reg Yugo crunched into the back of a trailer behind a broken-down Austin Ambassador.
Then it cannoned into the other car, flipped over on its roof — and careered back into the motorway.
The Yugo finally skidded to a halt upside down and straddling the middle lane.
Short, bespectacled Mansell scrambled out with only a slight head injury.
But a breath test revealed an alcohol content of 88 milligrammes — more than twice the limit, the court in Pontefract heard.
Mansell admitted drink-driving, two charges of driving with defective tyres and driving on a motorway while a provisional licence holder.
Paul Elmhirst, defending, said Mansell had been drinking heavily.
This sparked a row with his parents and he stormed out of their home and drove off.
Mr Elmhirst said Mansell earned £100 a week and led ‘a fairly quiet sort of life’.
That, police said later, was just one of many differences between him and the super-rich daredevil namesake.
CHUMP: Drink-driver Nigel Mansell yesterday
CHAMP: Other Nigel
THE GRR-EAT ESCAPE
Crook nicks his ‘arrested’ rotty back from cops
TOM MERRIN
A BURGLAR who left his snarling rottweiler behind when he fled from the law launched a midnight raid on a police station and nicked it back.
The robber had run off when he was spotted breaking into a house — but the 10-stone dog was ‘arrested’ in his car.
Last night the police admitted: ‘Now the dog is on the run as well.’
They had planned to photograph the monster at Winchester, Hants, hoping someone would identify his owner.
But the thief beat them to it.
Policewoman Tanya Cook said: ‘Somebody cut through the padlock to the kennels in the middle of the night.
‘It must have been the owner.
He is the only person who could have got near the animal.’
Scared police called in a vet when they found the abandoned rottweiler.
Broom
Tanya added: ‘He sedated the dog before we got him out of the car.
‘It was the only way to get close to him.’
Sgt Steve Lock added: ‘We fed him by poking food under the door with a broomstick — a very long broomstick.’
Detectives have one lead to go on.
They've still got the villain's car.
Liver swap Liam dies
BRAVE Liam Hamer yesterday lost his battle for life just five days after receiving a new liver.
Parents Zoe, 17, and Jason, 18, of Huddersfield, West Yorks, had been at eight-month-old Liam's bedside since the op at St James's Hospital, Leeds.
CINDERS' FELLAS CHARM PANTO QUEEN ULRIKA
THE stage career of former TV-am weathergirl Ulrika Jonsson got a lift yesterday — from two strong-arm men.
BBC children's favourites Brian Cant and Ross King swept the 25-year-old beauty off her feet as she started preparing for a pantomime.
Blonde Ulrika, who was charmed by Prince Edward before marrying cameraman John Turnbull, is to play Cinderella at Crawley, Sussex.
And co-stars Brian and Ross aim to make sure the show is a ball.
PANTO STAR: Ulrika
Mirror gets man cleared of rape
ROD CHAYTOR
A MAN was cleared of rape yesterday — thanks to the Daily Mirror.
A 22-year-old nightclub dancer had alleged she was gang-raped by Hell's Angel Stephen Townsend, 34, and his friends.
She then went to Ibiza and made similar claims against four men.
But a Spanish judge dropped charges when 30 men admitted having sex with her on her holiday.
Confessed
The Mirror discovered she was involved in allegations against Stephen and told police and his lawyers in Wolverhampton, West Midlands, where he was in custody.
The girl also told the Mirror she consented to group sex in Ibiza.
Stephen's solicitor, Dennis Dudley, told Wolverhampton magistrates: ‘I would like to thank the Daily Mirror for passing on this information.’
Prosecutor Smither Thiara said: ‘The charge has been dropped because of lack of evidence.’
Rich Nick in court over 5p
A MADCAP millionaire who lives in a run-down cottage has been taken to court over an unpaid poll tax bill — for FIVE PENCE.
Nick Bence-Jones, 25, was left almost £4.5 million by his grandmother in her will seven years ago.
But when he wrote a cheque to pay his poll tax bill it was five pence short of the £122.97p owed to Suffolk Coastal Council.
Magistrates at Saxmundham ordered Nick to pay the debt with £12 costs.
But after Nick confronted council chiefs, they agreed to waive the costs.
‘I was furious,’ said Nick, of Nacton, Ipswich, yesterday.
‘It was a waste of council money.’
A council spokesman said: ‘There was no alternative.
We issued a summons and he failed to pay the full sum on time.’
FURIOUS: Nick
DROPPED OFF!
STUDENT John McCoy went for a spin in his car hoping it would make him tired — and plummeted 30ft down a cliff.
John, 20, nodded off after parking at the top of a cliff in Crimdon, Co.
Durham.
He awoke, forgetting he had left his car in gear, and switched on the engine.
The car shot over the edge and landed in a sand dune.
John escaped with minor injuries.
Hero Sarge gets a gong
AN RAF sergeant who twice crawled through an Iraqi minefield to rescue two badly injured boys was yesterday awarded the George Medal.
Dennis Rogers, 37, used a knife in 45F heat to prod his way past scores of mines and reach the pair, aged 10 and 13.
The youngsters had stepped on mines while fishing on a beach near Kuwait City four months after the Gulf War.
They survived their injuries.
‘I had no previous experience of minefields, but I knew I had to do something,’ Dennis said at RAF Stafford.
BRAVE: Dennis
CAMBRIDGE BLUE
Cursing rugby toffs in terror rampage on jet
JOHN JACKSON
A SQUAD of Cambridge University rugby players turned the air blue as they terrorised a packed jetliner during a two-hour rampage.
Police boarded the plane, banned all alcohol and warned the players they would be booted into jail if they did not stop harassing the 150 passengers and crew.
The 29 rowdy rugger toffs were returning home after four wins in a five-match tour of Canada.
Travellers on the Canadian Airlines flight from Vancouver to London, which stopped at Edmonton, said the undergraduates:
SHOUTED obscene chants as the aircraft's safety videos were shown.
SCRIBBLED swear words on pillows and held them up to the cabin crew members demonstrating emergency procedures.
PESTERED girls with rude suggestions.
SHOUTED ‘You're a f—’ at a 17-year-old boy angry at sexual offers made to his two young sisters.
HURLED food and sprayed drink at people.
Shocked
The final insult came when one player stripped to his underpants and ran up and down the aisles.
Peter Strong, 47, an Oxford University lecturer, said: ‘I was shocked that people from one of the top universities could act like soccer thugs.’
The players only calmed down after airport police boarded the plane at Edmonton.
Manager Dr Tony Craigen said offending players would be disciplined.
His assistant, Tony Rogers, added: ‘We did apologise to passengers and the majority accepted it was a case of high spirits.’
Sausage meet
A BRITISH Sausage Appreciation Society is to be launched in London next month by fans of the banger.
BEER AD RAP
BREWERS of Castlemaine lager were accused yesterday of not giving a XXXX for deaf people because a TV commercial for the Aussie booze uses ‘gobbledegook’ sign language.
Liverpool Mayor Rosie Cooper, the daughter of deaf parents, said: ‘They are ridiculing deaf people.’
But Saatchi and Saatchi, who made the ad, said: ‘The sign language is Auslan, in common usage in Australia.’
XXXX: Can it
Sick kids miss out over snub for bikers
PETER KANE
A SNOOTY hospice lost a £1,250 gift for its sick kids — because it banned three bikers.
The caring trio had raised the cash at a week-end rally and concert attended by 2,000 motorcyclists.
They thought they would get a warm welcome when they offered the money to the charity-funded hospice in Milton, Cambs.
But they were told they must park their bikes 300 yards away.
And they were refused permission to visit any of the sick children.
Angry
The bikers were so angry that they rode off and gave the cash to another children's hospice at Quidenham, Norfolk.
Steven Stud, 40, said: ‘I can only surmise that the people at the Cambridge hospice didn't want us there.
‘They wanted our money but did not want anyone to know where it had come from.
‘We were very upset and decided to take it elsewhere.’
Milton staff said they thought the youngsters would be scared of the noisy bikes.
Appeals chief Dorothy Roberts said: ‘I am upset if I have offended anyone, but the care of the patients must come first.’
FLIGHT&BITTER
Tiger Moth pilot Tony drops in for a pub pint
SYDNEY YOUNG
BIGGLES pilot Anthony West coolly landed his vintage Tiger Moth biplane right outside a secluded country pub — and swaggered in for a pint.
Regulars blinked in disbelief as Anthony made his entrance in 1920s flying suit, helmet, goggles and scarf.
Then he ordered a beer, saying: ‘Nasty weather for flying.
Thirsty work, don't you know.’
Fifteen minutes later the daredevil said a jaunty ‘Cheerio.’
He popped into the garage next door, bought £20 of petrol for his 50-year-old plane and was up, up and away again.
Graham Robinson, guvnor of the Brook House Inn at Castle Cary, Somerset, said yesterday: ‘I saw this Tiger Moth at the edge of the car park.
‘I just cracked up when I saw him.
He was so calm — as though he had just parked his car outside.
‘He said, ‘I was dying for a pint so when I saw the pub I decided to land and come in.’‘
Crash
Garage boss Trevor Cave said: ‘It's the first time we've had a pilot come here to refuel.’
But three hours later Anthony, 36, crashlanded in a Cornish field after running OUT of fuel on his solo round-Britain test flight.
He was picked up by an RAF helicopter at Crowdy, near Davidstow.
Anthony, from Sharnbrook, Beds, was unhurt.
But the plane's undercarriage was damaged.
An RAF spokesman said: ‘There were power lines nearby and just half a mile away there was a sheer cliff.
He's a very lucky man.’
40s VINTAGE: Classic Tiger Moth
Baby grab beast is beaten off by girl
A TEENAGE babysitter told yesterday how she won a desperate tug-of-war with a bogus social worker who tried to grab the child.
Brave Nicola Wilkinson, who refused to let go of 12-month-old Kristian Watson, said: ‘I just hung on as tightly as I could.’
The scruffy snatcher, who wore a ring on every finger, forced her way into the house after Nicola answered the door.
The woman, aged between 30 and 35, rifled through drawers then picked up Kristian.
As he cried out, she insisted on taking him for a drive in her car.
Threat
But Nicola waded in and grabbed the baby as the fake social worker tried to pull him away.
The woman finally let go and fled when Nicola threatened to phone the baby's mother.
Kristian's mum Ena, 32, said at her home in Spennymoor, Co Durham: ‘Nicola was a heroine.
She saved my baby from being snatched.’
A police spokesman said: ‘This young girl did everything right.
‘Although the woman was much bigger, she kept her wits and refused to let her take the baby.’
Pay attention in my court-you're fired!
TEACHER Jane McKenna was sacked from a riot trial jury yesterday for not paying attention.
Lawyers claimed that during evidence she FILLED in official forms, FLICKED through her diary, DEALT with mail and STUDIED her cheque book.
After discharging mother-of-four Jane on the sixth day of the Newcastle trial, Judge John Johnson told the other eleven jurors: ‘It is an embarrassing position.
It appears she was not attending 100 per cent to the trial.’
But Jane's angry husband George said last night: ‘She may give a laid back impression but she is remarkably alert.
‘Jane can read a book while having a conversation, knowing exactly what has been said.
‘She also did a drawing of the judge but you can bet she absorbed every word spoken.’
Ten youngsters face charges arising from riots on Tyneside last year.
Baby grab: Woman held
POLICE hunting a bogus social worker who tried to snatch a child have arrested a woman.
Babysitter Nicola Wilkinson, 13, fought off the phoney as she tried to grab one-year-old Kristian Watson in Spennymoor, County Durham.
Early bird job-hunter
UNEMPLOYED Sandra Davies wants a job so badly she is tramping the streets at dawn pushing applications through letter-boxes.
So far Sandra, 27, who has nine O-levels, has applied to more than 500 firms in Barnsley.
Cop car ‘fast as Mansell’ in chase
DEATH chase police hit 120mph in conditions that that even racing champion Nigel Mansell couldn't have handled safely, a court was told yesterday.
Two motorbike thieves died when the stolen machine careered into a lamp-post at 100mph.
But the prosecution claimed at York Crown Court that the pursuing patrol car driver, PC Richard Wheeler, was reckless.
Speed
Michael Kalisher QC told the jury: ‘If you or I or even Nigel Mansell drove along that road at that speed no-one would suggest that it was anything other than reckless driving.’
Richard Nilsson, 22, and pillion passenger Stephen Parrott, 25, from Scunthorpe, died after the 6 ½mile chase between Doncaster and Bawtry, when speeds hit 120mph.
PC Wheeler, 41, of the South Yorkshire force, denies reckless driving.
The trial continues.
SUPERGIRL IS BROKE
ACTRESS Margot Kidder, who soared to fame as Superman's girlfriend Lois Lane, admitted last night: ‘I'm bankrupt.’
Five years ago Margot, 43, was flying high opposite Christopher Reeve in Superman IV.
But a car crash in 1990 in which she damaged her spinal cord, left her with £250,000 medical bills.
Canadian-born Margot had to sell her jewellery, art collection and furniture in order to survive.
She said: ‘It's been very tough.
I'm hoping for a part in Superman V — but I'm not sure I can fly around anymore.’
CRASH: Margot
Red alert
A HUGE man-like creature covered with ginger hair has been spotted in a Chinese national park.
Opera buff
THE Welsh National Opera company — Princess Di's favourite — has been slammed for using a naked woman in performance posters.
HORROR AS DAD'S PAL SHOOTS TOT
He didn't know gun was loaded
JIM OLDFIELD
LITTLE Christopher Cunliffe was shot in the eye by his dad's best mate — after the family friend joked he would ‘quieten him down’ by pointing an air rifle at him.
Horrified Arthur Day saw the three-year-old fall to the ground with a serious head injury when the weapon went off.
But Christopher was playing happily in hospital last night after making an astounding recovery.
Doctors feared an air rifle pellet had pierced his brain when the joke went horribly wrong.
His mum Lucy, 25, declared: ‘It's a miracle.
It looked really serious.
‘But he's so brave he has made a wonderful comeback.
‘He has been jumping around with all the other children in the ward.’
Trigger
Christopher was playing with sister Katherine, 5, and four-year-old twins Gavin and Becky at their home in Huddersfield, West Yorks, when disaster struck.
Mr Day, 32, pointed dad Frank's air rifle at the boy believing it was unloaded.
He pulled the trigger — and to his horror shot Christopher in the head.
Doctors at Pinderfield hospital, Huddersfield, will wait two days before operating to remove the pellet lodged behind his left eye.
It is too early to say if his eyesight will be affected.
Mum Lucy said yesterday: ‘It was a pure accident.
I'm not blaming anyone.’
Mr Day is distraught, but he is unlikely to be prosecuted.
Drug cops hold race car chief
TOP car-racing chief Vic Lee was charged last night with smuggling cocaine into Britain.
The charge came after Customs officers found cocaine worth £6 million on a trailer used by Vic Lee Motorsport, currently third in the touring car championship, at a ferry terminal in Sheerness, Kent.
Two men and a woman have also been charged.
They will all appear in court at Sittingbourne today.
Holiday's right up our street
PLAYGROUP organiser Pat Brown has cut down on holiday postcards — by taking all her neighbours away with her.
Yesterday Pat and 22 pals from Britain's friendliest street jetted off to Greece for a fortnight away from everything — except the neighbours.
They all moved into their new homes at Coal Aston, near Sheffield, South Yorkshire, 16 years ago and have holidayed together ever since.
Pat, 43, turns travel agent once a year to take a vote among neighbours where they want to go.
She said: ‘It takes us a year to save up and we try to put away £25 each every month.
This trip is costing us £17,500.
‘We all get on really well together, and I can truly say we have never fallen out.’
FROLICS TO YOU…
JIM OLDFIELD
VICAR'S daughter Hannah Murray-Leslie was outraged by village gossips who claimed she had been booted out of a public school because of a frolic behind the bicycle shed.
So Hannah, 16, penned an open reply in her dad's parish magazine.
In the Hot Gossip section she also challenged parishioners at Edale, Derbys, to show her ‘the scene of the crime’.
Hannah said yesterday: ‘I don't think there were any bicycle sheds at the school.
‘At least my piece stopped the gossip.’
She left £8,000-a-year Rossall School in Fleetwood, Lancs — where Ian Botham and Kenny Dalglish's sons are pupils — because, she added, she wanted a change.
Greatest love
BEAUTY queen Pamela Martin, 23, handed out the prizes at a Biggest Beer Belly contest in Los Angeles…and ended up marrying 62-inch waist winner Ned Foster, 29.
It's Meryl, looking so Streepish
TO be fair, you could put it down to jet lag and a 12-hour flight.
But when Meryl Streep tumbled off a plane at Heathrow yesterday, the screen goddess looked every inch a mortal.
Wearing a black cardigan and no make-up, she rummaged in her bag for her superstar life-saver kit — The Dark Glasses.
They weren't there.
‘Oh my,’ she mumbled, blinking at the cameras.
‘I wasn't expecting this.’
Head down, she insisted she WASN'T here to promote her new movie Death Becomes Her, in which she plays an actress worried about her looks.
Picture: VIC CRAWSHAW
Rustlers kill Brit hero, 19
BRITISH missionary Peter Jackson was shot dead trying to stop cattle rustlers raiding a remote African church, an inquest heard yesterday.
Peter, 19, from Penbury, Kent, had been spending the summer in northern Kenya before going to university.
Police there are still hunting his murderers, the inquest at Reigate, Surrey, was told.
Haul 'em in
AN angler hooked a bag full of stolen watches and jewellery as he fished in a lock near Portsmouth.
Holiday Brits are so mean
STINGY British tourists — some of them spending just £1 a DAY — have shocked a sunshine isle's hotel chiefs.
Barmen are often asked for glasses and ice to go with drinks bought at supermarts.
Hard-boiled eggs are sneaked from breakfast buffets to be scoffed for picnic lunches.
And guests at one hotel alone have nicked 2,000 towels since April.
The dodges were reported to the Association of Independent Tour Operators, in Cyprus last week.
Counter feat
COLIN Gibbons, who makes forgery-detection machines, was given a fake £20 note in his pay in Bourne End, Bucks.
Death of RAF hero
THE RAF officer who built the wooden vaulting horse used in a famous escape from a World War 2 German prison camp has died aged 86.
Two Britons tunnelled to freedom under the horse made from Red Cross food crates by Wing Commander Roger Maw, of Walesby, Lincs.
Firm collapses
THE London-based tour operator DHG (UK) Ltd, which has 3,000 customers on holiday abroad, mainly in Turkey, collapsed yesterday.
YOU AIN'T NOTHIN' BUT A POUND DOG!
Pooch repays cash she ate
SYDNEY YOUNG
HOUSEWIFE Jean Matthews was furious when her spaniel Bonnie snuffled through her purse…and wolfed down THREE £20 notes and a fiver.
But it worked out all right in the end.
Jean waited patiently for nature to take its course.
And six days later she hit the jackpot…when Bonnie paid back the cash.
After a hose-down, the serial numbers were still intact and Jean's bank agreed to swap the soiled £65 for crisp new notes.
Jean, 39, said: ‘I couldn't believe it when Bonnie ate the money.
‘She loves chewing paper — she once ate a £35 cheque.
But I certainly wasn't going to let her get away with it this time.’
Jean, of Backwell, near Bristol, put husband Arthur and teenage children Michelle and David on guard duty until Bonnie paid up.
‘Every time she did something, the whole family went rushing into the garden to check,’ Jean said.
‘I'm just glad Bonnie was on a bran diet.’
While they waited, Jean popped into her local Midland Bank to ask if they would change the money when it finally arrived.
‘They said it would be all right if I had the serial numbers but I don't think they expected me back,’ she said.
Bank clerk Hilary Williams said: ‘When Mrs Matthews first came in to check if she could change them, I thought she must be joking.
‘But when I saw them I couldn't believe how clean they were — and they'd recovered all the pieces.
‘In fact, I've seen some used notes in a much worse condition than that.’
HAPPY ENDINGS: Bonnie and owner Jean with £65 in crisp new notes
HIS ROYAL HUMPINESS
Charles keeps a distance
MARY RIDDELL
THEY may be trying to patch up the rift in their marriage.
But as Charles and Diana demonstrated yesterday, there is still a sizeable gap to fill.
Roughly a bus-width, judging by their arrival at the Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham, for their first joint public engagement since the furore over their future.
Di, clutching a bunch of flowers from a four-year-old leukaemia patient, was smiling and determined to appear unaffected by the rumours.
Charles was…just Charles, his expression a trifle bleak, as though he had the hump.
Adopting his usual Prince of Wales Shuffle he made his way over next to Di.
Well, almost.
That is to say, one could detect that the person in blue somewhere to one's left was almost certainly one's wife.
Surely that's showing a united front?
Full story — Pages 2 and 3 
SO NEAR, YET SO FAR: The closest Charles and Di got to a united front in Nottingham yesterday Picture: KENT GAVIN
BABYSIT FERGIE HELPS REBEL PAL
FERGIE came out of hiding yesterday — to play child minder for fellow royal rebel Marina Mowatt.
The duchess deliberately defied the Palace by picking up Marina's daughter Zenouska when she went to collect princess Eugenie, two, at their £600-a-term nursery school at Winkfield, Berkshire.
Marina, 26, daughter of Princess Alexandra and Sir Angus Ogilvy, caused a storm when she had Zenouska before her marriage to photographer Paul Mowatt.
But she bowed to convention by sending Zenouska, two, to the posh school.
Recently Marina was among guests at Princess Beatrice's fourth birthday party.
It was there Fergie recommended the school to her — where yesterday Eugenie and Zenouska enjoyed lunch of spaghetti and sponge cake.
Later Marina picked up Zenouska from Fergie's home at Wentworth.
LIFT: Fergie takes home Zenouska (left) and Eugenie Picture: DENNIS JAMES
WILLIS IN JOBS PLEA
ALAN LAW
TUC chief Norman Willis appealed to bosses yesterday to get Britain back to work.
The general secretary called on CBI head Howard Davies to build on his offer to work as the TUC's ‘social partner’.
Mr Willis said: ‘We are putting full employment centre stage.
And we need the employers to work positively with us to do it.’
TUC research, using the Treasury's own computer model, shows that a £2 billion increase in public spending would cut Britain's 2,700,000 jobless total by over 100,000.
It would be a quick and cost-effective way of boosting jobs with little effect on inflation.
Projects such as improving and building council houses would be a priority along with maintenance of schools, homes for the elderly, roads, water and sewage.
Scandal
George Bromwell, of construction workers' union UCAT, blasted the ‘scandal of 300,000 building workers out of work when the homeless figure is an all-time record’.
OFFER: Mr Willis
Ron's loser
A POLO sponsorship deal won by Major Ron Ferguson has gone up in smoke — only weeks after Fergie's topless snaps were revealed.
Tobacco company Davidoff Cigarettes is dropping its £30,000 cash backing for Major Ron's Royal Berkshire Polo Club and supporting its rivals Cowdray Park instead.
Gym KOs Kim
FILM beauty Kim Basinger was in pain last night with a foot stress fracture — after pedalling too hard on an exercise bike in a Hollywood gym.
Shot sarge ready for beat
A POLICEMAN who suffered months of agony after being shot by a small-time crook said yesterday: ‘I can't wait to get back to work.’
Sgt Alan Jones made his defiant vow as the man who gunned him down began a 15-year sentence.
The 35-year-old officer almost died when a 9mm bullet fired by Robert Fallon tore through his groin, severed a main artery and left a fist-sized hole in his leg.
He needed 48 pints of blood during 5 1/2 hours of emergency operations and lost 3st during his battle to recover.
Alan, from Hatfield, Herts, watched Fallon, 35, being jailed for attempted murder at the Old Bailey.
Fallon and Christopher Danaher, 33 — both from Wembley, Middlesex — had been stopped on suspicion of kerb crawling in West London.
Danaher was jailed for nine years.
MY HERO: Courageous policeman Alan Jones with his wife Katie yesterday
LOST SAILOR SAFE
A BRITISH sailor and his five-man crew, missing in the north Atlantic for a month, were found safe and well last night.
Adventurer Jack Lammiman, 53, from Whitby, Yorks, was spotted in his 60ft boat by fishermen off the north Scottish coast.
He had left Newfoundland last month as part of the Columbus celebrations.
DOLPHIN TRAGEDY
A WOMAN died while swimming with Fungy the TV dolphin off the West Coast of Ireland yesterday.
The woman, in her sixties from England, had not been named last night.
She is believed to have had a heart attack at Dingle Bay, Co Kerry.
Fungy featured in last night's Channel 4 documentary In The Company Of Whales.
Missing mum dead in her car
SIDNEY YOUNG
A SIX-DAY search for missing mum Tania Probyn ended yesterday when she was found dead in her car in a river.
Police lifted her mud-filled white Renault 19 from the Severn, two miles from the Gloucester home of Tania's estranged husband Jonathan Probyn.
Tania disappeared after visiting gas worker Mr Probyn to discuss custody of girls Natalie, four, and Bryony, eight.
‘There was a serious argument,’ said Det Chief Insp Ralph Goodrich.
He said Tania, 28, was in ‘a very distressed state’ when she left the matrimonial home around midnight.
As the hunt for his wife went on Mr Probyn, 33, appealed to Tania — or anyone who knew where she was — to contact police or family.
Money
He said he just wanted to know she was safe and well, and added: ‘I hope she is staying with someone to have a bit of breathing space.
‘I'm very concerned she has not contacted the children.’
Tania's mother, Jackie May, said her daughter had been due to attend a court hearing in Gloucester the day after her disappearance last Wednesday.
Tania — who lived at Whitminster, Gloucestershire, with boyfriend Robert Cross — had no money on her when she disappeared.
She was dressed in white shorts, a pale jacket and flat shoes.
Police fear she may have committed suicide.
DEATH SCENE: Tania's Renault car is dragged from the River Severn
TRAGEDY: Wife Tania
HUSBAND: Jonathan
I'll fight second cancer, pledges Jessica
HILARY BONNER
OSCAR-winner Jessica Tandy is fighting cancer again — at the age of 82.
The British-born star said yesterday: ‘I am afraid it has come back.
‘But I have conquered this disease before and been free of it for two years.
I will do it again.
‘Don't worry.
I have not finished yet.’
Jessica, in the French resort of Deauville to promote her new film Used People, wore a chiffon scarf and a hat to cover the baldness caused by chemotherapy.
Feared
She said: ‘It's a cruel treatment, but it's not as bad as it used to be.’
Jessica became the oldest-ever Oscar winner in 1990 for her role in Driving Miss Daisy.
Then doctors diagnosed ovarian cancer.
Jessica said: ‘I always feared it because my father died of cancer.’
After months of surgery and chemotherapy, she recovered enough to make two films.
But Jessica, married to Canadian actor Hume Cronyn, will spend her golden wedding anniversary on September 27 back in hospital.
BRAVE: Smiling Jessica
Ashe held in demo
EX-TENNIS champ Arthur Ashe was arrested last night for taking part in a demo outside the White House.
Ashe, his hands bound behind his back, was grabbed with 70 others for attacking US policy on Haitian refugees.
Of the 30,000 who fled from a military dictatorship in Haiti, 24,000 have been sent back.
Many more have drowned sailing to the US in flimsy boats.
NEIL SIMPSON
THREE hundred workers are to be sacked at GEC Communications' Chelmsford factory.
The company blamed declining orders and world competition.
TORY BACKER GETS IN RED
NEIL SIMPSON
ONE of the Tory party's biggest paymasters has slumped £16 million into the red.
Construction giant Taylor Woodrow — which gave the Tories £150,000 in 1989 — blames the slump.
Two years ago it slashed the gift to £24,000 in protest at the Tories' high interest rate policy.
It is refusing to say how much cash it will give this year.
‘Many construction companies supported the Tories during the boom years of the Eighties,’ another building boss said last night.
Now they are fighting for survival.
Soaptime at school
SOAP addict kids are being let off school early to finish homework before Neighbours.
New timetables at four Merseyside schools mean pupils start lessons at 8.30 and go home at 1.50 with just one half-hour break.
Heads say the change has reduced truancy.
GIFT CAR HORROR
It was a present from his mum…hours later Les, 17, and his 3 mates were dead
CLIVE CRICKMER
A TEENAGER and three of his pals died when he crashed the car he had just been given as a present.
Proud Leslie Peers, 17, could not wait to show off the A-registration Ford Escort — a surprise gift from his mother.
But as he took his three lifelong friends for a drive, the car veered over a dual carriageway and hit a bus head-on.
The Escort was split into three pieces by the impact on the busy A174 near Redcar, Cleveland.
The four youngsters — who went to school together and played in the same soccer team — died instantly.
Grieving
Leslie, who passed his driving test last month, could only be identified by a cash card number he scrawled on his arm.
Yesterday, his chums were named as Michael Lee, 18, Craig McGee, 17, and Stephen Connorton, 17, all of Middlesbrough.
No one on the bus was hurt.
Leslie's grieving mother Jeanette, 39, of Middlesbrough, said:
He longed to have a car of his own.
So I bought the Escort, taxed and insured it, and told him ‘It's yours.’
He was thrilled.
They were sensible boys.
If Leslie had been going too fast the others would have told him to slow down.
I can't imagine what caused the accident.
I just know four families have been robbed of their beautiful sons.
Her oil worker husband, Les, flew home after being told of the tragedy…on his 40th birthday.
Craig's father Terry, 45, said: ‘They did everything together — and that's how they died.’
Police said: ‘So far, there is no apparent reason for the crash.’
KILLED: Victim Craig
KILLED: Leslie, who was given the car as a gift
TWISTED: The wreckage of the Escort in which Leslie and his three friends died.
Leslie could only be identified by a scrawled number on his arm
DI'S long-time dresser and pal, 38-year-old Evelyn Dagley, has quit her job, it was revealed last night.
Evelyn had been an aide and friend to Di for 11 years.
A Palace spokesman did not comment on claims she left because of the princess's marriage crisis.
Ford jobs ‘to go abroad’
UNION leaders warned yesterday that hundreds of British car jobs could be ‘exported’ to Eastern Europe.
Their worries followed confirmation by Ford bosses that they were considering setting up a seat production plant in Poland.
Jimmy Airlie, chief union negotiator at the company, said: ‘It looks like the thin end of the wedge.’
LABOUR STARS FACE GAG
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
LABOUR big guns may be barred from speaking at this month's party conference because of a power struggle inside the party.
A ruling by the national executive could silence Shadow Cabinet ministers.
Party chairman John Evans, backed by union leaders, wants a return to the tradition allowing only NEC members to speak from the platform.
This would force some leading figures, like Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown, to fight for a few minutes' speaking time from the floor — or keep quiet.
The move is being resisted by party leader John Smith.
THREAT: Brown
Dog pounds
PEOPLE can open savings accounts for their pets at Japan's Sanwa Bank from today.
YACHT COUPLE PARCH TO DEATH
A BRITISH couple found in a yacht drifting in the Mediterranean are feared to have starved to death.
Police said yesterday that James Dunlop, 61, and Constance Peverell, 60, were found by Tunisian fishermen near Haouaria.
They are believed to have been caught in a storm without enough food or water.
Their yacht Merganser was towed to the Tunisian port of Kelibia.
Boy, 2, drinks acid at surgery
A TODDLER was fighting for life last night after he swallowed a bottle of lethal acid at a doctor's surgery.
Two-year-old John Storey was desperately ill in hospital with internal injuries and skin burns.
His mother Christine had left him playing with toys at the surgery while she had an injection.
When she came out, her son was missing.
Christine called out to him and found him crying with the bottle of poisonous carbolic acid still in his hands.
‘He had the stuff in his mouth and down his chest,’ Christine said.
Inquiry ‘The doctor looked at the bottle and rushed him straight to hospital.’
John was said to be in a critical but stable condition last night in St James' Hospital, Leeds.
Distraught Christine, of Bell Farm, York, said: ‘The doctors told me he could die any minute.’
Carbolic acid is a corrosive normally used in chiropody and for cleaning.
Christine's former boy-friend Robert Broxup called for an inquiry into how the youngster was able to get hold of the acid.
The Bromley, Jones, Moroney and Atkinson surgery at Monkgate, York, refused to comment yesterday.
Tissue of Leis
ROMANIA is recycling tons of its worn-out Lei bank notes…as toilet paper.
MARS…the end of an old faithful
No more work, rest and play for choc fans
NIC NORTH
TAKE a long lingering bite of your favourite Mars bar — it will never taste the same again after November.
The recipe of the old favourite is being changed after 60 years in a bid to lick the recession.
But how will it go down with the fans like England soccer heroes Gary Lineker and Des Walker or film stars Liz Taylor and Joan Collins?
The old bar had a taste of a different kind of publicity in the Sixties, which fans of singer Marianne Faithfull will recall.
Mars promise a new blend of the old ingredients — chocolate, caramel and nougat — to make the relaunched bar ‘smoother and creamier’.
And they'll sweeten up customers by making it six per cent bigger for the same 24p price.
The calorie count — 452 in every 100 grams — stays the same too.
Bob Eagle, spokesman for Berkshire-based Mars, said: ‘Our research shows a clear consumer preference for a bigger size.
‘The result is better-tasting chocolate and a lighter, smoother and creamier nougat centre.’
Fight
Mars are also dropping their famous slogan A Mars A Day Helps You Work, Rest and Play.
The new line is Now There's More To Mars.
Since 1990 sales have slid from 15.7 per cent to 12.5 per cent.
Mars expect their customers to chomp their way through more than a billion bars this year, worth about £90m.
But that's well short of the leader Kit Kat, which rakes in £190million.
Mars are relying on their army of fans to back the new bar.
Stand up Paul Gascoigne, who says he can't resist a Mars.
And broadcaster David Dimbleby, who munched them throughout the night during his gruelling TV election broadcast this year.
WRAP IT UP: This Mars bar is on the way out
A MOUTHFUL: The new Mars bar with the bigger look
MARS FANS: Soccer heroes Lineker and Walker
Suicide toll of farmers
THE Duke of Westminster — the country's richest man — yesterday blamed village poverty for the soaring suicide rate among farmers.
He criticised Government failure to tackle the cash crisis as he launched a new report, The Problems In Rural Areas.
His brother-in-law was found dead last year after complaining of cash worries.
ENGLAND YOBS IN RAMPAGE
RIOT police with drawn batons charged into English soccer hooligans twice during last night's international with Spain.
The police moved in during the first half and then at half-time as a mob of Englishmen taunted and threatened Spanish fans in Santander.
Several hooligans were beaten to the ground.
Twenty England fans were arrested before the ‘friendly’ match after they stoned cars, uprooted trees and broke windows in the northern Spanish resort.
All 20 were kept in custody during the match.
THE TOPS BAR NONE
THE MARS bar has many claims to fame but perhaps the strangest is its use as a guide to the economy, particularly the cost of living.
The Financial Times has described the Mars bar as ‘a currency for our time’ because it contains staple  commodities including cocoa, vegetable fats, milk solids and sugar.
It said it was a more reliable ‘currency’ than gold, which is prone to speculation.
Mars bars have saved the lives of diabetics needing an instant sugar intake.
Once a dog called Guinness saved his diabetic master by fetching him a Mars.
British Rail trains travelling in remote areas of Scotland carry Mars bars in their emergency packs in case they are stranded in snow.
Mars sent bars weighing three-quarters of a ton to AIDS-stricken children in East Europe.
It frequently scores in the world of sport.
In the past two years Mars bars were the official snack at the World Cup in Italy, the World Athletics Championship in Tokyo as well as the Barcelona Olympics.
And Mars also sponsors the Duke of Edinburgh awards.
Ahoy price
A BULLET-proof yacht built for deposed East German dictator Erich Honecker is up for sale in Copenhagen, Denmark, at £1,250,000.
PLANE CRAZY
TERRIFIED Ivan Kolov, 27, jumped to his death from a plane at Tobolsk, Russia, after four friends took him up — to cure his fear of flying.
They were charged with murder.
Mum gets dumped tot back
PATRICK MULCHRONE
A YOUNG mum who abandoned her baby son on a village footpath got the boy back yesterday.
Four months ago distraught Julie Shaw left little Daniel with a note saying: ‘My mummy doesn't love me.’
There was a list of his likes and dislikes.
Daniel, then six months old, was taken into care.
Social services chiefs have accepted that Julie, who also has daughters Tania, six, and Kelsey, two, was suffering from stress.
After caring for him at weekends, Julie has been allowed to have Daniel back home in Brierfield near Burnley, Lancs.
Julie, 24 yesterday, said: ‘I always loved him, I just didn't realise it at the time.’
Nay City Rollers
A CONCERT by 70s teenybop idols the Bay City Rollers was scrapped — when only 15 tickets were sold.
Even the offer of free membership in the group's fan club failed to shift tickets for the gig near Swindon, Wilts.
Guitarist Eric Faulkner refused to comment last night.
SILENCED: Faulkner
Fat lot of use
FATTIES make much better workers than fitness freaks, says a psychologist.
Ludwig Holzer claims that slobs work harder because they feel they must prove something.
Holzer, who examined 200 companies in Germany, revealed: ‘Super-fit people can be trouble at work.’
It's hard hear-ted
STAFF demonstrating a ‘magic’ well have been accused of giving children nightmares — by turning teddy bears to stone.
A visitor to world-famous Mother Shipton's Cave in Knaresborough, Yorks, claims youngsters were horrified at the ‘macabre’ stunt.
Stanley Harrison, of Fallowfield, Manchester, complained to bosses.
But a spokesman insisted: ‘Kids love it.’
999!
THE BACK OF YOUR AMBULANCE IS ON FIRE
Crew race on regardless
SAMUEL JAMES
STARTLED motorists stopped as a 999 ambulance sped past them — with flames roaring from its back.
Drivers flashed the crew and jumped out of their cars shouting warnings.
But the team, with their sirens and blue lights on full blast, raced on unaware of their own emergency.
And the ambulance was engulfed in flames before firemen caught up with it.
The medical crew, from Basildon, Essex, were answering a 999 call from nearby Stanford-le-Hope.
Police, alerted by a motorist who dashed to a phone box, organised a replacement ambulance.
Officers and firemen found the blazing vehicle finally at a halt, with the crew desperately trying to rescue  equipment .
But oxygen tanks fuelled the flames.
An Essex fire service spokesman said: ‘Our men had to fight the blaze from behind a mud bank for fear the tanks might explode.
‘The ambulance was totally destroyed.’
EMERGENCY: Where's that flaming ambulance?
Mums in catfight
POLICE wearing bullet-proof vests and carrying riot shields were called to break-up a catfight between three mums, Guildhall Crown Court heard yesterday.
They were left bleeding and bruised in a row over a stolen bamboo shoot at a council estate in Camberwell, South London.
Ann Chinket and husband Ian, both 34, deny assault.
The case continues.
‘KINKY SEX’ WITH POPEYE
A LABOUR councillor skipped town hall meetings to have three-in-a-bed sex romps with her boyfriend and a 15-year-old schoolgirl, it was claimed yesterday.
Susan Smith, 33, who once served on Lambeth Council in South London, made almost daily visits to Ronald Lineker's flat for the kinky sessions, Southwark Crown Court heard.
CB radio fan Smith met Lineker during a chat over the airwaves.
Her call sign was Gaslight Lil and his was Popeye.
The sex sessions started after the teenager, who can't be named for legal reasons, moved in with 53-year-old Lineker because she was unhappy at home.
Smith denies three charges of indecent assault and, jointly with Lineker, pleads not guilty to two more offences of indecent assault.
Lineker also denies six offences of unlawful sex with an under-age girl.
The trial continues.
JINXED CAP'N JACK ALL AT SEA FOR A MONTH!
Birdseye's starving crew are towed in
STEPHEN WHITE
GUNG HO Captain ‘Birdseye’ was heading home from icy seas last night after his crew almost starved to death.
Cold and hungry, they drifted helplessly towards the Arctic for a MONTH on the jinxed schooner Helga Maria.
Their emergency rations ran out and for three days they had just water.
The desperate crew of six — including three women — were only rescued after they lit a fire on the open deck and were spotted by a Norwegian ship.
Disaster struck as Birdseye — white bearded, pipe-smoking Jack Lammiman — sailed the Atlantic to mark the 500th anniversary of Columbus's voyage of discovery.
His 62-year-old converted trawler conked out after leaving Newfoundland on the return leg.
And for 1,500 miles it was carried on the current without power, navigational gear or a radio transmitter.
RAF planes scanned the seas and eight nations broadcast radio appeals every four hours for Birdseye to get in touch.
After the Helga Maria was finally towed into the remote Faroe Islands, a coastguard said: ‘They were on nothing but a bottle drifting on the high seas.
They could have ended up in Greenland.’
The Norwegian ship's captain said: ‘They almost hit icebergs and were lucky to survive.’
Last year Captain Jack from Whitby, Yorks, was fined £1,000 for sailing with two old ladies and a vicar on an unfit vessel.
Before setting off again yesterday, he said: ‘We are nine days overdue but it's not a big problem.
‘I can't wait to get home for a drop of rum — I've really missed that.’
Among those on board with him are a nurse, an ex-policeman and a former Navy diver.
TWIN TOT DROWNS IN BATH
A TODDLER drowned in the bath while her twin sister was being dried.
Two-year-old Bethan Boucher was found in six inches of water by her horrified mum Andrea.
Minutes earlier Bethan had been splashing about when single parent Andrea, 22, left the bathroom to take care of the other girl, Rhiannon.
Andrea was too distraught to speak as police probed the tragedy at Gabalfa, Cardiff, yesterday.
Her sister Teresa said: ‘We are all devastated.’
MOTHER TERESA'S BIG DREAM IS COMING TRUE
RONALD RICKETTS
MOTHER Teresa's dream of setting up a refuge for London's homeless has come a step nearer — thanks to the generosity of Daily Mirror readers.
You poured donations into an appeal fund which now stands at £280,445.
And the 82-year-old nun met Mirror officials to finalise details for the purchase of a property in one of the most deprived parts of South London.
Mother Teresa said: ‘The way the Mirror readers responded to this appeal shows that people really do care about each other.’
The appeal fund, held in a high interest account, is growing by almost £500 a week.
Calcutta-based Mother Teresa hopes to establish a shelter in Kennington, South East London, for the ‘unwanted, unloved, the lonely, sick and dying.’
Nuns of her order already provide food for the homeless.
She said: ‘I hope, God willing, to return for the opening of the shelter when it is all finished.’
Downing Street announced yesterday that the Government will honour a pledge, given to Mother Teresa by Mrs Thatcher, to contribute £30,000 for furnishing the refuge.
CARING: Mother Teresa with details of the refuge Picture: KEN LENNOX
HOMELESS in London
£200,000 suit
THE gold-trimmed wedding suit of King James II, made in 1673, is expected to fetch £200,000 at a London auction in November.
Hitmen hunt: 7 seized
POLICE hunting the contract killers of accountant David Wilson arrested six men and a woman yesterday.
Officers swooped on addresses in London, Kent, Essex and Worcestershire.
Mr Wilson, 47, was murdered by two gunmen at his £300,000 home near Chorley, Lancs, in March.
It is believed he was silenced before he could expose an international swindle involving fake cargoes of cigarettes.
Three men have appeared before Chorley magistrates in connection with the fraud inquiry.
JERSEY MURDERS SON SLASHES WRISTS IN JAIL WITH CD
BILL AKASS
MURDER suspect Roderick Newall slashed his wrists and groin with a compact disc in a suicide bid yesterday.
The 27-year-old former Army officer tried to kill himself less than 24 hours before he was due in court again accused of murdering his parents at their home in Jersey.
He was found slumped in a pool of blood by guards at his castle prison in  Gibraltar .
A bloodstained CD was discovered in the cell.
Newall had been staging a partial hunger strike — refusing all solid food — in protest at what his lawyer claimed were ‘inhuman’ conditions.
Last night he was stable in intensive care after emergency surgery.
A hospital source said: ‘He's lost a lot of blood but his life is not in danger.’
Fight
Newall, who was arrested at sea last month, is accused of killing his wealthy parents Nicholas and Elizabeth in 1987.
He was due to make a court appearance today as his lawyers fight extradition to Jersey.
The suicide bid follows protests by Newall's solicitor Chris Finch that his client was being held in ‘inhuman conditions’.
The Gibraltar court has heard how Newall had allegedly considered snatching a guard's sub machine gun — to shoot his way to freedom, or die.
Gibraltar's Attorney General John Blackburn Gittins, told the hearing Newall confessed his plan to prison officers.
The Attorney General, who described Newall as a dangerous man, said: ‘It is a strange attitude.’
DRAMA IN CELL SUSPECT Roderick Newall — he was found in a pool of blood by guards
Disgraced Winnie out
WINNIE Mandela gave up her last powerbase yesterday — rocked by reports of fraud and a love scandal.
Winnie, 58, resigned her last posts with the African National Congress after an alleged love letter to a 30-year-old lawyer was leaked.
The ANC also claimed there were ‘serious discrepancies’ in her welfare department's accounts.
Snapped up
A KODAK box camera made in 1932 fetched a world record £14,300 at London auctioneers Christie's yesterday.
Astro nut loses flag
JINXED astronaut Franco Malerba flew home to Genoa yesterday — to find he had lost the suitcase containing the Italian flag he had taken into space.
Malerba was on last month's Atlantis shuttle flight which failed to launch a satellite to produce electricity.
The flag was for Italy's President Oscar Scalfaro.
WHY I HAVE MISSION ON AIDS…
BY DI
PRINCESS Diana — asked by an HIV sufferer why she helped victims of the AIDS virus — said yesterday: ‘Somebody has to make the public more aware.’
Di was opening a care unit in Earl's Court, London, for drug users with HIV.
It is run by the charity Turning Point — of which the princess is patron.
And a 33-year-old mother-of-nine known only as Sandra — who has been helped by Turning Point — asked Di: ‘How did you get into this kind of work?
What makes you do it?’
Di — who smiled when wellwishers gave her flowers — said people took more notice if someone well-known was involved.
She also had ‘lots of other reasons’
SMILING DI: The princess yesterday, beaming as fans gave her flowers Picture: HARRY PAGE
EIGHT cameramen who pictured Di swimming in Egypt last May have been banned by Buckingham Palace from covering her visit to Korea in November.
Bread of heaven
ASTRONAUTS will bake loaves of bread on the shuttle Endeavour — due for launching this week-end — to see if yeast rises in space.
Amanada's just swell as a mum
TV hostess Amanda de Cadenet is shaping up beautifully as a mum.
But looking after five-month-old daughter Atlanta has put a brake on her clothes shopping sprees.
So when invited to a London movie premiere Amanda, 20, reached for her old jeans, skimpy top…and simply popped out.Picture: NIKOS
PEAT BOY'S PAL SENT COPS THE WRONG WAY
He feared ticking off
IAN CAMERON
PEAT trap boy Matthew Davies was left waist-deep in a bog for three days by his chum — who then sent police searching in the WRONG direction.
Fears grew as the hunt for Matthew intensified.
But his 11-year-old pal panicked because he was frightened of getting into trouble, it was revealed yesterday.
The two friends had been forbidden to go near the Welsh bog where Matthew, 11, got stuck on Saturday while they were out cycling.
Matthew's friend tried to dig him out — then left pledging to get help.
But he said nothing for 24 hours and later, in a panic, sent police in the opposite direction.
Last night, he was said to be ‘embarrassed and ashamed.’
Police said: ‘He lied and took us on a wild goose chase.
It put Matthew's life in grave danger.’
Scared
But the boy, who has not been named, will not be prosecuted.
Scared of the dark and freezing in a T-shirt and track suit bottoms, Matthew shouted himself hoarse until he was discovered.
As police and volunteers scoured the wrong area of Brecon, Mid Wales, passer-by Terry Higgins, 46, heard the boy's screams for help.
It took two hours to dig him out.
Matthew told his mum yesterday: ‘I thought I was going to die.’
But he was well enough to eat a breakfast of two Weetabix and milk in hospital.
Mum Linda Davies, 40 — who lives six miles from where her son was found — described 5ft 9in Matthew as a ‘gentle giant.’
Lovely
She said: ‘If he had been any shorter he would not have survived.’
Linda said his first words to her were: ‘Oh mum.’
She replied: ‘It's lovely to see you.’
Then Matthew wanted to know if his beloved red mountain bike was safe.
A doctor at Brecon Memorial Hospital said the boy was recovering well from exposure.
ALIVE!
Matthew recovers yesterday as mother Linda beams in delight
Shunned wife's quiet divorce
HUSBAND Ernst Hort was a man of few words.
In two months he spoke only 26 sentences to his lonely wife Susanne.
She kept a secret diary which revealed that he spoke on average 3.5 words a day, she told a divorce judge.
She said that once he became really chatty and told her: ‘This coffee tastes like washing-up water.’
Another time he said: ‘Scratch my back — I have an itch.’
Then he didn't speak to his wife again for eight days.
Susanne said their five-year marriage was over.
Ernst, 35, an office worker in Bielefeld, Germany, said simply: ‘I agree.’
And the couple were quietly granted their divorce.
Girls fall in
EIGHT women musicians in the RAF make history this weekend when they join the men in the Changing of the Guard parade at Buckingham Palace.
RATNERS ‘GEMS’ MADE OF PLASTIC
They want month to pay £1,000 fine'
STEPHEN WHITE
RATNERS were in trouble again yesterday…for selling a pair of ‘opal’ earrings made of plastic.
The crisis-hit jewellery firm were fined £1,000 for false labelling — and asked for time to pay.
Ratners, whose profits plunged after tycoon Gerald Ratner's famous ‘crap’ remark, landed in court after a trading standards investigator bought the stud ear-rings in a Hull store.
It was all down to a simple clerical slip-up, magistrates were told.
Staff had forgotten to add the word ‘imitation’ to the description of the £3.50 ear-rings.
The company's lawyer said: ‘You won't get a real opal in any shape or form for £3.50.
‘If you want a real one you will have to pay £50.’
Test
Hull magistrates heard the earrings were bought by Trading Standards Officer Lynne Howson a month after Mr Ratner told the Institute of Directors that one of his firm's lines, a £4.99 sherry decanter, was ‘total crap’.
The earrings were given a heat test.
Prosecutor Frank Oliver said: ‘The centre of the earrings were of a plastic resin material and not opal.’
Five months later another pair of earrings bought by investigators also failed a heat test.
Ratners admitted offering goods with a false description.
They were fined £1,000 with £365 costs — and asked for 28 days to pay.
The court heard that when the mistake was discovered, an urgent memo was sent out to correct the description.
The recession-hit company last month announced the closure of 330 shops in Britain and America following a £122 million loss.
FALSE LABEL: The earrings
TROUBLE WITH DAD
MORE men could be finding it difficult to father children because the average sperm count has halved in the last 50 years, an expert revealed yesterday.
Danish professor Niels Skakkebaek, who has studied results from 15,000 men  worldwide since 1938, said testicular cancer was also increasing.
He added: ‘It must be something in the environment.’
Dud's big carry-on
SEX thimble Dudley Moore appeared to be having bags of fun as he flew out of Britain with wife Brogan Lane yesterday.
Dud, 57, and Brogan, 30, clearly found something to giggle about at Heathrow as, loaded up with shopping, they headed for their Concorde to New York.
Picture: VIC CRAWSHAW
Ryan pays £25,000 to bail son
ACTOR Ryan O'Neal stumped up £25,000 bail after son Griffin was accused of terrorising and beating up his 24-year-old ex-lover.
Jilted Griffin, who faces up to three years in jail, was arrested after tracking Lynn Oddo to a flat in California.
Griffin, 27, whose sister Tatum is married to John McEnroe, spent three days in a cell before Ryan bailed him.
TUC BAD BOYS ARE FORGIVEN
THE TUC cleared the way yesterday for the rebel electricians' union to return to the fold.
Delegates at Blackpool voted overwhelmingly to re-admit the EETPU now that it has merged with the engineers to form the million-strong AEEU.
It was expelled in 1988 for poaching members from other unions — especially during the Wapping print dispute.
Journalists' delegate Colin Bourne won a standing ovation when he slammed the EETPU for its past bad behaviour.
He said it would allow ‘scab’ organisations who joined the union back in the TUC.
Now the AEEU will ballot on whether to take up the offer.
All mod condoms
COHSE member Christine Wilde was dubbed the ‘condom queen’ after calling for delegates to be issued with contraceptives.
New toy bonanza for tragic Nicholas
STEPHEN WHITE
TRAGIC blind boy Nicholas Killen was smiling again yesterday thanks to kind-hearted Mirror readers.
Within hours of us revealing how most of his toys had been destroyed in a fire, replacements were flooding in.
Corgi sent a full range of their model cars, including Rolls Royces and Porsches.
And superstar Michael Jackson promised to replace a badly-burned baseball cap he had given the six-year-old.
Goldfish
Even the youngster's goldfish perished in the blaze at his home in Saltaire, near Bradford.
‘It's sad,’ said Nick, who had his eyes removed to stop cancer of the retina spreading to the rest of his body.
‘But I still have four of my teddies left.
I like cuddling them.’
‘Truce’ in Sarajevo
A PROVISIONAL cease-fire between warring Moslems and Serbs in Sarajevo was announced last night by European Community mediator Lord Owen and UN peace envoy Cyrus Vance.
£1,000 for sex jibe girl
A FILM studio manageress who claimed her boss said she was ‘the worst lay I've ever tried to have’ was awarded £1,000 yesterday.
A tribunal in Reading, Berks, ruled that Lyn Beardsall, 31, was sexually discriminated against by Neville Hendricks, 34.
He also referred to her as a ‘slapper’ and a ‘tart’.
But claims that he sexually harassed her on a trip to Cannes were rejected.
NUKE CASH OVER CANCER DEATHS
COMPENSATION totalling thousands of pounds has been awarded to relatives of three nuclear power workers who died of cancer.
The payments were made through a ‘mortality agreement’ set up by British Nuclear Fuels and the unions ten years ago.
A panel of medical and scientific experts based them on how likely it was that cancer had been caused by the victim's working conditions.
Dependents of one man who worked at the controversial Sellafield plant in Cumbria and died of lung cancer in 1989 received a ‘quarter payment’ of £15,243.
Relatives of the second victim, who died of leukaemia after working at Chapelcross in Scotland, were awarded a ‘three-quarter payment’ of £19,047.
The family of the third man asked that no details of the case be released.
SEAT OF YEARNING
DOUBLE seats for raunchy couples have been installed in the Eldorado hard-porn cinema in Genoa, northern Italy.
And the balcony has been reserved for couples only — so that single customers cannot become Peeping Toms.
LUCIANO PUTS HIS ART IN IT
OPERA giant Luciano Pavarotti looked a picture of massive dedication yesterday as he built himself up for his latest role.
The 20-stone Italian tenor was rehearsing as painter Mario Cavaradossi for a production of Puccini's Tosca which opens in London tomorrow.
With a smock artfully covering his paunchy frame, Pavarotti, 56, burst into golden-toned song.
And, though the story kills off the painter, the big draw himself is sure to return larger than life.
Soft cell
POLICE cells in Hastings, Sussex, have been painted pink in a bid to relax violent prisoners.
St Paul's skydiver in court
A DAREDEVIL parachutist appeared in court yesterday charged over a leap INSIDE St Paul's Cathedral and another off Tower Bridge.
Ex-Royal Marine Russell Powell, 23, is accused under a 19th Century law of making a 150ft drop from the cathedral's Whispering Gallery into the nave.
Powell, from Harlesden, North-West London, was remanded on bail by City of London magistrates.
Trump's TV love-life
STRUGGLING tycoon Donald Trump's bedroom secrets are to be plastered all over American TV.
Ex-wife Ivana's book about their marriage and divorce has been snapped up by CBS for a mini-series.
Crooked PC robs corpse
CROOKED cop Jonathan Grundy robbed a dead man and went on a £1,200 shopping spree with his credit card.
The PC stole it when he was sent to the man's home after he collapsed and died, Sheffield Crown Court heard yesterday.
Grundy, 35, of Sprotborough, Doncaster — a promising policeman who had been acting sergeant and passed his inspector's exams — admitted theft and was jailed for a year.
Shop staff face the axe
TENS of thousands of shop staff face the sack as sales hit rock bottom, bosses warned yesterday.
Price rises are now at their lowest level since its records began in 1983, but customers are still too scared to spend.
‘Few shopkeepers expect any upturn in the next few months,’ said a CBI spokesman.
Seventy thousand retail jobs were axed in the first three months of this year.
And most shops did LESS business this August than a year ago.
Labour's Gordon Brown said fear of unemployment was ‘paralysing the the economy.’
Blind get speaking subtitles
THE hit film Hear My Song is to be released on video for the blind — with talking subtitles.
Actor Andrew Sachs — waiter Manuel in TV's Fawlty Towers — will describe the action, facial expressions, scenery and costumes in the film about Irish tenor Josef Locke.
William Kirby, of the Royal National Institute for the Blind, which is supporting the video, said: ‘This really is an exciting development.
Debts ‘It will bring visual entertainment into the lives of blind and partially-sighted people throughout the UK.’
Locke was one of the highest paid stars of the Fifties until his career crashed amid tax debts and allegations about his private life.
Cop and bandit hit in park shoot-out
BILL AKASS
A POLICE marksman and a bank robber blasted each other during a dramatic gun battle in a popular park yesterday.
Mothers and children cowered in terror as the shoot-out erupted.
The bandit was hit twice in the arm as the chasing marksman, a 25-year-old PC, opened up with a 9mm pistol.
But the bobby fell to the ground as the raider blasted him in the groin with a shotgun.
Danger
Last night the unnamed PC, whose wife is pregnant, was seriously ill in hospital.
But his life was not in danger.
The raider leaped into a getaway car.
But he was later captured along with the car's driver.
A third villain gave up.
The shoot-out came in Grove Hall park, Hackney, East London, after Scotland Yard's Tactical Firearms Group staked out a nearby bank following a tip-off.
One happy lady owner
A WOMAN has sold her car back to the garage where she bought it 32 years ago — and got more than she paid.
Rosine Greenfield handed over £395 for the black Austin A35 at Lincoln.
The garage refused to say what they paid.
HEALTH BOSSES WASTE £2M…
TO SAVE MONEY
SAMUEL JAMES
A HARD-UP health authority yesterday admitted wasting £2 million on hiring American research consultants…to save money.
Health chiefs spent another £350,000 on air tickets, accommodation and lavish entertaining for the firm's executives and their wives.
But there were no real savings.
And, it was claimed, a British firm had offered to do the work for as little as £20,000.
The contract was handed out by West Midlands Regional Health Authority, which is £12 million in debt and faces possible hospital closures.
The American firm, United Research Group, was asked to carry out an efficiency study of the supplies department, which buys hospital equipment.
A report by the Audit Commission says supplies director Chris Watney had a ‘cavalier disregard for the standard of conduct expected from public officers’.
But the report also blasts authority bosses for failing to control the activities of 58-year-old Mr Watney, who took early retirement last year.
Yesterday, the Government called in top NHS official Sir Roy Griffiths to supervise the running of the authority.
Former Sainsbury's managing director Sir Roy will report direct to Ministers.
Suffer
The authority's chairman, Sir James Ackers, said Mr Watney misled his bosses and was working to his ‘own agenda’.
Sir James said procedures had now been tightened.
Authority managing director Stuart Fletcher said: ‘Clearly there were failures in the handling of this contract.’
Birmingham Labour MP Richard Burden commented: ‘It is utterly scandalous…and it is the patients who are going to suffer.’
Mr Watney was on a yachting holiday abroad yesterday.
All the bosses responsible for spending the money have now left the authority.
PROTEST: Richard Burden
What a lock-up, M'lud
A JUDGE apologised yesterday to a shoplifter who was locked up and forgotten for nine months.
Police lost the papers on Fritz Wagner, 41, who was awaiting trial in Nuremberg.
Sex ban on space pair
THE earth won't move for married astronauts Jan Davis and Mark Lee after they blast off in the shuttle Endeavour tomorrow.
The first husband-and-wife team in space have been told: No out-of-this-world sex for you.
A cuddle is all that starry-eyed Jan, 38, and Mark, 40, can hope for during their week in orbit.
American space officials have stressed: ‘This is strictly a scientific mission.’
FLIERS IN RED AGGRO
FLIERS from the RAF's Red Arrows display team clashed with police at the Farnborough air show, it was revealed last night.
The crack pilots were in a hospitality chalet at the Hampshire show site celebrating a successful rehearsal for their first public performance.
Ministry of Defence police were called when they were still there at 10.15pm — after the site should have closed.
Organisers denied reports that punches were thrown.
But the MoD said an ITN woman journalist, a friend of a pilot, was asked to leave ‘because her pass had expired’.
Channel tragedy skipper ‘guilty’
GORDON HAY
THE skipper of a Cypriot ship that sank a British trawler killing six fishermen DID blunder, an inquiry ruled yesterday.
The master of freighter Zulfikar was ‘seriously at fault’ for not stopping after holing the Portsmouth-based Wilhelmina J in the Channel.
Lives might have been saved if he had not waited about two hours before reporting the crash in April last year.
Ten months ago, skipper Vishwas Patwardhan was cleared of negligence by a court in Cyprus.
Second mate Moostakali Adam was acquitted of navigating without caution as the ship sailed from Holland to Egypt.
Failed
Relatives of the victims were furious.
And yesterday inquiry chief Captain Peter Marriott, of the Department of Transport, said the report did seem ‘at variance’ with the court.
Patwardhan, 31, let his unqualified second mate take charge.
Adam saw the trawler on radar, but used automatic pilot.
The inquiry also said the trawler possibly failed to keep proper watch.
Relatives are still angry.
Gabbi Callas, 27, fiancee of victim Mark Fitz, said: ‘If all this had come out before the court case, it might have made a difference.’
VICTIM: Mark Fitz
NAFF OFF!
The claws are out as Anne and Through The Keyhole Eve clash on wedding ‘lies’
JAMES WHITAKER /ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
PRINCESS Anne was branded a liar last night by one of John Major's closest political allies.
The accusation came during an angry row over a newspaper story which claimed Anne had put off her wedding to Naval Commander Tim Laurence — and called Princess Di and Fergie ‘two silly girls’.
In a remarkable public statement, Anne insisted she said nothing of the sort.
But Sunday Express editor Eve Pollard — known to TV viewers as a regular panellist on David Frost's Through The Keyhole game show — hit back: ‘We stand by the quotes attributed to the Princess Royal.’
The row is a huge embarrassment for Premier John Major, who joins the Queen at Balmoral today to discuss newspaper coverage of the royals.
For he is a close friend of 47-year-old Miss Pollard and her husband, Daily Express editor Sir Nicholas Lloyd.
And the two Express newspapers are the Tories' most loyal supporters in Fleet Street.
They often act as the ‘voice’ of Conservative Central Office.
And this week the Government used them in an attempt to ‘rehabilitate’ sex scandal Minister David Mellor.
The story that sparked the storm claimed Princess Anne was defying attempts to hasten her marriage to Commander Tim.
It said Buckingham Palace courtiers had urged her to ‘go ahead’ with the ceremony to divert attention from troubled Di and Fergie.
Anne reportedly dug her heels in during a family conference at Balmoral.
The newspaper claimed she said: ‘I won't bail out those two silly girls’ and
‘I won't be a pawn in a Palace public relations exercise’.
But yesterday a Palace statement, issued with the approval of Anne and the Queen, said:
On September 6 the Sunday Express published on its front page a story concerning the Princess Royal which quoted her as making certain statements.
Her Royal Highness wishes it to be known that she did not make the statements attributed to her or anything like them.
The statement was issued after Miss Pollard refused to publish a retraction.
Instead the editor — also known as Lady Lloyd since her husband got his knighthood thanks to a grateful Margaret Thatcher — replied to Anne with her own statement.
It said:
We stand by our story.
On Wednesday we were notified by representatives of the Princess Royal of their intention to issue a statement denying the quotes attributed to her.
We had checked the story prior to publication and following the contact from the Princess Royal it was subsequently checked again with our source, who confirms the accuracy of the quotes.
Miss Pollard — also a TV fashion commentator at events like Royal Ascot — added: ‘While the Sunday Express has no wish for a dispute with Buckingham Palace we do not believe it would be proper to publish what amounts to a correction.’
The row could make for a strained atmosphere as Mr Major spends the Premier's traditional weekend with the Queen.
He intends to make talks on new privacy laws a central theme.
But he is also expected to tackle the monarch over the damage done to Britain's image by younger royals.
In Edinburgh yesterday, he refused to discuss the family's torrent of trouble.
HEAD TO HEAD: A furious Princess Anne and defiant editor Eve Pollard who is refusing to back down
Mirror ‘not yet for sale’
THE Mirror is not about to be sold, the man who effectively controls the Mirror Group said yesterday.
He is John Talbot, of accountants Arthur Andersen, who as administrator of the bankrupt Maxwell family empire holds nearly 55 per cent of the Mirror Group's shares.
The Mirror has been beset in recent weeks with rumours and reports that it was about to be taken over.
Traditions
But Mr Talbot said: ‘We are not anxious to sell.
We see no reason to rush into any fire sale of any part of our shareholding in the Mirror.
‘Our objective is to get the best price for creditors and it is our view that we will get a better price by waiting.’
Asked who might be the ultimate buyer, he was not prepared to comment — but said he was mindful of the great traditions of the paper.
On the timing of the sale he said: ‘We are not actively seeking buyers nor actively looking to sell the shares.’
Having the time of One's life
VROOM…
FUN PRINCESS IS TRACK WHIZ
Di gets a buzz out o racing in a go-kart
GORDON HAY
ENGINE buzzing, wheels spinning, the go-kart whizzed around the track as everyone watched the daredevil driver…
Princess Diana.
Fun-loving Diana led Team One and took the wheel of kart No 1 for a 400-lap endurance event.
And one has seldom been seen to enjoy oneself so much.
She was already smiling when she arrived with her team — Palace press officer Dickie Arbiter, Prince Charles's private secretary Richard Aylard and a man from her protection squad.
Wearing red overalls, the princess laughed and chatted to other drivers while she waited her turn.
Then she put on a white crash helmet, climbed into her kart and roared off at the Playscape circuit in Clapham, South London.
Music blared from loudspeakers and the smell of burning rubber filled the air as she tackled the 300-metre track at speeds of up to 45mph.
Diana, more accustomed to a luxurious 157mph Mercedes, handled the hairpin bends like a veteran in the little 160cc-engined kart.
The princess, who seemed relaxed away from the pressures of marriage problems, had taken sons William and Harry to Playscape for an earlier visit.
But now that the boys are at school, she can concentrate on improving her own skills around the twisting track marked out by red and white truck-tyre barriers.
She has picked up some driving tricks from the SAS.
The military experts taught her how to take evasive action and speed away from danger.
An onlooker at the circuit said yesterday: ‘Diana is an avid fan of the sport.
Quickly
‘She has been doing it for about three years.
‘She is very friendly with the track staff at Clapham.
‘She has become quite good, very determined and competitive.
‘One thing you notice about her driving is that she is quite precise but she is never afraid to go into battle.’
Other drivers are not overawed by their royal rival, though.
‘There are definitely no airs and graces out there on the track, even from the princess herself,’ said an insider.
‘Nobody gives way on purpose.
Once on the track, everyone is equal.
‘She is fast off the grid, accelerates smoothly, gains speed very quickly and keeps the momentum going.
‘She obviously gets quite a thrill from racing.
‘Who knows, Diana may well want to move on to bigger and faster racing cars as she gets better and more confident.’
TOP LEFT: She's a fast lady.
Daredevil Diana races around the track at the wheel of go-kart No 1.
ABOVE: The lid's off.
The princess removes her white crash helmet to chat to a fellow team member.
LEFT: Ready for action.
Diana looks relaxed waiting for her turn.
BELOW: Just smiles in front.
Karting is fun for the princess — beaming in a happy crowd of competitors.
Fergie cops' HQ in shed
POLICE guarding Fergie's schoolgirl daughter took delivery of their new HQ yesterday — a £25,000 armoured garden SHED.
But it immediately came under fire…from an angry councillor.
The 8ft by 6ft shed is at £600-a-term Montessori school in Winkfield, Berks, where Princess Eugenie, two, is a pupil.
It has 1 inch-thick armour plating, bullet-proof windows, security bolts — and central heating.
‘It's got everything except its own loo — but that's classified information,’ said police.
It is paid for by the Environment Department.
But Windsor councillor Mike Scott said: ‘It is time Fergie and the Royal Family put their hands in their own pockets.
‘The cost should be borne by the people being protected.
They should not rely on the taxpayer — especially in today's economic climate.
‘I know what I am talking about.
I've just been made redundant after 30 years as an engineer with British Telecom.’
GUARD DUTY: A policeman at the armoured shed
WE'RE HEADING FOR THE ROCKS
Tory MP's warning
JOHN HUSBAND
A TORY MP warned yesterday that Britain's economy was ‘like the Titanic heading for the rocks.’
John Carlisle joined businessmen in attacking ministers for doing nothing to end the slump.
He spoke as the pound ran into fresh trouble despite a drop in inflation to 3.6 per cent— the lowest for four years.
The pound slipped against the German mark and closed nearly six cents down against the US dollar.
Secure
Premier John Major insisted the fall in inflation was further evidence of ‘steady and secure’ progress to recovery.
But Luton North MP Mr Carlisle accused Ministers of ‘playing’ with people who were losing their jobs.
‘People are beginning to be totally frustrated with Government inactivity,’ he said.
Tycoon Alan Sugar — whose Amstrad computer firm was a success of the booming 80s — slammed the Tories for wanting to slash inflation at all cost.
He said: ‘I think they should switch attention from inflation to expanding the economy.’
Labour's Gordon Brown said Britain still had higher inflation than its main competitors.
The pound finally steadied against the mark at 2.79.
ATTACK: Carlisle
Jobs blow THREE hundred jobs will go as construction giant Tarmac shuts eight brick and concrete works.
Mr Major ruled out a referendum on Scottish home rule, saying he wished to  strengthen the country's union with Westminster.
Holiday crash
ANOTHER travel firm collapsed last night — but everyone booked with Greek Connections, of Fleet, Hants, will get their money back.
CASH POURS IN
MARK ELLIS
PRAISE and cash poured in yesterday after the Mirror's shock issue on Somalia.
Our switchboard was flooded with calls and thousands bombarded our appeal hotline to pledge donations.
Within a few hours, more than £10,000 had been raised by YOU — our generous readers.
Don Reading, of Save The Children, has just returned from Somalia and said: ‘This matter needed more than anything the chance to reach the people.
‘The Mirror has taken it from the limited audience it has had right out into the open.
‘And it has proved that the man on the street is not suffering compassion fatigue.
‘The only people who are are the  politicians whose job it is to sort this crisis out.’
Patrick McManus, of Concern Worldwide, said: ‘Your report was spot-on and the pictures said the rest.
‘It is only by turning the spotlight on the suffering that we can hope to end it.’
The impact was just as great on our readers.
Salesman Michael Luke, 36, of Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, said: ‘I'm going on a sponsored run.
‘I was going to raise money for my local football club.
‘But having seen your report I think the people of Somalia need it more.’
Leslie Janson, of Chelmsford, Essex, has vowed to start his own fund-raising effort.
He said: ‘Your report brought tears to my eyes.
‘I have three children and even though I do not have a job at present, they will never have to suffer in the same way as the children of Somalia.’
21,000 WILL DIE
It may be three weeks before the UN sends in troops to get food to Somalia's starving.
In that time…
CATHERINE O'BRIEN
THE United Nations dealt a new blow to the starving millions in Somalia last night by saying it could take three weeks to stop bandits raiding food supplies.
Aid organisations warned that the delay could cost another 21,000 lives in the parched east African country.
But as the dithering continued, thousands of big-hearted Mirror readers pledged cash to help the aid effort after yesterday's shock issue on the tragedy.
‘We've never had a response like it,’ said Julian Hopkins, director of the international relief agency CARE, which is co-ordinating the Mirror operation.
‘The phone lines haven't stopped and we have yet to wade through the post bag.
‘Please thank your readers from the bottom of our hearts.’
A thousand people every day are dying in Somalia as gun-toting gangs rampage through the capital Mogadishu and loot supplies awaiting distribution.
Rival warlords are also holding up mercy missions with feuds over contracts to take food to drought-ravaged towns and villages.
The UN plans to deploy 3,500 soldiers and the first 500 were due to arrive in Mogadishu today.
Yet the UN commander, Brigadier-General Imtiaz Shaheen, said yesterday that patrols in armoured carriers were unlikely to begin before early October.
He added: ‘They're not coming in like Rambo, with guns blazing.’
The general warned that the troops would face a highly dangerous task getting supplies to the needy.
Safer
He said: ‘These are not 500 bananas that you pick up in a supermarket and put in your basket and take somewhere else.
‘This place is bad news.’
US planes packed with rice, beans, grain and oil were forced to abandon several missions to the western town of Belet Huen yesterday and returned to their bases in neighbouring Kenya.
The UN also postponed flights to rural areas so that safer ground operations could be organised.
Brenda Barton, of the UN World Food Programme, said: ‘Everything has to be in perfect order.’
But other aid groups have accused the UN agencies of doing too little, too late.
They estimate that two million Somalians are in immediate danger of starving to death.
And it is believed that more than two-thirds of the entire population of seven million needs food desperately.
There was another twist to the tragedy yesterday when it was revealed that a chemical spill threatened to poison one of the nation's scarce drinking water supplies.
A 21,000-gallon leak from a pesticide warehouse in the north was reported by a UN environment official.
Shadow aid Minister Michael Meacher, who is flying to Somalia next week, said: ‘This famine, which is worse than the Ethiopia one of 1985, has been brewing for two or three years.
‘Everyone, including the British Government, has been waking up to this horrific plight too late.
‘We have a lot of catching up to do.’
Overseas Development Minister Baroness Chalker said: ‘Until some semblance of peace and security returns, helping the hungry and dying will be enormously difficult.’
SHOCK ISSUE: Front page of yesterday's Mirror
HELP ME: A starving child facing death in Somalia Picture: KEN LENNOX
Eek!
Icke's so glad to be a loony
GREEN Party ‘messiah’ David Icke came right out with it yesterday and declared: ‘Thank God I'm a loony.’
The broadcaster who threw it all up to become the son of God was giving thanks on the eve of the party conference in Wolverhampton.
‘I don't want to be sane,’ he will joyfully announce to a meeting of a fringe group called the Pagan Greens.
But the divine message will only bring gloom to the Greens.
Predictions
They blame Icke for being one of the major reasons why the movement has lost support.
Since quitting as its leading spokesman, Icke has predicted:
The COLLAPSE of the white cliffs of Dover, destroying the Channel Tunnel, the DISAPPEARANCE of Cuba — and a HURRICANE wrecking Londonderry in Ulster.
They are all still there.
ICKE: Giving thanks
Brothers in law
NEWLY-promoted Det Chief Inspector Mike Paddon has taken over the job and office of his retiring twin Terry at Exeter police HQ.
Woolly jumper
A SHEEP that behaves like a hound won first prize for fence-jumping at the Kent Dog Show.
Girls DO make a change
THEY really are changing the guard at Buckingham Palace today — women take part in the ceremony for the first time.
Ex-model Liza Nabi, 22, from Nottingham — who once graced magazines — is playing with eight girl pals from the RAF Central Band.
‘I'm really looking forward to it,’ she said yesterday.
History
Fellow  clarinettist Rebecca Cooney, 21, of Shepshed, Leics, is making her own bit of history.
She and husband Corporal Gary Cooney, 23, become the first married couple to take part.
The women wear the same blue uniforms as the men.
They can wear subtle make-up, but earrings are banned.
Cop shot himself
THE policeman injured in a chase in the East End accidentally shot himself in the groin as he leapt from a car.
The officer, who carried on to arrest a man suspected of an attempted bank raid, was in hospital yesterday.
A second man — also wounded — was held with two others at the Flying Scud pub in Bethnal Green, East London.
A fifth arrest followed.
Suck in traffic…
A WOMAN who was spotted breastfeeding her baby as she drove along a busy main road was being hunted last night.
Angry motorists on the A66 near Scotch Corner, North Yorkshire, complained that she kept ‘stopping and starting’.
LABOUR EURO ROW
SHEREE DODD
LABOUR leader John Smith's troubles over Europe deepened yesterday as more senior party figures broke ranks over the Maastricht treaty.
Leadership challenger Bryan Gould claimed it would put a ‘straightjacket’ on the economy.
David Blunkett said it would ‘reinforce worries that influence and control are slipping away’.
Law spokesman John Morris said it was ‘dead in the water’ after Denmark's rejection.
TROUBLE: Smith
KEVIN'S LITTLE DIVIDEND
Maxwells set for child No 5
GORDON HAY
THE wife of record-breaking bankrupt Kevin Maxwell proudly announced a nice little dividend for the troubled tycoon yesterday — she's expecting their fifth child.
As the hunt goes on for the missing millions of the family's crashed empire, Pandora, 32, beamed as she declared: ‘People will probably wonder how on earth Kevin managed it with all he's got on his mind.’
Just a day after Kevin, 33, visited his JobCentre, she joked: ‘People will make sarcastic comments like ‘She's done it for the £7 child benefit’.
‘Or ‘How can they afford another mouth to feed?’‘
Fraud
Five-months pregnant Pandora said they threw caution, and family planning, to the wind — despite Kevin's looming fraud trial and biggest-ever £406 million bankruptcy.
Speaking outside their £250,000 home at Hailey, Oxon, she said: ‘We are thrilled, we love children.
They are totally distracting.’
With Chloe, three, by her side, Pandora — who hopes to have the new baby on New Year's Eve — added:
‘When you've got four another one doesn't present any problems.’
She said Matilda, eight, Teddy, six, and Eloise, four, attend St Andrew's school at Pangbourne, Berks,— term fees £3,000 to £5,500.
‘Not all my family are bankrupt,’ explained Pandora.
‘My children have very generous god-parents.’
T'S CHILD'S PLAY: Mum Pandora with girls Matilda, Chloe and son Teddy
Yesterday's Mirror story
Accident blackspot
PEOPLE driving black or white cars are more likely to have ‘personal injury’ accidents, says the Transport Department.
That's followed by red, blue, grey, gold and silver.
‘Safest’ is yellow, then brown, green and beige.
‘Baby on way’ for Becker
TENNIS ace Boris Becker is soon to become a father, friends have claimed.
Girlfriend Babs Feltus, 25,(right) is six months pregnant, according to the German newspaper Bild.
But the news was kept from Boris, 24, before he was knocked out of the US Open championship, it said.
An actress who worked with Babs in Munich told Bild: ‘She said it won't be long before she gives birth.’
WANTED' JIM IS SO GLAD TO BE CAUGHT
Two-year campaign to give himself up
STEPHEN WHITE
BUILDER Jim Gladden got his wish yesterday and appeared in the dock — after trying to give himself up for TWO years.
In his efforts to surrender to justice Jim, 46, had PHONED the police to tell them where he was.
He CALLED twice at the station — only to be sent away with a flea in his ear — and LEFT his name and company address so detectives knew where to find him at all times.
Much to his relief he was finally arrested — and appeared in front of the judge who called for him to be brought before the court back in 1990.
Judge Harry Walker, who gave Jim bail yesterday, told him: ‘I intend to get to the bottom of this.’
Two years ago the judge issued a court warrant when Jim did only 29 hours of a 200-hour community service order after being convicted of theft.
His wife rang court officials to say he was ill with food poisoning.
When Jim, of Ravenscliffe, West Yorks, went to the police station, officers told him to come back another day.
He said: ‘I was told in effect to bugger off and stop being a pest.
‘I went home and got on with my work expecting them to come for me any day or night.’
Eventually two detectives called and Jim went to the police station the next day.
But even then they kept him waiting an hour before arresting him.
CROOK FOOLED STARS
CONMAN Michael Todd tricked TV celebrities into backing a get-rich-quick fraud.
Todd, 32, persuaded Glenda Jackson, David Bellamy and Sir Alastair Burnet to support a ‘children's education trust’, a court heard yesterday.
But he used their names to advertise a Human Potential Centre run from a garage next to his home.
Money
It was a pyramid-type scheme aimed at turning recruits into salesmen earning £1,000 a week.
But of the 700 people who handed over more than £350,000 to Todd, only 29 made any money.
He was jailed for nine months by York Crown Court after admitting six trading offences.
Tuff at top of the TUC
POSTMEN'S union chief Alan Tuffin was elected president of the TUC yesterday.
The former telegram boy is one of the organisation's most popular and respected general councillors.
He said: ‘Unemployment and the fear of it is having a corrosive effect on our economy.
‘The CBI promise of a partnership with the TUC to halt the rot was the best news of the week.’
NEW CHIEF: Tuffin
DRUG ALERT AFTER FIVE CHILDREN DIE
‘Don't use sedative’ warning to doctors
NICOLA BRIGGS
DOCTORS have been warned not to use a sedative drug on children after five youngsters died in hospital.
Experts believe the anaesthetic propofol ‘may have been a contributing factor’ in the deaths.
The children — aged between four weeks and six years — had all been given the drug while under intensive care, a report in yesterday's British Medical Journal revealed.
Following their deaths, the Department of Health issued a warning over the use of propofol, which is made by ICI Pharmaceuticals under the name Diprivan.
According to the BMJ article, the drug had been considered appropriate in some hospitals for occasional use on children.
But the ‘unique’ circumstances of the deaths meant ‘it should not be used in paediatric intensive care’until further information was available.
A Department of Health spokesman said yesterday that doctors had been warned in June against using propofol.
A bulletin issued by the Committee on Safety of Medicines reported the deaths of the five youngsters.
It went on to highlight another 66 reports from various parts of the world of serious reactions to the drug.
ICI Pharmaceuticals had also written to doctors telling them about the serious reactions and deaths.
Nothing doing
A COMPUTER has sent bills for 0.00p to Severn-Trent water users in the Midlands — threatening to sue if they don't pay up.
Slim bride gets in the picture
SUPER slimmer Moira Garrington is to have her wedding pictures taken again — now she is FIVE STONE lighter.
Moira, 25, weighed 16st when she wed 20-year-old Peter last year.
Now the couple, of Little Stoke, Avon, will have their marriage blessed before the same guests in November, when she hopes to have lost another two stone.
‘I want to wear a really sexy off-the-shoulder dress with a tight waist,’ she said yesterday.
Peter said: ‘I love her whatever she looks like.’
SLIMLINE: Moira with husband Peter
BIG: Moira on her wedding day
PEAT RESCUE HERO LANDS IN THE MIRE
But bosses let him off
ENGINEER Terry Higgins dropped himself right in it when he rescued a teenager trapped for three days in a freezing bog.
For he was interviewed on the telly as a hero — just hours after crying off work SICK with a heavy cold.
Surprised bosses thought 46-year-old Terry had been spending the day wrapped up in bed.
Then News at Ten told how he found 11-year-old Matthew Davies stuck up to his waist in peat on the Brecon Beacons in Wales.
Wary
Terry said yesterday: ‘The doctor told me to get some fresh air, so I thought I'd take the dog for a walk.
‘But I never expected to end up on TV.’
Terry, of Brecon, added: ‘Everyone was calling me a hero, but I was very wary of meeting the boss.
‘When I did see him, he said ‘I thought you'd got a cold?’
Luckily, though, he was all right about it.’
A South Wales Electricity spokesman said: ‘It wouldn't be right to discipline him.
He's a hero.’
SICK LEAVE: Terry Higgins
MURDER REMAND
AN UNEMPLOYED man of 24 was remanded in custody yesterday, charged with the body in the boot murder of accountant John Shippey.
Bruce Cousins, of Reigate, Surrey appeared before the town's magistrates.
Shippey, 47, was found stabbed to death in his burning car near Merstham last December.
Three days earlier he vanished from the luxury home he shared with a girlfriend in Kent.
WIZARDS OF OZ
EXPERTS began a three-day debate yesterday on: Why are Aussie TV soaps so popular?
The 150 dons from world universities heard Kate Bowles, studying soaps at Exeter University, lecture on Neighbours And Sub-Cultural Imagination.
Ian Harley, of the British Australian Studies Association, said the ‘earnest academic meeting will be strenuous and demanding’.
It ends tomorrow with a barbecue and beer-tasting.
Switch on to golden oldie TV
GOLDEN TV oldies will get a fresh run on a new satellite channel launched in November.
UK Gold will screen viewers' old favourites like The Onedin Line, starring Peter Gilmore, and The Duchess Of Duke Street.
The BBC-Thames TV partnership will also rerun top hits such as EastEnders, Bergerac and The Bill from their first episodes.
ONEDIN: Peter Gilmore
Mum ‘just faded away after jab’
TWO brothers told a court yesterday how they watched their terminally-ill mother ‘fade away’ after she was given an injection.
Widow Lilian Boyes, 70, had earlier pleaded with doctors to ‘finish her off,’ Winchester Crown Court heard.
But Dr Nigel Cox, 47, a consultant rheumatologist, denies attempting to murder her.
The trial continues.
ACCUSED: Dr Cox
Pop classic
SCIENTIST Dr Bob Allgrove illustrated a lecture on explosives at Southampton by bursting gas-filled balloons during Tchaikovsky's 1812 Overture.
Hero milkie full of bottle
MILKMAN Alex Wallace, 45, was blinded with ammonia and battered by two thugs — but insisted on finishing his round.
He told police at Charlton, London: ‘I can't let people down.’
Quick, lad send for the peelers
TWO naked men raided a garage yesterday — to steal a bag of spuds.
The pair walked into the service station at Canton, Cardiff, shortly before dawn.
Garage worker Martin Harris was too stunned to stop them.
A milkman later spotted the men a mile away — still without a stitch on and clutching their King Edwards.
Police believe they lost their clothes on a stag night and wanted to make chips.
12-STONE DEREK LIFTS 3/4-TON WITH ONE HAND TO RESCUE LUCKY LUKE
Tot run over by car trailer
JIM OLDFIELD
SUPERMAN Derek Kaye leapt into action when a trailer loaded with a car ran over his godson — and  lifted it clear with ONE hand.
Twelve-stone Derek hoisted the the three-quarter ton trailer and scooped four-year-old Luke Norbury to safety with the other hand.
Luke, nicknamed Lucky after a string of mishaps, escaped with just grazes — and a tyre mark up his back.
Derek, 40, and Luke's dad Kevin had just loaded a car on the trailer and begun to move it when Luke slipped under.
Kevin said: ‘The front wheels ran over him and he got caught by one leg.
‘The trailer dragged him along, face on the ground.
Derek shouted to the driver to stop — then went into action.’
Modest Derek would only say: ‘I saw Luke caught up and grabbed him — that's all.’
Kevin, 35 — partners with Derek in a kit car firm in Wakefield, West Yorks — added: ‘Derek's a godfather in a million.
‘We don't know how he did it.
He's not a big bloke.
Mum Valerie, 37, said: ‘He's called Lucky Luke — always getting into scrapes, but never as serious as this.
‘Derek's superhuman effort saved him.
‘He was incredible — just like The Hulk on TV.’
ALISON MURDER CHARGE
FOUR people were yesterday sent for trial at the Old Bailey over the deaths of bank clerk Alison Manwaring and her father Matthew at their home in Barking, east London.
Van driver Benjamin Laing, 24, is charged with murder, while his brother Bernard, 20, Sharon Thompson, 27, and Mark Leslie, 21, are all accused of conspiring to pervert the cause of justice.
OP FOR SOCCER STAR
FORMER England and Leeds United soccer star Paul Madeley is recovering after surgery to remove a benign tumour between his ear and brain.
Madeley, 48, who was in Don Revie's golden team before retiring in 1981, said at his Leeds home last night: ‘I am a lot better.
It was a rare complaint, but not life-threatening.’
Killer rapist jailed
A RAPIST was jailed for seven years yesterday for causing the death of a pensioner.
Frail Kathleen Lillyman, 61, died of a stroke after Raymond Oxborough's attack.
Her death was caused by the trauma of the rape, a doctor told the Leeds trial in July.
Oxborough, 30, had admitted rape and was convicted of manslaughter.
Sentence was delayed for reports.
QUEEN TAKES A PAY CUT
DAVID BRADSHAW
THE Queen is set to take a huge pay cut to prevent a humiliating probe into the Royal Family.
She will also consider pruning the number of royals who receive tax-payers' support — and paying tax on her private income.
Premier John Major and the monarch discussed the historic moves during his weekend stay at Balmoral.
Clamour
The Queen is believed to have offered concessions in a bid to ease mounting public concern over the royals — in particular the behaviour of the younger family members.
A new pay deal — which may mean a cut of up to £1 1/2 MILLION — could also head off the growing clamour at Westminster for a Commons inquiry into whether the family gives value for money.
The Queen is already thought to have accepted that the royals' £10 million Civil List payment must be reduced.
And as well as receiving less herself, it could mean a gradual cash cutback for Princess Anne, Prince Andrew, Prince Edward and Princess Margaret.
Andy, whose estranged wife Fergie has caused much of the dismay, could be the hardest hit.
Charles and Di will NOT be affected.
The troubled couple are paid nothing from the Civil List.
They draw their income from the Duchy of Cornwall and pay tax on riches of up to £3 million a year.
The royals won a bumper rise two years ago in a deal due to last until the end of the decade.
The Queen's own Civil List entitlement shot up by a massive £3 million to £7.9 million.
Taken over 10 years, it was equivalent to an annual rise of 7.5 per cent— nearly four per cent higher than the current inflation rate.
One way to reduce the amount would be to make it index-linked.
And last night Robert Sheldon, chairman of the powerful Commons public accounts committee — which oversees all Government spending — was convinced a pay cut would happen.
He said ‘movement’ was necessary on both the Civil List and taxation.
He added that Mr Major would have warned the Queen that she risked being dragged into a political storm.
And he suggested she had responded with an offer that her family would not draw the full Civil List payments.
He said: ‘The Queen could concede that with inflation being rather different from what was anticipated in 1990, there need to be certain adjustments.
And she can volunteer those adjustments.’
‘She could also say something about taxation on her own personal income.’
DEAL: Princess Anne
CASH: Edward
WHO KILLED KILLED RACHEL?
‘Alex picked up a pair of her earrings and asked: Will Mummy mind if I wear them…
I told him she doesn't want them anymore’
THE FATHER OF WIMBLEDON COMMON MURDER VICTIM TELLS HOW HER FAMILY ARE FACING UP TO LIFE WITHOUT HER
‘It's only now you realise what it means…you miss her every single day’
CATHERINE O'BRIEN
SLOWLY the horror of Wimbledon Common is fading from little Alex Hanscombe's mind.
He is learning to smile again.
The hidden mental torment left by mum Rachel Nickell's murder is impossible to gauge.
But each day brings progress.
And three-year-old Alex has his loving grandparents, Andrew and Monica, to help guide him out of the darkness towards normality.
That first smile came as he played with his toys.
Businessman Andrew Nickell, 51, says: ‘It is very important that we talk about Rachel.
‘Alex picked up a pair of earrings Monica had given Rachel for her 21st birthday the other day and said: ‘Will mummy mind if I wear them?’
‘Monica said: ‘Well, mummy doesn't want them anymore.’
That is the way it has to be.’
Alex was found clinging to 23-year-old Rachel's blood-soaked body, pleading: ‘Get up, mummy.
Get up, mummy.’
He went into such deep shock after the frenzied sex murder two months ago that he was struck dumb for 24 hours.
NOW, for the first time, Andrew Nickell has spoken in detail about his grandson's painful journey towards recovery.
And of the aching gap the loss of his beautiful daughter has left in all their lives.
These new pictures of Rachel and Alex are published with Andrew's permission.
He said:
Alex has horrific memories and we know that many of them are still locked inside.
Talking to him about it is very painful and very harrowing.
He goes through all the emotions.
He is upset, composed, then happy.
Like all children, his mind jumps all over the place.
We talk to him in his language and we have tried to lift as much of the experience from his mind as we can so that it doesn't fester, get covered over, then burst out in 10 years time and turn him into a disturbed child.
Until now, he has had to be with his father 100 per cent of the time.
He lost his mother and has seen it happen, so to be away from his father would be impossible.
Last week, for the first time since the murder on July 15, Alex's 29-year-old dad Andre Hanscombe, was able to leave him alone with his grandmother for three hours.
ANDREW went on: ‘At the beginning, he had clung constantly to Andre.
‘Then it got a little better and as long as he knew Andre was close by, he felt secure.
‘Now, in this past week, he has been playing and getting back to how he was before.
His progress is absolutely astonishing.
‘He has gone from being totally subdued and unsure of everyone to playing games, just as we used to.
‘Andre has done a tremendous job, explaining in great detail what happens when someone dies and when they are cremated.
‘Alex was at the funeral.
He poured his mother's ashes in the place she is now and I am absolutely positive that he knows now she is not coming back.’
Andrew and 49year-old Monica were touring in Canada when Rachel was knifed to death as she walked with Alex and her dog Molly on the common in South-West London.
It took police four days to trace the couple to Bridgnorth in Ontario.
They returned from an outing to find a note on the door asking them to call local police about a ‘serious family problem’.
Andrew says: ‘There you are, sitting by a lovely lake.
‘It is eight o'clock in the evening.
‘It's been a fine day, the sun is setting and somebody is telling you your daughter has been murdered.
You can't connect it.’
Andrew is a direct, no-nonsense man — a former Army officer who now runs his own shoe importing business.
He tells how he broke the news to his wife.
‘She was standing outside, on the deck overlooking the lake, as I was on the phone.
I went out and told her what she wanted to know.
‘Afterwards we sat down and talked about it and it was as if we were talking about someone else.
‘You don't think rationally.
I regretted everything — most of all that we were on holiday.
‘If we had been at home Rachel might have been spending the day with us instead.’
They were a close family.
Rachel would drive from the flat she shared with Andre in Balham, South London, to visit her parents at Ampthill, Beds, at least once a week.
AND she chatted to her mother on the telephone every day.
‘The phone always went between six and seven,’ says Andrew.
‘If it didn't, Monica would ring her.
‘They would chat about the day, what Alex had been doing — then Alex would come on the phone.
‘It is one of the hardest parts of the day now.
‘We both accept she is dead.
But that doesn't stop Monica waiting every evening for the phone to ring — or reaching out herself to make the call.’
Ten days after the Nickells flew back from Canada, they went to see Rachel's body.
‘We wanted to do that and we went as a family, including Andre and Alex,’ says Andrew.
‘It was a good thing to do.
Until then, there is always nagging doubt at the back of your mind — it might not be Rachel.
‘Then you see her and accept it and you are at the end of the first stage.
‘The second stage is getting her body released, and the funeral.
Now that is over we are in the third stage.
‘It is much, much longer and it is only now that you have time to realise what it means to you.
‘Even though you know that she is not coming back, it doesn't stop you missing her every day.’
Less than a month after the murder, the family celebrated Alex's third birthday.
Andrew says: ‘It was a small affair with just family and a couple of close friends at our house.
‘We gave him a bicycle and a helmet to wear on it.
It was a joint present from everybody.’
THE grandfather continues: ‘I think only in the short term.
‘Monica's vision is of two years time, when Alex starts school and Rachel won't be there for him.
‘And 10 years when he goes to senior school, 20 years maybe, when he is getting married.
‘That vision makes it much harder for her to accept.’
How will it be for Andrew when the maniac killer is caught?
‘I think he is a complete lunatic, a psychopath, to do what he did,’ Andrew says.
‘You just hope the pathologist is right when he tells you Rachel died quickly.
‘But it is very difficult to focus anger and revenge on someone you can't picture.
‘He is out there — but to me, he is faceless.
‘When he is standing in front of me and I know he is the person who has taken my daughter away — that is when it will be hard.
‘All of us know that the worst is yet to come.’
GRANDAD: Andrew Nickell gives his first full interview Picture: KEN LENNOX
HEARTBREAK: Dad Andre
HOLIDAY FUN: Grandad Andrew with daughter Rachel and Alex on a holiday two years ago.
Close family bonds are helping the toddler over the trauma
FIRST CHRISTMAS: Rachel and baby Alex at Christmas in 1989…happiness that was to be shattered by a madman
BEAUTY: Model girl Rachel…a ‘tremendous personality,’ says her father
RACE TO NAIL THE BUTCHER
NIC NORTH
BAFFLED police fear they may not catch Rachel's killer before he strikes again.
A senior detective said last night the murderer was a ‘lunatic who kills for kicks’ And he added: ‘Unless we find him it's possible he'll attack someone else.’
So far, detectives have questioned 27 people about the killing.
Fifty-four officers are sifting through thousands of pieces of information provided by the public.
But they still haven't found the murder weapon.
And interviews with Rachel's three-year-old son Alex have yet to yield any clues.
An appeal to help find the killer will be made on BBC1's Crimewatch UK at 9.30pm on Thursday.
Killer rains
MORE than 1,900 people were killed by floods in northern Pakistan and India after torrential rain in the Himalayas.
3 die in crash
THREE people died last night in a five-vehicle pile-up on the A1 at Sandy, Beds.
Minister sees the famine hell
BRITAIN'S Aid Minister saw the suffering of the Somalis at first hand yesterday — two days after the Mirror showed the full horror to the nation.
PLEDGE: Chalker
Tourists hijacked
A BRITISH holiday couple were hijacked in their car by two escaped prisoners in France, it was revealed last night.
James and Pauline MacGregor of Mulbarton, Norfolk, had to drive 180 miles from Auxerre to Lyon before being freed unharmed.
Their ordeal on Saturday followed a break-out at a French maximum security prison.
HURD SHUTS YUGO DOOR
BRITAIN slammed the door yesterday on calls to let in many more Yugoslav civil war refugees.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd said that Britain could not risk a new rise in racial tension through immigration.
Mr Hurd told European foreign ministers meeting in Hertfordshire that the refugee issue was ‘possibly the most serious problem’ facing the EC.
He later said he had reminded ministers of the ‘commotion and agitation’ caused by immigration in Britain in the 1960s and 70s.
‘Many of these things, such as the rise of the National Front in France, parallel the rise of the National Front then in Britain,’ he said.
PROBLEM: Hurd
Charles hols with beauty Sarah
JAMES WHITAKER
PRINCE Charles has been on holiday in the South of France with a beautiful physiotherapist.
Australian Sarah Key was called in to help him regain full use of his knee after his cartilage operation last week.
Sarah rushed to spend the weekend with him at his friend Baroness Louise de Waldner's 16th century castle.
Princess Diana did not go to the hideaway in Les Barroux, Provence — spending the weekend privately in London.
Buckingham Palace said only that Charles was on a private weekend.
But friends were not surprised he had slipped away with the physio, who has practices in Sydney and London.
Sarah spent weeks with him two years ago after he broke his arm in a polo accident, treating him daily at Highgrove, Balmoral and Baroness de Waldner's home.
‘I've never had a better client,’ she said then.
OP: Charles
BALMORAL ‘SAFE’
ROYAL aides have had talks with health officials over the higher-than-average level of cancer-causing radon gas — revealed by our sister paper the Sunday Mirror — in the Balmoral area.
But they have agreed that no action is needed because the royals only spend the summer at Balmoral Castle.
Baby Sam is Deb's delight
DELIGHTED TV presenter Debbie Thrower goes home from hospital today with her four-day-old son Samuel.
And then it'll be head down — trying to work out how she'll combine motherhood with her new job as news announcer for Meridian TV when it goes on air in January.
Debbie, 34, said yesterday: ‘It will be a lot of hard work — but the secret is to get the balance right.’
DEBBIE: New mum
Shrunken driving
A TRIBE of pygmies has been banned from driving after 37 accidents in Zaire — as they can't see over the dashboard.
Cut price
A SWORD said to have been used by poet Lord Byron in the 1823 Greek independence war is likely to fetch £4,000 at a London auction.
Toupee man death riddle
POLICE were baffled yesterday over the murder of a man wearing a toupee.
Bachelor Brian Claydon, 59, was found beaten to death in a lavatory at Nottingham station with the glue for his toupee in a bag by his side.
Airlift over a fish-sting
TROPICAL-fish keeper Ian Durnall was flown to hospital after being stung by his pet lion fish.
Its poisonous spines struck Ian, 21, from Wolverhampton, on the finger.
He should be allowed home in 24 hours.
Tyson's ‘ex’ KOs romeo
JAILED boxer Mike Tyson's ex-wife knocked a foulmouthed casanova out cold.
Actress Robin Givens gave the man a bloody nose after he mistook her for a hooker while she was filming in Chicago.
FURY: Robin
Weaving a spell
SCI-FI buffs yesterday sat through a seven-hour viewing of all three Alien films, starring Sigourney Weaver, at a Swansea cinema.
Star Sir John's holiday agony
FILM legend Sir John Mills arrived home from a cruise holiday in a wheelchair last night — in agony from a back disorder.
The 83-year-old actor had twisted his back playing golf before he left.
And on the first day of his eight-day tour of the Greek Islands with wife Lady Mills, it ‘went’ again and left him unable to walk.
‘I saw the Greek Islands from my cabin,’ said Sir John after flying in to London last night.
‘I think it's a crushed vertebra, it's murder.’
The star of epics such as The Colditz Story and Dunkirk went by ambulance to see a doctor.
ACTOR: Sir John
PAY IT AGAIN FOR £150m STAR COSBY
COMIC Bill Cosby was named highest-paid US showbiz star yesterday — thanks to REPEATS of his TV show.
Bill, 54, stopped making the hugely popular Cosby Show — seen here on Channel 4 — earlier this year.
But reruns around the world are set to net him £49 million for the two years ending this December, taking his total fortune to around £150 million.
Cosby headed the Top 40 earners on the annual list compiled by American magazine Forbes.
Runner-up was talk show host Oprah Winfrey, 38, whose pay packet for the two years is estimated at £44 million.
Robin Hood star Kevin Costner is set to make £10 million this year.
But pop band New Kids on the Block slip from No 1 with earnings of a mere £4 million.
Others in the Top 40 include actors Robin Williams and Dustin Hoffman, who both took a slice of the takings from Steven Spielberg's movie Hook.
Britain's highest ranker is West End impresario Cameron Mackintosh, at No 29 with £15 million.
REPEATS: Bill Cosby
No room…
A DESPERATE couple in Chelyabinsk, Russia, tried to place a newspaper advert offering to swap their baby for a bigger home.
Terrorist boss held
TERRORIST gang leader Abimael Guzman was behind bars yesterday.
Guzman, 57, boss of Peru's Maoist Shining Path gang, and 13 henchmen were rounded up in raids by police in Lima.
His 12-year reign of terror left 26,000 dead in assassinations, mass murders and car bombings, nearly destroying the state.
Hue and cry
NEW radio station Spire FM has recruited town crier Bob Scott to shout out details of programmes on the streets of Salisbury, Wilts.
Third of kids try drugs
MORE than a third of Britain's teenage schoolchildren are trying drugs, a shock survey revealed yesterday.
The kids — particularly GIRLS — experiment mainly with cannabis, ‘poppers’ containing solvents, LSD, amphetamines and ecstasy.
Thirty per cent also booze, sinking the equivalent of four pints of lager a week.
The figures are way above previous surveys.
But the man who carried out the latest probe, Manchester University social sciences professor Howard Parker, said they were ‘nothing to be terribly worried about.’
Care
He added: ‘It is in the nature of youngsters to try things.
But it is important for parents to be aware and keep an eye on their children.’
The professor's team questioned 776 children aged 14 and 15.
Carefully-worded forms included trick questions to weed out bravado and fibbing.
The team found 60 per cent had been offered drugs and 36 per cent tried them.
Girls were more likely to experiment than boys.
But hardly any kids had taken hard drugs like heroin and cocaine.
Prof Parker added that the number of children trying booze was far more worrying.
Love hurts so cough up £1,200
A STUDENT has won £1,200 for a collision injury in bed — making love to his girlfriend.
Fritz Wagner, 24, performed an ‘unfortunate manoeuvre’, a court heard in Bonn, Germany.
His insurers denied the twist of fate was a collision and had refused to pay medical costs.
But Judge Karl-Heinz Schmoll ruled: ‘The policy covered him in all situations in life.’
DRUGS BUST AT THE NICK
TWO alert cops made a drug bust — and seized cannabis plants growing at the POLICE STATION.
PCs Steve Woolway and Lynn Bishop glanced out of the window while having breakfast in the canteen — and nearly choked on their bacon and eggs.
For there, just feet away, were three flourishing cannabis plants.
They dashed out and pulled them up — and drug squad colleagues in  Cwmbran , Gwent, later confirmed that the plants were big enough to have supplied hundreds of joints.
How did they get there?
‘Either the seeds blew in — or someone planted them as a joke,’ said a senior officer.
Sailors in sex probe
A NAVY instructor has been disciplined for sexually ‘harassing’ a trainee Wren.
Two other instructors are being investigated.
The probe centres on alleged sexy romps in a Jacuzzi at HMS Raleigh training base, Torpoint, Cornwall, last Christmas.
COPS FIND NEW CLUE ON PUB CARNAGE
ROD CHAYTOR
FRESH evidence about who carried out the Birmingham pub bombings has been uncovered, it was revealed yesterday.
The breakthrough follows new tests on exhibits from the 1975 Six trial which have been carefully kept sealed and under lock and key ever since.
Experts again analysed materials using equipment not available then.
And their results challenge some earlier findings.
The evidence has gone to the DPP as part of an interim report.
The move follows a fresh hunt for the real IRA killers.
The Birmingham Six were cleared last year of killing 21 people in two Birmingham city centre pub blasts in 1974 and freed after 16 years in jail.
‘Cover-up’
A DPP official yesterday refused to say what is in the report.
And a West Midlands Police spokesman said: ‘Our forensic investigation is ongoing and we have some way to go.’
One of the jailed Six, Billy Power, blasted the new probe and the report as ‘a time-wasting public relations exercise’.
And the brother of another, Richard McIlkenny, said: ‘It is a whitewash aimed at covering up the mistakes made by police in convicting six innocent men.’
But Birmingham Labour MP Robin Corbett said: ‘The hope must be that the police have now been able to find something that will help identify the real culprits.’
Time's up
A PAIR of ‘priceless’ antique watches were stolen from a British Horological Institute exhibition at Upton Hall, Notts.
Cops' £2.5m drug haul
POLICE stopped a van on the M25 to warn the driver it was overloaded — and found a £2.5 million block of cannabis ‘the size of a hay bale’ in the back.
A man was later charged over the ‘pure fluke’ find near Amersham, Bucks.
MoD MUDDLERS GET THE UNION JACK IN A TWIST
British flags upside down at royal show
PETER KANE
MILITARY brass-hats proudly handed out scores of prizes to children — not noticing that the Union Jack printed on them was flying UPSIDE DOWN.
The prizes, bookmarks awarded to the youngsters at a show attended by the Queen Mum, featured the flags of all the 16 NATO nations — and OURS was the only one wrong.
But none of the experts from the Ministry of Defence spotted the printing blunder.
And an MoD spokesman admitted yesterday that THOUSANDS of bookmarks with the topsy-turvy flag have gone out to other kids throughout Britain.
The boob was spotted by security expert Barry Hyland at the show in Peterborough, Cambs.
Barry, 52, said: ‘I learned which way up the flag's supposed to be when I was a Scout and I always check whenever I see it displayed.’
Disgusted
And he blasted the muddling MoD, saying:
‘I went to the Defence Ministry stand — but the first person I spoke to simply shrugged and walked away.
I'm disgusted.
Surely someone somewhere should have checked to make sure that it was correct.’
He added: ‘This show is always attended by royalty — yet the MoD can't even get our national flag the right way up.’
The Mod spokesman could only say: ‘It was an unfortunate mistake.’
OUR Jack's all right.
The flag should always be flown as above — with its broad white stripe in the top left hand corner.
Perfect match
A NEW lonely hearts club on BBC Radio Cornwall is being run by Chrissie Loveday.
Bars of music
YOUNGSTERS in a high-security jail at Lichfield, Staffs, get music lessons from members of the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra.
Get some sexercise!
THE BEST sex foreplay is…a brisk jog.
Instead of tiring you out, a run round the park can perk up your sex life no end, a survey reveals today.
One woman in two who worked out said they were more easily aroused after sport, SHE magazine reports — and men said sex was more frequent and satisfying for them, too.
Swimmers reported the same good news after three 45-minute sessions a week.
RUSS JOB
MATT HUGHES
Leicester 0, Wolves 0
TEENAGER Russell Hoult arrived as a spectator — and ended up winning the man of the match award.
Five minutes before kick-off, Leicester goalkeeper Carl Muggleton went down in agony with a slipped disc and Hoult was ordered from the stand, where he was eating a hot dog.
And the 19-year-old capped his magnificent performance 60 seconds from time when Andy Mutch's header looked destined to settle this passionate clash — but the 6ft 4inch Hoult pushed the effort over the bar.
It denied Wolves their first win at Filbert Street in 20 years and Hoult walked off to a standing ovation from the 13,000 crowd.
‘I was in the stand munching a hot-dog when the boss called me down,’ said Hoult.
‘I was told that Muggers’ back had gone.
Agony ‘I had no time to feel nervous about facing Steve Bull and Andy Mutch.
It was great and they did not seem to cause us many problems.
It was marvellous to have the crowd behind me.’
Manager Brian Little revealed that Muggleton was in agony after collapsing in his pre-match warm-up.
‘I said ‘Get the big fella.’
Russell is a young kid, but has lots of ability.
‘When Mutch went up for his header we said ‘Oh no’— but the lad handled it well.’
Leicester's injury crisis came at the double when defender Richard Smith was carried off a minute after the break — and another trainee Neil
Lewis came on.
Wolves, unbeaten in seven games, had not conceded an away goal.
But City hit the woodwork three times and defender Kevin Ashley cleared a Gary Mills shot off the line.
Mills kicked himself in the 13th minute when he missed from two yards.
But Mutch and Bull, 300 goals between them, fired blanks all afternoon and rookie Hoult was in sharp form anyway.
Hoult had just two League games behind him while on loan to Lincoln last season.
Denied ‘I would have settled for a point,’ said Little.
‘But after that show we might have deserved the points.’
Bobby Davison, Phil Gee and David Oldfield were all denied by the Wolves woodwork.
Fought at a frenzied pace, Wolves showed their anxiety with four players — Paul Cook, Ashley, Keith Downing and Paul Birch — collecting bookings.
Kid gloves RUSSELL Hoult put down his hot dog and relished his League debut with a super show against Wolves.
His goalkeeping won him the man of the match award.
Britannia Hotels Limited
IN A REPORT on August 3 1992 we gave details of a survey of directors' pay conducted by the Labour Research Department.
It was stated that the directors of Britannia Hotels, Mr Michael Morton and Mr Alexander Langsam, had received rises of 98 per cent, taking their pay to more than £4 million each, at a time when their company had made an £8.5 million loss.
In fact, the LRD figure was wrong.
Britannia Hotels made a gross profit of £11.9 million in 1991 and a net profit after tax of over £200,000, taking into account the increased payments to the two directors.
Since Mr Morton and Mr Langsam are the sole shareholders, it was entirely a matter for them whether the profits were distributed as dividend or salary.
We apologise to Mr Morton, Mr Langsam and Britannia Hotels Limited for any false impression given by our article.
JACQUES-ASS!
DELORS IN £ RUMPUS
‘Reward Germans’
MARK DOWDNEY /ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
ARROGANT Jacques Delors yesterday urged Britain to take more Yugoslav refugees — to reward Germany for its tiny ONE QUARTER per cent interest rate cut to help the pound.
But the EC President's demand for solidarity angered Euro-sceptics, who saw it as Brussels trying to dictate British policy on a wide range of issues.
Mr Delors said Germany had shouldered a ‘huge burden’ by agreeing to take 200,000 refugees.
Britain has so far accepted 2,000.
He called on Britain to ‘show solidarity on the immigration issue’ after Germany's interest rate cut.
Tory MP Harry Greenway branded Mr Delors ‘a jackass’.
He said: ‘It is stupid to link these matters in this way.’
As Treasury officials tried to put a brave face on the German cut, the pound struggled again.
Sterling — now the EC's weakest currency following devaluation of the Italian lira — was propped up by the Bank of England, dashing hopes of an early interest rate cut in Britain.
Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown urged Nor-man Lamont to cut interest rates.
But city economists said: ‘It is difficult to see how.’
Anti-EC Tory MP William Cash dismissed the German cut as a bribe to French voters to vote for the Maastricht Treaty.
Fellow rebel Sir Teddy Taylor said it was humiliating that so much in Britain depended on unelected German bankers.
Putting the squeeze on — Page 6 
SLAMMED: Jacques Delors
MIRROR COMMENT
The way ahead
THE value of the pound Sterling is going to fall.
IF the Government stays within the European money club — the ERM — it will have to devalue whatever it says now.
IF it leaves the ERM, the pound will float against other currencies.
And float DOWN.
The pound is losing its value because of the collapsing British economy and there is only one party, and one man, to blame for that:
John Major's party and John Major himself.
Inflation
He over-valued the pound when we went into the ERM and, coupled with his insistence of achieving zero inflation, that is destroying industry, jobs, homes, families and any chance of rebuilding Britain for a better future.
He is to blame because we produce too little, export too little and import too much.
Everything we buy in Britain seems to come from abroad.
So what can he do — having got us into this mess — for the good of OUR people?
It now seems inevitable that he will have to devalue within the ERM.
Invest
He could — and should — cut interest rates within the ERM.
He could — and should — invest public money in transport, homes and industry.
Our European partners do that.
And he could — and should — give the economy a boost so people both have money to spend and the confidence to spend it.
To John Major that is heresy.
To everybody else it is sheer common sense.
MELLOR VISITED ME FOR TEA
Film girl tells court of Minister's regular trips to her luxury home
‘We had chat and a cuppa’
JOHN JACKSON
FILM producer Mona Bauwens told the court how David Mellor often popped in to her sumptuous Mayfair flat for cups of tea.
The pair met at a Medical Aid for Palestine charity dinner in 1988.
Mona was introduced to the Minister's wife Judith a week later — and said she became ‘good friends’ with the Mellor family.
She was asked by The People's QC George Carman: ‘Is it right to say you saw more of Mr David Mellor than of him and his wife together?’
Mona, who last month married her second husband, movie executive Mohammad Shourbaji, replied: ‘I wouldn't say that was necessarily right.’
Mr Carman went on: ‘Is it right Mr Mellor visited you on a social basis in the daytime without his wife?’
Mona, a Palestinian born in Kuwait, said: ‘Oh yes, he would often drop by for a cup of tea or coffee and a chat.’
There was laughter when Mr Carman said: ‘Did you ever visit a flat provided for Mr Mellor in Kings Yard in Mayfair?’
Asked by the judge why the question was relevant, Mr Carman said it was about the development of the friendship between the politician and the producer.
But he did not persist with it.
Photos
After Mona agreed with Mr Carman that she shunned publicity, he produced glamorous photos of her taken at her mother's mansion in Hampstead, North London.
In one she was dressed in a leotard, black tights and high heels — and sat astride a rocking horse.
Others showed her on her mother's bed, in the bathroom and on the bonnet of a Mercedes.
Mona said they were personal photos not intended for publication.
They were taken at her request at the end of a photo shoot to promote one of her companies.
‘I don't think they are improper pictures,’ she said.
Mr Carman replied: ‘I didn't suggest they were.’
When it was put to Mona that she had ‘posed provocatively’ she replied that she had refused to don a swimming costume for the photos.
Nasty
The film girl agreed that her father, PLO executive Jaweed Al-Ghussein, had put money into some of her companies.
She said: ‘I do work with him in the commercial world — but I have no involvement in his politics.’
The People's reports on the Mellor holiday were headlined ‘Top Tory and his pal from the PLO’ and ‘Top Tory and the PLO Paymaster’.
Mona's QC Richard Hartley described the accompanying editorial as ‘nasty and malicious’.
He claimed it suggested that ‘no decent person should be seen with her, let alone spend a family  holiday with her’.
The lawyer said she was entitled to be judged on her own merits and not those of her father.
He added: ‘We have not reached in this country the situation where you are guilty by birth — and long may it remain so.’
Mona — who has a five-year-old daughter Soroya from her first marriage to Belgian financier Arnold Bauwens — told the court she was a pacifist.
She was not prejudiced against any race.
And she said: ‘What I do is what I do.
What my family does is nothing to do with me.
‘I am not in any way ashamed of my father.
But he is an adult.
He does what he wants to do.’
She insisted that her father did not finance terrorism ‘and has never supported terrorism’.
Mona, who has also produced plays and musicals for the West End stage, said she was proud of her ancestry but saw herself as English because she was raised here.
HEADING FOR HOME MONA sees Mellor off at the airport (above) after the holiday at the villa (right)
COURT: Mona and husband Picture: ARNOLD SLATER
Lib-Dem MP will quit over abortion
SHEREE DODD
LEADING Liberal-Democrat MP David Alton will quit at the next election in protest at the party's decision yesterday to back pro-abortion policies.
The Lib-Dems' annual conference demanded equal access to abortion throughout the country.
And it said medical staff unwilling to take part in operations should refer patients to colleagues who would.
Mr Alton — a Catholic and fanatical anti-abortionist — said: ‘While this policy remains intact I will not be able to fight for or recommend people to vote for the Liberal Democrats.’
Sorrow
Five years ago the 41-year-old MP for Mossley Hill, Merseyside, resigned the Liberal Whip in a vain battle to get a private anti-abortion Bill through the Commons.
He said his decision at Harrogate yesterday was made ‘more in sorrow than in anger’.
Party chief Paddy Ashdown said Mr Alton's announcement was sad.
New kids come in 2 by 2
Ten sets of tiny twins give teachers double trouble
IT just has to be every teacher's nightmare — to turn up for the new term and face TEN sets of twins.
But that was the shock awaiting staff at Knowle infants school, Solihull, yesterday when nine new pairs of three, four and five-year-olds arrived on the same day to join one couple of twins already there.
Headmistress Pat Preedy did a double-take herself — now she's busy re-learning her two-times table.
‘It's amazing,’ she said.
‘At the moment we can only tell them apart by taking a sneaky look at the name-tags in their jumpers.
But we will get to know them all in time.’
Picture: GAVIN BLYTH
15m ARE CAUGHT IN DEBT
TWO-THIRDS of the country is in debt — owing an average £3,500 each, a survey says today.
And that does NOT include mortgages and credit cards.
About 15 million people — out of a working population of 22 million — have debts such as bank loans, car finance, hire purchase and shop credit.
Nine out of 10 are keeping up with their repayments, says consumer credit group Infolink.
But 1.5 million are three months or more behind.
And the south east is now the third worst region for arrears.
THE average net disposable income in Britain has fallen 40 per cent since the 80s boom, says a Lloyds bank survey.
Judges face gay sex scandal quiz
TOP judges face an investigation over claims that they were members of a secret gay sex ring.
And cases that may have been tampered with by high-ranking legal figures who feared being exposed will be reviewed.
The inquiry came after Scotland's top law officer, Lord Rodger, gave in to the demands of MPs.
Among the claims is that five men accused in a rent boys scandal walked free after fears that gay judges would be named in court.
The Daily Mirror revealed three years ago that four judges were at the centre of gay rumours.
Flood fears
BRITISH tourists were feared to be among the victims of the disaster floods in Pakistan and India as the death toll neared 3,000 last night.
Storm over race killers' sentences
FIVE skinheads who kicked a black immigrant to death were jailed for between two and four years yesterday.
The sentence caused uproar in eastern Germany, swept by neo-Nazi racist violence.
Stunned community leaders protested the sentences would not halt the almost nightly attacks on immigrants' hostels.
But a judge in Eberswalde said it was not his job to set an example.
Firework horror
TWELVE people were feared killed yesterday in a blaze at a fireworks factory in Tamil Nadu, southern India.
Couple in ‘town hall sex romp’
TWO councillors have been caught having sex on the floor of their town hall, it was claimed yesterday.
A colleague stumbled on the couple romping in a first-floor office just yards from the council chamber.
Les Worsley, Labour group leader at Rochdale, Lancs, wants an inquiry into the allegation.
The couple — a man and a woman — deny the claim.
Boy, 2, in bike horror
A TWO-YEAR-OLD boy was fighting for life last night after being hit by a bike at a moto-cross meeting.
Jason Askew was behind ropes with his parents when the machine careered into the crowd at Rotherham, Yorks.
A girl of 19 was also injured.
Many Harry Returns…
PRINCE Harry won't get a visit from Prince Charles or Princess Di today — his eighth birthday — at the Berkshire school where he started as a boarder last week.
And there will be no escaping lessons.
But Harry can expect a big cake, a pile of cards…and a special phone call from home.
Rich flickings
LOGOS of firms who sponsor Arsenal and other top clubs are to appear on the shirts of Subbuteo table soccer ‘players’.
HAWAII FIVE -OH
Hurricane hits Sly's homes
KEVIN O'SULLIVAN
RAMBO superstar Sylvester Stallone feared last night that a killer hurricane had flattened his FIVE luxury homes on a Hawaiian island.
He was waiting in Hollywood for news of his £4 million properties on Kauai — where South Pacific was filmed — after Hurricane Iniki scored a direct hit.
A friend said: ‘Sly's worried for his houses and for the whole island.
It's his second home.’
Stallone, 44, stayed there last month with girlfriend Jennifer Flavin.
Other stars were on the isle when the storm — which killed four people with gusts of 175mph — struck as they filmed Steven Spielberg's latest thriller.
Spielberg sheltered in the basement of the Westin Hotel with his 130-strong crew and cast, who include Sir Richard Attenborough.
Ten miles away Miami Vice star Don Johnson emerged from the Hyatt Regency to join rescue work.
Hurricane Iniki headed 100 miles north for the main Hawaiian resort of Oahu — where it killed a 15-year-old boy — before it suddenly switched course for Kauai.
A 91-year-old woman was killed when her house collapsed, a man of 76 was fatally injured by flying debris, and a further victim died of a heart attack.
More than 100 others were injured.
Nine out of 10 homes were destroyed in some areas, causing £500 million damage.
At least 50,000 islanders, and 2,000 tourists, were without electricity last night as President Bush declared it a disaster area.
Military planes flew in food supplies.
Dotted around the 50-mile long island are Stallone's five hideaways which he began buying up 10 years ago.
PARADISE LOST: Homes which were torn apart by 175mph winds look like driftwood on a beach on the luxury isle of Kauai
ADRIFT: Yachts were tossed around like toys in the harbour
MAGUIRE ‘SLUR’ FURY
MARTIN PHILLIPS
BOMB case mum Annie Maguire erupted in fury yesterday after it was claimed the Maguire Seven may NOT be innocent.
A new scientific report casts doubt over evidence which led to them being cleared last year of running a bomb factory.
Mrs Maguire, slamming the report's authors, told LBC radio: ‘We can go home tonight and sleep.
We have not got a guilty conscience.
We can live with it but can they?’
The study says it is ‘improbable’ their fingernails were innocently contaminated with explosives — as argued by defence lawyers at the Appeal Court.
But the report — for an inquiry into the 1974 Guildford and Woolwich pub bombings — makes clear that new tests had not proved the Maguires' guilt.
They were convicted in 1976 and served sentences ranging from four to 14 years with one dying in prison.
The inquiry was adjourned until Thursday.
CLEARED: Annie
Son sees his ref father die
A SOCCER referee collapsed and died during a match as his son watched from the sidelines.
Trevor Sharpe, 16, saw his dad Roger fall to the ground 40 minutes into the under-18s game.
The match was abandoned as both team managers tried to revive Roger, 43, but he died at Maidstone hospital, Kent, from a suspected heart attack.
‘Too sexy’ girl cop is banned
A GIRL cop has been banned from traffic duty because she is too sexy.
Natascia Rosignoli, 23, was relegated to a desk job near Perugia, Italy, for causing traffic chaos while wearing a too-tight skirt and revealing low-cut jacket.
Her boss said: ‘I can't have the public being driven crazy with desire.’
Natascia said: ‘I only wanted to look good.’
Gold rush
AT least 720 couples celebrated their golden weddings and renewed their vows at a cathedral service in Chicago.
Tear jerker
RECOVERY teams had to fight back the tears yesterday — after a lorry carrying thousands of pickling onions overturned near Wootton, Oxon.
Nurse dead in gun siege
ARMED police besieged a house for five hours yesterday as a woman lay shot dead inside.
The siege ended when ambulanceman Trevor Thomas, 48, a hero of the IRA's City bomb blast in April, walked out of the house in Barking, Essex.
The dead woman was nurse Susan Oliver.
Cleared rape man killed 4
A TYCOON cleared yesterday of raping a blonde topless model had been jailed for murdering his baby son and three family members.
The jury heard about wealthy amusement arcade boss Vincent King's past only after it had given its verdict.
King, 52, served 14 years of a 1963 life sentence for killing his five-month-old boy, mother-in-law and two sisters-in-law.
But yesterday the married father-of-three, who denied raping the 23-year-old, was jailed for 28 days at London's Snaresbrook Crown Court on a lesser assault charge.
A police spokesman said after the trial: ‘I think juries can handle details of relevant past convictions.’
Fergie's sister coins it
FERGIE'S sister Jane Makim won another big libel payout yesterday.
She is now thought to have picked up £250,000 in court actions around the world.
Australia's Nationwide News agreed to an out-of-court settlement over an article about Jane's marriage to farmer Alex Makim.
The couple divorced last year.
Implied
After the hearing in Sydney, Jane, 34, said the award was ‘extremely satisfactory.’
Jane won £120,000 after an Australian newspaper wrongly implied she was an ‘adulteress.’
A second claim, relating to similar allegations, was settled out of court.
Jane moved into a £200,000 home in Bondi last month.
Duchess of Scandal — See Centre Pages 
AWARD: Jane
WHAT A HAT TRICK
Footballer reverses over dog Drives forward and kills cat Then he gives away penalty
SYDNEY YOUNG
SOCCER player Steve Partridge was in such a hurry that he reversed his car over the family dog…and killed it.
Desperate to free the pet from his wheels, he drove forward — and crushed his cat to death.
Then, leaving his sobbing family at home, he dashed to a soccer match, where he gave away a penalty and cheated his team of a victory.
Yesterday Steve declared: ‘I had enough bad luck in one day to last the rest of my life.
I should never have got out of bed.’
Plasterer Steve's hat-trick of sorrows began as he clambered into his car outside his home at Sherborne, Dorset, late for the kick-off.
As wife Annie and four-year-old son Jack looked on in horror he reversed straight over the elderly family terrier, Jacko.
Annie and Jack yelled at him not to drive forward, as Chivers the cat was in front of the car.
Squeal
But frantic Steve didn't hear them, accelerated forward to free Jacko and killed the cat on the spot.
Jacko died on the way to the vet.
Heartbroken by the double tragedy, 35-year-old Steve said:
‘I was late for the match and in a tearing hurry.
I jumped into the car, waved goodbye to the wife and started to reverse.
There was a bump and an awful squeal — I just knew I'd run over the dog.
I slammed the car into first gear to get off the poor thing.
But then, ‘wham’, I went straight into the cat and broke its back.
I couldn't believe it.
After that, it was inevitable that the match would be a disaster.
I arrived after the kick-off, and gave away a crucial penalty with a hand ball which allowed the other team to draw 1-1.
The lads said I should have stayed at home.
Then I had to go back and bury my two pets and comfort Annie and Jack.
It was an absolute nightmare of a day.’
‘Chicken in box’ train line terror
CHILDREN as young as eight are playing deadly ‘chicken in the box’ inches from train lines.
They take it in turns to crouch in a cardboard box — edging it closer and closer to the track.
But they can't see trains coming and drivers don't know there is anyone inside the box.
The winner is the one who gets closest to a passing express.
Police investigating the craze in the Birmingham area said: ‘It is vital parents keep children away from rail lines.’
Bough back on air
A CALLER wished Frank Bough well on the air yesterday as he hosted a radio phone-in just two weeks after revelations that he had visited a ‘Miss Whiplash’ vice den.
Bough, 59, who is taking over Michael Parkinson's morning slot on LBC this week, is tipped to continue full time.
RADIO: Bough
Church wedding
EILEEN Chaplin and Richard Vicars were married yesterday at Caversham, Berks.
Rise and shine
A HUSBAND buried a year ago is exhumed by his wife every day ‘to enjoy the sunshine’, says a newspaper in Kampala, Uganda.
Ding-dong time
BELL-ringer Ernest Gosling left £250 in his will for a party for colleagues at Maidenhead, Berks.
Honesty doesn't pay for a bride
HONEST Sarah Foster's reward for handing back £1,000 paid to her by bank error was £25 — just 2.5 per cent.
Bride-to-be Sarah was given an extra wad of £20 notes by Barclays to make up the wages of 12 hotel workers.
When she spotted the mistake she immediately rang the bank and took the money back.
Shirley Gardner, owner of the hotel at Barrow-in-Furness, Cumbria, said: ‘I thought the bank would have sent champagne and a bouquet.’
Assistant bar manager Sarah, 21, said: ‘I was always taught that honesty is the best policy.’
Barclays said: ‘We are very grateful to her.’
Dressing rehearsal
NURSES are being given acting lessons — to help them cope with irate patients.
Tips on how to use body language to solve disputes are being provided by The Glasshouse Theatre Company of Manchester.
The actors have been booked for an extended run at Bradford Royal Infirmary by the local hospital trust.
WE WANT OUR WASPS SAVED
PEST exterminator Frank Murray was called on yesterday to SAVE a swarm of wasps.
The plea came from a community of Buddhists who said: ‘All life is precious.
We want the wasps removed from our centre without them being caused suffering.’
Frank, who works for Bristol Council, said he would follow the wishes of the Bath-based Buddhists but added: ‘Releasing the wasps into the wild could be extremely hazardous to anyone around.’
An RSPCA official said: ‘This all seems very pointless because wasps die out at this time of year anyway.’
‘8 snacks a day’ kids skip meals
YOUNGSTERS are gorging themselves on junk food — eating up to EIGHT snacks a day.
And some even skip normal meals to satisfy their craving for chocolate and crisps, a survey revealed yesterday.
Youngsters of 12 and 13 are the biggest eaters, said the report by Dr Mark Connor, a psychology lecturer at Leeds University.
Boys have an average 3.4 snacks a day — twice as many as girls.
But both sexes are down to one a day by the age of 18, said Dr Connor, who interviewed 1,000 youngsters in his research.
I'M OFF TO GAZZA
Five Bellies splits with lover and heads for Lazio
The lad is going howay
CLIVE CRICKMER
SOCCER star Paul Gascoigne's pal Jimmy ‘Five Bellies’ Gardner has split with his girlfriend…and is heading back to Italy to look after Gazza.
The rift was revealed yesterday when a charge that he attacked lover Joanna Gibson was dropped at her request in court.
Afterwards 15-stone Five Bellies said he was off to Rome to resume his £700-a-week job as minder to £5 million Lazio signing Gazza.
Grinning from ear to ear, he added: ‘Well, I'm happy now.
I can't wait to get back and see Paul.
All this has been a bit worrying.’
The 27-year-old former road worker, who will leave his toddler son Liam with Joanna, swaggered off puffing an imaginary cigar.
But a relative of Joanna insisted that neither the lure of the lire nor Five Bellies' close friendship with Gazza had caused the break-up.
She said: ‘Jimmy and Joanna realised they were no longer suited to each other in a romantic sense.
Bruised ‘They like each other and are still good friends.
But that is all.
‘Jimmy loves Liam.
He's a good father and Joanna is happy for him to see the youngster whenever he wants.’
Five Bellies was arrested last month at the terraced home he shared with blonde Joanna in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear.
Police said 22-year-old Joanna's face was swollen and bruised.
But the relative said: ‘It was a trivial incident and she was anxious that the case should not go ahead.’
The charge of causing actual bodily harm was formally dropped at Gateshead Court.
Homesick
Afterwards Five Bellies went to see Joanna, his girlfriend for four years, at the terraced house.
He said later: ‘Things are fine.
Everything is sorted.
It's all right.’
He added: ‘This is between Joanna and me.’
Joanna went to live with Five Bellies in a Rome apartment when Gazza was bought by Lazio.
But the pair returned to Britain a few weeks ago after homesick Joanna complained that Rome did not match up to Newcastle.
She said: ‘I don't like it.
The nightlife is non-existent, not like Newcastle.
‘It's just pasta and pizza restaurants.’
Since then Five Bellies, who is planning to live with his parents in Dunston until he flies to Rome, has been torn between his family and his Italian job with fun-loving Gazza.
HEADING FOR BIG TIME: Grinning Gardner after the charge was dropped
STILL FRIENDS: Jimmy and Joanna before the split
PAL: Paul Gascoigne
Top prof accused of kerb crawling
THE new vice-chancellor of a university has been charged with kerb crawling.
Professor Martin Harris, who started his job at Manchester University last month, was stopped in the city's red light district, police said.
The 48-year-old professor, an internationally known languages expert and former vice-chancellor of Essex University, is due in court in October.
Personal
University officials were stunned at the news.
‘It is the first we have heard of it,’ said a spokesman.
‘It is a personal matter and the university will not be making a comment.’
Father-of-two Harris, whose wife Barbara is a magistrate, said: ‘I strenuously deny the charges and have no further comment to make.’
BOULDER KILLS HOLIDAY MUM
A MOTHER-of-four was crushed to death by a boulder while walking on the holiday isle of Crete, it was revealed yesterday.
Mrs Linda Knott, 43, was behind her husband Dennis, 54, and other members of a coach party when she was struck.
She was killed instantly.
Friends said that the couple, from Maesteg, Mid Glamorgan, booked the trip at the last minute.
They wanted to escape bad weather in Britain and to help Mrs Knott recover from an operation.
Jobs boost
JOBS for 100 engineers could be created at NEI Parsons, Newcastle after they won a £100m order.
Grenade stops kids' bike race
A MOUNTAIN BIKE race for youngsters through woods came to a halt when when one rider spotted an unexpected hazard — a grenade.
Ten-year-old Luke Johnson dug it up and thinking it was ‘dead’, planned to take it home as an ornament.
His dad was with him at the race, but he couldn't find him and gave the grenade to a marshal.
But the pin was missing, making it ‘live’.
Bomb experts were called to the woods near Redcar, Cleveland, to blow it up.
They said it could have gone off at any time.
Police have ‘no idea’ how it got there.
We just want to be alone
MORE Britons are choosing to live alone, a survey revealed yesterday.
More than 6 million single people now live in their own home.
That's one in four of the UK's households — twice as many as 30 years ago.
And the total will rise to one in three by 2000AD — and single parents will boost that to 40 per cent.
It's all due to people living longer, marrying later — and more of them divorcing.
‘We are seeing a radical change in the structure of our society,’ said Mintel, the research group behind the survey.
‘Most single people enjoy living alone and make the most of it while it lasts.’
DAD SELLS HOME FOR A HEART OP
JOHN HICKS
A DESPERATE father is to sell his house…so that he can have a life-saving heart operation.
George Jamison, 45, has been told by specialists he needs a triple-bypass.
But he has to wait 12 months to join an NHS waiting list and two more years before he can have the surgery.
George said: ‘By that time, they could be digging me up for the operation.’
Cafe owner George's £55,000 three-bedroom Belfast home goes on the market today to raise the money for a private op.
He will then move into a council house with his wife Denise and children Kerry, 18, Chris, 16, and Collette, nine.
George — who is shopping around Ireland and Britain for the best op prices — said: ‘The minimum is £8,000.
And £2,000 of that is for the hospital theatre owned by the NHS.
It's outrageous.’
He added: ‘The kids would prefer to have me than the house and I can't afford to play for time.’
Gun gang wipe out club chief
NIGHTCLUB boss Lincoln Pennant plunged 35ft onto spiked railings after being blasted to death by mobsters.
Police found Mr Pennant, 32, impaled below the fire escape outside Tottenham's Arena club in North London.
He was blasted in the back with a shotgun as he fled from 12 men who burst in hunting for him.
COURT BRAWL OVER KILLER JOYRIDE BOY
Police struggle as driver is attacked
STEPHEN WHITE
FURIOUS relatives were grappled to a courtroom floor yesterday as they tried to attack a killer joyrider.
The two men — one screaming ‘I'll kill you, you bastard’— vaulted from the public gallery.
Then they ran across lawyers' benches to try to reach driver Christopher Lewin, 19, and passenger David Nnah in the dock.
Police forced the relatives to the ground before hustling them out of Liverpool Crown Court.
In the struggle one officer smashed his head on a bench and had to be taken to hospital.
Lewin and Nnah were also led away for their own safety.
Pat Thompson, aunt of 12-year-old victim Adele Thompson, wept as she yelled at them: ‘Why did you take her away from us?
Killers, child killers!’
Lewin smashed into Adele and Daniel Davies, nine, as they were out collecting for Bonfire Night.
Adele was flung 90ft, Daniel 70ft.
Both died from multiple injuries.
A third child, nine-year-old Christopher Nimbley, was also injured.
He still carries the mental scars.
Earlier Lewin and Nnah, 21, took a high-powered Mazda MX3 sports car from outside a Liverpool hotel to ‘show off’.
The car mounted a pavement, struck a wall, hit the children and smashed into a lamppost.
The two men ran off but gave themselves up next day.
Lewin, of Toxteth, who had never taken a driving test and was already banned for stealing cars, admitted manslaughter.
Nnah, of Edge Hill, admitted taking the Mazda without consent.
Both were remanded in custody for sentence.
KILLED: Adele Thompson, 12
KILLED: Daniel Davies, 9
Storm over race killers' sentences
FIVE German skinheads who kicked a black immigrant to death were jailed for two to four years yesterday.
The sentence caused uproar in east Germany, which has been swept by neo-Nazi racist violence since the collapse of the Berlin wall.
Community leaders protested that the sentences for the five, aged 19 to 21, were too light.
They will do nothing to halt the almost nightly attacks on immigrants' hostels, they said.
Nothing to Hyde
SEXY Joe Cain and Michelle Cleaver weren't hiding too much in London's Hyde Park yesterday as they showed off a range of new sexy outfits.
The girls' brief encounter marked the mail-order launch of erotic clothes and sex aids by Germany's Beate Uhse, 73, who already has a string of sexy shops across Europe.
Up and away
A RECORD 8,200,000 travellers passed through BAA's seven airports, including Heathrow and Gatwick, last month.
Back with a relish!
WAITRESS Delphine Barbiaux served up a surprise — by returning from the ‘dead’.
The body of a girl murdered in Belgium had been identified as Delphine, 19, by her stepmum.
But she was staying with friends.
HI-HO, IT'S OFF TO JOE WE GO
DEVOTED fans Stanley Gilbert and Demelza Poldark move house every year — to hear TV star Joe Longthorne sing.
The couple rent a home in the resort Joe is appearing for the summer.
Over a decade, they've gone to nearly all his shows.
‘Joe is well worth it,’ Stanley, 46, said yesterday as he and girlfriend Demelza, 29, got set to leave Bournemouth for Blackpool, where the singing comic is booked next year.
Stanley, who gets hotel jobs to pay the rent, admitted: ‘All the upheaval may seem strange to other people.’
But Demelza reckons she even owes her life to Joe, 38.
She says his records helped her out of a coma five years ago.
STAR: Longthorne
Harrods sale rap
HARRODS chiefs the Al Fayed brothers broke the rules in the £615 million battle for the group in 1985, the Takeover Panel said yesterday.
It accused them of making ‘misleading claims’ about their wealth.
AIDS star Perkins is defiant to the end
KEVIN O'SULLIVAN
ACTOR Anthony Perkins, killed by AIDS, called his suffering a ‘great adventure’ in a defiant testament released yesterday.
The 60-year-old Psycho star died in the arms of his wife Berry at his Hollywood home on Saturday.
His last message read: ‘There are many who believe this disease is God's vengeance.
‘But I believe it was sent to teach people how to love each other.
Experience
‘I've learned more about love from people I have met in this great adventure in the world of AIDS than I ever did in the cut-throat world in which I spent my life.’
Father-of-two Perkins — killer Norman Bates in the Psycho movies — had admitted that he had experience of gay sex.
He contracted AIDS in 1990.
But he never ‘went public’ with the disease.
Perkins said: ‘To misquote the script of Casablanca, the problems of one old actor don't amount to a hill of beans.’
VICTIM: Perkins
Crash boy dumps pal
A BOY of 12 crashed a stolen car yesterday — then left a pal trapped in the wreck as he fled.
The Vauxhall Cavalier hit a lamp-post in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear.
The driver, who had only cuts and bruises, was held shortly afterwards.
His friend, also 12, was in hospital last night with broken legs and arms.
Both had gone missing from a centre for disturbed youngsters in Newton Aycliffe, Co.
Durham.
£16,500 to serve drinks to EC chiefs
GEOFFREY LAKEMAN
WELL-PAID Euro jobs are going begging — kept ‘secret’ from Britain's unemployed.
Ingrid Heseltine, an EC civil servant, found the vacancies tucked away at the back of Euro documents, printed in French.
And among the 280 posts were some lucrative situations: £16,500 a year for serving drinks in EC bars and £15,000 for stacking shop shelves.
Ingrid translated the ads into English and passed on details to West Country job centres.
Real
‘The European Commission is offering ordinary jobs which have extraordinary salaries’ said Ingrid.
‘Any British applicant has a real advantage because English is their mother tongue.’
There are also vacancies for computer technicians, secretaries, and mechanics.
Details can be obtained from Truro Employment Centre.
NOT going for a song
THE antiques collection of TV expert Arthur Negus is going under the hammer — and it's expected to fetch £80,000.
The star of Antiques Roadshow and Going For A Song died in 1985 and now his widow Irene has decided to sell.
She wants the treasures — now locked in a vault — to give pleasure to others.
The 150 lots, including rare silver items, will be auctioned at Cheltenham, Gloucs.
TV EXPERT: Arthur
PRIZE CHEEK
Thief walks off with Yard cop's winning pumpkin
SAMUEL JAMES
A HEAVYWEIGHT pumpkin that won a policeman a prize has been lifted — by a thief.
The cheeky crook pounced after Scotland Yard detective Mick Roberts put down his 75lb monster outside a tent at a gardening competition.
And yesterday Mick didn't have a clue who walked off with his pride and joy.
He was delighted when his giant vegetable took first prize in the pumpkin section at the Newdigate Horticultural Show in Surrey.
And he happily agreed to donate the pumpkin for a charity event in which contestants would guess how many seeds it contained.
Enormous
Then he discovered that the big attraction had been nicked.
‘I couldn't believe it,’ he said yesterday.
‘The pumpkin was really enormous and it's hard to understand why anybody would want to steal it.
‘I still can't work out how they got away with it because I'd only left it outside the tent for a few moments before it vanished.
‘It's a great shame because every year the prize-wining pumpkin is used in the seeds contest by a local pub and I'd already said they could have it.’
Mick added: ‘I was pretty proud, but if I'd cooked it, I'd have been eating pumpkin pie all year.’
MONSTER HAUL: Mick with his prize-winning 75lb pumpkin…before it was nicked
Rebels in retreat
DAVID BRADSHAW
LABOUR Euro-rebels ducked a showdown with party leader John Smith last night — and were blasted by left-wing MP Dennis Skinner.
He accused Bryan Gould and David Blunkett of speaking out purely to boost their vote in the party's national executive elections next month.
Mr Gould had urged a referendum on the Maastricht treaty and Mr Blunkett had called for sterling to be revalued in the ERM.
But their threatened revolt fizzled out at yesterday's NEC meeting.
Mr Gould failed to back calls for a referendum.
And Mr Blunkett retreated from his devaluation demand, after an appeal from Mr Smith.
Mr Skinner said scornfully: ‘They say one thing outside the meetings and another inside.
‘When it comes to the vote, they do not deliver.’
And he forecast: ‘As soon as the election's over at the party conference, watch 'em fall into line.’
ANGRY: MP Dennis
OCH AYE, THE BLUE
KILTED Prince Charles got the wind up yesterday — and showed that underneath he's a true blue.
A sudden gust lifted his resplendent tartan for all to see…a pair of blue briefs.
Charles, spurning an old Scottish tradition, opted for a royal cover-up.
The prince went all a-flutter as he climbed to a memorial tower on Scolty Hill in Banchory, Grampian.
Wearing the Lord of the Isles tartan, he used a crook to support the knee recently operated on for cartilage damage.
Charles was visibly limping as he negotiated the steps to the top.
Meanwhile, his younger son Harry had a terrific eighth birthday at Ludgrove School in Wokingham, Berks.
Harry, who only joined as a boarder a week ago, began his day opening cards and presents.
Then at tea-time, he shared a tasty birthday cake with his chums before phoning his mum.
A Buckingham Palace spokesman said there was ‘no access’ for Di or other parents to visit their boys during the week.
But headmaster's wife Janet Barber promised: ‘We will make it a fun, special day.
All the boys here get excited on their birthdays.’
BREEZY: Charles
Pint of wallop
THE world's strongest beer — more than 17 per cent alcohol — is to go on sale by Christmas at pubs owned by London-based brewery Firkin.
Dirty scandal can't be halted
ENVIRONMENT Minister David Maclean said yesterday that it was ‘unrealistic’ to ask industry to stop dumping waste in rivers and the sea ‘overnight’.
Greenpeace wants the licence system phased out and no poisonous waste dumped in British waters by the turn of the century.
But Mr Maclean said: ‘Industry will always produce waste.
‘It is impractical to say that we should set some timetable for ending discharges without any idea whether it can be achieved or not.’
National Rivers Authority chairman Lord Crickhowell said the licence system protected the environment.
He added: ‘Greenpeace's demand for an immediate zero emission policy is naive.
Unless we want to go back to the Stone Age, zero pollution is not practical.’
ATTACK: Maclean
‘Hospital murder’ man clear
ROOFER Deith Bridges was cleared yesterday of murdering his boss in hospital.
Graeme Woodhatch, 38, was shot four times at close range as he made a phone call at the Royal Free Hospital in London's Hampstead in May.
But none of the staff or patients saw the gunman.
The court was told Woodhatch had made many enemies while working as a director of a roofing firm.
He fled Britain for a time to escape debts.
Magistrate Daphne Wickham freed Bridges, 20, at London's Thames court after finding there was insufficient evidence to send him for trial.
Bridges, held in custody for four months, said later: ‘I'm delighted.’
KILLED: Woodhatch
1,000 kids get wrong exam mark
BUNGLING examiners botched the marking of nearly 1,000 GCSE and A-Level papers.
The independent body set up to hear appeals against exam results said last night the number of complaints has tripled in the past year.
The attack comes only days after school inspectors said they had ‘little confidence’ that proper GCSE standards were being maintained.
WATER LOAD OF RUBBISH!
‘Filthy 50’ firms foul our rivers and seas
BARRY WIGMORE
TOP companies legally dump billions of tons of poisonous chemicals into rivers supplying drinking water, a report revealed yesterday.
All but five of the worst offenders — the so-called Filthy Fifty — allegedly discharge even MORE than they are allowed.
And that could be just the tip of the iceberg as official monitoring picks up only a fraction of illegal pollution.
Leading firms like ICI, Beecham, BP, Shell, Esso and British Steel are granted Government licences to discharge dangerous chemicals.
But, claims the Greenpeace report, even by sticking to the licences the Filthy Fifty would:
PUMP up to 1,723 billion tons of chemicals into rivers and estuaries.
DUMP a horrifying 2,492 tons of zinc, 2,320 tons of pesticides and industrial solvents, 9,660 tons of oil, 34 tons of cadmium and 16 tons of mercury into the sea.
Dirty
Official records, however, show that since the beginning of last year 45 of the Filthy Fifty have breached the limits a total of 469 times.
The shocking figures, say Greenpeace, justify Britain's reputation as the ‘dirty man’ of Europe.
It adds: ‘Britain is still by far the biggest polluter of the seas of northern Europe.’
Greenpeace used figures from the National Rivers Authority and Scottish Rivers Purification Boards.
Campaigners also sailed round Britain to check for themselves.
The report says they found large numbers of chemicals being dumped which were NOT licensed to be discharged.
ICI at Wilton, Teesside, was licensed to discharge nine chemicals.
The local watchdog identified 11.
Greenpeace claims that its scientists found 174 compounds.
Pollution, say Greenpeace, has led to deformed and contaminated fish, poor seal breeding and, on the River Mersey, fish unfit to eat.
Trouble spots include the River Humber, the Tees, the Dee estuary, Cardigan Bay and the Severn Estuary.
ICI said Greenpeace's figures were correct.
But a spokesman added: ‘If your discharges go into a river at a slightly too-high temperature, or with slightly too high a level of sediment, you have breached your licence.’
He said ICI spent £300 million last year on environmental measures.
Griffin's Eye — Page 6 
SIX out of seven ICI plants around the country broke licence terms covering either the level or type of discharge.
THREE BP plants are named in the Greenpeace report.
Two are slammed for discharging materials not on their licences.
ONE in seven samples from Shell's Stanlow refinery at Ellesmere Port — 42 out of 275 — were in breach of regulations.
Red Robin
THE Reliant Robin could be produced in Russia.
Its makers in Tamworth, Staffs, may have the Fox four-wheel version built there under licence.
LIBS DEMAND NEW DEAL FOR HOOKERS
SHEREE DODD
A CAMPAIGN for a new deal for Britain's vice girls was launched by Liberal-Democrats yesterday.
They demanded the scrapping of fines and a crackdown on pimps instead of hookers.
Lib-Dem chiefs also plan to talk to prostitutes to find out their views about legalised brothels.
The campaign was backed by party's Harrogate conference — despite a plea from a woman delegate who called prostitution ‘vile, dirty and ugly.’
A motion from Lib-Dem students calling for legal brothels was rejected.
Instead the party will set up a top level group to investigate prostitution and draw up plans for new laws.
Delegate Caroline Shorten said changes were needed to protect women from kerb-crawlers.
She drew cheers with a joke about notorious Madam Cyn — Cynthia Payne — as a possible head of a new regulatory body, Ofbroth.
JOKE: Madam Cyn
PLEA TO LABOUR
FORMER Liberal leader Sir David Steel yesterday urged Labour to stand down for the Liberal-Democrats in seats they cannot win at the next Election.
But, he said, it could not be a two-way pact.
VACCINES AXED IN MEASLES JAB SCARE
Meningitis link to two brands
DAVID LEIGH
TWO brands of a vaccine given to millions of children were withdrawn last night because it is feared they could cause meningitis.
The makes are Pluserix and Immravax.
Children who became ill after injections showed symptoms within three weeks.
‘GPs can no longer get these two brands,’ said a Department of Health spokesman.
The vaccine is used to immunise children against measles, mumps and rubella.
It was stressed that a third vaccine — MMR2 — was perfectly safe and there were sufficient stocks for doctors to meet demand.
The withdrawal of the other two brands, which accounted for 850f the injections, came after a ‘small number’ of children got ‘mumps-meningitis’.
A health spokesman stressed there had been no reported deaths — and said parents should continue having their children vaccinated.
The risks of catching vaccine-related meningitis were minimal compared to the benefits of immunisation against the other diseases.
Pluserix was withdrawn by the Government on the advice of the company manufacturing it.
Smith Kline Beecham spokesman Alan Chandler said: ‘Once we found we had a slightly higher incidence of mumps-meningitis we notified the authorities.
‘We told them that if they could find a better vaccine they should use it.
‘We don't want to cause people to panic.
The vaccine is not very dangerous.’
Bingeing officer ‘hit bar steward’
TOM MERRIN
Army officers celebrating the Tories' poll victory ended with a private being punched, a court martial heard yesterday.
And a fellow officer was given a bloody nose when he refused to get out of bed and watch the results coming in on TV, it was alleged.
Private Richard Downs, 19, said he was serving as a bar steward in the officers' mess of the First Battalion Duke of Wellington's Regiment on election night — April 9.
By 4.30am pint glasses were being hurled around the mess while officers chanted ‘Vote Tory’.
One tankard hit the ceiling, another broke a window.
Stormed
Finally, when an officer fell off the bar, Private Downs complained about their behaviour.
He said Second Lieutenant James Mundell then told him: ‘I'm going to fill you in’— and hit him in the face.
Mundell, 22, and Lieutenant Andrew Hadley, 24, then stormed into Lt Richard Brearey's room and asked him to get up and watch the results.
He refused — and was grabbed in an arm lock and bashed in the face.
‘My nose was bleeding quite heavily,’ he told the court.
Mundell denies common assault on Private Downs and both officers deny causing actual bodily harm to Lt Brearey.
The hearing at Bulford, Wilts, continues.
URCHIN'S £ 1/4m FIND
A POVERTY-stricken Egyptian girl found a bag containing jewels and cash worth £250,000 — and handed it to police.
Reda Adam, ten, and her father, a cycle repairman in Ismailia, also turned down a £25,000 reward from the owner, an Australian tourist.
Reda asked instead to meet Egypt's First Lady Mrs Suzanne Mubarak.
Devout Moslems believe honesty will be rewarded by God.
Shield boy is shot by gangsters
A BOY of two was shot when he was used as a ‘human shield’ in a gang gun battle.
Jonathan Williams was critically ill yesterday in hospital.
He was walking with his mum in Chicago when two men in a car began firing at three others.
One grabbed the lad and held him in front of him.
A police officer said: ‘This is a new low in crime here.’
£22,500 cracker
A CRACKED old plate, given to a hard-up student by the owner of a house she moved into, has brought her £22,500.
The 17th century Lambeth plate, which was held together by glue and string, was bought by a London dealer at a Sheffield auction.
Soccer side in the pink
A FOOTBALL team is putting rivals in the shade — after painting their opponents' dressing room PINK.
Third Division Torquay were told the colour would make visitors feel less competitive.
They've decorated their own an ‘aggressive blue’.
IT'S RICHARD THE LOINHEART
TV presenter Richard Madeley was yesterday asked to reveal the size of his manhood.
Viewers watching a sex debate on ITV's This Morning show heard a phone caller ask him: ‘How big are you?’
Richard kept mum, dismissing the call as a hoax.
COOL: Richard
YORATH TEAM CHECK PLEA
WALES soccer boss Terry Yorath yesterday urged clubs to screen young players for the heart disease that killed his 15-year-old son Daniel.
Fit people are more at risk from hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Yorath is patron of a help group.
Cops win Tube race
A SUSPECTED kidnapper was caught after a rush-hour police chase along a London Underground tunnel yesterday.
The man leapt on to the track at Victoria and raced into a tunnel.
Two men were being quizzed by police last night.
TEACHERS SEEK CLASSES PACT
A BAN on classes with more than 30 children was demanded last night by the Tories' favourite teachers' union.
The 40,000-strong Professional Association of Teachers, which has pledged never to strike, wants a deal that no teacher can be forced to take classes of more than 30 unless they agree.
Figures show over a million children are being taught in oversized classes.
Snow White on the night!
MIRROR, mirror on the wall, who's the funniest baddie of them all?
Comedienne Marti Caine, star presenter of BBC1's Joker in the Pack is gearing up for a hair-raising performance as the evil panto Queen in Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs.
Marti, 47, will be hissed and booed at the Richmond Theatre, Surrey, this Christmas.
At the same time, she is recording an album of songs, and planning to write a ‘really sexy’ book.
The brave star, who has been battling cancer for four years, admits that she still suffers from terrible stagefright.
But if her snarling face in the mirror is any indication, Snow White's the one who should be quaking in her boots.
On reflection, Marti's the spitting image of a panto baddie.
JUDGE ZORRO ON THE CARPET FOR KISSING USHER
M'lud says he's sorry
CLIVE CRICKMER
A JUDGE nicknamed Zorro has been given a wigging for kissing a pretty court usher.
The woman was shocked when QC William Crawford put his hands on her waist and pecked her on both cheeks.
She angrily complained to the Lord Chancellor about 55-year-old Judge Crawford's ‘over familiar’ behaviour.
He was ordered not to sit at Newcastle Crown Court while her claims were investigated.
Now the father-of-three has said sorry for getting too fresh in his chambers there.
And the woman, believed to be a pretty mum in her twenties, has accepted his apology.
Judge Crawford earned his nickname because he looks like Tyrone Power, the star who played the swashbuckling swordsman in the movie classic The Mark Of Zorro.
He's a rifle crackshot who represented Scotland in the 1966 Commonwealth Games.
After the complaint, he was summoned to London and quizzed by Mr Justice Waller, presiding judge for the north east.
He will resume duties next week following the apology.
A spokesman for the Lord Chancellor said: ‘During the incident, Judge Crawford kissed the woman on both cheeks and placed his hands on her waist.
‘The member of staff is content with the apology she has received.’
Court staff at Newcastle were ordered not to say anything.
But one junior official revealed: ‘She was badly shaken by what happened and determined not to let the matter drop.
‘We think she has been very brave.’
There was no reply last night at the judge's £500,000 home in Dunscore, near Dumfries.
SWASHBUCKLING: Judge Crawford
On a loo-ser
A WOMAN driver desperate for a loo ran to a public toilet in Newmarket, Suffolk, only to find it shut — and her car stolen when she returned.
Jailhouse rock
POP group The Stranglers are staging a concert at Dartmoor prison on Friday, using a £10,000 sound system won by a warder.
Mum told her child is missing
…by radio
TINY Angel Clarke ran away yesterday.
But her mum never knew — until she heard an appeal on the radio.
The two-year-old wandered out the house at dawn dressed in mum Michelle's high heels and nightie.
Angel was picked up by police half a mile from her home while Michelle snoozed in bed.
The officers took the tot off to the station, gave her breakfast and put out the radio appeal.
Michelle, 20, said: ‘I couldn't believe it when I heard the radio and they gave a description of a little girl dressed in her mum's nightie and shoes.
‘I checked Angel's room and was shocked to discover it was her.’
Blonde Angel sneaked out after her dad went on an early fishing trip and left the door unlocked at their home in Sheffield.
Michelle added: ‘She looked a bit of a sight when I got to the station but she's always trying on my clothes.
‘I think she was on her way to the playgroup.’
And the relieved mum vowed to keep her eye on the ‘little devil’ from now on.
NIGHTIE: Angel
LOVE-SPLIT STEPDAD KILLS GIRL
A ROMANCE between a man and his 16-year-old step-daughter ended when they were found dead yesterday — 275 miles apart.
Lisa Conway was discovered in a nightie stabbed through the heart on her bed in a Newcastle flat.
And Craig Stuart, 36, died when he plunged from a 12th floor hotel room in London.
Police, who broke into the flat when alerted by Stuart's parents, believe he killed Lisa because she planned to leave him.
Then he travelled to London to kill himself.
The couple's romance started more than a year ago when Stuart wed Lisa's mother.
Kids in den horror fire
A GIRL of 13 was feared dead in a huge hay barn blaze last night.
Thirteen other children from a nearby housing estate escaped after candles set light to their ‘den’ at White Waltham Farm, near Maidenhead, Berks.
As 30 firemen fought the flames, one said: ‘We fear the worst.’
SIMON, 6 GETS £400 BUS BILL
BUS company bosses whose shelter was demolished by a rogue motorist slapped a court summons and a £400 repair bill on a six-year-old boy.
Stunned schoolboy Simon Dove ended up with the blame after the real culprit gave a false name and address.
But the fastest vehicle Simon owns is a pedal go-kart.
‘He's fairly handy behind the wheel,’ said his dad Michael, of Honley, West Yorks.
‘But I don't think he could do that much damage.’
Now West Yorks Passenger Transport have agreed to put the brakes on the court case.
‘I'm sure Simon's a very responsible driver,’ said a spokesman.
Bomb drop
A MAN fell through the floor of his garden shed at Hythe in Kent — and uncovered five World War Two mortar bombs.
They're trout of control
TROUT fishermen are being given the slip — the tasty morsels are just too clever for them.
So many are dodging the hook that Ireland's lakes are teeming with them.
‘The trout are literally dying of old age,’ said fishery spokesman Aidan Barry.
Now more anglers are being urged to try to cut the soaring numbers.
Horror of barn inferno
FIREMEN found the body of a 13-year-old girl in a burned-out hay barn yesterday.
The girl, Jamie Auld, and 13 other children, aged between 10 and 13, built a den in 60 tons of hay in the barn and lit a candle as it got dark.
The other children fled in terror as the hay caught fire when the candle tipped over.
One of the friends, Manuel Cabrera, said he tried to grab Jamie but the intense heat drove him out.
Fifty firemen searched for her body in the barn at White Waltham, Berks all night as her distraught mother Sue waited outside.
BLAZE VICTIM: Jamie
Bus ban on ciggies
COACH company National Express is banning smoking from November.
The firm, which carries more than 12 million people to more than 1,200 destinations a year, claims 90 per cent of its passengers prefer smoke-free express travel.
Mum pulls car to halt
SLIMLINE mum Deirdre Burton stopped a runaway one-ton Volvo with her hands as it rolled towards a crowd of youngsters.
Nine-stone Deirdre, 39, halted the driverless car by pulling on the door handle.
Police at Newmarket, Suffolk, said: ‘She averted a potentially dangerous accident.’
PRAISE: Deirdre
The fall guy
A BURGLAR broke his ankles when he leapt out of what he thought was a first-floor window at Bristol — and fell four storeys.
The fall guy
A BURGLAR broke his ankles when he leapt out of what he thought was a first-floor window at Bristol — and fell four storeys.
First of the phew
MADCAP Mick Grimmer plans to eat thirty cloves of garlic and breathe on anyone who refuses to give to an RAF charity at Mansfield, Notts.
Champ caught short
CHAMPION leek grower George Grayson had to buy back his winning exhibits — after they were auctioned off while he took a leak.
Green-fingered George, who won £1,700 for his two specimens, did not hear organisers say unclaimed vegetables would be sold.
George, 50, had to pay £10 from his prize money at the annual leek show at Northallerton, North Yorks.
He said: ‘To a leek grower these two are priceless.’
MISTER, YOU CAN STUFF THE PORK PIE FACTORY
Tycoon slams council officer
GEOFFREY LAKEMAN
A STRAIGHT-talking tycoon ditched his plan for a pork pie factory when a council official told him: ‘Call me Mister.’
Down-to-earth ‘Call me Doug’ Grocutt was about to invest £620,000 — creating 28 new jobs in an unemployment blackspot where 4,200 people are out of work.
Now the furious businessman is to take his pork pies elsewhere after being chided for over-familiarity.
Doug, 60, was chatting about food regulations to a town hall environmental officer when he chummily addressed him as Richard.
In icy tones, the offended bureaucrat replied: ‘For future reference, you will call me Mr Hooton, not Richard.’
Angry Doug blew his top, then told Restormel Borough Council in Cornwall what they could do with the factory plan.
‘I reminded him he was a public servant,’ said Doug.
‘I can't stand pompous people.
‘All this forelock-tugging went out with the Victorian era.
Sell ‘I employ 36 people and they all call me Doug.
I've been in business for 43 years.
‘I've talked with top financiers, bankers, solicitors and accountants.
‘I call them all by their christian names and expect them to call me Doug in return.’
Now the businessman, who owns a caravan park and a chain of fish and chip shops, intends to sell his pork pie plan to a council with less crusty officials.
Restormel Council leader John Horn promised Doug an apology and pledged a meeting to ‘smooth this over’.
But when the Mirror attempted to contact MISTER Hooton we were told he was unavailable…by a colleague calling herself MISS Russell.
Ink Spots star dies
INK Spots singer Jim Nabbie has died in Atlanta, aged 72, after double heart-bypass surgery.
He led the group, who had a series of hits in the 1940s, for 47 years.
Star's hotel bust-up
POP star James Atkin was thrown out of a hotel after his band EMF held a wild party in his room.
The five-piece group, who had a smash hit with their debut single Unbelievable, were celebrating a private gig for their Parlophone record label.
But angry guests at the Britannia Hotel in Manchester claimed they were kept awake by the loud music until 5am.
Police escorted singer Atkin and four friends off the premises but made no arrests.
Couple's kidnap horror
A COUPLE told yesterday of their terror when two escaped convicts kidnapped them at gunpoint.
Jim and Pauline McGregor feared they would die after being snatched while holidaying in France.
The prisoners — who killed a guard while fleeing a Paris jail — hijacked the McGregor's car.
They took the couple, from Norwich, on a 180mile drive before dumping them near Lyon six hours later.
Back at their home, Pauline said: ‘It was like a bad dream.’
The convicts were last night still on the run.
£ OUT OF CONTROL
Interest rate fiasco It's still devaluation Parliament recalled
Major humiliated…
Lamont likely to resign
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
PREMIER John Major and Chancellor Norman Lamont were fighting for their political lives last night — and blaming anyone but themselves for the mess.
Lamont may resign today — despite Downing Street denials — after being forced into a humiliating withdrawal from Europe's Exchange Rate Mechanism, leaving the pound to float.
The move sent sterling lurching out of control.
Last night it was effectively devalued by eight per cent.
Major's future is also in doubt — he had staked his reputation on staying in the ERM and not devaluing.
The crisis is so severe Downing Street gave in to Labour demands to recall Parliament.
The decision to quit the ERM followed a day of fiasco in which Lamont raised interest rates twice — by five per cent— then cancelled the last rise.
The rate now stands at 12 per cent.
Earlier, the Bank of England threw away £10BILLION in a futile attempt to prop up sterling.
Downing Street said Mr Major had angrily protested to German Chancellor Helmut Kohl about a ‘whispering campaign’ against the pound.
MAJOR: Fighting for his political life
LAMONT: Expected to resign today
Test ace Sarfraz accused of holding woman captive
DON MACKAY
CRICKET star Sarfraz Nawaz was charged last night with imprisoning and assaulting a woman.
The former Pakistani and Northamptonshire fast bowler was quizzed for more than three hours by detectives at Chelsea after the woman, who has not been named, made a complaint.
It is believed she claimed she was assaulted and kept captive at a friend's flat in Chelsea after Sarfraz gave her a lift in his car.
As the cricketer left the police station his solicitor, Brian Fugler, said: ‘Sarfraz has been charged with certain offences.
Row
‘Those offences are based on a complaint which is completely false and baseless.
We will be denying the charges strongly in court.’
Married Sarfraz, of School Road, Hounslow, would not comment on the alleged offences which are said to have taken place last Wednesday.
He will appear at Horseferry Road Magistrates Court on October 6.
Sarfraz is suing England cricketer Allan Lamb in the Pakistani ‘ball tampering’ row.
Lamb claimed in the Mirror that he called the umpire's attention to alleged ball tampering by Pakistan at Lord's.
He also said 43-year-old Sarfraz revealed the secrets of Pakistan's reverse swing to him 12 years ago.
HELD: Sarfraz yesterday
MIRROR COMMENT
A crisis made in Britain
BRITAIN'S economic and financial crisis is grave and growing graver by the hour.
It is a crisis which will put people out of work, families out of their homes and firms out of business.
Yesterday's savage increase in lending rates will devastate British industry for years to come.
Bankruptcy will become even more commonplace.
Unemployment will become even more widespread.
Make no mistake about it.
This is a crisis made here in Britain, in Downing Street, fashioned in No. 10 and marketed from No. 11.
Yesterday Norman Lamont changed his policy three times in ten hours, putting up interest rates, putting them up again, changing his mind, perhaps, about the second increase and finally deciding to leave the ERM, effectively paving the way for devaluing the pound.
His days are now numbered as Chancellor, but who the Hell cares about Norman Lamont?
What matters is the British people, British jobs and the British future.
They have all been put in danger by a Government of incompetents led by a master of mediocrity.
Mess
We aren't being wise after the event.
On March 25 this year, a fortnight before Polling Day, the Daily Mirror warned the British people:
Britain is in an appalling financial mess because the Government has got its sums wrong…
There is nothing left for it but to lie its head off until Polling Day is past…
Vote now, pay later has never been a more frightening truth.
The British people didn't listen to the warnings.
They voted for a Tory Government instead.
But the vote in April has fallen due for payment in September.
And they will pay for it in October, too.
And in November.
And for the rest of the winter until only the Bundesbank knows when.
The Government has no excuses left.
This isn't a crisis caused by the fear of the French voting Non in next Sunday's referendum.
It can't be blamed on the unions or the last Labour Government.
And it isn't because the workers won't work hard enough, not when three million don't even have the chance.
This is Major's crisis.
Just as Hurricane Andrew devastated Florida, so has Hurricane John devastated the British Isles.
The British people will pay for it and the foreign speculators will profit from it.
And the worst may be yet to come.
The dread in Downing Street this morning must be that yesterday's panic policies won't work.
What then?
Will the Prime Minister face the only alternative left and accept open devaluation, disposing of his Chancellor in order to save his own skin?
The life of this Government still has four and a half years to run, a terrifying prospect for us all.
The only way to get rid of it would be for enough Tory MPs to join with the Opposition parties to throw it out.
But don't raise your hopes.
It won't happen.
If there is one certainty in a crisis, it is that every Tory MP will put party before country.
And the nation now knows to its cost that is the only thing on which the Tories can be trusted.
WARNING: Budget Day edition
Fire first, Yugo Rats are told
DESERT Rats going to war-torn Bosnia will be allowed to shoot first — and take the battle to their attackers — to protect themselves.
The pledge was given by Whitehall yesterday to protect 1,800 British troops about to join the UN peace-keeping team.
The troops — armed with mortars — will escort convoys of emergency food and medicines through the battered war zones.But the Government fears that the men — mainly from the Cheshire Regiment — could get snared in heavy fighting and suffer casualties.
If that happens, the troops will be allowed to use their 45 heavily armoured 30-ton Warrior carriers to see off the attackers.
The Government has also agreed that the men could be used to escort detainees released from prison camps.
The mission could be even more dangerous than protecting convoys.
Britain's involvement could cost up to £90 million over the next year.
PANICKING MAJOR AXES TRIP AS POUND CRASHES
New shock puts shares in a dive
DAVID BRADSHAW /JOHN HUSBAND
DESPERATE John Major pressed the panic button yesterday as Britain's economy plunged into deeper crisis.
The Premier cancelled a trip to Spain at the last minute as the sick pound hit its lowest level since joining the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
His decision to stay at home for emergency meetings sent shock waves through the money markets and shares plunged.
The sinking of the pound brought new fears of an interest rate rise or a humiliating devaluation.
Downing Street insisted it was simply due to‘pressure of work’ but admitted he was to hold crisis talks on the economy and spending cuts.
Labour said Mr Major's decision was ‘a public admission of how serious the situation has become’.
Whitehall sources said he realised cancelling might damage the pound.
But he feared a jaunt to Expo 92 in Seville would send the wrong message to the markets — and did not want the humiliation of returning early to deal with a sterling crisis.
The pound — at 2.78 marks — is the weakest currency in the ERM after the weekend devaluation of the Italian lira.
Sterling lost all gains made over the past few days after the Germans cut a quarter per cent off their interest rate.
Merchant bank SG Warburg said: ‘We are no better off than we were on Friday.’
Mr Major could come to more grief this weekend.
The City fears a Bank Rate rise to prop up the pound if the French vote no to the Maastricht treaty on Sunday.
Labour's Tony Blair said Britain needed a change of policy rather than a Premier hiding in his bunker.
‘There's little point him staying in Britain unless he begins to act on jobs, industry and the housing market.’
A Cabinet committee meets tomorrow to agree to slash public spending by billions.
The squeeze, because of Government economic blunders, could mean cut-backs in the NHS and social security benefits.
MPs are dismayed that Mr Major undermined confidence in sterling even further by cancelling his trip.
It reminded them of when Labour Chancellor Denis Healey turned back at the airport in 1976 over a sterling crisis.
Lord Healey said last night that Mr Major must blame himself because ‘he went into the ERM at far too high a rate’.
BUNKER JIBE: Blair
BANKS RUSH TO CASH IN
NEIL SIMPSON
THE High Street banks were blasted for profiteering as they rushed to cash in on the interest rate jump.
They instantly raised charges for borrowers — but are delaying any rise in the interest they pay savers.
While extra millions will immediately start flooding into the Big Four's coffers, spokesmen would only say that savings rates ‘will be reviewed over the next few days.’
And some hinted they may not increase AT ALL.
‘It's blatant profiteering,’ the Federation of Small Businesses protested.
And Labour consumer affairs spokesman Nigel Griffiths attacked it as ‘yet another example of banking arrogance.’
But the Bankers Association denied the banks are profiteering.
‘They had to increase lending rates once the Bank of England acted,’ said a spokeswoman.
‘Savings rates always lag behind — and if the 2 per cent rise is temporary they may not have time to move at all.’
It's good news for savers if the rise DOES stick, however.
A senior banker said: ‘At 12 per cent you'd have to go back to 1985 to get similar value.’
ACCUSED: NatWest
ACCUSED: Midland
Thousands will lose house
WILLIAM KEENAN /GILL SWAIN
THOUSANDS more families will lose their homes if building societies raise their interest rates.
About 75,000 homes were repossessed last year — putting around 6,000 men, women and children out on the streets every week.
Housing experts fear lenders may no longer be able to be flexible — and have to repossess as the slump in the housing market worsens.
Richard Spink, of the Citizens Advice Bureaux, said: ‘Thousands are hanging on by the skin of their teeth.
‘This could be the straw that breaks the camel's back.’
For Bill Leavis, 37 — whose home is being repossessed — the rise may have killed what hope he had.
His haulage business went bust and he owes £120,000 on a semi in New Denham, Bucks, now worth only £80,000.
His only chance of avoiding a council bed and breakfast hostel is a mortgage rescue scheme.
Bill and wife Sally, 35, are waiting to hear if a housing association will buy the house and rent it back to them.
‘SUICIDE’ FOR SHOPKEEPERS
JAN WALSH
THOUSANDS of stores may have to raise prices or close, it was feared last night.
More than 70,000 shopkeepers have been forced to put up the shutters in the past year.
And the new interest rate rise could wipe out retail businesses who have cut profit margins to the bone to survive.
DIY, furniture and jewellery stores who have to borrow to buy in huge amounts of expensive stock will be hardest hit, the British Retail Consortium warned.
And pub landlords who operate on overdrafts may be forced to put up to 2p on a pint to stay in business.
A BRC spokeswoman said: ‘Retailers have already cut their costs as much as they can.
If they have to pay higher interest charges the money will have to come from somewhere.
‘They will either have to squeeze jobs or charge higher prices.’
A sofa costing £499 could rise to as much as £525 to cover the extra interest charges.
But most big stores admit they daren't put prices up for fear of losing the few customers they have.
DIY giant Great Mills described the 12 per cent rate as ‘suicidal’.
‘It bodes dark days ahead for retailers,’ said sales director Peter Bastin.
‘All DIY stores have been discounting heavily to stimulate demand.
We can't let prices rise.
We need those sales.’
Supermarket food prices may not be affected.
‘We don't anticipate any increase,’ Sainsbury's said.
TURNING THE SCREW: DIY stores will be hard hit
Fury of Libs
LIBERAL Democrats meeting in Harrogate jeered when they heard the news.
Treasury spokesman Alan Beith told the Tories: ‘Go, but clear up the mess first.’
‘All my graft is worth nowt’
BILL DANIELS
DESPAIRING factory owner Michael Whitehead looked back on 18 years of ‘bloody hard work’ last night and said: ‘I've got nothing for all my graft.’
Mick invested £200,000 four years ago to re-equip his small engineering business against the the threat of foreign rivals.
He has struggled since to meet the £3,500 monthly loan repayments and works 15 hours a day with his team of four in Aston, Birmingham.
Now the interest rate rise threatens to lose him everything.
Even his home is pledged as security against the loans.
Mick, 44, said: ‘It has been a desperate battle and now it will get worse.
The Government is turning this country into an industrial desert.’
Mick has slashed his own earnings from the Autocap components business to just £9,000 a year.
‘I'm taking less than the men I employ,’ he said.
‘But I can't cut their wages — they have families and mortgages.
‘I haven't been able to sleep because of all the worry.
‘I just wonder whether it has all been a waste of time.’
Mick's gloom was echoed by Neville Simms, chief executive of Britain's biggest construction firm, Tarmac.
He said of the rate rise: ‘It is tactically wrong and very damaging to our already hard-hit industry.’
Ted Evans, president of the Federation of Master Builders, said: ‘Our industry has already been decimated.
I doubt now that it will ever recover.’
GRIM: Small businessman Mick, fighting for his business survival yesterday
Picture: DICK WILLIAMS
Free my father
SCHOOLGIRL Rhian Ride has written to Saddam Hussein begging him to free her dad Paul — jailed for seven years for straying into Iraq.
Rhian, 11, wrote: ‘I love him very much.
Let him come home to people who care for him.’
She said at home in Garnant, Dyfed: ‘I hope Saddam gets my letter.’
JAILED: Paul
Sellafield lies on nuke  leak 
BARRY WIGMORE /PATRICK MULCHRONE
SELLAFIELD bosses are exposed today as liars after denying a cover-up over a leak at the nuclear plant.
They lied at least four times last week as they tried to gloss over the seriousness of a plutonium spillage at the heart of their reprocessing operation.
And they were still lying yesterday when they denied the charge.
They LIED last Tuesday in their weekly works' newsletter when they said: ‘Reprocessing has been temporarily halted because of maintenance work.’
No mention of a leak.
They LIED last Wednesday when they spoke of a ‘mechanical fault’.
No mention of a leak.
They LIED to the Daily Mirror the same day when we rang to check.
A spokesman said the level of liquor in an evaporator was ‘higher than it should have been’.
Again, no hint of a leak.
They LIED after a report about the leak fell into the hands of Greenpeace.
Sellafield said: ‘We don't know if there has been a spillage.’
And they were STILL LYING yesterday when they denied telling the Mirror that repairs would take two or three days.
Latest estimates are at least five weeks.
TRUTH: Yesterday's Mirror
Mellor's aide in Antonia ‘TV gag’
A PUBLIC relations adviser to David Mellor tried to stop the Minister's ex-lover Antonia de Sancha from talking live on TV yesterday.
Sir Tim Bell is thought to have suggested to ITV's watchdog body that her This Morning interview should be pre-recorded.
That would have enabled any controversial remark to be edited.
But Antonia's chat with presenter Richard Madeley WAS pre-recorded.
But it was thought to have gone out unaltered.
And the Independent Television Commission said the pre-recording was a decision Granada ‘took themselves’.
But they were asked to consider it.
Sir Tim refused to comment.
Asked about Mr Mellor's denials on making love in a Chelsea shirt, spanking and toe-sucking, Antonia told viewers:
‘I would imagine he probably would deny it.’
Interview: Antonia 
INTERVIEW: Antonia
Bandit fin-gered
A FROGMAN waddled into a Swiss bank, snatched £20,000, dived into a river to escape — and was netted by cops following his bubbles.
FIREBOMB ATTACK
BOMB squad detectives were early this morning investigating reports of two small firebombs at London's Imperial War Museum.
And about the same time a mystery blaze broke out at Madame Tussaud's, another of the capitals major tourist attractions.
Some of the waxworks in  Tussaud's Chamber of Horrors were thought to have been badly damaged
LINEKER IN CRASH
NIC NORTH
A DISPATCH rider was thrown from his motorcycle in a collision with soccer star Gary Lineker's 155mph car.
Jamie Leach, 23, escaped with a bruised hand.
Gary, driving his £37,000 black Toyota Lexus, was unhurt in the accident in Kensington High Street, West London.
Jamie was off work for three days while his bike was patched up.
A friend said both Jamie and Gary gave statements to police.
Gary was not available for comment.
UNHURT: Gary
FIVE KIDS KILLED ‘BY CAR RACE PALS’
SYDNEY YOUNG
FIVE youngsters were killed as two drivers raced each other through a housing estate, a court heard yesterday.
The victims were sitting on a bench when one car hit the other, bounced off and ploughed into them at 80mph, it was alleged.
A taxi driver told Gloucester Crown Court that he saw two drivers laughing at each other as they roared past him nose-to-tail just before the crash.
The Friday the 13th horror was relived when builder Shaun Gooch, 24, and labourer Anthony Gallagher, 22, denied causing the deaths by reckless driving.
Gallagher wept as the jury heard how he and Gooch raced their powerful Escorts through Swindon.
The prosecutor said that Gooch lost control as he overtook his pal's car at 80mph in a 40mph limit.
The Fords touched and Gooch's took off, hitting the children with a ‘heart-rending and devastating’ loss of life.
Ian Lilley, seven, Sherie Lear, eight, Paula Barnes, 16, and John Carr, 17, all died.
So, too, did Belinda Brown — on her 19th birthday.
Taxi driver Peter Simpson said that two cars raced past him at high speed.
One was only 10-12ft behind the other and both men were laughing.
The trial continues.
‘RACE’: Gooch
VICTIM: Sherie
VICTIM: Ian
Boy-rescue gorilla dies
GENTLE gorilla Jambo who saved a young boy who fell into his pit died yesterday.
Jambo, seven foot tall and 18 stone, protected Levan Merritt, then five, as 16 other giant apes advanced menacingly.
A holidaymaker filmed the astonishing scene at the Jersey zoo — and millions saw it on TV.
Levan, now nine, said yesterday: ‘It's very sad.’
Jambo, 32, is thought to have had a heart attack.
Cathy go home
PARTY'S OVER…
BUT DARLING BUD STAR DOESN'T NOTICE
RICK SKY
THE party's over, it's time to call it a day — but Catherine Zeta Jones was having such a perfick time she just didn't notice.
And in the end the organisers had to tell TV's Darling Buds Of May star to go home or there would be no one left to party with.
Catherine, stunning in an off-the-shoulder black dress, was at a launch bash for the album Spartacus, which features her new single For All Time.
She and her mum, dad, auntie and boyfriend, Blue Peter presenter John Leslie, mingled with guests including actor Anthony Hopkins, who narrates the album.
An organiser said: ‘She was having such a great time she didn't want to go.
I told her she should really leave or she'd be the last.
‘That would have looked bad — you should never be one of the stragglers at a party.’
ON THE RECORD: Cathy and Anthony Hopkins
BOYFRIEND: John Leslie and Cathy
LET'S PARTY: Cathy took her mum and dad along.
Pictures: ALAN GRISBROOK
Has-beans
THOUSANDS of tins of baked beans rolled off a lorry and split open yesterday on a busy road in Blyford, Suffolk.
Mother's curse on strangler
A SOBBING mother cursed her daughter's killer yesterday as she collapsed at the graveside of pop fan Helen Gorrie.
Shiela Gorrie, 40, screamed: ‘Bastard — I only hope the killer is suffering.’
Friends and relatives wept uncontrollably for Helen, 15, who was found strangled on a path at Horndean, near Portsmouth, six weeks ago.
Song
The church in nearby Catherington, Hants, was filled with the song The Time of my Life, taken from Helen's favourite film Dirty Dancing.
A large photograph of Helen looked down on the mourners.
Four men have been quizzed about the murder but no one has been charged.
MURDERED: Helen
Joke's on Maxwell
EDITOR Richard Stott raised a laugh when asked if Mirror Group Publisher Robert Maxwell had written the editorial comment over which Mrs Bauwens was suing.
Mr Stott replied ‘No’.
Counsel Richard Hartley asked: ‘Does he write editorials?’
Mr Stott: ‘Not now.
Unless you have a direct line to him, Mr Hartley.’
DRIVER DEAD 3 DAYS
GORDON HUGHES
LORRY driver Timothy Howard lay dead under his cab on a busy main road for THREE days.
And yesterday his heartbroken wife Jane slammed police for failing to find him after she raised the alarm 48 hours earlier.
Timothy, 31, was trapped beneath his 45ft juggernaut which was parked with its hazard lights flashing in a lay-by on the A63 near Hull.
It is thought he lifted the cab after a mechanical fault and it crashed on top of him.
Dozens of drivers had stopped in the lay-by and thousands driven past.
Mum-of-two Jane, 29, of Cleethorpes, said: ‘I'm baffled how anyone could have ignored his lorry for three days.’
Police were even given the registration number.
‘I don't think they treated it as being urgent,’ said Jane.
‘Tim always phoned if he was going to be late.
Nobody seemed to want to know.’
Humberside police said they ‘deeply regretted’ his death.
They admitted they were told on Saturday that Timothy had not returned from a 250-mile trip from Tilbury in Essex — but they only found the lorry on Monday morning.
TRAPPED: Timothy
Right to die' battle
TRAGIC Hillsborough coma victim Tony Bland may win a last right for brain-dead patients in Britain — the right to die.
Health chiefs are planning a test court case for the right to disconnect his feeding tubes.
A victory would allow dignified death for scores of other ‘human vegetables’, they said yesterday.
Liverpool fan Tony, aged 21, has been in a coma in a hospital at Keighley, Yorks, since the soccer ground disaster three years ago.
KIDDIE PORN SHAME OF CHILD CARE BOSS
He had photos of naked young boys
BILL DANIELS
ONE of Britain's top child care experts was caught with seedy porn photos of naked young boys, a court heard yesterday.
Peter Righton, 66, was trapped after customs men carried out random checks on mail from Holland.
Two packages addressed to him contained a book and a magazine full of indecent photos.
Later more obscene material was seized in a police raid on his home.
It included three paedophile books called Ben and a magazine named The Stud Boys.
When he was quizzed Righton — a leading consultant on children's homes -said he had them for his ‘personal gratification.’
He agreed some of the material was ‘dubious’ but did not think children should be protected by law against being photographed in the nude.
Righton was fined £900 by Evesham court, Worcs, after he admitted importing and possessing indecent material.
His lawyer said his real punishment had already happened.
He had been removed from an important child care project and his lecturing work with the Open University had ended.
Righton has also quit as governor of a school for children with learning difficulties.
He shares a home near Evesham with the headmaster of the school, Richard Alston.
The head has been suspended and police are probing the school.
MAIL: Righton yesterday
I'M USHER KISSED BY JUDGE ZORRO
CLIVE CRICKMER
PRETTY mum Suzanne Scott stepped outside a court yesterday to reveal she was the usher kissed by the judge nicknamed Zorro.
Suzanne, 25, told what happened when Judge William Crawford became ‘over familiar’ in his chambers.
Nervously reading from a statement, she said: ‘He kissed me on both cheeks and placed his hand on my waist.
‘I left the room and reported the matter to my manager.’
Suzanne made the public appearance after it was revealed she had complained to the Lord Chancellor about the incident at Newcastle Crown Court.
Judge Crawford, 55, has been carpeted by a senior judge.
Before being whisked inside the court, the mum-of-two added:
‘I have received a full written apology from the judge which I accept.’
The judge earned his nickname because he looks like Tyrone Power, who stared in the movie The Mark of Zorro.
He is expected to resume duties next week.
It was revealed last night that the Lord Chancellor wants a report after complaints about the judge from other women staff.
HOLDING COURT: Suzanne revealing that she was kissed by a judge
RAP: Judge Crawford
DOG SAVAGES BOY, 5
A BOY of five was nearly blinded when he was savaged by his pet bull mastiff.
The dog sank its powerful jaws into the boy's face when it suddenly turned on him as he played at his home in Alton, Hants.
Yesterday the youngster, who has not been named, was recovering in hospital from an emergency operation to save his sight.
Pervert scout jailed
A SCOUTMASTER was jailed for 39 months at the Old Bailey yesterday for sexually abusing his seven-year-old daughter and son aged 11.
The father, a South London cab driver, attacked the children when he was granted weekend access to see them after his eight-year marriage broke up.
The judge ordered rape and incest charges to lie on the court file after the father admitted four indecent assault charges.
CLUNK…
CLINK
Double yellow lines trap jailbird after 14 years on the run
A PRISONER on the run for 14 years was back behind bars yesterday — because he parked on double yellow lines.
Alan Model, 35, made the illegal stop in a town centre as he popped into a shop.
Policeman Steve Bedford spotted the car as he patrolled Ringwood, Hampshire, and slapped a ticket on the windscreen.
When Model returned with his wife and children, Constable Bedford asked them if they wished to pay the fixed penalty immediately.
Model told the officer they were on a caravanning holiday in the nearby New Forest.
But Constable Bedford noticed that his Ford Cortina did not have a tow bar.
He decided to carry out a computer check on Model.
And this revealed he had fled from Ford Open Prison in Sussex in 1978 — while serving three years for conspiracy to steal and forgery.
He was arrested and yesterday he was being held in custody in London while detectives questioned him.
Police Sergeant John Chalk said in Ringwood yesterday: ‘Model was very unlucky — and he must be kicking himself.
‘After all, he managed to keep his head down for 14 years.’
The officer added: ‘We're very pleased he has been caught.
‘But it does leave us with a problem.
Who is going to pay the parking fine?’
WHAT'S ALL THIS EAR, TED?
SHE'D love a quiet night at home in front of the telly.
Or a cosy cuddle without all that ear-bashing.
But there's little chance of that for Joanne Malkin when the swinging detective hits town.
It's all rhythm and booze when Ted Roach plays the blues.
Blonde Joanne had to grin and bear it when actor boyfriend Tony Scannell, who stars as Ted in The Bill, whooped it up on one of his fun nights at Stringfellows in London.
Tony, 47, who once admitted to drinking up to twelve pints a night, just can't resist a good time.
He's been pictured prancing the night away with 26-year-old Joanne on numerous occasions.
It makes you wonder if he ever has time for anything else.
Like a night in FRONT of the box.
Picture: FRANK DORAN 
OHIO?
DOCTOR WHO GIRL EXTERMINATED MY MEMORIES
Ex-Mirror man loses job fight
RONALD RICKETTS
FORMER Mirror Foreign Editor Nick Davies said yesterday that grief at the loss of his Dr Who wife wiped out his memory of a visit to Ohio.
But his explanation for the lie that cost him his job failed to convince an industrial tribunal which rejected his claim for unfair dismissal.
Davies was sacked for falsely telling editor Richard Stott that he never went to Ohio in 1985.
Yesterday, he said he ‘forgot’ about the trip which he made shortly after the break-up of his second marriage to Dr Who actress Janet Fielding.
He said:
It was a traumatic time for me.
My wife left me without a word at the end of March, leaving only a Dear John letter on the table.
One of the reasons I forgot about Ohio was that I wanted to forget that unhappy period of my life.
But I did not lie.
I made a mistake.
I was wrong, but it was not intentional.
Earlier Davies, 55, claimed he was fired because executives feared evidence might be produced that he was an arms dealer even though no-one believed such a thing.
Drowned
He claimed he was not given a fair hearing.
And he said Mirror publisher Robert Maxwell would have got him his £55,000-a-year job back if the tycoon had not drowned before returning to London.
Ian Mayes, for the Mirror, told the London tribunal that Davies's forgetfulness was ‘frankly incredible.’
He said: ‘He has fudged and shaded, and tried to get away from the fact that he made specific statements and those statements were wrong.
‘It is incredible that he made the mis-statement about Ohio other than wittingly and dishonestly.’
The tribunal said Davies's lie was sufficient reason for losing his job.
It will give its reasons in writing later.
ACTRESS: Janet, who appeared in TV's Dr Who
LIAR: Davies with actress Janet Fielding who walked out on him
Admiral's dust-up on the river
AN ADMIRAL is being sued by a yacht club bigwig after a dust-up on a river.
Sailor Trevor Bardwell-Jones says the wash from Vice Admiral Sir Alan Grose's launch swamped his boat and swept it against a quay in the River Tamar at Plymouth.
Mr Bardwell-Jones, commodore of Saltash Yacht Club, claims Sir Alan was speeding and wants £1,300 damages.
But Sir Alan, Flag Officer at Plymouth's naval base, denies going too fast and says that the commodore's yacht was not moored properly.
AIR THEY GO OVER ATLANTIC
TWO Britons set off yesterday on the first trans-atlantic hot-air balloon race.
Don Cameron, 53, from Bristol, and BBC producer Rob Bayly are competing against four other teams — all flying identical 90-foot helium balloons.
The balloons, which set off from Maine on the US East Coast, were moving last night towards Newfoundland.
The first to cross any paved road in Europe will win — and receive a trophy from the race sponsors, American car firm Chrysler.
ROCKING HORSE WENDY FREED OVER SEX LESSONS
Schoolboys queued for a romp with her
A RANDY divorcee nicknamed Rocking Horse Wendy by her schoolboy lovers escaped a jail sentence yesterday — because she didn't charge them for sex.
Blonde Wendy Daine, 36, also dodged community service after her lawyer said she would meet young men who would take ‘salacious enjoyment from her presence’.
Instead, she was put on probation for a year after admitting indecently assaulting four 15-year-old boys.
The youngsters queued for sex at Wendy's house for what one lawyer described as ‘every schoolboy's dream’.
They would draw up a ‘batting order’ downstairs then go up to her bedroom one at a time for sex.
The romps started when a 16-year-old went to Wendy's house at Winthorpe, near Skegness, Lincs, to borrow tools to repair his motorbike.
Willing
Word got around and large numbers of lads started turning up.
They were given a ‘generous welcome’, magistrates were told.
Later Wendy admitted that ‘four or five boys in a row was all I could manage’.
Yesterday her lawyer told the court: ‘These boys were more than willing to have intercourse.
‘No seduction took place.
‘All four boys appeared to be sexually experienced.
‘No money exchanged hands and no perverted acts took place.’
Suicidal
He said Wendy, who first appeared in court last month, ‘finds herself with her reputation in tatters.
She is suicidal.’
Magistrate John Pemberton told Wendy, who now has a steady boyfriend, aged 24: ‘If prostitution had been involved you would have been going to prison.’
He said she was ‘a lady with problems with her sexuality…
You are in need of help and advice.’
Wendy refused to comment after the case.
SHAMED: Wendy Daine outside her home yesterday
Bones test
BRITISH scientists have begun six month tests to see if bones from a Russian pit are those of executed Tsar Nicholas II and his family.
Poison demo swoop on ICI
GORDON HUGHES
DEFIANT Greenpeace demonstrators staged nationwide protests yesterday over the dumping of toxic waste into rivers by major British firms.
They swooped on two ICI plants to block pipes pouring out thousands of gallons of poison.
And in London, they dumped barrels of industrial effluent at the Environment Department.
The protests followed a Greenpeace report on the way ‘50 Filthy Firms’ including ICI, BP and Shell legally dump huge amounts of waste.
Blocked
At ICI in Billingham, Cleveland, protesters blocked a pipe leading into the River Tees.
And at Thornton, near Blackpool, a pipe into the River Wyre was sealed.
Four men were arrested.
Greenpeace called ICI the UK's ‘biggest Government-licensed water polluter’.
The pipes were later unblocked.
In London, two skips and six barrels full of toxic waste blocked the front entrance to the environment building.
The waste came from the River Mersey whose fish are unfit to eat.
Dashing soldiers
SIX soldiers finished a gruelling 1,000mile dash from Berlin to Britain — in four days.
The triathlon team from the Royal Welch Fusiliers cycled 600 miles to Calais, swam the Channel and then ran 375 miles from Dover to Cardiff.
They raised £2,500 for disabled athletes.
Husband held
JONATHAN Probyn, whose estranged wife Tanya was found drowned in her car in the River Severn, was arrested yesterday.
UK sinks animal test ban
GILL SWAIN
BRITAIN looks set to scupper a European ban on cosmetic firms testing their products on animals.
A Mirror-backed campaign to stop the horrific experiments suffered by animals in the cause of vanity appeared to have won.
Euro MPs voted by 244 to 2 in June to outlaw the tests by 1998.
But Britain, currently holding the EC presidency, plans to oppose a ban in Brussels next week — and the other 11 governments are expected to agree.
Sailor on rape rap
BRITISH sailor Darren Moffatt, 25, who is accused of rape in New Zealand, faced an extradition hearing in London yesterday.
It was adjourned.
SOLD down the river
BLACK WEDNESDAY and your future is in their hands
GEOFF SUTTON
THIS was Black Wednesday madness yesterday as City ‘bookies’ gambling on Britain's future went on an orgy of selling in an atmosphere of raw  aggression .
Their faces contorted with tension and their voices hoarse from screaming deals, traders at the London financial futures market hit the floor running and didn't stop throughout the most hectic day they've ever known.
The sweltering ‘pit’ deals in shares, bonds and other securities all over the world and the aim is to predict how the financial market will stand in the future.
Yesterday, with two interest rates announced in three hours and a devaluation on the way, there was only one message for sterling — sell, sell, sell.
As deafening pandemonium broke out, a record 850,000 deals were struck involving securities worth £243BILLION.
Dressed in the  multicoloured jacket of his company ‘team,’ exhausted Daryn Swords said: ‘I thought it was a hell of a day when the first rate rise came.
‘But when the second hit us, the place went mental.
It's been selling all day.
I've never seen anything like it.’
Nursing a pint of lager after a 12-hour shift, £80,000-a-year ‘Gazza’ French said: ‘Thank Christ that's over.
Freak ‘I knew it was going to be a long day.
But I never thought Lamont would freak like that.
‘The irony is that it's all been dead for us lately.
No-one's wanted to have a punt and we've been scrambling about for the odd winner.
‘Now, when it all turns to dust, we can make a bit of dosh.’
ANGUISH: It's all too much for one dealer yesterday as the futures market is hit with its busiest day involving deals worth £243billion
MONEY MANIA: A trader yells himself hoarse in the deafening pit where fortunes changed hands
SIGN OF THE TIMES: A ‘tic-tac’ dealer surrounded by rival ‘punters’
GO FOR IT!
It's war out there as pandemonium mounts
STERLING WORK: The deafening ‘pit’ went crazy as dealers gambled on Britain's financial future PICTURES: Arnold Slater
Girl, 12 saves Pc in fight
TINY Teresa Hind shamed grown men when she helped a policeman struggling with a violent prisoner.
While bystanders did nothing, Teresa, 12, waded in and slapped a pair of handcuffs on the prisoner as he tried to escape.
Then she turned on the crowd and accused them of being cowards.
Teresa, from Flanderwell, Rotherham, said: ‘I really couldn't believe it.
They stood by while the policeman asked for help as he was being punched.’
MITTERRAND HAS CANCER
MARK DOWDNEY
FRENCH President Francois Mitterrand has cancer, his doctors revealed yesterday.
They removed malignant tissue from his prostate during an operation last Friday.
But the doctors said that the tumour was not dangerous.
Mitterrand, 75, who left a Paris hospital yesterday, will resume his duties soon.
He is expected to be able to vote in the crucial Maastricht Treaty referendum on Sunday.
Medical experts said prostate cancer is not uncommon in men over 60.
Mitterrand's personal doctor said his condition could be treated easily — probably with pills — and did not require chemotherapy.
But the cancer throws doubt on Mitterrand's political future, especially if France votes ‘No’ in the referendum.
If that happens there will be enormous pressure on him to step down.
Mitterrand is highly unpopular as the French economy weakens and unemployment soars.
OPERATION: Mitterrand
HELLO, HELLO, HELLO
Meanwhile…the case of the disappearing £BILLIONS
What the ****'s going on ‘ere then?
‘ERE, a word in your ear, Prime Minister.
The bobby on duty outside 10 Downing Street would like an explanation.
There's the case of the £10 billion wasted trying to prop up the pound.
The riddle of the up-and-down interest rates — back down to 10 per cent yesterday.
And the mystery of how your Chancellor, Norman Lamont, is still in his job.
He refuses to quit.
He won't apologise.
We're in the middle of the worst economic crisis for decades.
Would you mind telling us, Mr Major, how we got into this mess and how we're going to get out of it?
Of course, anything you say will be taken down and may be used in evidence against you…
THIN BLUE LINE: Mr Major, with a policeman at his shoulder, leaves Downing Street after yesterday's Cabinet meeting on the economic crisis
Boost for hols firms
SOME of the gloom over the holiday trade lifted yesterday with the devaluation of the Italian lira and Spanish peseta.
A Thomas Cook spokesman said: ‘Holidays in Spain and Italy will be even better value now.’
MIRROR COMMENT
Humpty's great fall
AS the smoke is clearing and the wreckage can be examined, what do the convulsions of the last two days mean?
Why did they happen?
And what should flow from them?
John Major took Britain into the ERM with an over-valued pound.
He wasted billions of foreign currency reserves propping it up.
He said the pound would never be devalued while he was Prime Minister.
On Wednesday he devalued it but yesterday he pretended he hadn't.
The floating pound removes Britain from the ERM straitjacket and allows us to expand.
But Mr Major said he wants to get back in.
Interest rates should be slashed by three or four per cent to get Britain moving.
Mr Major said the time wasn't ripe.
There should be increased spending on public building, services and industry to get people working again.
Mr Major insisted on further severe cuts.
Chancellor Norman Lamont has been stripped of all credibility here and abroad.
Mr Major forced his pathetic Cabinet to swear a loyalty oath to him.
John Major's economic strategy is in more than tatters.
It has been destroyed.
What is at stake is not his authority, integrity and reputation.
That, like Humpty Dumpty, can never be put back together again.
What matters is the welfare of our people and the future of Britain.
That is what Mr Major should address, however many more times he has to stand on his head.
MAXWELL SIGNS ON THE DOLE
BRITAIN'S biggest bankrupt Kevin Maxwell drove to the dole office in his silver Mercedes yesterday to sign on.
Maxwell, 33, who has debts of £406.5 million, arrived promptly for a 20-minute interview with a job counsellor at Didcot, Oxon.
He signed a form applying for benefits and will get his first dole cheque in the post within three days.
NIGHTMARE ON MAJOR ST.
Election promises exposed as sham
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL /JOHN HUSBAND
BRITAIN was in utter chaos last night as John Major pulled the plunging pound out of Europe's Exchange Rate Mechanism.
The dramatic move — effectively devaluing our currency — exposed the Prime Minister's general election pledges of economic recovery as worthless.
It followed two huge interest rate rises of first two per cent, then another three.
The second rise was later withdrawn.
But millions of battered Britons still face the grim prospect of dearer home loans, more house repossessions, longer dole queues and firm after firm going to the wall.
Mr Major and his Chancellor Norman Lamont were fighting for their political lives last night in the greatest crisis they have faced.
And far from enduring the ‘Nightmare on Kinnock Street’ invented by the Premier during the election campaign, the country is now in the frightening grip of a Nightmare on Major Street.
Free
The announcement of the pull-out from the ERM was made by Mr Lamont by a drain in the Treasury forecourt.
It meant the pound was set free to float to find its own value in world markets.
Last night it was down by eight per cent in early dealings.
The move also meant that the £10 BILLION spent by the Bank of England yesterday in a bid to prop up the sliding currency was wasted.
And it heaped humiliation on Mr Major.
He fought to put the pound into the ERM two years ago, defeating ex-Premier Mrs Thatcher over the issue.
She believed it was better to leave the currency to find its own level.
Mr Major argued that as good Europeans we should tie it to the strong German mark to lick inflation and sustain recovery.
And he staked his reputation on defending its value within the ERM.
Labour leader John Smith demanded a proper programme of ACTION to boost the economy — and laid the blame for the crisis firmly at the Prime Minister's door.
Quit
He said: ‘This policy is closely identified with Mr Major who, as Treasury Chief Secretary, Chancellor and Premier has clearly nailed his colours to this mast.
‘This is the result of his policy, his economic mismanagement.’
As chairman of Europe's finance ministers, Mr Lamont also called an emergency meeting of the EC monetary committee in Brussels.
He wants to find ways of stabilising Europe's currency markets.
The Government is pressing for the entire ERM system to be suspended until after France's referendum on the Maastricht Treaty on Sunday.
But this is unlikely to be accepted by Britain's Euro partners.
Mr Lamont said he hoped the withdrawal from the ERM would be temporary.
But he is expected to quit today if the crisis continues.
Following the Chancellor's announcement, Downing Street bowed to Labour pressure for a recall of Parliament.
MPs will return to Westminster next Thursday.
High Street banks raised their lending rates by two per cent following the Government's initial interest rate hoist.
Thousands more Britons will now be forced to join the 35,000 who have lost their homes since the election and the 58,000 who have lost their jobs.
The Euro pull-out completed the most dramatic day in politics since Mrs Thatcher was toppled.
It came amid a crisis sparked by fears that the ERM could be destroyed if the French vote No in their referendum.
This provoked a flight out of weaker currencies such as the Italian lira and the pound into the strong German mark.
The wave of selling forced Italy to devalue by six per cent last weekend.
Attention on world money markets then switched to the next weakest currency — the pound.
The panic grew amid worries that it, too, would have to be devalued.
The Bank of England squandered a huge chunk of Britain's precious foreign currency reserves in a vain bid to prop it up.
When it was clear something else was needed, Major and Lamont tried interest rate rises.
The first, taking borrowing rates from 10 per cent to 12 per cent, came at 11am.
It was the biggest hoist in five years.
The second was announced at 2.17pm, temporarily taking the total rise for the day to five per cent.
That just knocked confidence further.
And by last night, with the pound still falling below its permitted floor within the ERM, Mr Lamont was faced with two options — devalue or get out of Euro system.
Tory chiefs desperately tried to distance Mr Major from the disaster.
And last night there were signs that Mr Lamont would be the fall-guy.
Yet BOTH men have staked their credibility on avoiding devaluation.
The Government tried to put a brave face on the mess.
A Downing Street spokesman said: ‘We don't use words like crisis.’
Unconvinced, bookies William Hill slashed odds on Mr Major being forced out of No 10 down to 2-1.
Mr Lamont tried to blame the crisis on uncertainty over the outcome of the French referendum and the ‘extraordinary flow of speculative funds in the German mark.’
Pressure
But Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown, who has been pressing for CUTS in interest rates, said the rise was ‘disastrous.’
Ex-minister Lord Tebbit blamed membership of the ERM for the chaos.
And Mrs Thatcher's former economic adviser Professor Sir Alan Walters said: ‘I said it would end in tears.
DEMAND: John Smith
ANGRY: Lord Tebbit
Money club ‘in tatters’
EUROPE'S currency club, the Exchange Rate Mechanism, is now ‘in tatters’, according to currency experts.
How do Europe's different currencies rate?
Germany's mark is Europe's strongest currency by far because of a good reputation for steady growth and low inflation.
But the cost of unification is threatening to fuel inflation.
The Dutch guilder and Belgian franc are the next strongest currencies, both closely linked to the mark.But Belgium has one of Europe's largest government debts.
Then comes the French franc.
France has achieved low inflation and steady growth but paid a high price in heavy unemployment.
Denmark's crown is also quite strong but came under selling pressure yesterday in the currency chaos for no apparent reason.
The Irish punt was driven down to its permitted ‘floor’ yesterday even though the economy is in good shape.
Heavily dependent on Britain as the main market for its goods, in the past it has devalued with us.
Spain's peseta is suffering from inflation but struggling to beat it.
Devalued by 5 per cent yesterday before currency speculators attacked it.
The Italian lira floated down to below its previous permitted floor yesterday.
It is suffering from what one expert described as ‘45 years of criminal mismanagement’.
Britain's pound was effectively devalued by ten per cent yesterday.
Destroyed by the shaky state of the economy.
Its value abroad was too high for the UK to compete, so its fall was only a question of time.
BOOST FOR EXPORTS
JOHN HUSBAND
EXPORTS should be boosted by the effective devaluation of the pound.
For it will be cheaper for foreigners to buy British goods.
On that basis, production should be increased with the hope of more jobs and increased business for ailing industries — which could help kick-start the economy.
It will also be cheaper for foreigners to visit Britain which could bring a much-needed boost for the tourist industry.
Devaluation would also help narrow our trade gap.
And it would result in the Bank of England no longer having to support the pound.
Premier John Major, who took Britain into the ERM against the advice of ex-premier Mrs Thatcher, has stuck out against devaluation.
The move would not affect the everyday spending power of the British public.
But it would have a strong impact on imports.
It makes them more expensive, importing inflation — which the Government has decreased at all cost — into the country.
And this would deal a savage blow to the Government's fight against spiralling prices.
BATTLE: Maggie
The 12 hours that shook us all
8.30am: CITY opens for business with stock market braced for the worst.
FTSE index of the top 100 shares starts 28.2 points down.
The pound opens at 2.7800 German marks — perilously close to its floor of 2.7780.
9.00am: The Bank of England steps in to buy pounds — but the rescue bid fails as speculators go on dumping them.
9.30: Bundesbank and French central bank join the rescue.
10.45am: Pound at 2.7750 marks.
Bank makes last effort to stave off interest rise.
11.00am: Pound at 2.7790.
The Chancellor decides on a rate rise to 12 per cent.
11.01am: Rise announced.
Stock market instantly plunges.
11.13am: FTSE loses 79 points, wiping billions off shares.
12.30pm: Pound still below its ERM floor.
2.17pm: Another 3 per cent announced.
Sterling still fails to rally.
3.00pm: Pound steadies at exactly 2.7780, its ERM floor level.
4.00pm: Official Bank closing rate shows pound at 2.7784 marks.
5.00pm: It closes on foreign markets at 2.7528 marks — two pfennigs below ERM floor.
5.57pm: Lamont returns to the Treasury to call EC finance meetings and prepare statement.
7.30: Lamont emerges to announce withdrawal from ERM.
8.30: Recall of Parliament announced.
WHAT DOES IT REALLY MEAN
JOHN HUSBAND
BANK RATE or MINIMUM LENDING RATE: The minimum rate the Bank of England will lend at, which sets the floor for all other interest rates.
BASE RATE: The rate banks use as the basis for all their interest rates.
EXCHANGE RATE MECHANISM (ERM): Europe's club of currencies which are linked together at rates agreed by the governments.
DEVALUATION: When a government fixes a new lower rate for its currency.
FLOAT or FLOTATION: Freeing your currency to float up or down to find its own level.
RESERVES: The foreign currencies governments hold to settle bills abroad and to support their currency if need be.
SUPPORT or INTERVENTION: When a government intervenes in market to prop up its currency.
SPECULATORS: People who buy or sell currencies to make money or avoid making a loss.
MAASTRICHT
TREATY: An agreement signed by Europe's governments as the next step towards political and economic unity.
BUNDESBANK: Germany's central bank — their equivalent of our Bank of England.
The Bank of England is directly controlled by the Government, while the Bundesbank claims independence.
SUCH A £10bn WASTE
MARTIN PHILLIPS
HEALTH, education, industry and housing could have a huge shot in the arm with the £10 billion used to support the pound.
A £1.4 billion boost for the NHS would pay for 7,000 lost nursing jobs (£136 million), keep open intensive care beds, improve hospitals and fund things like a desperately needed £10 million on ambulance services.
Crumbling schools could be revamped and new equipment provided with £4 billion.
Soaring unemployment would be pegged with a £3.1 billion recovery programme for firms of all sizes and job training for school leavers.
And the remaining £1.5 billion would help the house building industry.
City ace makes a mint for the Japs
GEOFF SUTTON
THE pound will plunge further and interest rates will drop another two per cent today.
Shares will boom and John Major will cling on by his fingertips.
These are the forecasts of ace City analyst Nick Knight — and he has been right all the way through sterling's crisis.
The head strategist of Nomura International has earned his Japanese firm a fortune with his brilliant dealing.
As politicians took the flak, Nick barely slept a wink in the battle to stay ahead in the ‘high stakes poker game’.
At midnight on Tuesday, he told his share dealers to start buying — confident the pound would be devalued.
Then on Wednesday night he forecast that interest rates would drop — fuelling the City boom.
After yesterday's shares surge, he said: ‘The fun isn't over yet.
Interest rates may go much lower.
‘Now the Tories have changed policy, they have to go with it.’
KNIGHT:Tips
IMPORTS TO COST MORE
MARTIN PHILLIPS
JAN WALSH
HIGH Street retailers warned yesterday that prices of imported goods were bound to rise.
Foreign-made cars, computer equipment, clothes, wine, fitted kitchens, videos, TVs and radios are all set to cost more.
A £500 washing machine could go up £15 and a £600 TV by £18.
Luxury German car-makers such as Mercedes and BMW are not expected to be panicked into price increases.
But if sterling is still in crisis in a month or two rises could come.
Off-licences fear this could be their worst Christmas for years as booze prices are forced up.
‘Almost half our stock comes from France,’ said Tony Mason, trading director for Majestic Wine Warehouses.
But some retailers say they will not raise prices until after Christmas.
Dixons chairman Stanley Kalms said: ‘We have enough goods already in the pipeline to last three to six months.’
TAKING A POUNDING: Prices of imported goods will rise
WE'RE BEHIND YOU, NORM
Cabinet praises ‘Mr Courage’ for plunging economy into chaos
(At least that is what the Prime Minister told us to say)
‘But he could sink us all’
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
THEY came to praise the Chancellor, not to bury him.
One by one, Ministers at yesterday's Cabinet meeting told Norman Lamont they were right behind him.
It was what John Major had told them to say.
But it brought to mind Mrs Thatcher's description of ex-Chancellor Nigel Lawson as ‘unassailable’— shortly before he quit in protest at her opposition to Europe's Exchange Rate Mechanism.
Around them lay the wreckage from the most costly gamble in British history — with a third of the nation's foreign reserves thought to have been lost in Mr Lamont's battle to protect sterling.
And it is not over yet.
Minutes after the Downing Street meeting ended, the image of unity was exploded.
One Government Minister told the Daily Mirror Mr Lamont had become ‘a laughing stock’.
Shelter
The Minister warned: ‘He may be able to carry on in the job but he cannot do so effectively.
‘If they are not careful, the whole Cabinet will go down with him.’
Incredibly, the Prime Minister had told the Cabinet Mr Lamont responded ‘with speed and courage’ to Wednesday's attack on the pound.
Mr Major insisted he would not let the Chancellor be used as ‘an air raid shelter’ taking all the flak.
Earlier, Mr Lamont ordered a reversal of Wednesday's two per cent interest rate rise — bringing rates back to 10 per cent.
That was where they were before the Bank of England wasted £10billion trying to shore up the pound.
Last night, with the pound floating free following withdrawal from the ERM, homeowners and businesses pleaded for further interest rate cuts and a boost in public spending.
But their pleas fell on deaf ears, as Mr Major dug himself deep into his bunker and pretended the sterling crisis had never happened.
The Premier said nothing publicly.
But through his officials, he made a series of astonishing claims.
The pound had NOT been devalued — it was just worth less than before, a line echoed by Mr Lamont in TV interviews.
Mr Major would take sterling back into the ERM ‘as soon as conditions allow’.
The Government remained committed to low inflation and would keep to strict public spending limits.
The Government still intends to put the Maastricht Treaty Bill through the Commons.
Yesterday's Cabinet meeting was held in a large room inside the Cabinet Office because of building work at No 10.
The small talk before the meeting was described by one Minister as ‘muted’, the atmosphere ‘austere, a bit desolate’.
Mr Major opened by explaining Wednesday's decisions.
Battle
Mr Lamont spelled out the tactics behind the battle for the pound.
He spoke of the Bank of England's intervention, the interest rate rises and the reversal that followed.
He also told why the decision was made to take sterling out of the ERM.
Mr Lamont is said to have told the Premier: ‘The game is over.
The market has won the day.’
Mr Major spoke again, praising the Chancellor's handling of the crisis.
Then it was Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd's turn.
Nobody, he said, could have done better than the Chancellor.
Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke echoed the line, then Transport Secretary John MacGregor and so on, right round the table.
Trade supremo Michael Heseltine, whose supporters want to see him in Mr Lamont's job, was even more lavish in his praise.
It was a scene reminiscent of the ‘rubber stamp’ meetings of the old Eastern bloc politburos.
So warm were the tributes that the Chancellor finally started to smile and nod his thanks.
He told colleagues he was ‘very grateful’ for their support.
He had taken ‘common sense action to deal with a whirlwind’.
The official complacency brought to mind the ‘Crisis, what crisis?’ reaction that damaged the Callaghan government in the middle of a sterling crisis not nearly as bad as this one.
Downing Street said the Cabinet were ‘very pleased’ that interest rates had been reduced to 10 per cent.
And they clearly hope to get them down further before the Tory conference next month.
City experts said if Mr Major was clever, he could turn the crisis to his advantage by engineering a mini-boom.
Only last week Mr Major said devaluation would be ‘a betrayal of our future’.
The Premier's robust defence of Mr Lamont — who was always less keen on the ERM than himself — was an admission that their fortunes are tied together.
Commons debate on the economy will be held next Thursday.
It will be followed by a vote in which the Government faces a rebellion from Tory MPs demanding the ditching of the ERM and the Maastricht Treaty on European union.
Dead
Ministers admit privately that it would be ‘impossible’ to get the treaty ratified by Parliament in the current climate.
And they believe a NO vote in Sunday's French referendum on Maastricht will kill the treaty stone dead.
THE NAKED TRUTH: The full Cabinet…with Chancellor Norman Lamont as nature intended, stripped of all pretence of having a decent economic strategy
Petrol up 5p
ESSO is raising pump prices today by 5p a gallon for 4-star petrol and 6p for diesel.
LAMENT FOR A LATE LAMONT
NO, it's not an epitaph for you-know-who's dying career.
The late Norman Lamont MP remembered here is an ancestor of our Chancellor who represented Wells in the 1830s.
The original Norman Lamont is entombed in the Somerset city's cathedral and was a soldier who survived the battle of Waterloo.
Whether his descendant has the same staying power remains to be seen.
Or is he about to end up as just another RIP — resigned in pain?
Dead?
Not me, I'm just asleep
JAN DISLEY
AN ELDERLY woman dozed off on her sofa — and was almost whisked away in a coffin.
Policewoman Anne Moore thought that the woman had died — and called for an undertaker.
But as WPC Anne sat making notes, the 75year-old lady suddenly woke up, rubbed her eyes and demanded: ‘What are you doing here?’
Anne, 33, was first on the scene at Burnaby Dun, Yorks, after worried neighbours reported they had not seen the woman for some time.
Gaffe
She broke in and radioed for a doctor to certify death, asked other police to tell next of kin — and summoned a funeral director.
The old lady has not been named.
Yesterday Anne was taking a day off trying to forget her gaffe.
But colleagues at Armthorpe, Doncaster, will keep reminding her.
One said: ‘There are drawings all over the station taking the mickey.
Anne's a good sport.’
Copping a rise
POLICE pay is going up by 6.5 per cent— well above the inflation rate — under a deal confirmed last night by Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke.
EYE FOR EYE OPENER
A JUDGE ordered a thief's home to be raided — by his victim.
Judge Joe Brown, of Memphis, Tennessee, said: ‘I wanted the burglar to see how he'd like it if his house was burgled.’
Under the bizarre ruling belongings equal to the value of those stolen were taken and handed over to charity.
GRIZZLY SACRIFICE
Holiday hero is savaged to death saving his love
ERIC DOWD
KEVIN O'SULLIVAN
A WOUNDED British woman told yesterday how her lover gave his own life to save her from death in the claws of a crazed grizzly bear.
Cherry Reksten was dragged to the ground by the 23 stone giant as she frantically scrambled up a tree in a bid to escape.
Then artist Trevor Percy-Lancaster stepped in.
‘He started yelling and screaming and waving his arms, trying to distract it,’ Cherry said.
‘The bear turned and eyed Trevor and went after him…‘
It was the last time Cherry, 45, was to see her common-law husband alive.
‘I had got part way up the tree when the bear grabbed one of my shoes and pulled it off,’ she recalled.
‘It hauled me to the ground with a thump and started mauling me on the back and neck.’
After Trevor, 46, was attacked by the grizzly, Cherry — dripping with blood and in agony — had to leave her lover and seek help.
She sprinted 100 yards through Canada's Jasper National Park to a tent where American Jim Murakami was sleeping.
He led her from the scene of horror to a patch of rocky high ground that seemed safe.
Then he ran to his car and drove five miles to alert police and park rangers.
When rescuers found her, Cherry had struggled four miles through the wood to a track to meet them.
Stable
Trevor's mutilated body had massive injuries to the head and torso…and part of one leg had been eaten.
Wardens who made a cautious search of the site were amazed when, minutes after they arrived, the grizzly charged at them, too.
They shot it dead and took the corpse to a government building in Edmonton.
Cherry was airlifted by helicopter to the city's University Hospital.
A spokeswoman there said last night: ‘She has been through a terrible ordeal.
‘She has injuries to the head, back and buttocks.
‘But she is conscious and stable.
‘She will certainly survive.’
Jasper Park warden Gerry Israelson said: ‘Effectively Mr Percy-Lancaster gave his life to save his partner — a very brave thing to do.
‘From the moment he caught the bear's attention there could have been no chance of him escaping.
‘Grizzlies are much faster than men, and when they are frightened there are very few more dangerous creatures.’
He added: ‘When we found the lady she was very collected.
‘She kept remarkably calm.’
The intrepid tourists, on holiday from Winchester, Hants, were about to pitch camp when they surprised the grizzly.
The remote spot they chose was a riverside picnic area in the Alberta park's Tonquin Valley — popular with ski-ers after a heavy snowfall.
It seemed safe — but the happy couple forgot the golden rule for campers in districts where grizzlies live: If you meet one, DON'T MOVE.
Warden Israelson said: ‘Attacks by these bears are extremely rare but they are ferocious animals.
‘Contrary to their story book image as big old friendly things they are very bad tempered.
‘If you encounter one you should never run or climb a tree.’
He added: ‘You should stand still, or lie down and play dead.’
Trevor was the third person to be killed by a grizzly in Jasper Park since 1929.
In the wildernesses all across Canada and the USA an average of 13 human deaths a year are blamed on the bears.
THE SURVIVOR: Cherry Reksten, 45, who was dragged from a tree by the bear in a Canadian park
THE VICTIM: Traveller Trevor Percy-Lancaster
DEADLY SPECIES: A North American grizzly
SHOT: The killer bear
NURSING GIRLS GOT ‘SPANKED BY BOSS’
A NURSING home boss punished teenage girl workers by spanking them on the bottom, an industrial tribunal heard yesterday.
Nael Mahfouz set the girls impossible tasks, then inflicted the kinky blows when they failed.
Yammeaka Cole, who was whacked 20 times with a ruler, said Mahfouz asked: ‘Is your bottom hot?’
Yammeaka — then 18 — said: ‘I replied ‘Yes, wouldn't yours be?’.’
The girl, consulting her Winnie the Pooh diary, said Mahfouz then sent her to learn the Mental Health Act.
Lap
Karen McCafferty, 17, was punished when she failed to memorise duty procedures.
She said: ‘He wanted me over his lap, so my feet were off the ground.
He hit me on my bum about 20 times.’
The following night, Karen was beaten on the bottom with a brush.
Yammeaka was awarded £6,510 and Karen £7,426 for damages and loss of earnings.
Mahfouz, who is in his forties, denied assaulting the girls.
PERFECT COUPLE
TOM MERRIN
FRIENDS and neighbours of dead Trevor Percy-Lancaster paid tribute to the devotion which ended in tragedy.
One pal said: ‘He loved her so much he would have done anything to protect her and he paid for that love with his life.’
Alan Vincent, 58, a neighbour of the couple in Winchester, Hampshire told how they were besotted with each other.
‘They were so in love,’ he said.
‘They went everywhere together.
‘They were at all the important functions in the area and Trevor's action to save Cherry would have been automatic.
Devoted ‘He wouldn't have thought about it.
They were so close I don't know how Cherry will live without him.’
Artist Trevor, who taught art students at evening classes, had a reputation as a talented landscape painter.
He met Cherry, the personal secretary to Hampshire museum's boss, six years ago.
Another friend Emily Farrar, 62, wept as she said: ‘They were the perfect couple.
They were so very close and did everything together.
‘They were always holding hands and he kissed her goodbye every day as she set off for work.’
She went on: ‘They would go off together for days on end on their bicycles.
He loved the countryside.
‘It seemed as though they didn't want anyone else to intrude.’
Neighbour Mrs Violet Smith, 75, said: ‘It's a terrible tragedy.
He really was a nice man.’
Funny money
HUMOROUS sketches worth £300,000 will go on show at the National Museum of Cartoon Art in London next week.
Busted flush
A GUNMAN who fled into a public loo after a bungled raid in Ashbourne, Derbys, was arrested when the attendant locked him in.
ROCKIES' SECRET PERIL
MARK DOWDNEY
I WATCHED in horror as a huge black bear nosed about in the handlebar baskets of my bike yards away.
Whatever it was looking for, we didn't hang around to find out.
Gathering up our two young children, we edged away upstream to the cover of some trees.
We had chanced across one of the best-kept secrets of the Rockies, the danger from bears.
The experience in America's Yosemite National Park was one of the most frightening of my life.
My blood still runs cold at the memory.
Yet no one warned us when we hired bikes to cycle in the remote mountain valley park.
There was no advice.
We found the locals don't like to talk about it for fear of putting off money-spinning tourists.
Unwittingly we had strapped our two youngsters, then aged two and four, into their seats and pedalled towards danger.
Then defenceless, all we could do was fight the panic and slowly slip away.
Luckily, the kids were too young to realise the danger.
Also, we appeared to have caught this bear in a rare good mood.
When he finally left the bikes, he ambled down to the stream just where we had been and sat in the water to cool off.
We got away and were finally rescued by a park ranger.
His comment ‘If you don't bother him, he won't bother you’ did nothing to restore our shattered nerves.
Back at the lodge they tried to make light of the experience.
But out of earshot of the boss, one of the workers told me that two campers had been mauled only the previous week.
SCARE: Dowdney
Driver in a 3-mile hell trip
MOTORIST David Millen drove on for three miles after an accident — with a severed arm hanging by a thread from his shoulder.
Mr Millen, 43, had his right arm resting on a window ledge when his Granada was clipped by an oncoming lorry.
With blood pouring from the bare bone he made it to a pub near Loose, Kent, where regulars called 999.
He was in intensive care in Maidstone Hospital last night as surgeons tried to save his arm.
Third off rail fares
INTER-CITY rail fares for journeys over 150 miles are to be slashed by up to a third if booked a week ahead.
BR has also decided Inter-City stewards will be called ‘Customer Hosts’ from next month.
They will patrol platforms to help lost or confused passengers.
Edward has his plastic nicked
STORE charge cards used for Prince Edward have been stolen from his valet's car.
The cards — for department stores including Harrods and the Army and Navy — were stolen from the hired car of valet Brian Osbourne.
The thief, who smashed a window to get into the car, also escaped with Mr Osbourne's driving licence.
Scotland Yard said the theft happened last Wednesday in South Kensington.
But the thief won't be able to use the stolen cards on a spending spree.
Police said last night that ‘appropriate measures’ have been taken.
Staff at the top stores have been told to look out for anyone trying to use the royal cards.
THEFT: Edward
WE'RE SORRY FOLKS
IN yesterday's Daily Mirror we told you how Princess Diana had paid a visit to the Chiswick Family Rescue and published this picture of the Princess surrounded by mums.
The picture was taken at a fertility clinic and was used to illustrate the Princess's caring nature.
It was not intended to suggest that these were battered wives.
Unfortunately we did not make this clear and we would like to apologise for any embarrassment caused.
As you can see from their smiles, these women have a lot to be happy about in their lives.
Famine kids' plight shocks Diana
BARRY WIGMORE
PRINCESS Diana was shocked, distressed and puzzled yesterday as she saw pictures of Somalia's starving children.
‘Why did it take so long for the world to wake up to what was going on,’ she asked repeatedly.
Diana was overwhelmed by the horror spotlighted in last week's Mirror shock issue on the African nation's famine.
She revealed in London that she wants to go with the Red Cross for a first-hand view of aid work.
British Red Cross director-general Mike Whitlam said: ‘We hope she will be able to travel with us at some time.’
Diana, patron of British Red Cross Youth, had asked him to brief her on Somalia and war-ravaged Bosnia.
He said: ‘The princess was very moved.’
TO HELP the starving please send donations to the Daily Mirror/CARE Somalia Appeal, PO Box 232, Melksham, Wilts, SN12 7SB.
Cheques and postal orders should be payable to Daily Mirror/CARE Somalia Appeal.
Or make a credit card donation on the Somalia Appeal hotline: 0800 666 808.
QUESTIONER: Diana yesterday.
Picture KENT GAVIN
SHOW ME THE WAY TO GO HOME!
DENNIS NEWSON
TWO soccer fans were tired and wanted to go to bed…
But they'd had a little drink in Germany, and didn't know where to head!
‘Take us to our hotel,’ George and Pat asked taxi driver Markus Wermelskirchen outside a bar in Cologne, where Celtic had been thrashed 0 — 2 in the UEFA Cup.
Unfortunately they couldn't remember its name — or even which town it was in.
But they thought it might be in Dortmund — about 90 miles away.
‘When we got there I drove round and round for hours looking for the hotel,’ Markus said.
‘After paying £70 for the cab fare they had no money left.
‘So we went to the railway police.’
Officers phoned 25 hotels, but without luck.
Then Pat and George had a brilliant idea.
At 3 am they rang Pat's wife in Scotland.
She knew their hotel's phone number.
And the area code showed it was in Dusseldorf — 70 miles away.
Police had a whip-round so that next morning the lost Scots could pay their fares to Dusseldorf.
And now their motto is:
No matter where you roam,
Just make a phone call home.
Grain drops
BRITISH farmers will harvest 22.4 million tons of cereals this year — 200,000 tons less than last year — a survey says.
BANANAS!
TV APE AD RAPPED AS RACIST
Viewers ‘think of black people’
A TV advert which shows an ape munching a banana was branded racist yesterday.
A watchdog group reckons many viewers will think of black people when they see the furry orang-utan in the electricity commercial.
Peter Oteng, senior officer at the Commission for Racial Equality in Birmingham, said: ‘For years the ape or monkey has been used as a form of abuse to black people.
Here they are being used as the main character in a popular advert.
‘It is very insensitive and could upset many black people.’
Two animated apes are the latest characters in the Electricity Association's Creature Comforts series, which also includes toy penguins, pigs, pandas and tortoises.
One orang-utan peels a banana as the pair chat about the advantages of having an electric tumble drier.
But Mr Oteng added: ‘It is up to the media to try to dispel racist stereotypes, not push them to the forefront.
‘Advertising agencies should consult groups such as ours to make sure they don't offend.’
Honest
A spokesman for the GGK agency which made the advert said: ‘I think they are being over-sensitive.
‘These orang-utans are clearly not black-sounding.
To be quite honest, the racist element did not even enter our heads.
‘We had one advert with pigs — but we didn't have any complaints from outraged overweight people.’
Keith Weare, spokesman for the Electricity Association, said: ‘We have featured loads of animals and none of them was supposed to be identified with people.
‘We used an ape because it is a popular, identifiable animal.
‘There was never any intention for the advert to be racist.’
ROW BREWING: The apes chat over a banana and a cuppa
CHRISSIE'S BOY JOINS TENNIS SET
WITH a well-controlled two-handed drive, tennis legend Chrissie Evert introduces son Alex to New York's Flushing Meadow stadium.
The three-times Wimbledon champ has quit playing now, but along with husband Andy Mill she was keen to see some of today's big names in action.
And 11-month-old Alex, in a buggy fitted with a sunshade, was happy to play along.
Foiled by Biggles
A FLYING lesson turned into a Biggles adventure for instructor Pat Harris and pupil Linda Hunt.
They were about to land at Bristol when he spotted car thieves and buzzed them for 10 miles until they ditched their motor.
DIVORCE COSTS
ON August 25, 1992, in a report about the large amount of divorce legal costs, we inadvertently stated, due to a typographical error, that average costs of cases which take some time amounted to £250,000, when the correct figure should be £25,000.
Ace cleared
FORMER England rugby union star Gary Rees, 34, broke down and wept yesterday after a jury cleared him of smashing an opponent's jaw.
The Nottingham forward told Kingston Crown Court that he injured Stefan Marty, 31, by accident during a friendly match.
MUSEUMS BOMBED
ANTI-TERRORIST squad officers were last night probing firebomb explosions at three top London tourist attractions.
The devices went off at Madame Tussauds, the London Planetarium, and the Imperial War Museum at Kennington.
But no one has admitted planting them.
The first exploded in the chamber of horrors at Tussauds in Baker Street, central London, just after 1am yesterday.
Within minutes another went off at the Planetarium next-door, followed by two more at the Imperial War museum.
There was some minor damage to exhibits, but no one was hurt.
BT chops Sundays chat cost
THE cost of using the phone on Sunday evenings is to be slashed during November and December, BT announced yesterday.
Most direct-dialled calls anywhere within the UK will be charged at local rates from 3pm to midnight.
BT say it means an hour's chat will cost just 84p — even if the call is made from Land's End to John O'Groats.
Long-distance calls normally cost up to 79p for 10 minutes.
Calls on payphones, mobile phones or using a Chargecard are not included.
Neither are premium rate 0898-type lines.
Kiss ‘n’ dwell
JUDGE William Crawford, 55, who kissed a woman usher in chambers, has been told not to resume duties for the time being.
Package detour
TOUR firms yesterday branded Majorca's Palma airport a paradise for organised bagsnatchers because 30 holidaymakers lose their luggage every day.
SNOOZE READER
TONY PURNELL
TV newsreader Fiona Armstrong met new colleague Michael Wilson yesterday — and talked about going to bed.
Fiona, 34, is leaving ITN's News At Ten to present a 6am breakfast TV show with Michael from January.
And she's ready for early nights.
Fiona, whose businessman husband Rod Potts lives in Cumbria, plans to turn in at the same time as her baby daughter Natasha.
‘Waking up won't be a problem,’ she said.
‘Since Natasha was born six months ago, I'm used to being disturbed in the middle of the night.’
She will spend four days a week in London with Natasha, then join Rod at weekends.
Mike — 43 and married with a son of ten — has already worked in morning TV for Sky.
Picture: STEVE KING 
WAKEY, WAKEY: Fiona with Michael yesterday
N-plant leaked for five hours
BARRY WIGMORE
SELLAFIELD finally came clean last night on what happened when plutonium liquid leaked at the heart of the nuclear reprocessing plant.
After the Mirror accused them of a cover-up, they revealed that the deadly brew trickled down the outside of a hot evaporator for FIVE HOURS before alarms were triggered.
As the liquid boiled off, it left a brown stalactite-like lump of plutonium and salt hanging down the side of the container and a mound on the floor.
This is the first stage of a nuclear reaction which can lead to an explosion.
Critical
Independent nuclear consultant John Large said: ‘There was a serious malfunction.
‘Everything in the plant is designed to avoid this liquid solidifying in an uncontrolled way.’
But a Sellafield spokeswoman denied the plutonium was anywhere near ‘going critical’.
Scientists are now drawing up plans to clean up the mess.
TRUTH: Mirror's story
KIDNAP IN COURT
Revenge of Roller gang
BILL DANIELS
A KIDNAP gang who snatched an accused man from court were last night holding him hostage…until a stolen Rolls Royce is returned.
Police launched a nationwide hunt for Ahrjinder Singh Dosanjh — known as Bobby — after he was viciously beaten and bundled into a van.
Hours later a man believed to be East End boss Edward Clancy rang detectives accusing the Asian of taking his £38,000 Silver Shadow.
Burly Clancy — the 6ft, 19st owner of a crane hire business — is thought to be one of five men involved in the ambush at Leamington Spa magistrates court, Warwicks.
The five heavies pounced on Dosanjh, 21, as he walked through the court lobby after being bailed on an unrelated theft charge.
He was dragged kicking and screaming to a van parked nearby.
Witnesses could see the Asian getting a ‘severe beating’ as the van raced off.
Squad cars were sent in pursuit but the van, a white F-reg Nissan Euro-Vanette, got away.
The bearded victim, wearing a leather jacket, tracksuit bottoms and trainers, comes from London but often stays at addresses in Coventry.
Last night Det Chief Supt Colin Port, heading the kidnap hunt, said: ‘We are gravely concerned for the abducted man's safety.
Mr Clancy has been in touch with the Metropolitan Police to say he has Bobby.
‘This is an utterly stupid act where a group of men have taken the law into their own hands.’
Detectives also want to trace the metallic blue Rolls Royce, registration number ECH 83.
Mr Clancy sold it to a trickster who paid with a worthless stolen cheque.
Tug of love gun plea
A DISTRAUGHT mum last night begged her danger man husband to return their two young children after he snatched them at gunpoint.
Sobbing Julie Moore, 45, said: ‘Please don't hurt them.’
Her estranged husband James Moore, 33, bundled Clare, two, and David, four, into a stolen car at Barrow-in-Furness, Cumbria.
A nationwide hunt has been launched.
TARA GOES FROM BUFF TO A PUFF
STILL panting from her naked romps in TV's Camomile Lawn and Anglo-Saxon Attitudes, actress Tara Fitzgerald picked up some tips on puffing yesterday from old hand Peter O'Toole.
The pair star in Keith Waterhouse's new play Our Song, which opens in Bath next month.
Picture: ALAN GRISBROOK
Maltese pigeon spirited in by jet
CLIVE CRICKMER
RACING pigeon Lucky took the easy route from Malta to Britain…flying on a holiday jet in her owner's duty-free bag.
But eagle-eyed Customs men solved the case of the Maltese pigeon when the stowaway popped her head out of a brandy bottle presentation box.
British tourist Stephen Profitt, who paid £200 for Lucky in Malta, was fined £100 yesterday for bringing her into the country without a licence.
Stephen, 28, said afterwards: ‘The Customs officers jumped a mile when Lucky peeped out of the box — their faces were a treat.’
The pigeon is being allowed to serve 35 days quarantine at Stephen's home in Middlesbrough, Cleveland.
DANGER!
YOUR SWIM BANDS CAN BE ‘ARMFUL
Faulty valves fear
JAN WALSH
CHILDREN learning to swim could be in danger from faulty inflatable arm-bands, it was revealed yesterday.
Tests showed that five brands could deflate within seconds — causing the child to panic in the water.
Only EIGHT makes, some designed for tots as young as six months old, passed tests with flying colours — out of 28 examined.
‘Some bands went down as we watched,’ said Manchester trading standards officer Ian Simpson.
He added: ‘We are worried that a product which parents regard as a safety device actually has serious hidden dangers.’
Importers were urged to recall the worst brands.
Examiners found that safety valves — designed to keep the arm bands inflated when the stoppers are knocked out — failed to work properly.
Some of the least reliable bands cost more than £2 a pair, while a 50p set passed all the tests.
The eight best brands are:
Bema RF Swim Aid (size one and two); Speedo size 0; Floaties baby size and size two; Thomas the tank engine, ref 664; Mothercare, ref 9480; Boots junior, age 3-6; Water Fun age 2-6; Artee Swim Aids, baby size.
Five brands alert
THREE of the five makes which most worried Manchester trading standards officers are made in China.
They are Swim Arm Bands, code GS3600, The Wet Set, code 59640, and an unbranded make.
Also named were Tommee Tippee, ref 452692, made in Taiwan, and Aqua Fun, item 8/1, origin unknown.
ARM-BANDS: Alert
Sex probe head quits
A HEAD at the centre of a sex probe has resigned.
Richard Alston quit New Barns special school, Toddington, Gloucs, after his flatmate, former school governor Peter Righton, was fined for having porn photos of naked boys.
Police are quizzing staff and pupils.
RAQUEL'S LAD & FRED'S LASS IN MARRIAGE SPLIT
Heartbreak for Test ace father
MARTIN PHILLIPS
THE daughter of fiery Freddie Trueman has split with actress Raquel Welch's son.
But the bust-up between model Rebecca and gym boss Damon is thought to have been kept secret from former Test ace Freddie — just like their marriage.
Rebecca's sister Karen said: ‘It sounds true, but I have not spoken to her.
I've talked with one of dad's friends, and he told me he thought the stories were accurate.’
News of the bust-up stunned former England fast bowler Freddie and his family.
It's only two years since they were shocked by the couple's secret wedding in America.
Rebecca, 27, and Damon, 32, got hitched without telling their parents.
But both Raquel and Freddie were at a celebration here last year to bless the marriage.
Karen said: ‘I know Rebecca had been feeling homesick, but she got a new job which was keeping her busy.
‘I thought that was why she hadn't phoned lately.
I'm in the dark.’
Blessed
Damon and Rebecca fell in love and wed after she paid £300 for a date with him at a charity auction in California.
They later had their marriage blessed at Bolton Abbey in the Yorkshire Dales.
Raquel upstaged Rebecca by arriving late in a skimpy mini-skirt.
Freddie was on holiday in Spain last night.
He said before leaving: ‘They've had fall outs, but no more than any other marriage.’
HAPPY DAYS: Raquel with Rebecca and Damon at their marriage blessing
SIEGE ECONOMY
Downing St gets a facelift as Ministers take to the bunker
BILL AKASS
AS the economic crisis raged on yesterday, besieged Premier John Major retreated with his Cabinet to the Downing Street ‘bunker’.
Chancellor Norman Lamont's official residence at No 11 echoed to the din of hammers while bomb-proof windows were being installed.
Workmen used a sand blaster from a hydraulic platform.
At No 10, a network of scaffolding has been put up during renovations to boost security.
But yesterday it was the shaky Government that desperately needed propping up behind the mass of steel at fortress Downing Street.
Outside No 10, a notice warned: ‘Danger: Men Working.’
Some observers saw that as fair comment on the Cabinet meeting taking place inside.
The meeting — which lasted two hours 50 minutes — was accompanied by the racket of workmen's drills and hammers.
When he finally emerged, Mr Major demonstrated his mastery of one form of economy — with words.
The nation was waiting for an important announcement on the outcome of the talks.
The Prime Minister's lame comment: ‘Very good Cabinet meeting, very helpful.’
As he bustled into No 10, he didn't notice the workmen's assessment of his performance.
Their sign in a window said: TO LET.
WAR ON THE BOMBERS: Work in progress at No 11 to improve security.
Yesterday, the Chancellor was fighting a different battle…for political survival
BEHIND THE BARRICADES: Workmen installing bomb-proof windows at No 10.
They made their own comment on the Prime Minister's future
NO COMMENT: Lamont yesterday
NO ACTION: John Major
THE FULL CABINET IN SESSION A STACK of cabinet's piled in Downing Street yesterday for use in the renovations.
They could be of further use if Treasury chiefs are sent packing.
OH REALLY, WHO ARE YOU KIDDING?
THE sign of the troubled times in the road outside 10 Downing Street yesterday.
But for the nation, the real danger was within.
Mellor: A ‘head in the sand ostrich’ with his thinking parts exposed
JOHN JACKSON
THE ‘folly’ of David Mellor was blasted yesterday in one of the most savage court attacks ever launched on a Cabinet Minister.
The Minister of Fun was likened to an ostrich which buried its head in the sand ‘thereby exposing its thinking parts.’
The mauling came in the closing stages of the libel case brought by PLO chief's daughter Mona Bauwens against The People.
The paper's QC, George Carman, told the High Court jury that by taking his family on a free Spanish holiday with Mrs Bauwens during the Gulf crisis, Mr Mellor had made a serious error of judgment.
The case was about the liberty of the press to comment freely at any price.
‘That price has always been extreme vigilance,’ the QC said.
Your right to know — Pages 6 & 7 
SAVAGED: David Mellor
OWZAT!
Gower has his wicket way at last CRICKET star David Gower held his greatest catch yesterday — as a bridegroom.
England's ex-skipper married his long-time love Thorunn Nash.
And spectators cheered as the couple walked arm in arm from Winchester cathedral.
Thorunn shone in an ivory silk off-the-shoulder gown with full train and matching headband.
Sporting guests watched the pair kiss.
But current captain Graham Gooch, wasn't there.
England-reject Gower said: ‘He didn't make the team.’
What A Comeback — Page 3 
THE BIG MATCH: David and Thorunn leave the cathedral after yesterday's wedding…and kiss
MINISTER NABBED WITHOUT A TICKET
TORY Minister Michael Howard has been caught travelling on a train without a ticket, it was revealed yesterday.
He was nabbed by a new British Rail patrol waging war on fare-dodgers and had to fork out an on-the-spot £10 fine.
Environment Secretary Mr Howard was travelling first-class between his Folkestone constituency and Ashford in Kent when he faced the embarrassing showdown two weeks ago.
He was questioned by two uniformed inspectors of BR's Revenue Protection Squad.
And when the Cabinet Minister admitted he had no ticket, he had to cough up the fare as well as the fine under his Government's 1989 Act which orders passengers to pay before they travel.
A spokesman for Mr Howard said last night that he had every intention of paying his fare.
‘He was in a hurry to catch a train and went straight to the platform, fully intending to buy a ticket on the train or at his destination,’ the spokesman said.
‘He paid on board and paid the penalty ticket as well.’
FINED: Tory Howard
All's well at No 10
SYDNEY YOUNG
A JOBLESS Tory voter got a letter from 10 Downing Street yesterday telling him things are looking up.
‘Recent evidence does suggest the economic situation is improving,’ wrote John Major's aide Lucy Miller.
‘It is recognised by the Prime Minister that the recovery will initially be slow and patchy…in time, it should give rise to sustainable economic growth and the creation of new jobs.’
Miss Miller was answering a plea for advice by Steve Reese, 28, who moved to Bristol after his home in Newcastle upon Tyne was repossessed — and then saw his photographic business collapse as interest rates ‘went daft’.
‘The reply is incredible,’ he said.
‘Now I feel a right mug.’
HAPPY NOTE: Steve and that letter
ON YOUR MARKS SPEND!
MARK DOWDNEY
THE Germans were yesterday urged to go on a spending blitz in Britain after the crashing pound turned our goods into bargains.
‘We Germans can choose what we want from Supermarket Europe,’ the top-selling newspaper Bild boasted.
‘You beautiful strong Deutschmark!
You make our life cheaper.
‘Our consumers will be able to get cheap goods and services — thanks to our neighbours’ cheap currencies.’
Then it splashed a shopping list of knockdown British products across its pages.
The Germans, who now get more pounds for their marks, could have:
A HANDSOME £5,000 off a Daimler Double Six limousine.
A NEAT £1.50 off a bottle of whisky A COSY £23 off a tweed jacket.
AND a £192 discount on a week's salmon fishing in Scotland.
But the arrogance of the German newspapers infuriated British MPs.
Tory Bill Walker said it showed the German nation in its true colours.
The papers also urged Germans to swoop on struggling Italy and snap up cheap handbags, shoes and wine.
Meanwhile, the row between politicians grew.
Naive
Chancellor Norman Lamont accused the Bundesbank of a whispering campaign against the pound and called for changes in German monetary policy.
Chancellor Kohl, on a visit to Italy, dismissed his demands as ‘inappropriate for a Minister’.
Mr Kohl was backed by Italian Prime Minister Giuliano Amato, who accused Britain of being naive.
Mr Amato said: ‘Believing there is always a bad guy with a big stick, who hits the little guy, belongs to the world of three to five-year-old children.’
Mr Major yesterday joined in the attack on the Germans.
He blamed remarks ‘from people who should have known better’ for sparking the run on the pound.
£5,000 OFF: This luxury Daimler limousine is a snip in Germany
£192 OFF: Salmon fishing is a great bait
£1.50 OFF: Scotch
DISMISSIVE: Kohl
BEJABERS! 60,000INTEREST
JOHN HUSBAND
INTEREST rates in Ireland touched an astonishing 60,000 per cent for a time as the Dublin government battled speculators.
But later the Irish pound recovered and it is now comfortably within its level in the ERM, Europe's currency club.
Fears the French will vote ‘Non’ in tomorrow's Maastricht referendum hit the floating pound and most other European currencies again.
The pound fell a further 2 pfennigs against the strong German mark to just under 2.61 marks and nearly 4 1/2 cents against the dollar to $1.74.
Britain's trade gap in the first six months of this year was £6 billion — nearly the total Chancellor Lamont had predicted for the whole year back in March.
They've blown it
THE Government is living on borrowed time, Liberal-Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown warned.
He said Tory leaders had lost the confidence of markets, their Euro-partners and the British people.
The next few days could decide the fate of thousands of hard-pressed workers, home owners and firms.
Mr Ashdown blamed post-election Tory ‘inertia’ for letting the crisis build up.
He added: ‘Now we know them for what they are — the party of devaluation.’
ANGRY: Ashdown
25,000 PIT JOBS FACING THE CHOP
Thirty mines are doomed
TERRY PATTINSON
THIRTY pits are to be closed with the loss of 25,512 jobs, according to a leaked letter which sparked fury in the coalfields last night.
The letter from Industry Minister Tim Sainsbury to Michael Portillo, Chief Secretary of the Treasury, was revealed by miners' leader Arthur Scargill and the Coalfield Communities Campaign.
The bombshell came as official figures showed that Britain's jobless total rose 47,000 to 2,807,000 last month — with workers joining the dole queue at the rate of 1,500 every day.
It is the highest total for five years.
The letter says British Coal will announce the closures ‘all in one go’ before the end of this month and that there can be no new measures to tackle the job losses.
Mr Sainsbury  pointed out that the issue is ‘extremely sensitive’ and copies of the letter should be restricted to ‘those who need to know.’
Copies went to  Prime Minister John Major and six Ministers.
Embarrassed Trade and Industry Department officials refused to comment on the letter.
British Coal said Mr Scargill appeared to have acquired the list by ‘dubious means’.
Death ‘But it is well known there needs to be a substantial realignment of production capacity.’
Labour said: ‘This could be the death certificate of the coal industry as we know it.’
Pits on the Minister's list are:
North East: Easington, Vane Tempest/Seaham, Ellington Combine.
North West: Parkside.
Yorkshire: Sharlston, Whitemoor, Bentley, Hatfield, Markham Main, Goldthorpe, Grimethorpe, Houghton Main, Prince of Wales, Kiveton Park.
East Midlands: Manton, Annelsey, Silverhill, Bevercotes, Bilsthorpe, Clipstone, Rufford, Shirebrook, Cotgrave, Calverton, Bolsover, Markham.
West Midlands: Trentham, Littleton.
Wales: Betws and Taff Merthyr.
Edwina uproar
EDWINA Currie caused uproar yesterday by insulting cancer-victim President Mitterrand.
She said he called for Sunday's Maastricht referendum because he was ‘stupid’ and ‘sick’.
Mrs Currie described the French leader as ‘one of the vainest men’.
His referendum had caused great uncertainty.
Her comments on Radio Derby came as Tories tried to shift the blame for Britain's economic ills elsewhere.
French MPs branded it ‘simple-minded drivel’.
INSULT: Currie
Don't blame us say the Germans
GERMANY furiously refused to accept the blame yesterday for Britain's sterling crisis — and was backed by the International Monetary Fund.
Finance Minister Theo Waigel said Major's claim on Wednesday that a German ‘whispering campaign’ had sabotaged the pound was ‘unjustified’.
German newspapers also rejected the claim, with one saying: ‘Weak £ — Weak Premier’.
IMF boss Michel Camdessus praised Germany's tough policies and insisted that its interest rates were not to blame for the chaos.
He urged Britain and other EC countries to reform their economies more forcefully.
The Dutch offered to help Britain by cutting interest rates.
It's pilau MICE at free Sun Indian!
AN INDIAN restaurant taking part in The Sun's free curry offer has turned out to be a right poppadump.
Readers claiming their complimentary meal would be well advised to tikka close look at the kitchens.
For the owner has just been fined £32,000 by a court for breaking health regulations.
Public health inspectors swooped after a horrified customer spotted a cockroach scuttling through the restaurant.
Filth
They found mice droppings in the rice containers and a colony of cockroaches in the kitchens.
There were dead insects in the poppadom containers and the kitchen walls and ceiling were black with grease and filth.
Abdul Khan, owner of the Tandoori Cottage in Chadwell Heath, Essex, admitted 16 offences.
He told Barking magistrates he had been unaware of the problem because he had been away ill.
Bench chairman Christine Whiting described the kitchen conditions as ‘appalling’.
Sun bosses kept a pilau profile yesterday — and said nothing.
NOT SO HOT: Curry
Heart op girl dies
HEART-swap girl Wendy Walker, 10, lost her brave fight for life last night.
Wendy, from Longforgan, near Dundee died with her parents at her side 24 days after the op.
An official at the Freeman Hospital, Newcastle-upon-Tyne said: ‘We are all very upset.’
JP orders in bailiffs on himself
A MAGISTRATE set bailiffs on to two companies for being £26,000 behind with business rates — without realising the firms were HIS.
The gaffe came as millionaire Kim Cowell, sitting on the bench at Dunmow, Essex, dished out liability orders to a list of firms.
Two of them — who had failed to pay — are run by Mr Cowell.
He said later he had been unaware they were on the list of defaulters.
Son's shame
ARMY officer James Mundell, 22, was jailed for eight weeks and kicked out of his brigadier father's regiment yesterday for brawling at Bulford, Wilts.
Hostage fury over film on Beirut ordeal
DON MACKAY
FREED Beirut hostages John McCarthy and Terry Waite yesterday blasted a new TV drama about their ordeal.
They claim Granada Television has been advertising the two-hour film Hostages as the ‘full story for the first time’.
But McCarthy and Waite, who were held by terrorists for five years, refused to co-operate with Granada and accused them of ‘pure fiction’.
The two men, together with fellow hostages Brian Keenan and Terry Anderson, issued a statement condemning the programme, due to be screened next week.
They say Granada's promotion was ‘both highly insensitive to the hostages and their families and a serious abuse of public trust.’
Last night Granada said: ‘We've never promoted the film as ‘the true story’ or ‘the full story for the first time’.
‘Another television company may have without consulting us.’
See TV Weekly 
He drinks like a fish!
HOUSEWIFE Joan Carey brought daughter Nina's goldfish back to life with…a swig of scotch.
When Nina found Goldie lifeless in his tank at their Manchester home, Joan revived him with the kiss of life and two shots from an eye dropper.
Sheffield is foreign to crazy officials
SYDNEY YOUNG
SOCIAL security bosses axed a man's benefit while he was on holiday — because they thought Sheffield was ABROAD.
Pete Garrett, 54, wrote to the DSS telling them he was going to stay with a friend in the city — the fifth largest in Britain.
He was stunned to receive a reply saying his payments were being suspended while he was away because he was out of the country.
Pete, of Bruton, Somerset, said yesterday: ‘I laughed at first because I did not believe it.
Wrong ‘I know they go to great lengths to avoid paying up, but I didn't realise it had got this bad.’
The officials finally admitted they were wrong — and paid Pete his two weeks' benefit of £84.
Sheffield's Mayor Bill Jordan said yesterday: ‘I'm absolutely appalled.
We are still very much part of the UK.’
A DSS spokesman at Yeovil said yesterday: ‘From the information on the form, we thought he was going abroad.’
Doc faces acid charge
A DOCTOR is to be prosecuted under safety laws after two-year-old John Storey swallowed acid at his surgery.
Dr Bernard Bromley, from York, will appear in court on November 3.
John is still in hospital but he is out of danger.
You're a doll, Cindy
CATWALK dazzler Cindy Crawford steps out in a wispy wraparound of leopard fabric, a welter of gems and precious little else.
Richard Gere's wife let her hair down for free at a New York AIDS benefit show.
But Cindy, 26, just couldn't help looking a million dollars — or providing a beautiful free advert for her new exercise video, Shape Your Body, due here by Christmas.
OO LA LA!
IT'S CORONATION RUE, CHUCK…
TV's Street goes French
RICHARD GARNER
‘EY UP!
Have you heard about the oui change in Coronation Street?
Telly's top soap is going to be transmitted in FRENCH.
Pub landlady Bet Gilroy will play the femme fatale.
Even boring Ken Barlow will get a touch of Gallic charm.
But Street fans need not worry.
There'll be no garlic turning up in t’ hotpots.
Jack Duckworth won't be forsaking the ale for a drop of vin rouge.
And not a single frog's leg will be hopping into Bettabuys' frozen food section.
For La rue du Couronnement — Coronation Street to you, chuck — is just a cunning scheme dreamed up by school bosses.
They reckon that dubbing French dialogue on to the kids' favourite soaps will keep them switched on in class.
Lingo
The theory is that pupils will be so busy trying to follow the gossip in Le Retour de l'Errant (pay attention — that's the Rovers Return) they will not even realise they are learning the lingo.
School chiefs in Somerset — where the experiment is taking place — also plan to impose a little je ne sais quoi on the kids' Aussie heroes in Neighbours.
Christine Wilding, general secretary of the Association of Language Learning, said yesterday: ‘It is a very good idea.
It means children are going to have something familiar to relate to.’
Just think, in a few years from now baffled Frenchmen could be facing a generation of British tourists demanding: ‘Ee chuck!
J'ai faim…ou est le chippy?’
Or even worse: ‘Bonjour, Sheila!
Voulez-vous crack a tube avec moi?’
BET: Femme fatale 
YOU'RE NO MUG
MARK Edwards reckons his ‘villainous looking’ face is his fortune.
Mark, 22, has pocketed £3,000 from appearing alongside real suspects in police identity parades at Birmingham — at £8 a time.
WIFE KICKED TO DEATH BY A HERD OF COWS
She tried to save her pet
RONALD RICKETTS
ANIMAL lover Angela Toller was kicked to death by a herd of cows as she fought to save her pekinese from being trampled underfoot yesterday.
Brave Angela, 55, was pounded by flailing hooves — after wading through a ‘mass of cows in a circle’ to reach her pet lying unconscious on the ground.
The panic-stricken friesians had turned on the dog to protect their calves.
Only the day before mum-of-two Angela celebrated her 32nd wedding anniversary with husband Tony, 54, boss of the company that dreamed up the PG Tips chimp adverts.
Tragedy struck as Angela took her usual stroll through a farmer's field with pekinese Yeng and deerhound Jamie.
There were 90 dairy cows and 14 calves in the herd near her home in Fifehead Neville, Dorset.
Neighbour Muriel Harding-Newman, 79, said: ‘We could see the cows were stamping and kicking and that someone was trying to push them away but they wouldn't move.
‘It was terrible.
She was devoted to her dogs.’
Angela was kicked in the abdomen and on the chin as villagers rushed to help.
Her beloved pet Yeng survived.
A police spokesman said: ‘She went among the cattle to get her dog.’
Husband Tony's business colleague Alan Easton said: ‘He rang to say his wife had been trampled to death by a herd of cows.
Those were his words.
‘It's tragic, she loved the countryside.’
HORROR: Friesians turned killer to protect calves
Winning hand
PROFESSIONAL gambler Yona Betitou was cleared yesterday at London's Southwark Court of conning £350,000 from his girlfriend.
Fury at leaking of Carl dossier
PAUL FOOT
POLICE were accused yesterday of leaking a secret report on the Carl Bridgewater murder case to the BBC.
Solicitor James Nichol said he was ‘sickened and disgusted’ by the leak and demanded an inquiry by Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke.
Mr Nichol added: ‘We all smell dirty tricks.’
According to BBC reports, a probe by Merseyside police concludes that there is no reason to reopen the case of the 13-year-old newsboy murdered at a Staffordshire farmhouse in 1978.
Language experts are said to have challenged the conclusions of four top scientists — reported in my Daily Mirror column — that a key confession was false.
Demand
Mr Nichol represents the three men serving life for the killing and the family of a fourth who has died.
The London lawyer dismissed suggestions of a new confession as ‘rubbish.’
Mr Nichol demanded: ‘Who leaked this report before we in the defence had a chance to see it?’
Merseyside police deny it was them.
The Home Secretary is considering the report and will rule whether the case should be sent to the Appeal Court.
VICTIM: Newsboy Carl
Cops nab a ‘rogue’ sandwich
POLICE tracked down a health scare sandwich yesterday — and warned a French girl student not to eat it.
The girl's landlady had made a packed lunch from pork which is at the centre of a botulism alert.
The food bug kills 40 per cent of victims.
The landlady rang police from Dover.
Police later traced the mini-bus the student was on in London.
Uncured pork from a firm at Wisbech, Cambs, has been withdrawn from sale by supermarkets and shops.
Hair's to the new-look Roy
TONY PURNELL
HERE'S to a topping show.
Brave Roy Castle toasts a new stage musical — and the return of his hair.
The 60-year-old entertainer went bald through chemotherapy treatment for cancer.
But now he is battling back and using a comb again.
‘I'm thrilled to be here,’ he said at a party for the London song-and-dance spectacular Valentine's Day.
After what Roy's been through, every day calls for a celebration.
Picture: ALAN GRISBROOk 
BEFORE: Bald Roy
SWIMMERS GASSED
PETER KANE
MORE than 50 children were swimming in a pool when deadly clouds of chlorine gas bubbled up through the water.
Lifeguards dragged out kids coughing and vomiting as parents looked on in horror.
Several swimmers had to be given gulps of oxygen at the pool-side.
‘I thought I was going to drop dead in the water,’ said 16-year-old Mark Pitcher.
Terrified children were led outside in their costumes away from the poisonous fumes.
Ambulances took 23 youngsters to hospital.
Seven were still detained yesterday after the drama at the new council-run Waveney Valley pool in Bungay, Suffolk.
Three adults also had check-ups.
Swimming club coach Terry White, 38, said: ‘There was no way the kids could avoid the gas.’
Firemen in breathing gear located the leak and sealed it off.
A full inquiry was promised.
Gang grab £250,000
THREE masked thugs trussed up businessman Tom Hartley and his wife Helen at their home and drove off in their new £60,000 Mercedes with valuables worth £250,000.
Mr and Mrs Hartley, both 52, of Cannock Chase, Staffs, last night offered a £50,000 reward for the capture of the gang.
Mr Hartley said: ‘This was terrifying.’
Model freed
EX-MODEL Jacqueline McAvoy was freed by the Old Bailey yesterday after denying involvement in the £26million Brinks-Mat robbery.
KILLER'S TRIBUTE
HILLBILLY killer Albert Dryden has sent a bizarre message of congratulations to the farmer who showered council offices with cow dung.
In a scruffy hand-written note from his prison cell at Durham jail, he tells David Cannon: ‘I am proud of you.’
Cannon, 63, recently showered Castle Morpeth HQ, Northumberland with four tonnes of dung after council bosses turned down his application to build a retirement bungalow on land near his farm at Ponteland.
Cannon said yesterday: ‘We both know what it's like to fight council planning officers.
I can understand his frustration, but he went too far.’
Dryden, 55, is serving life for the murder of council planning boss Harry Collinson.
Collinson was gunned down after ordering bulldozers to demolish the bungalow which Dryden had built without planning permission.
Police said last night Cannon will be charged.
Riot thugs locked up
FIVE more teenage thugs involved in an orgy of violence were caged yesterday.
The offenders, aged between 16 and 19, received sentences of up to 27 months at Newcastle Crown Court.
A 200-strong mob caused hundreds of thousands of pounds worth of damage to cars and shops during the riot at Scotswood last September.
BBC axing 1,500 jobs
THE BBC is to shed another 1,500 employees over the next 18 months, bringing the total of jobs axed since 1986 to 7,000.
They include cleaners and caterers — but not journalists.
Tony Lennon of the broadcasting union BECTU said: ‘We are stunned and angry.’
Tarzan's EC summit slip
TRADE president Michael Heseltine let slip plans for an emergency EC summit yesterday — and so added to Premier John Major's troubles.
Major — current holder of the rotating EC presidency — had hoped to keep the summit plans secret until after tomorrow's French referendum on the Maastricht Treaty.
But ‘Tarzan’ Heseltine, professing total support for Chancellor Norman Lamont revealed the plans in a radio interview.
Downing Street confirmed plans for a summit of EC leaders were well advanced.
Top of the agenda will be the currency crisis.
Mr Major had been under pressure to call the meeting from German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, the French and also from the Italians.
It will be held in London or Birmingham after next week.
Mr Heseltine denied any suggestions that he was interested in Mr Lamont's job.
GAFFE: Heseltine
…but how did they feel when the covers came off?
WELL I DECLARE…
WHAT A COMEBACK
FUNNY old game, cricket.
Two mornings ago David Gower and his stag night team-mates were groaning under their bedcovers.
Yet here the lads are 24 hours later, all jaunty smiles and hangovers seemingly forgotten as they line up with newlyweds David and Thorunn Nash.
Ian Botham, mastermind of the epic booze-up on the Channel island of Alderney, enjoyed a wicked laugh.
But he wisely didn't push his luck with Thorunn, choosing to stay right at the back where he chuckled: ‘I think David's just about recovered.
‘He's been pretty bleary-eyed since the stag night, but he should be able to raise the strength to toast the bride.’
Soccer's Mr Clean, Gary Lineker, a guest with wife Michelle, had no such problems.
But, like the hundreds of cheering spectators, he was still miffed David wasn't chosen to go to India on the winter tour.
Gary said: ‘It's obvious that people want him in the England team.’
David, 35, and Thorunn, 34, who shone in an off-the-shoulder full length wedding gown with ivory matching headband, hosted a reception after the Winchester Cathedral ceremony before going on honeymoon.
They wouldn't say where.
But with a sly dig at Essex and England captain Graham Gooch, David quipped: ‘It won't be near Essex or Bombay.’
REVELLERS' REUNION: Cowdrey beside Thorunn, Allan Lamb behind her, Robin Smith behind him alongside Lineker — and Botham laughing in Bob Willis's ear Pictures: NIGEL WRIGHT
WE'RE JUST DANDY
DAVID and best man Chris Cowdrey, bouncing back in fine form from the rip-roarer on Alderney (right)
Bosses fear more jitters
BOSSES fear the narrow French vote will mean more instability.
Institute of Directors chief Peter Morgan said after the recent turmoil it would be ‘folly’ to commit Europe to closer monetary and political union.
He said Euro policies should now be aimed at creating economic growth and more jobs.
GRIM NEWS BY CAR PHONE
CLIVE CRICKMER
THE heartbreaking news was broken to Caroline's parents over their car phone.
Police rang them as they headed north after a friend's wedding in the Home Counties.
Ian Clarke, a Bank of England executive, and his wife Jacqueline promptly turned back to Surrey so they would be nearer Heathrow and Gatwick airports — and better placed to take off for Australia.
The couple moved to Slaley, Northumberland, last year but still have a house in Farnham.
Their son Simon, 26, said his father had already been planning to get details of Sydney flights.
‘He felt that if he went there it may have generated extra publicity through TV and radio interviews which might do some good in tracing the girls,’ said Simon.
‘I suppose he also hoped he just might pick up their trail.
‘Now my parents realise they may have to go to help with identification.
‘Perhaps they will just want to be there anyway.
‘They have tried to lead normal lives since the girls disappeared, but they've been under great stress and anxiety.’
Simon's own globe-trotting in Australia, Indonesia and Thailand may have spurred his sister to quit her job in a London pizza restaurant and follow in his footsteps.
‘I wrote to her often and we spoke on the phone during my travels,’ he said.
‘I am sure it was my accounts of my experiences which set her off on the same route.
‘She was a happy, lively and adventurous girl — not one for a quiet life.’
The family's hopes that Caroline was alive slumped when her visa expired three weeks ago.
Mrs Clarke said then: ‘It was our last real deadline.
‘I know some people overrun their visas, but Caroline was not the sort to do anything like that.’
Simon, who quit his job as an estate agent, begins a one-year accountancy course in Newcastle upon Tyne today.
‘It will help keep my mind off things,’ he said.
DAD: Banker Ian Clarke
MUM: Jacqueline Clarke
LOST: Caroline, whose visa expired three weeks ago
Oh Flipper!
Baby born in hospital
A BRITISH mum hoping to give birth surrounded by dolphins had her boy — in hospital.
The nearest dolphin was five miles away at sea.
Michelle Hooper's 8lb 2 oz son arrived in a Jewish hospital with the help of a doctor using traditional painkillers and forceps.
Michelle, 25, from Wanstead, London, was one of six British women who flew to Israel with Dr Gowri Motha last month for the world's first dolphin births.
But after two weeks swimming with friendly mammals in Eilat's dolphin reef, their planned sea births were banned by Israeli health chiefs.
HARRY'S SMACKER
DUMPED L.A. Law star Harry Hamlin is smiling again — thanks to a mystery girl called Marci.
The actor's sexy British-born wife Nicolette Sheridan walked out on him in July.
But happy Harry put it out of his mind as he planted a smacker on his new date at a New York film premiere.
LIFE'S GREAT: Hamlin with mystery girl Marci
Darned luck
KNIFEMEN forced a man from his car at traffic lights in California, made him strip and drove off leaving him standing in his socks.
600 in child abuse quiz
THREE employees of Clwyd County Council, North Wales, have been suspended in Britain's biggest child abuse inquiry.
Police have now interviewed more than 600 people and taken 1,500 statements in the year-long probe.
Apple crunch!
APPLES that got waterlogged between France and a British store ‘exploded’ in the homes of customers at Eaton, Norwich.
TV chef Hudson is dead
TV CHEF Peter Hudson has lost his battle against cancer, it was revealed yesterday.
He died in London aged 50.
Australian-born Peter and partner David Halls were a hit with viewers who loved the jokey attitude to cooking.
The final series of the Hudson and Halls show is to be screened by the BBC later this year.
Earlier programmes will be re-run each morning this week.
HIT: Peter Hudson
Home loan pain grows
THE number of hard-up homebuyers asking housing charity Shelter for help soared by 50 per cent last year.
People threatened with repossession because of mortgage debts now make up one in seven of their cases.
Director Sheila McKechnie said: ‘The debt crisis swamps new victims every day.’
Mock war's so uncivil!
A BID by 1,000 battle games fans to re-enact a 1642 Civil War clash ended with 19 of them hurt and five in hospital.
Some were trampled by horses and others knocked about by staffs and swords in the fight at Worcester.
A St John ambulanceman said: ‘We were rushed off our feet.’
Germans shoot at pigs to try bullet
THE German army is to shoot 700 live pigs — to test a new rifle bullet.
But the plan was slammed by animal lovers yesterday.
Military doctors say the ‘defence medical research’ is necessary to find out how to treat wounds caused by the new high-velocity ammunition.
Pigs have been chosen for the gruesome tests because their skin structure is the closest to humans.
The living targets will be tethered — then marksmen will shoot at different parts of their bodies to cause battlefield-type wounds.
Budget
And if the first batch of 700 pigs is not enough for the test, the Bonn defence ministry has earmarked a budget of £77,000 to buy more of the live targets.
Shocked animal lovers have protested to the ministry, but the tests are to go ahead.
An Animal Protection Association spokesman said yesterday: ‘The whole idea is cruel and barbaric.
‘They ought to shoot the defence minister instead.’
LINDI'S 200 MP LOVERS
VICE girl Lindi St Clair claims to have had sex with 204 MPs during her career.
WHIPLASH: Lindi
Terrorist alert over firm's test
COMPANY bosses are facing prosecution after an ‘initiative test’ for executives sparked a terrorist alert.
Police were alerted by a milkie who saw a man in a hooded anorak place a package with wires under a rail bridge.
Army bomb disposal experts were called in at Hope, Derbys — and another ‘suspicious package’ was found four miles away at Bamford.
Severe
A road was shut off and train drivers were ordered to go slow.
Then it was discovered that the packages held instructions for a local firm's staff on a ‘development exercise’.
A police spokesman said: ‘Prosecution of this company is now being seriously considered.
‘Severe disruption was caused and many hours spent needlessly.’
Drugnet
CANNABIS worth £70,000 was found in a canister landed by fisherman Peter Storey near Brighton, Sussex.
Holy holey
RESCUERS knocked a hole in the wall to reach a sleeping priest bricked up by jokers in his church near Verona, Italy.
BAN FOR ‘LINEKER’ YOB
SOCCER bad boy Ian Jolosa, who was ordered by a judge to clean up his act by watching Gary Lineker videos, has been banned from the game for three years.
Jolosa, who broke a rival player's jaw, was told to model his play on the England striker.
But in his next match he was sent off for twice attacking the goalie.
Now soccer bosses in Gwent, South Wales, have put the boot in — and banished Jolosa.
His manager Kyle Holmes said: ‘This will finish him.
There's no way he can come back from this.’
After the judge's advice, striker Jolosa, who lives in Cwmbran, branded Lineker's style of play ‘soppy stuff’.
Red light girls ‘to be legal’
BRITAIN'S first legal red light district could soon be given the go-ahead.
Councillors hope a ‘zone of tolerance’ will help clean up their vice-plagued city.
Prostitution would be made legal — and kerb-crawlers would not risk being arrested.
Research has shown there are 1,200 vice girls in Birmingham — some only 14 years old.
About 650 are arrested every year in notorious Balsall Heath district.
Now council chiefs hope to move the prostitutes from residential areas, possibly onto an industrial estate.
Griffin's Eye — Page 6
Potty!
Kids get passes for the loo
RONALD RICKETTS
CHILDREN at a comprehensive school have been issued with ‘potty passes’— to get them into the toilets.
The high-tech personalised plastic cards — nicknamed bog breakers — have been handed to all 1,400 pupils at The Ridings School at Winterbourne, near Bristol.
Bizarre
Head teacher Maureen Sedgwick said the cards, which have to be passed through an electronic scanner, were introduced to stop older children stampeding into the toilets.
‘I suppose it's a little bizarre but the children are tickled to death with the cards,’ she added.
‘The governors asked for ideas to improve the school and pupils voted to improve the toilets, which are about 40 years old.’
A VICE WARM WELCOME IN THE HILLSIDES
‘Madame’ Julie gets top Welsh tourism award
IAN CAMERON
SEX parlour boss Julie Williamson has won a top tourism award — for giving her customers a really good time.
Bubbly Julie, 45, was awarded the Wales Tourist Board's ‘Welcome Host’ title because she offered super service with a smile at her hotel.
But last week a court heard how she also ran three kinky health studios.
And she was fined £1,500 after being found guilty of controlling prostitutes' earnings.
Julie said yesterday at her Imperial Hotel in Swansea: ‘You've got to laugh — otherwise you'd go under.
‘I went on a course to win the award, and obviously I'm pleased to have it.
We were taught to be polite and pleasant.’
The Cardiff Crown Court trial heard that sex was on offer to customers at the three health studios in Cardiff, Swansea and Bridgend.
But Julie claimed she had sub-let the studios and had nothing to do with them any more.
Slogan
She is now selling off the leases.
One Imperial regular said: ‘She's a very good, popular business-woman.
‘She deserves recognition and what happened in court doesn't alter that.’
A spokesman for the tourist board — who launched the awards with the slogan ‘Expect the most’— said: ‘Julie deservedly won one.’
The Welsh flag
AGONY OF CUP HERO
BRAVE Peter Carman played in goal for nearly an hour during an FA Cup match…with a broken leg.
The Hastings footballer said: ‘I thought it was a bad ankle sprain.’
STICH IS SO QUICK TO WED
TENNIS ace Michael Stich has married actress Jessica Stockmann — after a 16-week romance.
Last year's Wimbledon champ recently admitted he was afraid of losing the German beauty.
He confessed: ‘I lost my last two girls by concentrating too much on tennis.
I don't want to lose Jessica.’
The couple, both 23, sealed their match in church at Eze, on the French Riviera.
Among the guests, with girl-friend Babs Feltus, was someone who also knows about mixed doubles — Boris Becker.
GUESTS: Boris Becker and girlfriend Babs
HEAD-TURNER: Bride Jessica leaves the church with smiling Michael
A twist in the tale!
A PRIEST carries on preaching in Hawaii — despite the havoc wreaked by Hurricane Iniki.
Father Gordy Carvaho is seen through the twisted window in the bell room of Kalaheo town's Holy Cross Catholic church, which had its steeple devastated in the storms.
BILL GIRL HAS TO CALL THE BILL
DON MACKAY
TV's Bill star Nula Conwell had to call in the real police when she woke up to find her home burgled.
Nula, who plays tough detective Viv Martella in the hit show, slept peacefully with record boss husband Martin Frederick as raiders sneaked into their house.
The gang helped themselves to a video, leather jacket, private letters plus bits and pieces to the tune of £1,000 before fleeing.
A police spokesman said yesterday: ‘When she woke up she found the front door wide open.
‘There was no sign of forced entry.
‘This just proves everyone can be a target and should be wary.’
It's not the first brush with real crime for ITV's Sun Hill sleuth.
Nightmare
Nula, 32, of North London, has had to fight off an attacker at a bus stop and survive a nightmare ride with a sinister mini-cab driver.
And once, as she filmed in WPc uniform in London's Shepherd's Bush market, a woman who had been mugged thought she was the real Bill and begged her for help.
Brave Nula scoured the market for the villain — but with no luck.
BURGLED: Actress Nula
PIT DEATH BLAST
AN explosion in a Canadian gold mine that killed nine workers was set off deliberately, police said yesterday.
A Mounties spokesman said the death blast 600ft down in the Yellowknife mine in the Northwest Territories was being treated as ‘multiple homicide’.
A strike has been going on at the mine for over three months and the nine who died were all non-union men.
Bobby dazzler
BOBBY Fischer went ahead in style 5-2 in his match with Boris Spassky yesterday on the Adriatic island of Sveti Stefan.
I'VE WON A MILLION
Shame it's in Mexican pesos worth only £160
PATRICK MULCHRONE
HOSPITAL clerk Pat McHugh became a millionaire after winning a fortune in Mexican pesos.
But she won't let her megabucks prize change her life…it's only worth £160.30p.
Mum-of-six Pat was presented with a suitcase stuffed with the crisp green banknotes yesterday as her prize in a radio contest.
The organisers — Hogg Robinson Travel and Greater Manchester Radio — felt so sorry for her when the true value was revealed that they upped her winnings to £380.
Thrills
But Pat, of Stockport, was delighted to taco the money and run.
‘I don't care if it's pesos or Polish zlotys,’ she laughed.
‘Just to be told I've won a million was one of the greatest thrills of my life.
I have never won anything before and I was absolutely thrilled when I was told.’
Pat is planning to use her winnings to provide a few more kicks — by buying a Manchester United season ticket.
Hogg Robinson spokesman Derek Smith explained that the company decided to make Pat a millionaire twice over when they learned how little her pesos would buy.
‘We played about with the exchange rate,’ he said.
CHILLI-CON-BARMY: Pat's Mex million
REUNITED?
WHAT A LOAD OF BLANDFORDS
Becky's fury over marquis
THE wayward Marquis of Blandford and his estranged wife Becky had a blazing row yesterday…hours after they were reported to have patched up their rift.
Becky, 29, stormed out of the cottage where 36-year-old Jamie Blandford spent the weekend visiting his baby son George.
‘The rumours of a reconciliation between James and me are absolute balls,’ Becky said.
‘I mean, he is even sleeping in a separate bedroom.’
She refused to pose for a happy family picture with Jamie and two-month-old George, saying:
‘It will start all sorts of speculation that we are getting back together and I am not going for that.’
Former drug addict Jamie, who served a prison term for driving offences, has been living in London with girlfriend Arabella Tait since the split with his wife.
George's birth brought hopes of a reunion.
And on Friday, Jamie arrived at Becky's rented cottage on the Blenheim estate in Oxfordshire.
Yesterday, the couple were seen arguing outside the cottage.
Becky yelled at the flustered marquis:
‘All right then, but we'll sort it out later.’
Then she roared off in an estate car with the baby in the back.
Three hours later, Becky returned and went for a lunchtime drink with Jamie to talk things over.
The marquis is heir to the £100million Blenheim estate.
But he did not call on his father, the Duke of Marlborough, after the pub outing to Woodstock near Blenheim Palace.
BATTLERS FEUDING Jamie and Becky at the Blenheim cottage yesterday
GIRLFRIEND: Arabella
OPERA HERO GERAINT DIES
OPERA star Sir Geraint Evans has died in hospital, aged 70, a week after suffering a heart attack.
Son of a Welsh miner, he left his pit village home to become a legend on the world stage.
Sir Geraint was best known for his portrayal of Falstaff.
But he sang many roles in a 30-year career in which he rose to principal baritone at London's Royal Opera House.
He retired in 1984.
Sir Geraint was thought to be making a good recovery in hospital after suffering a minor heart attack at his home near Aberystwyth.
But his condition deteriorated and he died late on Saturday.
His wife Brenda was at his bedside.
LEGEND: Sir Geraint
DANNII HEADS FOR THE ACTION
ALL that fame has clearly gone to Dannii Minogue's head.
For once, the pop starlet seemed to be trying to keep her identity under her hat.
Of course, she had only nipped out to do a spot of shopping in London's Covent Garden.
Perhaps the Aussie singer wasn't brimming over with confidence.
But, after a moment's consideration, the girl from Down Under decided to face the world after all…and came up smiling.
Picture: ALAN GRISBROOK 
HATTA-GIRL: It's Dannii
SUNK WIFE THAT INVENTED SOAP THAT FLOATS
Sarah's bubble bursts
CLIVE CRICKMER
HOUSEWIFE Sarah Fox's dream of making a fortune from soap that FLOATS has disappeared down the plughole.
For nobody wanted to know about her bathtime invention.
And last night as the bubble burst, Sarah said: ‘I've sunk £10,000 into the project.
Now enough's enough.
‘I still believe I've come up with one of the greatest innovations of modern times.
But, sadly, nobody appears interested.’
The bathtime problems of sinking soap first dawned on Sarah, 42, when her four children were still small.
Bars turned gooey as they slid underwater — then the youngsters slipped on them when they stood up to get out.
When Sarah couldn't find any ‘floating soap’ in the shops, she decided to make it herself.
Early attempts — including putting a ping-pong ball inside a soap bar — sank without trace.
Then she hit on a buoyancy technique.
This involved grating soap, microwaving it and finally putting it through a food processor.
Sarah, of Hart, near Hartlepool, said: ‘It sounds weird, but worked by aerating the bars.’
She and husband Bob, 47, bought machinery to make attractively-shaped soap.
They ploughed cash into marketing attempts and even won a prize from the local council.
But shops showed no interest and the big soap companies didn't even reply to her letters.
Sarah said: ‘It seems mankind doesn't want to benefit.’
IN A LATHER: Sarah Fox
OUI
…but it's only by a whisker
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
THE European train struggled back on track last night after France narrowly voted YES to the Maastricht Treaty.
But the French referendum on closer European ties left a huge headache for Premier John Major, currently EC president and still reeling from last week's pound crisis.
Anti-Maastricht forces hailed the lukewarm verdict as a boost for their bid to sink the treaty.
With nearly 90 per cent of the poll counted late last night, the Yes vote nosed ahead by just one percentage point.
Cuts
There is now little prospect of Britain soon rejoining the European currency club, the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
Last night, amid growing doubts that the treaty will ever become law in its present form, Mr Major faced demands for a referendum in Britain.
He called an emergency summit of EC leaders for early next month to sort out the shambles.
Mr Major said he still believed the treaty was good for Britain and Europe, but added: ‘We now need to consider the way forward.’
Tory rebels queued to warn that they would sabotage efforts to put the treaty through Parliament.
France's President Francois Mitterrand and EC President Jacques Delors had staked their political careers on a Yes vote.
Victory
They and other committed Europeans like Germany's Chancellor Helmut Kohl hoped for a massive endorsement to put all their plans firmly back on track.
The Yes verdict was first confirmed with almost two-thirds of the votes counted.
French Interior Minister Paul Quiles claimed victory 75 minutes after the polls closed.
He insisted: ‘There will not be any renegotiation of the treaty.’
These were the figures with 90 per cent of the votes counted:
YES: 11,661,391 — 50.66 per cent NO: 11,356,803 — 49.34 per cent.
Mr Mitterrand called the result a vote for ‘youth and opportunity.’
Mr Delors said: ‘In a referendum only the result counts.’
Publicly, the Yes — however grudging — was greeted with relief in the capitals of Europe.
But the wafer-thin support in France, coming on top of Denmark's No vote in June, left European leaders badly shaken.
All 12 EC countries must ratify the treaty for it to become law.
Mr Major now has the job of finding a solution to the problems raised by the Danish No vote.
He said last night that the treaty Bill would not go before Parliament until the Danes had sorted out their problems.
Urgent EC meetings were being held in Washington and New York last night to assess Europe's future.
All eyes are now on the financial markets, rocked by last week's sterling crisis.
VICTORY: Delors
STAND-IN DI STEALS SHOW
DAZZLING Diana stepped into her husband's shoes last night…and walked off with the glory.
Dressed in a pearly gown, the Princess deputised for Charles at the British Film Institute awards because he was double booked.
A host of celebs turned out in London to see Hear My Song, the film about Irish singer Josef Locke, win a top prize.
But there was no doubt about who stole the show — the royal stand-in.
STAR ROLE: Di shines at film awards Picture: KEN LENNOX
DIANA SENDS HER MERC BACK!
JAMES WHITAKER
PRINCESS Diana has returned the controversial £72,000 Mercedes sports car she has driven for 10 months.
Di decided to save the £1,250 a month it costs to lease the 157mph dream machine.
There was an outcry from MPs and British car workers when the 31-year-old princess took delivery of the red two-seater 500SL.
Now it is the turn of Germany — cashing in as the pound plummets — to feel snubbed.
Buckingham Palace said Di wanted to tighten her belt along with everyone else.
And last night TUC president Alan Tuffin said: ‘I'm glad she's sent it back.
‘We don't want to do the Germans any favours these days.
They haven't done us many lately.’
Husband Charles, 43, was upset when Di picked a foreign car and made her pay for it herself.
Now it is back at Mercedes Benz's UK HQ at Milton Keynes, Bucks.
Mr Tuffin said: ‘I was never happy that Di was driving a German car.
‘It just didn't look good for the British car industry which needs all the help it can get.’
Jimmy Airlie, chief Ford union negotiator, said: ‘The princess should never have picked a foreign car in the first place.
‘But this is a welcome decision.
It will boost the morale of car workers and — who knows — it could even help save jobs.’
A Palace spokesman said: ‘In times of recession one should look at cost-cutting and the princess has done just this.
‘It was a personal decision to get rid of the car.
She made it because everybody else is involved in belt-tightening and she felt she should, too.’
TIGHTENING HER BELT: Diana
DREAM MACHINE: Di dozing in the Merc in March
I'M DEVASTATED SAYS MERCY DOC
Sentence ‘too harsh’
TOM MERRIN
MERCY killing doctor Nigel Cox walked free yesterday when a judge gave him a suspended 12-month prison sentence.
But he said: ‘I'm devastated by both the verdict and sentence.
‘It seems somewhat harsh to criminalise me for doing my best in what were quite exceptional circumstances.’
The 47-year-old consultant now faces being struck off the Medical Register for attempting to murder a terminally-ill patient.
A jury at Winchester Crown Court heard how father-of-two Dr Cox gave a lethal injection to arthritis sufferer Lillian Boyes, 70, after she begged to die.
Mr Justice Ognall told him: ‘What you did was not only criminal, it was a total betrayal of your unequivocal duty as a physician.
I have no doubt this has been a terrible ordeal for you and the verdict is a personal and professional catastrophe.
But such conduct can never be excused.’
Later Dr Cox, from Colden Common, Hants, stressed that his trial had not been about ‘the general issue of euthanasia’.
He added: ‘My aim now is to get back to as normal a life as possible.
I will be continuing to see my patients.’
Dr Cox described Mrs Boyes as ‘a brave and patient lady’.
‘What I did was a bona fide act solely in her interests,’ he said.
‘I hope now that her family will be allowed to grieve in peace.’
Compassion
Her sons, John and Patrick, praised Dr Cox's ‘care and compassion’.
Patrick, 42, said: ‘Mother was a very special and caring person.
‘We are certain she would be horrified that her passing resulted in the conviction of a doctor she respected and considered a friend.’
Last night the sentence was described as ‘obscene’ by two of Dr Cox's colleagues.
.
Sentenced to life — page 6
Cash crisis shuts new hospital unit
PETER KANE
TORY cash cuts forced a hospital's new head injuries unit to shut yesterday — ten weeks after it opened.
TORY cash cuts forced a hospital's new head injuries unit to shut yesterday — ten weeks after it opened.
A plea for a £98,000 grant to keep it open was refused by the government.
The four-bed unit at pioneering Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, was set up to treat some of the worst brain-damaged and head injury cases in the country.
Three patients who had been receiving specialist care were back in ordinary wards last night after the unit closed.
And the unit's highly-trained staff were on general duties in the hospital.
Doctors and other medical staff had fought for 15 years to get the unit open.
The hospital's planning director, Mr Roy Mawford, said the project would be mothballed until funding became available.
He added: ‘Head injury patients will now have to be treated in the same way as before.
‘But if we can find the funds in future we would want to reinstate the service.’
It was the third time the hospital had applied for a government grant for the unit.
A spokeswoman for Headway, the national head injuries association, said the closure was ‘a devastating blow’.
She said: ‘Experience elsewhere has shown that people with head injuries need a concentrated level of service in the early stages.
‘It is a great shame that Addenbrookes can no longer provide this service.’
WHY COULDN'T YOU BE MY BEN?
Kidnap mum Kerry flies 2000 miles to discover the torment goes on
JIM OLDFIELD
SHATTERED kidnap mum Kerry Needham wept bitter tears of disappointment as she first laid eyes on the child she had raced 2,000 miles to see.
For she knew in an instant that the blue-eyed blond tot was not the baby snatched from her on a Greek island 14 months ago.
As the confused little boy eyed her warily, Kerry tenderly drew him into her arms and sobbed: ‘I wish you were Ben.
Why couldn't you be him?’
The poignant meeting took place in a Corfu bar after an amazing series of coincidences led to 17 separate sightings by British tourists.
They followed the release of new pictures of Ben, which experts had ‘aged’ by computer to give an impression of what the tot must look like now.
Kerry, 20, made a desperate appeal in the Mirror, begging our readers bound for Greece to look out for her child.
She hardly dared to believe it would do any good.
Then the reports began to flood in…a fair-haired, blue-eyed toddler of about the right age, always in the company of a Greek couple much too old to be his natural parents.
Six of them originated from the same bar on Corfu — 500 miles from the island of Kos where Ben first vanished.
Even the police in Sheffield, the family's home town, were convinced.
‘We have never had a lead as good as this,’ said Sgt Bert Norburn, the man co-ordinating the British hunt.
‘I feel this has to be Ben Needham.’
The British police cannot work in Greece, so the Mirror agreed to help in a secret operation to investigate the sightings.
As we flew Kerry and her mother Christine to Corfu, they finally dared to hope.
They made straight for Yani's — the lively tourist bar where ‘Ben’ had been sighted in the resort of Kassiopi.
For an hour the two women sat in silent prayer, nervously scanning the other customers.
Their anxious faces were hidden behind dark glasses — in case the people holding Ben should recognise them.
Suddenly a blond boy of about three darted through the door…and the precious hope in Kerry's heart died.
Clutched ‘Oh God — it's not Ben,’ she cried.
‘I just know it's not him.’
And the two women clutched each other and sobbed.
They had travelled 2,000 miles only to be disappointed by cruel coincidence.
For little Panos, the child who sparked such excitement, WAS born in Greece to British parents.
He WAS the right age.
He DID bear a strong resemblance to Ben.
But he was given by his unmarried mum to a childless couple from Corfu, probably the only such adoption ever to take place in the Greek islands.
When the child's father heard Kerry's story, he was full of sympathy and concern.
A 63-year-old property developer who does not want to be named, he is one of the wealthiest men on the island.
After giving up all hope of ever being parents, the businessman and his wife learned of a young English girl living on Corfu who was putting her baby up for adoption.
Dashed
Now little Panos stands to inherit his father's empire of holiday apartments and villas.
The father said: ‘We are very lucky.
He is probably the only adopted English child in these islands.
‘We love him so much.
If anyone took Panos I don't know what we would do.
‘We feel so very sorry for this girl, coming all this way for nothing.
‘She must have had such high hopes and now they have been dashed.’
At first Kerry could only collapse in her mother's arms and ask despairingly: ‘How will we ever find Ben?
When will I ever see him?’
Christine told her: ‘We WILL find him — because we have to.
We will never stop looking.’
Then Kerry began to realise that she had found a strange kind of relief amid the disappointment that knocked her sideways when she first saw Panos.
Until then she had been tortured by fears that she might not recognise her son if she should see him.
‘He must have changed so much,’ she said.
‘All this time I have been riddled with guilt wondering if I would know his face.
But as soon as I saw that little boy I knew it wasn't Ben.
And I know now that I will recognise him…however long it takes.
‘I know now that there is something between a mother and her baby that even time cannot take away.
I don't regret coming.
This is the closest we have ever been to getting Ben back.
‘All the facts seemed to fit and he even looks like Ben.
‘It would have been a chance in a million but maybe next time we will be lucky.’
Kerry now fears her original suspicions were correct — that Ben was abducted by one of the bands of gipsies roaming the Greek isles.
But of one thing she is certain…
‘When the time comes I will know him.’
As she spoke, young Panos played at her feet, shooting curious glances at the nice English lady with tears rolling down her cheeks.
For the little boy who had found a family could not begin to understand the anguish he had unwittingly caused to the family who had lost a little boy…
SO CLOSE, YET SO FAR: Kerry cuddles Panos and thinks of her Ben
MISSING BEN: He would be 3 next month
HOLDING ON: Kerry and Chris will keep looking
LOOKALIKE: Panos sparked 17 ‘Ben’ sightings
Mitterrand ‘must go’
FRENCH president Francois Mitterrand, 75, was under heavy pressure to quit last night.
His gamble of calling a referendum totally backfired, rivals said.
The ‘Yes’ majority of just 51.05 per cent meant he barely escaped the biggest humiliation of his political career.
And it exposed divisions which rocked the EC to its roots.
GAMBLE: Mitterrand
£ still plunging
THE pound plunged by more than 7 1/2 pfennigs to a new low level of 2.54 marks yesterday.
International investors continued to switch their money out of sterling because they expect the Government to slash interest rates.
But on the Stock Exchange the shares boom was stopped in its tracks after the Bank of England warned there would be no immediate cut.
The Italian lira also continued to dive.
TORIES AT WAR
Major blasted from all sides over treaty
Cabinet split after French Euro vote
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
SQUABBLING Tories launched all-out civil war over Europe yesterday — with Premier John Major trapped as piggy in the middle.
Cabinet Ministers and MPs clashed openly among the chaos caused by the French voting by a whisker for the Maastricht Treaty.
The pro-Europeans and sceptics — each camp backed by an ex-Prime Minister — went into battle.
The treaty's supporters, led by Sir Ted Heath, demanded Mr Major ‘show leadership’ and fight to save the deal.
But their enemies, with Lady Thatcher flying their flag, called for the treaty to be killed.
Sir Ted warned Thatcherites last night that the party would never allow them to destroy the EC.
And on Channel 4, he accused Mr Major of ‘hiding behind the Danes’.
Chancellor Norman Lamont didn't help unity.
He made no secret of his belief that Britain would NEVER go back into the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
He also appeared to call for a referendum on Maastricht — against Government policy.
But Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd ruled out a referendum.
The closeness of France's ‘Oui’ vote has put Mr Major in a spin.
The Premier, writing in the London Evening Standard, started off in anti-Maastricht mode, referring to ‘bloody battles’ during negotiation and urging EC leaders to ‘reflect’.
Survive
He said the idea of a single currency was ‘even less realistic than I believed it to be nine months ago’.
But he then stressed his commitment to making a ‘success’ of our EC membership and his desire to get back into the ERM.
MPs are now wondering if Mr Major can survive.
Bookies William Hill have cut odds on him lasting until the Budget next March from 3-1 to 13-8.
EC president Jacques Delors last night ruled out any changes to the treaty.
He said: ‘If you start back, you will open Pandora's box.’
Ex-Cabinet member Lord Tebbit described it as a ‘dead parrot’.
He told TV's Panorama: ‘They may try to nail it on to the perch again but nobody will believe it's still alive.’
Mirror Comment — Page 2 
THATCHER says NO to Treaty
MAJOR is piggy in the middle
SIR TED says YES to Treaty
Dead Yugo Brit named
A BRITISH aid worker killed in Bosnia was named yesterday as father-of-six Gulam Jilani, 44, from Leicester.
In Herzegovina, seven foreign fighters, including a Briton, were killed.
Golden jumble
BRITAIN'S richest man made more than £200,000 yesterday — by selling off his junk.
The Duke of Westminster cleared out the attics and sheds at his stately home near Chester to create more space.
The 500 lots were auctioned by Sotheby's.
Prices started at £2.30.
Rachel: Quizzed man is guilty of flashing
DON MACKAY
A MAN quizzed for 60 hours by detectives hunting Rachel Nickell's killer was finally charged with flashing.
Colin Stagg, 29, was arrested last Friday after a videofit of a man was screened on BBC's Crimewatch UK.
But yesterday the newspaper delivery man walked free from Wimbledon Court, South London, after being fined £200 for indecent exposure.
He admitted confronting a woman on Wimbledon Common while completely naked apart from sunglasses.
The offence took place between July 15 — the day Rachel, 23, was sexually assaulted and stabbed to death on the common in front of her three-year-old son — and July 24.
Scotland Yard said no further action would be taken against Stagg, who lives at Roehampton less than a mile from the murder scene.
The murder hunt team are now back at square one after having arrested and released 27 men.
TRAGIC: Rachel
FINED: Flasher Stagg
FIREBALL TERROR AT CHEMICAL FACTORY
Two killed, 15 hurt in blast
STEPHEN WHITE
SHOCKED onlookers told last night of a shattering blast and raging fire that killed two chemical workers and injured 15.
As a massive explosion ripped through the plant, eyewitness Joyce Colgan heard a rumbling like a train which got louder and louder.
She said: ‘I thought it was a plane going to crash.
Then there was a great ball of fire about 300ft into the air.
I really thought the whole place was going to go up.’
Sheila Malanszak, whose house overlooks the sprawling factory at Castleford, West Yorkshire, said: ‘I raced outside to see debris being hurled into neighbouring fields.
‘It must have been thrown more than a quarter of a mile.
‘The whole plant was covered in a pall of smoke.
The smell was horrible — it was difficult to breathe.
‘There was also a deafening screeching sound, like gas escaping.’
The terrifying blast erupted at the Hickson and Welch chemical works near Castleford rugby league ground at 1.20pm yesterday.
Blazing liquid nitrotoluene, which is used to make dyes and fertilisers, sprayed over maintenance workers.
The fireball destroyed a prefabricated office building before setting a four-storey office block ablaze.
Many workers only escaped because they were in the canteen.
Managing director Dr Jim Fyfe said: ‘Thank God it was lunchtime.’
Smike
One hundred firemen tackled the blaze.
They found one badly-injured woman in a toilet.
As dense black smoke swirled over the town, residents were told to stay indoors.
Firms sent workers home early and schools kept pupils in class.
The all-clear was given three hours later after police confirmed that the fumes were not poisonous.
The injured included a 24-year-old woman who had to be resuscitated from a heart attack as she was being flown to hospital by helicopter.
Two of the burns victims were in a critical condition last night.
Safety officials have begun an inquiry.
Dr Fyfe said: ‘At this stage we have no idea what went wrong.’
Britain's worst chemical disaster — at Flixborough, North Yorks, in June 1974 — killed 28 people.
ACTION STATIONS: Workers race to join firemen tackling the inferno after yesterday's huge blast at the Castleford chemical plant Picture: PHIL SPENCER
WRECKED: Burnt-out cars blitzed by the fireball which roared through the plant
Fire heroes ‘rescue’ toy
A NEW £300,000 fire engine with turntable ladder raced to an ‘emergency’— a model plane stuck in a tree.
It was called to make the 30-mile round trip after other firemen found their ladders were too short to reach the stranded model.
Yesterday, fire chief Bob Batchelor defended the decision to call the emergency tender out to Felixstowe, Suffolk.
‘People expect a service and we always try to help,’ he said.
‘Con spree’ Briton held
A BRITON was behind bars in Florida yesterday after allegedly admitting that he preyed on women estate agents in a trail of crime across the USA.
William David Gorman, 40, a former military policeman and cruise ship worker, is charged at Fort Lauderdale with assault, issuing dud cheques and car theft.
Gorman was trapped on video at a store as he used a credit card owned by one of his victims, said police.
Top dog
A HOUND called Snoopy was rescued alive after 25 days without food, trapped down a well near her home at Ogbourne Maizey, Wilts.
Ding-dong battle
A CHURCH has been told to tone down its bells or be prosecuted for noise pollution by Nottingham Council.
Pupil killed
RAF officer's son Matthew Hurst, 17, plunged to his death from a balcony at Barnard Castle School, Co Durham, it was revealed yesterday.
Yeltsin visit
BORIS Yeltsin is to make the first official visit to Britain by a Russian president in November.
Cops grab gun gang
A GANG armed with a sub-machine gun were caught with drugs worth £5 million by undercover police.
Nine men were arrested in swoops by 24 officers in London and Essex, it was revealed yesterday.
Four semi-automatic pistols were also seized in one raid at Ongar, Essex.
Armed police found 21,000 ecstasy tablets.
Five men will appear at Grays magistrates court today on drug plot charges.
85 trains ‘too long’
TUBE bosses spent £350 million on 85 new trains which are too long for their stations.
Now they are spending another £40,000 shaving an inch off 23 platforms on London's Central Line to stop the trains scraping the edge.
George jets for smiles
BY George.
Funny girl Pamela Stephenson looked like she'd joined the smile-high club yesterday as she jetted into Britain with pop star George Michael.
The pair were having a right old giggle as they walked through Heathrow airport, despite a tiring flight from Los Angeles.
George, 29, in baseball cap and trainers, and Pam, 41, sporting a leopardskin outfit and dark glasses, shared the same Virgin flight.
They refused to reveal what they had each been up to in the States.
There wasn't even a careless whisper from George.
Picture by VICTOR CRAWSHAW 
THE PAY'S POULTRY
WORKERS at a state-run poultry plant near St Petersburg, Russia, are being paid in EGGS because it has run out out of roubles.
Anger at Mellor's £6m US contract
ANTHONY HARWOOD
LOVE-cheat minister David Mellor was last night blasted by British architects after his ministry awarded a plum £6million contract to an AMERICAN firm.
A new London HQ to house 350 civil servants will be designed by New York-based Swanke Hayden Connell.
There were renewed calls for his resignation after he was accused of failing to live up to his brief as Minister of National Heritage.
Colours
Mr Mellor, 43 — said to have made love to actress Antonia de Sancha in his Chelsea team strip — was accused of ‘showing his true colours’.
London architect Peter Ullathorne said: ‘This is a showcase job and a prime opportunity for British architects.
‘He is not acting in the best interests of national heritage.
This is a test case for him and he's fallen at the first hurdle.
He should resign.’
Last night a spokesman for Mr Mellor said the US company was not directly appointed by him.
ANGER: Mellor
JEALOUS HUSBAND'S MEATFORK REVENGE
WIFE'S HALF-NUDE LOVER PROTECTS HIS PRIME CUTS
GEOFFREY LAKEMAN
JEALOUS husband Michael Arthurs threatened to give his wife's half-naked lover a roasting with a sharp-pronged meatfork.
He screamed ‘She's my property’ as terrified David Berry dodged the blows with just a towel protecting his ‘prime cuts’, a court heard yesterday.
Estranged wife Sheila, wearing only a dressing gown, finally managed to grab the meatfork off her furious husband.
But then Arthurs, who had called at his former home to visit his three children, lashed out at Mr Berry with a cricket bat and kicked him in the face, breaking his jaw in several places.
He also threatened to drag him down the street handcuffed to the bumper of his car.
Arthurs, 33, of Exeter, was jailed for nine months after admitting causing grievous bodily harm.
Mark Whitehall, defending, said Arthurs had two Achilles' heels —‘his love for his children and his bad temper’.
He added: ‘Plainly it was embarrassing that his wife was probably having a sexual relationship with Mr Berry.
‘He complained about these cavortings and his temper snapped.’
Recorder Guy Boney, QC, told Arthurs: ‘Passions run high when marriages break up and children are involved.
‘But there was no real provocation offered in this case.
‘You had separated from your wife more than 15 months earlier.
‘So it could hardly have taken you by surprise that she'd started up life with a different partner.’
Money to burn
ROYAL Mint worker Alan Meredith gave his wife fake bank notes for her shopping.
He was caught when she tried to pay an 80p supermarket bill with a forged £20 note.
Police found Meredith, 33, burning bundles of dud tenners on the living room fire at his home in Caerphilly, Mid-Glamorgan.
He was sacked from the Mint — and was jailed for nine months at Cardiff Crown Court yesterday.
Ifield's all set to wed
SINGER Frank Ifield, 56, is to marry Australian air hostess Carole Wood.
Frank, who topped the charts in 1962 with I Remember You, aims to live in Sydney after the Christmas wedding.
We keep taking the tablets…
SICKLY Britons coughed up £438 million on health remedies last year — including £152 million on cold cures and £45 million on indigestion tablets, it was revealed yesterday.
The aspirin and paracetamol market was worth £148 million — a healthy increase of almost 10 per cent on 1990, said the market research group Datamonitor.
Britain is becoming ‘self-medicating’, they reported.
We spent £9.43 a head on non-prescription remedies in 1991.
And next year the market is expected to be worth £508 million.
TOO-SOBER DRIVER IN WEAK BEER PROTEST
‘I should have failed B-test’
PETER KANE
A MOTORIST passed a police breath test after drinking five pints of beer — then complained to trading standards officers that the beer was too weak.
He reckoned he should have been legless after his booze-up at a nightclub and insisted that the ale must have  been watered down.
A council inspector was called in to test the beer at the club in Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk…and found it up to strength.
Suffolk County Council trading standards official Alan Fletcher revealed details of the B-test hiccup yesterday.
He said: ‘The motorist decided to drive after sinking five pints.
‘When he was stopped by the police at the roadside and given the breath test he was convinced he was going to fail and lose his licence.
‘But instead of being delighted with the result he complained to us about the beer.
‘He thought the only explanation was that staff at the club had watered down the drinks.
‘We investigated, as we are obliged to, but found nothing wrong at the club.’
Suffolk police spokesman John Mayhew last night condemned the motorist, who has not been named, as ‘highly irresponsible’ for getting behind the wheel after drinking five pints.
‘He was extremely lucky to get away with it,’ he said.
PINT: Not enough wallop
BOUNDER POTS SIR NICK IN EYE
FLAMBOYANT Tory MP Sir Nicholas Fairbairn was recovering yesterday after being shot in the eye as neighbours potted clay pigeons.
The injury temporarily blinded one eye and gave him double vision in the other, but is now no more than a bruise, said his wife.
Lady Fairbairn said they were peppered with pellets as they walked in the garden of Fordell Castle, their home in Fife, Scotland.
She added: ‘We fetched a doctor, called the police, remonstrated with the neighbours, but did not prefer charges.’
Sir Nicholas, 58, whose recreations are listed in Who's Who as ‘loving beauty and beautifying love’, said: ‘Some bounder got me.’
SHOT: Fairbairn
Gun gang go down for 1p
THREE armed robbers were jailed for a total of 33 years yesterday…for stealing a penny.
The gang expected to net £5,000 as they ambushed a wages clerk on her drive back from the bank.
One of the robbers jumped onto the young woman's car bonnet brandishing an imitation gun.
Then another smashed the window and grabbed a bag — only to discover that it contained just 1p.
All three men, of Moston, Manchester, admitted the robbery at Clayton Vale.
Steven Hyde, 29, who had the gun, was jailed for 14 years.
William Howarth, 23, and Anthony Fothergill, 31, got 11 and eight years.
BT cheat is jailed
A TELEPHONE engineer cost BT £200,000 by calling dial-a-quiz games.
Steven Osbourne, 30, used three lines nearly every day for six months — sometimes for 22 hours at a time — to ring the Wheel of Fortune.
BT had to pay contest organisers 90 per cent of calls made.
Osbourne, of Wallasey, who won £12,000, was jailed for six months by Liverpool Crown Court.
NEWLYWEDS KILLED
A BRITISH bride and her husband have been killed in a helicopter crash during their honeymoon in Hawaii.
Carol Shawcroft, 19, and Raoul German, 31, were among seven people who died when the pleasure trip helicopter smashed into an extinct volcano at 3,000ft.
Last night Carol's distraught parents, from Southport, Merseyside, were still at the newly-weds' home in Los Angeles.
Her father John said: ‘Carol looked beautiful at the wedding and I was the proudest dad in the world.
The news came as a bombshell.
We're surrounded by their unopened presents.’
TRAGIC COUPLE: Bride Carol with Raoul
Sex drive is kerbed
VICE cops in Italy have found a novel way to stop kerb-crawlers.
Instead of arresting a man caught with a hooker in his car, the police in Florence impound the motor.
The driver then has the ticklish problem of explaining to the missus why he came home by bus.
Linda's stage fright
OOH help!
Leggy Linda Lusardi has just been told that her new job involves moving in with seven adoring men.
But the model-turned-actress need not look so worried…she's starring as Snow White in this season's panto at Croydon's Ashcroft Theatre.
And with Linda on the team, they should dwarf the opposition.
Picture: HARRY PROSSER
Out of gas
TWO Dutch balloonists who ditched during the Atlantic race were rescued by Navy helicopter and flown to hospital at Truro yesterday.
Children ‘starved of books’ in school
RICHARD GARNER
CHILDREN in cash-starved secondary schools often go all day without even seeing a book.
A report published yesterday by Book Trust researchers says: ‘Rarely have so many pupils had so few books.’
Sometimes youngsters must make do with teachers' worksheets giving summaries of books they should be studying.
Researchers spent days sitting alongside pupils watching them learn.
They report: ‘Some worksheets have an amateurish lay-out and are sometimes illegible.’
Schools' biggest problem is shortage of cash.
Publishers believe primary schools should spend £15 a year for every pupil on books and secondary schools £25.
The report says: ‘Few pupils have the basic books they require for the GCSE without financial support from home.
‘We are in danger of producing a book-starved generation.’
Kids dicing with death
CHILDREN are risking life on a busy road — while £10,000 has been spent on a nearby crossing for cows.
Parents have been warned of a two-month delay for pelican lights at Southmoor, Cumbria.
But similar lights have been installed for a farm.
Disappointed Mona vows: ‘I'll fight on’
JOHN JACKSON /RONALD RICKETTS
BEAUTIFUL Mona Bauwens last night spoke of her ‘disappointment’ at her failure to win libel damages over the newspaper story about her Spanish holiday with David Mellor and his family.
But after the jury were deadlocked 6-6, she vowed: ‘I am going to fight on.’
Mrs Bauwens will seek a retrial of a case that cost £250,000 over seven dramatic days at the High Court.
Last night editor Richard Stott — then in charge of The People newspaper, which published the story — said of a possible retrial: ‘We shall see them in court.
We will have a great deal more material to put next time.’
And he called on Mr Mellor to resign as Heritage Secretary, saying: ‘His days are numbered.’
Mr Stott, now editor of the Daily Mirror, said the ‘hung jury’ outcome was ‘a famous victory for journalism.’
He said of Mr Mellor:
He took a holiday he should not have done during the Gulf War crisis when this country was facing its greatest possible crisis.
Truth
He has taken a freebie holiday at enormous expense and the jury has found it is clearly not on.
That was our case and it is still our case.
The story was in the public interest.
Mr Stott went on: ‘Investigative journalism like this has proved that no Minister, however powerful, however rich, however threatening he might be, can come up against a newspaper that is prepared to tell the truth.
‘That is the stuff and fabric of journalism’.
The People story on Mr Mellor and Mrs Bauwens — daughter of the PLO's chief fund-raiser — was headlined ‘Top Tory and his pal from the PLO.’
Mrs Bauwens claimed the article branded her ‘a leper’ and ‘social outcast’.
An editorial comment also had this message for the then Prime Minister Mrs Thatcher: ‘Just what would make your Minister blush with shame?’
At the time in August 1990, Iraq was invading Kuwait, which led to the Gulf war.
And yesterday Mr Justice Drake sent the jury of six men and six women to consider their verdict with this final thought:
There is no doubt that the background to The People article was a time of great crisis for this country.
It was a fact that 4,000 British hostages were held by Saddam Hussein to be used as human shields by stationing them at places which might be attacked by the allied forces.
That was quite clearly a matter of great public interest and concern.
‘He added: ‘The conduct of a Government Minister which in no way affected the crisis was equally a matter of fact and public interest,’.
Mrs Bauwens, wearing a black cloak over a grey suit, clutched the arm of her second husband — Egyptian financier Mohammed Shourjabi — as the jury filed out.
Three hours later they sent a note to the judge to say they were split and could not budge from 6-6.
Mr Justice Drake instructed them to try for a majority 10-2.
But after another 75 minutes a second note said no one had changed their mind.
Before they returned to be discharged, Richard Hartley, QC for Mrs Bauwens, suggested the judge himself could decide the case.
George Carman, QC for The People, replied: ‘An invitation to the dance at this stage comes too late.
Confident as I am of your Lordship's view, the parties agreed to trial by jury’.
Action
Leading libel solicitor Peter Carter-Ruck, whose firm represented Mrs Bauwens, said a split jury in a libel action was ‘pretty rare’.
But there is at least one precedent.
Last year Labour MP Brian Sedgemore finally abandoned a libel action against The Times newspaper after a jury failed to agree a verdict.
Mr Sedgemore's complaint was about an an article by Robert Kilroy-Silk on the Salman Rushdie affair.
Both sides met their own costs.
FACTS: Justice Drake
HE DIDN'T TELL US SAY DOWNING STREET
Time runs out for Mellor as No 10 breaks silence on THAT holiday
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL /DAVID BRADSHAW
DAVID Mellor was heading for the political scrapheap last night after Downing Street revealed that he did NOT seek permission for his ‘freebie’ holiday with Mona Bauwens.
The stark admission came after the sensational ending of the High Court libel case brought by Mrs Bauwens against The People newspaper.
The court verdict was divided.
But the judgment at Westminster was almost unanimous.
Mr Mellor may have survived the scandal of his affair with actress Antonia de Sancha.
But the plug was about to be pulled on the Fun Minister because he broke the rules on ministerial conduct.
Earlier, Mr Mellor had defiantly denied that he would quit.
That was before the statement from 10 Downing Street about his family's expenses-paid holiday to Marbella with Mrs Bauwens, daughter of a PLO chief.
Until yesterday, No 10 maintained it was ‘impossible to tell’ whether the holiday was in line with official rules governing Ministers and gifts.
But last night they admitted for the first time that Mr Mellor did not refer it to the then Prime Minister, Mrs Thatcher.
Downing Street said: ‘He clearly took the view that it was not a problem.’
It was the first sign of a crack in the support given to Mr Mellor by his close friend John Major.
Officials insisted they did not expect a Cabinet reshuffle.
And the Premier, rocked by the Maastricht storm and last week's sterling crisis, does not need a ministerial resignation to add to his troubles.
But Government whips have reported a slide in backbench support for Mr Mellor.
And Mr Major faces Labour demands for an official inquiry into the month-long villa holiday taken when Mr Mellor was Arts Minister.
Bills
Mrs Bauwens, an independent film producer, paid the £10,000 rent on the villa and footed most of the other bills.
Mr Mellor told The People newspaper at the time: ‘I'm not the slightest bit embarrassed by my holiday arrangements.’
But many Tory MPs are — and they believe that taking the holiday cast huge doubts over Mr Mellor's judgment.
The People attacked him for accepting the freebie during the 1990 Gulf crisis.
Mrs Bauwens claimed the story made her out to be a ‘social leper’ not fit to be seen with a Government Minister.
The official rulebook, Questions Of Procedure For Ministers, stresses it is a ‘well-established and recognised rule that no Minister or public servant should accept gifts, hospitality or services from anyone who would, or might appear to, place him under an obligation.’
Ministers are told any gifts worth more than £125 must be refused or handed over to the department.
Those in doubt should seek the Premier's advice.
Mr Mellor made his ‘I stay’ statement at lunch-time.
Pressure
As he hurried from his chauffeur-driven car he was asked by reporters: ‘Are you going to resign?’
He replied with a smile: ‘Definitely not.’
Then the pressure started to build.
The London Evening Standard reported that Tory chairman Sir Nor-man Fowler was wavering in support.
It was six hours before party chiefs denied the report, adding to the impression that Mr Mellor was being undermined by his colleagues.
Later, Tory MP Nicholas Winterton said: ‘I think David Mellor's sell-by date in respect of what has happened has passed.
‘It would make a lot of people feel very much easier if he offered his resignation.’
Mr Winterton added: ‘I do not want to be bitter or vindictive.
‘But I do feel strongly that John Major can take loyalty too far and his friends may prove to be a millstone or albatross around his neck.’
Last night, Labour's heritage spokesman Bryan Gould said the Mellor holiday clearly broke the official rules.
Mr Gould wrote to Mr Major demanding an inquiry.
He plans to question the Prime Minister when Parliament resumes.
If Mr Mellor hangs on, he faces the ordeal of appearing before the Tory rank and file at next month's party conference.
He already seems certain to be stripped of a major part of his ministerial duties.
Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke is expected to take over leading responsibility for regulation of the press.
Job
Mr Gould said: ‘If a Minister can't do his job properly, he should consider his position.
‘And if he will not, then John Major must do it for him.’
Mr Mellor has pulled out of an engagement to open the Classical Music Show at London's Barbican tomorrow.
ISN'T THIS FUN!
Judith and Mona at court last week
NOT SO FUNNY: Mona with husband Mohammed after yesterday's stalemate
WAY THEY WERE: Arnold, Mona and Soraya as a toddler
HANGING ON Mr Mellor leaves home for work yesterday.
He denied he will quit but the Tory knives are out
SMILES THAT TURNED SOUR
WHAT a difference a week made for Mona Bauwens.
Last Tuesday she was all smiles as she left the High Court joking with Judith Mellor.
But yesterday, she looked a picture of gloom.
The 36-year-old blonde beauty was unable to hide her bitter disappointment at failing to win her libel action against the People.
Crestfallen Mona sought comfort on the arm of her banker husband Mohammed Shourjabi as she faced the cameras afterwards.
It was a stark contrast to the happy family snap of Mona with ex-husband Arnold and their daughter Soraya, now aged six.
Arnold has hinted to pals that Mona's friendship with David Mellor played at least some part in his marriage break-up.
He told them: ‘The only affinity between us was that he appears to like my wife.’
Arnold knocked court claims that Mona was a private person.
‘That was a trick for the lawyers,’ he said.
‘She loves publicity.’
CONDUCT UNBECOMING A MINISTER
By the time Mellor's family holiday was over, Mona had paid out at least £10,000
He was so jealous I could live like this
GORDON HAY
WEALTHY Mona Bauwens shelled out at least £10,000 to bankroll the freebie holiday enjoyed by David Mellor and his family.
And Mellor willingly accepted her lavish hospitality — even though he was Arts Minister at the time and she was a film producer.
The paunchy politician had a wonderful, wish-you-were-here time in a month-long stay at the Marbella villa rented by Mona.
He told the villa's owner Count Robert de Beaumont how much he loved the sun-soaked Costa high life.
But he rarely had to put his hand in his own pocket.
Count de Beaumont said blonde Mona, 36, paid for almost everything during the family's stay — including ice creams, balls and toys for Mellor's two sons Mark, 12, and eight-year-old Freddie.
She forked out for their flights to Malaga and taxis from the airport to the villa.
She laid on a team of maids and cleaners.
Bed
And at the start of the holiday, she paid rent of 20,000 US dollars in cash to the count — counting out the money in front of Mellor.
Mona, who had her daughter Soraya and a nanny with her, also picked up the tab for expensive dinners at trendy restaurants.
According to the count, the bill for the holiday party often came to £500.
One of the restaurants they visited was Don Leone's — a stone's throw from the marina in Puerto Banus where the rich and famous moor their luxury yachts.
Mona, daughter of the PLO's chief fund-raiser, slept in a four-poster bed at the villa across the corridor from Mellor and his wife Judith.
She told Belgian-born Count de Beaumont that Mellor could one day be Prime Minister and that she ‘liked him very much.’
She clearly enjoyed the politician's company.
The pair of pals would sometimes pop out together to buy bread and newspapers.
The villa — packed with antiques and complete with tennis court and Jacuzzi — is currently on the market for £1 million.
Pocket
Speaking by its swimming pool, playboy Count de Beaumont said Mellor never attempted to pay for anything during the 1990 holiday.
He added: ‘The first impression from him was he didn't need to put his hand in his pocket to pay any money right from the first evening.’
The count said it was clear Mona was in charge of the party.
He went on:
She was the captain.
Or maybe you can say that Mellor wanted to be the captain, but she was for sure the admiral.
She organised the rooms.
Mona and David were very polite and nice together.
They would go shopping and everything was very pleasant.
We had lunches and dinners together but sometimes Judith would stay at home with a headache or because she was tired.
She was always very quiet — reading books and pre-occupied by her kids.
David and Mona were going out, coming in, going out to buy bread and newspapers.
One day I decided to go into town with Mona.
David rushed out of the house and asked where we were going.
He was upset and told Mona he would come with us.
The count said Mellor was ‘really impressed by Marbella.’
He added: ‘He said the climate was fantastic and my house was beautiful.
‘He was very charming in the first days and said he was really jealous that I could live like this.’
The count stayed with the holiday party for 12 days but said he left when his relationship with Mellor became strained.
He was there, however, when Iraq invaded Kuwait the day after the party arrived.
Shocked
He said: ‘Straight away Mr Mellor phoned his secretary to find out if he needed to go back.
‘He was watching it all day on TV.
He wasn't shocked.
The Arabs here thought they needed to go back to Bahrain and Abu Dhabi.’
When Mellor found out he was surplus to requirements in London, he left for a Mediterranean sea trip with his hosts aboard the count's 30ft cruiser, Fidelity.
The Minister's wife stayed on dry land while he sailed to Gibraltar with Mona, the count, his sons and two Arab girls.
Mrs Mellor was chauffeur driven to the Rock and taken back by car after having lunch with the boat party.
Mellor returned to Marbella on the cruiser.
The count said: ‘It was a lovely day and there were dolphins around the boat.
‘I don't know why Judith didn't want to go on the boat.
‘We had a lot of fun but David was not swimming.
His sons said later that he didn't know how to.’
OWNER: Playboy Count de Beaumont by the pool of the villa he let to Mona
LAP OF LUXURY: The villa rented by Mona when she played host to the Mellors Pictures: HARRY PAGE
HOLIDAY'S END: Mona and Mellor at Malaga airport
TV ROW SEEN BY MILLIONS
MARTIN PHILLIPS
MILLIONS of TV viewers around the world witnessed Mr Mellor as he tried to humiliate an Israeli army colonel who arrested a Palestinian boy.
Mellor was on a Middle East tour as a junior Foreign Office Minister in 1988 and international news teams were in tow as he picked on the officer during a visit to the Gaza Strip's biggest refugee camp.
He was approached by the family of a 14-year-old who had been held for alleged stone-throwing.
As the cameras and microphones were trained on him, he told the colonel that HE had seen no evidence of stone-throwing.
He demanded the colonel investigate, declaring: ‘It is not good.’
Instantly Mellor was a a hero to Palestinians.
Attack
The Israelis were furious at the attack on their colonel who was doing the same job as British soldiers in Ulster, they said.
President Chaim Herzog rebuked Mellor and a lunch in his honour at Israel's parliament was cancelled.
But Mellor stood by his claims that Israel was responsible for the Middle East stalemate.
Many MPs voiced concern at his ‘arrogant’ and ‘undiplomatic’manner.
Faisal Awaidah, the PLO's London representative, was ‘delighted’, however.
The following April Mellor attacked Israel's ‘ambiguous’ nuclear programme.
And three months later he was quoted in an Arab newspaper as comparing Israel to South Africa.
Villa limo ‘was nicked’
A MERCEDES at the villa is listed as a stolen car, police revealed last night.
Yesterday the £60,000 limo — registration BBF918 — was parked in a garage at the villa next to a black Porsche.
Belgian police said it belonged to Joahanna Van Der Mast and disappeared in 1988 from the village of Lanaken.
Spanish police were last night waiting for confirmation from Brussels that the car was stolen.
A spokesman said it could be recovered ‘if necessary with a court order’.
Spanish police may also want to interview the ‘current driver’.
GARAGE: Mercedes (right) at the villa yesterday
Cancer row boffin back
A HOSPITAL scientist whose blunder led to nearly 1,000 cancer patients getting too little radiation treatment is to get her job back.
An inquiry yesterday found Margaret Grieveson guilty of professional misjudgement.
But bosses at the North Staffordshire Hospital Centre reinstated her, saying: ‘No one person can be considered accountable.’
Ciggie lands gran in dock
GRAN Sheila Hartley landed in court yesterday — for lighting up on the bus while on her way to work.
Sheila, 56, was given an absolute discharge at Blyth, Northumberland, after admitting breaking a smoking ban.
Sheila, who said she put the cigarette out when told to, said: ‘They made me feel like a criminal.
I was devastated.’
MUM'S PRAYER
JIM OLDFIELD
SHATTERED mum Kerry Needham yesterday left a prayer behind on the Greek island where she had hoped to find her missing son.
Kerry, of Sheffield, had been flown to Corfu by the Mirror — in liaison with South Yorkshire police — after a ‘positive’ sighting of three-year-old Ben.
But the child turned out to be the English adopted son of a Greek couple.
Before flying home, Kerry went to church, lit a candle at the altar and begged: ‘Please give me my boy back, help me find Ben.’
He vanished 14 months ago when his family lived on the island of Kos.
ANGUISH: Kerry
Girl aimed to kill Bush
A WOMAN with a gun came within feet of shooting President Bush, it was revealed yesterday.
Secretary Deborah Butler, 33, planned to fire as she watched his motorcade in Denver, Colorado.
But she gave herself up to police and told them her real motive was to win attention for emotional problems.
She was in a psychiatric hospital last night.
PC PLOD CURB
IDLE and useless police could be thrown out of the force in a crackdown aimed at raising standards, Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke revealed yesterday.
Mr Clarke backed plans for tough new powers to deal with the PC Plods.
‘The nettle has to be grasped,’ he told a conference of middle-ranking officers in Blackpool.
‘It is quite simply not fair either to other police officers or to the public they serve to put them at risk by failing to deal with poor performance.’
Standards were being reviewed by a working party which will report to the Police Advisory Board at the end of the year, he said.
PLAN: Clarke
MY LIFE AS FERGIE NANNY
STEVE ATKINSON
FERGIE'S ex-nanny Alison Wardley has told of her life with Fergie for the first time.
Alison, 25, described the duchess as ‘kind and caring’.
But she did let slip that she had to curtsey to her every day and say: ‘Good morning Your Highness.’
In an interview in Hello! magazine, Alison is asked whether Fergie should have allowed her daughters to see her on holiday with ‘financial adviser’ John Bryan.
Alison, now a teacher at a London nursery, replied: ‘She's entitled to a private life.
‘It does upset me seeing all the stories about her because it's not a true picture of the real woman.
‘She's so kind.
She cares about everyone.’
The former royal nanny insisted that Fergie was a good mum.
Alison, who looked after Beatrice and Eugenie since they were babies, denied a rift with Fergie when she quit last month.
PRAISE: Alison
CARING: Fergie
Paint that a lot!
SEVEN paintings by French artist Cezanne are expected to fetch around £12 million when they are auctioned in London in November.
DEMOCRAT Bill Clinton leapt to a 21 per cent lead over Bush in a major poll released yesterday.
Then billionaire Ross Perot hinted he may rejoin the presidential race as an independent.
Joke's on Quayle — Page 15
POST HASTE FOR CHRIS
ALAN LAW
OLYMPIC cycling champ Chris Boardman swapped his hi-tech machine yesterday — for a postman's bike.
The Royal Mail's new mountain bike lookalike is a million weary miles from the boneshaker that has been the mailman's rusty steed.
But Chris's smile shows he clearly doesn't see any real threat to his golden 4,000 metres record.
Picture: HARRY PROSSER 
GOLD: Chris's big win
MY ROYAL APPOINTMENT BY MISTER BARBIE DOLL
PR ace vows new look for the palace
STEPHEN WHITE
THE man who sold us the Barbie doll may soon be promoting the scandal-rocked Royal Family.
Sixteen-stone PR ace Brian Cartmell says he has been approached by Buckingham Palace to give them a new image.
And yesterday he vowed: ‘If I am appointed, I shall be doing things in a somewhat different style.
From my point of view after 25 years as a PR consultant, the way the Palace handles the press needs to be re-examined.
‘There have been a lot of stories recently which I would have handled differently.’
Former newspaperman Brian, 53, has built his Blackpool-based business into the biggest PR agency outside London.
As well as toy giant Mattel, who make eternally-young Barbie, they also promote Coca-Cola and the resort's famous tower.
Brian refused to reveal who had approached him about the royal job.
He said: ‘I wouldn't be so indiscreet.
But I am flattered at being considered.’
Last night, though, the Palace press office dismissed Brian's claims as ‘nonsense’.
TOWER MAN: Brian
STEPHEN WHITE
PRINCESS Di's decision to dump her German Mercedes backfired yesterday.
She visited the London HQ of family planning charity Marie Stopes International in a Vauxhall Senator — built in Germany!
CAR: Di yesterday
LISTEN TO SINATRA AS PUNISHMENT
TEENAGERS who misbehave in teacher Bruce Janu's classes have to face the music of Frank Sinatra.
Half an hour's detention listening to Ol' Blue Eyes is enough for most of them.
‘They're miserable,’ said Bruce, 34, of Chicago's Riverside Brookfield High School.
‘I hear the groans when I play Songs For Swinging Lovers and other classic albums.
‘For kids brought up on rock, Sinatra is torture.
‘I can see them grimacing and thinking: ‘I can't believe I'm listening to this.
It's something my grandparents listen to.’
And it seems to work.
I rarely see any of them coming back for more.’
But for Bruce it's pure pleasure.
He's a big Sinatra fan.
TORTURE: Frank
Top cop's son is accused of theft
A CHIEF constable's son is facing trial on theft and dishonesty charges.
Richard Wilmot, 24, son of Greater Manchester police chief David Wilmot, is due to appear before magistrates in Southport, Lancs, on Monday.
And last night his father — who is divorced from Richard's mother — said he was ‘saddened’ by the news.
Wilmot, of Waterloo, Liverpool, is jointly accused with another man of stealing a radio cassette player from a car.
He is also charged with driving away from a filling station without paying for petrol.
Wilmot also faces a  separate trial at Southport on November 19 accused of driving under the influence of drugs.
His father said in a statement: ‘I have no personal knowledge of this incident from my adult son of my former marriage.’
CHIEF: Mr Wilmot
Danger mouse
A MOUSE brought rush-hour chaos to Birmingham when it bit through wires in a traffic light control unit.
We haf ways of building your homes
A HOUSING complex was left looking like a swastika after funds ran out before it was finished.
Screened porches were meant to have been added, squaring off the blocks of 100 flats for retired church folk.
But nobody noticed the sinister shape at Decatur, Alabama, until recently, when local newsmen saw an aerial photo.
The builders said they were only obeying orders when they stopped work 10 years ago.
Hero Pilot saves crew
IAN CAMERON
HERO pilot Dane Crosby coolly saved the crew of his rescue helicopter from drowning yesterday as he ditched in raging seas.
Flt Lt Dane, 42, guided the crippled chopper smoothly into 12ft waves.
Then he and his three uninjured crew scrambled on to life-rafts — and were themselves rescued by helicopter.
The men from RAF Brawdy, Dyfed, were hunting for two men missing in the Bristol Channel after two trawlers collided.
As the Sea King hovered in gale force winds, alarms warned of engine trouble.
Dane steered into the wind and ditched.
Dane, co-pilot Steve Johnsone, 25, winchman Paul Trethewy, 33, and radar man Glenn Holmes, 35, were recovering back at base last night.
He said: ‘There was no time to panic.’
A salvage operation was under way for the £6 million chopper.
Toddler is saved by a cat
A TODDLER was saved from drowning in his bath — by a lucky black cat called Dribble.
Seventeen-month-old Alexander Thomas had stopped breathing after swallowing water.
But when his dad ran out of the house for help, he found qualified lifeguard Paul James rescuing Dribble from the top of a telegraph pole.
Paul, 39, who gave Alexander the kiss of life at Wick, Mid-Glamorgan, said: ‘He was fading fast.’
Swinging sixty
THE Parkhurst family, of Chelmsford, Essex, have just returned from holiday together — all SIXTY of them.
They span four generations.
Cutting up rough
A DIVORCED wife cut off her former husband's manhood with a razor and forced him to hold it up in front of her mocking friends, police said in Dacca, Bangladesh.
PARAS AT WAR OVER TV SERIES ‘ERRORS’
CO blasts Beeb for ‘50 boobs’
A HARD-HITTING TV drama about the Parachute Regiment came under fire last night from the commanding officer of the elite fighting force.
The BBC1 blockbuster Civvies — which starts tonight — takes an uncompromising look at ex-Paras as they try to adjust to life outside the Army.
But Lieutenant General Sir Michael Gray blasted the book it is based on as ‘grossly innacurate’.
The Colonel Commandant of the regiment listed more than 50 errors — ranging from incorrect uniforms to the wrong ammunition.
He said scenes in Northern Ireland ‘show a remarkable ignorance of the conduct of our soldiers’.
The six-part series is by top writer Lynda La Plante, author of hit shows Widows and Prime Suspect.
It stars ex-Bread heart-throb Peter Howitt.
In a stinging letter to BBC Director General Sir Michael Checkland, general Gray said Civvies would belittle the regiment and demoralise troops.
Armed Forces Minister Archie Hamilton has asked that the series is described as ‘pure fiction’.
But the BBC stressed it was a fictional drama as opposed to a documentary.
A spokesman said: ‘We are not making a PR film for the Army.’
STAR: Howitt
Pile-up rep gets a Skoda
JOHN PEACOCK
HIGH-flier Andy Holmes had his wings clipped when he pranged a £15,000 company car.
Bosses swapped it for a £900 Skoda.
They also enrolled him in the Skoda Owners' Club, complete with badge and sticker.
His bosses at Datronech Ltd, Aldershot, Hants, insist that any other computer salesmen who damage their expensive VWs will get the same treatment for a month.
Andy, 36, said: ‘I feel a bit self-conscious parking my Skoda.’
1,000 PINTS TODAY
Den gets a milk float in his window
PETER KANE
SHOP owner Dennis Brighty put a ‘no milk today’ sign in his window — and got a delivery of 1,000 pints.
He was making an early morning cuppa in a back room when a milk float crashed through the shop's brick wall and 12ft by 8ft window.
Dennis, 53, rushed to investigate and found milkman David Roberts sitting petrified but unhurt in the wreckage.
David, 29, said he had lost control when he swerved to miss a car going the wrong way round a roundabout.
Dennis said at his corner shop in Brandon, Suffolk, yesterday: ‘I decided to stock milk for customers and bought 20 pints on the first day.
‘But I had some left over and put a sign in the window saying I didn't want any the next morning.
‘I thought David would see the sign.
I certainly wasn't expecting a delivery of 1,000 pints.
I couldn't believe it when I went into the shop and saw hundreds of milk bottles scattered everywhere.
‘I shall definitely think twice before I put up a sign like this again.’
David, of Newmarket, Suffolk, said: ‘I careered up the kerb to avoid the car and went straight through Dennis's shop front.
‘I didn't even see the sign saying ‘No Milk’.’
Dairy Crest depot manager Geoff Doggett said: ‘I'm just very glad David wasn't injured and that Dennis was able to see the funny side of it.’
Smuggler killed by own drugs
A WOMAN who tried to smuggle drugs into Britain died in hospital yesterday after packets of cocaine she had swallowed leaked in her stomach.
Mother of six Clara Ayemwenre, 47, collapsed from a drug overdose at Heathrow Airport on Sunday soon after arriving on a flight from Nigeria.
Surgeons who tried to save her life at Ashford Hospital, Surrey, found 84 condoms packed with cocaine in her stomach.
Two more had burst — spilling their deadly contents.
Castaway girl found
CASTAWAY explorer Gerald Kingland yesterday found an ‘absolutely gorgeous’ Girl Friday for his latest adventure.
Then the 62-year-old globetrotter from Bristol revealed he was looking for two more women!
Lost chords
BRIAN: Worried
QUEEN star Brian May has lost the home-made guitar used on most of the group's hits.
The instrument made by him 20 years ago was put in the wrong case after a studio session with singer Judy Tzuke — and it vanished en route to France where she is doing concerts.
ANTI-QUAYLE GAGS WOW THE TV FANS
MARK DOWDNEY
DAN Quayle was the target of non-stop TV jokes and insults last night on a show which he has slammed for glamorising single mums.
More than 45 million viewers saw the US vice-president mocked by Candice Bergen, who stars as unmarried newsgirl Murphy Brown.
Murphy was seen with her baby in her arms watching a broadcast of Quayle's attack on her.
Sleepless and dishevelled, she fumes: ‘He thinks I'm glamorising motherhood?
‘What planet is he on?
People in prison get to shower more than I do.’
Later, rejecting the claim that she has been irresponsible, Murphy says:
‘I didn't just wake up one morning and say ‘Oh gee, I can't get in for a facial — I might as well have a baby’.’
Quayle, in a bid to limit the political damage to himself, viewed the show in Washington with a group of single parents…who loved the gags.
DAMAGE: Quayle
HOLDING THE BABY: Candice Bergen as unwed mum Murphy Brown
New quiz for flasher
SEX pest Colin Stagg faces more questioning over the Rachel Nickell murder, Scotland Yard revealed yesterday.
Stagg, fined for flashing on Wimbledon Common the day Rachel died, is on police bail pending further inquiries.
GIVE HER A WAVE!
ALISON Streeter, 28, of Dover, set a new women's world record yesterday when she braved a thunderstorm to complete her 20th Channel swim.
‘Chocs away’ sacking
FOUR airport workers were sacked — after 16 chocolates disappeared from a plane they were cleaning.
The sweets — given free to passengers — had been left on the Swissair jet at Manchester airport.
They were found in a van used by the cleaners.
And when none of the four owned up, all were sacked.
They are appealing.
One of them, Graham Cuthbert, said: ‘I never saw any chocolates.’
The employer, Manchester Handling, said it had acted appropriately.
BOYKS THIEF JAILED
FORMER cricket star Geoffrey Boycott collared a thief who tried to nick his £1,000 golf clubs from the luggage rack of an InterCity train.
‘Boyks’ caught the crook at a ticket  barrier as he tried to flee, a court heard yesterday.
Timeshare salesman Thomas Kerr, 21, from Loughton, Essex, was jailed for 18 months at Snaresbrook Crown Court when he also admitted burglary and stealing £10,000 worth of computer equipment.
Banks cash in
BRITAIN'S biggest banks and insurance companies pocketed around £2,000 million during last week's sterling crisis, city experts revealed yesterday.
As the Bank of England poured in £10 billion to prop up the pound, the four big banks — Natwest, Barclays, Midland and Lloyds — and insurance giants the Pru were busy coining it by speculating.
GERMANS SAVE FRANTIC FRANC
MARK DOWDNEY /JOHN HUSBAND
GERMANY yesterday spent billions of marks to save the French franc from speculators — a week after refusing to help the pound.
The Bundesbank's assistance was crucial in a day of frantic trading on the currency markets.
Hundreds of billions changed hands as dealers tried to force President Mitterrand into a humiliating devaluation.
At one point, the franc dropped below its permitted floor in the European Monetary System.
But with German help, the franc just survived.
‘The acid test is whether the Bundesbank is prepared to cut interest rates to help the French,’ said a London dealer.
France also jacked up its key bank interest rate from 10.5 per cent to a crippling 13 per cent.
Dealers believe France has been forced to spend three-quarters of its foreign currency reserves in the past 24 hours.
The pound rose 3 pfennigs against the mark.
MY BUST-UP WITH MELLOR
12 years as good friends…now I never want to speak to David again, says Jim
By the builder whose firm collapsed after row over £20,000 bill
NIC NORTH
FRANK THORNE
ANGRY builder Jim Garrad told yesterday how a row over money shattered his close friendship with Fun Minister David Mellor.
For 12 years the Mellor family enjoyed holidays at Jim's seaside home with the builder and his wife.
But Jim says his firm had to settle for less than they expected over work on the Minister's home in Putney, south-west London.
And that left them £15,000 out of pocket.
Jim, 70, was forced into retirement after his business collapsed.
He said: ‘We lost our friendship.
I never want to speak to David again.’
Jim and his wife Pam met Mr Mellor and his wife Judith on holiday in Italy 13 years ago.
The Mellors and their two young sons became regular guests at the Garrads' home at Frinton-on-Sea, Essex.
Pam, 63, said: ‘They used to come every summer for a couple of weeks and the rest of the year they would stay for the odd week.
‘Most Christmases we used to send them hampers full of food and wine.’
Early in 1990, the Mellors had major structural work carried out at their home because of subsidence.
Wreck
Jim's firm, C.D.Garrad and Son, were then hired to do extensive renovations at a cost of £60,760.
But Jim says the Minister asked for extras which added nearly £20,000 to the bill.
Mr Mellor claimed the builder overran his budget.
Jim insists the bill was correct.
He says both Mr Mellor and his wife, who supervised most of the work, were kept informed of escalating costs.
Jim said: ‘In the end I had to accept his £4,500 offer and write the rest off — otherwise I would not have been able to pay my men's wages that week.
‘The bank was breathing down my neck.
‘If I hadn't settled with him, the firm would have gone into liquidation there and then.’
The work took six months — from April to October 1990.
‘The place was a wreck,’ Jim said.
‘We virtually rebuilt it from the inside.’
Renovations included:
LUXURY TOUCH: Mr Mellor told the builders to scrap plans to install a plain £20 sink with £14 taps in a toilet.
Instead he wanted a £100 fancy shell-shaped sink in ‘Whisper’ pink with a £68 mixer tap.
LUXURY TOUCH: He ordered decorators to coat the walls with an expensive marble-effect finish — about three times dearer than the standard chip paper and emulsion he had chosen earlier.
Coffee
LUXURY TOUCH: Mr Mellor instructed electricians to carry out more than £1,500 of extra re-wiring so he could listen to his beloved Elgar on compact disc in the breakfast room.
The building site manager at the time told the Daily Mirror: ‘I had a meeting with Mellor's wife over cups of coffee at the start of each week to discuss any problems and let her know how much we had spent so far.
‘She was always extremely helpful.’
But sometimes, the Minister's requests went too far.
The site manager said: ‘At one point he wanted hand-made mahogany shelves either side of the fireplace in the lounge to house his compact discs and other hi-fi equipment.
‘I told him it was far too expensive.
‘I spoke to his wife and she over-rode him.
‘It would have cost him a fortune.
In the end I got the men to install fairly standard white shelving instead.’
During the week, some of the workmen lived with the Mellors at their temporary home in Putney.
The site manager said: ‘Mellor was rarely there during the week.
He told the men he had late-night sittings at Parliament and stayed in town.’
The Minister made stage payments totalling £48,000 to the builders.
He was presented with a final bill on December 20 1990.
Four months later, Mr Mellor, then part of the Government's Treasury team, wrote expressing his concern at the amount he still owed.
Bust
His letter to Jim said: ‘I accept that during the course of the contract, some extras were specifically agreed between us, and on that basis, I fully expected a very limited overrun on costs.’
Promising to pay more when he received cheques from his insurance company, he added: ‘It might be sensible for us to have a meeting to give you an opportunity to justify and explain, item by item, the reason for the variation between the price agreed in April 1990 and the final bill.’
The meeting never took place — and Jim's recession-hit company went bust in last September.
‘As it turned out, we could never have survived,’ says Jim.
‘But if Mellor had not disputed our bill we could have survived a few more months in the hope that we would sell several houses on our books.’
Last night, Mr Mellor's solicitors confirmed that a dispute arose over building costs.
They said in a statement: ‘That dispute was referred by our client to professional advisers acting on his behalf who negotiated a settlement with the builders which was acceptable both to the builders and to our client.’
One-time pal BUILDER Jim Garrad, who never wants to speak to his former friend Mellor again after their dispute over a bill
HOME: A semi that was hit by subsidence
LOO: Fitted with a fancy £100 pink sink
HEARTH: Shelving for CDs is on each side
FOURSOME: David Mellor with Pam Garrad, flanked by Judith and Jim, at Frinton
Homes blitzed
HUNDREDS of homes were wrecked when a massive car bomb blasted the Royal Ulster Constabulary's forensic centre in Belfast last night.
YARD IN UNION BALLOT PROBE
TERRY PATTINSON
SCOTLAND Yard is probing ballot rigging allegations in the seamen's union — revealed in the Daily Mirror last year.
Detectives were ordered in after we told how Pamela Wilkins, widow of ex-union official Roger Wilkins, had helped him rig his own re-election and that of other officials in 1985.
They will also want to see 2,500 voting papers from another NUS election which mysteriously turned up seven years after they should have been destroyed.
The probe was ordered by then Home Secretary Kenneth Baker in March — but detectives could not start work until now.
He acted after a complaint from Tory MP Gwilym Jones.
Mr Jones had been visited by four ex-members of the seamen's union who read the Mirror article.
The ballot papers from the other election were posted to an executive member of the RMT — the merged seamen's and rail workers' union.
The vote was also won by Mr Wilkins.
ENVOY RUNS TO THE RESCUE
‘I sent SOS to consul’
MARTIN PHILLIPS
DAVID Mellor admitted last night that he called in British diplomats to sort out a water crisis during his Marbella villa freebie with his family.
They were asked to use their influence with local officials to get the water supply re-connected to the £1 million villa rented by Mona Bauwens.
Labour's Bryan Gould charged that Mr Mellor acted ‘improperly’ and said he was raising the matter in a letter to the Prime Minister.
But Mr Mellor said it was a perfectly natural request to make.
He said problems of water supply in that part of Spain were common.
Most homes had a spare water tank — but their villa, owned by Count Robert de Beaumont, did not.
Mr Mellor said: ‘We found ourselves devoid of water and unable to bath or do anything.’
As none of the guests spoke Spanish ‘I rang up the British Consul and asked for his help and he provided it.
‘The whole thing has got to a ludicrous stage when that is used as a stick to beat me.’
Mr Mellor insisted he had no aversion to the media.
‘I don't like the fact that I am the butt of so many things — a lot of which I think is unfair — but I'm not inhibited by it.
‘I thought I was famed for not having an aversion to the media, but I am sure every virtue can be turned into a vice.’
FREEBIE HOSTESS: Mona Bauwens yesterday
BRITS FLEE KILLER TORRENT
LESLEY HUSSELL
BRITISH holidaymakers told yesterday how they fled for their lives when a killer flood surged through their campsite.
They dashed to safety as a massive wall of water smashed their caravans to matchsticks and swept away dozens of cars.
The Brits, most of them pensioners, were caught in a storm which is feared to have killed at least 45 people in southern France.
Dozens are missing — swept away after torrential rains caused rivers to burst their banks.
Bruce Calvert-Toulmin, one of dozens of Britons at a campsite in Aubignan, said: ‘I saw people trying to cling to trees 20 yards away but I could not get to them.
‘The water was roaring past my waist.
They were just carried away,’ said the 63-year-old former sales manager from South Humberside.
Social worker Annie Barton-Card, 43, said: ‘We sheltered in the toilet block after a wall of water hit us.
But as the water rose we had to break through the roof to escape.’
Iain Gordon, 58, from  Kirkcaldy , rescued half a dozen pensioners too terrified to move.
At least 21 died in the medieval town of Vaison-la-Romaine, 25 miles north of Avignon.
Witnesses said camping vans were carried down river ‘like toys’-with people inside screaming for help.
Other bodies were found trapped in trees.
STORM HAVOC: Two camper vans are overturned at a shattered campsite in Vaison-la-Romaine
Big Yin is tortured by violent childhood
LYNN DALY
COMIC Billy Connolly is haunted by memories from his tortured childhood.
The Big Yin says he was beaten by a ‘psychopathic’ aunt and struck so hard by his father it was like ‘being hit by a building’.
Connolly's mother walked out when he was four leaving him, his sister and father William — who died three years ago — to live with two aunts.
‘My childhood was deeply violent,’ Connolly, 48, tells Melvyn Bragg on The South Bank Show next month.
‘I was beaten up a lot by my aunt.
It had a profound influence on me — I am still working on the stuff she did to me.’
And he hints at memories he cannot talk about.
‘There are other things which disturb me greatly.
I will get around to it eventually,’ he says.
His mother Mary Adams, 68, said last night: ‘I believe him when he says he was hit.’
BEATEN: Billy
Dream hut is blitzed
WORKERS caved the roof in last night on a council tenant's 20-ton mud hut.
Desiree Ntolo built it in her garden to remind her of Africa.
But Dagenham council won a court order to make the hut safe after it sagged in the rain.
BUT THERE IS STILL A DROUGHT ON…
OFFICIAL
PETER KANE /SIMON FERRARI /STEVE ATKINSON
WASHED-OUT Britain was mopping up yesterday after one month's rain fell overnight…yet we're STILL in the middle of a drought.
Homes were flooded and blacked out, rivers burst their banks, villages got cut off and rail services ground to a halt as fierce storms lashed the country.
But last night Nina Miller of the National Rivers Authority said: ‘We still need more rain.
Most of this lot will just pour into the rivers and the sea.
‘So that means the drought goes on.
I know it sounds daft, but the message is still, ‘Use water wisely’.’
One of the wettest spots yesterday was EDGWARE, Middlesex.
Twenty one pensioners had to be rescued by boat from their sheltered accommodation.
Barricade
And five feet of flood water threatened to swamp the area's General Hospital.
Emergency workers built a sandbag barricade as 60 patients were put on evacuation stand-by.
At RINGSTEAD, Northants, Lynda Wyatt had to clamber on her car roof with seven-month-old baby Luke and son David, three.
A farmer rescued them.
Postie Jim Goldsmith used a canoe to get the mail through at PAPWORTH ST AGNES, Cambs.
And in LONDON, Holloway Road and Mornington Crescent Tube stations were ‘too dangerous’ to open.
BOATING WEATHER Residents stay cheerful as they are ferried across a flooded road at Edgware
Tearaway, 14 on run again
A TEARAWAY 14-year-old dubbed ‘the boy we can't lock up’ by police was on the run again last night.
He failed to turn up in court at Milton Keynes, Bucks, charged with taking a car before a police chase.
The boy has been arrested 37 times in the last 11 months.
His dad pleaded with magistrates: ‘Please lock him up next time he's caught.
I'm terrified he'll kill himself.’
Old flame's tragic quest
A LOVELORN Italian woman dying from cancer has travelled to Plymouth in search of her British wartime sweetheart.
Gabriella Quattrocchi, 70, has never wed — hoping she will be reunited with Charles Williams.
The couple met when he was an army sergeant in Anagni, Italy.
He mailed his last love letter to Gabriella from Plymouth in 1947.
Wing-ding over parrot
A VET clipped the wings of a valuable parrot to stop it escaping — but when the owner got it home it flew off and was never seen again.
The man, from Leiston, Suffolk, complained to trading standards officers.
But they were powerless as the vet broke no law.
A spokesman said: ‘If the parrot could talk it might have said something unpleasant about having its wings clipped.’
Sold!
Whata loada Skoda
DON'T scoff at Skodas, they're having the last laugh.
Sales of the low-priced Czech motor have soared by a quarter in crisis-hit Britain this year.
Spokesman Peter Titterton cheekily suggested that Princess Di should drive one now she has given up her Mercedes.
He said: ‘They are very reliable and do well at rallies, as well as being value for money.’
Secret Six trap raider
SIX youngsters got £50 rewards from a judge yesterday for an Enid Blyton-style operation to trap a gang raiding a warehouse.
The five boys and one girl, aged 12 to 16, from Barw Valley, Mid-Glamorgan, got descriptions and getaway vehicle numbers.
A man was jailed for three years in Cardiff for burglary.
Girls tell Sgt Paul to strip!
HUNKY police sergeant Paul Drake went to an airline office for help in tracing a villain — and was greeted by cries of ‘Get 'em off!’
Staff thought he was the stripogram booked for a stewardess's farewell party.
Paul, 28, was at Gatwick to see if Dan-Air workers recognised a picture of a gunman.
He knew it was a case of mistaken identity when they urged him to bare all.
But the personnel manageress said later: ‘We may ask him to appear as the real thing next time.’
FOUL PLAY BY COPS
THREE police football teams were too busy tackling crime to play all their fixtures — so they invented bogus results and sent them in to the league.
Now the teams from Kingston, Clapham and Peckham, London, have been fined.
And refs will have to report results in future.
WATER LOT OF DOSH
WATER charges have shot up 35 per cent in three years — and the future looks just as grim, a watchdog warned yesterday.
In the past year, prices have risen by three times the rate of inflation, says National Utility Services, which advises industry on costs.
It blames the government pricing formula, set during privatisation in 1989, for ‘favouring the water industry over consumers who are forced to pay ever increasing prices’.
It urges a new formula and more competition.
But it adds: ‘The outlook in the UK is one of continuing high price rises for years to come.’
I'd kill 007 fumes Sean
SUPERSTAR Sean Connery wants to bump off James Bond.
He says he ‘created a Frankenstein monster’ when he first played the superspy in the Sixties.
Now he has admitted to Annabel magazine: ‘I have always hated that damn James Bond.
I'd like to kill him.’
Deadly signal
MOTORIST Kellie Freed was chased and murdered by a gang who mistook a hand signal for an obscene gesture in Stockton, California.
Baby in a million!
POOLS winner Diane Barlow, 26, gave birth to her third child — a baby girl — in Leicester Royal Infirmary yesterday, exactly a week after husband Graham scooped a £1million jackpot.
BLAST HEROES SICK
STEPHEN WHITE
TEN firemen were in hospital with a mystery illness last night — just two days after tackling a death blast at a chemical plant.
Another 30 people at the disaster scene have been treated for sickness.
All show signs of chemical poisoning.
Two died and 15 were injured when the blast and a fireball ripped through the plant in Castleford, West Yorks, on Monday.
Afterwards, a huge black cloud of acrid smoke rose hundreds of feet above the town.
But experts said it was not toxic.
Now the Fire Brigades Union is demanding an investigation into the blast and another in West Yorks.
Soccer man kidnap raid
TWO men kidnapped a Millwall soccer club employee and stole £21,000, police said last night.
He was about to bank the club's money in London's Old Kent Road when the men, claiming they had a gun, bundled him into his car and dumped him bound and gagged 20 miles away in Surrey.
ALL MOD CONMAN
We pay £3,000 a month mortgage on jailed crook's £350,000 mansion
MARTIN PHILLIPS
EVIL conman Mark Lee was behind bars last night — leaving the taxpayer to foot his £3,000-a-month mortgage.
The callous crook got five years after milking two families of everything they owned to pay for his luxury life in a country mansion.
But as Lee's outraged victims slammed the ‘weak’ sentence, his wife Jane and three children were still in their £350,000 house.
The Department of Social Security admitted it was paying their whopping mortgage to stop the mansion being repossessed.
A DSS spokesman said: ‘The purpose of helping with the mortgage interest is to keep a roof over people's heads.’
Lee, 36, was jailed at Isleworth Crown Court after he admitted ten charges of fraud involving £788,000.
But the two families he preyed on were furious he was not caged longer.
Sheila Collings stormed: ‘He should be sent down forever.
‘He's an evil, nasty, frightful and revolting little man who is a danger to decent people.’
And Wendy Smart said: ‘I hope I get something back from all this.
I have had a real gutful of it.’
The court heard Lee preyed on the ‘gullible’ while he was bankrupt.
His first victims were Mrs Smart and her son Andrew.
Posing as a financial adviser, he told them he could make a quick fortune on the house, farm and flats left by her husband Peter.
But he tricked them out of the deeds, then conned them out of £85,000 to buy a Bentley.
Trapped
Lee forged payslips to get a £292,000 mortgage from the Abbey National to buy his mansion near Wentworth Golf Club, Surrey.
Then, when he fell £83,000 in arrears with the mortgage, he befriended Frank and Sheila Collings and conned them out of the deeds of their Twickenham home.
The policeman who finally trapped Lee said: ‘He was a real rat.
We found a Pandora's box of evidence in his fraudster's den.’
The court heard that nearly £500,000 could be recovered.
SUMPTUOUS: The mansion near Wentworth that conman Lee bought with his crooked deals
GRABBED: The Collings' home in Twickenham
GRABBED: The Smarts' house in Egham, Surrey
FURIOUS: Victims Frank and Sheila Collings
DI MISSES HER MERC
CLIVE CRICKMER
PRINCESS Diana yesterday revealed the pangs she feels over the Royal rift…with her beloved Mercedes car.
She spotted an identical model to the one she gave back in a cost-cutting gesture this week when she visited a  bicycle tyre factory in Middlesbrough.
Director's wife Susan Brinton, 37, said the blue 500SL parked near the factory gates was hers.
Di replied wistfully: ‘Oh, it is a nice car.’
Earlier she admitted: ‘It was a shame it had to go’, when a fund-raiser at the town's South Cleveland Hospital asked her about the returned Mercedes.
Love child priest in truce bid
GEOFF SUTTON
ROMEO priest Christopher O'Neill is begging the mother of his love child for a reconciliation.
He has written three times to Monika Kocanek ‘deeply regretting the hurt I have caused’— and a mystery £100 has now been paid into her bank account in Bedford.
Affair
Father O'Neill, 38, had a love affair with 27-year-old religious education teacher Monika — then ran out on her when she became pregnant.
He has never seen 4-month-old daughter Jennifer but has written: ‘I am seeking a reconciliation for all our sakes.’
Monika said yesterday: ‘He needs to go a lot further for me to be happy — but these letters are certainly a start.’
And she said of the cash: ‘Perhaps Chris has started to contribute to the upkeep of his child.’
Leech cure for girl, 2
BLOOD-sucking leeches are being used in a last bid to save two year-old Tanya Wood's severed finger.
Doctors who sewed it back on in Barnsley, Yorks, hope the ancient ‘vampire’ remedy will strengthen blood vessels.
THOU SHALT NOT BET OR READ THY STARS
It's a sin to back nags says Pope
DAVID LEIGH
BEWARE, ye, who like a good old flutter on the horses.
You're heading for a nasty fall — into the fiery furnace of damnation.
And stargazers who slavishly read those horoscopes are set for the sign of eternal damnation.
Who says so?
None other than His Holiness the Pope.
Gambling and stargazing are just two of the sins listed in his updated version of the Ten Commandments.
The Pope's 450-page draft text has been drawn up with the help of 24,000 suggestions from bishops all over the world.
The draft is still officially secret, but church sources said that leaks about it in the Italian press were generally correct.
Abortion, divorce, premarital sex, and drug trafficking are listed as serious sins.
The catechism says homosexuals must abstain from sex, but should be treated with respect and compassion.
Prostitution and suicide remain sins, but the new draft sympathises with some ‘victims.’
It admits that people may be driven to vice by desperation or cruel social circumstances.
It says that life-support equipment could be withdrawn from some terminally-ill people.
Lesser sins include getting drunk, fiddling company expenses, eating too much — and bad driving.
GO ON, folks, be a devil.
Turn to Page 22 and check out your stars for today in June Penn's great guide.
THEN turn to pages 26 and 27 for Britain's best racing guide!
POPE: All bets off
DISHED!
SKY SOCCER IS A TURN-OFF FOR FAN
PAUL STANLEY
SATELLITE TV is taking a hammering in the soccer ratings war.
The fans are snubbing live BSkyB coverage of the Premier League at £304 million over five years.
An estimated 465,000 watched Manchester City play Chelsea on Sky Sports on Sunday — with a satellite dish costing between £350 and £400 installed, plus £5.99 monthly subscription.
More than 870,000 viewers tuned in FREE to West Ham against Derby in ITV's London region.
At the same time Channel 4, which paid £1.5 million to televise Italian soccer scored with TWO MILLION viewers.
But way out in front is BBC1's Match Of The Day with 6 million watching RECORDED highlights on Saturday nights.
An ITV spokesman said: ‘It proves the public like their football free.’
A Sky official insisted: ‘There's no panic.
It is a building market, a marathon not a sprint.’
Docs make ‘going private’ too dear
MILLIONS of Britons have to pay too much for private medical cover, insurers claimed yesterday.
Premiums could be cut by a fifth if consultants passed on savings they have made with the increase of private work, said the Norwich Union.
Toddler, 2, shot dead by his pal, 3
A TWO-year-old toddler was shot dead by his three-year-old friend at a barbecue party.
Victim James Monday found a loaded .38 calibre handgun in his parents' bedroom in Stockton, California.
He was shot through the forehead as they played with the gun.
Man and woof
PET pooch Becky, wearing a pink bow, was bridesmaid at her owner Sue Ashbury's wedding at Huddersfield register office, Yorks.
RICH BASTARD
That's his name and he earns £37,000 mending the lights
STEPHEN WHITE
COUNCIL worker Derek Bastard earns £37,000 a year…just for keeping a city's street lights going.
He's paid more than the bosses who run his cash-strapped city.
Now councillors anxiously looking for ways to save money want his pay to be cut.
But 50-year-old Derek yesterday defended the bonus bonanza which probably makes him Britain's best-paid council worker.
‘You could say I am a rich Bastard — but I work bloody hard for my bread,’ he said.
The lighting engineer boosts his £15,000 basic pay with bonuses for being on call at Newcastle upon Tyne all through the night.
He gets time-and-a-half for six nights a week between 4.30pm and 7.30am with double time for Sundays.
Tory councillor Marian McWilliams said: ‘It is grotesque.
We could be employing two people for that sort of money.’
Pub
But Derek — who has just bought a £10,000 car and added a two-storey extension to his five-bedroom semi, hit back: ‘I am a workaholic.
‘Most of these councillors are just hangers-on in suits who don't know the meaning of an honest day's graft.’
Divorced Derek added: ‘It sounds a lot, but I don't have an extravagant lifestyle.
‘My idea of a good night out is a few pints with the lads down the pub.’
The council is now carrying out a work study which could bring a shake-up that will end Derek's golden days.
PAY BONANZA: Derek yesterday
DJs get shut out on air
BREAKFAST listeners were left in silence when two radio presenters nipped off for a coffee during the news — and got locked out of the studio.
Nigel Freshman, 21, and Chuck Street, 20, found themselves trapped in an adjoining room when the door handle fell off.
So they jumped out of the window on to the fire escape — and kicked in an outside door to get back into the studio at Beacon Radio, Wolverhampton.
Nigel said yesterday: ‘I think I will bring a flask in future.’
JERRY IN THE FRAME
MODEL Jerry Hall put herself in the picture when she opened an art show yesterday.
Her choice of the 2,000 canvasses at the 20th Century British Art Fair in London was…a portrait of herself.
She was given the £795 watercolour by illustrator Michael Frith as a present for opening the fair.
It's small enough to fit on the mantelpiece.
And it could fill an awkward gap if she has dumped any photos of her estranged husband Mick Jagger.
REAL LIFE: Jerry at the art show yesterday
PICTURE: Her portrait
£6,000 shame of vandal aged 70
A DEPRESSED pensioner caused £6,000 worth of damage by splashing paint stripper on 39 parked cars, a Newcastle court heard yesterday.
Ronald Hutchinson, 70, of Heaton, was given an absolute discharge and ordered to pay £1,170 compensation.
JP ‘tried a rubber stamping’
MAGISTRATE Michael Tobin pinned a female colleague against a wall, lifted her T-shirt and tried to rubber stamp her skin, an industrial tribunal heard.
Other women at the city council office where he worked hid when he chased them with a syringe filled with water, it was claimed yesterday.
The 37-year-old JP was sacked by Newcastle council for gross misconduct after complaints by three women.
The hearing in which Tobin claims unfair dismissal continues.
I USED TO BE A FLOWER SAYS BECKENBAUER
Ace talks to plants, too
DENNIS NEWSON
FOOTBALL ace Franz Beckenbauer has gone potty — he thinks he was once a flower.
Germany's World Cup maestro believes that in a former life he popped up as a plant — or an animal.
And, just like Prince Charles, he admits: ‘I talk to plants.’
Beckenbauer told Penthouse magazine that next time he comes back he hopes to be a WOMAN — because he would like to bear children.
Pain
Franz, 44, said: ‘Women are perhaps more sensitive.
I won't say more intelligent, but they get more attention.’
He added: ‘I don't know if I won't be scared of dying.
But I'd like to die in pain.’
Beckenbauer, who led Germany to World Cup triumphs as captain and coach, is known as Kaiser Franz to his fans.
But Bild, Germany's biggest newspaper, had another name for him yesterday: Guru Franz.
The paper asked: ‘Franz, are you daft or something?’
Drag fiend dragnet
A SEX beast dressed as a woman hockey player in short skirt, tights and large black boots was being hunted last night.
Police think the man — who attacked a young woman in Brighton — is a transvestite or had been to a fancy dress party.
Gem of a clue
A RAIDER left a tell-tale clue after robbing a jeweller's — his parole papers.
They were on the dashboard of his getaway van, which he crashed after the £2,000 raid in Leigh-on-Sea, Essex.
Police nabbed the man, who was out on licence from prison, when he returned home.
Drinker killed by a wasp
A DRINKER died 15 minutes after he was stung on the lip by a wasp that had dropped into his glass of port.
Horrified friends fought to save 52-year-old farmer John Wilcox as he suffered heart failure from the venom.
But Mr Wilcox, who farms at Wootton, near Oxford, died before an ambulance arrived.
Shock
He is one of a handful of people killed in Britain each year by wasp and bee stings.
The tragedy happened during a lunch break in a clay pigeon shoot at Horton-cum-Studley, Oxon.
Mr Wilcox's son Adrian said: ‘No one could do anything to save him — it was such a total shock.’
Hours after the tragedy, Mr Wilcox's first grandchild was born to his other son Edward.
Freed…to study law
MUM Tina Baker, 33, was freed from jail — to study LAW.
Her 15 months for deception and handling was cut on appeal so she can start a degree course in Manchester on Monday.
‘Then I want to work in prison reform,’ she said.
Painter's devil dog ‘ordeal’
FRANK CORLESS
FRIGHTENED decorator Philip Mounsa was kept prisoner by two snarling rottweilers after being accused of botching a job, a court heard yesterday.
Angry Brian Reatus, 44, allegedly foamed at the mouth as he pinned him to the wall.
Then he dragged in the two devil dogs and left them guarding the door so Mr Mounsa couldn't leave, Liverpool Crown Court was told.
‘They were huge and vicious,’ said prosecutor Elizabeth Cliff.
Mr Mounsa, 47, was ordered to strip off the wallpaper he had just put up at the house in Toxteth.
Then, said Miss Cliff, he was made to hand back £48 it cost to buy the rolls.
Reatus also allegedly jabbed Mr Mounsa in the neck and hit him with a dog chain.
He denies false imprisonment, assault and blackmail.
The trial continues.
‘I took chocs’
AIRPORT worker Phil Thomas admitted yesterday: ‘I took the Swissair chocs.’
Thomas, 30, of Wythenshawe, was one of four Manchester Airport cleaners sacked after 16 chocs went missing from a Swissair jet.
He said: ‘I felt sorry for the others, so I confessed.’
Swots' head start
RICHARD GARNER
BRAINY kids should start swotting for university degrees while still at school, Britain's top heads demanded yesterday.
And slower learners should have three years instead of two to do their A-levels.
The moves are part of a shake-up urged by the Headmasters' Conference, meeting in Bruges, Belgium.
The heads, from top independent boys' schools, want to reduce A-level failures by letting students study at their own pace.
Penny foolish
HOUSEWIFE Alma Brownrigg, who emigrated from Chelmsford, Essex, to Malta has received a bill from Eastern Electricity for 1p.
Be M1NE
A BRIDE could have love on a plate — the car number 1 DO is on offer at next month's DVLA sale in Birmingham.
Then she could buy him 4 YOU.
THERE'S NO SUCH THING AS A FREE LUNCH
DOWNFALL OF DAVID MELLOR
NOW HE KNOWS WHY…
Pages 2,3,4,5,6,7 and Centre Pages
Cocky David brazens it out as list of scandals grows
MARTIN PHILLIPS /DAVID BRADSHAW
DESPERATE David Mellor tried to brazen it out last night as his list of scandals grew.
He went into the lion's den at a newspaper charity reception and insisted: ‘I've done nothing wrong.’
But he said he would go if fellow MPs wanted him to.
The Fun Minister said his affair with actress Antonia de Sancha was not a resignation issue.
And he defended his freebie holiday in Spain, where he and his family were guests of PLO chief's daughter Mona Bauwens.
Mr Mellor said the trip was a purely private matter and did not break any rules.
He said: ‘So far as the question of Ministerial rules goes, it is quite clear that there was no breach whatsoever, and I deeply resent the suggestion that there was.’
This is in sharp contrast to the Ministerial rule book, which states: ‘No Minister or public servant should accept gifts, hospitality or services from anyone which would, or might appear to, place him or her under an obligation.
‘The same principle applies if gifts, etc, are offered.’
Mr Mellor told the press meeting in London: ‘My conscience is quite clear.
‘I said from the start if my remaining in Government embarrasses anyone, I will go, and that remains the position.
‘Everything in my life, every little manhole, has been opened up and everyone has had a sniff.’
Later Mr Mellor did a round of TV interviews in a last-ditch bid to win party backing.
He pleaded with his colleagues not to push him out of office.
Last night John Major said Mr Mellor's holiday did not break Ministerial rules.
The Prime Minister said: ‘His decision not to refer the matter to the then-Prime Minister (Mrs Thatcher) was entirely consistent with the guidance.’
But Labour MPs dismissed Mr Major's comments as ‘a joke’.
AFFAIR: Antonia
BACKING: Major
Raid on his agent
BURGLARS have stolen an answering machine and tape from Mr Mellor's party agent in Putney.
Victim Sue Howat joked: ‘And before you ask, No, Mr Mellor has never been to my flat.’
Jewellery was ignored — arousing suspicions that the raid was ‘political’.
INTO THE LIONS' DEN
Major's aide sees shaking Fun Minister have one hell of a time
The joke's on Mellor as he faces press
ANTON ANTONOWICZ /MARTIN PHILLIPS
PALEFACE David Mellor walked into a hall full of journalists last night…and found himself drinking in The Last Chance Saloon.
That was the nickname, for one night only, given to London's historic Stationer's Hall by chuckling Fleet Street editors — in memory of Mellor's notorious warning to them.
It was somehow appropriate given the Minister's precarious hold on his Cabinet seat.
And when a waitress named Nanette thrust a glass of claret into his shaking right hand it seemed, well, perfect.
Never one to turn down a freebie, Dave swigged the wine in five gulps…holding his left hand behind him, fingers crossed.
Mellor marched reluctantly into the lions' den to address the annual charity gala for the Newspaper Press Fund.
Normally the event is attended by the Prime Minister of the day.
Friend
But John Major, who says he is ‘firmly behind’ Mellor, sent his scandal-ravaged friend instead.
‘With friends like that, who needs Fleet Street?’ one newsman observed.
‘Major's so far behind him you can't see him.’
The PM's press secretary Gus O'Donnell WAS there.
Asked why, he replied: ‘Just keeping an eye on things.
We have a busy day ahead of us tomorrow at No 10.’
In truth, it was not a fun evening for the Minister of Fun — even if there wasn't a straight face around him.
He tried…oh, how he tried.
‘My life is an open book,’ he declared.
But then came the inevitable reply: ‘Well, it is now.’
Mellor rallied with a string of jokes.
But most would have sent a holidaymaker scurrying for his siesta.
‘I'm going through quite a quiet patch lately,’ he said, having drained his third glass of claret.
‘But I seem to be almost as big a draw as the Prime Minister.’
Funny one, that.
Undaunted, he switched to an anecdote about the death of the Italian composer Rossini.
‘When he died a friend delivered an ode.
When he finished he asked a colleague what he thought of it.
The friend answered ‘It's better that you died and Rossini wrote the music’.’
What a hoot.
Mellor grasped the nettle and told how he felt like Daniel in the lion's den.
Prayer
He was like a man fearing his moment had come, he said, covering his eyes in silent prayer — yet astonished to find the lion in the same pose.
‘Then the lion looked up and said ‘I don't know about you, mate, but I'm saying grace before meals.’
Eat your heart out, Billy Connolly.
Eventually, Mellor gave a nod towards the good work done by the Press Fund — then made his excuses and left.
His car turned out of Amen Corner and down Ave Maria Lane.
Back in the Last Chance Saloon, the drinking went on.
ANY QUESTIONS?
David Mellor is besieged by a press posse as he arrives for a showdown at The Last Chance Saloon last night Picture: KEN LENNOX
Odds on Lady B
BARONESS Blatch, 55, the Education Minister in the Lords, is favourite with Tory MPs to replace Mellor as Minister of Fun.
She would be the third woman in Major's Cabinet.
Also high in the frame is Treasury Minister Stephen Dorrell, 40.
MELLOR had a third freebie at the Cannes home of a cousin of Mona's in August 1991, it was claimed last night.
‘RELIEF’ OF TORY MPs
SHEREE DODD
TORY MPs last night heaved a collective sigh of relief as David Mellor finally quit.
Close colleagues who had decided he had to go said it was for the ‘greater good’ of the party.
Deputy chairman Angela Rumbold said the decision was ‘the right one for the party and the right one for the Government’.
She thought his resignation was ‘inevitable’ but believed he could return to the Government later.
Chairman Sir Norman Fowler said: ‘He has been an outstanding member of the Government for a number of years.
‘I hope it will not be long before he returns to the front bench.’
Senior backbencher Sir Marcus Fox said: ‘There is a feeling he has been hounded and forced out of office.’
And that was not good for relations between Parliament and the press, he warned.
But Hugh Dykes, MP for Harrow East, said: ‘I hope politicians will not go overboard and seek to bring in tough laws to curb the press.
‘Despite the excesses of some tabloids, freedom of the press is sacrosanct and should remain so.’
Shadow Heritage Secretary Bryan Gould said he was right to quit as he could no longer perform his duties.
DON'T BLAME ME…
IT'S MONA'S FAULT
I feel no guilt, says Antonia
DON MACKAY
STEVE ATKINSON
ACTRESS Antonia de Sancha — whose affair with David Mellor started his slide to shame — said last night: Don't blame me…blame Mona.
The glamour girl said she felt no guilt over Mr Mellor's resignation and declared: ‘I don't think I take any part in his downfall whatsoever.’
Antonia added: ‘I think the reason he has resigned is because of the particular allegations which have just occurred.’
This was a reference to Mr Mellor's month-long holiday in Spain in August 1990 — paid for by Mona Bauwens, daughter of the PLO's chief fund-raiser, at a time when Iraq was invading Kuwait.
On Tuesday, a libel action brought by Mrs Bauwens against The People newspaper over its story about the holiday ended with the jury deadlocked.
Antonia said if Mr Mellor had intended resigning over their affair ‘he would have done so long ago — or would have been forced to do so long ago’.
The affair was revealed more than two months ago, with details of their telephone ‘love chats’.
Antonia, talking in London, said that at the end of the day ‘you are responsible for your own actions’.
She added: ‘You have to wake up and you have to deal with them.
‘I'm not saying I think he's foolish.
At the end of the day you have to think before you act.’
Asked if she had any feelings of guilt over the fall of a Cabinet Minister, Antonia said:
‘How have I brought down a Cabinet Minister?
You tell me.
How have I brought him down?
I have no feelings of guilt.
‘I had a relationship and it blew up through various circumstances.
It was out of my control.’
Meanwhile, Mona Bauwens issued a statement in which she said she was ‘very sorry’ at the news.
She said she had invited the Mellors on holiday at a time when she had personal problems.
Mrs Bauwens, 36, said: ‘I am very grateful to David and Judith for their support both at that difficult time and since.
My heart goes out to them and their children.’
Face that he fell for EX-LOVER Antonia says you are accountable for your own actions.
HOLIDAY: Mona
WELL WE ALL GET OUR JUST DESERTS
Wife's family speak out as shamed Cabinet Minister resigns at last 
I'd rather watch Inspector Morse
By Mellor's father-in-law
TOM MERRIN
SHAMED Minister David Mellor got what was coming to him, his father-in-law declared last night.
‘We all get our just deserts,’ retired physics professor Edward Hall said.
And he revealed that he was too busy to tune into his son-in-law fighting for political life on Wednesday night's TV news.
The professor said: ‘I watched Inspector Morse instead.’
It was a repeat.
Judith Mellor's elderly parents have already attracted the Minister's fury -by publicly criticising him over the Antonia de Sancha affair.
Professor Hall, 75, even told how the Minister had threatened: ‘If you talk about me again you will not see your grandchildren.’
Then Mellor carted his wife and young sons down to the Halls' home in Upper Beeding, Sussex, for a stage-managed ‘happy families’ photo-call.
The Minister was pictured beaming over his in-laws' garden gate with the children about whom he had earlier made a plaintive ‘keep them out of it’ appeal.
Worse
Asked if Mellor's ‘gag’ had now been lifted, the professor laughed: ‘I've not asked him.’
The Halls main concern now, as ever, is for their daughter.
The professor said: ‘Judith has had a worse time than David because all of this is not of her making.
‘As for him, some people reap a little more than they sow and others nothing at all.
‘But we will ride it out as a family somehow.
I'm sure he will come back because they all do.’
Professor Hall said he and his wife Joan would still welcome Mellor into their home.
‘There was a split between us when this first happened,’ he said.
‘I hope it is healed now.’
The professor added that he could envisage his daughter having a worse husband.
‘But then he's the only son-in-law I have ever had.’
Mrs Hall, 75, revealed that despite Judith's brave face, she is still struggling to come to terms with the betrayal.
‘I have spoken to my daughter Judith many times today,’ she said.
‘She is not any more upset than she has been.
‘The marriage will survive because she is very strong.
I am very proud of her…very, very proud.’
Referring to her disgraced son-in-law as ‘Mr Mellor’, she added that she knew of his decision to resign ‘some time ago’.
Despite the sudden change in fortunes, Mrs Hall has no fears for her daughter's material well-being.
‘I am sure he will find plenty of things to do,’ she said.
‘He is a Queen's Counsel so he is not out on the street.’
Asked if she felt sorry for Mellor, Mrs Hall replied: ‘That is a very difficult question…‘
SNAPPY FAMILIES: Mellor sets up a jolly photo-call with his in-laws after they claimed he banned visits from the grandchildren
Sad Judith stays loyal to the end
RONALD RICKETTS
JUDITH Mellor remained loyal to her unfaithful husband to the bitter end.
After spending the whole day besieged by newsmen at her Putney home, she heard the news of his downfall at exactly 5.35pm.
Just as his resignation was being confirmed at Westminster, 43-year-old Mrs Mellor was seen kneeling in front of the TV in her front room.
Soon after, she said wistfully: ‘I am just very, very sad that someone with such ability is not able to serve his country in the way he can do best.’
Yesterday's events were the culmination of weeks of trauma that have dogged Mrs Mellor since the Minister's steamy affair with actress Antonia de Sancha was exposed.
But somehow she has managed to remain cool and calm.
The housewife, who gave up her career as a barrister after marrying her husband, stayed out of sight for most of the day.
At 3.05pm she appeared barefoot, dressed in jeans and a cotton blouse on the doorstep to say she was going to post some letters.
But Mirror photographer Steve King ran the errand for her.
Last night sad Mrs Mellor's only comment was: ‘What can I say — what is there to say?’
The first casualty
MELLOR is the first Minister to be forced out since Mr Major took over as Premier.
And he is the first to quit because of revelations about his private life since Energy Minister Cecil Parkinson admitted fathering a child by his secretary almost nine years ago.
Asked how Mellor would now be feeling, Parkinson said on BBC TV's Question Time last night: ‘He's going to face a totally empty diary — and he's going to have to come to terms with that.’
MIRROR COMMENT
Easy target
AS soon as he rose to speak, it was clear this was not the same John Major who won the Tories a fourth election.
Here was a man easily ridiculed because of the words he has been forced to eat.
Easily despised because of the promises he has broken without a word of apology.
And easily defeated in a debate on the Government's economic policy — because the Government doesn't have an economic policy.
This was certainly NOT a man capable of leading this country out of a recession created by his policies.
As for John Smith, he could not have had a better target for his Commons debut as Labour leader…
And he hit the bull's eye.
Of the two Johns in the Commons yesterday, only one looked like a Prime Minister.
And it wasn't Mr Major.
Franc is fighting
THE battered franc steadied yesterday as French and German central bank support held currency speculators at bay.
The partnership has triggered reports of a secret deal to press on with European unity — leaving Britain and others out in the cold.
The pound fell again as Mr Major insisted we will stay out of the ERM until it is reformed.
But shares boomed on hopes that this means more interest cuts.
Thousands more car jobs are scrapped
TERRY PATTINSON
ALAN LAW
ALMOST 2,500 car jobs were axed yesterday in one of the motor industry's blackest days.
Fords are to shed 1,500 jobs and Rolls-Royce Motors 950.
Seven hundred jobs are to be lost at Ford's plant at Halewood, Merseyside, and 740 at Dagenham, Essex.
Both plants are already working a four-day week.
Another 57 jobs will go at the Ford plant in Bridgend, South Wales.
Ford chairman Ian McAllister said: ‘This is the painful but inevitable consequence of the difficult trading conditions in the UK.’
Nearly one in three Rolls-Royce car-workers are going in the job cuts at its Crewe factory.
The company has now axed more than 2,000 jobs in the last 18 months following a dramatic sales slump.
Rolls-Royce chairman Peter Ward said that the company could see no sign of any recovery.
Bill Morris, leader of Britain's biggest union, the Transport Workers, said:
‘This must be the blackest day in car-making history.
‘The weakness in our economy has reached dangerous levels when key companies like Fords, Rolls-Royce and British Aerospace, whose success really matters to this country, are shedding skilled workers in their thousands.’
Other job cuts revealed this week include 230 at Birmingham stationery manufacturer Avery Gudex and 73 at ICI plants in Dumfries and Galloway.
LAMONT'S SQUEEZE
A PAY squeeze on the public sector is on the way, Chancellor Lamont warned last night.
He told MPs that ‘the strictest control’ of expenditure, including pay, was his top priority.
That means spending cuts as the Tories fight inflation outside the Euro money system.
Labour's Gordon Brown said it was now a question of ‘when not whether’ Mr Lamont would go.
The only monetary target he should be interested in was the price of his memoirs.
WITH THIS WRIT, I THEE SUE
Groom's parents take the bride's parents to court over wedding bill
BILL DANIELS
THE PARENTS of a bride and groom glared at each other across a courtroom yesterday — in an amazing dust-up over the bill for their wedding reception.
GROOM Chris White's mum Cara laid on a huge spread through the catering firm she runs.
But BRIDE Angela's mum Gladys Smith took one look at the sandwiches and canapes and sniffed: ‘It's worse than school dinners.’
And she promptly refused to pay her £836 share of the bill.
Wedding day bliss turned sour for happy Chris and Angela as soon as they arrived at Barrowby village hall, Lincs after the wedding ceremony.
Trestle tables were laid out with plates of ham, prawns and tidbits.
And to round it off their was a tiered wedding cake — all provided by Mrs White.
Bitter
But when Angela's mum complained about the feast she started a family feud.
Angela sided with her new in-laws and said the spread was terrific.
But her mum refused to hand over a penny — and Chris's parents finally decided to go to court for the cash.
Yesterday all eight members of the feuding families were at Sleaford county court, Lincs for a preliminary hearing.
And there was anger and tears outside.
Bride Angela, who has sided with her in-laws, sobbed as her mother Gladys hissed:
‘I never thought the day would come when I would be ashamed of you.’
And dad Norman said:
‘Angela, you have got a lot to answer for.’
Angela said: ‘Everyone was full of praise at the reception.
‘Then my mum told me it was terrible.’
Mrs White, 52, said: ‘We never wanted to go to court to get the money.
We only decided after talking it over with Angela.’
The families must now wait at least 28 days for a date for the full hearing.
 WEDDED HISS: The Whites, groom Chris, bride Angela, and the Smiths
IRA wipe out vital evidence
THE fight against terrorism may have been put back years by a monster IRA bomb which wrecked Ulster's forensic science HQ.
The 2,000lb van bomb also damaged 700 Belfast homes, three churches and a school and 23 people were injured.
Vital forensic evidence needed to convict up to 500 terrorist suspects is feared to have been wiped out.
Beautiful Di is not so perfect
PRINCESS Diana may be beautiful but she is not perfect, says top make-up artist Clayton Howard.
She hides a secret flaw — a slight indentation on the left side of her nose, he says in a new book, Look Like A Princess.
Meanwhile Di attended a premiere in London last night for Julie Walters' film, Just Like A Woman, in aid of a cancer appeal.
She spoke to Julie about her daughter Maisie, four, who is being treated for leukaemia.
Twenty transvestites were in the audience.
DENT: Diana
CRUSH LANDING
Jilted pilot drops in on his old love
MARK DOWDNEY
A PILOT called Randy went into a tailspin when his girl-friend gave him the elbow.
He decided to make one more call — and crashed his two-seater Cessna plane into her house.
Lovesick Randy Mock, 30, ploughed straight into the living room after buzzing the house in Edmonton, Canada, for two hours.
He was taken to hospital critically ill with severe head injuries — leaving girlfriend Donna Lorenz, 23, speechless.
But her shocked father said: ‘I told him he wasn't welcome in my home.
I guess this is how he got in.’
Spurned
Donna, her parents and 100 neighbours fled in terror as the kamikaze flyer:
DIVE-BOMBED Donna's home repeatedly;
CLIPPED tree branches as he swooped in too low;
SPURNED police pleas to land after Donna still refused to talk to him; and
FORCED police to evacuate the entire neighbourhood.
Finally, Randy warned: ‘I'm almost out of gas, man.
You know nobody takes me seriously and it'd be a disaster if I ran out of gas where I am now.’
But even that threat did not soften Donna's heart.
Within minutes, the Cessna's engine spluttered and died and Randy glided into the living-room window.
Witness Don Rudko said Randy casually flicked a cigarette butt out of the window only seconds before crashing.
‘I thought: This guy must be a Cool Hand Luke.
Here he's going to kill himself and he flicks a cigarette out of the window.’
Randy was not wearing his seat belt and went through the plane's windscreen.
Experts say the house windows ‘cushioned’ the impact and saved him from instant death.
WHAT A PANE: Randy's Cessna pokes through the living room window
Third death from factory horror blast
THE death toll from a chemical plant blast rose to three yesterday when a girl died in hospital.
Sara Atkinson, 18, had been on a life support machine for three days.
Two men were killed in Monday's explosion at Castleford, Yorks, and three are still seriously ill in hospital.
Ten firemen are in a special isolation ward with ‘glowing fingertips’, nausea and diarrhoea believed to have been caused by chemicals.
CLINT'S FAN CLUB GOES BUST
ROD CHAYTOR
ACTOR Clint Eastwood's fan club has folded — after asking him in vain for a fistful of dollars.
Founder Dave Turner said yesterday: ‘I'm very disappointed.
There hasn't even been a thank-you for all my hard work.’
Dave, 38, of Kingswinford, West Midlands, appealed to multi-millionaire Clint to help meet £1,800 bills.
Now the father of two is being forced to sell his collection of Clint memorabilia.
Worldwide membership of the 13-year-old Eastwood Appreciation Society — which produced a monthly magazine — had slumped from 1,000 to just 87.
APPEAL: Clint
Police hit out
POLICE yesterday rapped social workers for allowing baby Harry to be discharged from hospital with a fractured skull into the care of his mother and the man who finally killed him.
Welfare staff overruled an experienced detective who said the tot should stay in care.
Inspector David Williams, head of Barking's child protection squad, said yesterday that the social services were wrong.
‘The alarm bells were ringing,’ he said.
‘The next step should have been some form of close supervision.’
Barking social services director Neil Walker said the decision was ‘right at the time’.
He added: ‘It's always easy with hindsight to scapegoat the professionals but there was only one culprit and that was Mr Feathers.’
I'LL STAND BY BEAST WHO KILLED MY BABY
Tragedy of tortured tot sent back to die
A TEENAGE mother yesterday vowed to stand by the pot-smoking body-builder who viciously battered her tiny baby to death.
Joanne Gurney spat abuse at an Old Bailey jury for convicting her live-in lover Frederick Feathers of murder.
Feathers, 20, hurled four-month-old Harry Gurney against a wall in a fit of temper, causing the tot to die in agony.
But Joanne, 19 — who has had three children by different men — screamed at the jury: ‘You are idiots!
You don't know what you are doing.’
After Feathers was jailed for life she vowed: ‘I know he did not mean to kill Harry.
I am sticking by him.’
The court heard that little Harry's death could have been prevented if social workers had not overruled detectives.
Returned
Ten days before he died the baby was rushed to hospital with a fractured skull and police took out a 72-hour care order.
But Harry was returned to his mother in Barking, Essex, after a welfare services meeting led by social worker Mrs Bula Biswas.
One week later he was dead.
Feathers, who was not Harry's father, told the court he threw the baby on the bed because he would not stop crying.
But a post mortem revealed three huge head blows had bruised the baby's brain so badly, the swelling caused the old skull fracture to enlarge by four inches.
Harry's stomach was covered in ulcers caused by his stress and pain.
Joanne has since given birth to Feathers' daughter.
But a court order bans him from any contact with the baby.
RAGE AT JURY: Joanne was angry at verdict
GRIP OF DEATH: Killer Feathers cradles tiny Harry in his arms
Cat is off the menu
THE headless bodies of 100 cats — bound for restaurant kitchens — were found in a car stopped by police.
The animals had been smuggled into Macau from neighbouring China.
They were decapitated to prevent earwax spoiling the taste.
Roseanne's boy feels the squeeze
TV comic Roseanne Arnold, who recently had her nose bobbed and her boobs reduced, got to work on her son Jake at a Los Angeles premiere of the Walt Disney movie The Mighty Ducks.
It wasn't clear if the mighty Roseanne was reshaping Jake's jawline or just being friendly.
Either way, the lad didn't argue with his heavyweight mum.
He just shut his eyes and hoped for the best.
PEST ON A HOT LINE!
A CONFUSED computer gave a weary couple a rude awakening at one o'clock every morning.
For it mistook Darren and Michelle Fryer for a giant heating boiler.
And it rang three times every night for three weeks…to take their temperature.
All Darren, 23, could hear were whistles, bleeps, buzzes and pings.
He thought it was a phone pest until police collared the culprit with a phone tap.
Council bosses in Sheffield had already scrapped the boiler-check system.
The spare line was allocated to the Fryers.
But someone forgot to tell the computer.
Micro magic
THE world's smallest motor, an electromagnetic micromachine 31 thousandths of an inch in diameter, has been made in Japan.
Burglars grab the Guinness records
JOHN PEACOCK
The Guinness Book Of Records has had all its records stolen.
Burglars struck at the offices of the world-famous best-selling annual and carried off computers and its priceless data discs.
They contain nearly 40 years' information about the biggest, smallest, heaviest, highest, longest, fastest, oldest in sport, science and everything else in life.
But the raiders who broke into the Guinness Records headquarters in Enfield, Middlesex, won't stop the latest edition — the 39th — being published as planned on October 9.
Bonus
A spokeswoman yesterday said: ‘Fortunately for us this year's book has already been printed.’
There was another bonus for the company — much of the information in the 15,000 stolen discs was also stored in back-up discs.
The spokeswoman added: ‘It will take a few days to find out just what has been taken.
‘There is a possibility that some information could be lost to us forever — but at the moment we don't really know.
‘We're still sorting things out.’
Just for the record — the 1992 edition will be launched at Lord's.
Child-sex beast free
A YOUTH who was told by a judge that his sex attack on a nine-year-old girl was ‘like a breath of fresh air’ walked free yesterday.
Judge Geoffrey Jones caused a storm by making the comment at an earlier hearing because Ian Stevenson also admitted assaulting two boys.
Stevenson, 18, of Scunthorpe, South Humberside, was put on probation for two years at Lincoln Crown Court.
Patients' 999 hell
A MASSIVE 96 per cent of road accident and assault victims in Britain have less chance of surviving than similar cases in the USA.
They may suffer long delays in reaching hospital and are likely to be treated by junior doctors, says a survey of 15,000 victims, carried out at 33 hospitals.
‘We'll get you fury’ at death joyrider
FRANK CORLESS
SCREAMING relatives were dragged from court yesterday after a joyrider who killed two children was attacked in the dock.
A cigarette lighter hurled from the public gallery struck teenager Christopher Lewin on the forehead and victim's aunt Pat Thompson shouted: ‘Kill him.’
After Lewin, 19, received a 7 1/2-year sentence, another woman screamed: ‘We will be waiting for you.’
Lewin, in a stolen sports car, mowed down Daniel Davies, nine, and Adele Thompson, 12, as they collected ‘pennies for the guy’ at Toxteth, Liverpool.
Adele was flung 90ft and Daniel 70ft.
Another child was injured.
Six weeks earlier Lewin had been bailed after an 80mph police chase.
The judge at Liverpool Crown court said 10 minutes of ‘wicked, arrogant joy’ had caused others a lifetime of agony.
VICTIM: Adele
‘Maxwell's wife rules’
PUBLISHER Robert Maxwell's widow Betty took over as the ‘puppet master’ behind secret family trusts in Liechtenstein when he drowned, it was claimed yesterday.
She was ‘in control of the empire’ within two days of his death, said Tory MP David Shaw.
And she is still the power behind the trusts masking his web of deals, he suggested to the Commons Social Security Committee, which is carrying out a probe.
Britannia is pranged
THE Royal yacht was in a bit of a scrape with a common little tanker yesterday.
Britannia was bumped as she was refuelling at Portsmouth.
The tanker left 20ft scrapes on her stern.
But a Navy spokesman said: ‘It's nothing the crew can't sort out with a pot of paint.’
Racy Alana's the tops for sheer chic!
THAT'S one in the eye for Rod Stewart!
Ex-wife Alana demonstrates that she's still out in front in the glamour stakes at the ripe old age of 43.
Alana unveiled her eye-popping see-through look at a glittering Hollywood premiere.
As Rod once said…she wears it well.
Tutu bad for fan
A BALLET lover yesterday lost her £200 damages claim over what she rated as a bad performance by superstar Rudolph Nureyev.
Lesley Middleton claimed travel expenses from Stainmore, Cumbria, for herself and her daughter and a ticket refund following the appearance by Nureyev at the Empire Theatre in Sunderland.
But a judge dismissed her compensation claim.
PLANEMAKERS AXE 3,0OO WORKERS
Historic plant shut
ALAN LAW
PLANEMAKERS British Aerospace yesterday axed 3,000 jobs — and announced the closure of the factory where some of the most famous aircraft in history were made.
Stunned union chiefs said the savage cuts signalled ‘the beginning of the end for our planemaking industry’.
And bosses revealed that only a deal with Taiwan had prevented the number of job losses being DOUBLED.The shock move means BAe's factory in Hatfield will shut by the end of next year.
All 2,060 workers will go in a town which is already an unemployment blackspot.
The plant produced the world's first jet airliner, the Comet.
And legendary names like the Tiger Moth trainer and Mosquito and Vampire fighters were also made there.
It is currently turning out the 146 high-wing short-haul airliner.
Two factories in the Manchester area will also be badly hit.More than 700 jobs will vanish at Woodford and 200 at Chadderton.
The company swung the axe before revealing pre-tax losses of £129 million for the first half of this year.
This compares with a profit of £86 million in the same period last year.
The job cuts bring the total across all BAe firms to 43,000 since 1990.
And the latest move could lead to a further 1,500 jobs going among component suppliers.
Union leaders, given the grim news at a meeting in London, called it an ‘absolute disaster.’
Tim Webb, of the aerospace union MSF, said: ‘We suspected the news would be bad — but not on this scale.
‘It is the end of Britain as a leading planemaker.’
The jobs toll could have hit 6,000 but for a £295 million deal clinched with Taiwan Aerospace.
BAe will join forces with the Far East firm to produce passenger planes for regional travel.
Shadow Trade Secretary Robin Cook blamed crippling Tory policies for the axings.
‘These distressing job losses show the parlous state of the economy,’ he said.
TURBULENT TIMES: Troubled BAe's 146 high-wing airliner
Selina stuns Beeb in Clothes Show walkout
PAUL STANLEY
TELLY fashion queen Selina Scott has left BBC bosses in the lurch — by quitting the Clothes Show days before a new series.
Her shock decision to leave the programme after six years has stunned Beeb bosses.
No contract had been signed.
But the BBC were so confident their glamour girl would return on October 4, they put her in the Radio Times credits.
Selina, 40, has also pulled out of hosting the British Fashion Awards — whose guest list includes the Duchess of Kent — in a few weeks.
Now the load will fall on co-presenter Jeff Banks and rookie Brenda Emmanus, who has yet to make her TV debut.
Selina — said to earn £200,000 a year as a newscaster with Sky TV — is reported to be considering a £250,000 contract from the new London TV station Carlton.
BBC editor John King said: ‘Selina's contribution has been immeasurable.
We wish her well.’
But corporation bosses are said to be privately seething.
A Clothes Show insider said: ‘This has come like a bolt from the blue.
It's really dropped us in it.
‘It wasn't unusual for no contract to be signed — we've worked with Selina for a long time.’
A spokesman for Selina said: ‘She felt it was time for a change.’
Madonna's No-Clothes Show — See Page 3 
DE-FROCKED: Selina
HE MAY BE GONE SOME TIME
Frozen-out Mellor follows in footsteps of a mightier man
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
DAVID Mellor headed for the political wilderness yesterday by comparing himself to a great British hero.
Telling MPs why he was off to the ‘icy wastes’ of the backbenches, the ex-Fun Minister said he felt like Captain Oates — the member of Scott's Antarctic expedition who walked out into the snow to die to give his companions a better chance of survival.
Brave Oates, who was born and raised in Mellor's Putney constituency, told Scott as he left: ‘I may be gone for some time.’
Last night the feeling at Westminster was that Mellor resembled him in only one respect — he may be gone for some time, too.
Mellor's self-styled heroics were cold comfort for his team leader, John Major.
For like Oates, Scott perished in the end.
Mellor, 43, addressed the Commons to explain why he quit as Heritage Secretary on Thursday.
But he was unrepentant over his affair with actress Antonia de Sancha and his string of freebie holidays.
He still insisted he had done nothing to be ashamed of and said he had been cleared of wrongdoing by his ‘constant friend’ Mr Major.
Though he admitted for the first time he was the author of his own downfall, he spent much of his speech attacking the press.
He said: ‘Having become heartily sick of my private life myself, I could hardly expect others to take a more charitable view.’
Normally such personal statements are heard in silence.
But there were murmurs of dissent from Labour when he said: ‘What is clear is that there was no question of impropriety.’
And Opposition MPs could not conceal their scorn when he compared his life in recent weeks to that of a victim of Ceaucescu's Romania.
Mess
Mellor's wife Judith and son Freddie, eight, watched from a gallery as the ex-Minister said his family had been a tower of strength throughout the whole ‘sorry mess.’
He told of his sorrow at having to quit a job he passionately enjoyed.
And he quoted John Lennon by saying: ‘Life is what happens to you while you're busy making other plans.’
Mr Major looked sad as he listened.
But other Tories gave the statement a cool response.
There were just a handful of hear-hears when Mellor said his ‘cheap and sordid’ affair was not a resigning offence.
And no one argued when he said he had become an embarrassment.
Afterwards, Mellor tasted life as a backbencher as he was driven away from Parliament.
Instead of riding in the Fun Minister's Rover limousine, he climbed into a C-reg VW Golf.
IN THE WILDERNESS: Having lost his Minister's limo, David Mellor leaves the Commons in a C-reg VW
‘Babbling’ Brooke to take over
SHEREE DODD
FORMER Ulster Secretary Peter ‘Babbling’ Brooke will replace Mr Mellor as Heritage Secretary.
Mr Brooke's recall after five months on the backbenches surprised MPs.
They had expected the Prime Minister to appoint a third woman to his Cabinet.
Mr Brooke, 58, earned his nickname by singing My Darling Clementine on a Dublin TV show last January — hours after an IRA massacre.
He was later defeated for the Speaker- ship by Betty Boothroyd.
Last night he likened his political fortunes to ‘a roulette wheel’.
One of his tasks will be to bring in the national lottery.
COMEBACK: Brooke
‘GET A GRIP, MAJOR’
DAVID BRADSHAW
PUNCH-DRUNK John Major was given a veiled warning by Tory MPs yesterday to get a grip on things.
Sir Marcus Fox, the powerful chairman of the Tory backbenchers, suggested that the Premier was in need of a break and his Government in need of a tougher approach.
He called for ‘tougher and newer policies’ which must be sold to the public ‘with panache and style’.
The backbenchers' unrest was underlined by the rousing ovation they gave to Chancellor Nor-man Lamont at a private meeting yesterday.
It echoed the reception he got in Thursday's emergency Commons debate whereas the Premier's lacklustre speech received only a muted response.
The backbenchers were making the point yesterday that the Chancellor was not the man they blamed for the economic crisis.
WARNED: Major
ABOUT TIME, TOO!
Shamed minister finally pays the price for scandal of those freebie holidays
Mellor quits after weeks of disgrace
‘He's a crude sacrifice’
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
DAVID BRADSHAW
DISGRACED David Mellor learned there was no such thing as a freebie as he was finally prised from his Cabinet seat last night.
The 43-year-old Fun Minister resigned after WEEKS of saying he wouldn't.
He finally bowed to the inevitable after revelation upon revelation about his seedy affair with soft-porn starlet Antonia de Sancha and freebie holidays hosted by PLO chief's daughter Mona Bauwens and an Arab sheik.
Only hours before his resignation, another story surfaced of how he and his family enjoyed a THIRD free sunshine break.
They were guests of an Arab financier at his luxury apartment in the South of France.
Mellor tried to blame the press for his downfall.
But just about everyone else thought he had brought it on himself.
And the ex-Minister learned that when someone else foots the bill there is always a price to pay in the end.
As QC George Carman said towards the end of the Mona Bauwens court case earlier this week: ‘There's no such thing as a free lunch.’
Feared
Not only has Mellor lost the cherished Cabinet post that thrust him to the forefront of British politics, but he has also waved goodbye to the Heritage Secretary's salary of £63,047.
His pay packet as Tory MP for Putney will plummet to £32,193.
Mellor's resignation plunged John Major into another huge crisis.
The Prime Minister was already reeling from a savaging inflicted in the Commons by Labour leader John Smith.
In an incredible display of loyalty to his close friend, Mr Major backed Mellor to the end and told him he was ‘very reluctant’ to let him go.
But Cabinet colleagues feared the Premier's unwavering support was becoming almost as embarrassing as Mellor's antics.
And they were stunned at how he allowed yesterday — the day of his biggest ever test in the Commons — to be dominated by phone calls and meetings about the future of his friend.
Mellor told Mr Major he felt unable to carry on in a phone call early yesterday morning.
The official news that he was quitting came nine hours later.
Dismal
In what Labour called ‘pure cynicism,’ the announcement was delayed until after Mr Major's dismal performance in a crucial debate on the economy.
Once it was clear Mr Smith had wiped the floor with the Premier, Mellor was used for what one Tory called his ‘last good deed’.
He announced he was going just in time to overshadow reports of Mr Major's humiliation on the evening TV news bulletins.
Labour's defence spokesman George Foulkes said Mellor had been ‘crudely sacrificed’ by the Premier.
Mellor's resignation was the final act in a drama running since July, when his romance with Antonia was exposed.
As revelations about the freebie hols followed, he bleated that he was the ‘victim’ of a tabloid newspaper war.
But it was exasperated Tory backbenchers who sealed his fate.
They made it clear he was a liability who had to go.
When Mellor joined colleagues for yesterday's Cabinet meeting, he knew it was for the last time.
Those sitting at his side were pretty sure, too.
All had come under pressure from constituents, Tory officials and MPs.
Mellor met Mr Major briefly before the Cabinet meeting — then stayed on afterwards.
The Premier made it clear he was not being forced out.
Despite the freebie fiascos, Mr Major still reckoned his pal was being ‘pilloried’.
But when Mellor left 10 Downing Street, his grim expression showed his Cabinet career was over.
He returned to his office to write his letter of resignation and clear his desk.
He thanked Mr Major for clearing him of any breach of ministerial rules.
But he made no reference to how this is contradicted by the ministerial rule book, which states:
‘No Minister or public servant should accept gifts, hospitality or services from anyone which would, or might appear to, place him or her under an obligation.’
Mr Major's reply expressed ‘deep regret’.
But ominously, there was no hint of an eventual return to the Cabinet.
Late last night Mellor did his duty as a backbencher by voting for the Government at the end of the economy debate.
Then he was chauffeur-driven back to his Putney home to consider his future…and his folly.
DEAR PRIME MINISTER
As you know, I decided this morning that I should resign.
I am deeply touched by your reluctance to let me do so, but I feel sure this is the right thing to do.
‘I was very grateful that you and colleagues concluded in July that my folly in becoming embroiled in revelations of an affair did not warrant my leaving the Government.
‘I am also very glad that following advice in the normal way, you have been able to make it clear that in relation to subsequent allegations, I have acted within the guidance on the conduct of ministers.
‘However, I have concluded that it is too much to expect of my colleagues in Government and in Parliament to have to put up with a constant barrage of stories about me in certain tabloid newspapers.
‘Rather than have this turn into a trial of strength between the Government and some sections of the press about my future, I have decided to resolve it myself by resigning.
I also have to bear in mind the interests of my wife and family who have been such a wonderful support to me during this particularly trying period for all of us.
‘I leave with great regret.
I have been privileged to hold office for 11 years in a series of jobs of enormous interest and I believe of some importance, especially in relation to drugs, broadcasting, the NHS and foreign affairs.
‘It has been a special privilege to serve under you in the Cabinet as Chief Secretary and as the first Secretary of State for National Heritage.
It is an opportunity given to few to lead in the creation of a new Department of State, especially one which has so much to contribute to your own vision of improving the quality of life in this country.
I would have loved to have been able to do more to turn that vision into reality.
‘I shall of course continue to serve as Member for Putney.
I love my constituency and will do all I can to advance the interests of my constituents from the backbenches.
I shall also do everything in my power to support and sustain the Government in the months and years ahead.
‘The country is fortunate to have you as our Prime Minister.
I am privileged to count you as a dear friend.
I do not want to be seen as a liability to you.
It is my one great regret about this whole sorry business that at this crucial time in the Government's fortunes, when I should so much have liked to be seen as a tower of strength, I am perceived by some as a point of weakness.
I hope I deal with that matter today by taking this step.
JOHN
DEAR DAVID
I was very sorry when you told me this morning of your decision to resign from the Government.
As you know, you have always had my warm personal support, and I accepted your decision with deep regret.
I admire the courage with which you have handled difficult circumstances in recent weeks.
‘You have been a valued member of my Cabinet, both as Secretary of State for National Heritage and before that as Chief Secretary.
Your knowledge, experience and insight has been invaluable in getting the new Department of National Heritage off to a swift and successful start.
‘I know from the messages of support I have received from those in the arts world and elsewhere how much your leadership, interest and enthusiasm will be missed.
It is a matter of great regret that you will not be overseeing the next stage in the development of the department, but you have laid a sound foundation for the future.
Before that, you handled the difficult job of Chief Secretary to the Treasury with great skill and determination and made an important contribution in a wide range of other ministerial jobs.
‘I will continue to value your friendship and your continued support in the
House of Commons.
My very best wishes to you and to Judith, who has provided such marvellous support through all this.
JOHN
GOODBYE OLD FRIEND: Mellor's resignation letter to Major
SO LONG, OLD BUDDY: Major's reply to the ex-Fun Minister
END OF THE ROAD: It was Fun while it lasted — but now it's all over for downcast David Mellor as he is driven away from Westminster after announcing his resignation
FREEBIE VILLA IN KIDNAP DRAMA
GORDON HAY
THE Costa villa where David Mellor stayed was once used by a child-kidnapper during a £9 million ransom plot.
Armed police staked out the luxury home in their 11-day hunt for gang boss Jean Louis Camerini and his hostage, six-year-old Melodie Nash.
Camerini, a friend of owner Count Robert de Beaumont, is thought to have made phone demands from the villa after snatching Melodie.
Grabbed
The terrified youngster — daughter of a former Soho club owner — was grabbed at gunpoint in Marbella three years before Mellor's freebie break there with PLO chief's daughter Mona Bauwens.
Police kept a 24-hour watch on the villa after Camerini demanded £9 million for Melodie's return.
They later stormed the house and rescued the child — but missed their prey.
It was another year before Camerini was caught and jailed for 21 years.
The Fun Palace — Pages 12 and 13 
STAKED OUT: The villa where Mellor stayed
‘Danger’ hangers dumped
MARKS and Spencer have scrapped millions of clip-on hangers in a safety scare.
The move comes after one of the spring-loaded metal clips flew out and hit a child's face.
Now all stores have been told to replace the hangers, used for trousers and skirts, with the old drape-over design.
M and S said yesterday a coiled metal spring was a ‘potential hazard’ to customers.
It refused to say how much replacing them will cost but admitted: ‘It will be very substantial.’
M and S has also told its hanger suppliers to come up with a safe design.
Hall change
A JAPANESE hotel giant is set to buy London's County Hall after a Government block on a bid by the London School of Economics.
New jail HQ plan ditched
PLANS to move the prison service HQ to Derby were shelved yesterday because of a curb on public spending.
Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke said with ‘great regret’ he could no longer justify the expense of a new building.
The final innings of big-hit batsman
PATRICK MULCHRONE
CRICKET fanatic Fred Smith died trying to smash a six for victory off the last ball of a match.
Fred, 51, collapsed at the crease with a heart attack.
And a fielder caught his big hit on the boundary, denying his team a win.
Security guard Fred had played for the Scholes club near Rotherham, South Yorks, since he was only 12.
Skipper Malcolm Ring promoted him to No 4 in the batting order as they chased victory against a team from Doncaster.
Loved
Malcolm said yesterday: ‘We were looking for six runs to win the game.
‘They bowled, Fred hit it — and he fell to the ground.’
Ambulancemen tried desperately to revive him, but he was dead on arrival at hospital.
Wife Kath, 48, said: ‘He loved his cricket and that would have been the way he wanted to go — playing the game he loved.’
Today Fred's 23-year-old son David will take his place in the team for the last match of the season.
I'M FREE AT LAST!
Battered wife who killed
BILL AKASS /LORRAINE BUTLER
A BATTERED wife who burned her brutal husband to death was freed from jail yesterday.
And as she left court with cheering supporters, Kiranjit Ahluwalia vowed to campaign for other wives in prison for killing their violent husbands.
‘We deserve some happiness in our lives,’ she said.
Indian-born Kiranjit, of Crawley, Sussex, endured 10 years of torture before dousing sleeping husband Deepak in petrol and setting light to it, the Old Bailey heard.
She was jailed for life in 1989 for murder.
But in July the Appeal Court quashed the conviction and ordered a second trial.
This time the prosecution accepted Kiranjit's plea of guilty to manslaughter because of diminished responsibility.
And the judge imposed a three years and four months jail sentence — the time she has already served in prison.
Mother of two Kiranjit — whose sons are eight and six — wept as she said: ‘In prison I felt like I was lost.
‘I had lost my children, my hopes, my dreams, my ambitions and everything.
‘I am so excited about seeing my sons again.
‘I will tell them the truth when they are old enough.
I will not hide anything — I will tell them everything.’
Battered wives like Sara Thornton — serving life for killing her violent husband — were always in her thoughts.
‘They have suffered enough already,’ she said.
Her solicitor said the case could start a flood of similar appeals.
Labour peer Lord Ashley said: ‘No battered wife should suffer as she has.
I will introduce a Bill in the Lords to extend the defence of provocation.’
VIOLENT: Deepak
JOY: Kiranjit Ahluwalia leaves court yesterday with cheering supporters
Pit jobs halved
HALF the 1,170 miners at Daw Mill mine — the last pit in Warwickshire — are to lose their jobs, British Coal bosses yesterday announced.
Crackdown on school sex pests
TOUGH new measures to stop sex pests teaching in Britain's private schools were ordered by the Government yesterday.
Education Secretary John Patten warned that any school which failed to check whether staff had a criminal record would face immediate closure.
It follows the case, highlighted by the Mirror, of headmaster Lionel Mann, jailed for a SECOND string of sex assaults on little boys.
He had already served a prison sentence in New Zealand.
Mr Patten said: ‘Schools must check credentials properly.’
Peers aid probe
LORD Walker, Lord Williams and Lord Donoughue are to give evidence about the Maxwell scandal to a Commons inquiry.
Shirl comes up tramps…
THE minute she walked in the joint, she could see he was a man of distinction — probably Britain's best-known tramp.
After all, he's been pictured with a host of celebrities, including Rod Stewart and now Shirley Bassey.
And when the old chap approached Shirley outside London nightspot Tramp — of course— it reminded her of another line from that old song of hers: ‘Hey big spender, spend a little time with me.’
And she was happy to oblige.
HOLIDAY FIRMS GO BUST
ALAN LAW
TWO more holiday firms ran into trouble yesterday.
The Civilian Aviation Authority guaranteed to bring home 10,000 people on holiday with the AirBreak group after it withdrew the troubled firm's operator licence and called in its £3.97 million bond.
It will also repay advance bookings.
The AirBreak group, which also includes Next Holidays, Peter Pan Ltd and Suntan Tours, revealed a £2.9 million loss for the first six months of this year.
Coach company Scott's Greys, based at Darlington, Co Durham, has gone into liquidation.
Hundreds of customers could lose their bookings because the company was not a member of the Association of British Travel Agents.
Many customers found out the company had closed when they found a notice on the door of the company's Darlington office.
Ouch, I've had a bout of coffin
A MAN who tackled two thieves was thumped with — a coffin lid.
The pair turned on him after he spotted them carrying the coffin through High Wycombe, Bucks, at midnight.
Police later found the coffin, which had been stolen from an undertaker, buried under rubbish bags.
Two men are accused of burglary and handling stolen property.
JAG VICTIM LEAVES £ 1/2m
GORDON HAY
BODY-IN-THE-JAG murder victim Penny Bell has left her husband more than £600,000.
But Alistair Bell said last night that the money would not ease his sorrow, or his bitterness that her killer is still at large 15 months later.
Estate agent Mr Bell, 45, said he was not surprised at the size of his wife's will.
Catering firm boss Penny, 43, was a ‘fine, intelligent’ businesswoman.
He plans to complete extensions to their £400,000 home at Denham, Bucks, where he still lives with children Matthew, 12, and Lauren, 10.
But they had to rebuild their lives without Penny, which was ‘very, very difficult’.
Penny's body was found in her Jaguar XJS in West London in June, 1991.
She had been stabbed 50 times.
The killer stole £8,500 she withdrew from an account the previous day.
STABBED: Penny
SORROW: Alistair
STORM AS A BISHOP USES THE ‘F’ WORD
Four-letter attack on casual sex
MIKE TOWERS
A BISHOP sparked a storm last night after using the F-word in an outspoken attack on casual sex.
The Right Reverend Philip Goodrich, Bishop of Worcester, was speaking at a conference on the future of marriage.
He stunned his 80-strong audience by saying: ‘If you will excuse my using this expression, the attitude today is too often find it, f—it and forget it.’
The 62-year-old bishop later explained that he was quoting from a book called How To Be A Wally.
But last night former Tory MP Peter Bruinvels — now on the Church of England's governing General Synod — said: ‘I'm astonished.
It was a great error of judgment.
From what I'm told people were quite offended.
‘My concern is that he's got to protect family morals — and this doesn't help.
Values
‘There are a number of bishops in public life who attack bad language.
Here we have an astonishing faux-pas.
‘If the church isn't going to stand up for good values, who is?’
But Mr Bruinvels added: ‘He is a most charming man.
It's completely out of character.’
The conference was held in the bishop's home at Hartlebury Castle, Kidderminster.
His audience included social workers, probation officers and police.
The Wally book he mentioned spotlights young people who have one-night stands without worrying about the consequences.
The Cambridge-educated bishop, who has four daughters, was unavailable for comment last night.
RAPPED: Bishop Goodrich
MAJOR: EDDIE THE EAGLE OF POLITICS
As his pal goes…
PM faces up to another shambles
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
JOHN MAJOR was dubbed ‘the Eddie Eagle of politics’ yesterday as he took a massive fall in the Commons.
The Premier ski-ed into trouble over his claim that sterling would replace the German mark as Europe's No 1 currency under his Government.
Leaping into action, Labour leader John Smith said there was more chance of ski-jump flop Eddie winning a gold medal at the next winter Olympics.
His jibe was greeted with howls of laughter as Mr Smith savaged Mr Major during the emergency debate on the economy.
The Premier could just as easily have been on the slalom — ducking and diving as MPs taunted him over the Exchange Rate Mechanism fiasco.
Mr Smith described his speech as ‘a rambling piece of nonsense on Europe’.
And he condemned him as ‘the devalued Prime Minister of a devalued Government’.
Mr Major — who hoped that David Mellor's resignation would overshadow the debate — was attacked from all sides.
Failure
Anti-Europeans interrupted him over the failure of the ERM.
Pro-Europeans were no happier as he stated that sterling would not go back into the ERM until changes were made.
Last night Ministers were predicting it could be ‘years rather than months’ before we re-enter.
During the debate, Mr Smith told Mr Major: ‘You don't know what is your economic policy — that was  startlingly clear in your speech.’
And turning on Chancellor Norman Lamont, he said: ‘After this performance, who can ever believe you in anything you subsequently say!’
Mr Major defended the devaluation of the pound and backed Mr Lamont.
‘I take full responsibility for the actions and policies of my Chancellor,’ he said.
He added the Maastricht Treaty would not go before MPs until the Danes decided how to deal with their ‘No’ vote.
In his first Commons speech since becoming Labour leader, Mr Smith mocked the PM's comments about recovery.
Labour had pressed for a programme to boost jobs and investment.
MPs last night voted 330 to 288 to reject a Labour amendment condemning the ‘total collapse’ of the Government's economic policy.
ON THE ATTACK: John Smith yesterday
ANOTHER LOSER: John Major doubles as failed ski-jumper Eddie the Eagle
Holiday firms go bust
TWO more holiday firms ran into trouble yesterday.
The Civil Aviation Authority guaranteed to bring home 10,000 people on holiday with the AirBreak group after withdrawing its operator licence and calling in its £3.97 million bond.
It will also repay advance bookings.
AirBreak group includes Next Holidays, Peter Pan Ltd and Suntan Tours.
Coach company Scott's Greys, based at Darlington, Co Durham, has gone into liquidation.
Hundreds of customers could lose their bookings.
Wogan crashes Bentley
TV star Terry Wogan landed up in a ditch in his posh Bentley after losing control on a bend.
He was found at the side of the road at Sunningdale, Berks, by two policemen.
The officers called a breakdown truck to pull him out.
Police said last night that Tel, who was driving alone, was not given a B-test because there was no suspicion he had been drinking.
Now here's the good news, Dave
A MAN told he had lung cancer gulped wine and valium before crashing his car into a tree.
But his suicide bid failed — because he forgot to unclip his seatbelt.
A week later doctors told Dave Cameron, 47, he didn't have cancer after all.
But by then his wife had left him and he had lost his factory job.
A court in Melbourne, Australia, completed his misery by fining him £120 for drink-driving.
Maniac butchers mum
A YOUNG mum was brutally knifed to death just moments after taking her five year-old daughter to school yesterday.
Jennifer Grant, 25, was stabbed in the neck in a deserted alleyway near her home at Leyton, East London.
A schoolboy found her dead in a pool of blood on her driveway.
What Ar-lott!
WISDEN cricket books owned by broadcaster John Arlott, who died last December, fetched £24,000 yesterday at auction in London.
GRANNIE IN SEX ORDEAL HORROR
SYDNEY YOUNG
A TRUSTING 73-year-old granny was subjected to a horrific three-hour sex ordeal yesterday — after offering help to a stranger.
The baby-faced rapist knocked on her door in the early hours, claiming to be a neighbour who had locked himself out in the pouring rain.
But when the frail widow let the man into her home to shelter, he knocked her to the floor and put her through a savage attack.
She slipped in and out of consciousness as the man dragged her around the house in Horfield, Bristol, carrying out repeated assaults.
Sickened detectives said the old lady was lucky to be alive after the ‘gruesome’ attack left her with a broken jaw, a gaping head wound and shock.
Last night she was ‘stable’ in hospital.
Police are looking for a scruffy man aged 17 to 21.
CHARLES PAL'S ART SELL-OFF
DAVID LEIGH
PRINCE CHARLES'S closest friend is selling the Mountbatten art collection to meet debts of £4 million.
Lord Romsey — grandson of the late Earl Mountbatten — is facing mounting costs in the running of his Broadlands stately home in Hampshire.
He is said to be devastated at having to dispose of the famous art works and family silver and furniture.
The sale by Sotheby's over the next few months is expected to raise £5 million.
Half will go in taxes.
Lord Romsey, 44, Charles's best man, inherited Broadlands when his grandfather was killed by the IRA in 1979.
He said the sale would meet ‘current financial obligations’ concerning the estate.
Aero-engine plant to shut
THE engineering group Laird is to close its aero-engine components plant in Burnley, Lancs by the end of the year.
The decision puts 339 jobs at risk.
A company spokesman said yesterday it was not yet clear how many workers could be redeployed elsewhere in the group.
Pop concert goes out on a bad note
A HUGE open-air concert has been cancelled at the last minutes over cash wrangles.
Organisers — expecting 70,000 to turn up this weekend at Tatton Park in Cheshire — have offered ticket-holders their money back.
They say they will re-organise the event next year.
Appearances by Evita star Elaine Page and soul singer Alexander O'Neill were cancelled.
And some contractors pulled out after cash rows.
THE FUN PALACE
Welcome to paradise…the holiday island of mega-rich sheik
Where Mellors frolicked on dream freebie
JOHN JACKSON
THIS is paradise.
An exotic palace on a sun-kissed island lapped by an azure sea and all the little luxuries that make David Mellor's day.
It's a far cry from Putney on a wet Friday.
These exclusive pictures show the splendour of Sir Banyi Yas island in the Gulf.
It was here that the former Fun Minister was treated like royalty by Sheik Zayed, ruler of Abu Dhabi.
His magnificent palace, combining the grandeur of the best Arab architecture and a Roman temple, looms out of the haze as you approach from the sea.
The Mellors spent their time in green and white Moorish-style guest houses, furnished with Persian carpets and all the trappings of a billionaire sheik.
Standing on the sand is a beach hut built like a mini-mosque.
From the rooftop terrace the Mellors gazed across lilac and  bougainvillea bushes to the sea.
They dined on lobster and barbecued kebabs, sitting Arab-style, cross-legged on the floor.
Huge golden canopies shielded them from the 100-degree heat.
Wines
Fruit was picked from a plantation growing mangoes, guava, grapes, oranges, lemons and bananas.
The only thing missing were the fine wines that Mellor likes to sample.
For alcohol is banned on the island.
But yesterday the magnificent palace stood empty.
The furore over the Mellors' freebie at New Year in 1990 has put paradise temporarily out of bounds to the world.
Police launches patrol the tiny harbour in front of the palace and the blue lagoon leading to the guest area.
No one can take the 20-minute boat trip or fly to the airstrip without police permits which are hard to obtain.
Birdwatchers, walkers and those who enjoy the animals imported by Sheikh Zayed found the island cut off.
A government official said: ‘Sheik Zayed is an exceptionally generous host.
‘But he was rocked by the publicity surrounding his unfortunate involvement with the recent BCCI bank crash and now he hits the headlines because of his kindness to Mr Mellor.’
The mega-rich sheik, who met the Queen at Claridges in July 1989, has spared no expense on the island, 11 miles long and five miles wide.
He flew in animals from around the world, including llamas from the South American Andes, ostriches, local bustards and Arabian oryx.
‘It is as if Woburn and Whipsnade had been trans ported to a fantasy island,’ said a British ex-pat.
For Mellor, back in his end-of-terrace home in Putney, the fantasy is over.
MAJESTIC: The sheik's sumptuous palace on his holiday island in the Gulf Pictures: ROGER ALLEN
EXOTIC: The richly-adorned guest house in which the Mellor family lived like lords on their fantasy isle
BIZARRE: It looks a miniature mosque — but this is a beach hut on Sheik Zayed's Sir Banyi Yas island
FUN'S OVER: Mellor
WELL-HEELED: The sheik and the Queen in 1989
TATTOO WON'T DO FOR A JOB
TRUE Brit Wayne Batterbee was turned down for a job — because he has the Union Jack tattooed on his hand.
Father-of-three Wayne, 25, got the cold shoulder from Swedish-owned frozen food firm Frigoscandia.
And yesterday he called their refusal to consider him for a factory floor job ‘pathetic and ridiculous’.
Wayne added: ‘You're not a different person because you have got a tattoo.
You don't turn into a thug.
A tattoo is not dirty.
Tattooing is an art form.’
Wayne, of Dersingham, Norfolk, applied to Frigoscandia through the Jobcentre at King's Lynn.
Image ‘I couldn't believe it when they said Frigoscandia wouldn't take on anybody with tattoos,’ said Wayne.
‘I phoned them myself and was told it was not the image they want to present when they show customers around.’
Wayne, who also has swallow and star tattoos on his hand, added: ‘I like tattoos.
‘I've spent about £300 having various ones on my body, including a large dragon on my back.
‘I don't regret them and don't see why I should be made to feel inferior because of them.’
Frigoscandia general manager Charles Abbs said: ‘Supermarket buyers and technologists are getting very fussy about people's appearance on the line.
‘Tattoos are one thing they find objectionable.’
Owl was a twit to woo
AN AMOROUS owl has been breaking into a nature park visitors' centre every night after falling in love — with a wooden model.
He set off burglar alarms after wriggling through a ventilation hole at Eynsford, Kent.
Wardens find him sitting in a fake oak tree beside the replica of a female tawny owl.
PINING: Tawny owl
DELIVER IT YOURSELF
Birth drama outside locked hospital
PETER KANE
HANDYMAN Steve Flynn did the ultimate DIY job — as a do-it-yourself midwife.
He sprang into action when wife Ann, 26, suddenly went into labour in the middle of the night.
Steve drove her to hospital.
But when he tried to get into the maternity wing he found the doors were locked.
He rang the bell but no one came.
And by the time Steve dashed back to Ann in the car, the baby was well on the way.
Nervous Ann told him: ‘It's coming, it's coming — do something quick.’
Steve sprang into action and moments later he was the proud father of a bouncing 7lb 12oz baby girl.
Steve was just cleaning up when staff from inside Orsett Hospital at Grays, Essex, arrived on the scene.
Yesterday Ann cuddled baby Sophie and said: ‘Steve is a big DIY fan.
He was great.’
Customs officer Steve, 27, of Corringham, Essex, said: ‘I had little choice in the matter.’
A hospital spokesman said: ‘The doors are locked for security reasons.
But Steve did a marvellous job.’
DIY BIRTH: Midwife Steve and new mum Ann with baby Sophie yesterday
Type-Reicher
ADOLF Hitler's typewriter is expected to fetch £80,000 at an auction in Sydney.
Groom in court
A MAN due to get married today appeared in court yesterday accused of attempting to murder his aunt.
Estate agent Darren Horsewell, 28, was remanded in custody for a week.
Dorothy Read, 48, of Chigwell, Essex, was ‘serious but stable’ in hospital with 19 stab wounds and a fractured skull after being attacked in the street.
Last night, Horsewell's distraught girlfriend cancelled their church wedding.
Fore!
It's Fergie…
FERGIE and Andy nearly bumped into each other on the golf course yesterday.
SHE took a short cut across the fairway from her £1,000-a-week rented house backing on to the Wentworth course in Surrey minutes before HE arrived to head a charity tournament.
Andy hadn't a care in the world as he joked with a star-packed line-up of players.
He was also presented with a hand-made set of mini clubs for Princess Bea — but he didn't pop round to Fergie's to deliver them.
ANDY: A close miss
Disney murder
A EURO Disney hotel cashier was stabbed to death and robbed of cash he was putting in a safe at the Paris fun park yesterday.
TUNNEL LOVERS' SEXPRESS SHOCK
THE earth moved for a naked couple making love in a tunnel — as a TRAIN thundered right over them.
Darryl Washington and Maria Ramos thought the New York subway line was disused and dragged an inflatable mattress between the tracks.
‘I was kissing her and things were getting hot and heavy,’ Darryl said last night.
‘The next thing I heard a very big bang.
‘I could see the train coming on top of us.
I don't remember anything else.’
Maria, 32, escaped with cuts.
Darryl, also 32, who lost the toes on his left foot, said: ‘I shudder to think what else might have been cut off.’
Shoot to thrill on the beach
DIVE for cover, folks!
If the fashion pundits are to be believed, this Wild West look will be riding high on the beach next summer.
Model Nikki is on target for a very strange tan in fringed bikini, cowboy boots, bandana and six-shooter.
For £125, you too could be a sun of a gun.
Picture: HARRY PROSSER
Dad's pet savages daughter
A FATHER'S loyal bull terrier savaged his 16-year-old daughter when she argued with him.
The dog ended the quarrel by leaping at Clare Evans, ripping open her face and neck.
Last night Clare's parents were at her hospital bedside as she recovered after an operation on her horrific wounds.
Their Staffordshire bull terrier Bodger was destroyed after the attack in their home at Lee-on-Solent, Portsmouth.
Police said the dog had always been protective to Clare's father, a worker at Gosport Navy base.
ROTT AN IDIOT!
BOOZY DOG THIEF IS MAULED
Brutes see off 15-pint joker
STEPHEN WHITE
BOOZER Geoff James tried to steal two huge rottweilers for a prank — and got savaged.
Tanked cup with 15 pints and several scotches, the drunken father-of-six scaled an 8ft fence to get into a car compound which the hounds were guarding.
But 9st Rocky and his 7st mate Tara turned on him — and tore chunks out of his head, arms and legs.
James, 34, limped from the compound in Middlesbrough, Cleveland, after neighbours raised the alarm.
He was caught with his clothes in tatters trying to flee in a taxi and owned up to police.
Yesterday jobless James, 34, of Middlesbrough, was fined £100 by Teesside magistrates for attempted theft.
The court heard he broke into RJ Kent motors after an all-day drinking binge at family celebrations.
‘It was a complete fiasco,’ said his lawyer.
‘He went along to help his friend, the ringleader, who has not been found.
‘The dogs saw them off in no time.
Mr James was bitten all over.
‘He was extremely drunk and in a stupor when he attempted the crime — which was never going to work.
‘He had a considerable amount of mickey-taking from friends and wants to forget the incident.’
James said later: ‘It was a bit of a drunken laugh at the time but I want to forget it — it was a stupid thing to do.’
Robert Kent, owner of the six-year-old rottweilers — worth £1,000 — said: ‘They did what we keep them to do.
‘That will teach him to drink too much and attempt the impossible.’
SAVAGE: A rottweiler
Net loss for boss
SOCCER boss Graham Langtree went in goal after keeper Bob Hill let in 10 — and conceded 11 himself at Piddletrenthide, Dorset.
CHEF'S BIG BILL
A SACKED chef who went on the rampage in his kitchen was landed with a £700 bill yesterday.
William Reid, 31, had been fired for protesting at a late lunch order from executives at the Daily Mirror's London offices.
He hit his boss twice in the face then hurled plates of food.
At Southwark Crown Court Reid, of Peckham, was fined £200 for criminal damage plus £502 compensation.
LADY BUBBLES' 2,000 HOLIDAY PILLS HOARD
Health fanatic wife's overdose
SAMUEL JAMES
PARTY-loving Bubbles Rothermere kept 2,000 pills in the French holiday villa where she died.
The jetset hostess was a hypochondriac who could not manage without sleeping pills.
And Bubbles — real name Patricia — died after accidentally taking twice the amount she should have done…and five times the level of a drug that was supposed to wean her off them, a Westminster inquest heard yesterday.
Bubbles, 63, wife of newspaper owner Lord Rothermere, was getting tablets for a variety of ailments from at least four doctors in London alone, the inquest was told.
One, Dr Douglas Rossdale, said: ‘If she did not get the answer she wanted from one doctor she would go to another.’
But she would not reveal to any of them what the others had prescribed.
Dr Rossdale said he tried to wean her off the sleeping tablets.
‘But she couldn't take the withdrawal symptoms so she went back to them,’ he said.
She was found slumped dead on the floor after going to bed with a sore throat, the inquest heard.
Coroner Dr Paul Knapman ruled out suicide.
Bubbles took pills for everything, but ‘whether they were all necessary is another matter’.
Verdict: misadventure.
TABLETS: Bubbles
TURN ON FOR LOVE
TV chiefs are set to give viewers a little love in the morning.
A daily helping of romantic fiction will be read out by a celebrity on the new BBC1 show Good Morning, presented by former TVam ‘dream team’ Anne Diamond and Nick Owen.
Executive producer Mike Hollingsworth, Anne's husband, said: ‘It will bring some warmth and romance into everyone's morning.’
The love-is-on-the-air stories will be told in five parts in a slot called the Library of Romance.
Romantic novelist Barbara Cartland will introduce the first instalment on October 12.
ANTONIA DE SANCHA'S AGENT MAX CLIFFORD TAKEN TO HOSPITAL
ANTONIA de Sancha's agent Max Clifford was taken to hospital last night after collapsing just before he was due on a live TV show with the actress.
He was released from the Birmingham hospital after treatment for pains brought on by stomach upset tablets.
BOY DIVORCES HIS MOTHER
Greg, 12, wins split
MIKE McDONOUGH
A BOY of 12 who begged a judge to set him free of his mother was granted his wish last night.
Brave Gregory Kingsley made legal history after calmly telling a hushed court: ‘I don't love her and I don't want to live with her.’
After hearing the boy's story of how he had been ‘neglected and abused’ by his mother Rachel, judge Thomas Kirk told him he could be adopted by his foster parents George and Lizabeth Russ.
Onlookers burst into applause as the judge said: ‘Gregory, you're the son of Mr and Mrs Russ at this moment.’
Gregory, who has been in and out of care most of his life, didn't even glance at his 30-year-old mother as he told the court in Orlando, Florida:
‘I asked her to come and get me out of foster homes but she never did.
‘She never sent me a Christmas card or a present.
I thought she had forgotten all about me.’
After the verdict, the delighted boy said: ‘Now I can have a happy life.
‘I hope it gives other kids like me a chance — they deserve it.’
Gregory's father Ralph, who the boy claims is an alcoholic who abused him, did not contest the action and says his son will be better off with foster parents.
Betting's no sin in my book, Squire!
DON MACKAY
RACING tipster The Squire defied the Pope's ban on betting yesterday and prepared his weekly column — for the Catholic church's newspaper.
‘There is nothing sinful about a flutter,’ said the 79-year-old expert for The Universe.
‘I've stopped being surprised by the number of people, including priests, who like the odd punt.
The Pope has put betting — with tax-dodging and reading horoscopes — on a list of sins that risk eternal damnation.
Difference
Universe editor Anne Noels checked with bosses about the ban in the new catechism — an updated Ten Commandments planned by the Pope.
‘We decided there was nothing wrong in £1 on something like the Grand National,’ she said.
‘There is a vast difference between that and when serious gambling leads to deprivation.’
THE Squire tips Selkirk for today's Queen Elizabeth II Stakes at Ascot.
I quit!
Gould throws lifeline to the Tories
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
DAVID BRADSHAW
LABOUR Euro rebel Bryan Gould dramatically quit John Smith's shadow cabinet yesterday.
His shock decision — on the eve of Labour's party conference — threw a lifeline to battered Premier John Major.
Mr Gould took the heat off the crisis-hit Tories by resigning to attack official Labour policy on Europe.
He said he ‘regretted’ the impact his departure will have on Labour's Blackpool conference.
But the news overshadowed Labour attempts to make the economy the centrepiece of their conference attacks on the government.
It shifted the political spotlight from blundering Mr Major and allowed the Tories to claim that Labour are just as divided as them.
Mr Gould — National Heritage shadow to shamed David Mellor who quit last week — infuriated Labour with the timing of his announcement.
He had been moving towards resignation since being routed by Mr Smith in the July leadership election.
And for weeks he had been agonising and clashing with colleagues over Europe.
He could have quit last Wednesday when the party's national executive rejected by a 21-3 vote his demands for a referendum and a rethink on the Maastricht treaty.
His only supporters were Tony Benn and Dennis Skinner.
Fellow shadow cabinet members John Prescott and David Blunkett abstained.
Mr Gould, freed last night from the rules of collective responsibility, immediately launched an attack on the Maastricht treaty and Europe's exchange rate mechanism.
Smokescreen
He told an anti-Common Market fringe meeting in Blackpool he said he was resigning ‘on a matter of principle.’
And he said he could no longer tolerate the ‘gag and straitjacket.’
Mr Gould said he didn't resign last Wednesday because he didn't want to overshadow John Smith's impressive Commons debut as Labour leader.
He also said he had long fought from within the shadow cabinet for a change in Euro policies.
But this was immediately denied by sources close to former Labour leader Neil Kinnock.
Replying to Mr Gould's ‘with deep regret’ letter, Mr Smith said: ‘I regret but respect your decision.’
The Labour leader said he felt certain Cabinet ministers should consider their positions too.
The immediate propaganda impact of the resignation was revealed as TV stations dropped plans to focus on the economy in favour of programmes about Euro divisions.
Shadow foreign secretary Jack Cunningham dismissed referendum calls as ‘a perfect smokescreen for the Tories in the worst economic crisis for 60 years.’
Left winger Ken Livingstone claimed last night that more than 100 Labour MPs will follow Mr Gould in defying the leadership over Europe.
REBEL: Gould
HOOKED ON SMOKING…
AGE 2
GORDON HAY
A DISTRAUGHT mum told last night how her little girl is hooked on smoking — at the age of TWO.
Amanda Piper, 24, said daughter Cherie craves cigarettes so much that she screams if she cannot have one.
The mother — who believes she passed on her 50-a-day habit to the girl while she was pregnant — revealed that Cherie had been diagnosed a nicotine addict by a doctor.
And she told how the tot:
STARTED smoking soon after she learned to crawl.
PLUCKED smouldering dog-ends from ashtrays around the house.
HELPED herself to cigarettes from packets and lit up, ignoring the times when she burned herself, and
SNEAKED off to the loo for a secret drag.
Amanda, of Stevenage, Herts, is now desperately trying to wean Cherie off.
But she has her work cut out.
Not only must she cope with Cherie's distressing withdrawal symptoms, she also needs eyes in the back of her head to curb a two-year-old's natural mischief.
Like her mechanic husband Graham — another smoker — Amanda is doing everything she can to kick the habit herself.
Dangers
And she said she wanted to tell her story to warn pregnant women of the dangers of smoking.
She added: ‘I'd heard of babies born addicted to drugs.
But I never dreamed mine could be addicted to nicotine.’
The first inkling Amanda had of Cherie's problem was when the child tried to snatch cigarettes whenever her parents lit up.
After the doctor's diagnosis the mum began the weaning-off process.
But as yet it has not worked.
Amanda said: ‘We hid every cigarette we had.
Cherie went wild.
She was always screaming.
‘Then when she caught me with a cigarette she went really mad and tried to grab it off me.’
The mum added: ‘When we went to visit her aunt last week I noticed she had gone quiet.
‘We found her sitting in the loo lighting up.’
Amanda, who also has a five-year-old son, Daniel, said she managed to kick smoking when she learned of Cherie's plight.
But she started again after a robber held a knife to her as she worked in a petrol station.
Oxford University medical expert Dr Godfrey Fowler said Cherie's addiction could have been caused by Amanda smoking when pregnant or while breast feeding.
Or it may have been through passive smoking.
But he said Cherie should not suffer permanent damage if cured soon.
NICOTINE ADDICT: Little Cherie Piper with worried mum Amanda
Benn in line for the boot
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
TONY Benn, the veteran darling of Labour's left wing, is expected to lose his seat on the party's ruling National Executive today.
The departure of the former Cabinet Minister, who has won a seat every year since 1959, would be welcomed by leader John Smith.
If Mr Benn is voted out it will reinforce Labour's belief in wider use of ballots, rather than having polls stitched up by local activists.
Former leader Neil Kinnock is expected to top the NEC poll and Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown, standing for the first time, is also expected to sweep in.
Shadow Cabinet members David Blunkett, John Prescott and Robin Cook should all keep their seats easily.
And Bryan Gould could well survive despite his unsuccessful leadership challenge and decision to quit the shadow cabinet.
Dennis Skinner is likely to stay on with a reduced vote.
THREAT: Tony Benn
WELL IT'S ONE WAY TO TAKE A SUNDAY AFTERNOON SPIN
ACE PATRESE LIFTS OFF ON A 100mph GRAND PRIX FLIGHT
TED MACAULEY
A SPLIT second earlier he was driving a racing car.
Now Riccardo Patrese looks more like a doomed astronaut…rocketing crazily out of control towards the heavens.
This was the heart-stopping moment shared by millions of TV viewers yesterday when the Italian ace cheated death in a spectacular 100mph crash.
His car, nudged in a duel with Austrian Gerhard Berger, reared up on its back wheels and shot 12 feet into the air.
It hurtled on, shedding wheels and bodywork as it almost turned turtle.
With Riccardo helpless and team crews cowering in terror yards away, the car scraped along the pit wall at the  Portuguese Grand Prix circuit in Estoril.
It finally came to a halt battered against the wall, leaving a shower of debris on the track.
But 39-year-old Patrese clambered out with just a pair of bruised knees and trembling hands.
And it was space-age technology that saved his life on his dramatic flight.
He was safely cocooned in a tough carbon fibre shell.
Riccardo, a veteran of 238 races, said afterwards: ‘That's the luckiest escape of my entire life.’
His British team-mate Nigel Mansell enjoyed his own Sunday afternoon spin rather more — roaring to a record ninth win.
Cloud Nine — Page 27 
HIGH DRAMA: Race veteran Patrese hurtles skywards as wheels and metal fly off his car.
But he lived to reflect on what he described as the ‘luckiest escape of my life’
SURVIVOR: Patrese escaped with a few bruises
CLIMBING OUT: And Riccardo has only bruised knees
COLLISION: The clash with Berger (left) which sent Patrese flying
Plane tragedy
A NIGERIAN Air Force plane crashed shortly after taking off from Lagos, killing all 163 on board— most of them military officers.
Breezing in
RARE warbler and pipit birds from Russia and the Mediterranean have been blown off course by strong winds to Flamborough Head, Humberside.
KILLERS GO FREE
A WHITE extremist who shot dead seven blacks and an Indian in 1988 and an ANC car bomber who killed three white women in 1986 will be among 150 ‘political prisoners’ freed in South Africa today.
It follows talks on Saturday between President de Klerk and Nelson Mandela.
3,000 DIE IN CAMP HORROR
THREE thousand Moslems were massacred in two Bosnian concentration camps, US officials revealed yesterday.
Men, women and children were slaughtered in groups by their Serb captors.
Then their bodies were cremated at night to conceal the evidence.
Witnesses have been describing the full horror of the May massacres for several weeks — and are now being taken seriously by the U.S. State Department.
Some of the worst atrocities of the Yugoslav civil war took place at two camps based at a brick factory and a pig farm near Brcko, 75 miles north of Sarajevo.
The State Department said: ‘Many people were killed in groups of up to 50 at a time.’
Some were beaten and tortured first.
Camps
The first-hand reports from former prisoners spurred America to ask the United Nations last week to set up a war crimes commission.
A State Department official said: ‘This could have been happening in other places, too.’
Serbian leaders in Bosnia have denied carrying out massacres and claimed there were no camps near Brcko.
But some Serbs admitted thousands of prisoners were shuttled around the country to cover up the camps.
Top dog
A HOUND called Snoopy was rescued alive after 25 days without food, trapped down a well near her home at Ogbourne Maizey, Wilts.
Neil is rootin' for a job
JOBLESS Neil Horsfall has swapped his two front teeth — for work in a chocolate factory.
He failed a Rowntrees medical in Halifax, Yorks, because of the black molars.
So 28-year-old Neil had them removed and now has a false set after losing the rest while playing sport.
He will try Rowntrees again, and said: ‘I hope it's worth it.’
JOB-HUNGRY: Neil
CROOKED LAWYERS' £20m BOOTY
ROGER TODD
MORTGAGE lenders sparked a storm yesterday by launching a campaign to crack down on crooked lawyers who run off with £20 million a year.
The Bristol & West Building Society and Barclays banned all 3,000 one-man-band solicitors from handling home loans arranged through brokers.
And the Council of Mortgage Lenders urged all members to consider following suit.
Bristol & West's Nick Eyre said bent lawyers who leg it with loans are making ‘more than most armed robbers.’
But straight solicitors are outraged.
Exeter lawyer Simon Armitage said: ‘Why should I suffer for others dishonesty?’
Killer in new quiz
MASS killer Dennis Nilsen — who strangled and dismembered up to 16 men — has faced a Silence Of The Lambs style quiz, it was revealed yesterday.
He was analysed on video by a top psychiatrist to help police build up mental profiles of killers, said the Home Office.
VIDEO: Nilsen
Plea of tiny rape victim
AN eight-year-old girl raped on her way to school has pleaded with police: ‘Catch this horrible man.’
The girl, of Pitsea, Essex, has spent 14 hours a day with two specially trained policewomen and a counsellor to try to get information on the rapist.
Police last night appealed for witnesses to Friday's attack in Felmores Park, Pitsea.
OH BABY!
ONE WORD LIZ IS BACK
GARY MORGAN
LIZ TAYLOR is returning to showbiz…with a ONE-WORD part in the hit cartoon The Simpsons.
But she won't be seen on screen.
Liz will provide the voice-over for baby Little Maggie when she says her first word —‘Daddy!’
It is the beginning of a comeback for Liz, who will work on the thriller Faithful next year.
Liz, married for one year, has thrown away her strict diet and has put on 20lb, says the National Enquirer.
She is said to have put on 5lb in one week while on an eating binge — and husband Larry Fortensky is ‘delighted.’
HAPPY: Liz Taylor
Bank calls in fraud squad
THE Bank of England has called in fraud squad detectives to investigate claims that two bank officials took bribes from crooked BCCI bosses.
The allegations were made in evidence to the inquiry into the Bank of Credit and Commerce International's £10 billion collapse
Op of the pops
HEART op patients often wake thinking they've just had a baby — even if they're men, according to American doctors.
PAY MORE TO MAKE IT ON TIME
ALAN LAW
RAIL passengers will have to pay more for their tickets next year if they want to travel in comfort and arrive on time.
For hard-up British Rail plan to increase fares by as much as 8.5 per cent on those lines with modern carriages and good punctuality records.
But routes where the service is poor may get away with rises of 4.5 per cent.
Because of John Major's Passengers Charter, bosses have ruled out an across-the-board increase from January.
Instead fares will rise by an average of six per cent.
BR lost £145 million last year, despite 7.75 per cent fare increases in January.
This year, falling business to the tune of £50 million has left bosses with a grim choice.
For if they pitch fares too high they could drive away even more passengers.
Jimmy Knapp, leader of the biggest rail union, fears bosses will also slash jobs in a desperate bid to balance the books.
He said: ‘Already there are plans to axe 2,600 station staff on the run-up to privatisation.
‘This will leave only 800 out of 2,500 stations fully manned.’
JOBS FEAR: Knapp
Cub sees dad die in ‘fun leap’ on lake
CUB scout John Moore watched in horror as his father's body was pulled from a lake during a a ‘lads and dads’ adventure weekend.
Dads had to jump into a lake from a rope-bridge just above the surface.
Mick Moore, 36, leapt in, swam a short distance, then collapsed with a suspected heart attack.
Failed
As son John, 10, looked on helplessly, a rescuer plucked his father from the water at an activity centre at Carlton Miniott, North Yorks.
Attempts to revive him failed and he was dead on arrival at hospital.
Scouter Ruth Sellors, head of the group, from Farsley, near Leeds, said: ‘Mick swam a couple of strokes, then went still.’
Mick's wife Christine is the scouts' secretary.
They also have a daughter, 15.
KEEP-FIT VIDEOS CAN DAMAGE YOUR HEALTH
You could get a slipped disc say TV experts
NICOLA BRIGGS
KEEP FIT videos can be bad for your health — giving you slipped discs or torn ligaments, it is claimed today.
Workouts featured by stars like Hollywood tough guy Dolph Lundgren and TVam's Lizzie Webb may not help fight the flab and could land you in bed for weeks, says BBC TV's Watchdog.
Many videos ‘make claims they cannot live up to— and some of the workouts are dangerous,’ exercise physiologist Dr Chris Riddoch tells tonight's programme.
Lundgren's Maximum Potential video is ‘the worst I have ever seen’, says physiotherapist Wendy Green.
Wendy, physio with our Olympic judo team in Barcelona, adds: ‘I could not believe the number of unsafe exercises.’
Watchdog lists FIVE of Lundgren's movements it claims are dangerous.
One, where the exerciser has one leg outstretched and the other bent backwards, ‘could damage the bent knee enough to warrant surgery’, says Wendy.
Lizzie Webb's Eight Minute Workouts tells you to scissor your legs — but that puts too much strain on the lower back and could tear ligaments, says the programme.
Dr Riddoch, of Bristol university, says: ‘To be effective you need to concentrate on one exercise or part of the body.
Lizzie's video does neither.
‘I cannot believe that eight minutes every day of that sort of exercise will have any significant effect on fitness.’
Lizzie says: ‘I have 20 years’ experience and have never had a single complaint.’
One of diet expert Judith Wills's movements — lying on your back and raising the upper and lower body — could slip a disc, Watchdog claims.
Promises
But she tells the programme: ‘It worked for me and other people have said the same.
I will omit the dangerous exercise if I revise the video.’
Callan Pinckney's Quick Callanetics — Hips And Buttocks is also slammed.
‘This type of exercise won't make a flabby bottom firm,’ says Dr Riddoch.
But American Callan says: ‘Thousands of enthusiasts worldwide have experienced incredible results.’
WORKING OUT: But one of the exercises on Lizzie Webb's video could tear your ligaments, says TV's Watchdog expert
RIDDLE OF TOT LAUREN'S LOST HOURS
JAN DISLEY
LITTLE Lauren Cartledge was re-united with her frantic mum yesterday after mysteriously disappearing for 12 HOURS.
And as baffled police struggled to piece together the three-year-old tot's lost hours, delighted mum Helen beamed: ‘Thank God I've got my baby back.’
Nearly 100 police, mountain rescue teams and volunteers searched through the night after Lauren went missing from a playground in Preston, Lancs.
But she turned up safe and well at dawn when she walked into a mobile police station just yards away.
Detectives still haven't ruled out the possibility that she was abducted.
SAFE: Lauren gets a hug from her mum
Toddler drowns
A TOT drowned in a garden pond as his mum nipped out to buy him an ice cream from a van.
The 18-month-old boy tipped over his buggy, freed himself from the straps and crawled into the pond at Chatham, Kent.
Op is a real snip for doc
A DOCTOR swamped by patients wanting vasectomies is ready to cut his waiting list — by performing 300 in four weeks.
The GP advertised a snip service in his local paper.
And he got about 30 inquiries a day.
Now Dr Kaz Fuks, of Romford, Essex, has decided to carry out 10 of the 20-minute ops every day.
‘After one small-ad, I was swamped,’ he said.
‘The only answer is a blitz on them’
Dr Kaz added: ‘Most of the men are 30 or over and have either completed their families or have problems with other forms of contraception.’
But it's Bermuda bliss for Pebble Mill's Judi
Bride's trump cards
THE SECRET is out…
Pebble Mill presenter Judi Spiers, 39, cuddles businessman Richard Hacker after their hush-hush wedding in balmy Bermuda.
Beautiful Judi didn't tell her family or friends — but was rumbled by a tarot card reader in California just four days before the wedding.
Judi, who was in the US interviewing Hollywood stars, said: ‘I nearly died when this lady kept saying I was getting married.’
Letter drops
A FARM in Bures, Suffolk, has just received a reply from water chiefs to a drainage query sent in 28 years ago.
POLICE RAP DIY B-TEST
JILL TURNER
A DIY breathalyser will soon be able to tell drivers if they are over the limit — but police say it can't be trusted.
The £1.40 kit, already on sale in Ulster and due on the mainland by Christmas, is the first disposable breathalyser to be marketed in Britain.
Drivers will simply blow into a cigarette-sized tube and if chemical crystals inside turn blue it shows that they are over the limit.
The kit, named Road Test, is a British version of a device used in the US for six years.
Manufacturers Lifeguard Breathalyser, of Dorset, say it is a ‘great deterrent’ to drinking and driving.
False
But a police spokesman said: ‘We wouldn't recommend any DIY kits of any description, any cost, any manufacturer or any supposed accuracy.
‘If they are not accurate, drivers can be lulled into a false sense of security.
‘And if they are accurate, a reading taken at the bar can go up when the alcohol gets into the bloodstream.
‘Our message is just don't drink and drive.’
A Lifeguard spokesman said: ‘We agree, but despite this advice the number of alcohol related accidents is still high.
‘Our device makes you think about drinking and driving and so avoid the risk.’
He said the kit could also be used by pilots, public transport drivers and people operating dangerous machinery.
TIPPLE TEST: The £1.40 ciggie-sized breathalyser
DPP bid to limit windbag lawyers
LONG court cases are a drain on the taxpayer and must be stopped, lawyers were warned yesterday.
Director of Public Prosecutions Barbara Mills said marathon trials let down the justice system.
Some dragged on for months, getting nowhere day after day, she said.
‘What are we doing wasting the public's money this way?
This has got to be stopped.’
Mrs Mills, former Serious Fraud Office chief who took over as DPP this year, called for:
STRICT time limits on trials — they should never last more than two months.
A NEW charge of simple fraud.
SHORTER speeches by barristers —‘brevity concentrates the mind’.
JURORS to be given a brief outline of the case in writing beforehand.
Worst
Mrs Mills told the Bar Conference in London that long trials gave the public the impression that lawyers were ‘feathering their nest’.
Worst examples were serious fraud cases like the Guinness and Blue Arrow trials and the 17month Britannia Park trial in Nottingham.
Her comments were backed by Mr Justice Henry, the judge in the seven-month Guinness trial.
He said fraud cases cost too much and happened too late.
OH LORD!
BEAUTIES CRY OVER CROWNING INSULT
Stunned Tory runs into a race storm
MARK ELLIS
BEAUTY queens broke down in tears when Britain's Lord Waddington crowned the winner of the Miss Bermuda contest.
Spectators booed and hissed as the colony's new Governor — former Tory Home Secretary David Waddington — stepped forward to honour 24-year-old Diana Mitchell.
The storm broke after the judges picked one of the few white girls among the 19 contestants for the title.
And what should have been a doddle for Lord Waddington turned into a disaster.
Sixteen losing girls hurled charges of racism and score-fixing at the judges and said they would sue the organisers.
Some judges demanded that the title be withheld from Diana until allegations of voting irregularities had been probed.
It all came as a shock for the 63-year-old Governor.
He took over the £60,000-a-year plum job only three weeks ago.
Bogus
But it must have seemed just like old times.
He was once accused of racism for saying the claims of some Tamils seeking asylum were ‘manifestly bogus.’
Lord Waddington quickly left the swish hotel to return to his official residence Government House — a 60-room Victorian mansion with swimming pool and 30 acres of gardens.
One of his staff said he was not available for comment.
NO CONTEST: ‘Queen Diana’ with Lord Waddington before it all went sour
Q's got a secret message
SOUNDS like a plot for a new Bond film.
Someone invents a scrambler device so people can use their Cellnet phones without the opposition listening in.
Bond's technical wizard Q (Desmond Llewellyn) and new assistant Eve Barker, from BBC's Born Kicking, realise the security implications and come out from the shadowy world of espionage to help publicise them.
And for once it's Q, not Bond, who gets the girl.
Burns baby riddle
THE body of Robert Burns's lover ‘Highland Mary’ should be dug up to see if she had his baby, says biographer James Mackay.
He wants DNA tests on Burns relics and a baby's coffin found when Mary was last exhumed in 1920.
CHILDREN IN RAID ORDEAL
TWO small children watched terrified as their wealthy parents and a gran were handcuffed and manhandled by a gang of masked raiders.
The gang bundled the family into a bedroom after bursting in to a house on Coventry's ‘millionaires’ row’in Kenilworth Road.
They stole cash and gems and escaped in the parents' Mercedes.
THE HATE TRAP
Homes can't be sold
Couples can't split
Families live in hell
ROGER TODD
THOUSANDS of couples who hate each other are trapped together in a living hell because of the slump.
The tormented partners have had to put off their divorce actions as they can't sell their homes.
Now they are stuck with each other, locked in violence and misery with no end in sight, lawyers revealed yesterday.
MEN explode in frustration and batter their wives.
WOMEN strike back with anything that comes to hand — including knives and rolling pins.
SOME have nervous breakdowns and suffer stress and high blood pressure.
And CHILDREN are damaged by the constant tensions.
Drop
Twelve thousand couples have had to postpone their divorces, the Solicitors Family Law Association disclosed.
It means divorces last year fell to 179,000, the first time there has ever been a drop in petitions.
FLA solicitor Valerie Kleanthous said: ‘It's a terrible problem.
‘These people can't sell their homes because of the recession, so they can't separate and split their assets.
‘Some have even gone through a ghastly divorce lasting up to 18 months only to find they have to stay together.
‘The sheer frustration and misery of it is too much for them.
‘I know one husband who forces his wife to eat separately from him and his two daughters.
‘They are trying to force her out.
But even though she is dying to leave, she has to stick with it because there is no alternative.’
Zelda West-Meads, of the marriage guidance organisation Relate, said: ‘Thousands of couples are leading separate lives under the same roof because the slump stops them divorcing.
‘Some even have to carry on sleeping in the same bed — back to back in angry silence.
‘Others make up a bed on the sofa each night.
‘It gets particularly fraught when one of them doesn't come home and the other knows they have a new partner.’
PIT BULLS GO ON FIGHTING
RENEGADE pit bull terriers are being used in illegal dog fights all over Britain for £1,000 prizes.
A Channel 4 documentary next month will show horrific scenes from fights observed by an RSPCA undercover team, led by charity Chief Superintendent Don Balfour.
He says 5,000 pit bills may still be unregistered — as many as ARE on the list.
Sailor Jack's back
CHEERING crowds greeted Jack Lammiman and his crew when they sailed home to Whitby, North Yorks, after following Columbus's route to America — where they were rescued after drifting for a month with engine failure.
Fast bucks
A SET of race ace Nigel Mansell's tyres are to be sold off at an auction next month for Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital in London.
Di Merc goes to museum
THE sporty Mercedes driven by Princess Di is heading to the car giant's museum.
The company will ship the £72,000 motor back to Germany next month.
It will join Mercs owned by the Kaiser, John Lennon and other famous names at the museum near Stuttgart.
Di handed back the leased supercar recently following continuing pressure for her to drive a British model.
DI: Mercedes fan
Dead dad torched in feud
A COFFIN containing the body of a father-of-five was set ablaze in a garden yesterday as a family feud raged out of control.
The coffin of 67year-old locksmith Richard Whitelaw was dragged from a flat, bumped down two steps and pulled 15ft into the garden before being torched.
Neighbours raised the alarm when they saw flames light up the early-hours darkness in Ferry Road, Edinburgh.
A man has been charged.
But the funeral of Mr Whitelaw, who died of a stroke, will go ahead as planned today.
BREAKFAST STAR PAULA ON TV LICENCE CHARGE
‘Caught by the detector van’
ANTHONY HARWOOD
NEW breakfast TV presenter Paula Yates will appear in court this week — accused of not paying her television licence.
Paula, due to co-host The Big Breakfast on Channel 4 with husband Bob Geldof from today, is due in court on Wednesday.
She is said to have been caught by a Post Office detector van at her home in Chelsea, West London.
Post Office spokesman David Ormiston said last night: ‘She has been summonsed to appear before Horseferry Road magistrates for using a television set at home without a licence.
‘Visits by our officers can result either from the use of detector vans or follow-ups from computer records of who has and who doesn't have a TV licence.’
Slammed
Paula, 32, and Geldof won the £10 million contract this summer to revive Channel 4's flagging early morning slot.
Furious mother-of-three Paula raged: ‘I'm doing this really massive thing tomorrow and all you want to know about is my effing television licence.’
At the door of their home she claimed: ‘I don't know anything about it.
Maybe it is true, maybe it isn't.
I've got no idea about my TV licence and I'm not even slightly interested.’
Asked if she had received notification from the TV licensing authorities she said: ‘I don't know — I don't handle all my mail.’
Then she slammed the door and stormed off to bed.
A Channel 4 spokesman said: ‘This is a matter for Paula, not Channel 4.
‘A TV licence is required by law.
‘We would not want to encourage anybody not to buy a licence.’
SUMMONS: Paula
Bouncing back
AN experimental Dambusters ‘bouncing bomb’ will be raised by helicopter tomorrow from waters where it was tested nearly 50 years ago.
The 9,000lb device was dropped into a lagoon at Fleet, Dorset, months before bombers breached the Mohne and Eder dams on the Ruhr in 1943.
NO TOAST BLOW FOR DYING DAD
JIM OLDFIELD
A CANCER victim who made a dying wish for a slice of toast was turned down by hospital staff…because it was not on their menu.
Cyril Bradbury's shocked daughter Denise had to make his breakfast at home and rush it the four miles to his bed wrapped in foil.
Denise complained bitterly after he died.
And now bosses of Dewsbury hospital, Yorks, have blasted staff for ‘failing in their duty’ to ease his last hours.
Cyril, 71, spent six weeks in the hospital with the terminal illness.
He did not like the continental breakfasts on offer.
But when he asked for his toast, a sister told him he would have to eat rolls and jam or go without.
Denise, 40, offered to take a toaster to his bedside.
But she was banned by staff who said it would create a fire risk.
Cyril's widow Doreen said: ‘All he wanted was a couple of pieces of toast.
It's not much to ask.
‘He wasn't the type to moan and asked us not to complain until he got out.
But he never did.
‘We couldn't believe the hospital could be so insensitive.
What's the country coming to?’
Hospital services manager Gordon Walker has sent the family a written apology.
‘The hospital needs to revolve around the needs of the patients, rather than the reverse,’ said Mr Walker.
CANCER VICTIM: Cyril
Boys find half a body
TWO schoolboys looking for crabs found the lower half of a human body.
Police in Sunderland do not know if the badly decomposed remains found in the River Wear are male or female.
Bold move
CLARICE Connor, of Mexborough, South Yorks, has joined a keep-fit club — at the age of 98.
WAIT FOR IT, I'M A MUM
DELIGHTED Dawn Eddery has become a mum — thanks to a hospital waiting list.
Dawn astonished doctors by becoming pregnant as she waited for a hysterectomy after being told she would never have a child.
‘She is our miracle baby, ‘said Dawn as she cuddled three-week-old Anne at home in Norton, North Yorkshire, with husband John.
‘If there hadn't been a waiting list, Anne wouldn't be here today.’
Dawn, 30, who suffered from blocked tubes, and John, 32, had been trying for a baby for nine years.
She said: ‘The doctors are just as amazed as we are.’
Crash hotline
A HOTLINE for people worried about relatives on the Airbus has been set up on 071 270 4112 (office hours) and 071 839 1010 (other times).
Cloud over airliner
BILL AKASS
YESTERDAY'S crash was the first in which A300 Airbus passengers were killed or injured, according to the best-selling plane's makers.
But other Airbus models have been involved in a string of disasters.
Less than two months ago a Thai A310 also smashed into a mountain near Katmandu, killing 113.
In January, an Air Inter ‘fly-bywire’ A320 went down near Strasbourg with the loss of 87 lives.
A test pilot crashed an Airbus at a French air show in 1988.
And in 1990 there were 92 victims when an Air India flight dropped at Bangalore.
The crashes aroused controversy over the computerised control systems on the newer models — made in Toulouse by a Euro consortium including British Aerospace.
But they were later blamed on human error.
Flying experts again reckoned a cockpit mistake was the most likely cause of yesterday's catastrophe.
David Learmount, of Flight International magazine, said: ‘A300s have an excellent safety record.
I don't think the type of aeroplane will have anything to do with this.’
SCRAPPING TORIES PUT SKIDS UNDER MAJOR
Cabinet insults fly as Euro split becomes chasm
SHEREE DODD
HAPLESS John Major found himself in the middle of an almighty Tory punch-up over Europe yesterday.
All pretence at unity went out of the window as close Cabinet colleagues traded insults over the future of the pound and Britain's place in the EC.
And last night the Prime Minister's despairing supporters were trotting out the ‘back him or sack him’ line that Mrs Thatcher used to fall back on when she was in trouble.
Dissent flared into civil war after a Sunday Telegraph Gallup poll revealed opposition to the Maastricht Treaty was at an all-time high among Tory backbench MPs.
Mr Major immediately ordered the pro-Europeans into the frontline, starting with a robust speech from Foreign Office Minister Tristan Garel-Jones.
But their guns were spiked by Environment Secretary Michael Howard.
He welcomed being ‘free of some of the restraints of the Exchange Rate Mechanism.’
Now, he added, it was time to make decisions ‘on the basis of what's best for the British people.’
Roadblock
Mr Howard dismissed the French and German threat to press on with unity ahead of the rest of Europe.
He told ITV's Walden programme:
‘It won't be the first time that people who think they're in the fast track come across a roadblock and are overtaken by people in what was falsely described as the slow track.’
But the Howard view was rubbished by Agriculture Minister John Gummer, who accused Tory Euro-rebels of ‘playing on people's ignorance.’
He added: ‘We are in the centre of Europe and intend to stay there.’
Earlier Mr Garel-Jones had claimed that the rebels were ‘perverse and reckless Europhobes.’
And he warned that failure to back the Maastricht Treaty would bring ‘humiliation’ for Britain.
Major Blunder — Page 6 
SLOW TRACK: Howard
WARNED: Garel-Jones
Big cuts on cards for dole
AXEMAN Michael Portillo is demanding big cuts in dole cash and foreign aid from the Cabinet.
The Treasury number two has targeted the most vulnerable in the drive to put the squeeze on government spending.
He wants to lop large amounts off benefits unprotected by election manifesto pledges.
Halving
And he is also calling for a massive reduction in overseas aid, already hit by the fall in the value of the pound.
Ministers are being asked to look again at halving the year-long entitlement to unemployment benefit.
This would force the jobless onto income support after only six months, at a big saving to the social security budget.
A freeze on dole money and invalidity benefit is also being considered.
SQUEEZE: Portillo
WE LOST OUR FRIENDS
DON MACKAY
TWO of the dead Britons were on business for a London travel agency specialising in exotic trips, it was revealed last night.
‘We have lost two of our friends,’ said Tony Jones, head of Encounter Overland.
The young men, en route to Katmandu, left Heathrow on Sunday and switched to the fatal flight at Karachi.
Mr Jones, whose firm is in Chelsea, said: ‘I have been in touch with their parents and will fly to Nepal myself.’
Marketing manager Melissa Colston said: ‘Obviously everyone here is very upset.’
Staff at other travel firms were stunned as they heard clients were among the dead.
Jerry Bridge, managing director of North London firm Bridge The World, said: ‘This has hit us all pretty bad.
‘It is the first time in thousands of holidays that we have lost any clients.’
His three customers on the plane were a woman who had changed her travel plans at the last minute and a married couple starting a world tour.
Six others booked through Quest Worldwide Travel, of Kingston, London.
Boss Keith Beswick said there was one couple and four people travelling  separately .
‘We do not definitely know they were on the flight but it is very unlikely they were not,’ said Mr Beswick.
EXOTIC: Encounter Overland
My rocky ride over peaks of peril
ALASTAIR MCQUEEN
I FLEW into Katmandu less than six months ago.
It was a tortuous, switchback ride.
On the approach to the modern international airport, our plane bounced around, buffeted by the winds and draughts from the jagged peaks below.
Range after range of mountains passed beneath as we bucked and swayed on the final approach.
Within a very short distance of the airport, roads peter out to cattle tracks.
They can be reached only by helicopter or on foot — even the latest four wheel drive vehicles are no match for most of Nepal's interior.
The helicopter wing of the Royal Nepalese Army, commanded by Sandhurst-trained Lieutenant Colonel Narayan Singh Pun, are rescue experts in the hostile terrain.
They have flights of French-built Super Puma helicopters and five-seater French Alouettes.
And the highly trained pilots continually exercise with Western forces.
They are recruited from throughout Nepal and among the aircrews will be men who know the crash area intimately.
DOC IS VICTIM
FRANK CORLESS
A TOP doctor and a charity worker on her way to help children died in the tragedy.
Victim Alison Gourdie, from Kirkcaldy, was consultant in charge of emergency cases at two Scottish hospitals.
Laura Strutt, 76, was to have spent 10 weeks in schools in Nepal for Action Aid.
Mrs Strutt, of Chirk, Clwyd, also helped in a hospital in Llangollen.
THE SPECTATOR PREMIER
Brown puts the boot in to a do-nothing leader
‘Major watches football on Saturday, watches cricket on Sunday and watches the pound on Wednesday…
Under his captaincy, England collapses before lunch’ Gordon Brown
DAVID BRADSHAW
JOHN Major was yesterday branded a ‘spectator Prime Minister’ who stays on the sidelines while Britain takes a pasting.
In a stinging attack, Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown mocked Mr Major's habit of looking on at soccer and cricket matches — and said the Premier did the same when it came to the economy.
Mr Brown had Labour conference delegates roaring him on as he said: ‘He is a Prime Minister who watches football on Saturday, watches cricket on Sunday, watches the pound on Wednesday.
Under his captaincy, England collapses before lunch.
‘Gnomes of Zurich three, Gnomes of Downing Street nil.’
Mr Brown got the Blackpool conference off to a storming start, brushing aside fears that it might be distracted by Euro rebel Bryan Gould's resignation from John Smith's top team.
The Shadow Chancellor blamed Mr Major personally for the mountain of misery caused by the slump.
He said hundreds of thousands of jobs and lives had been destroyed while the Premier had done nothing but watch it happen.
And he added:
‘When John Major was Treasury Secretary the recession started.
When he became Chancellor the recession worsened.
And when he became Prime Minister the recession intensified.
Nerve
Every time he changed jobs thousands more lost theirs.
And the recovery will only fully happen when John Major loses his.’
Mr Brown was livid at the way £1 billion in precious foreign reserves was poured down the drain during the sterling fiasco a fortnight ago.
He said: ‘It is Britain that suffers when after losing their direction, nerve and now billions of our reserves, we have a Government with no policy, a Cabinet with no leader, a Chancellor with virtually no exchequer, and a Prime Minister with no ideas, no friends and soon no future.’
Mr Brown said even Chancellor Norman Lamont had deserted Mr Major, ‘leaving him floating downwards to find his own level.’
He added: ‘We have the spectator Prime Minister -not a power at the heart of Europe but a void at the heart of the British Government.
‘This Government, these men, are guilty of the betrayal of Britain.’
Mr Brown called for a national recovery programme to boost industry and create jobs.
He said: ‘The duty of government is to end mass unemployment.’
Mr Brown was backed by Labour's industry spokesman Robin Cook.
He said 50,000 jobs had gone since April's election.
UNION leaders called for High Street banks to be taxed on the £500 million profit they made during the sterling crisis.
Bonanza
GMB boss John Edmonds lashed the banks for joining in speculators' attacks on the pound.
He demanded a ‘windfall tax’ on their bonanza and said those who gamble on currencies should be treated the same as horse racing punters.
Engineering union leader Bill Jordan said: ‘The pin-striped patriots of the City laughed as they profited from putting the boot into the British economy.’
ON THE ATTACK: Gordon Brown hammers Mr Major Picture: ANDREW STENNING
SUBDUED: Mr Gould yesterday
MIRROR COMMENT
One giant step forward
Yesterday morning the Tories were rejoicing at the prospect of Bryan Gould splitting the Labour Party as deeply as they are split.
Fat chance.
In the afternoon, Gould's rebellion went down even faster than the Tory £.
Commonsense and unity over Europe crushed his self-indulgence.
Offered
Yesterday, the Daily Mirror called upon the Labour Party to seize the hour.
In a few minutes, Gordon Brown, the Shadow Chancellor, offered more substance than Chancellor Lamont has in all his months at No 11 Downing Street.
Mr Brown demanded an emergency national recovery programme to create jobs within weeks and days and save the building, hi-tech and manufacturing industries.
It was a programme the whole country could welcome.
Dennis Skinner, savage critic of Labour leaders, standard bearer of the Left, the old darling of the constituency parties, was thrown off the National Executive.
By constituency party members.
On the economy, on Europe and on support for the new leadership, Labour took a giant step towards becoming the Party the people will trust to govern Britain.
WHAT A DAY INDEED!
‘Despair’ slammed
FORMER deputy leader Roy Hattersley slammed the ‘despair’ which prompted calls for a change in Britain's voting system.
The impression that the party was ready to do a deal with the Liberal Democrats contributed to the election defeat, he said.
Di's touch of love for dying AIDS man
PRINCESS Diana held hands with a dying AIDS victim yesterday and spent 15 minutes comforting him.
Tragic Jim ‘Tosh’ Burton told her: ‘I actually feel better for talking to you.’
Tosh, 32, who featured in a Mirror report on the homeless, said Diana was ‘very understanding’.
He said: ‘She even shook my hand a second time after I told her I had full-blown AIDS.’
At their meeting in a London Methodist centre for homeless and rootless people they also talked about Diana's recent marriage problems.
Tosh said he didn't like some things that had been written about her in papers.
Diana replied: ‘It's just part of the job — something you have to put up.’
Tosh also revealed how once when he was selling a magazine for the homeless at Charing Cross station Diana drew up in her car and a man got out and gave him £5.
‘She really does care,’ he said.
VICTIM: Tosh
TENDER: Diana
Killers free in peace bid
A WHITE who killed eight South African blacks went free yesterday, with an ANC bomber.
Bernard Strydom and Robert McBride were released from life terms under a deal to restart political talks.
WOMEN HOLD KEY TO No 10
STEPHEN WHITE
WOMEN hold the key to No 10 for Labour, party chiefs believe.
After the post mortem into the election defeat, delegates backed plans to recruit more women over 35 — and promote them to positions of power.
The men behind the election campaign admitted they made mistakes.
The ‘victory’ rally in Sheffield was picked out as a turning point in the party's fortunes.
General secretary Larry Whitty said ‘It was too flash and too triumphalist — it was a mistake.’
Mr Whitty also admitted voters did not trust Labour,’ he said.
‘We failed because we did not raise people's hopes sufficiently.
‘The Tories succeeded because they played on people's fears.’
EURO-REBELS ON THE RUN
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
LABOUR'S Euro-rebels were routed as delegates rallied round the party's pro-European stance.
An emergency resolution demanding a referendum over the Maastricht Treaty was thrown out on a show of hands.
It made a mockery of Bryan Gould's claims that up to 100 Labour MPs supported him.
There was widespread anger over how he hijacked the conference with his Shadow Cabinet resignation.
Engineering union leader Gavin Laird said ‘personal vanity’ should not be allowed to obscure Labour policy.
Ex-Shadow Foreign Secretary Gerald Kaufman said warring Tories should not be let off the hook with the ‘distraction’ of a referendum.
Charles in Euro gaffe
PRINCE Charles stepped into the Euro wrangle yesterday by demanding that each country must safeguard its own ‘cultural diversity.’
His remarks, in Italy, will undoubtedly be seen as a ‘No’ to one-market union.
FREEBIE ROYALS IN CASH CRUNCH
JAMES WHITAKER
SHEREE DODD
THE Government is set to overrule the Queen and axe more than half the royal hangers-on from the Civil List.
The storm surrounding the Queen's children has left her with no option but to cave in and slash the £9.8 million the Royal Family costs the taxpayer.
ANNE is set to lose her £228,000 a year, EDWARD his £96,000 and ANDREW will have his £249,000 halved.
In addition, MARGARET will say goodbye to her £219,000 and PRINCESS ALICE her £87,000.
Palace sources admitted last night: ‘Ultimately, the Queen has to obey her Ministers.’
Government insiders believe that only the Queen, Prince Philip, the Queen Mother and Prince Andrew will eventually be on the list.
But the Queen will battle to keep hard-working Anne included.
Last year Anne carried out 736 engagements compared to Andy's 128.
The Queen is expected to accept sacrificing the cash of minor members like Alice, Edward, the Duke of Gloucester and Princess Alexandra.
She has been warned that the public will not continue to hand over large sums to some of the young royals.
A string of sensational stories has made them deeply unpopular.
Now they will find out just how much — through their pockets.
Anne divorced Mark Phillips in June.
Then Fergie, after parting from Andy, was pictured cavorting topless with lover John Bryan in front of her daughters.
Pressure is now building in Whitehall to cut the payments to those who stay on the list.
This is despite the agreement made only two years ago that the list should be inflation-proof to the year 2,000.
We were told last night: ‘The Civil List will be reduced in both size and the number of people.
Sir Marcus Fox, chairman of the influential Tory backbench 1922 Committee, said last night: ‘I am not opposed to the Queen paying tax.
I would tax them.’
The Queen gets £7.9 million from the list, the Queen Mother picks up £643,000 and Philip gets £359,000.
Charles and Di are not funded by it.
PRESSURE: The Queen
A THANK-YOU VOTE FOR NEIL
NEIL KINNOCK got a huge vote of gratitude from the Party — with a poll-topping return to the national executive.
As leader for nine years, he had an automatic place on the ruling body.
And yesterday Labour's rank-and-file kept him there as he won 533,000 votes in the constituency section of the election — which is decided by ballot.
Mr Kinnock said he was ‘grateful for the confidence the movement has shown in me’.
Euro-rebel Bryan Gould — who has quit the shadow cabinet — was voted off the NEC in the same section, with his support halved.
Fellow rebel Dennis Skinner went with him, after a 14-year stay.
But rising stars Gordon Brown — third in the constituency section — and Tony Blair join the NEC for the first time.
Maxwell protest
ANGRY delegates revolted when asked to observe a minute's silence in memory of Robert Maxwell.
His name was on a list of prominent party members who died in the past year.
The protesters gave in when told the silence was to honour all the dead.
SOCCER FANS IN TRAIN PLUNGE
PETER KANE
JO BECKERLEY
TWO soccer fans plunged to their deaths after heavy drinking sessions on a 125mph Inter-City train yesterday.
They fell from an open door after missing their stop and last night a police spokesman said: ‘There are reports of scuffles on board, but it seems unlikely the deaths will be treated as suspicious.’
The tragedy happened as 100 Hibernian fans travelled south from Edinburgh for their team's UEFA Cup match against Anderlecht in Belgium.
Thirty of them had been drinking so heavily that they forgot to get off at Peterborough to catch their connection to Harwich.
Tempers flared as the supporters scuffled with other passengers.
Scuffling
Then, at Offord, near Huntingdon, the men fell out.
A London-Leeds express travelling in the opposite direction hit the open door and both trains made emergency stops.
A British Transport police spokesman said: ‘Fans had been drinking heavily before the accident and would have been fairly merry.’
Officers planned to question every passenger on the fans' train.
The lock on the open door will also be carefully examined.
More than 300 people have fallen from trains in the past 20 years.
And earlier this year the Health and Safety Executive said slam-type doors could accidentally open.
British Rail later announced they would spend £15 million on a back-up electronic locking system.
FORTY fans who got off the train at Peterborough and tried to board a ferry at
Harwich were turned away by the captain.
‘Sick’ V2 party is kaput say red-faced Germans
MARK DOWDNEY
GERMANY caved in yesterday and shot down the controversial party to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the V2 rocket.
Protests, led by the Mirror last Saturday, erupted after plans for the shindig were revealed.
Celebrating Hitler's secret terror weapon, which killed 2,855 British civilians near the end of World War 2, was branded ‘obscene’ and ‘sick’by MPs.
And the Bonn government was also shocked when news of the celebration at Peenemunde, scheduled for this coming weekend, leaked out.
Erich Riedl, the right-wing junior aerospace minister who was to give an official speech at the do, was hauled over the coals by his bosses.
And shortly afterwards it was announced that he had cancelled his ‘patronage’ of the ceremony.
Then the Bonn government leaned on Germany's aerospace industry chiefs so hard that they scrapped the whole event.
Economics Minister Juergen Moelleman said commemorating Hitler's ‘wonder weapon’ was tasteless.
But just as tasteless, he added, was the recent unveiling in London of a statue to Air Marshal Arthur ‘Bomber’ Harris.
He masterminded the mass bombing of Dresden in 1945 when up to 100,000 people were killed.
FURY: The Mirror
CONFERENCE COMMENTARY
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
A team to take on the Tories
THERE is still something slightly absurd about the notion that 4,812,000 people cast their votes for Mr Dan Duffy.
They didn't of course.
Trade unions did.
And as Mr Duffy represents the Transport Workers Union, the biggest block-voter of all, he came top in the trade union section of the National Executive Committee elections.
But if we learned little from the trade union section, the constituency section results were a genuine revelation.
Tony Benn and Dennis Skinner, who with boring and automatic regularity voted against the leadership, have with boring and automatic regularity come at or near the top.
But under the leadership of Neil Kinnock, whose top place was no surprise, local party stitch-ups have been replaced by ballots.
So Benn scraped on in the seventh of seven places.
Skinner, who ticked me off yesterday for suggesting his vote had fallen, is off after 14 years, leaving my colleagues on the Sun distraught and casting around for a new NEC contact.
As for Bryan Gould, the votes were all cast before his silly eve-of-conference resignation.
Had that been taken into account, his humiliation would have been even more severe.
Gould and Skinner off.
Brown and Blair on.
No wonder John Smith was smiling.
It used to be that causing trouble for the leadership was the surest way to a big NEC vote.
The team elected by Labour members yesterday bore some resemblance to the team the public might elect to take on the Tories.
In the Shadow Cabinet and on the National Executive, Smith now has people who recognise their real opponents are the Tory Party, not the people sitting around the same table.
The kind of luxury John Major must dream about, if he wasn't so busy having nightmares about Norman Lamont, Michael Howard, Michael Heseltine and Margaret Thatcher.
SUCHET TV DISH!
AN EAGER woman viewer took newsreader John Suchet at his word when he said: ‘Join me tomorrow night’.
She took a train to London from Manchester and turned up at ITN.
‘I have an appointment with him at 5.40pm,’ she told staff.
Suchet, 47, had said: ‘Where will the pound be tomorrow?
We'll bring you up to date at 5.40pm.
Join me then.’
When told he was busy working the mystery woman, in her fifties, walked out.
DATE: Newsman John
Bear-cheek ban on boss
THE landlord of the Bear Inn caused a row by naming a donkey derby he was sponsoring ‘The Bear Ass Stakes.’
Officials at Wilton, Wilts, told Dave Phippard to change the ‘smutty’ name.
But he refused and withdrew his £25 backing.
‘It was so small-minded,’ said his wife Sheila.
£122m DRUG SWOOP
SYLVIA JONES
BRITISH Customs agents helped smash a huge worldwide cocaine smuggling and money laundering network, it was revealed yesterday.
More than 200 people were arrested in five countries and £122 million worth of high grade cocaine seized in swoops around the world.
Three Americans were held at a luxury flat in West London where cocaine worth £7 million was found.
Two appeared in court on money laundering charges.
The third was freed on police bail.
More than £1.7 million in cash was also found in Bermondsey, South London.
The operation — codenamed Green Ice — pulled in top brass from the Mafia and the feared Colombian drug cartels.
They included members of a Mafia clan from Corleone in Sicily — the birthplace of fictional Godfather Don Corleone who was played in films by Marlon Brando.
FILM: Brando
It's a fair clock, guv
SLEEPY Hugh O'Neil escaped a fine or jail for turning up two hours late at court yesterday — because cops searching his home had taken away his alarm clock.
Magistrates at Cheltenham, Glos, forgave O'Neil, 22, for sleeping on, but fined him £312, plus a 12-month ban, for drink-driving.
Rock star divorces
POP star Nick Rhodes of Duran Duran and his wife Julie Anne are to divorce.
Keyboard player Nick and the American ex-model split in July after eight years but live next door to each other in Kensington.
Julie Anne said the divorce was going very slowly and carefully ‘to soften the blow’ for daughter Tatjana, six.
Tanks for the Porsche
KEVIN Brown left his keys in the ignition when he filled his new Porsche with petrol — and had the £50,000 car nicked while he paid the bill at Washington, Tyne and Wear.
Scull-duggery
THE Hooray Henleys regatta gift shop was robbed of its £2,000 stock two days after opening at Henley, Oxon.
Red hot lovers
A DATING agency called From Russia with Love in Dartmouth, Devon is linking lonely local bachelors with Russian girls.
GELDOF ‘TURN-OFF’
ALEC LOM
BOB GELDOF'S Big Breakfast show got a big thumbs-down from its TV rivals yesterday.
Geldof, 37, and his wife Paula Yates went on the air on Channel 4 from a multi-coloured studio in East London.
TV-am called it ‘a technicolor yawn’ and the BBC said it was ‘too wild and wacky’.
Geldof, who offers a mix of interviews, showbiz and fashion, hailed it ‘a success’— even though his name was spelt ‘Geldorf’ on a trailer.
HOST: Geldof
Fan ‘nuts’ woman ref
WOMAN soccer ref Marilyn Kelly, 47, had to be taken to hospital after a fan head-butted her.
She was attacked after asking him to move from the touchline during an amateur game at Gillingham, Kent.
JOHN LOOKS BLANK IN ANGER…
IT'S curtains for a dignified literary awards night as playwright John Osborne, still famed as the original Angry Young Man, stars as the Tipsy Old Ham.
FINAL SCENE: Head down, Osborne is helped from the stage by wincing Lynda and angry Alan
HIGH FARCE:: Osborne's rambling speech
Mum ‘no cigs’ vow
THE parents of the two-year-old hooked on smoking vowed yesterday to give up the habit.
Amanda and Graham Piper dropped their ciggies in the dustbin and said: ‘That's it.’
Amanda, 25, said: ‘Our daughter's health is more important.’
She believes she passed the habit to daughter Cherie as she puffed 50 a day during pregnancy.
Car mechanic Graham, 28, of Stevenage, Herts, said: ‘We've tried many times to give up but this time it's different.’
Amanda added: ‘We've done everything we can to keep cigarettes away from her but she's clever.
‘There's only one sure way to protect her.
As of now, cigarettes are banned in this house.’
Fraud job for George
THE chief of Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist operations is being switched to the fraud squad.
Commander George Churchill-Coleman, 54, who has led the fight against the IRA for seven years, will move to his new job on November 2.
He is being replaced by Commander David Tucker, head of SO11, the Yard's intelligence section.
Commander Churchill-Coleman has been in charge of the elite anti-terrorist branch longer than any other officer.
Former fraud squad chief Perry Nove is being moved to a special job to re-investigate the murder of PC Keith Blakelock during the 1985 Tottenham riots.
MOVE: Churchill-Coleman
SOUNESS LOVER SUES EX-HUSBAND FOR CASH
Soccer boss court battle
JAN DISLEY
SOCCER boss Graeme Souness comforted his lover Karen Levy yesterday as she went to court to get cash from her ex-husband.
The Liverpool manager should have been with his goal-starved squad when they flew to Cyprus for an important cup match tonight.
Instead, he held Karen's hand in Manchester County Court as she sued wealthy fashion wholesaler Jonathan Levy.
The case, which is being heard in secret, is believed to centre on payments to her and their two children, Daniel, 9, and Lauren, 5.
Karen, 33, split with Jonathan two years ago.
She lives in a mock tudor mansion in Cheadle, Greater Manchester.
The Levys stayed tight-lipped after the first day's hearing.
Romance
Smart-suited Jonathan said he had ‘absolutely no comment.’
Karen, dressed all in black, insisted: ‘I have got nothing to say.’
Souness, who is thought to have made special plans to be at tonight's European Cup Winners' Cup match against Limassol, kept a low profile in court.
But his romance with Karen has sparked controversy.
His estranged wife Danielle and their three children spurned him at his sick bed when he announced plans to wed the former Bond girl.
He had just undergone a heart triple bypass.
He was later slammed by thousands of Liverpool supporters when he was pictured kissing Karen on the anniversary of the  Hillsborough disaster.
Danielle has since filed for divorce.
Souness has spent the summer recuperating and renovating his house at Mere, Cheshire.
Last night a Liverpool spokeswoman said she did not know Souness's precise plans for today.
But she confirmed that he was expected to be at the match.
LOVERS: Souness and Karen yesterday
Disabled spinster beaten to death
ROD CHAYTOR
SAVAGE raiders battered a disabled woman to death in her sheltered home.
They broke into partly-paralysed Rosemarie Smith's ground-floor flat and brutally attacked her as she tried to escape.
She was found by a home-help lying in a pool of blood dressed in her nightie.
And yesterday as a big hunt was launched for her attackers, police revealed there may have been women in the gang.
Paralysed
Spinster Rosemarie, 52, had been paralysed down her right side since birth.
She could barely walk unaided and used a wheelchair.
Recently she broke a leg in a fall and it was still in plaster.
She returned from hospital to her flat in Long Lawford, near Rugby, only two weeks ago.
She also suffered from epilepsy and diabetes but was said to be happy and cheerful despite her disabilities.
Det Chief Supt Colin Port, head of Warwickshire CID, said: ‘It is hard to think of anyone less of a match for these brutal people.’
HELPLESS: Rosemarie
Rings a bell
FIREMEN called to a chimney blaze found themselves at boss Jeffrey Ord's home at Alnwick, Northumberland.
Street's writers are tops
CORONATION Street scriptwriters were voted the best on the box last night.
They scooped the Best Drama Serial award at the Writers' Guild presentations in London.
Street star Julie Goodyear, who plays barmaid Bet Gilroy, said: ‘I knew there was good lead in their pencils.’
Actor Bill Roache, alias Ken Barlow, added: ‘The cast is all filled with admiration for the way they sustain the standards of our scripts.’
Veteran writer Adele Rose said: ‘I'm proud to be a member of the finest team on TV.’
Bullying bosses land firms with bumper losses
ROGER TODD
BULLYING bosses are costing Britain millions of days in lost production.
Their harassed victims take time off through stress, cutting output and efficiency.
The tyrants’ toll was spotlighted at a London conference yesterday.
Offenders got a rocket for not being more tolerant.
Andrea Adams, author of Bullying At Work, told the Institute of Personnel Management: ‘They spend a lot of time undermining people by rubbishing them in front of their workmates after setting impossible tasks.
‘They humiliate them publicly until their confidence is shot to pieces.’
She told of one man who was harangued for ninety minutes at a time until he had a nervous breakdown and quit.
And she added that some women were just as bad at bullying as the men.
Magic tiger mauls wizard
MAGICIAN Jonathan Pendragon, 37, was bitten to the bone by a tiger after apparently making it disappear then bringing it back.
He was mauled after his leg slipped into the tiger's cage on a casino stage in Reno, Nevada.
£20m cut for Beeb
BBC chiefs must cut costs by £20 million over the next six months after the discovery of an accounting mix-up.
Plans for new TV shows could be shelved to stop the Beeb overspending its £700 million budget.
But a spokesman said there should be no need for further job cuts on top of 1,250 redundancies already in the pipeline.
For peat's sake
A PEAT bog at Tregaron, Mid Wales, famous for butterflies, has been named a wetland of international importance to protect it.
KIDS IN BUG PERIL
JILL PALMER
THOUSANDS of children are being struck down by a dysentery-type bug sweeping through nursery schools.
Cases of shiggelosis — which causes stomach pain and diarrhoea — have increased five-fold, it was revealed yesterday.
Last year, there were nearly 10,000 victims, compared to just over 2,000 in 1989 and 1990.
The rise was disclosed by the Government's Chief Medical Officer Dr Kenneth Calman in his annual report.
He had no explanation for it, and warned that the infection — which lasts a week — was difficult to contain.
HOLY SPIRITS!
Drunk priest is nicked driving to a funeral
BILL DANIELS
A CATHOLIC priest was full of holy spirit when he drove into the back of another car.
Father Francis Shanahan, 67, downed a quarter of a bottle of whisky before setting off to conduct a funeral.
He never made the service because of the crash — and instead found himself offering a confession to police.
A roadside breath test showed he was 2 1/2 times over the legal alcohol limit.
It was Father Shanahan's SECOND drink-drive offence.
And yesterday he sat shame-faced in Leicester court as he was fined £225 and banned from the road for three years.
Magistrates were told the fine would be paid within 28 days by the Catholic Church.
The priest's lawyer Oliver D'Sa said Dublin-born Father Shanahan sank the whisky because he felt lonely and depressed.
Refuge
Mr D'Sa added: ‘He is an old and ill priest who suffers from arthritis and has led a blameless life.
‘But he sought refuge in drink because of his loneliness.’
Father Shanahan, of Rushey Mead, Leicester, rammed his Datsun into another car on the way to the city's Gilroes cemetery.
He quickly made arrangements for another priest to conduct the funeral.
Mr D'Sa said: ‘He accepts it was a potentially dangerous situation.
‘He is shattered by what has happened and filled with remorse and shame.
‘This court appearance is punishment enough for him.’
Father Shanahan received his call to God when he was engaged to be married, the court heard.
He devoted himself to the poor of Leicester.
But he fell from grace for the first time in 1985 when he was convicted of drink-driving at Weymouth, Dorset.
He refused to comment as he left court yesterday.
SHAME: Fr Shanahan
HIKERS PICNIC CLUE
CORAL O'CONNOR
MURDERED hikers Joanne Walters and Caroline Clarke were seen with a man at a picnic spot only five miles from where they were later found murdered, police said yesterday.
Their companion, in his 20s, had an old, noisy van with a smiling face logo on the spare tyre.
Police in Sydney said the picnic on April 26 — two days after the previous last sighting — was their strongest lead yet.
The British girls' decomposed bodies were found in a forest in New South Wales on September 20.
Puppy love
MUSICIAN Tony Withersford, 42, wed Rosalind Compton, 35, in Lapworth, Warwicks — with his golden retriever Tasmin as bridesmaid.
GIRLS' BIG GAIN
FORGET the beating by the ERM, Britain has one round figure that's gained on Europe — that of the housewife.
At an average 10st 12lb, she's the plumpest of the lot.
German girls are a mite heavier, but much taller.
And the frisky French are lightest at 10st 2lb, said a report to a medical congress in Paris.
Overall average is 10st 8lb.
Nurse shot
BRITISH nurse Liz Berryman, 27, working for Save the Children in war-torn Somalia, had her arm broken by a stray bullet.
Walk-over
ALL traffic will be banned from German towns for one Sunday a month if a plan by Bonn politicians is adopted.
PAULA IS IN TOP GEAR
MODEL Paula Hamilton puts a long leg forward as she strides across the catwalk in stunning fashion.
The girl from the VW Golf ad was in top gear at a London fashion show where the nominations for British Designer of the Year were announced.
Paula, 35, didn't allow herself to be hemmed in by the dearth of mini-skirts on offer at the show in the Victoria and Albert museum.
She simply donned a flowing outfit by Amanda Wakely, stepped out…and skirted neatly round the problem.
Picture: HARRY PROSSER
TV Casualty saves boy
TEENAGER Steven Perry dived into a canal in West Bromwich and saved a drowning youngster — using the kiss-of-life he had seen on the TV series Casualty.
FOG HELL PILE-UPS SHUT TWO M-WAYS
JIM OLDFIELD
NINETY drivers piled into each other in THREE mass crashes which closed TWO motorways yesterday.
One person was killed and 25 injured — two seriously — in a 54-vehicle smash on the southbound side of the foggy M18.
Then, as rescuers freed victims, a lorry shed its load of steel bars on the northbound side, causing an eight-vehicle shunt.
Both carriageways were closed for eight hours causing huge tailbacks.
Later a 30-vehicle pile-up shut the M62 near Humberside.
Exasperated police blamed drivers for going too fast and ignoring fog warning signs.
One traffic officer at the scene near Rotherham, South Yorks, said: ‘When will they ever learn?
‘It is a miracle more people were not killed.’
Visibility on both motorways was down to 50 yards but some drivers were speeding a few feet from the vehicle in front.
166 visits to Butlins
HAPPY campers Ron and Olive Saunders have just returned home from their 166th holiday at Butlins.
The devoted duo have splashed out £50,000 on Butlins visits — £1,000 more than they paid for their house.
They have spent up to six holidays a year at Butlins sites, starting in 1952.
And they've returned to their favourite in Minehead, Somerset, 126 times.
Ron, 74, of Wrafton, Devon, said: ‘We'll be going even when they have to wheel us in.’
Juice-tice done
SAINSBURY'S was cleared of misleading shoppers about the purity of orange juice after charges were dropped yesterday at London's Wells Street court.
Wash-out
GERMAN leader Helmut Kohl has sent his new £240,000 Mercedes back to the factory — because it's too wide for his carwash in Bonn.
DRIVING THEM UP THE WALL
OOH-ER, looks like someone's been trying a spot of stunt driving that led to a Mini being made even mini-er against a thick brick wall.
But hang on a min, that number plate is a bit 2 GOOD 2B TRUE.
Actually, the car was embedded in the wall at Surbiton, Surrey, to plug a local crash repair shop.
You could call it a smash and grab attention job.
Mike has little joke
COMIC Mike Reid faced an audience of only 300 — and joked: ‘Did you come in one car?’
The EastEnders star said after the show in Portsmouth: ‘It was good of them to come — someone had to.’
Toy gun prank sparks a scare
SYDNEY YOUNG
A SCHOOLBOY brandishing a toy gun jokingly held up his mum in the street — and triggered a police alert.
A neighbour dialled 999 after ‘gunman’ Frankie Cavacuiti, bobble hat hiding his face, snarled: ‘Keep quiet, stick 'em up and get inside.’
And as Frankie, 14, and mum Monica, 45, watched Inspector Morse on TV, police arrived.
They called off the alert only after finding Frankie's hat and ‘cowboy’ gun in the house in Chippenham, Wilts.
‘I was coming back from the shops and saw Frankie dodging between parked cars,’ Monica said yesterday.
Embarrassing
‘He hid behind a hedge and jumped out on me.
I played along with him and he followed me in.
‘Next thing I knew there was a police van outside.’
Monica, who runs an ice cream parlour with husband Peter, 52, added: ‘I suppose if people caught a glimpse of what happened it may have looked suspicious.
It was very embarrassing.’
Frankie said: ‘I kept apologising for wasting their time.
They were really good about it.
‘I certainly won't do anything like it again.’
A police spokesman said: ‘We can see the funny side now but when we get a report like that, we have to respond.’
It's trolley good stuff
SHOPPERS are getting the taste for healthy eating, it was revealed yesterday.
A government survey of family shopping trolleys revealed that for the first time, we are buying as much low-fat milk as the traditional whole variety.
Less red meat is being consumed, but people eat more chicken.
Shoppers are also buying more fruit and vegetables.
The average food purchase per person was £13.37, up 19p on this time last year.
Homes cheer
THE Halifax and the Woolwich building societies cut mortgage rates to 9.99 per cent yesterday.
Sleeping rail man locks 100 in station
FURIOUS rail passengers had to fork out for taxis yesterday — the day BR increased their fares.
One dozy railman overslept, leaving more than 100 early-morning commuters unable to get out of Birmingham's Five Ways station.
They had to wait 20 minutes for a train to take them back the way they'd just come from, then hire cabs to return to the Five Ways area.
The passengers felt bad enough earlier when they were hit by a regional rail fare rise of more than five per cent.
But they were enraged when they reached Five Ways to discover the one exit door was locked.
Seething
Roger Childs, a daily commuter on the 6.09 from Nottingham to Birmingham, said: ‘People were seething.
‘After a few minutes an embarrassed train driver told us the man who should have unlocked the gate had not turned up.’
The passengers made their own way after being taken back to New Street station.
British Rail promised to look ‘symathetically’ at any complaints.
A spokesman said: ‘We only have one member of staff in at that time to open the doors, and on this occasion he overslept.
‘Everyone is human and everyone oversleeps.’
BRIDE'S DAD IMPALED ON CHURCH RAILINGS
Wedding day horror
JIM OLDFIELD
PROUD dad Phil Stancliff lost half his blood after plunging on to church railings before his daughter's wedding.
Phil toppled from a stepladder as he was putting up decorations for the big day — and a spike went right through him.
As he was rushed to hospital, his devastated daughter Suzanne went ahead with the service — not knowing if he would live or die.
It was not until half way through the sombre reception that doctors told Phil's anguished family he would survive.
Last night the 53-year-old father-of-two was recovering in intensive care after emergency transfusions.
The horrific accident happened just three hours before Suzanne, 27, married Gerry Hewitt, 31, in Bingley, West Yorks.
Phil was putting the last bow on the church gates when he fell on to the 6ft railings.
Gaping
One spike went right through him but he managed to pull himself off.
Then as four pints of blood spurted from his gaping wounds, he staggered screaming to the nearby home of 63-year-old Mavis Clark.
She said: ‘As I opened the door he slid to the ground.
‘Blood was pouring from him.
It was right across the road and on the pavement.
He was groaning, ‘Help me, help me’.’
Phil's 52-year-old wife Barbara, who runs a florist's in the town, said: ‘He was much too ill to speak to us.
But we knew he would have wanted the wedding to go ahead.
We carried on as best as we could.’
And the couple did not fly to the West Indies on honeymoon until they heard he was recovering.
Barbara added: ‘I still feel numb.
I can't believe what has happened.
‘But he should be out of intensive care soon.’
VICTIM: Unlucky Phil
ANGUISH: Gerry and Suzanne feared the worst
Denis is feeling chirpy at last CRUMBS!
Denis Summers-Smith has been chasing little birds most of his life.
He's crossed deserts, jungles and oceans tracking down the world's 20 types of SPARROW.
It hasn't come cheep either.
Denis, 71, has spent a fortune on his quest since the 1940s.
But in remote Kazakhstan he's finally spotted the last one on his list.
After visiting 53 countries Denis was just one short.
And the retired engineer from Guisborough, Cleveland, seemed fated to stick on 19.
The missing spuggie was the elusive saxaul sparrow, a distant cousin of Britain's common or garden house sparrow.
Forbidden
It lives in areas of Russia and China forbidden to visitors until recently.
But Denis's hopes took flight with the break-up of the Soviet empire and he set off for Russia this summer.
‘I was amazed, I could get to places with cameras which just a few years ago Russians wouldn't have been allowed to visit,’ he said.
And in the vast wilderness of Kazakhstan he finally saw his missing sparrow.
Said super twitcher Denis: ‘I was very excited.
At last I've achieved my lifetime's ambition.’
Now he writing a book about sparrows.
‘There's still plenty to learn about them,’ he said.
TYING THE KNOT
Sue's marriage is on the rocks
ROD CHAYTOR
GETTING hitched was sheer bliss for Nigel Longmore and Susan Lansley.
They tied the knot suspended 40ft up a cliff-face.
Then Susan, 32, who dangled from ropes wearing gown and boots, joked: ‘They say our marriage is already on the rocks.’
Climber Nigel, 28, and best man Patrick Rafferty abseiled to a tiny ledge near Leek, Staffs.
As a guest played Here Comes the Bride on his portable keyboard, the Rev Keith Haywood started the service.
‘I've never had a higher pulpit,’ he said.
HIGH CHURCH: The Rev's cliffhanger
TO HAVE AND TO HOLD: Nigel and Sue are linked as man and wife
SHOOT ME INSTEAD OF MY BOY, PLEADS MUM
But killers gun down teenager
JOE GORROD
A TEENAGER was gunned down by sectarian killers yesterday — as his mother pleaded with them to shoot her instead.
Paper seller Gerard O'Hare, 18, had just got home when two members of the outlawed Ulster Freedom Fighters burst into the house with guns blazing.
The boy tried to escape — but collapsed in the living room with a bullet in his head.
‘As he lay bleeding his mum, Bridie, pleaded with the gunmen to kill her instead,’ said a neighbour in Belfast.
‘But they shot him again as he lay dying.’
Gerard had returned to his home in the Catholic area off North Queen Street after a trip to the local swimming baths with friends.
One of his seven elder brothers was upstairs taking a shower when the killers struck.
A sobbing girl said: ‘Gerard and his mum were in the living room when the shooting started.
‘He was lying behind the door with blood everywhere.
‘I just kept screaming and screaming until somebody came in to help.’
Gerard's home was the first one the killers came to as they left the Tiger's Bay Loyalist stronghold.
Their stolen getaway car was found later in Tiger's Bay.
Police are hoping that a security video camera at a supermarket on the other side of the road may have captured the killers on film.
GOLD BID
DAVID MOORE
LINFORD CHRISTIE is going for a golden Grand Slam in a bid to rival Carl Lewis as the greatest sprinter on earth.
Christie, exhausted after leading Great Britain to second place behind Africa in the World Cup, still plans a fabulous four-timer to knock the crown off King Carl's head.
Christie, 32, confirmed: ‘I have now made a definite commitment to compete for another two years.
‘That gives me the chance of winning all four major titles in a row, with Barcelona already in the bag.
‘If I could end up with the Olympic, world, European and Commonwealth golds, I reckon that might make even Carl blink.
‘But I would never criticise Carl.
He is the greatest athlete of all time in my book.’
CHRISTIE: Ambitious
Alert after baby alarm bursts into flames
IAN CAMERON
A SLEEPING child nearly died in a bedroom blaze when a baby alarm burst into flames, it was revealed last night.
Consumer watchdogs were alerted yesterday as furious mum Caroline Oram, 39, declared: ‘I want some answers.’
Similar devices are used in millions of homes.
Mrs Oram's three-year-old son Charles almost choked to death in thick fumes after the £30 Safe and Sound monitor ‘spontaneously ignited’.
His sheets were scorched after the white plastic monitor box melted and set fire to the carpet.
He was saved when company director dad Paul, 42, looked in by chance.
Shop
The boy was treated for carbon monoxide poisoning but was back last night at his farmhouse home in Blackmill, near Bridgend, South Wales.
Mrs Oram bought the plug-in alarm from a baby shop in Cardiff which has since closed.
As tests were being carried out yesterday a safety official said: ‘If there's a fault we'll have it taken off the shelves.’
Mothercare and Boots sell versions of the Safe and Sound monitor.
Both said they were ‘not aware of any problems with it’.
Makers Adam Leisure, of Harrogate, said the probable cause of the fire was a faulty plug socket or wiring.
A spokesman said: ‘This is the first ever incident apparently involving a plug-in Safe and Sound baby listener.
The product has been subject to rigorous quality control.’
Mrs Oram said: ‘You think everything is safe.
You don't expect to find your child's room in flames.’
ANOTHER FINE MESS
You asked for it Mister Smith…
HERE IT IS!
The Laurel and Hardy of British politics
PREMIER John Major and his bungling sidekick Norman Lamont were shown up for the joke double act they are yesterday.
John Smith, making his first Conference speech as Labour leader, dubbed them the Laurel and Hardy of British politics.
But as he spoke, the mess created by the Downing Street duo was anything but fine, as thousands more were thrown on the scrapheap in Britain's deepening recession.
And there were no laughs in store for homebuyers, as Bank of England Governor Robin Leigh-Pemberton warned of the dire consequences of another interest rate cut.
Mr Smith made his demolition of Major the centrepiece of a 48-minute speech which had his party on its feet.
And Labour are looking forward to an even bigger laugh next week when Laurel and Hardy take their act to the Tory Conference in Brighton.
Conference Report — Pages 4 and 5 
We're all poorer
LIVING standards of Mr and Mrs Average have fallen by one per cent since 1990, according to official figures.
Why, even in death, was there no dignity for the victims of Flight 268?
MIRRORMAN'S PROTEST OVER FATE OF BRITONS
HARRY ARNOLD
IT WAS a pitiful sight.
And for the 167 victims of the Nepal air disaster there was little dignity even in death yesterday.
The bodies of many of the 167 who died — 37 of them Britons — were laid out in a makeshift mortuary at an army barracks near Katmandu.
The corpses lay uncovered in the open on plastic sheets.
The area was screened by khaki canvas sheets.
But members of the public walked freely among the victims.
And as hundreds of people queued to gaze at their remains the Daily Mirror won high-level backing for a plea that decency must take over.
Onlookers admitted to me that they had come simply to see the tragic spectacle of the naked bodies — some of which were badly burned.
I lodged a formal complaint with Archie Hamilton — Minister for the Armed Forces, who is visiting Britain's Gurkha soldiers in Nepal — and with the British Consul, Andrew Hall.
Mr Hamilton said: ‘I am deeply concerned at what you have told me and I shall ask for immediate steps to be taken for normal decencies to be observed.’
Mourners of some Britons are due to fly out today for a final look at their loved ones.
But Britain's Vice-Consul Harold Jenkins told me: ‘Sadly it may be quite impossible for them to make positive identifications.’
Mr Hall — head of the British Embassy in the absence of Ambassador Timothy George — said after visiting the scene: ‘It is absolutely awful.
‘However, there is no mortuary big enough here to cope with the number of the dead.
‘While the bodies are lying in the open, blocks of ice are being placed on them.’
I also suggested that Britons should be urged not to ask for a chance to look at the remains until the situation improves.
Mr Hall said: ‘I have already complained to the authorities about sightseers.
I agree with everything you say and I shall make further representations.
‘In particular, I shall insist that covers be placed over the bodies.’
All 155 passengers and 12 crew of the Pakistan International Airlines Airbus on Flight 268 from Karachi to Katmandu died instantly when it slammed into the Tinpane mountain 10 miles from Tribhuvan Airport on Monday.
VISIT: Hamilton
THE WOMEN LEFT BEHIND AS THEIR BOYFRIENDS DIED
STEVE ATKINSON
THREE British women escaped death in the Himalayan air disaster because they thought they were too busy or not fit enough to trek or climb with their men.
Yesterday, as the number of Britons killed in Monday's horrific air crash near Katmandu in Nepal rose to 37, Sandy Goodyer, Fiona Spillard and Sian Gower were left mourning alone.
Teacher Sian, 34, of Redland, Bristol, had so much work to catch up on that she couldn't join 39-year-old DUDLEY BROWN on the trek they had planned.
He went alone — and died.
Travel rep Fiona cancelled plans to join her New Zealand born boy-friend CHRIS BUDGETT, 26, on a trek of the Everest base camp because she didn't think she was in shape.
‘If I'd been fitter I would have been sitting next to him on that aeroplane,’ said heartbroken Fiona, who had nicknamed her lover the ‘Kiwi Crocodile Dundee.’
Chris, of Lyme Regis, Dorset, died with his travelling companion SHARON DUHIG, a ski instructor.
Sharon, 28, of Hillingdon, Middlesex, had ditched a boring career as a supermarket manageress to pursue an outdoor life as a ski instructor.
Saved by a last-minute illness was Sandy Goodyer, who waved goodbye to her boyfriend BRIAN ROLLINS, 40, planning to join him later.
Last night heartbroken Sandy, who lived with Brian at Didsbury, Manchester, said: ‘Everyone who knew him has lost a part of themselves through this tragedy.
‘He was one of a kind.’
Mr Rollins was a physical education lecturer at South Manchester College.
Also among the victims were four instructors at the National Mountaineering Centre in the heart of Snowdonia at Capel Curig, North Wales.
They were MICK HARDWICK, 33, his wife SUE, 28, and their friends DAVE HARRIES, 33, and ALISON COPE.
A brilliant climber, Derbyshire-born Mick was head of the rock climbing department at the centre.
Dave, originally from Manchester, was in charge of the Alpine climbing department.
Clinical psychologists LOUISE PEATE, 31, and KATE WHITE, 26, of Leicester, were taking a trip of a lifetime after completing a successful seven-year stint at university.
Union officer DEBORAH LEON, 32, of Guisborough, Cleveland, perished heading for a month's trekking holiday.
In her spare time Deborah, who was based in Tyneside for the TGWU, enjoyed rock climbing and cycling.
‘In everything she did she gave 100 per cent,’ said a friend.
Sweethearts HAMDI ELMENSHAWY, 27, and SHARON HENSON, 25, of Selly Oak, Birmingham, were starting a two-month backpacking holiday to celebrate a new life.
Top mountaineer MARK MILLER, 31, was flying out to lead a party of climbers aiming to reach the peak of Makalu 2 in the Himalayas.
Bachelor Mark, of Woodseats, Sheffield, the co-partner in an adventure holiday agency, was on the flight with his 27-year-old pal VICTOR RADVILS, of Crookes in Sheffield.
SAD END LOUISE Peate was so excited about her holiday.
EXAMS: University student Kate White
INSTRUCTOR: Mountaineer Dave Harries
HOLIDAY: Union official Deborah Leon
DAREDEVIL: Top climber Mick Hardwick
DEVASTATION: Smouldering wreckage was all that remained yesterday of the Airbus, like the one pictured, which crashed killing 167
THREE FIRMS AN HOUR ARE GOING BUST
IAN MILLER
FIRMS are now going bust at the rate of THREE an HOUR.
Business collapses soared to 46,500 over the past nine months — 40 per cent more than in the same period last year.
That's just 1,777 short of the total for whole of 1991, says a report by business data group Dun and Bradstreet.
Small firms suffer worst — nine out of ten British businesses employ less than 20 people.
And big company cut-backs will continue to devastate the little men, warns the report.
It predicts a further rise in small firm bankruptcies because of harsh, competitive conditions.
The south east has had the sharpest rise in failures — up 54.7 per cent.
The Federation of Small Businesses, said: ‘The Chancellor's green shoots of recovery have got frostbite.
‘Businesses which have been clinging on for months are now going over the edge.’
Dreamer Sharon's hunt for danger
FRANK GILBRIDE
CRASH victim Sharon Duhig travelled the world in search of adventure.
But the ski instructress died trying to fulfill her biggest ambition — to visit the Everest base camp.
Dad Reg said last night: ‘She always dreamed of going there.’
He choked back tears as he told how he waved her off from Heathrow, where he works.
‘She was a lovely girl who loved the outdoors and had a great sense of adventure,’ he said at their home in Hillingdon, Middlesex.
‘We will miss her very much.’
Sharon, 28, planned to spend two months climbing in the Himalayas.
Travelling with her was New Zealand pal Chris Budget, 26, who lived in Lyme Regis, Dorset.
His brother David said: ‘Chris was in tremendous spirits and bubbling about the trip.
‘He had a 21-day trek planned together with a rafting expedition.’
Another victim was health worker Pam Muttram, 28, from Whalley Range, Manchester.
Colleagues wept as they told how she planned to meet up with a friend for a two-week walking holiday.
One said: ‘She was a wonderful friend and a brilliant colleague.’
The PIA logo
BANK CHIEF HITS RATE CUT HOPES
SHEREE DODD /JOHN HUSBAND
PREMIER John Major suffered a new blow yesterday, when the Governor of the Bank of England scuppered his hopes of a new interest rate cut.
The move would have boosted rock-bottom Tory morale just in time for their conference next week.
But in a no-nonsense speech to American businessmen, the Bank's Governor Robin-Leigh Pemberton issued a thinly-veiled warning to the Government to hold fire on letting millions of homeowners off the hook.
A premature cut in interest rates would risk sending the pound into a dive which could spark inflation in Britain, he said.
The value of sterling had a ‘profound effect’ on our economic fortunes.
‘We cannot afford to ignore the  exchange rate,’ he cautioned.
Mr Leigh-Pemberton insisted that German interest rates would have to come down before Britain could risk another cut.
Desperate
The Governor's warning was yet another set-back for Mr Major, as he met with Chancellor Norman Lamont.
For MPs have been urging that the current nine per cent interest rate be cut again in a desperate bid to kickstart the economy.
There is a slim chance the Germans could get the Tories off the hook before their conference.
Rumours swept the City yesterday that the Bundesbank may cut German interest rates — leaving Mr Major a little room in which to manoeuvre.
BOSS: Leigh-Pemberton
POETIC DREAMER KILLED ON PILGRIMAGE
‘None escape the tomb and its vulgarity’
BILL AKASS
POET Dominic Sasse was a dreamer — but one of his lines read ominously: None escape the tomb and its vulgarity.
The 38-year-old adventurer lived in Ludlow, Shropshire, with his wife Mary, daughter Lydia, nine, and son Joshua, four.
But he was also at home in Nepal, where he and his father had built a mountain lodge.
Supplies
He was making a pilgrimage there on the ill-fated flight.
His publisher William Sieghart said yesterday: ‘The place was close to his heart.
‘Everyone in the area knew him and followed him everywhere, as he was well known for bringing provisions and medical supplies.
‘He was a wonderful character.’
The ‘Pied Piper’ side of Dominic is seen in a verse called Without Finance: As I saunter unabashed, Best foot forward, Hair slicked back, Am I not just the sort of chap That fortune often favours?
The line None escape the tomb appears in a poem which continues: If ever I should die to decompose and smell Of shrub rose and mixture of mould, Tinctures of ash and soda to produce, As time will brittle and break my bones, Yet moan I shall not, Nor throw stones, Or care about celestial trombones that play The forgotten names of Galileo and Florindo…
And in another poem, entitled Local Hero, Dominic wrote: Devoid of charts I drift on a raft of dreams, So please think kindly if ever you consider me, For is not compassion the finest of the arts?
3,000 jobs go in cuts avalanche'
ALAN LAW
MORE than 3,000 job losses were announced yesterday in cutbacks grimly described by one union leader as ‘an avalanche of destruction and misery.’
The DEFENCE MINISTRY is to axe 1,950 research workers within two years as 19 of its 54 research centres are shut down.
Shocked Derrick Baker, of the GMB union, said: ‘Staff at these establishments were working 24 hours a day during the Falklands and Gulf conflicts.
Some were presented with medals.
Now they are being treated with contempt.’
High-tech equipment makers NORTHERN TELECOM are slashing 400 jobs in Northern Ireland, South Wales and Basildon, Essex.
A total of 290 workers are to go at PIRELLI'S industrial cable plants at Eastleigh, Hants, and Newport, South Wales.
Closing
ITV are axing 112 outside broadcasting staff.
NESTLE-ROWNTREE is losing 100 at Norwich.
And SEARS, the high street stores giant which sells Dolcis and Saxone shoes, is closing 350 shops over the next three years with the loss of 1,700 people.
The company said many will be relocated in new-style, bigger stores.
Engineers and electricians' leader Bill Jordan said: ‘This is an avalanche of industrial destruction and human misery.’
DISASTER AT THE TOP OF THE WORLD
35 Britons are killed as holiday jet slams into Himalayan mountain
MARK DOWDNEY
BRITONS flying to the top of the world were minutes from safety when disaster struck their holiday jet yesterday.
The Pakistan Airlines Airbus slammed into a mountain and exploded while making the nerve-racking approach to notorious Katmandu airport.
The blazing wreckage crashed into wild, inaccessible countryside only eight miles from the airport.
Searchers found no sign of survivors.
At least 35 Britons were believed dead.
The A-300 Airbus was carrying 167 passengers and crew — including many British climbers and trekkers heading for Nepal's magnificent peaks.
It is the start of the tourist season and Katmandu is the gateway to the world's highest mountains, including Everest.
Airport officials said there had been no hint of trouble until radio contact was suddenly lost three minutes from touchdown.
But they said the plane appeared to be flying too low — at 7,500 feet.
The correct height for a routine approach to the mountain-ringed airport was 9,000 feet.
Nepalese troops, police and medical teams were ordered to the crash scene — but faced massive problems.
Army helicopters could not land because of the mountainous terrain and dense jungle.
Andrew Hall, British consul in Katmandu, said: ‘Where the plane came down is very wild indeed.
‘Rescuers are having to walk the last two or three miles carrying all their equipment.’
The plane was carrying 148 passengers, 12 crew, four air guards and three aircraft engineers.
The airport has no radar nor instrument landing system and planes are guided in by radio beacon.
Fifty Britons left Heathrow at 6 pm on Sunday for Karachi.
It was not known how many of them caught the connecting flight to Katmandu.
Among the passengers were 29 Spaniards, 12 Dutch, 14 Pakistanis, and others from Italy, Germany, Switzerland and Canada.
It was the second crash near Katmandu in two months.
A Thai A-310 Airbus slammed into a mountain in the foothills of the Himalayas 60 miles south of the Nepalese capital.
Spiral
All 99 passengers, including two Britons, and 14 crew on board died.
The flight from Bangkok was only minutes from landing when it was turned away because of a monsoon.
The pilots were told to divert towards India but it is believed they turned north by mistake and hit the mountains.
Katmandu airport is notoriously tricky, located in a narrow saucer-shaped valley surrounded by snowy mountains and pine hills.
The approach is extremely alarming to first-time passengers as the aircraft constantly swoops over ridges and precipices.
To lose height pilots have to spiral down to the runway.
An Indian pilot who flies regularly to Katmandu said the rate of descent once the plane cleared the mountains was about 2,000 feet a minute instead of the usual 600 feet a minute.
DOOMED: The Pakistan jet's flightpath to tragedy
THE SCENE OF DESTRUCTION: Smashed and mangled metal around the battered tailplane is all that remains of the doomed airbus in which 167 people were killed
PIA: The airline's logo
Tears for a grim task
STAFF at Pakistan Airlines wept as they consoled victims' relatives.
Urgent plans were being made at the London office to fly next of kin to Katmandu tomorrow.
Passenger manager Kamran Ali Kahn said: ‘The families are so brave.’
Pound on slide again
THE pound plunged to a new low of 2.51 against the mark yesterday.
It has now been devalued 15 per cent against Germany's currency since Britain quit the ERM.
Fresh pressure on the Irish punt forced the government there to raise the bank rate by three per cent to 13.75 per cent yesterday.
I'M SORRY LAMONT TELLS THE GERMANS
DAVID BRADSHAW
CHANCELLOR Norman Lamont said ‘sorry’ to the Germans last night.
He apologised for trying to blame them over the Tories' economic blunders.
The Chancellor was forced to eat his words at an angry meeting of European finance ministers in Brussels.
And Labour MPs immediately demanded he apologise to the British people as well.
Premier John Major and Mr Lamont had tried to shrug off blame for the Sterling crisis.
They accused the Germans of a ‘whispering campaign’ aimed at harming the pound.
Mr Lamont went on to slam the German Bundesbank for forcing devaluation.
But last night he was in humiliating retreat after protests from German finance minister Horst Koehler.
Grilling
He attacked the Chancellor and protested about British Press reports which likened the German behaviour to that of the Nazis.
Mr Lamont said: ‘Obviously some harsh and difficult things have been said.
‘We have had our differences and I am sorry if it has caused offence.’
Meanwhile, he pulled out of a grilling by Euro MPs today — pleading pressure of work.
Later the Treasury claimed Mr Lamont stood by his remarks about events leading up to the pound's ERM suspension, but apologised for Press comments.
RETREAT: Lamont
‘Bring back the old bat’
FORMER Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher should never have been kicked out of Number Ten, ex-Tory chairman Norman Tebbit claims today.
He boasts in the Tory-backing Daily Mail that she has been proved right in her warnings against the European exchange rate mechanism.
And he warns that the Council Tax — to be introduced next spring in place of the dreaded Poll Tax — could be another fiasco.
If things do go wrong, Tebbit adds, Tory voters will say to themselves:
‘Can't think why we ever got rid of the old bat.
‘She was right about the ERM, right about Europe — and right about the Poll Tax.’
The taunting article is bound to open a new front in the civil war which is already threatening to rip John Major's party apart.
TAUNT: Tebbit
TRAGIC LOVERS
BILL DANIELS
GLOBE-TROTTING graduate Sharon Henson and her university sweetheart both died.
She and Hamdi El-Menshawy, who recently set up home together, were going on a trekking holiday in Nepal.
A neighbour said last night: ‘We can't believe it.
They were such a lovely couple.’
Sharon, 25, and 27-year-old Hamdi met at Nottingham University — then discovered their parents lived just a few streets away from each other in Birmingham.
She recently gave up a secretarial job to start her own jewellery-making business.
Hamdi worked in his father's car-components business in Selly Oak.
Expert mountaineer Mick Hardwick and his wife Sue were also on the plane.
He and colleague David Harries, from the Sports Council's national mountain centre, planned to climb Annapurna One.
Sue's friend Alison Cope, who also worked at the centre in Capel Curig, Gwynedd, was travelling with them.
FINAL JOURNEY: Sweethearts Hamdi and Sharon
DEATH OF A KIDS' CHAMP
FRANK CORLESS
A CHARITY worker on her way to help children died in the crash.
Laura Strutt, 76, was to have spent 10 weeks in schools in Nepal for Action Aid.
Mrs Strutt, of Chirk, Clwyd, also helped in a hospital in Llangollen.
Her husband, John, 77, said: ‘She did so much for so many people.
Everyone thought the world of her.’
Another caring woman who died in the disaster was doctor's daughter Deborah Leon, from South Gosforth, Newcastle upon Tyne.
Debbie, 32, worked for the Portland Project for the homeless before becoming women's officer with the Transport Union.
She left Britain on Sunday for a trekking holiday in the Himalayas.
MIRROR COMMENT
The straight man
JOHN SMITH said yesterday that there is a void in British public life.
It is the void he set out to fill.
He spoke of the need for active government.
What a contrast with the paralysed inactivity of John Major and his negligent and bankrupt Government.
Mr Smith did not retreat following the election defeat from Labour's policies on Europe and on creating jobs, caring for people, building homes, equipping schools and re-opening hospital wards.
He re-affirmed them.
Lunacy
What a contrast with Mr Major's abandonment of policy and principle after his costly Black Wednesday defeat.
Mr Smith rammed home the lunacy of gambling away ONE THOUSAND MILLION POUNDS trying to prop up the pound when the money could have done so much good at home.
What a contrast with the pathetic attempts by Mr Major and Norman Lamont to blame others for their coming public spending cuts.
Mr Smith inspired conference not with powerful platform oratory but with a sincere concern for the future of Britain and the well-being of all its people.
He came across for what he is: a caring, efficient, moral man who would lead a caring, efficient, moral government.
The country could bank on the confident and honest John Smith.
What a contrast with the rattled and untrustworthy gamblers at Number 10 and Number 11 Downing Street.
And Mr Smith was so right to compare those two comedians with Laurel and Hardy.
What a fine mess indeed!
‘Dustbin Britain'
BRITAIN has become the ‘dustbin of the world’ and the ‘environmental leper’of Europe, John Prescott told delegates.
He said the government should export technology so countries could deal with their own toxic waste.
Transport spokesman Mr Prescott also lashed plans to sell off BR.
And rail union leader Jimmy Knapp said privatisation would put up fares by 142 per cent.
LET'S BE TOP IN EUROPE
LABOUR must fight to put Britain in the First Division of Europe, said Mr Smith.
If we were pushed to the fringes of power we would be stripped of influence in both Europe and the world.
But the Labour leader demanded a reshaping of the community to match people's needs.
He said: ‘We are not advocates of a European superstate.
We never have been.
But we are determined to play our part in maintaining the momentum for closer co-operation to build a stronger European economy, to extend social justice, to preserve the environment, and to deepen our democracy.
‘Europe cannot stand still.
We either move forward or retreat into isolationism.’
Boost
Mr Smith spelt out the new direction the EC must take to make sure it would be a community for people and not just for business.
That was why Labour strongly supported the Social Charter, he said.
The community must also look at ways to boost jobs and strengthen democracy.
‘Too many of its institutions are not accountable enough to the people,’ said Mr Smith.
A pledge for action
LABOUR would provide the action needed to unlock the country's talents, John Smith promised.
Britain desperately needed a government to create the climate where all could succeed.
Safe streets, efficient transport, good schools and health care and a strong economy were vital to set people free, said Mr Smith.
‘Labour stands for Active Government — active government not absence of government,’ he said.
WHAT THEY COULD DO WITH ONE BILLION POUNDS
REPAIR 6,000 SCHOOLS BUILD 16,393 HOMES BUILD 21 HOSPITALS
MR SMITH savaged the Tories for wasting £1 billion in their failed bid to prop up the pound on Black Wednesday.
He stormed: ‘Just think what could be done constructively with £1,000 million.
How many houses could be built?
How many schools repaired?
How many hospital wards opened?’
Well here are the answers and they make shameful reading for Premier John Major.
A billion pounds would repair 6,000 schools.
It would buy 16,393 homes at the current average of £61,000 each.
Or, it would build 21 district hospitals and run them for a year.
PLANNED cuts in overseas aid were branded ‘repugnant’ by Mr Smith, who accused the Government of making the starving pay for their economic blunders.
‘HEARTLESS TORIES’ HIT THE POOR
DAVID BRADSHAW
PREMIER John Major's complacency over poverty was savaged by John Smith.
The Labour leader accused Major, who said he wanted a classless society, of instead building ‘a heartless society ruled by a Government devoid of any sense of responsibility for its people.’
Mr Smith said when the Premier had been quizzed about poverty in Britain recently he had snapped back: ‘What poverty?’
He added: ‘John Major may not know what poverty is, but he certainly knows how to create it.’
The Tories had pretended society did not exist and had bowed to the markets.
But after the sterling crisis, Mr Major had been quick to brand the same markets as irrational, Mr Smith declared.
Pot ‘Mr Major's first comment when he finally emerged blinking from the air raid shelter last week was to protest that it wasn't his fault — it was the markets that were irrational.
‘That's a case of the pot calling the kettle grey.’
The Labour leader pledged that he would devise a new radical strategy to tackle injustice in Britain.
HUMILIATION OF MAJOR AND LAMONT
Triumphant Smith damns the men who have betrayed British people's trust
‘They pushed the nation into crisis’
We'll expose the broken promises of Number Ten
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
BATTLING John Smith savaged the Prime Minister yesterday in the most withering attack Britain's crisis-hit leader has ever suffered.
Mr Smith condemned him as the man who ‘designed and delivered the disaster’ that has pushed the nation into economic crisis and into the Second Division of Europe.
Chancellor Norman Lamont was also slammed by the Labour leader for the damage the Tories' ‘heartless and mindless’ policies had done.
He coupled his damning assault on Mr Major and Mr Lamont — the Laurel and Hardy of politics — with a highly moral vision of a Labour Britain and an ‘active government’ looking after those in need.
Mr Smith said there was a ‘void and a vacuum’ at the heart of British public life.
And he pledged to lead an Opposition that would fill it.
He warned Mr Major there would be no escape from Labour's relentless attacks — and the PM had no alibi.
Though much of the 48-minute speech was devoted to outlining policies Labour had for Britain and the wider world, it was his attacks on Mr Major that set the Blackpool Labour Conference alight.
Mr Smith said the Premier had not just humiliated himself and his Government through the sterling crisis — he had humiliated Britain.
It wasn't good enough for Mr Lamont alone to apologise to the Germans for recent attacks.
Mr Major should apologise to the British people ‘for his betrayal of their trust.’
Tory deceit had been exposed since the election, he said.
There was no more devalued currency than a Conservative election promise.
Mr Smith added: ‘There was no enthusiasm for this Government, no admiration for their performance, no sense that after 13 years they had delivered the goods, fulfilled promises or proved themselves worthy of the trust of the nation.’
And he asked: ‘Now, six months on, how many of those reluctant voters who gave John Major the benefit of the doubt, are regretting their decision?’
Toppling
The sterling crisis saw a Government ‘gripped by indecision, paralysed by fear and a Prime Minister plodding to disaster’.
He said: ‘John Major had only one policy — wait and see what happens.
The result was total humiliation.
‘The opt-out Prime Minister leading a do-nothing Government off the European stage.’
Mr Smith scorned Mr Major's claims to put Britain at the heart of Europe.
‘The man who dreamed of toppling the Deutschmark carries the responsibility for the single most disastrous day in our post-war economic history,’ he said.
‘People are entitled to be angry — the cynical deceit of the Tory election campaign, the easy promise that all the economy needed was the reassurance of a Tory victory, all now exposed in the harsh light of the real world.’
He said the crisis was the result of years of economic error and mismanagement.
Disaster
First at the Treasury and then in Downing Street, Mr Major was the architect of disaster.
Mr Smith said: ‘The dole queues, poverty, repossessions, the collapse of industrial investment — a record which has sent our manufacturing industry to the breaker's yard.
It is all his own work.’
He said: ‘What we have seen is the devaluation not just of a currency but of a Prime Minister and an entire Government.
‘What started out on Black Wednesday as a tragic-comedy has degenerated into Whitehall farce.’
He detailed recent job losses including yesterday's news that 2,000 workers from the Government's Defence Research Agency are heading for the scrapheap.
Then, returning to the weapon of ridicule, he wondered why ministers refuse to use the management techniques they want others to apply.
‘They keep saying the idle and incompetent must be weeded out,’ said Mr Smith.
‘They call for performance related pay.
‘If he is so keen on these ideas why doesn't he apply them to the Cabinet?
Should he start on the idle or concentrate on the incompetent?
‘Would he be able to tell which is which?
Would there be any ministers left?’
Scornful of Mr Major's so-called Big Idea, the Citizens' Charter, Mr Smith launched his own Citizens Charter for the Cabinet and dubbed it ‘Majorwatch’.
He said: ‘In the days and months ahead we will expose all their broken promises, all their empty commitments so that the British people can hold them to account.’
Labour was born to bring about social justice and change.
Mr Smith said: ‘People should enjoy, as a right of citizenship and not as a privilege of wealth, the opportunity of a good education, the chance to find a decent job with decent pay, the opportunity to buy or rent a decent home.
Faith ‘To have access to child care and health care and security in their old age, to enjoy a clean environment, to walk the streets in safety and have a voice in the conduct of public affairs.’
He said Labour believed that citizens should work together for the good of the community.
The Tories had the ‘objectionable’ view that we were consumers in a marketplace.
‘Their language is the language of self and of self-interest.
I have too much faith in the British people to accept that.
‘I do not believe the British people lack compassion, decency, honour.
They do care about others and are concerned about their country's future.’
It also made economic sense, he said.
He pointed out: ‘It costs £8,000 a year for every person who is unemployed, £14,000 for every homeless family.
‘Tory policies are not only heartless, they are mindless.’
He said Labour would provide a way forward through an ‘active Government’.
Mr Smith added: ‘More than anything today Britain needs leadership.’
He vowed to continuously challenge the Government.
Void
He said: ‘At the same time, in every week of every month we will be working and preparing for Government.
‘For there is a void at the heart of our public life in Britain, a vacuum left by 13 years of Conservative rule.
‘It is up to Labour now, to all of us working together, to fill that void.’
NEW LEADER, NEW DAWN: John Smith, joined by wife Elizabeth, acknowledges the standing ovation after his first speech as leader
Honest John ‘man of force’
ENGINEERS' chief Bill Jordan praised John Smith as a leader of ‘force and conviction.’
John Edmonds, of the General and Municipal Workers, said Smith offered an alternative to Tory ‘moral vacuum and decline’.
And Labour's John Prescott praised him as a ‘very strong Christian socialist’.
PRAISE: Union chief Jordan
Conference Commentary
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
DEARLY departed Bryan Gould, when in charge of Labour's 1987 election campaign, trailed, then executed a rather personal attack on Mrs Thatcher.
It backfired.
When Neil Kinnock complained that soldiers were forced to leave their guts on Goose Green to show Mrs Thatcher had guts of her own, the Tories used it to mount a massive propaganda campaign against him.
John Smith would have been aware of those risks yesterday.
Personal attacks must be handled with care.
But there is a difference.
Mrs Thatcher was always more unpopular than her party.
She was a hate figure, so the language of hate was inevitably employed to have impact.
But not so John Major, not yet.
As any Tory would tell you until Black Wednesday, his personality and his popularity won the election.
But he is now being exposed for what some of us always warned that he was.
A fake.
A flake.
A wimp.
A phoney.
Nice smile, shame about the lies, the splits and the job losses.
Don't let anyone say politics is not about personalities.
It is.
And Smith is right to target Major.
The public relate to personalities.
They either like or dislike politicians.
Many who liked Major are beginning to feel neutral.
Many who felt neutral are beginning to dislike him.
Many who disliked him are beginning to feel the same contempt and venom they felt for Baroness Bonkers.
Major the Nice Guy was a myth.
Major the Couldn't-Care-Less, Major the Can't-Do-A-Thing-About-It and Major the Can't-Believe-A-Word-He-Says…they are the real thing.
Smith's job is to make people see he could care less, can do something about Britain's problems and that his words are worth more than those of Johnny Devaluation.
The gloves began to come off yesterday.
They should stay off until John Major has gone.
JOB AXE LOOMS
THE Labour Party must shed jobs to make ends meet, retiring treasurer Sam McCluskie revealed.
The party, facing a deficit of £1.3million, must cut costs by 30 per cent in the next financial year.
This means job losses among many of the 250 employees at London HQ and in the regions.
‘400,000 to face death’
UP TO 400,000 people could die from cold and hunger in Bosnia this winter as the Yugoslav civil war rages on, the UN warned yesterday.
And 2,000,000 refugees in all the former Yugoslav republics are at risk because they lack proper food and shelter.
‘We are on the verge of disaster,’ a UN spokeswoman said.
Riddle of shot dad
A KILLER gunned down a young father at his seaside home for no apparent reason.
Baffled police admitted last night that they had no clue why Neil Fenton was shot.
Neil, 31, was found after neighbours at Westgate-on-Sea, Kent, saw his front door open with the milk outside.
His girlfriend left the house with their two daughters last week.
JAIL CUT STORM
ROGER TODD
BRITAIN'S new top judge was set for a clash with the Government last night after he called for SHORTER jail sentences.
Ministers have promised tougher sentences under the new Criminal Justice Act.
But Lord Chief Justice Taylor told newsmen:
‘I will be issuing directions to judges on sentencing in the next few days.
They will have to pass shorter sentences.
If we are not careful we will have a bulge in the prison population.’
Previously, prisoners qualified for parole after serving one-third of their sentence.
In future they must serve at least half.
Lord Taylor said: ‘Under the new act prisoners may find themselves serving longer than under the old regime.
I am going to warn judges against that.’
ORDERS: Taylor
Zapped!
TV ads get the
ALEC LOM
TV ads are a big turn-off with viewers, a new survey reveals.
It claims that ITV's audiences fall by an average of 18 per cent at the end of shows.
As the credits roll more and more of us are hitting the remote control buttons and channel hopping.
‘At peak times, that adds up to millions of viewers,’ said a survey spokesman.
The study — by media consultants Billets — said the worst hit are ads surrounding dull sitcoms, documentaries and soccer.
Jerry Judge, boss of top ad agency Young and Rubicam, said: ‘It means we have to make adverts more interesting’.
More than 15 million viewers now own a zapper.
BR shandy man's joy
JIM OLDFIELD
A RAILWAY clerk sacked for drinking half a shandy at his farewell do celebrated his reprieve yesterday — with the same tipple at his local.
Alex Bryson, 63, was dismissed with four colleagues for drinking on duty.
They had a pub lunch on his last day to toast his early retirement.
The sacking cost Alex a £20,000 pay-off.
But now British Rail has reversed its decision on him and the two others at a freight depot in Doncaster.
‘Now at least I can retire with some money,’ said Alex, a BR worker for 46 years.
BR said each case had been carefully rejudged.
CHEERS: Alex
10p debut
MORE than 500 million of the new-look 10p go into circulation today.
The changeover to the smaller, lighter coin will take until next June.
‘Murder show’ TV man held
A TV researcher was arrested yesterday over a programme which claimed the RUC and Loyalist death squads colluded in murder.
Channel 4, which broadcast the programme on Ulster a year ago, branded the arrest of Ben Hamilton, 25, ‘wholly unwarranted and oppressive’.
Channel 4 and Box Productions, which made The Committee, were fined £75,000 at the High Court in July after refusing to name their informant.
Police said Hamilton was held in connection with alleged perjury.
RAC SOS FOR BOSS
RAC publicity chief John Hutson was red-faced yesterday after his wife called patrolmen to rescue their baby daughter from a locked car in Hutton, Avon.
John said: ‘I'll get some ribbing.’
Family at war over Onassis fortune
MARK DOWDNEY
A BITTER battle over the £1,000 million fortune of the richest little girl in the world burst into the open yesterday.
Athena, seven-year-old daughter of the late Christina Onassis, inherits the fabulous riches when she reaches 18.
Sole survivor of the Onassis dynasty, she already gets £2 1/2 million a year.
But now the men managing her money are accusing her father of a bid to take complete control.
The row went public in Athens at a press conference held by the Onassis Foundation, which runs the family shipping and financial empire.
Frenchman Thierry Roussel, Christina's fourth and last husband, was accused of trying to lay his hands on his daughter's entire fortune.
He already has an income of £800,000 a year.
But Foundation director Stelios Papadimitriou alleged: ‘He claims the right to manage all the Onassis assets, something we strongly dispute.’
He also criticised the way re-married Roussel was raising his daughter.
Boy's billions — Page 9 
RICHES: Athena
V2 party will go on
THE launch of Hitler's deadly V2 rockets 50 years ago WILL be marked in Germany, it was revealed yesterday.
Aerospace chiefs are to stage ceremonies despite the government dropping its official support.
ALAN TACKLES ROLE AS DAD
SHE'S A BETTER DRIBBLER THAN GAZZA
ENGLAND soccer star Alan Shearer cradled his baby daughter Chloe yesterday and declared: ‘She's a better dribbler than Gazza.’
Wife Lainya, 22, gave birth to the 7lb 12oz girl last week after just 1 hour 50 minutes in labour at Southampton's Princess Anne Maternity Hospital.
Blackburn Rovers striker Alan, 22, who was present at the birth, said: ‘It was important for me to be there.
I think she's just wonderful and I'm delighted to be a dad.’
He added: ‘So far she has been pretty good.
We've only had one night when she cried a lot — luckily it wasn't the night before a game.’
PROUD DAD: Alan beams — but Chloe sleeps through her first public appearance Pictures: HARRY PAGE
FAMILY SNAP: Alan, wife Lainya and baby
Disney matter
SIX early Disney cartoon films which the studio thought were lost forever have been found in Holland — complete with Dutch subtitles.
Dead mum and baby car charge
A WOMAN motorist could face two charges of causing death by dangerous driving after a crash which killed a pregnant wife.
Linda Wolage, 28, died after she and her husband Andrew were hit by a Fiesta car at Blackwater, Hants, on September 5.
Her baby, Hannah, born one month prematurely by caesarian section, died 40 hours later in her injured father's arms.
Bailed driver Mrs Jill Gunns, 47, was warned of the possible charges when she reported to police yesterday.
CAN I GO FOR A PINT ASKS THIRSTY JUROR
Angry judge scraps trial
RONALD RICKETTS
A BEER-loving juror astonished a judge when he slipped him a note asking: ‘When is it dinner time?’
After the man had enjoyed his trip to the pub, Judge George Shindler sacked him, sent the rest of the jury home and ordered a retrial that could cost thousands.
The boozy juror, who is in his thirties, made his amazing request a minute before the lunch break in an attempted murder trial at Inner London Crown Court.
Before he fired the man, Judge Shindler heard from the rest of the jury that the wayward juror had DRUNK and SWORN during the trial and DISTRACTED them while they tried to listen to the evidence.
After clearing the court, Judge Shindler told the juror: ‘Well, sir, you sent a note at 12.59, which has been described, rightly, as an impertinence —‘When is dinner time?’
’ Juror: ‘Yeah’The judge then accused the juror of saying he would go to lunch whatever the time.
Juror: ‘I didn't say that.’
The judge: ‘As well as being rude, you have been drinking during court time.’
Juror: ‘I've had some drink and that's why I asked when is it dinner time.’
The cheeky juror's reply was the final straw for Judge Shindler.
He said: ‘You are unfit to be a member of the jury.’
Unrepentant juror: ‘If you say so.’
The judge, struggling to contain his anger, said: ‘You are lucky I do not deal with this as a contempt of court.’
Snag
Then Judge Shindler called back the 11 other jurors and said he had no choice but to discharge them too and order a retrial.
But the new trial, due to start yesterday, was jinxed too.
The man accused of a West End shooting sacked his lawyer and the case had to be adjourned.
WATCH OUT BEAUTY, IT'S THE BEAST!
MODEL Melissa Brown stepped off a catwalk yesterday — and was hounded by a pooch.
Fruity Fred the bull terrier took a fancy to the leggy lovely and thought he'd try his luck.
Melissa was horrified when the bounder made his own designs clear as she modelled a £700 Prince of Wales check trouser suit in a London park.
Being a true professional, she flashed a smile — as Fred hung on for dear life — and admitted it was a pretty paw show.
HOLDING ON: There's no kicking him off
GOTCHA: Melissa is grabbed by Fred
SEND MUMS AND DADS TO SCHOOL, SAYS ANNE
‘Learn with kids’ plea
RICHARD GARNER
PARENTS who cannot read and write should go back to school with their children, Princess Anne urged yesterday.
She spoke out after a new survey into adult literacy revealed the scandal of the ‘forgotten millions’ struggling with the written word.
One in five adults could not understand a simple job advert or subtract £17.89 from £20 to calculate the change from a shopping bill.
And there had been a 26 per cent rise in the number of people seeking help in the past five years.
Many mums and dads only realised the extent of their problems when they were caught out by their kids, added the princess, patron of the Adult Literacy Unit.
She called for British schools to follow the lead of an American scheme — inviting parents into the classroom for short courses in the three Rs.
Children whose mums joined the US programme did much better at school, added Anne.
‘It seems to me evident that a family will provide support for each other,’ she told a conference of 300 experts.
‘Motivation is the key.’
KEY SPEECH: Anne
Children coached in crime
A SCHOOL bus driver packed in twice the legal limit of pupils on his coach and told them: ‘Duck if you see a copper.’
But the children reported him to education chiefs.
Now his firm has been axed from school duties in Swansea and faces prosecution.
Two other ‘cowboy’ coach firms are also alleged to have flouted safety rules.
Council officials say lives were at risk from mechanical defects, including faulty brakes.
Nice swan!
FOOD giant Safeway have paid £1,500 for bunting on a bridge over the Thames in Reading, Berks — so swans don't fly into the stonework.
Mission chips is top nosh
A TINY mission for lonely fishermen is one of Britain's top eating places — according to a leading food guide.
The homely Danish Mission in Grimsby, Humberside, is ranked beside posh restaurants in the Which?
Consumer  Association's Good Food Guide, out yesterday.
Its tasty home-cooking has become so popular that ordinary diners are squeezing the fishermen out.
Boss Fini Iversen, 31, whose wife Lisa does the cooking, said: ‘I don't know what our secret is.
We don't serve anything fancy, just plain, ordinary food.’
THE GENIUS THAT NOBODY WANTS
Bosses snub brainy Steven because he is deaf and blind
GORDON HAY
BRAINY Steven Hazlehurst has twelve O-levels, four A-levels, a maths degree and the highest IQ in Mensa.
But he can't get a job — because he's blind and deaf.
After beating incredible odds to prove himself a classroom genius, Steven has been cruelly snubbed by prospective employers.
They refuse to take him on because of his disabilities.
Computer buff Steven has been jobhunting since graduating from London's Imperial College four years ago.
Now 29, his prospects are fading despite his remarkable talents.
He said: ‘Being blind and deaf doesn't help you find work.’
Steven, who lives alone in a rented house at Peterborough, stunned Mensa chiefs by achieving the maximum IQ score of 161.
Harold Gale, director of the exclusive club for brainboxes, said: ‘If our test went above 161 I am sure he would go even higher.
That would place him in the top 1/2 per cent of intelligence for this country.
‘It's appalling he has overcome all these hurdles yet can't get a job.’
Blind since birth, Steven began losing his hearing at 13 and is now almost totally deaf.
Excuses
When he applied to one college for a teaching job he was told bluntly they would have nothing to do with blind people.
He also tried to get computing work but was only met with excuses.
Now he writes computer software for the National Blind League but needs a proper job.
Cambridgeshire social services helper Maureen Robinson, his interpreter in the Mensa test, said Steven would be an asset to any employer.
‘He only needs things to be left in the same place so he can find them and he's fine,’ she said.
‘Surely there must be a job somewhere for someone with his ability.’
TOP IQ: Jobless Steven
Tears of star for starving Somalia
CATHERINE O'BRIEN
FILM star Audrey Hepburn fought back tears yesterday as she re-lived the horrors of famine-stricken Somalia.
The 62-year-old actress declared: ‘So many children are barely alive, children who cannot smile or see any more.
‘My greatest impulse was to hug them — but you are afraid to do so because they are so fragile, you are frightened they might break.’
Ms Hepburn, speaking in London, said she was so haunted by the images that she could hardly sleep.
‘I will never forget their huge eyes, tiny faces and the terrible silence,’ she added.
The star of My Fair Lady and Breakfast at Tiffany's visited the country as goodwill ambassador for the United Nations Children's Fund.
She praised the Daily Mirror for the way it has highlighted Somalia's plight.
‘The most important thing is to let people know what is happening, so that they can send help,’ she said.
The Mirror's appeal now stands at £375,000 — which is being used to fund airlifts to Baidoa and Bardera, two of the worst-hit areas.
Thanks to the generosity of Mirror readers, 300,000 people have been fed.
But it is vital to keep donations coming in.
Send them to Daily Mirror/CARE Somalia Appeal, PO Box 232, Melksham, Wilts, SN12 7SB.
Cheques and postal orders should be made payable to Daily Mirror/CARE Somalia Appeal.
You can make a credit card donation by phone on 0800 666 808.
MOVED: Audrey
Porsche in good nick
A NEW £50,000 Porsche, nicked at a garage when Kevin Brown, of Stocksfield, Northumberland, left keys in the ignition, was found almost without a scratch at Gateshead, Tyne and Wear.
PAUL'S A SHOW-STOPPER
FILMING of a new multi-million pound TV war epic has been halted because the leading man, actor Paul McGann, has been hurt — playing football.
Monocled Mutineer star McGann was flown home after twisting his knee during a kickabout on location in the Crimea.
Central TV fear he may have to be replaced.
HURT: Paul
3's company
SIX mums and their 18 babies yesterday attended the first meeting of a help group set up in Nottingham for mothers of triplets.
Courage of raped girl
A SCHOOLGIRL who was savagely raped just five days ago is returning to her classroom today.
The brave eight-year-old will mix with her classmates again at Basildon, Essex, in a bid to get over her ordeal.
Jacko in tyrant's palace
MICHAEL Jackson has upset fans in Romania by staying in hated dictator Nicolai Ceaucescu's former summer palace.
The superstar took over the lakeside complex at Snagov as he prepares for a sell-out concert in Bucharest tomorrow.
Ceaucescu lived in luxury at the palace while Romanian workers starved.
The tyrant fled there before he was executed during the revolution of December 1989.
Student Irina Dumitrescu said: ‘Michael is the king of rock, but I feel angry that his agents have chosen to put him in Snagov which represents such bitter memories for Romanians.’
Jackson's concert will take place at the National Stadium where the old Communist Party held many rallies.
It coincides with the launch of his Heal the World foundation aimed at helping youngsters.
ROW: Jackson
Unhand me sir…after one last kiss
PROPER GENT MAKES DI'S DAY
JAMES WHITAKER
CHUFFED Princess Di discovers the age of chivalry is not dead — courtesy of a Cockney squire with the noble name Hubert de Graft-Hammond.
He boldly stepped forward yesterday as the princess toured an East London housing estate, and inquired: ‘Can I kiss your hand?’
‘Of course you can,’ Di replied.
And Hubert, 31, needed no further bidding.
He clasped the royal hand and plastered it with three lingering kisses.
The princess beamed: ‘Thank you.’
Psychiatric nurse Hubert gasped: ‘She's gorgeous.’
It was a day of laughs for Di.
She shared a few with Hackney's mayor Harry Shaw.
And there were more when, laden with flowers, she went round the Guinness Trust Estate.
She noticed a surplus of women and asked: ‘Is there a shortage of men here or something?’
Rita Loumansky, 71, explained: ‘There are always more women than men here.’
Di smiled ruefully: It's the story of our lives.’
BUNCH OF LAUGHS: Flower-laden Diana with mayor Harry
CARRY ON KISSING: Admirer Hubert, smothering smiling Di's hand with smackers yesterday after she accepted his offer
GLORIA'S FAMILY SHOW
RADIO Two star Gloria Hunniford is teaming up with daughter Caron Keating to host a new BBC1 afternoon show, Family Affairs from October 19.
But they will also be rivals when former Blue Peter girl Caron, 29, presents a game show on Radio 5 — at the same time as mum is on air on Radio 2.
STAR: Caron
Treaty makes a dull thud
THE Maastricht Treaty has shot into Britain's best selling book lists — though even its publishers admit it's a crashing bore.
The 150-page tome is being snapped up by people anxious to discover just what the treaty is all about.
Extra copies of the £12.50 book, entitled The Consolidated Treaty on European Union, are now being printed.
Cotswolds-based publishers, the British Management Data Foundation, are delighted.
But they confessed: ‘It was a very tedious task for us.’
WIDOW ‘WAS KILLED BY BUNGLING BOGUS DOC’
Ex-GI denies manslaughter
A FAKE doctor tricked his way into a hospital job — and killed an elderly widow through negligence, a court heard yesterday.
Ex-US Army paramedic Matthew Brafman, 33, had ‘a reasonable bedside manner’ and got on well with the patients at the geriatric hospital where he worked.
But he was ‘bogus, a sham, an imposter’ and was totally unqualified for his job as a senior house doctor, the prosecution claimed.
Brafman denies the manslaughter of 78-year-old Jessie Harris, who was admitted to St George's Hospital, Hornchurch, Essex, one Sunday last October.
Brian Barker, QC, prosecuting, said: ‘She should have left hospital alive, well and recovered.’
But within 12 hours she was dead.
As her condition deteriorated, Brafman did not seek help from senior doctors but ‘brazened it out and took away her last chance to be properly and professionally treated.’
He was ‘self-confident, firm in his views,’ and went out of his way to take charge of patients' care, said counsel.
Brafman, who was living with his English wife Alison in medical quarters in Romford, Essex, was the duty doctor the day Mrs Harris, who had various medical problems, was admitted.
‘His acts and his omissions contributed significantly to that lady's death,’ Mr Barker claimed.
At the time, Mrs Harris's death was treated as routine.
There was no post mortem examination and she was cremated — so the cause of her death was not known.
The trial continues.
ACCUSED: Brafman
JILLY TEACHES RIGHT FROM RON
ROGER TODD
TINY terror Ronnie Corbett scores a big hit with gorgeous Jilly Johnson…by joining her in a new campaign against smacking.
The odd couple got together yesterday to urge all slap-happy mums and dads to ‘count to ten and think again’.
Model mum Jilly and her little sidekick were helping to launch the NSPCC's anti-whacking offensive in the wake of a survey about parenting.
More than half of those questioned admitted to ‘going over the top’ when disciplining their children.
Most just let off steam by shouting and screaming, but one in five admitted to lashing out.
Only one in 20 attempted to reason with their youngsters, said the survey, which blamed the recession.
The children's charity is issuing leaflets which advise harassed parents: ‘Cool down and set children a good example rather than overreact.
‘Leave the room and scream if you feel like it.
It's better to shout at the walls than at the children.’
KEEP COOL:Model mum Jilly has sidekick Ronnie firmly under control
Children coached in crime
A SCHOOL bus driver packed in twice the legal limit of pupils on his coach and told them: ‘Duck if you see a copper.’
But the children reported him to education chiefs.
Now his firm has been axed from school duties in Swansea and faces prosecution.
Two other ‘cowboy’ coach firms are also alleged to have flouted safety rules.
Council officials say that lives were put at risk from mechanical defects, including faulty brakes.
Film extras
THE Kevin Costner film Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves drew an extra million visitors to Sherwood Forest last year, say Notts councillors.
Hitman is held
ONE of a gang who massacred a top Mafia-busting judge and five bodyguards was behind bars last night.
The 27-year-old car bomber was charged with killing Paolo Borsellino, who was blown up outside his mother's flat in Sicily on July 19.
Tories in row over sacking
TORY bosses are being taken to an industrial tribunal today — because they sacked their agent.
Tony Middleton was fired weeks after helping MP Paul Marland get back to Westminster.
Tony, 59, is claiming unfair dismissal against West Gloucester Conservative Association.
His fight is being funded by supporters in the party.
Tony said: ‘The Tories told me a fairytale about being hard-up.’
Party treasurer Graham Doggett stormed: ‘You shouldn't snoop into our affairs.’
Bright idea
NELSON'S Column is to be floodlit in a multi-million pound facelift for London's Trafalgar Square so tourists can go sightseeing at night.
TRUCKER PRINCE
PRINCE Michael of Kent has got a Heavy Goods Vehicle licence — so that he can drive a horse transporter to hunts for his wife.
The 50-year-old prince beamed after passing the trucker's test near his mansion in Stroud, Glos.
TEST: Prince
Flash in pan blew Gents to pieces
GEOFFREY LAKEMAN
A STUDENT larking with chemicals sparked a chain reaction in a public loo — and blew it to bits.
Jason Tyler tossed pierced canisters of sodium, which reacts violently with water, into the bowls in two cubicles.
The result was spectacular.
There was a huge bang and the toilet bowl in one cubicle was blown to smithereens.
Prosecutor Andrew Chubb told Exeter Crown Court yesterday: ‘Pieces of porcelain went flying 20ft.
Shotgun ‘It was like both barrels of a 12-bore shotgun going off at once.’
Tyler had made sure no-one was in the Gents at Wellington, Somerset.
But he had not checked the Ladies next door — and it was lucky no-one was hurt, said Mr Chubb.
Tyler, 20, of Wellington, admitted criminal damage and receiving stolen goods.
He was put on probation and ordered to pay £360 in compensation and costs.
A BOOZY taxi driver drove 14 miles the WRONG WAY down a dual carriageway at night.
John Chapman was ‘absolutely petrified’ when he saw the headlights of traffic speeding towards him, a court heard yesterday.
When police finally flagged him down he told them: ‘I knew I was wrong — but I couldn't turn around.’
Terrified motorists swerved desperately to avoid Chapman's black cab on the A12 between Galleywood and Rivenhall in Essex.
And Chapman, 51, was so traumatised by the experience he vowed never to get back behind the wheel, magistrates heard.
For the next three years he won't have any choice.
The court at Witham, Essex, banned him from driving until 1995 for his escapade.
Chapman drove at 50 to 60mph before he was stopped by a police patrol car.
His lawyer, John Gillette, said: ‘He was not aware of any slip roads or hard shoulder.’
But the court heard he passed SIX slip roads where he could have turned off.
Chapman, of Billericay, admitted dangerous driving after drinking twice the legal limit.
He was fined £188 and ordered to retake his driving test.
Soccer veteran ‘dropped shorts’
JOHN JACKSON
FORMER soccer star Mark Dennis was seen doing squat thrusts and press-ups on a common with his shorts and underpants round his ankles, a court heard yesterday.
He was recognised by a youth who identified Dennis, 31, as the man who had indecently assaulted his sister, it was alleged.
The brother claimed that when he challenged Dennis, the ex-England Under 21 player told him: ‘Let's sort it out here.’
Grabbed
The row took place after the 15-year-old sister complained that a man grabbed her breast in Mitcham, Surrey.
After his arrest, Dennis, 31 — who played for Southampton, QPR and Crystal Palace — agreed to an identity parade.
But it had to be called off after a police blunder led to Dennis and his alleged victim coming face-to-face with each other before the parade.
He denies indecent assault.
The case continues at Kingston Crown Court.
Gymslip mums up
TEENAGE girls are far more likely to end up as gymslip mums now than a decade ago, according to a Government report.
Teenage pregnancies have soared by 35 per cent since 1980.
The biggest rise was among the under 15s.
Abortions also went up.
BUNGLED!
BOOZE-UP IN BREWERY WITH NO BEER
GORDON HUGHES
DOZY drinker Duncan Belfitt was drowning his sorrows yesterday — after his mates blasted him because he couldn't organise a booze-up in a brewery.
Duncan charged £5-a-head for the 200-mile round trip to the new brewery.
But he forgot to let on that it was still being built — and didn't have any beer.
As he stared into his pint at the Turk's Head in Long Eaton, Derbyshire, Duncan, 38, said: ‘I knew the place wasn't open.
I just forgot to mention it.
Pub landlord John Payne, 47, who joined a dozen regulars for the trip to the Black Sheep Brewery in Masham, North Yorks, said: ‘We wouldn't have gone if we had realised.
‘We were looking forward to free hospitality but there wasn't a drop in sight.’
They did get a drink eventually.
After a dry tour, the brewery directed them to the local pub — which sells a RIVAL brew.
Meanwhile Duncan had new plans.
‘When the brewery is open I might get round to organising another trip,’ he said.
Buzz off!
Builders flee bee barrier
BUSINESSMAN David Clark made a bunch of builders buzz off yesterday — after he set a swarm of angry bees on them.
He set up a beehive barricade as bulldozers moved in to dig a pipeline near his land.
Workmen were forced to retreat with their JCBs as Mr Clark unleashed his stinging squad.
David and wife Carol who run a food and tourism business say they face ruin over the pipeline plans.
They claim a watermill they own will be flooded as a result.
Row
But magistrates at Northallerton, North Yorks, have told the Clarks to remove the hives.
Mrs Clark said: ‘We thought about standing in the way of these bulldozers but the bees were a better idea.’
The row broke out after home giants Wimpey were allowed to pipe rainwater from a new estate into the mill stream.
Cabbie bans blind MP and his dog
STEPHEN WHITE
A MEAN cabbie refused to pick up blind MP David Blunkett — because of his guide dog.
And last night driver Brian Mitchenson stormed: ‘I don't care.
‘If it had been the Queen and her corgis waiting, I wouldn't have picked them up.
‘I do not let dogs, especially big ones, in my cab.’
The Shadow Health Minister and labrador Offa were waiting at a Blackpool rank when Brian pulled up in his Ford Orion.
Mr Blunkett, blind from birth, said: ‘He was extremely rude and abusive — insisting we could not get in.
‘I am always careful about taking Offa in cars.
He always sits on the floor in front of me.
‘Any blind person would have found his behaviour offensive.
There was no excuse for it.’
The MP — who made his major speech to the Labour Party Conference in the town yesterday — is demanding an apology.
And he has reported the cabbie to licensing officers.
Brian, 50, of Seabourne Avenue, Blackpool, said: ‘I never take big dogs in my cab.
I have an allergy to them.
‘They make me sneeze continuously.
I can produce a doctor's certificate to prove it.’
Mr Blunkett needed the cab to take him from an evening meeting in the town to nearby Poulton-le-Fylde — a £9 fare.
He was eventually picked up by another driver.
Brian added: ‘I recognised his face off the telly, but didn't realise he was such a big noise.
‘I wasn't rude but I wasn't given time to explain.’
Brian, a cabbie for 25 years, could now face having his licence suspended or withdrawn at a tribunal.
Dennis Wright, of Blackpool's Licensed Taxi Operators' Association, said: ‘This man is a disgrace.
The main criteria for taxis is that drivers must at all times act civilly.’
The association has offered the MP free cab rides for the rest of his stay in the resort.
Alison Radevsky of the Guide Dogs For The Blind Association, said: ‘All guide dogs are groomed daily and trained to sit at their owners’ feet, even in a small car.’
NO RIDE: Cabbie Brian
SNUBBED: David Blunkett with guide dog Offa
LABOUR AT BLACKPOOL
Defeat for chiefs on pensions
THE Labour leadership was overwhelmingly defeated yesterday as the conference demanded big pension increases.
Delegates backed calls for the state pension to rise to half average earnings for couples and one third of average earnings for a single pensioner.
The ruling executive wanted a decision postponed to assess a review of benefits and taxation.
The motion also called for equal retirement for men and women — at 60.
David's pledge to rescue NHS
SHADOW Health Secretary Dave Blunkett vowed that Labour would keep up the fight to stop the Tories ruining the NHS.
The blind MP had delegates cheering as he slammed ‘fragrant’ Tory Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley.
He also signalled that Labour is rethinking its policy on ‘trust’ hospitals which have quit the NHS management structure.
He said self-run hospital trusts have become ‘Frankenstein's monsters’.
Having been freed from NHS control and from any control by local people, trust managers were now saying they didn't want to answer to the Health Secretary either.
Mr Blunkett said: ‘I don't blame them for that, but if they are not accountable to us and they are not accountable to the Secretary of State, who the hell do they think they are accountable to?’
RAP: Bottomley
UNION VOTE TO BE CURBED
LABOUR made it clear yesterday that it will not cut its ties with the unions.
PLEA: Paul Gallagher
Janet swipes at bruisers
BATTERED wives' champion Janet Pike urged the conference to wage a party crusade against domestic violence.
She said many culprits appeared respectable but thousands of women suffered ‘a living hell’.
She told male delegates: ‘Some of you will go home, drop your socialist views and beat your wife.’
The conference backed Janet's demand for more homes for battered wives.
TRAGIC FAMILY LEFT ‘NOTE OF HOPE’
SAMUEL JAMES
A FAMILY wiped out in the air tragedy left a poignant message behind.
Missionaries Andy and Helen Wilkins and children Hannah, 10, Naomi, eight and Simeon, six, gave details of their planned new life in Nepal.
The note was pinned on the notice board at St Andrew's Church in Stansted Abbots, Essex.
It included cartoons of them house-hunting in Katmandu and the children building sandcastles on holiday in Wales.
Andy and Helen had spent a year in Britain.
They wrote: ‘The girls are very aware of all they are leaving behind and are finding the goodbyes painful.
‘However, they are also looking forward with excitement to returning to Nepal.’
The letter ends: ‘Now on the point of departure we ask for your PRAYERS — for ourselves and our families whom we leave behind.’
IN THE PICTURE: The drawing of the family house-hunting in Katmandu
ON THE BEACH: The children are shown building sandcastles on holiday
PRINCESS A CUT ABOVE
LITTLE Tessa Hawkins went to have her fringe trimmed yesterday and was cut right out of presenting Princess Diana with a bouquet.
Tessa, eight, was due to hand over the flowers when Di arrived at the Freshfield drug counselling service in Truro, Cornwall.
But the Princess zipped in 20 minutes ahead of schedule.
And Tessa was still having her hair done.
When she heard why she was missing, Di immediately agreed to meet Tessa when her official visit was over.
And an hour later she emerged to heal the little girl's broken heart — and accept the bouquet.
‘I was really upset but she came and found me later,’ said Tessa.
‘She is very lovely.’
FRINGE BENEFIT: Tessa
I'M PRINCE CHARLES'S STUBBLE (BELIEVE IT OR NOT)
UNVEILED: THE UNSHAVEN, PAINT-SPLATTERED ROYAL ‘LOOKALIKE’
Stars of TV mini-series
PAUL STANLEY
HERE he is — TV's Prince Charles's ‘double’…complete with morning stubble.
Bleary-eyed actor David Threlfall hadn't even time to shave yesterday before taking a bow with his screen princess, Serena Scott Thomas.
Sporting a royal blue shadow, open neck shirt and flecks of paint from a spot of humble home decorating, he looked more like a pauper than a prince.
David, 38, and willowy blonde Serena have been picked from hundreds of hopefuls to star in Diana: Her True Story.
The American-made mini-series is based on Andrew Morton's controversial book about Di's marriage troubles.
And Serena — glamour girl of Fiat Uno adverts — tried best to gloss over her partner's scruffy appearance at their first photo-call.
Forbidden
She said: ‘I'm a big fan of Diana.
I thought long and hard about taking the role.
‘I just hope I can do her justice.
I wouldn't want to cause her any distress.’
The makers are hoping to screen the series in Britain.
David, who played odious Cabinet minister Leslie Titmuss in Paradise Postponed, said: ‘It hasn't really sunk in yet.
My first thought when I heard I'd got the part was: ‘Bang goes my knighthood!’’
The couple have both been forbidden to discuss the script.
But insiders say it is drawn closely from the book which had the co-operation of intimate friends of the princess.
It is believed to contain explosive scenes — including Di's alleged suicide bids, emotional turmoil and friendships with other men.
JUST ENGAGED: TV's royal couple pose for their first balcony scene
CHIN UP: Selena's gleaming smile puts her hairytale prince in the shade Pictures: KENT GAVIN
JUST ENGAGED: Charles and Diana in 1981
GCSE snub for Patten
EXAM chiefs hammered Education Secretary John Patten last night by saying ‘no’ to an inquiry into the GCSE exam.
And they dismissed an inspectors' report which doubted standards were being maintained.
GCSE boss John Edmundson said: ‘We have no evidence that they have slipped.’
CLAIMS FIRM IN CRISIS
JOHN COPPOCK
BRITAIN'S ninth biggest insurance firm was close to collapse last night — with 2,000 jobs under threat.
Municipal Mutual Insurance halted business and slapped a freeze on payouts.
Claimants include families of the 95 soccer fans killed in the 1989 Hillsborough disaster — some expecting cheques this week.
More than 120,000 disabled motorists are also insured with the firm.
They were told last night that their policies are still valid.
MMI's personal customers were promised a transfer to other insurers.
The company, which specialises in insuring local authorities, has been hit by £239 million losses after massive claims from town halls.
Phantom phatigue
EXHAUSTED Phantom of the Opera star Michael Crawford has cut short his US concert tour performing the music of Andrew Lloyd Webber.
Crawford, 50, was advised to take it easy by his doctor.
Cheers, tears for Kinnocks
DAVID BRADSHAW
JOHN Smith paid a moving tribute to Neil Kinnock — the man he replaced as Labour leader.
Mr Smith told delegates that the party owed an enormous debt to his predecessor's vision, courage and energy.
‘Neil had the vision to see what needed to be done to carry Labour forward, he had the courage to take on the task, and he had the determination to see it through,’ he added.
‘No one else could have achieved that.
Neil, the Labour movement owes you an incalculable debt of gratitude.’
Mr Smith went on to praise the contribution made by Glenys Kinnock.
Warmth
And she was in tears as he said: ‘All of us owe the same debt to Glenys because if there was a complete partnership, this is it.
‘We are all enriched by the warmth, the integrity, the personal effort and dedication you have both shown over the past eight years.’
The hall erupted into an ovation as Mr Smith added: ‘Neil and Glenys, we salute you today.’
DUMB-BELLS
RAIDERS dropped a massive clanger when they tried to steal a half-ton bronze bell for scrap.
They cut its supports, then saw it crash through the floor they were on…and two more…and hit the ground with such a clatter that security men half a mile away alerted police.
Three men were later charged with attempted theft at the historic Old Customs House in Hartlepool, Cleveland.
DROPPED: Clanger
SAMS GRIEF
THE man accused of kidnapping estate agent Stephanie Slater and murdering teenager Julie Dart was allowed out of jail to attend his stepfather's funeral.
Handcuffed Michael Sams, 51, spoke to his mother Iris after the cremation at Skipton, North Yorks.
He was then driven back to Winson Green jail, Birmingham, to await his trial.
His stepfather Sidney Walker, 82, died a week ago.
ORDEAL: Steph
REFUGEES SNUB FLAT
PETER KANE
A REFUGEE family who fled to Britain from war-torn Yugoslavia was at the centre of a housing storm yesterday.
They turned down the offer of free council flat in a city where 2,000 people are on a long-term homeless list.
The couple told stunned housing officials that the three-bedroom flat simply was not up to scratch for their needs.
The council had even offered to provide emergency furniture for the family, who leap-frogged to the top of the housing list after being reunited in Cambridge earlier this week.
But former pilot Dragan Cvejic, his wife Danka, both 36, and their five-year-old daughter Dijana complained that the accommodation was ‘dirty’.
A furious housing official said: ‘It was perfectly okay.
We were most put out by the way they turned it down.’
Last night Mr Cvejic said: ‘Before the war in Yugoslavia I had a well paid job and a nice flat.’
He added: ‘We still want to stay in Britain, but we want a decent place to live in.’
Cash cut
A SWORD used by poet Lord Byron while  rallying the Greeks against the Turks in the 1820s fetched £30,000 yesterday at a London auction.
Flipping great
DEAN Gould beat his own world record in Felixstowe, Suffolk yesterday — flipping 296 new 10p pences from his arm to his hand.
Good life of ‘bribed’ BR boss
A BRITISH Rail chief enjoyed a ‘champagne’ lifestyle for nearly 10 years after accepting bribes from a firm of suppliers, the Old Bailey heard yesterday.
Gifts lavished on David Currie, the former head of civil engineering, included foreign trips and expensive meals.
Norbert Jurasek and Michael Brooks, of Plasser Railway Machinery (GB) deny plotting to bribe BR staff.
The trial continues.
Son's suicide
ANGUISHED William McGovern, 12, hanged himself in Wishaw, Lanarkshire, four days after his parents' divorce.
No, senor!
We won't take your £ cheques
JOHN HUSBAND
BRITISH tourists are taking a double pounding with their holiday money, it was revealed yesterday.
They're already getting less foreign currency since the £ was floated.
Now banks and hotels in Spain, France, Italy, Greece and Belgium are refusing to cash sterling travellers' cheques because of the wild swings in the value of the £.
Desperate holiday-makers are forced to go to local bureaux de change, where they get very poor rates for sterling.
Advice
Even Barclays Bank has felt the pinch.
A spokesman said: ‘At a bankers’ conference in Brussels, the bankers could not get their hotels to cash their sterling travellers cheques.
‘Our advice is to cash cheques in larger banks in the nearest main town.’
As the £ dipped again on foreign exchange markets yesterday, the AA and travel agents advised Britons to buy travellers cheques in the local currency, take foreign money with them or use credit cards.
Mirror Money: Page 28
Soccer skipper ‘tackles a thug’
DAVID LEIGH
ENGLAND soccer star Geoff Thomas rushed to the rescue after a thug attacked a team-mate, it was claimed last night.
A pal said the Crystal Palace captain left a man bleeding from the face after a brawl outside a south London nightspot.
He said: ‘Geoff helped out a younger Palace squad member who was being hit.
‘He pulled the man off and punched him in self-defence.
‘He wasn't hurt and that's the end of it as far as he's concerned.’
Fists flew when Thomas, 27, and other Palace players were ambushed by a group of men who had earlier been thrown out of Joe Bananas revue bar in Croydon.
‘NO SENTENCE BIG ENOUGH’
POLICEWOMAN Pauline Tilley said afterwards on behalf of the grieving families: ‘If the judge had given Gooch 100 years it would probably not be enough, because you cannot bring the lives of five children back.’
Inspector Tilley, who has been counselling the parents, added: ‘There are no winners in this case, only losers.
‘Let's hope this is the last chapter for them — it has been hanging over them for more than a year — and they can now start to rebuild their lives.’
Judge Gabriel Hutton cited the families' grief and the ‘general public outrage’ when he passed sentence.
He said Gooch's car became a lethal weapon as he raced at near 90mph speed, ‘probably to show off.’
The judge told him: ‘There must be a severe penalty to punish you for the enormity of what you have done.
‘And also, one hopes, to deter other people from wicked driving of this sort.’
Vaccine go-ahead for tots
A NEW vaccine to protect babies and children from one of the most common forms of meningitis is available from today.
In the next year more than five million under four year-olds will have the chance to be immunised with the new haemophilius influenzae B vaccine.
It aims to wipe out the Hib form of the deadly disease which kills 65 children and leaves a further 150 permanently brain damaged every year.
The Government has launched a £1.25 million publicity campaign with TV and radio adverts.
Ex-union chief sits tight in cash row
TERRY PATTINSON
FORMER union chief Ken Gill yesterday refused to hand back £30,000 worth of perks from his £201,000 retirement package.
Marxist Mr Gill also plans to keep a £46,000 pension boost and won't hand over £14,000 for tax dues on his union car.
Details of Mr Gill's golden retirement deal amazed his ex-colleagues at the white-collar Manufacturing, Science and Finance union.
Bill
They were told he:
TOOK delivery of a £19,000 Ford Scorpio three weeks before he quit, saddling the union with a £14,000 bill for tax and national insurance.
WAS GIVEN a lump sum of £42,000.
PICKED UP another £30,000 for sabbaticals — study leave — that he did not take.
ARRANGED for £96,000 of union cash to be paid into his pension pot to give him inflation-proofing and a two-thirds pension on his final £55,000 salary.
Yesterday, the new leader of the MSF, Roger Lyons, said Mr Gill had been asked to hand back part of his nest egg to help out the union during the recession.
But Mr Gill said at his home in south London: ‘Everything I have had I am entitled to under my contract.
My contract is quite clear.’
JO'S THE PICK OF BUNCH
NO WONDER actress Joanna Lumley is all smiles.
She's just picked up this bloomin' nice bunch from her co-stars in a new London play.
The floral tribute stemmed from her first-night performance in the West End show Who Shall I Be Tomorrow?
Pals were clearly impressed by her portrayal of a fading actress — even though critics were lukewarm.
But Joanna, who starred in TV's New Avengers, looked happy enough as she openly displayed her scents of achievement!
Picture: NIKOS
TEARS ON JET OF SORROW
STEVE ATKINSON
HEARTBROKEN relatives and friends of the dead Britons left Heathrow for Katmandu yesterday.
Sobbing in each other 's arms, the 47-strong party retraced the route of their loved ones on a Pakistan International Airways jet.
They were warned it might fly over the crash site.
PIA general manager Farqirullah Jan wept unashamedly as he met the mourners.
He said: ‘Cabin staff will cater to their every need.’
Spoiler sport
FERRARI-driving Viscount Portman, of Hereford, paid £1,000 at auction for the rear spoiler off Formula One champ Nigel Mansell's car.
EDWARD'S BATH SENDS £17,000 DOWN PLUGHOLE
Taps left on at Palace
DON MACKAY
BATHTIME for Prince Edward ended in a £17,000 flood after the royal taps were left running.
Gallons of water cascaded over the side of the bath and through his private rooms at Buckingham Palace.
A team of valets had to mop up waterlogged carpets with sponges and buckets.
It was unclear last night who was to blame for the deluge — the 28-year-old prince himself or a forgetful aide.
The Palace dismissed suggestions that the butler did it.
‘Prince Edward does not have a butler,’ was the reply.
A spokesman denied that any structural damage was caused to the royal rooms.
‘But obviously things had to be dried out as one would expect,’ he added.
FLOOD: Edward
BBC pays for stars' shower
THE hard-up Beeb has splashed out about £14,000 — so Anne Diamond can spend a penny in comfort.
New loo, shower and dressing room facilities have been installed at the Pebble Mill studios in Birmingham.
Anne and former TV-am partner Nick Owen will host a daily show from there next month.
A BBC spokesman insisted the pair had not asked for the changes and promised: ‘They'll be available for anyone needing them.’
Wife dies in car horror
A WIFE died last night when she was crushed under a car with her husband at the wheel.
Margery Clark, 54, was checking the rear lights as the car surged backwards at Farnborough, Kent.
BT's £3m row with council
A HARD-UP council last night attacked Telecom bosses for trebling a bill to £3 MILLION.
Trouble started when Southwark Council decided to repair the Old Kent Road.
Phone cables had to be moved and the council agreed to pay.
BT's first estimate was £922,000.
It went up to £1.3 million when tunnelling had to be done.
But a council report claims BT then jacked up the cost to £3 million and refused to finish the job unless they were paid.
But BT denied threatening to stop work and blamed the extra costs on the council.
TV ads a real turn-off
ALEC LOM
VIEWERS scramble for their TV's remote control zapper when the adverts loom, a new survey reveals.
It claims ITV's audiences fall by an average of 18 per cent at the end of shows.
‘At peak times, that adds up to millions of viewers,’ said a survey spokesman.
The study — by media consultants Billets — said the worst hit are ads between soccer, dull sitcoms and documentaries.
Jerry Judge, boss of ad agency Young and Rubicam, said: ‘It means we have to make adverts more interesting’.
Toddler alarm No 2 in burn-out
IAN CAMERON
A SECOND toddler could have died because of a burning baby alarm, it was claimed yesterday.
Two-year-old Bethany Hudson's alarm started to smoulder and smoke as she lay in her cot.
Dad Mark managed to carry her to safety before the alarm burst into flames.
Mark, of Southport, Lancs, said he found wires in the flex had short-circuited and burnt out.
The alarm was the Safe and Sound model.
Hospital
Yesterday the Mirror revealed that a similar model ‘spontaneously ignited,’ setting fire to a toddler's carpet.
Charles Oram, three, of Blackmill, South Wales, was taken to hospital after inhaling fumes.
Mid Glamorgan consumer watchdog John Frow said: ‘Parents should check their alarms.
It seems problems develop with the flex.’
Importers Adam Leisure, of Harrogate, are investigating.
Nude fans' pool romp
THREE vodka-swigging Scots jumped naked into a pool — watched by horrified diners in a gourmet restaurant.
Belgians said they were beaten up when 25 Glasgow Rangers fans gatecrashed a leisure centre near Ostend during a motorway coach stop.
DIRTY DEN'S FOUL RECORD ON THE FIELD
GORDON HAY
AN astonishing number of ‘early baths’ failed to stop Dennis being dubbed the Dirty Den of soccer.
His offences included repeated fouls, fighting, swearing and spitting at officials or opponents.
Among the players he clashed with were Martin O'Neill, Alan Ball, John Fashanu, Ian Crook and Ossie Ardiles.
Dennis was booked 70 times — and sent off on at least 11 occasions.
He faced six charges of bringing the game into disrepute.
Clubs punished him for taking unauthorised time off, missing training and breaking curfew.
Early in 1990 he BOASTED of playing 10 consecutive games without being sent off.
In a 13-year career he was on the books of Crystal Palace, QPR, Southampton, and Birmingham City.
Now, at the age of 31, he seems unwanted…
DISREPUTE: Dennis
Car has free hole in roof
MOTORIST Janet Glover put her new £10,000 Toyota Corolla in for its first service — and got it back with an unwanted extra.
A sunroof.
Blundering mechanics had got it mixed up with an identical model parked next to it in the workshop.
Janet, of Denmead, Hants, said yesterday: ‘It was lovely and streamlined before — now it looks awful.
The sunroof looks cheap and nasty.
The local firm, Hampshire Car Sales, offered a free car alarm and servicing in compensation.
But Janet is so angry she rejected the offer and is seeking a cash settlement.
Bouncing back
A DAMBUSTERS bouncing bomb tested near Portland, Dorset, in World War Two was recovered from the seabed yesterday.
1.4 million more of us
THE population of England and Wales has increased by nearly 1.4 million since the last count in 1981.
Final census figures for 1991, published yesterday, showed 49,890,273 people in the two countries.
There are 47,055,200 residents in England and 2,835,073 in Wales.
Fireman killed
FIREMAN Kevin Power, 35, died when his engine overturned as he sped to an emergency call in White City, West London, yesterday.
Millions?
That's rich says Barbara
RONALD RICKETTS
DAME Barbara Cartland yesterday slammed claims that she is worth £40 million as ‘pure romance…complete fiction.’
She insisted: ‘I wish to God it was true, but I am not even worth £1 million.
‘I am like everybody else — hard up.
I am overdrawn on most of my accounts.’
Dame Barbara, 91, hit out at a survey which labelled her Britain's 34th richest woman.
Speaking at her mansion near Hatfield, Herts, she dismissed the survey as ‘bloody lies’.
HARD UP: Dame Barbara
ANGEL FACE BOY AGED 11 NICKED FOR THE 69th TIME
GORDON HUGHES
A SCHOOLBOY hooked on vice and crime has been arrested — for the 69th time.
The 11-year-old tearaway, who has netted £150,000 in the past two years, was nicked after a pub raid.
He had stolen £1,200 and, when asked why he only had £700 left, said: ‘I gave the rest to a prostitute for sex.’
A detective said yesterday: ‘We checked it out and it's true.’
Last night the angel-faced hoodlum — who absconded from care scores of times — was in a Leeds police cell.
Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley has now given council chiefs permission for him to be held in a secure unit.
The boy was first arrested three weeks after he was 10 — the age of criminal responsibility.
His record includes robbery and burglary and he once gave £1,000 to a drug dealer for heroin.
The detective added: ‘To look at him butter wouldn't melt in his mouth.’
The boy — dubbed Houdini — had escaped from a police cell last week.
His father, of Gipton, Leeds, said his son had amassed a fortune.
He added: ‘He's like Robin Hood — he's given thousands to people in trouble.’
Play it again, Radio 1
THE DJs have changed, and so has fashion.
But Radio 1 replayed one golden oldie tradition on its 25th birthday yesterday.
The current crop of presenters lined up on the steps of the same church outside Broadcasting House where the original team — Terry Wogan, Bob Holness, Jimmy Young and all — had posed exactly a quarter of a century before.
Only one of them was still there yesterday…the indestructible John Peel, 53.
And in his identical spot on the front right.
Recalling that swinging ‘67 start, the dry Scouser said: ‘I expected to be chucked out by the BBC any moment then.’
But even John's changed.
He was smiling.
THE BIRTHDAY ALBUM CLASS OF ‘92: Lining up in London yesterday were 1, Bob Harris.
2, Johnny Beerling (Radio 1 Controller).
3.
Anne Nightingale.
4.
Alan Freeman.
5.
Dianne Oxberry. 6.
Pete Tong.
7, Nicky Campbell.
8, Neale James.
9, Paul Gambaccini. 10, Simon Mayo.
11, Alan Robb. 12, Steve Wright.
13, Dave Lee Travis.
14, Jakki Brambles. 15, Lynn Parsons.
16, Gary Davies.
17, Man Ezeke. 18, Sybil Ruscoe. 19, Mark Goodier.
20, Adrian Juste. 21, Rod McKenzie. 22, Tommy Vance.
23, Nicky Horne.
24, Bruno Brookes.
25, John Peel.
BLAST FROM THE PAST: Radio 1's first crop of DJs in 1967
Missing link
MAYOR Ray Weaver's 200-year-old gold chain of office, worth £25,000, was stolen from his car during a civic visit to France from Weymouth.
Cut price bonanza at Asda
SHOPPERS cashed in when a power cut shut down a supermarket's electronic tills.
As they queued to pay, each of them was told: ‘We can't add up your bill, so make us an offer!’
Checkout girls then negotiated prices for trolleyloads of goods — and never overcharged.
Eric Sortwell, manager of the Asda superstore at Bedminster, Bristol, said yesterday: ‘We had to underestimate each bill by about 50 per cent.’
Shopper Richard Snow, 37, of Clifton, said: ‘Assistants noted expensive items like bottles of booze and then just guessed on the rest.
‘I was asked ‘How about a tenner?’ for over £30-worth.’
Rat race
THE vehicle registration 1 RAT is expected to fetch over £7,000 at an auction in Birmingham later this month.
BLOW ME DOWN I'M STILL ALIVE
Blast strips Alan, 66, to his underpants
GORDON HUGHES
PENSIONER Alan Upton was hurled 50ft into the garden when a huge explosion demolished his home.
But amazingly, 17-stone Alan escaped with a few small cuts and bruises — and a little lost dignity.
Neighbours found Alan, 66, struggling to his feet dressed only in his boxer shorts.
The blast — triggered when Alan lit his gas oven — had ripped off his clothes.
Most of his red-brick semi lay in pieces in the garden around him.
The collapsed roof tumbled on to the drive and wrecked his car.
And the semi next door in Melford Drive, Prenton, Birkenhead, was shifted two feet.
‘It was one hell of a bang,’ an ambulanceman said yesterday.
‘And he is one hell of a lucky man.’
Police evacuated nearby homes while British Gas officials investigated.
Dazed
Neighbour Kathy Burn said: ‘We heard a bang and thought someone was doing some DIY work.
‘When I looked out, the house was just collapsing slowly like a pack of cards.’
A Mersey Ambulance spokesman said: ‘When we arrived, Mr Upton was dazed but on his feet.
‘No one could believe he got out of that.
The place was demolished.
‘How he was thrown clear with his clothes blown off and still survived is a miracle.’
Retired bus driver Alan, who lives alone, was ‘quite comfortable’ in hospital last night.
HE WENT THATAWAY: The arrow marks Alan's astonishing 50ft ‘flight’ from kitchen to garden.
He escaped with bruises
Balloon dancers popped!
SAUCY bosses livened up a party by dancing naked with only balloons to hide their embarrassment.
But the Christmas party piece by area managers Dave O'Bryne and Allan Dwan fell flat with their employers.
Electrical giants Dixons sacked them for ‘gross misconduct’.
The pair danced with party hats in their pants then returned with two balloons each.
A woman armed with a fork joined in the fun.
Dave, 30, of Bolton and Allan, 37, of Liverpool say no-one had complained and are claiming unfair dismissal.
Dave said: ‘It's hypocritical of Dixons to sack us.
The balloon dance was introduced by Chris Tarrant on TV.
Now he does voice-overs for the company's adverts.’
PARKING MAD!
‘Glamorous’ multi-storey wins award
TOM MERRIN
A TOP architectural award has gone to a town CAR PARK.
To anyone else, the incredibly exciting three-level building is, er…well, a place where you park your car.
But to the Royal Institute for British Architects the grandly named Avenue de Chartres car park in Chichester, West Sussex, is an object of beauty.
Judges loved its deeply inspiring red and grey bricks.
They adored its yellow, blue and red internal pillars.
And they drooled over its yellow and blue ironwork.
It has, they said, ‘made valuable and acceptable a building type that is usually considered unglamorous.’
RIBA president Richard MacCormac was even more lavish in his praise.
He said: ‘If I were to single out any one project as a model of its kind, it is the car park in Chichester.’
The car park — so named because Chichester is twinned with Chartres in France — is included among 29 regional winners which go forward for national awards later this year.
Crazed
And just look at some of the other winners — stunners every one.
There's Stansted Airport in Essex, whose massive tubular supports look like the work of a crazed plumber.
Then there's ITN's fascinating headquarters in London's Grays Inn Road — did you ever realise that glass could be that interesting?
Other winners guaranteed to have you reeling in admiration are Bandley Hill play centre at Stevenage, Herts, and Milton Keynes magistrates' court.
Just think what the losers are like.
WINNER: ITN's inspiring London headquarters
KNOCKOUT: The judges loved Stansted Airport
WHAT A BEAUTY!
Just feast your eyes on Chichester's winning municipal car park — admire its perfect pillars, drool over those gorgeous railings…
YOUR CAR'S ON ROOF
BILL DANIELS
FACTORY workers fed-up with secretary Carolyn Bullock's dodgy parking hoisted her car on to the firm's roof with a crane.
For years they suffered in silence while barriers were pranged, concrete bollards damaged and other cars blocked in as the 23-year-old careered around looking for a space in the car park.
While her boss took the unsuspecting Carolyn out to lunch, workers hoisted her H-reg Volkswagen Polo 20ft into the air with a borrowed crane and parked it neatly on the roof.
‘It gave her quite a shock,’ said Bob Murray, managing director of the International Freight firm in Small Heath, Birmingham, where Carolyn has worked for three years.
‘She really has been a menace,’ Bob added.
‘She is known as the Evel Knievel of parking.
She terrifies everyone.’
Carolyn, who got her Polo back in time to drive home, is now on honeymoon in Barbados.
‘We are hoping when she returns her parking will have improved, but we are not over-optimistic,’ said Bob.
Art raid gang net millions
THIEVES escaped with three old masters and antique clocks worth millions in a daring raid on a mansion.
They drove a lorry across farm fields and loaded it up from the home of the Marquess of Cholmondeley yesterday.
The marquess, Britain's 61st richest man, inherited £118million — much of it works of art at his home near Fakenham, Norfolk.
He sold a Holbein masterpiece earlier this year for £10million to pay for the upkeep of his estate.
Bookies caught
ANGLER John Manning — a 500-1 outsider in a Gloucester fishing contest — bet a tenner on himself each-way and landed £6,020.
MUGGER KILLS BIRD MAN, 83
DON MACKAY
A FRAIL pensioner died of shock after he was mugged as he fed the pigeons near his home.
At the scene of the attack police found a plastic bag holding the pint of milk and four sausages he had bought for his tea — and some of the breadcrumbs he scattered to the birds each day.
William Horsley, 83, was punched and kicked by the thug who snatched the few pounds he had on him.
But it was trauma that killed the ex-RAF mechanic, Detective Supt Mickey Banks said yesterday.
Heart
The 5ft 6ins victim had a weak heart and ‘a toddler could have robbed him’— but his death was still a case of murder, the officer added.
Mr Horsley, who became a boilerman after helping to keep planes flying in the Battle of Britain, lived alone.
His pastimes were picture framing, playing his violin — and befriending the birds outside his flat in Realston Street, New Cross, East London.
The mugger was black, aged 18-25, of medium height and wearing dark blue jeans.
Two cyclists chased him, but he ducked in and out of blocks of flats and vanished.
One in six residents of the New Cross estate have been attacked in the past two years, and a quarter have been hit by break-ins, a recent council survey showed.
SAS FURY AS PALACE SECURITY IS BLOWN
Hunt for mole who revealed plans of the Royal bedrooms
New book ‘opens door to bombers’
JAMES WHITAKER /ALASTAIR McQUEEN
SECURITY chiefs and the SAS last night lashed a new book they described as a bomber's guide to Buckingham Palace.
The book includes precise plans pinpointing the bedrooms of the Queen, Prince Philip, Prince Andrew and Prince Edward.
It also details the operations of the undercover police station at the Palace.
Author Brian Hoey, a former BBC Court correspondent, gives an insight into how royals like Charles and Di are tracked on journeys in bugged cars.
And he tells how the SAS photograph the layout of every room in royal residences to be prepared for any kidnap or siege drama.
Last night — as a hunt was launched for the mole who blew the family's most guarded secrets — a senior Royal Protection officer said:
‘We can't think of anything more stupid than this man publishing detailed maps in this book.
‘These diagrams are an intruder's dream guide to the Palace.
It is a highly irresponsible action which is putting our royal family at risk.’
A former commander of the SAS — which would be thrust into the front line in the event of a terrorist attack — said: ‘Not only has he put the security of our royal family at risk, he has jeopardised the lives of Special Air Service regiment troops.’
Stink
The book, All The Queen's Men, is freely available in shops.
It was written with the help of Buckingham Palace employees.
A spokesman for the Queen last night denied that anyone inside the Palace had supplied details of the bedrooms.
But a senior member of the royal household told the Mirror that any inaccuracies in the diagrams were tiny.
He added: ‘There is a hell of a stink going on.’
Hoey claims the SAS watch on the royals is so rigorous that Di must alert them every time she wants to move a piece of furniture or a even a painting at Highgrove or Kensington Palace.
An Army photographer then moves in to take a picture of the new room layout.
SECRETS: Now everyone can know the layout of rooms in Buckingham Palace
TRACKED: Princess Diana
BUGGED CARS: Charles
DI was rapped by a top German politician last night for handing back her leased Mercedes sports car.
Otto Lambsdorff, leader of the German Free Democrats, said it was a ‘nonsense’ gesture which over-protected British interests
AAARGH!
Now the Tories are even talking about putting up taxes
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL /SHEREE DODD
TORY Ministers and MPs were openly talking about the unthinkable last night as Britain's economic crisis deepened…
TAX INCREASES.
The speculation was fuelled by Premier John Major who refused to rule them out.
He said: ‘Nobody can determine what might happen.’
And he added that it would be ‘silly’ to forecast ‘either tax reductions or increases’.
The pound plunged to a record low against the mark yesterday in the wake of a row over a document revealing how Germany tried to prop sterling.
Hopes of another interest rate cut were dashed.
Ministers now fear Chancellor Norman Lamont — or his successor if he is forced to quit — will have to produce an emergency Budget.
Tax rises would be even more humiliating for the Government than devaluation of the pound.
And they could bring down Mr Major as well as Mr Lamont.
For it would effectively mean that Britain had gone bust.
Cash reserves have been savaged by massive rises in social security benefits because of ever-growing dole queues and interest repayments on debt.
Mr Lamont's squandering of £1 billion in his vain bid to prop up the pound has not helped.
Troubled Mr Major yesterday headed for a showdown with Euro-rebels by announcing he would put the Maastricht Treaty before Parliament around Christmas.
But he admitted there would be no swift return to the Exchange Rate Mechanism which Britain had to quit on Black Wednesday.
The pound slumped to 2.47 against the mark at one point yesterday as the row with Germany over the leaked Bundesbank document rumbled.
German Ambassador Herman von Richtofen — a nephew of the German First World War air hero the Red Baron — was called to the Foreign Office for a ‘carpeting’.
The document has caused a political storm and Labour has called for a statement from Mr Major.
It revealed that the Bundesbank spent £17 billion trying to prop up the Italian lira and the pound — most of the cash spent in a bid to save sterling.
And this blew away Mr Lamont's excuse that the Germans were to blame for the pound crashing.
Markets were also unnerved by a call from the Financial Times for Mr Lamont to resign.
Andy Horne of Barclays Bank said: ‘This slating has done sterling no good at all.
‘The overseas markets believe the FT is the voice of the Government.’
The Chancellor — clearly just clinging to his job — told Ministers at a Cabinet meeting yesterday that they must slash millions off their budgets.
He was still smiling when he left and asked if he was quitting, he replied: ‘Of course I'm not.’
Lamontable war — See Page 6 
IN TROUBLE: Major
ROW: von Richtofen
LABOUR AT BLACKPOOL
FIXED!
MAJOR'S CHEAP MORTGAGE DEAL
‘He has so little faith in his own policies’
DAVID BRADSHAW
TROUBLED John Major was accused yesterday of having ‘little confidence’ in keeping down interest rates — because he's taken out a cheap FIXED mortgage.
Labour's Bryan Gould claimed the Premier struck the deal on his £220,000 detached home this summer in case loan rates shot up.
And last night Downing Street refused to deny Mr Major had a fixed 9.85 per cent mortgage with TSB — the bank that likes to say Yes.
Mr Gould told the Labour Party Conference: ‘We have a Prime Minister who lives in a sort of Walter Mitty land.
‘He was still prepared enough to face reality to reorganise his own mortgage so he got a fixed interest rate for the next three years.
‘So much for his confidence in his own Government's economic policies.’
Mr Major bought his four-bedroom home in Great Stukeley, Cambridgeshire, for £150,000 nearly 10 years ago.
The TSB deal was struck between May and August.
Since the Tory election win in April, Mr Major promised interest rates would come down.
Yet, in the sterling crisis, he put them up to 15 per cent for the day.
Home loans now stand at around 10 per cent.
But experts predict interest rates will have to jump to protect the pound.
Quit
Mr Gould — who this week quit the Shadow Cabinet and was voted off the NEC after defying the party's Euro line — was applauded by his Blackpool audience.
A WAR on soaring crime was demanded by Shadow Home Secretary Tony Blair.
He called for more bobbies on the beat, an end to court delays and reform of prisons.
Mr Blair said that thefts and violence were destroying people's lives —‘our people, not Tory ministers in their chauffeur-driven cars and well-protected houses.’
A £9 BILLION cut in Britain's £24 billion defence spending was urged yesterday.
Debra Gold said the cash could fund rises in pensions and child benefits.
But Defence spokesman David Clark warned peace dividends could not ‘happen overnight’.
The Left called for the scrapping of our nuclear deterrent.
BILLIONS of pounds held by town halls must be freed to provide housing, said Labour.
Environment spokesman Jack Straw said £5 billion was lying idle while thousands were forced to sleep on the streets.
He said: ‘Every billion could build 16,130 homes or buy 18,000 empty properties for the homeless.’
UNIONS HIT VOTE PLANS
PLANS to introduce a ‘one member, one vote’ system in key Labour elections were torpedoed yesterday — by the trade unions' block vote.
Unions threw their weight behind a call to involve them ‘at every stage’ in the selection of party candidates.
Only 24 hours earlier conference delegates voted to reduce the unions' voting strength.
MEET MIKE…
JUST ANOTHER OF MAJOR'S DAMNED STATISTICS
With words that should shame the Prime Minister, one man's humiliation on facing the sack
‘I may never work again'
I thought my future was here.
I've worked hard, served an apprenticeship
…now I am in the wrong, and it's not my fault.
STEPHEN WHITE
THE grim daily tally of redundancies grinds on — and people's individual tragedies get submerged.
This is the story of one such statistic.
His name is Mike Knowles.
This statistic served a five-year apprenticeship, this statistic worked hard.
At the age of 21 — with real fears that he may never work again — Mike is a statistic that should shame John Major.
Mike was called into the manager's office at Vickers shipbuilding division VSEL at Barrow in August and told: ‘There's no job for you.’
Yesterday as 390 of his old workmates were thrown on to the dole with him, Mike said: ‘It's like somebody kicked you in the guts.
You always think it's not going to happen to me, I'll be all right— but then you get handed the letter.
It has got me really depressed.
I don't mind admitting that.
It's not just this town that is going down the drain, it is the country.
Somebody has to do something.
I am trying to find work but there is just nothing at all.
Every time I have been to the Jobcentre it's been a waste of time.
Future
I was born and brought up in this town and I thought and hoped my future was here.
I have done everything right.
I served an apprenticeship, worked hard and now I am in the wrong and it is not my fault.
I will take anything, any sort of work I can do.’
The casual manner of his dismissal still rankles.
Mike said: ‘I wasn't told in the nicest of manners.
I went into work and was told to see the manager.
‘He just said ‘I guess you know what this is about.’
‘He just told me ‘You haven't got a job and that's it.’
‘Last week they fired off another 250 lads just after they had finished their apprenticeship.
‘They served all their time and then there was just no future for them.
‘It's just as bad for the men still working in there.
It is difficult to have pride when there is no future.’
Yesterday just 10 jobs were advertised in Barrow Jobcentre's window.
Mike's plans for the future are on hold.
His girlfriend Eleanor lives with their 18-month-old son Christopher at her parents' home.
He lives with his.
A home together is a dream that shattered when his job disappeared.
Mike's £160 a week wage has now dropped to just £41 a week on the dole.
In the VSEL yard a brass bell hangs in a museum of shipbuilding, all that remains of the original HMS Vanguard which was sunk in Scapa Flow.
At the beginning of March the company rolled out the new Vanguard — a Trident submarine for the Royal Navy.
Expensive
A brass band belted out songs from West End shows as the Princess of Wales christened the nuclear sub surrounded by smiling company bosses.
Yesterday there were no bands.
Mike added: ‘There's hardly anything to do — and when there is it's too expensive.
‘They have built a lovely new leisure centre but I can't afford that.
I used to enjoy going out.
I had earned my money by working hard.
‘Playing pool is about the most exciting thing I do now.’
OLD DAYS: Shipbuilding at Barrow
PREMIER: John Major
SHATTERED: Mike's dream of a home for himself, his girlfriend and son has disappeared.
‘Nobody thinks of the future’ Picture: ANDREW STENNING
Mum's grub tastes best!
BILL AKASS
ONE in four British husbands find their wives' cooking ‘barely edible’.
But mum still knows the best way to a man's heart, according to a new survey.
Almost two out of three men prefer their mother's grub to their partner's.
Another quarter describe the wife's culinary skills as only ‘average’.
And scarcely half believe she's any good in the kitchen.
More and more husbands, desperate for a decent meal, are donning aprons themselves.
Disgusting
Thirty-five per cent of London men claim they cook most evening meals.
Most Northerners, however, still believe it is the wife's chore.
Only 17 per cent admit to cooking.
And some wouldn't dream of helping out, however disgusting their loved ones' dishes.
A staggering 42 per cent of men under 45 claimed they NEVER cook.
Five hundred men from London, Birmingham, Manchester, Bristol and Plymouth, were polled in the survey by the BBC's Good Food Cooking and Kitchen show.
‘Sparks’ is trapped under floor for 6 hours
A WORKMAN was trapped under floorboards for six hours — after carpet fitters nailed him in.
Electrician Mike Gresty, 32, was running cables through a hotel when the other workers arrived.
They pinned down the boards and laid new felt and carpet — unaware Mike was underneath.
‘I was entombed,’ he said yesterday.
‘I spent ages crawling around the hotel's foundations and couldn't find a way out.
‘I had my torch but then the batteries went and I was in darkness.
Knocking ‘I kept knocking on the boards but no one took any notice.’
Eventually another worker heard Mike's muffled shouts for help at the Pleasant Hotel, Blackpool.
Mike, who lives nearby, crawled under the floor to rig up a supply to a glass-washing machine.
Carpet company boss Richard Atherton said: ‘I have apologised but it wasn't really our fault.
‘We were assured that the area was ready for carpeting.’
Mike's boss, Max Smith, 53, said: ‘Even though he was trapped he finished the job.’
Mum shoots TV row son
A WOMAN shot her 12-year-old son in the stomach as they argued over their TV remote control.
Yvonne Lindsey, 39, of St Louis, Missouri — who has been charged with assault — grabbed a gun when her son kept switching channels.
Mark of cane
NEW penalties to crack down on adultery in Malaysia include…six strokes of the cane.
EEE ORVILLE!
ARE YOU ON ECSTASY?
Fury over ‘drug record’
SYDNEY YOUNG
CHILDREN'S favourite Orville the Duck is appearing at rave parties — plugging a song claimed to be about the killer drug Ecstasy.
Ventriloquist Keith Harris and his puppet star at the parties where a new version of Orville's ten-year-old song, I Wish I Could Fly, is a hit with acid house ravers.
On the controversial remix, by the group DWA, ‘Orville’ chants ‘I wish I could fly’and repeats the letter E — slang for Ecstasy.
Then he says ‘E-E look at me, I'm flying’ before a voice urges ‘Come on, come on.’
MPs and doctors want the song banned.
But yesterday 45-year-old Keith insisted: ‘I know some people are going to say it's all to do with Ecstasy but, honestly, it's not.
‘I'm not promoting using drugs — I just go out there and waggle my duck.’
Mental health chief Mike Day, who is treating six Ecstasy ravers at Scunthorpe hospital, is outraged.
He said: ‘At best, this song is sick.
At worst, it's potentially lethal.
There have been terrible incidents when people who have taken LSD thought they could fly.
‘Ecstasy has similar effects, and this song could easily sink into a youngster's subconscious.’
Distributors Reverb Records said: ‘Keith isn't  encouraging kids to take drugs.
It's just fun.
‘If anything, it's Orville's fault.
The duck is a bad influence on Keith — it should be in the Betty Ford clinic.’
PLUG: Orville
HIT: Keith Harris
DUCHESS OF WINDSOR JEWELS IN £6m RAID
Britain's biggest haul
DAVID LEIGH
THIEVES have escaped with up to £6 MILLION of jewellery in Britain's biggest gems raid, it was revealed last night.
The record haul included treasures once owned by the Duchess of Windsor.
Dealers have been alerted to look out for 250 items snatched from an exclusive house in London's Belgravia.
Many of the glittering pieces are reported to be worth more for their design than the gems they contain.
They include the Duchess of Windsor's inscribed gold Cartier bracelet and a diamond and  turquoise turtle brooch that once belonged to the late American artist Andy Warhol.
‘Many of the items are one-offs,’ said a spokesman for the Art Loss Register, which alerts dealers to stolen works.
There are fears that the raiders might break up some of the  unmistakable jewellery rather than risk trying to sell it.
Smuggled
The gems are thought to belong to a female member of an Arab royal family.
It is believed the haul has already been smuggled out of the country.
The jewellery was hand-picked from several rooms.
But there were said to be no signs of a break-in.
Many far less valuable items were left untouched in the raid — which means it must have been a ‘professional job,’ say police.
Last night Scotland Yard would only confirm that a quantity of jewellery was stolen.
‘We are unable to discuss the matter further at the loser's request,’ said a spokeswoman.
TREASURES: The Duchess
‘Five kids died because of him…
I hope he rots in hell’
HORROR CRASH CULPRIT WHO DROVE WHILE BANNED IS JAILED FOR FIVE YEARS
‘IT'S HEARTBREAKING’
SYDNEY YOUNG
A BANNED driver who mowed down and killed five youngsters in a high-speed chase was jailed for a maximum of five years yesterday.
And a grieving father whose son was killed by the ‘wicked’ driving of ex-Army boxer Shaun Gooch said: ‘Five children died because of him.
‘Now I find out he should never have been on the road.
I hope he rots in hell.’
Martin Lilley, 33, whose seven-year-old son Ian was the youngest of the five victims, added: ‘I just hope that he — like us and anyone who loved and knew these children — has nightmares.
‘I'm so angry our little boy is dead because someone wanted to drive fast.’
Gooch would have faced a maximum 10-year jail sentence if he had been charged with causing death by dangerous driving — a new offence introduced in April.
Control
But the horror crash happened in September last year and he was charged with causing death by reckless driving, which carries a maximum of five years' jail.
Gooch, a 25-year-old bricklayer, had three weeks of a one-year ban left to run when he lost control of his Ford Escort and careered into the group of children.
Little Ian Lilley, Sheree Lear, eight, and Paula Barnes, 16, died in the accident at Acres Way, Swindon, Wilts.
Belinda Brown — who celebrated her 19th birthday with her twin sister Jackie on the day of the crash — and her new boyfriend Paul Carr, 17, were also killed.
Belinda's mother Mrs Jane Brown, 45, said: ‘I have so much hate for that man.
‘I want him dead, all the families do.’
Mrs Brown wept as she recalled the moment of Belinda's death.
‘I was in such a daze, there were so many bodies just lying there,’ she said.
‘I can't get that picture out of my mind.
‘I just sat and told Lindy I loved her.
I saw a little tear in her eye.
‘She lifted her arms and as she put them down she squeezed her sister Jackie's hand and that was it.’
Gloucester Crown Court was told Gooch drove at over 80mph through the residential area as he tried to overtake a car driven by Anthony Gallagher.
His Escort clipped the pavement and somersaulted onto the verge where the children sat on a bench.
Racing
Gallagher, 22, a machine operator, of Pinehurst, Swindon, was fined £300 for careless driving.
Judge Gabriel Hutton told Gallagher he accepted that he had not been racing.
Gooch, of Penhill, Swindon, had denied causing the five deaths by reckless driving.
He was banned from driving for 10 years and was also jailed for an additional six months for driving while disqualified.
KILLED: Ian Lilley, 7
KILLED: Sheree Lear, 8
KILLED: Paula Barnes, 16
KILLED: Belinda Brown, 19
KILLED: Paul Carr, 17
GUILTY: Shaun Gooch before his jail sentence
DEATH SPOT: The road where the children died is strewn with flowers
Wok's all this…
AN ornithologist sent off £20 for a ‘parabolic microphone kit’ to record his favourite birdsongs from 250 yards — and got back a WOK used for stir-frying.
He told consumer watchdogs at Havering, Essex, and the Brighton-based mail order firm was fined £200 under the Trade Descriptions Act.
Beg pardon
BEGGING is a form of free speech and should be allowed on New York's streets, a federal judge ruled yesterday.
ONE MORE DANCE COULD MAKE YOU BLIND
Gun pellet stuck next to ballerina's eye
JIM OLDFIELD
A STAR ballerina hit in the face by an airgun pellet has been told: Dance one more pirouette and it could blind you.
Fifteen-year-old Nicola Child was blasted with an air rifle in a cruel prank.
The pellet entered her nose, bounced from a bone and ended less than a millimetre from the optic nerve of her right eye.
Now doctors who dare not move the slug have warned Nicola that one spin on her feet could dislodge it and instantly blind her.
Even if she does dance again Nicola, who has lost part of her right eye's sight, will have to relearn how to pirouette to overcome her disability.
Yesterday the heartbroken teenager, who was on the verge of trials with the Royal Ballet, said: ‘In just one second, my life has been wrecked.
Walk ‘I've worked since I was five to be a top ballerina.
It is all I live for.
‘While other children were out playing I was practising up to 30 hours a week after school.
‘I don't know what I'll do if it's all gone.’
Nicola, of Wakefield, West Yorks, was out on a walk when she was shot.
She said: ‘It felt like someone had stabbed ice in my face, then my right eye went black.
‘The sight came back.
But I can still only see through half my eye.
‘Doctors say that if enough skin grows round the pellet, it might be held in place.
But no one knows when or if that will happen.’
Banned
Mum Sue, 43, said: ‘A moment's stupidity has wrecked our lives.
Airguns should be banned from public places.’
And Nicola's ballet teacher, Dorothy Stevens, added: ‘This is a tragedy.
Nicola is such a brilliant student I'd asked the Royal Ballet to give her an audition.’
A 17-year-old youth has been accused of assault.
TALENT: Nicola was already a ballet star at ten
SO SAD: Nicola has hung up her dancing shoes
Perot back in race for president
BILLIONAIRE Ross Perot last night threw himself back into the race to become US President.
Perot, 62, quit as an Independent candidate in July leaving the battle to President George Bush and governor Bill Clinton.
But with only 34 days to the election, he said on TV: ‘I made a mistake.
People want a new political system.’
Perot is bound to grab votes from Bush who is already 13 points behind Clinton.
He named Vietnam war admiral James Stockdale as his running mate.
How I'm going to save ELDORADO
EXCLUSIVE On the woman with toughest job on TV
Keep watching — soon you'll really like it
ALEC LOM
ELDORADO, the BBC supersoap launched in a blaze of glory only to fizzle like a damp squib, CAN be saved.
And one woman reckons she knows how.
Verity Lambert, Britain's top independent producer, has got the job, and her rescue act is already in full swing.
Its cornerstone —‘some very exciting storylines,’ she says, ‘much more emotional than before’.
‘We are not talking about births,’ Verity, veteran of TV hits ranging from Dr Who to Minder reveals from the luxury London office she shares with her Great Dane, Arthur Daley.
‘But, well, I suppose there's a possible marriage coming up.
‘There's a pregnancy too.
I hope viewers will want to know how the relationships turn out.’
More she is not prepared to reveal.
‘We have a rule not to disclose storylines,’ she explains.
‘So I'll get clobbered if people read suddenly in the Daily Mirror that I've been giving some away.’
Then, of course, there's the cast.
‘There were too many characters and it was difficult to develop stories for them all,’ Verity admits.
So they've been slimmed down.
AS VIEWING figures slumped — they're now 6.56 million against Coronation Street's 15 million — six were quickly axed.
Soon to vanish are German toyboy Dieter Schultz, played by Kai Maurer; beach bar brothers Allan and Gavin Hindle (Jon Morrey and Darren Newton); restaurant owner Bunny (Roger Walker); Irish handyman Snowy (Patch Connolly); and French teenager Arnaud Leduc (Mikael Philippe).
Kathy Pitkin, who was child bride Fizz, has already left the screen.
She'll be playing panto this Christmas instead.
‘There are no plans for any more to go,’ Verity says.
But in turning around Eldorado's fortunes, she knows she faces one of the toughest challenges of her 30-year career.
To help her in her task, she has been joined by Corinne Hollingworth, a former producer of EastEnders.
Corinne is working closely with the scriptwriting team and is ‘full of good ideas and energy’.
Poor sound quality, and difficulty in telling what characters were saying, also came under fire.
So that is being put right, too.
Sally Grace, a dialogue coach who has taught at RADA, has been sent down to Eldorado's £2 million set in southern Spain to help improve the actors' diction.
‘Confidence will come naturally when people get to know their characters,’ Verity says.
To help this, she has insisted they be given more time to rehearse.
BBC chiefs had high hopes for the series as a ratings winner.
The thrice-weekly sun, sex and sangria saga was scheduled to replace Terry Wogan's chat show.
But hardly had it reached our screens last July than it was plagued by troubles and controversy.
Among the shocks was the departure of Eldorado's creator Julia Smith, who also brought us EastEnders.
Her leaving was officially put down to ‘exhaustion’, but there were hints of a rift between her and 55-year-old Verity.
‘Let's set the record straight,’ Verity says.
She spells it out: ‘There.
Was.
No.
Row.’
Ask about the Sunday newspaper story claiming BBC Director General-elect John Birt wants to axe Eldorado and Verity gnashes her teeth.
And what about suggestions that cast morale has hit rock bottom?
‘Bullshit!’ she insists.
‘The cast are a delight.
They are working together very well.’
She has harsh words for the media.
‘Frankly,’ she says, suppressing anger, ‘the Press could help me save Eldorado by getting off our backs.
‘When the show started everybody jumped on it and picked up on the things that weren't working.
‘No one made any attempt at all to see any of the good things about it.
That's how things have remained.
‘It began to irritate me, as well as being very demoralising.’
But today, with audience figures slowly picking up, she is happier.
‘The essence of Eldorado as a series about people who live out of their own countries is very much its strength.
So I don't feel I need to be defensive about the show,’ she declares.
‘Don't get me wrong.
I'm not saying everything is right about it.
‘But with something as broad-based and ambitious as this, it would be impossible to get everything right.
‘I'm an optimist and I do truly believe that Eldorado is a good idea and that it will work.
‘Sure, there were mistakes we made at the beginning.’
She attempts a reassuring smile.
‘But we're putting them right.
I believe we are sailing out of troubled waters now.
‘And in a couple of months we'll be in the sunshine’.
‘My message to your readers, our viewers, is simple.
‘Keep watching Eldorado because you're going to enjoy it…
I promise!’
OUT The Hindle brothers
OUT Child bride Fizz.
Despite the glamour she brought to the soap, Kathy Pitkin is having to settle for panto
OUT Toyboy Dieter
ON THE LINE Verity Lambert has learnt a lot in 30 years of TV — and she's going to need it Picture: HARRY PAGE
SEX PESTS AT THE NICK, BY GIRL COP
Protest ‘ignored’
A POLICEWOMAN claimed yesterday she was ignored for promotion after complaining about sexual harassment by male officers.
WPC Tracey Scanlon said she demanded forensic tests on suggestive notes left in her work tray.
A fingerprint was found — but she was told it could not be used as evidence and other officers were not questioned about it, she told an industrial tribunal.
Miss Scanlon, based at Wimbledon, South London, said she also got an obscene midnight phone call at home.
And male colleagues made rude ‘noises’ over the airwaves when she worked in the radio room, she claimed.
Sick
But her complaints to superiors about a ‘systematic campaign of harassment’ were ignored.
And she was suddenly denied job interviews and passed over for promotion, she said.
Miss Scanlon, who is in her 20s, has been on sick leave for four months.
She claims sex discrimination, sexual harassment and victimisation.
The hearing continues.
COMPLAINTS: WPC Tracey Scanlon yesterday
Rotten break for Mr Glass
DOUBLE glazing boss Andy Glass is all steamed up after his advert appeared in Yellow Pages — with a RIVAL firm's phone number.
Furious Andy, of Abingdon, Oxon, who paid £1,000 for the ad, said: ‘This is a right screw-up.
I can't imagine how much trade we've lost.’
NO HOT FOOD…
THERE'S A ROYAL VISIT ON
Patients lose out to VIPs
MARTIN PHILLIPS
HOSPITAL patients were given a COLD lunch yesterday — because the cooks were too busy preparing a HOT one for a royal visit.
The Duchess of Kent and 60 guests sat down to a delicious fish meal while patients had to make do with quiche or ham salad.
Last night NUPE official Alex Rennie slammed the bosses of Milton Keynes Hospital, Bucks.
‘I think it is outrageous,’ he stormed.
‘If anyone had to have the cold meal, it should have been the bigwigs.
Why should the patients suffer because one of the royal family is invited to a junket?
‘The hospital is for patients, not just for a load of hangers-on.’
The Duchess visited the 358-bed hospital, which got NHS Trust status in April, to open an £18 million extension.
She spent an hour chatting to patients before tucking into melon, fish in white sauce and summer pudding.
Official
One of the cooks explained: ‘We could not do hot meals for both the patients AND the official dinner guests.
‘All our staff were involved in preparing the Royal lunch.
‘The patients normally have two hot meals a day, but not today.’
Hospital spokesman Chris Birdsall confirmed that patients' meals had been changed because of the visit.
But he insisted that they were due for a cold meal yesterday.
They had a three-course roast chicken meal after the visit ended, he explained.
Mr Birdsall added: ‘The reason we changed the meals around was to avoid the cost of bringing in outside caterers.’
COMFORT The Duchess chats to an elderly woman patient during her visit
STORM: The Duchess
Judge hits back over sex jibe
A JUDGE who told a young robber with girl trouble that it was a female's role to upset men insisted yesterday: ‘I'm no sexist.’
Judge John Lee, 65, kept a defendant waiting 20 minutes at Hereford Crown Court as he justified remarks which caused outrage among feminists.
He admitted his language was ‘somewhat clumsy’ but declared: ‘I was talking to an unhappy young man — not the world at large.’
But he stood by his decision to give Robert Ward, 20, probation for holding up a solicitor's office with a starting pistol.
TV BALL-VROOM DANCING
PAUL STANLEY
COME Dancing has been saved — by a soccer-style sponsorship deal with a car firm.
It has put Rosemarie Ford's career in top gear too…the Generation Game hostess joins the new BBC1 series this month as presenter.
The deal with Malaysia's Proton Cars is thought to be worth £50,000.
Simon Betts, producer of the £400,000 series, said: ‘This deal is helping to keep Come Dancing going — without it the show might not have survived.’
Dancers will compete for the Proton Cars Trophy and an £8,000 car.
Landing the presenter's job is not 30-year-old Rosemarie's only good fortune — she has found love at last.
But she is keeping her new man under wraps.
‘He is taller than me and he has a sense of humour but I keep that side of my life very private,’ she said.
WOMEN?
THEY'RE ONLY HERE TO UPSET MEN
…says judge
KEVIN O'LONE
A JUDGE sparked fury yesterday after saying it was a woman's ‘function in life’ to upset men.
His comments brought protests from outraged MPs and women's groups who want him sacked.
Circuit judge John Lee, 65, told a court that all men suffer because women enjoy making their lives a misery.
And when a female reporter asked about his remarks, he snapped: ‘Which lesbian group are you from?’
Judge Lee spoke out at Hereford Crown Court as he took pity on jobless Robert Ward, 20, who held up a solicitor's office in Ross-on-Wye.
Ward had emotional problems with his girlfriend, it was said.
Sentencing Ward to two-years' probation, the judge said: ‘A lot of the excuse for your behaviour is that you had problems with a woman.
Who do you think hasn't?
‘I've had my girlfriends — I've had a wife for 37 years.
Even after 37 years they give you problems from time to time.’
Excuse
He added: ‘If a woman upsets you, all right— it's part of their function in life.
It's part of the fun they have.
‘It's part of your fun as well— if you have not picked that up, you should.’
Last night Labour MP Bridget Prentice said: ‘It's appalling that some judges excuse crime on the basis that some men have problems in their relations with women.’
London-based Rights For Women raged: ‘It's a mockery of justice and he should be censured.’
Judge Lee refused to comment at his luxury home in Malvern, Worcs.
But his wife Beryl insisted: ‘He is the most wonderful man.’
UNDER ATTACK: Judge John Lee
I'LL CARRY ON FIGHTING UNTIL THE DAY I DIE
Sister's fury after Bentley pardon plea turned down
JILL TURNER /ROGER TODD
HANGED Derek Bentley's sister last night vowed to carry on fighting to clear him of murdering a policeman 40 years ago.
Defiant Iris Bentley wept as she began planning an appeal to the Queen to win a posthumous royal pardon for her brother.
She said: ‘I shall be campaigning until the day I die.
I shall fight and fight.
I'll even be fighting on the way out.’
Earlier Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke admitted that if it had been his decision in 1953 he would have reprieved 19-year-old Bentley from the gallows.
But, after sifting the evidence, he found ‘no grounds to recommend a free pardon.’
Iris, 61, of Colliers Wood, London, slammed his decision as ‘barbaric.’
And she was furious that Mr Clarke did not break the news to her before holding a Press conference.
‘You can guess how distressed I am,’ she said.
‘I thought we were going to get a just Home Secretary.
But it doesn't look like we have.’
Promise
Iris, who carried on the campaign started by her parents to clear Derek's name, added: ‘I won't give up now — no way.’
Then clutching her daughter Maria Dingwall, she added: ‘Mr Clarke doesn't know he has got Iris Bentley to fight.
‘I have another 30 years left inside me and my daughter has another 60.
‘And she has made the same promise to me that I made to my mum and dad.’
Maria, a Labour councillor and deputy mayor at Merton, south London, said: ‘My mother has been treated terribly.
‘Now I know how my grandparents felt when they heard that Derek was to hang from journalists at their door.’
Bentley went to the gallows after pal Christopher Craig shot dead a police officer during a bungled warehouse robbery.
Both were found guilty of murder after an Old Bailey jury heard Bentley shouted: ‘Let him have it, Chris.’
Craig, however, cheated the rope because he was still only 16.
Mr Clarke agreed to reopen the case last year after two hard-hitting TV documentaries.
But he has now refused either to grant the long-expected pardon or refer the case back to the Court of Appeal.
In a statement Mr Clarke said:
Most of the concern reflects strong feeling that Derek Bentley should not have hanged.
Personally I have always agreed with that, but I cannot now simply substitute my judgment for that of the then Home Secretary, Sir David Maxwell Fyfe.
A free pardon should only be granted if moral as well as technical innocence can be established.
The key question is did Bentley know Craig had a gun.
There was evidence he did.
Bentley had a knife and a spiked knuckleduster that belonged to Craig.
They were jointly engaged in a burglary and had contemplated resisting arrest.
Obsession
Bentley knew Craig's obsession with guns.
He was rightly convicted of murder.
Last night Shadow Home Secretary Tony Blair described Mr Clarke's decision as ‘extraordinary.’
He said there was ‘powerful evidence’ that Bentley had been innocent.
And he accused Mr Clarke of being ‘cruel’ in not revealing his decision to the family before holding a Press conference.
INNOCENTS: Derek, aged 7, and Iris
EVIDENCE: Mr Clarke
DISTRAUGHT: Iris Bentley yesterday after hearing the news Picture: ROGER ALLEN
GALLOWS VICTIM Teenager Derek Bentley who was convicted of murdering a police-man during a robbery in 1952.
Milk float hijacker is just 3
A BOY aged THREE knocked down a poll tax collector and trapped a workman yesterday after commandeering a milk float.
Pint-sized Martin Conroy climbed into the float as milkman Brian Connell was collecting cash.
He put his foot on the accelerator and surged across the street in Anfield, Liverpool.
Brian snatched the boy to safety.
But the float careered on and crashed into the 58-year-old tax official, breaking his leg.
Then it crunched into a trench, hurting a workman, aged 44, who was laying a TV cable.
Tot alarm wire alert
FIRE chiefs yesterday warned parents to check the cables of baby alarms.
It followed two cases of toddlers being snatched to safety after alarms caught fire.
Tests showed the cables were damaged, causing overheating.
Mid-Glamorgan fire chief Don Williams said: ‘Wires where they enter the appliance can become frayed with a lot of use.’
Skinhead bites off ear over dog row
A SKINHEAD bit off a man's ear and spat it out on a pub floor after the victim criticised his pitbull terrier.
Tattooist David Ayres, 28 — who had downed 12 pints of cider before the attack — walked out cradling the dog in his arms.
He left John Fox, 25, screaming in pain as his mum and horrified regulars packed his severed ear in ice.
Surgeons tried in vain to sew it back on.
Justice
Ayres of Old Market, Bristol, was jailed for 15 months yesterday.
The judge told him: ‘Drink does not give you permission to cause mayhem.’
The attack came after steel erector Mr Fox and his mum complained when the pitbull ran amok in the pub, Bristol Crown Court heard.
After the case, Mr Fox said: ‘I'm glad he's gone to prison, he deserves it for what he did.
Justice has been done.
But I'm still left with the scars.’
Shark horror
A SHARK mauled and killed a 28-year-old surfer on Australia's Gold Coast yesterday.
Friends watched in horror as the 15ft monster played with the body for more than 15 minutes near Brisbane.
A friend who tried to go to the man's aid had to be held back.
News-maker
THE National Union of Journalists has elected 55-year-old John Foster as its new general secretary.
THOU SHALT PAY ME BACK MY POLL TAX
Council sacks vicar over prayer protest
GORDON HUGHES
A CHEEKY vicar got the sack — for demanding a poll tax rebate during council prayers.
Mayor's chaplain Tony Rees was furious he hadn't been refunded a £187 overpayment.
So he decided to give the council a sermon when he blessed its monthly meeting.
He quoted from Romans 13: ‘Render therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due…owe no man anything.’
Then as councillors at Tameside, Manchester, stood with heads bowed, he swiftly added: ‘I am still owed £187.66.
I've written six letters and not had a single reply.
In the name of God that can't be right.
Now let us confess our sins.’
Councillors decided he hadn't a prayer of getting away with it.
And next day Mayor John Hughes gave Mr Rees the boot.
He said: ‘I had no alternative.
He abused his privilege.’
Unrepentant Mr Rees, 43 — vicar at nearby Mottram — said: ‘I don't give two hoots.
‘I get quicker answers to prayers from God than I get answers to my letters.
Meanwhile, I still want my money.’
A council spokesman said: ‘We're resolving the problem.’
FIRED: Mr Rees
SNAZZY YAZZ'S SPECS APPEAL
YOU could be forgiven for thinking that pop star Yazz is off to study.
After all she is clutching her bag like a student would her books.
And her spectacles and peaked cap seem to add to the image of a beauty with brains.
The 30-year-old blonde singer — who topped the charts in 1988 with the Only Way Is Up — was in fact on her way to a London party.
Marks out of ten for her new look?
Picture: ALAN GRISBROOK 
Fall boy's amazing escape
SCHOOLBOY Anthony Charlton told yesterday how he plunged head-first down a 100ft quarry — and escaped with a sprained ankle.
First the terrified 15-year-old managed to turn himself round in mid-air.
Then he scrabbled desperately at the passing rocks to slow his fall.
Finally his life was saved when he landed on a narrow ledge 25ft from the bottom of the pit.
Anthony, of Chipping Sodbury, near Bristol, said: ‘I seemed to be falling for ages.
‘It was terrifying — especially when I was upside down.’
Firemen lowered a paramedic down the quarry to treat Anthony before winching him to safety.
BIG MEL IS THE NEW MAXWELL
ALEC LOM
ROLY-POLY comic Mel Smith is set for his biggest role yet — playing disgraced tycoon Robert Maxwell.
Sixteen-stone Mel joked: ‘I wear massive padding round my body and a big suit with slicked-back floppy hair.’
Mel will send up the ex-Mirror publisher in his TV show with Griff Rhys Jones, who plays a reporter.
Mel added: ‘The Maxwell character I play has even more stomach than I do.
‘And he has a major problem reaching the food on his table.’
The comedy duo also lampoon the TV news in another sketch.
They read a bulletin of ‘News That Makes You Sick,’ including an item that super-rich singer Michael Jackson has won a state lottery.
PADDING: Mel
Swimmers uncovered!
SWIMMERS were ordered from pools and golfers off tees yesterday — in case they hurt themselves.
They had to quit their favourite sports at Exeter because the council's cover with troubled Municipal Mutual Insurance ran out.
The council also had to withdraw its vehicles after failing to find alternative cover by the noon deadline.
Meanwhile, police insured with MMI may end up paying compensation for the Hillsborough disaster.
BARON HARDUP!
He eats free spuds Pals give clothes
BILL DANIELS
A BARONET with a 1,300-acre estate is so hard up he has been reduced to eating free spuds provided by one of his tenant farmers.
Friends of stony-broke Sir Charles Wolseley, 48, are giving him bags of supermarket food and joints of meat.
Things are so grim that the pals are throwing in hand-me-down clothes for the baron's American wife Jeannie.
And when the pair went to a recent wedding, Sir Charles spray-painted an old gran's hat for Lady Jeannie to make it look new.
The baron's estate near Rugeley, Staffs, is worth about £7 1/2 million.
But a disastrous business venture has reduced him to near-ruin.
Two years ago he pumped £1.7 million into developing an ambitious garden park and leisure centre in the grounds of the 1,000-year-old estate.
Debts
But few trippers have turned up.
And earlier this year Sir Charles escaped bankruptcy by a whisker as his debts soared to £4.6 million.
He persuaded creditors to give him three years to make a go of the garden.
But now the baron — family motto ‘Man is as a wolf to his fellow man’— must concentrate on keeping the wolf from the door.
Lady Jeannie said it had been ‘very embarrassing’ to receive the spuds and clothes.
She added: ‘I never thought I'd be living like this when I married Charles.
‘But it was for richer or poorer and I'd be happy to live in a cardboard box if it was with my husband.
‘We are living on my savings and a small settlement from my divorce.
We will survive.’
UPPERS CLASSES Broke Sir Charles and Lady Jeannie before the wolf knocked on their door
WORTH £7 1/2 M: The baronet's spread in Staffordshire
Oh yes it's Street Chris
EX-Coronation Street star Chris Quinten is trying to rekindle his career — by appearing in panto.
He will play the lead in Dick Whittington at Halifax.
LEAD: Quinten
Stepdad spins girl, 4 in the tumble drier
FRANK CORLESS
A BRUTE punished his four-year-old step-daughter by spinning her in a tumble-drier, a court heard yesterday.
As the youngster sobbed in terror, the sadist bundled her into the machine.
Then he switched it on and laughed as she was jolted round and round.
Later, the girl said she couldn't remember how long she was trapped.
But she felt ‘dizzy, hot and scared.’
Afterwards, her eight-year-old brother was told to give her a cold bath.
He poured cans of cold water over her.
The horrifying punishment was part of a catalogue of terror inflicted on the two children, Mold Crown Court, North Wales, heard.
Hanging
When the 30-year-old man caught the girl climbing while wearing a coat, he left her hanging in the garment from a peg.
He punched her on the head and made her do pull-ups against a door frame.
He forced the boy to stand still, and hit him if he moved.
And he made the youngster — now 13 — walk up and down stairs until he was exhausted, hitting him on the back of his head and legs.
The man, from Wrexham, was jailed for nine months after admitting cruelty.
He is now living apart from the children's mother, but cannot be named for legal reasons.
His defence said: ‘He is deeply ashamed, and so he should be.’
SCANDAL OF PALACE SECRETS LEFT ON THE TUBE
JOHN JACKSON
FRANK THORNE
TOP-SECRET details of Buckingham Palace security plans were left on a packed Tube train, it was revealed last night.
The hush-hush builder's blueprint, which gave details of an undercover police station being built in the Palace grounds, later turned up in Kilburn, North London — a stronghold of IRA sympathisers.
Their loss was not reported to police or the royal household — and work carried on as if nothing had happened.
But last night a senior SAS source described the bungle as ‘manna from Heaven for the IRA.’
It is the second royal security scandal revealed by the Mirror in 24 hours.
Yesterday we told how a new book gives precise locations of bedrooms used by the Queen and members of her family at the Palace.
Condemned
The book was condemned by security chiefs as a ‘bomber's guide.’
Our story jogged the memory of a former chauffeur with Balfour Beatty, the construction firm.
The company installed the secret station six years ago.
But their blueprint — or a photocopy of it — would still be a Godsend for today's IRA assassins as nothing has been changed since.
The ex-chauffeur, who ferried bosses from site to site, told how panic broke out when a woman phoned Balfour's head office to say she had found the blueprint on a rush-hour Jubilee Line train.
Worse still, she was phoning from her home in Kilburn, which has a large Irish community.
The chauffeur, who asked not to be named, said: ‘There was a huge stink but it was all covered up.’
He added:
‘I had just left the managing director at a site meeting in Middlesex at around 6.30 one evening when the carphone rang.
The guy on the other end was frantic, demanding to get a message to the boss, David Cawthra.
Then he dropped the bombshell — our security plans for the Palace had been found by a woman, left on the seat of the Tube train.
We couldn't believe how they could have been allowed out of the site office.
They should have been safely under lock and key.
We wondered what stupid idiot had left them on the Tube.’
The chauffeur said his boss was ‘hopping mad.’
And he told how he was ordered to retrieve the plans from the woman's home early the next morning.
He said: ‘I thanked her for her honesty with a box of chocolates.’
The driver added: ‘The company naturally wanted it all kept quiet.
Contract ‘And as a chauffeur to top management, you do as you are told and say nothing to anybody.
But there was a right fuss.’
The driver claimed Balfour's felt able to complete the contract because they were satisfied no one else had seen or copied the blueprint.
His story was confirmed by former colleagues.
A security man who worked at Balfour's Croydon HQ at the time said: ‘I know it did happen.’
A Buckingham Palace spokesman said last night: ‘This is complete news to us.’
And Scotland Yard were equally baffled.
Balfour Beatty said: ‘Mr David Cawthra left this company last year — and no one seems to have any record of this incident.’
The firm employed Irish labourers on the Palace site.
And a Mirror Group reporter who met them said many were IRA sympathisers.
She said yesterday: ‘The brickies were quite open about backing the IRA and giving some of their wages to the ‘cause.’
‘They thought it was a huge joke that they were IRA sympathisers working inside the Palace grounds.’
SECOND PALACE SCARE The lost blueprint is the second Palace security scandal revealed by the Mirror, following yesterday's alert (left) on the book lashed as a ‘guide’ for an IRA bomb squad
SITE: An undercover police station was built at the Palace
TUBE: Plans lost on a train
‘Jumble sale schools’ fury
RICHARD GARNER
CRUMBLING schools face another four years of relying on jumble sales to survive, Labour warned yesterday.
Education spokeswoman Ann Taylor said that fund-raising was the only way to buy much-needed books.
She demanded that Education Secretary John Patten apologise to Britain's six million State schoolchildren — for forcing them to share text books in overcrowded classrooms.
And she blasted Tory plans to force more schools to quit town hall control.
She told the conference: ‘What a future it promises.
Not a penny more for the classroom, for books, or for teachers.’
Patten was also blasted for ‘denying children a hot meal’ with cuts in school dinners.
Delegates voted to oppose the mass opt-out plans and scrap controversial tests for seven and eleven-year-olds.
ANGER: Ann Taylor
CONFERENCE COMMENTARY
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
IT would have been pretty hard, given the Government's troubles, for Labour to have had a bad Conference.
But ‘not bad’ is about the best that can be said for it.
Despite John Smith's firm establishment as an authoritative and credible alternative Prime Minister, Labour are fooling themselves if they think a change of leader is all that was required to bring about a change of government.
It was Mr Smith's view, before the April 9 nightmare, that Oppositions don't win elections — governments lose them.
Up to a point.
The last election showed that no matter how deep the Government's troubles, you can't automatically assume the Opposition will win.
THERE are several assumptions we reasonably CAN make about the future.
Come the next election the Tories will not be in the state they're in now.
They may have a different leader.
They will certainly have different policies.
When it comes to facing up to change the Tories are ruthless.
They do whatever is necessary.
And they do it quickly.
There were times in Blackpool you'd have thought Labour had won on April 9.
There was little recognition of the fact that Labour lost not because they changed but because they didn't change enough.
There was no real sense of a project, little feeling of the crusade for power that should accompany a Government's slide into humiliation, chaos and decay.
AND there was too much evidence of the view that ‘one more heave’ for power will do.
It won't.
With all eyes having been on the Government, Labour can get away with one conference like this one.
But one year, two years and three years from now, ‘not bad’ won't be good enough.
Love in the sand for Gulf soldiers
STEWART DICKSON
SOLDIERS in the Gulf War enjoyed sex in the sand dunes, a survey claimed yesterday.
Two-thirds of American troops quizzed said there was no shortage of hankypanky.
Bored GIs waiting for the war with Iraq to begin whiled away the time with fellow female soldiers.
Top for romping were those serving in the army — with three-quarters admitting sex was widespread.
It was not known how many of the 1,100 troops were involved.
A Pentagon official said last night: ‘A lot of fellas were stuck in the desert with nothing to do except what comes naturally.
‘When you're men and women living together in close quarters like that there is always going to be temptation.’
But feminist groups fighting for the right of women soldiers to be in combat zones criticised the figures.
One said: ‘Every time there is debate about women in the services, they produce stories of widespread sex as an argument against us.’
HOW THE YEARS DO ROLL BY!
GRAHAM BARNES
HE'S been running off with the toilet rolls — and viewers' affections — for 21 years.
The Andrex puppy has scampered through house and garden, fields and even a maze in a string of TV adverts, tugging the tissue behind him.
He has won the equivalent of an Oscar — the ads were voted Britain's favourite commercial last year in a Marketing magazine survey.
And like all great stars, he hasn't aged a day in all those years.
But success has not gone to his head.
At a birthday party yesterday — on Kensington Woof Gardens — he and a few brothers and sisters handed £200,000 to Guide Dogs for the Blind for a new training centre in Southampton.
He thought they deserved a bit of cash.
Rolls of it, in fact.
‘TIS YOU: Charity girl Angela Power and pups.
Picture: STEVE NICHOLSON
Eggheads
BALDNESS can be caused by ringworm from a fungi passed on by pet budgies, dogs and cats, says an Australian hair expert.
Sword horror
A MAN who threatened to commit harakiri with a 3ft sword after a row with his mother surrendered to police at Seaview, Isle of Wight.
The wild bunch…
A HEALTH official in New York has quit after spending £700 of taxpayers’ money on 158 plastic male organs.
Youth clubs may now use them in an AIDS campaign to show how to put on condoms.
They currently use fake bananas.
Royal baby
THE Duke and Duchess of Kent became grandparents for the second time yesterday when the Earl of St Andrews and his wife had a baby girl.
Disney dust-up
DISNEY chiefs are fighting a US ruling that their new film, Sarafina, is not fit for children under 13 after claims it is too violent.
Bros star loses his £160,000 bungalow
KEVIN O'LONE
BROKE Bros pop star Luke Goss had his luxury country home repossessed yesterday.
The bungalow, guarded by video cameras and electronic security gates, was once worth £250,000.
Now it is on the market for £160,000 — less than the singer's mortgage.
Luke, 23, left the bungalow in Camberley, Surrey, nine months ago to live in a rented house five miles away.
He said: ‘There are things that happen in life over which you have no control.
‘It's sad, but it wasn't unexpected and it isn't the end of the world.
‘You always have to look forward in life.’
Luke and twin brother Matt — the other half of Bros — spent the £12 million fortune they made with their hits in the Eighties.
They blew £700,000 in just 18 months.
Matt now lives in Los Angeles, where he is trying to launch a solo career.
SELLING: Luke
MYSTERY ‘ANGEL’
AN anonymous benefactor has donated £150,000 to help three-year-old Stuart Masters get a life-saving liver and bowel transplant.
Stuart, from Shoeburyness, Essex, now needs a further £90,000 to pay for his operation in the US.
GUNG-HO U.S. SAILOR IN WAR GAME HORROR
‘Friendly fire’ missile kills five
MARK DOWDNEY
A GUNG-HO sailor may have fired the missile that killed five Turks in a NATO exercise.
Experts feared yesterday that an over-excited crewman aboard the US carrier Saratoga got carried away during the war games — and launched two Sea Sparrows by mistake.
One of the 2,000mph missiles smashed into the bridge of the Turkish destroyer Muavenet three miles away.
The captain and four others were killed and 15 crew injured.
America last night apologised to Turkey for its latest ‘friendly fire’ disaster.
Experts ruled out equipment failure as a million-to-one chance.
No missile firings were planned during the exercises involving 50 warships off the Turkish coast in the Aegean Sea.
But the Sea Sparrows may have been tracking imaginary aircraft when they were fired.
Their launch system is protected by a cover which has to be physically raised by a crew member before use.
The destroyer was escorting the 36-year-old Saratoga and its 5,000 crew when it was hit.
Fire broke out on the stricken ship and two US helicopters raced in to help put it out.
The US navy has been plagued with a string of embarrassing incidents.
An Iranian airliner was shot down over the Gulf by a missile from a US cruiser in 1988, killing 290 people.
In July, a US warship in the Pacific warned an Australian airliner carrying 300 passengers that it faced ‘hostile action.’
Blunder
The ship was only seconds away from firing its missiles when the blunder was realised.
During the Gulf War, an American jet fired on and killed nine British soldiers in the desert.
And at least 35 of the 146 Americans who died in the war were victims of US ‘friendly fire.’
SHIP OF DOOM: The blitzed bridge of the Turkish destroyer
SHIP OF SHAME: The US carrier Saratoga which fired the missile that killed five Turkish sailors
RACE ROW ON IRISH
A VAN driver alleged racial discrimination yesterday — because he is Irish.
But his case was thrown out because an industrial tribunal was not entitled to deal with it.
John Doogan, 33, was barred from a top secret atomic weapons base in February during an IRA mainland bombing blitz.
Mr Doogan — who had previously been let in to the site at Aldermaston, Berks — claimed a new rule banned Irish people.
Defence chiefs had offered Mr Doogan of Maynooth, Co.
Kildare, £600 to settle out of court.
In documentary evidence the MOD accepted that he was treated unlawfully.
Kevin in book bid
KEVIN Maxwell is planning to co-write a book on coping with bankruptcy.
One chapter will deal with his story and part of any proceeds will go to Maxwell creditors.
Times axes newsmen
THE Times newspaper axed more than 20 journalists' jobs yesterday.
A spokeswoman said editor Peter Stothard wanted new blood to sharpen up coverage.
Some older journalists took early retirement.
Record for JY
VETERAN DJ Jimmy Young, 69, celebrated 25 years of his top-rated Radio Two JY Prog yesterday.
Then the man voted Britain's most-polite interviewer said: ‘I might go and celebrate with a beer and a bag of crisps now.’
Model Naomi catwalks in memory lane
SUPERMODEL Naomi Campbell swapped the catwalk yesterday for a trip down memory lane.
Naomi paid a surprise visit to her old school — London's Italia Conti acting academy.
The 22-year-old beauty, who was a pupil there between 1982 and 1985, spent 90 minutes chatting.
Earlier Naomi revealed she writes to boxing champ Mike Tyson — jailed for rape.
‘He was like a brother and always will be.
He was never that way with me,’ she told Channel 4's Big Breakfast.
Their romance ended when she dated actor Robert De Niro.
MODEL PUPIL: Naomi Campbell meets head girl Tashaka Francis, 16,(right) and Kellie Phillips, 15
WEBBER SHOW BLOW
SHOW giants Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber and Cameron Mackintosh last night threatened legal action that could ruin a top amateur theatre group.
The Apollo Players planned excerpts from Phantom of the Opera, Les Miserables and Miss Saigon for 25th anniversary shows next week.
But Lloyd Webber and Mackintosh — who own the song rights — will sue if the Glasgow group's performances at the city's Kings Theatre go ahead.
Apollo, who thought copyright law permitted short extracts from musicals and face ‘advance’ costs of £50,000, said:
‘If we can't open on Monday, it will bankrupt us.’
Gorby's passport is seized
RUSSIA seized Mikhail Gorbachev's passport yesterday and barred him from leaving the country.
The shock move follows his refusal to speak at a trial on the fate of the banned Communist Party.
Hardliners are trying to overturn a decree by Russian President Boris Yeltsin banning the party.
Court officials said Gorby, former leader of the collapsed Soviet Union, had no special rights to boycott the trial.
He vowed not to attend ‘even if handcuffed’.
He claimed there was a plot to make him a scapegoat for economic failures.
Blast!
It's the karaoke pensioners
A NOISY karaoke knees-up by pensioners drove neighbours wild.
Desperate for quiet they called police who told the old-timers to pipe down.
Folk living near the social club at Uttoxeter, Staffs, claimed they couldn't hear the telly for the strains of Danny Boy and On The Sunny Side of the Street.
But party organiser Ossie Tortoishell, 78, said yesterday: ‘It wasn't even 10 o'clock and we didn't make that much noise.’
Cars alert
VAUXHALL is recalling more than 3,500 four-wheel-drive Frontera Sport and Estate cars to check the wheels.
WHAT A DIS-ASTER
Holiday family's luggage stolen
Burglar shot dead near their room
Illness cuts short Disneyworld trip
BILL DANIELS
A FAMILY'S jinxed trip to Disneyworld started in disaster, turned to horror…and then went from bad to worse.
FIRST thieves stripped their room of luggage, clothes, money, passports and tickets within hours of their arrival in Orlando, Florida.
Builder Dave Young, wife Jane and son Paul, three — who had been taking a dip in the hotel pool — were left with just the costumes they had on.
TWO days later a burglar was shot dead outside their room at night.
AND their visit to Disneyworld was cut short when Jane, 36, fell ill.
The family — without plane tickets and passports — had to talk their way past airport officials on their homeward journey.
To add to their misery, the flight was delayed when the plane had to land at Belfast because of bad weather.
Finally they reached home and tried to put the kettle on for a welcome cup of tea — to discover their water had been cut off.
Dave, 37, of Belgrave, Staffs, said:
‘It was bad enough having our room raided.
But on the third night we heard someone trying to get into our room followed by a gunshot.
We came out to see them putting the body in a bag.
Humour
It was just the sort of thing we had seen on Starsky and Hutch.
We expected someone to shout ‘Cut’.’
The Youngs managed to get replacement traveller's cheques to buy clothes and continued their fly-drive holiday.
But they arrived home with just 40p on them.
They had to break in because their keys had been nicked.
Luckily the plumber they called out to reconnect the water was so touched by their plight that he waived his fee.
Dave added: ‘Everything that could go wrong did go wrong.
‘But at least we kept our sense of humour.’
JINXED: Disneyworld
FED-UP: Dave, Jane and son Paul yesterday
JET FAMILIES' PILGRIMAGE
HARRY ARNOLD
HEARTBROKEN families of 37 Britons killed in the Himalayan air crash are to make a pilgrimage to the disaster spot.
About 27 relatives will visit the site in mountains above the Nepalese capital of Katmandu as a way of coming to terms with their grief.
Another 20 who cannot face seeing the area have been invited to the British ambassador's villa at Kakami.
Nearly all the relatives have agreed not to make a harrowing personal identification of the victims.
Among the dead were missionary Andy Wilkins, his wife, Helen, and their three children.
Their Pakistan International Airlines jet crashed on Monday killing all 167 on board.
The plane's ‘black box’ was found yesterday — but it will be weeks before it yields clues to the cause of the crash.
DEAD: Andy Wilkins
999 sell-off ‘threat to lives’
LIVES could be lost because of BT's planned 999 sell-off, firemen's leader Ken Cameron claimed yesterday.
And he pleaded for the public to write to Premier John Major to protest at the move.
Mr Cameron said: ‘This is a recipe for disaster.
There will be delays in the arrival of fire engines and ambulances — which could cost lives.’
The 80 emergency exchanges would be slashed to just three with the loss of 8,000 trained operators.
The King and Icing
BIRTHDAY girl Julie Andrews blows out a candle at the launch of her new record — a version of the classic musical The King and I.
The singing actress, now 57, plays Anna with Gandhi star Ben Kingsley as the King of Siam.
Showbiz pals at her London party reckoned the LP sounded great, and saluted Julie with this ornate cake…fit for the King.
Aristocop
EX-BOBBY Alan Cornish, 49, of South Cerney, Gloucs, has become a French marquis after inheriting a title from a distant relative.
IT'S A HONG CON
A CROOKED civil servant sold 100 British passports to people wanting to leave Hong Kong before the colony is handed back to China, a court heard yesterday.
David Lynch, who worked at the Passport Office, admitted his part in a racket to slip the documents on to the black market where they were worth £40,000 each.
Jailing him for three years, Judge Gerald Butler told Southwark Crown Court: ‘It is only too obvious what mischief can be caused if passports are obtained and used by people not entitled to them.’
Tragic girl's £325,000
A TEENAGE twin who has the mind of a baby after a hospital blunder at birth won £325,000 damages yesterday.
Mary Moore, 17, of Chatham, Kent, was starved of oxygen after doctors failed to diagnose her presence in the womb.
David nose he is best
FATHER of two David Kidd snored into the record books yesterday.
David, 34, from West Monkseaton, Tyne and Wear, recorded 88 decibels in a contest for Britain's noisiest sleeper.
Wife Jan said: ‘Love is blind — it's deaf, too.’
Merc to axe 10,500 jobs
LUXURY car-makers Mercedes-Benz AG is to lose more than 10,500 workers by the end of the year, bosses announced yesterday.
The German firm blames a sales slump.
SHOPPERS MISS BODY IN TREE FOR TWO DAYS
‘They were too busy to notice’
IAN CAMERON
A MAN hanged himself from a tree in a busy shopping centre — but no one noticed his body for at least two days.
Thousands of shoppers and office workers walked past the tree in Cardiff's Oxford arcade.
But no one looked up to see the dead man hanging from a branch near the top of the 30ft conifer, said police.
The body was finally spotted yesterday by an office worker.
‘It is astounding that he was up there for all that time in such a busy area without anyone noticing,’ said Det Insp Martyn Evans.
‘He was there for at least two days and possibly longer before anyone looked up to see him.’
Police said that the unidentified man — aged between 30 and 40 — climbed nearly to the top of the tree.
He then tied electrical cable around the trunk and his neck before hanging himself.
Bustling ‘The foliage of the fir tree is very thick and it wrapped around his body,’ said Det Insp Evans.
‘But you would have thought that someone would have looked up over all those days.
‘Perhaps they are just too busy bustling around.’
Police said the death is being treated as suicide and a report is being prepared for the coroner.
GIRL, 8, KICKED OFF BUS OVER 1p EXTRA FARE
AN EIGHT-YEAR-OLD girl was thrown off a bus…because her fare was ONE PENNY short.
Distraught Sarah Miles was forced to wait twenty minutes for a rival bus — just days after another girl the same age was brutally raped on her way to school in Essex.
The bus driver refused to take Sarah home from school when she produced 15p for a 16p journey.
And last night her mum Jackie stormed: ‘I'm disgusted.
‘She is only a little girl and could easily have been attacked while she was standing there alone.’
Sarah's ordeal happened after she left school in Portsmouth.
Jackie explained: ‘Sarah had 15p with her, which was the normal fare.
‘But the driver told her the cost had risen by 1p the previous day.
‘Sarah explained that she had no more money, but the driver told her to get off.’
The People's Provincial bus sped off, but a driver from the rival company, Red Admiral accepted Sarah's 15p and took her the three miles home to Paulsgrove.
People's Provincial boss Piers Marlow promised a full investigation — and said the driver would be disciplined.
‘It is against our rules to turn away children.’
With this ring…
COUPLES will don electronic suits to make love via phone lines within 100 years, scientist Arno Penzias said in Munich.
WOODY PUT ME THROUGH HELL
English rose Lysette Anthony on the scandal-hit director's darkest movie
…
BUT THE PAIN WAS WORTH IT
HENRIETTA KNIGHT
IT WAS a Hollywood dream come true for beautiful English actress Lysette Anthony when she was asked to star in Woody Allen's latest movie.
But as she worked on the film, Woody's 12-year love affair with Mia Farrow broke up — and he changed Lysette's character from an amusing bimbo into a sometimes vicious bitch.
After Mia discovered that Woody was having an affair with her 21-year-old adopted daughter, Soon-Yi, the tortured comic genius started to have violent mood swings — and the light-hearted film turned more and more brutal as Woody's world fell apart.
In one scene Lysette — who plays an air-headed aerobics teacher — and her middle-aged boy-friend were supposed to have an amusing tiff after a party.
Instead the overwrought director turned it into a bitter battle which ends with the lover, played by Sydney Pollack, savagely forcing Lysette's character into his car.
Said Lysette: ‘On the page it was hilarious.
I was a vulnerable, war-wounded angel.
But Woody said he was going to reshoot it, making my character really obnoxious.’
Allen told her to ramble on about astrology, a subject Lysette knew nothing about.
‘I said, ‘I don't know what I'm supposed to be talking about.
You have to help me here.’
‘So he said, ‘Crystals, tofu, this and that.’
I don't know what the hell I said but I went back and did it.
‘The scene got incredibly violent.
I couldn't sleep for three days — I'm not exaggerating.
Afterwards, there were people with their mouths open going ‘My God, we've never seen this much violence in an Allen movie.’
‘The atmosphere on the set between Woody and Mia was extremely tense at times,’ said Lysette, 29, who first won fame in the TV sitcom Three Up, Two Down with Michael Elphick.
‘Woody tends to keep people in the dark about everything.
But we could just sense it.’
Whether by accident or design, Husbands and Wives contains uncanny echoes of the real events that were being played out in the lives of the cast as it was made.
Woody, 56, and Mia, 47, play New Yorkers Gabe and Judy who are shocked to learn that their friends (Judy Davis and Sydney Pollack) are breaking up.
Then Gabe and Judy's marriage collapses, and he becomes infatuated with a college student played by Cape Fear star Juliette Lewis.
Despite his having given her a tough time on set, Lysette is still very fond of Woody Allen: ‘He gave me the courage to be brave.
There's just something about him.
‘I'm deeply saddened about what happened.
But anyone who has been in close contact with Woody can only support him.’
Lysette, who bared all for Playboy in 1988, has won acclaim for her role in Husbands and Wives.
But only last year she used to spend hours weeping on the floor of her flat because she thought her career wasn't getting anywhere.
She'd made the move to Hollywood with her Dutch artist husband Luc Leestemaker in the hope of breaking into the movie big-time.
But all she'd had were roles in forgettable TV shows and minor movies.
Then she met Woody at a New York exhibition of Luc's paintings — and he asked her to audition for Husbands and Wives.
‘I could not believe my luck,’ she said.
‘I have no idea why he picked me, but when I got the call, I screamed with delight.
‘I want to have a full career here and I couldn't think of a better way to do that.
This is some of my best work.’
Lysette has no fears that her marriage to hunky Luc will wind up like a scene out of Husbands and Wives or with the heartbreaking headlines that Woody and Mia have endured.
‘We will be together forever,’ she vowed.
‘My moving was temporary, but the cats moving months later made it permanent.
I took all my money out of the banks, sold everything I had and packed up.’
She and Luc share a luxurious flat just a stone's throw from the famous Hollywood sign — complete with swimming pool.
But she said: ‘I don't want to be a movie star.
That is a very boring ambition.
I just would like to be a respected actress.
‘And that means working with the creme de la creme.
‘Working with the likes of Allen and Clint Eastwood would be wonderful.
‘It would make it worth getting up in the morning.’
HARD TIME: Lysette found tortured Woody tough to work for
BIG TIME: Lysette's Hollywood break brought her more than she bargained for
SAD TIME: Woody and Mia broke up during the movie
Blazing scare at the crem
FIRE broke out during a funeral at a crematorium yesterday and set the roof alight.
A faulty incinerator is thought to have caused the blaze in Milton Keynes, Bucks.
‘We believe the flue set the roofing timbers on fire,’ added the brigade.
A crematorium official said: ‘We will be up and running tomorrow.’
Tears of TV hunk
JILL TURNER
HUNKY Hawk may have muscles bigger than his baby's head — but tiny Tyrus still reduced the Gladiator to tears.
The 17-stone superman, who watched the birth, said yesterday: ‘It was very emotional.
Even a Gladiator can crack at a moment like that.’
Mum Jayne, 25, is convinced 7lb 6oz Tyrus will take after his dad.
She said at their Welsh home: ‘He's a tough lad.
I thought he'd be born holding a couple of dumb-bells.’
Hawk, 26, who boasts a 56-inch chest, is starring in a new ITV game show, The Gladiators, from next week.
Contestants will join him in the arena to try to do a Tyrus — and bring on the tears again.
LITTLE KNOCKOUT: TV Gladiator Hawk cuddles his son Tyrus Pictures: ROGER ALLEN
Gareth lords it
RUGBY ace Gareth Chilcott's on a dummy run for a panto role in Cinderella.
The ex-England prop will play Lord Chancellor at Bath's Theatre Royal, where he's sure to have a ball!
AIRPORT SCRAPS CHECKS
BRITAIN will begin scrapping airport customs controls for European citizens from next week.
Luton Airport's red and green channels will be replaced by one exit for EC nationals and a second for other passengers.
There will still be spot checks for drugs and other illegal goods.
The scheme should spread to other airports before the start of the single European market in 1993.
CHEQUE CARD CROOK IS NICKED BY OLD WILL!
‘Thief’ thought he should look like the bard
JAN DISLEY
A DOPEY thief thought the hologram of William Shakespeare on a stolen cheque card was a mugshot of the OWNER.
And he was still worrying about how to pass himself off as the long-dead Bard when police nicked him dithering outside a bank.
A bearded, balding actor who looks like old Will features on Nat West ‘Switch’ cards.
A spokesman for the bank said: ‘The portrait is supposed to deter people from copying the cards.
‘It just shows you can't assume everyone will know what Shakespeare looks like.
‘This is one deterrent we didn't bank on.’
But Nat West decided to do without their pound of flesh and the bungler, in his early twenties, was cautioned and released without charge.
Police said: ‘It's a good job we got to him before he lost his hair, put on a frilly collar and developed total mastery of Elizabethan England.
‘Otherwise he could have fooled everybody.’
BARD CARD: The hologram of William Shakespeare
Pub crawl kills worker
A MAN who usually stuck to soft drinks died after downing at least a dozen whiskies, an inquest heard yesterday.
Foundry worker David Parr sank the booze at 10 bars in three hours while delivering darts fixtures.
The 32-year-old bachelor finally collapsed unconscious, killed by alcohol poisoning.
David, from Torrington, Devon, joined three pals for the evening, despite being told it might involve heavy drinking.
The coroner in Bideford recorded a verdict of death ‘through non-dependent abuse of drugs’.
Bonjour cobbers!
A STOWAWAY from Morocco hoping to reach his brother in France slipped aboard the wrong ship — and ended up in Western Australia.
The 21-year-old was arrested two months later in a pub in Point Samson — 12,400 miles off course.
CB hero, 3, saves his dad
TODDLER Peter Marriott saved his father's life by calling for help on a CB radio.
The three-year-old had picked up the patter from watching his dad Keith on the airwaves.
And when Keith, 40, collapsed, Peter coolly switched to a mobile channel and cried: ‘19 for a Roger — help!’
Switchboard operator Hannah Doyle responded and got enough details to send an ambulance.
Single parent Keith, from Stockport, was unconscious for 30 minutes and is now undergoing tests.
He said yesterday: ‘I'm so proud of Peter.’
NO TAX RISES IF YOU'RE WELL-OFF
Tory threat as £ suffers a walloping
ANDY McSMITH
SHEREE DODD
TAXES are set to soar — except for the well-off, it was confirmed yesterday.
With the pound diving to a record low of 2.438 against the German mark and with John Major facing a mauling at next week's Tory conference, the grim news came from Trade Secretary Michael Heseltine.
Wealthy people are to be shielded — by the party's cast-iron promises that their taxes will be LOWERED.
Increases ‘would have to be considered against commitments already made’, Mr Heseltine said.
Labour leader John Smith declared the Government's economic policy ‘has been torn to shreds’.
He had ‘never known a situation when a Prime Minister and Chancellor are going to their own conference without knowing what their economic policy is’.
And ‘Tarzan’ Heseltine's remarks were coupled with a warning of savage public spending cuts and a possible hike in interest rates.
Fears were revived that VAT will be lifted to 22 per cent.
Before the election Mr Smith, then Shadow Chancellor, forecast that this would be the only way to make the Tory sums add up — although John Major denied it.
The embattled Premier will now find himself in the dock at Brighton.
He must try to convince delegates that he is not to blame for Britain's economic mess if he wants to keep his job.
The pound dropped yesterday by almost 4 1/2 pfennigs as foreign investors switched into the powerful German currency — and economists said it could fall under 2.40 by next week.
The pound's decline this week has diminished prospects of further interest rate cuts.
Ministers expect the current public spending round to be the toughest for many years as the Government seeks to maintain its anti-inflation policy outside the ERM disciplines.
All the weapons in the Treasury's armoury — spending cuts, higher interest rates and higher taxes — are politically unpalatable.
Lawson tip-off — Page 5
Major on trial says ex-minister
SHEREE DODD
PREMIER John Major will be on trial at next week's Tory conference, leading Euro rebel Lord Ridley warned last night.
And his job could be threatened if he fails to convince delegates that Britain's economic crisis is not his fault.
Worried Party insiders are already whispering: ‘It's time to bring back Maggie.’
Former Cabinet Minister Lord Ridley said: ‘If the party splits, he will be in the minority.
He has no option but to change his policies.’
He revealed ‘so-called Euro-sceptics’ were right and added: ‘They grow stronger by the day.
The party in the country knows it and it cannot be cowed by pleas for loyalty.’
In an attack in the Spectator magazine, Lord Ridley catalogued charges against the Major government.
He said: ‘We have driven our economy into the sand.
We approach three million unemployed.
Our housing market is a disaster, our businesses have gone under by the hearseload.
Last night, bookies slashed the odds on Lady Thatcher's return from 16-1 to 12-1.
ATTACK: Ridley
Love in the sand for Gulf soldiers
STEWART DICKSON
SOLDIERS in the Gulf War enjoyed sex in the sand dunes, a survey claimed yesterday.
Two-thirds of American troops quizzed said there was no shortage of hankypanky.
Bored GIs waiting for the war with Iraq to begin whiled away the time with fellow female soldiers.
Top for romping were those serving in the army — with three-quarters admitting sex was widespread.
It was not known how many of the 1,100 troops were involved.
A Pentagon official said last night: ‘A lot of fellas were stuck in the desert with nothing to do except what comes naturally.
‘When you're men and women living together in close quarters like that there is always going to be temptation.’
HUNDREDS of millions of dollars of Iraqi oil money were ordered to be seized last night to pay for relief aid to the Kurds.
The order to use Saddam's cash was made by the UN Security Council which insisted it should also be used for reparations to Kuwait.
BLAZE JET CRASHES ON BLOCK OF FLATS
Terror as residents flee blazing buildings
150 feared dead At least 300 hurt
It crashed into the flats…people ran out on fire
MARTIN PHILLIPS /KEVIN O'LONE /MARK DOWDNEY DON MACKAY /DENIS NEWSON /NICOLA BRIGGS ANTHONY HARWOOD
AT LEAST 150 people were feared dead last night after an Israeli jet exploded in mid-air over a city suburb.
The flaming fuselage smashed into two nine-storey blocks each containing 200 flats — leaving at least 300 injured.
Police reported ‘a huge number of dead’ as a vast area of the suburb was set ablaze.
Dozens of people were seen leaping from windows in the apartment blocks.
The El Al Boeing 747 cargo plane took off from Amsterdam for Tel Aviv at 6.22pm.
Ten minutes later it sent out a distress call saying two of its four engines caught fire.
The pilot tried to turn back but the jet exploded and a large fireball ripped into a crowded residential area.
The plane's crew of three and one passenger were killed.
There were no other passengers on the jumbo.
A witness said: ‘Two engines cut out and the plane started to eject fuel as it lost height.
‘There was a blinding flash as it came down.
I think about 10 or 20 buildings have been damaged.
‘There must be a tremendous loss of life.
‘I saw a woman run out past me down the street with her clothes and hair on fire.
‘She was shouting: ‘For God's sake get help.
There are dozens of families back in there’.’
Signal
The plane came down in Bilmermeer, an area made up predominantly of tenement blocks.
An official from Holland's air security office said the pilot sent a desperate Mayday signal just before the crash.
‘Another 90 seconds and he would have made it.’
Dutch police said they were investigating the possibility that a bomb was planted on the jet — although engine trouble was the likely cause.
Amsterdam police spokesman Sergeant Janice Verteegh said: ‘There are so many bodies we cannot count them yet.
‘The rescue services are still trying to put out fires.
‘The plane hit the seventh floor of the apartment building.
The blocks there are very big and there is a high population.
‘The crash happened at a time when a lot of people would have been in their homes.’
Witness Rikke Cate said victims were trapped in a towering inferno.
She said: ‘The entire building is on fire.
There must be hundreds of people living in that building.’
A hotel porter said he saw people on fire running from the block.
Flames
He said: ‘The plane was flying very low over buildings.
‘The next thing it crashed into the flats.’
Police spokeswoman Monique Boersema said fire crews were unable to enter the building which was in danger of collapsing or exploding.
Television showed the apartment buildings spewing smoke and flames and chaotic scenes of paramedics treating people on the ground for injuries.
One unidentified man told radio said he saw the plane flying northward very near the ground.
‘It was banked and a pillar of smoke rose from the right wing.
Then we saw the sky burst into red,’ he said.
A spokesman for the Amsterdam Fire Brigade said at least 30 flats had been destroyed.
He added: ‘Even if you calculate there may just be two people to an apartment that is a lot of people who may be killed.
‘Then there is the falling debris and concrete.
‘At the moment we are trying to dig people from the rubble.
But we don't know how many people there may still be trapped.’
TRAGEDY: El Al jet
FIREBALL: A cargo-carrying jumbo jet exploded in mid-air over a densely-populated suburb of Amsterdam and smashed into apartment blocks
EL AL's jet was downed by engine trouble yesterday
AGONY: A badly-injured victim of the crash is tended by rescue workers in the Amsterdam suburb
HORROR SCENE: Where the jumbo jet hit
CABINET ‘IN THE DARK’
THE Cabinet was never told of a German offer to reform Europe's money system, Kenneth Clarke and Michael Heseltine claimed yesterday.
Their statement is certain to cause another storm in Anglo-German relations.
For the Germans say they DID make the offer.
And unless they are lying, John Major and Norman Lamont kept the Cabinet completely in the dark.
According to Bundesbank officials, they first suggested on September 11 that Britain's problems would be eased if the pound shifted its position inside the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
Shambles
That was six days before Black Wednesday, when the Government's economic policy collapsed in shambles and Britain quit the ERM.
Major denies the offer was made.
And Clarke said: ‘I heard nothing about this supposed realignment until well after Black Wednesday.’
TORIES TURN THE SCREW TO SAVE £
Schools and NHS in cash threat
ANDY McSMITH
PUBLIC spending is set to be slashed in a desperate Government bid to save the pound, two Cabinet ministers said yesterday.
Their warnings came amid bleak forecasts that sterling will plunge to a new low during this week's Tory conference at Brighton.
Fresh cuts mean that schools, the health service, and bus and rail travellers will face another tough year.
And it was feared the Government might change the rules for claiming dole, to reduce a vast social security budget swollen by recession.
That would be a devastating blow to the long-term unemployed.
As the Government still reeled from Black Wednesday, some City experts reckoned the pound could fall to 2.2 German marks, from Friday's close of 2.43.
If that happens, sterling will have been devalued by a QUARTER in three weeks.
And with markets losing all confidence in beleaguered Chancellor Norman Lamont, Increasing numbers of money men backed calls for Mr Lamont to quit last night.
Keith Skeoch, chief economist at stockbroker James Capel, said: ‘Whatever he puts forward now in the way of economic policy won't be worth the paper it's written on.’
Higher
The gloomy prediction of cash curbs came from Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke and Trade Secretary Michael Heseltine.
Mr Clarke admitted no ‘responsible’ government could rule out tax or interest rate rises.
But he added: ‘Cuts in public spending are the Conservative approach.’
And Mr Heseltine said: ‘Our priorities are to keep public expenditure under control.’
Labour was horrified by the prospect of cuts.
Shadow Trade and Industry Secretary Robin Cook accused the Tories of being obsessed with their own ‘civil war’ when they should be working on a strategy to revive industry.
PRIORITIES: Heseltine
CASH CUTS: Clarke
Boss's coup
BOSSES have cashed in on the Euro money crisis.
They sold low-price share options — and pocketed huge profits as City prices soared.
Woolworth chief Geoff Mulcahy's shares cost £374,000 — and he sold them for a £1,037,000 profit.
Living in the shadow of death
KEVIN O'LONE/ANTHONY HARWOOD
IT'S THE nightmare that everyone who lives near a big airport dreads.
Last year it almost happened over London.
The capital came within 20 FEET of disaster when a packed British Airways jumbo jet, on its final approach to Heathrow Airport, roared towards a hotel.
The flight from Bahrain, with 263 people on board, veered away at the last moment, skimmed just 80ft above rush-hour traffic and narrowly missed another hotel before the landing was aborted.
Pilot William Stewart was later fined £2,000 for criminal negligence.
Terrible
The Amsterdam horror also brought back chilling memories for the people of Lockerbie, where 270 died when a Pan Am jumbo was blasted out of the sky by a terrorist bomb nearly four years ago.
Eleven people on the ground died as wreckage rained down.
As he watched TV pictures of the Amsterdam disaster, Lockerbie survivor John Smith, 78, said: ‘It brought it all back to me.
It was terrible.
I felt very sorry for all those poor people.’
Mr Smith and his wife were badly burned as they escaped from their blazing bungalow.
HE'S THE GREATEST
Tributes pour in for charity king
TRIBUTES poured in from showbiz stars as Leslie fought for his life in hospital last night.
Funnyman Eddie Large, who lives just a few miles away from The Price Is Right star, said: ‘We've been friends for 20 years and he's one of the nicest men I know.
‘I cannot believe what has happened.
I am horrified and wish him a very quick recovery.’
Pianist Russ Conway added: ‘I've known Leslie since the early 60s when we shared the stage on the Billy Cotton Band Show.
‘The entertainment world needs people like him.
He does so much for charity.’
Roly-poly comedian Bernard Manning said: ‘Leslie is a great man to work with.
‘I know he overcame a serious drink problem and is a very good family man.’
But Bernard added: ‘Everyone in showbusiness should have a driver.
‘The hours spend on the road are exhausting, and when you get tired the risk of crashing is very high.’
Leslie, who first hit the big time on kiddies' show Crackerjack, was about to host a new TV series of Stars In Their Eyes — nominated for an award as Britain's best light entertainment show.
A spokesman for makers Granada said: ‘All our thoughts are with his family at the moment.’
Diana wraps up well
ALL eyes were on Princess Diana last night as she stepped out in this stunning wrap-around dress.
She was in London for a Royal Gala ballet performance to helps an AIDS trust.
The Feuding Spencers — Centre Pages Picture: KENT GAVIN 
Blackmail charge
MICHAEL Bradbury, 50, is due to appear in court in Bournemouth today charged over an alleged blackmail plot against Sainsbury supermarkets.
Plane tough
EL AL is the most security-conscious airline in the world.
The ever-present threat of Palestinian terrorist attacks has forced the airline to introduce exhaustive security procedures.
After baggage and passport checks, passengers are individually quizzed by interrogators.
Their answers are carefully considered before they are allowed to board their plane.
Nazis in violent threat to Queen
MARK DOWDNEY
NEO-NAZI thugs are planning to target the Queen during her state visit to Germany this month.
She is in danger of running into violent protests, said an extreme right-wing group last night.
The biggest threat will be on October 22 when the Queen visits Dresden, a hotbed of neo-Nazism.
Extra security has been ordered in the city where 40,000 civilians died in an RAF raid in 1945.
A spokeswoman for the far-right Deutsche Volks- union said: ‘We can't rule out demonstrations when she appears with Bonn government officials.’
Jeered
She added: ‘We have no control over the skinheads and other neo-fascist activists.’
More than 600 neo-Nazis marched through Dresden at the weekend.
They jeered police, gave banned Hitler salutes and chanted: ‘Foreign pigs — we'll get you all.’
There may also be trouble when the Queen meets Chancellor Helmut Kohl in Bonn on October 20.
Hooligans showered him with rotten eggs and he was even punched in Schwerin, east Germany.
GUARDS: The Queen
HOSPITAL SMOKES BAN NEXT YEAR
GEORGINA WALSH
SMOKING is to be banned  throughout all hospitals next year.
The order is for the good of the seven million patients treated each year — and their 21 million visitors — says the Health Department.
Only long-stay patients will be able to light up after May 31.
The full ban will be announced on Wednesday as part of a new health drive.
Hospital shops will be told to clear cigarettes and tobacco from their shelves by December 31.
In the New Year, staff will be given advice on how to kick the habit.
But hospitals will be allowed to set aside smoking rooms for them and patients who are unable to stop.
Last year 110,000 people died and 254,000 were treated for smoking related illnesses, taking up 9,473 hospital beds every day.
It costs the NHS £4.5 million a year.
CABBIE RAPPED
THE cabbie who refused to drive blind MP David Blunkett and his guide dog has been ticked off.
Blackpool council ‘warned’ Brian Mitchenson after the incident at last week's Labour conference.
Sad farewell
RELATIVES of murdered Britons Joanne Walters and Caroline Clarke yesterday held a service at the death spot in the Australian bush.
Women are the money wizards
STEVE ATKINSON
MOST women reckon they're clever with cash.
And many resent the way financial ‘experts’ seem to look down on them.
A total of 37 in every 100 women believe that bankers treat them differently just because of their sex.
Of these, 18 per cent feel they are expected to take a bank's advice without question.
Fourteen per cent claim the men have a condescending attitude.
And one in a hundred say they have to use their ‘feminine charms’ to get their own way.
Managing
Yet 69 per cent think they are good at managing their own finances.
Nine out of ten wives share big decisions with their husbands.
And half of all women think they are BETTER than men at money matters, says a survey of 1,000 women by Good Housekeeping magazine with American Express.
Nearly all are seldom or never overdrawn — and only two per cent have no idea how much — or how little — is in the bank.
Bit of all Wright…
WACKY DJ Steve Wright's radio show is great for making love to.
Half the people asked if they had sex with the radio on were listening to the Radio 1 star, just voted Britain's top DJ.
Chat magazine said: ‘A lot of people must be doing it in the afternoon.’
Jail riot kills 111
A RIOT in a Brazilian jail left 111 convicts dead, it was revealed yesterday.
Troops were sent in to crush the uprising at Carandiru prison in Sao Paulo.
An official said most of the deaths were caused by the inmates.
But human rights groups accused guards of gunning down unarmed convicts.
Woman flasher at large!
A BUXOM woman stunned pensioner Jack Cookson — by leaping from a car and flashing her boobs.
Then she shouted an obscene suggestion at 65-year-old Jack and sped off.
The retired civil servant, who was walking his dog, rang police.
But he was so shocked by the experience in Preston, Lancs, he forgot to take the car number.
He said: ‘I think even the most broadminded of men would be taken aback by this.’
Police said the woman, aged about 20, could be prosecuted if Jack ‘felt threatened’.
They added: ‘Some men might feel fortunate to experience this sort of thing.’
Hosiery pretty girl
HERE'S a glimpse of what's new in the undie world — and there's a place for lace.
Model Kimberly certainly looked sexy in it at London's Hosiery Show yesterday.
Together, her lacy stockings and body cost around £30.
Better still girls, you could get your guys to buy them.
Then you can wear…and they can stare!
Picture: DENNIS JAMES
JAILED BRITS HOPE
IRAQ is reviewing the sentences of two Britons jailed last month, the Foreign Office said yesterday.
The news gave a glimmer of hope that Michael Wainwright, 42, and Paul Ride, 33, might get an early release.
Wainwright, from Sowerby Bridge, West Yorks, got 10 years and catering manager Ride seven years for allegedly entering Iraq illegally.
The FO said: ‘We're not sure how long the review will take or what it all means.’
Mrs Ride said: ‘I feel much encouraged.
My husband and Mr Wainwright were appealing Perhaps this is part of that.’
Ruby Tuesday
THE Appalachian Star, a US ruby worth about £14million, goes on show at London's Natural History Museum tomorrow.
I'M DYING OF AIDS ADMITS SKATE CHAMP CURRY
Gold medal star's weight drops to 9st
BILL DANIELS
STRICKEN Olympic skating star John Curry broke his silence yesterday to admit that he is dying from AIDS.
Revealing the torment he has endured since it was diagnosed, he said: ‘I don't want other sufferers to be frightened like I was.’
Blood tests confirmed he had the disease in December 1987 but he kept the tragic secret from his family for more than three years.
John, 43, whose weight has dropped to 8st 12lb, said that he tried to live a normal life for as long as possible.
‘I couldn't believe I had the virus.
After all, I felt as fit as a fiddle,’ he explained.
‘I was a fit and healthy young man who had always been active.
I couldn't sleep or eat for thinking about it but I decided I was not going to be beaten by AIDS.’
John was devastated when told he had the disease.
‘This was at a time when there was a lot of unpleasantness shown to people with AIDS,’ he said in an interview with The Mail on Sunday.
‘I thought people would snarl at me and say, ‘Keep away from me, you leper.’
Lover ‘I knew others who were HIV positive but people were terrified of being exposed.’
The ice champion, who has not had a lover since his AIDS was diagnosed, has never denied being homosexual.
He claimed that tournament judges had openly declared they would not place him first because he was ‘queer.’
John said his misery increased over the years as several friends died of AIDS.
He added: ‘It is hard to watch people in that situation.
You start to think, when is it your turn?’
John, whose dazzling style won an Olympic gold medal at the 1976 Winter Games, has had treatment for more than a year at St Mary's hospital, Paddington, West London.
Coping
Between bouts of care there he stays at his mother Rita's home in Binton, Warwickshire.
Three weeks ago doctors discovered he was suffering from a form of TB, although he is now recovering from that.
John told the paper: ‘I feel strong and I'm coping quite well.’
Binton's vicar, the Rev Peter Williams, said last night: ‘I understand his family want to keep the whole thing private.
‘They have the support of the whole village.’
GLORY DAYS: Ice star John Curry in 1976
LAST OF THE FEW…
Farewell to war heroes' airbase
RONALD RICKETTS
A LONE Spitfire flew over the RAF's most famous base yesterday in a final salute to The Few.
Moments after the fighter had dipped its wings, the RAF ensign was gently lowered for the last time at Biggin Hill, Kent.
And veterans of the Battle of Britain cursed the fight they had lost — their bitter campaign to save the historic base as a tribute to heroes.
Two campaigners, an Englishman and a Frenchman, brushed away tears as they recalled 453 airmen who never returned from World War 2 sorties.
‘It's tragic,’ said former Wing Commander Ian Cosby, who flew Spitfires from Biggin Hill in 1940.
Ian, 73, was the only one of The Few to bid a final farewell to the base.
Bravery ‘It should remain open,’ he said.
But his old comrade Alex Groux, who travelled from France for the poignant ceremony, reflected ruefully: ‘This was the one battle we could not win.’
Biggin Hill, which opened in 1917 as a Royal Flying Corps centre, is older than the RAF itself.
Its glory days came when Spitfire and Hurricane pilots scrambled to defeat Hitler's Luftwaffe despite overwhelming odds.
Wartime leader Winston Churchill summed up their bravery:
‘Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few.’
Shortly before he died Churchill visited Biggin Hill and spoke of the role it had played when Britain stood alone against Germany.
‘This station,’ he declared, ‘must never close.’
But RAF chiefs faced with defence cutbacks have decided that it will shut after all.
All 30 RAF personnel left at the base will go by Christmas.
Biggin Hill's last commanding officer, Wing Commander Les Palmer, said: ‘It's a very sad day — the end of an era.’
SALUTE: A Spitfire paid tribute yesterday
CLOSURE: Cutbacks mean Biggin Hill must go
F-WORD IS CHOPPED 30 TIMES FOR TELLY DIE HARD
ALEC LOM
CENSORS have sliced 30 F-words from the movie Die Hard for its first screening on British television.
And some violent scenes — accepted for US TV — were also left on the cutting room floor.
ITV's film clearance committee ordered the changes to the Hollywood blockbuster — starring Bruce Willis — before agreeing to its broadcast next week.
It is being shown on October 14 at 9pm, the time reckoned to mark the end of family viewing.
The man who edited the movie for TV is Pat Mahoney, who chairs the clearance committee.
Tough
He said last night: ‘We had to cut out around 30 F-words.
‘Guidelines tell us we cannot transmit an undue amount of bad language.
‘This film's a bit tough.
We trimmed the majority of the bad language and some of the excesses of violence as well.
‘Another scene cut was one where a man's brains are splattered over a window.’
Mr Mahoney added: ‘We had to voice-over some passages of dialogue.
‘The F-word word becomes ‘frig’ in some cases.’
Die Hard's action sequences won rave reviews when it was released four years ago.
Willis's pistol-packing New York cop John McClane is shown spraying victims with bullets.
STAR: Willis
‘Misery’ line hits buffers
ALAN LAW
A TELEPHONE moan line that promised to pass complaints about British Rail to the chairman has mysteriously shut down.
A BR spokesman said: ‘It had nothing to do with us.
And it did not pass complaints to us, or our chairman Sir Bob Reid.’
The Mirror rang the London firm that set up the line, Cablecom Productions.
A woman said: ‘The service has been withdrawn.
The person who deals with it is out of the country.’
BINGO!
WE'RE OFF TO EURO DISNEY
JILL TURNER
A WIN on the Daily Mirror's sparkling Diamond Bingo means a trip to Euro Disney is on the cards for David Hughes's eight grandchildren.
‘We're a very close family and I'm really looking forward to treating them,’ said ex-miner David, whose three sons are grown up.
‘Five of the grandchildren went to Euro Disney on a school trip and loved it but didn't have time to really do it justice.
‘I want to take them back there, with the others — and see it for myself.
‘At 71 I might not get the chance to go again.’
Along with his £10,000 jackpot David won something special for his wife Ivy — a gold and diamond eternity ring worth £149.
‘It's wonderful,’ he said, ‘I haven't been able to give her jewellery for a very long time.’
David, of Aberdare, South Wales, called house on No 32 in Game 231.
New Game — Page 24
TV COP SPENDER HAS 145MPH MOTOR NICKED
Joyriders nail Jimmy
FRANK CORLESS
TOUGH TV copper Spender has had his 145mph supercar nicked…by joyriders.
Actor Jimmy Nail, who plays the hard-nosed Geordie ‘tec, was back in his home town of Newcastle upon Tyne for only 12 hours when they pounced.
They broke into his brand new Ford Sierra Cosworth and raced away with it as he began work on another of his smash-hit Spender series.
And the £24,000 motor didn't look so new when it was found scratched a few hours later in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear.
Just like supercool Spender, 34-year-old Jimmy took it all in his stride yesterday.
‘Some welcome home,’ joked the star who has also topped the pop charts.
But he added seriously: ‘I understand these kids.
‘They are going out and pinching cars because they've got no money and nothing else to do.
‘If I was 17 I'd probably think I had nothing to lose either.’
But his comments angered a joyride victim's relative.
The uncle of 12-year-old Adele Thompson — killed by a joyrider in Toxteth, Liverpool — hit out: ‘He wouldn't have said it if he had been through the heartache we have suffered.’
SWIPED: A £24,000 Cosworth dream machine
NAIL: ‘Some welcome’
All eyes on Rod
A SUAVE Rod Stewart has specs appeal as he poses with his model wife Rachel Hunter.
The 47-year-old rocker's glasses caught the eye at a glittering showbiz charity ball in Hollywood — where he and Rachel were a focus of attention all night.
Everyone agreed they looked well suited…particularly Rod.
‘I saw babies flung from windows…burning people jumping for their lives’
WE'RE GOING DOWN Pages 2 & 3 FIREBALL ON GUNPOWDER MOUNTAIN Pages 8 & 9 
DEVASTATION: Smouldering ruins are all that is left of the spot where the doomed Israeli jumbo jet sliced through a block of flats in Amsterdam.
Picture: HARRY PAGE
200 DEAD
TOWERING INFERNO
BLAZING JET RIPS THROUGH 80 FLATS
‘It was just a sea of flames…they have all gone, children and everyone’
MARK DOWDNEY/KEVIN O'LONE/DON MACKAY/DENNIS NEWSON/NICOLA BRIGGS/ANTHONY HARWOOD
TWO hundred people were feared dead last night after a blazing Israeli jet smashed into two blocks of flats.
The buildings erupted into a towering inferno as the plane, carrying only four people, exploded on impact.
The massive El Al Boeing 747 cargo jet gouged a canyon six apartments wide and five floors deep in one block.
A city official said 80 flats — home to 239 people — were ‘blown away’ as the 400-ton jumbo scythed through the buildings in an Amsterdam suburb.
Police did not expect to find anyone alive there.
At least 300 people living on storeys closer to the ground were hurt in the nine-floor blocks, which contained 480 flats.
Flames leapt hundreds of feet high, illuminating the jagged edges of the blocks.
Twenty people were reported killed after leaping from windows in the buildings.
The jumbo took off from Amsterdam for Tel Aviv at 6.22pm.
Ten minutes later it sent out a distress call: ‘Two of the four engines are on fire.’
The pilot tried to turn back to Schipol airport.
But Flight 1862, carrying 100 tons of fuel for its five-hour flight to Israel, exploded in a large fireball as it ripped into the flats.
The three crew and a woman passenger were killed.
Two engines were found in a lake nine miles from the disaster area.
A witness said: ‘Two engines cut out and the plane started to eject fuel over a lake as it lost height.
‘There was a blinding flash as it came down.
‘There must be a tremendous loss of life.
‘I saw a woman run out past me down the street with her clothes and hair on fire.
‘She was shouting: ‘For God's sake get help.
There are dozens of families back in there.’‘
A mother ran screaming from the building trying to find her children.
‘It's a sea of fire.
Everyone has gone.
Children…everyone,’ she cried.
Marja van Terwijden had just finished dinner when the plane hit the apartment blocks.
She said: ‘I was in the kitchen doing the dishes.
I suddenly saw a burning plane coming down from the sky…with its nose pointing towards the apartment buildings.
‘It just hit the buildings fully.
I thought I was having a nightmare.
‘The whole thing caught fire and people in the street fell down, hit by pieces of the plane.’
A distraught mother said: ‘We got out of our car and we saw an aeroplane flying very low over our house.
‘My husband said, ‘He's going down.’
‘We watched and boom!
Fire everywhere.
‘I'm looking for my children, I don't know where they are.’
The plane came down in Bijlmermeer, an area of predominantly tenement blocks in Duivendrecht suburb.
An official from Holland's air security office said the pilot sent a desperate Mayday signal just before the crash.
He added: ‘Another 90 seconds and he would have made it.’
Dutch police said they were investigating the possibility that a bomb was planted on the jet — although engine trouble was the likely cause.
Amsterdam police spokesman Sergeant Janice Verteegh said: ‘There are so many bodies we cannot count them yet.
‘The rescue services are still trying to put out fires after five and a half hours.
‘The plane hit the seventh floor of the apartment building.
The blocks there are very big and there is a high population.
‘The crash happened at a time when a lot of people would have been in their homes watching TV.
It was a big sports night.’
Witness Rikke Cate said victims were trapped in a towering inferno.
She said: ‘One entire building is on fire.
There must be hundreds of people living there.’
A hotel porter said he saw people on fire running from the block.
And a photographer told how he saw a girl of about six so severely burned that a fireman could not bring himself to treat her by dousing her with a hose.
Police spokeswoman Monique Boersema said fire crews were unable to enter the buildings which were in danger of collapsing or exploding.
Television showed the apartment buildings spewing smoke and flames and chaotic scenes of paramedics treating people on the ground.
The scene was both surreal and frantic, as helicopters carrying strobe lights tried to illuminate the scene for hundreds of rescue workers.
A cordon of police struggled to keep back onlookers and relatives desperate for news.
Others outside tried to dodge the fires as flaming high-octane aviation fuel set a parkland near the flats alight.
Disaster
The blast was heard 12 miles away.
A spokesman for the Amsterdam Fire Brigade added: ‘At the moment we are trying to dig people from the rubble.
‘But we don't know how many people there may still be trapped.’
Amsterdam's three main hospitals called in staff from all round the city as the toll of dead and wounded rose.
THE 13-year-old airliner — the newest in El Al's jumbo fleet — carried hundreds of passengers until a few months ago.
It was recently converted from a passenger plane to cargo use.
When it was on scheduled service, the jumbo would have had up to 450 passengers and 12 crew on board.
CARNAGE: Flames billow from the crater where the huge jet finally came to rest after ripping a canyon through the shattered Amsterdam apartment blocks last night Picture: DE TELEGRAAF
SCENE OF HORROR: Wreckage from the jet strewn across the scorched earth near the block of flats
FIREBALL’ An El Al cargo jumbo jet exploded and plummeted into blocks of flats
DEVASTATION The hellish scene faced by emergency services in Amsterdam last night when a huge El Al jumbo jet ripped through suburban apartment blocks after losing two of its four engines soon after taking off from the city
FIREBALL: An El Al cargo jumbo jet exploded and plummeted into blocks of flats
MERCY MISSION: Rescuers tend a badly-injured victim of the fireball nightmare
ACTION: Firemen haul on hoses in a desperate bid to quench the flames raging through the flats
How minutes ticked by to fireball hell
MARTIN PHILLIPS
DISASTER struck within minutes of the jumbo's take-off at 18.22 on Sunday.
18.29 People in Almere district, south east of the city see jet burning.
18.29 Pilot sends Mayday saying: ‘Engine number three is on fire.’
Airport's first alarm phase.
18.32 The jumbo loses two engines.
18.34 Witnesses see plane heading back, east to west.
18.36 People in the Bijlmermeer hear jet in trouble.
18.37 Aircraft losing fuel and height.
18.38 Plane crashes.
Police and airport alerted.
18.45 First police and firemen arrive.
Taxis ferry injured and relatives to emergency centres.
19.18 City disaster plan in action.
21.07 Large sections of fire under control.
01.00 Rescue effort scaled down.
Twelve bodies recovered.
03.00 Fire breaks out again in top floor of apartment block.
04.00 Two more bodies recovered.
06.00 Police resume full search.
TRAGEDY OF A WIFE
THE only passenger on board the jumbo was a woman, it was revealed.
Her identity was unknown, but she was believed to be the wife of an El Al employee working in Holland.
Meanwhile, Israeli Premier Yitzhak Rabin sent a message to the Dutch Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers after the disaster.
He said: ‘We are crying at the deaths and hope the injured will soon recover.’
MIRACLE LEAP FOR LIFE
A MOTHER leapt from a second-floor window with her son aged three in her arms and her daughter aged six.
All escaped unhurt.
Ruth Atucehene, an immigrant from Ghana, said: ‘I had just come home from church and I was in the house with my children.’
She added: ‘I didn't see anything, just heard a loud noise, and suddenly my home was on fire.
‘I grabbed my little son and jumped from the window.
Thank God, my daughter jumped with us.’
RAMPAGE BY LOOTERS
LOOTERS moved into the disaster area last night to plunder shops and abandoned flats.
While hard-pressed police were occupied in rescue work, the heartless thieves descended on local shopping centres.
And a witness told how he had seen looters running through evacuated apartments hunting for anything they could carry away.
Special riot squads were ordered in from outside the city to deal with the gangs.
We may never know full toll
MARTIN PHILLIPS
THE final death toll from the El Al disaster might never be known.
Officials feared last night it will be at least 300 but the crash area is notorious for sheltering illegal immigrants.
Their names would not appear in the lists of people living in the shattered apartment blocks.
Amsterdam police sparked racial anger recently when they estimated that there were about 10,000 illegal Ghanaians in the Bijlmermeer district of the city alone.
And one officer at the crash scene yesterday said: ‘There are people who live there who should not and the building that was hit is one of the worst.
‘If there were people in those flats without registering, we may never know.’
Feared
Up to 30 victims could have died in a basement community centre directly below where the jumbo jet struck.
It crashed in a fireball early on Sunday evening, as many people settled down to watch television.
The number of people officially registered in some of the flats may have been swelled by visitors from neighbouring apartments.
Less than half of the 140 pupils at a nearby primary school were in class yesterday and it was feared they might have perished.
The disaster is already set to be the world's worst for ground casualties inflicted by a crashing aircraft.
In 1976, 100 people were killed when another cargo jumbo jet ploughed into a crowded street in Santa Cruz, Bolivia.
KIDS IN TEARS AT SCHOOL
GRIEF stricken children arrived weeping yesterday at one local secondary school — where two pupils were among the missing.
‘It is a nightmare for us,’ said headmaster Keef Visser, who taught one of the missing boys.
‘Many of our children have seen awful things.
They have heard screaming all through the night.
‘Many children were weeping — in every single class at least one child has lost relatives, friends or neighbours.’
Builders to turn screw
ANGRY building bosses set off in a ‘battle bus’ yesterday — to confront Ministers at the Tory conference and demand action.
Before they left they blasted the Government for demolishing more than 400,000 jobs in the industry in three years.
‘We haven't had it so bad for 22 years,’ fumed Sir Brian Hill, president of the Building Employers Confederation.
‘Orders are low and the position is very serious indeed.
The sharp fall in employment in the industry is very alarming.’
NURSES IN 8PLEA
HARD-UP nurses yesterday called for an 8.7 per cent rise — amid fears of pay curbs.
They said stretched services would be further hit if they were made to ‘pay the price for the Government's economic mistakes’.
Job cuts are already being made and newly-qualified nurses are going straight on the dole.
The Royal College of Nursing, COHSE and NUPE told their Pay Review Body that ‘any further erosion’ of their position would confirm the low-pay image of nursing.
A typical staff nurse earns £10,800-£12,400 a year.
Bomb plot axed from EastEnders
SCRIPTWRITER David Yallop planned to pep up EastEnders by killing off Pete Beale with an IRA bomb.
But he was blown out of his £78,000-a-year contract instead, the High Court heard yesterday.
Mr Yallop, it was said, had a brief to reduce the cast in the ratings war against rival soaps.
His idea was for a giant terror bomb to explode accidentally.
Stallholder Pete would have been among those killed and Wicksy would have been paralysed.
But the BBC feared a probe by the Broadcast Standards Commission.
It said the scripts showed ‘errors of judgement and taste.’
Mr Yallop, who was hired in 1989, claims the BBC broke its contract.
AIDS blackmail
AN AIDS victim called ‘The Terminator’ is threatening to contaminate supermarket food with his infected blood unless he gets £300,000.
He claimed in a blackmail note to have doctored 27 items in nine of the 97 stores belonging to the Budgens group based in Ruislip, Middlesex.
Nothing has been found.
CHARLIE CHEERS DI BY PHONE
BILL AKASS
PRINCESS Diana's young brother Charlie has revealed that he regularly phones to boost her morale.
‘I feel it's my duty to remind her that she is adored and does an exceptional amount of good for an awful lot of people,’ he says.
The 28-year-old Earl Spencer's reassuring calls were disclosed as Di visited South London's tough Brixton area to launch a project aimed at fighting drug and alcohol abuse.
She quickly made friends with the Reverend Esme Beswick, general secretary of the Joint Council for Anglo-Caribbean Churches.
She also heard some hot gospel music — and liked it so much she asked for more.
One number that had her tapping her feet was called I've Got A Feeling Everything's Gonna Be All Right.
Brother Charlie, in an interview with Hello! magazine, says: ‘I feel immensely protective towards my sister.’
But does she ever feel lonely?
Charlie says: ‘I think it must be very difficult every day to give so much of yourself to so many people — and not feel in a way that, since you've given a great deal, therefore you deserve love and warmth when you go home.’
The Feuding Spencers — Centre Pages 
EYE TO EYE: Diana launching an anti-drug abuse project with the Rev Esme Beswick yesterday
DUTIFUL: Althorp
TV hols Carter sees off gunman
A GUNMAN woke TV travel star John Carter and his wife in the middle of the night and told them: ‘I'm going to shoot you.’
But the fearless Wish You Were Here? reporter leapt out of bed and the raider fled.
John's wife Sheila told of her shock when she woke to find a gun trained on them at their home in Bromley, Kent.
She said: ‘I woke John and told him we had burglars.
‘The intruder then said he had a gun.
‘John sat up and said: ‘Oh, have you now?’, and chased the man.
Jumped ‘The gunman got out of a window and must have jumped at least 25 feet to the ground.
‘How he didn't break his leg, I do not know.’
Sheila and John think the burglar must have been in the house when they returned from a night out.
It was four hours later when they woke to find him at the foot of the bed saying: ‘I've got a gun and I'm going to shoot you.’
Sheila reckons police should soon be hot on the trail of the burglar, who stole a CD player and sentimental items.
‘I got an excellent look at him,’ she said.
FEARLESS: John
I'M GOING BLIND SAYS SIR JOHN MILLS
Star's secret anguish
PAUL STANLEY
VETERAN actor Sir John Mills has revealed he is going blind.
The 84-year-old Oscar-winner has been fighting a losing battle against failing sight for the past year.
He swore his family to secrecy and tried to continue living a normal life, making regular stage appearances and several movies.
But now he believes that little can be done to help.
The suave star of films including Ryan's Daughter, The Colditz Story and Ice Cold in Alex said: ‘I cannot see straight ahead.
I have to look sideways to see people.
‘I had great difficulty coming to terms with it and adjusting to the problem.
‘I was completely thrown.
I still feel frustration and anger.’
Sir John, who heads a theatrical family which includes actress daughters Hayley and Juliet, said his biggest heartache was being forced to give up motoring and golf.
He added: ‘What I really miss is jumping into my car and popping to the shops.’
The stiff upper-lipped actor, who has been married to wife Mary for 51 years, was diagnosed as suffering from detached retinas 12 months ago.
The condition was possibly caused by years spent under bright stage lights.
Daughter Hayley said: ‘For a while he was able to watch television by sitting in the hall with a pair of binoculars.
‘But even that doesn't work now.’
She added: ‘He is unable to read a script and has all his lines put on a tape by my 14-year-old niece, Melissa, and learns them from that.’
Sir John — who lives in Denham, Bucks — recently returned from Poland where, ironically, he played a blind man for a new film.
HIT HARD: Sir John misses his golf
Taking flight
THREE prisoners escaped from Bois d'Arcy jail near Paris yesterday, using a helicopter.
THE FIREBALL THAT EXPLODED ON GUNPOWDER MOUNTAIN
TERROR DIVE OF DOOMED JUMBO
THIS is the horror of Gunpowder Mountain — the tower block smashed by a jumbo jet fireball.
An eerie orange glow lights up the devastation of Bijlmermeer — the Amsterdam suburb set ablaze by a crashing El Al plane.
Dutch journalist Rob Rib saw the fiery jet hurtle past his window as he and his family were finishing supper on Sunday.
Rob, who lives in a fifth floor apartment, said: ‘The noise got louder and louder.
We ran to the window and saw this huge fireball heading towards us and growing bigger and bigger.
HE SAID: ‘Within seconds it had grown to 300ft high, almost the height of a tower block, and seemed to be rolling towards us, glowing brighter all the time.
‘I screamed, ‘Lie down, lie down,’ and pushed my wife and child to the floor.
‘I never saw the outline of a plane, just this incredible ball of flame.
It roared past the window, then exploded into the block of flats opposite.
‘My mother ran to the balcony and beneath her was a huge piece of wreckage from the plane still blazing.
‘People were running everywhere.
Buildings were in flames and I could hear the screams and moans of the trapped and injured.
We heard several loud explosions, then saw the enormous glow of fire.’
In the ghostly orange light, the full tragedy of Sunday's disaster was plain to see.
A JAGGED line showed where the jumbo tore into the ten-storey block called Kruitsberg…which means Gunpowder Mountain.
Shattered homes were ablaze and trees torched by flaming aviation fuel.
The gaping hole in the 10-storey building still bleeds smoke and the stench of burnt fuel oil is sickening.
Sixty flats have been wiped out.
Several hundred victims are feared buried under tons of broken metal and tangled metal.
Rescuers digging slowly and in silence could see bodies but could not reach them.
They dig without urgency and with little hope.
They fear in their hearts there will be no survivors.
While searchers toil, people from all over Holland have come to see Bijlmermeer burn — and to collect souvenir shrapnel.
Opportunist thugs tried to loot a nearby shopping centre and to raid the burnt-out flats but police were quick to move in.
It did not stop other youths stealing police radios from emergency vehicles to add to the confusion.
SPEEDY TORY MP FINED £55
TORY MP Teresa Gorman was fined £55 yesterday for speeding.
She admitted driving her Ford Fiesta at 50mph in a 30mph limit in Streatham, south west London.
Charges of failing to produce or not having required documents were dropped by magistrates in Camberwell Green.
Gorman, 61 — MP for Billericay in Essex — did not appear because she was at the Tory conference in Brighton.
FINED: Gorman
Fan stays tuned on goal line
FOOTBALL-MAD Mike Grimsley gets a pal to tune in to match commentaries on the radio — then listens in over the phone.
Mike is a Derby County fan who lives in Swansea.
So when the team plays at home, his chum in Derby switches on the local sports show ready for Mike's call.
The pal then puts his phone receiver to the radio and Mike listens in for the next 90 minutes — cost £6.75.
Grocer Mike, 44, who dons full County kit for the occasion, said: ‘I wouldn't miss it for anything.’
Bride, 23 for Alvin
POP star Alvin Stardust, 47, has secretly married 23-year-old dancer Julie Payne.
They met four years ago in the London run of the musical Godspell.
Alvin, whose biggest hit was Jealous Mind in 1974, has been married twice before.
He and actress Liza Goddard were divorced in 1987.
DEADLY GUN RAMPAGE OF LOVESICK  SQUADDIE 
‘Eight-pint soldier blew away two in siege terror’
DON MACKAY
LOVESICK squaddie Gregory Hobbins shot dead a security guard and severely wounded a policeman in a three-hour terror siege, a court heard yesterday.
He blasted them with a powerful assault rifle after knocking back eight pints and storming his girlfriend's flat, it was alleged.
Yet Hobbins would not have been able to get hold of the bullets if a broken cabinet in his barracks had been repaired.
And it was only the brave pleading of hostage Barbara Brady that persuaded him to hand the ammunition over, the Old Bailey was told.
Hobbins, 30, a Coldstream Guards lance corporal and regimental policeman, lived with Barbara in West London.
But she later moved out and ended their affair.
Distraught Hobbins began pestering her, but apologised when she complained to his bosses at Chelsea Barracks.
Then, still depressed at being ditched, he drank eight pints on a night out with other squaddies, said prosecutor Graham Boal.
At 1.15am, as they slept, Hobbins allegedly crept into the guardroom and took the rifle.
He had a key to the armoury, but not one to the ammunition safe.
That was kept in a cabinet — but ‘regrettably,’ said Mr Boal, the lock on it had been broken for months.
Shouted
He said Hobbins took the key, helped himself to a 20-round magazine, and stole a fellow soldier's car to drive to Barbara's Harlesden bedsit.
He shouted her name, but she only let him in after he threatened to kick down the door.
Soon after, neighbours heard her shout ‘get the police’ and dialled 999.
PC Royston Daniels, 26, ran up the stairs and told Hobbins to open up.
The officer was than joined from the next flat by security guard Christopher Coyle, 39.
Moments later, the court heard, Hobbins fired twice through the door.
Mr Coyle was fatally hit in the chest.
PC Daniels suffered terrible arm injuries and will never resume active duty again.
Hobbins, who surrendered after threatening to kill himself, denies murder, attempted murder and firearms offences.
The trial continues.
COURAGEOUS: PC Daniels was hit in the arm
DEADLY: The assault rifle Hobbins is said to have used
SLY'S TARDIS
FILM star Sylvester Stallone paid £12,500 yesterday for a police box described as Dr Who's original Tardis.
He bought it at a London auction — along with a bath used by Madonna in the film Shanghai Surprise — for his Planet Hollywood restaurant.
But last night Dr Who experts said Rambo may be stuck in a time warp.
They claimed the first Tardis, as used in the 1963 series starring William Hartnell, collapsed 16 years ago.
BOXED-IN: Stallone
LOVER SEES MUGGERS MURDER FLORIDA BRIT
Postie is gunned down on holiday
MICHAEL McDONOUGH
A BRITON was shot dead protecting his fiancee when muggers ambushed them only hours after they arrived in Florida.
One of the gunmen blasted Keith Thompson, 42, at point-blank range, police said last night.
His grief stricken sweetheart Anne Sole, 32, sobbed: ‘There was this loud bang, then there was silence.
He slumped down and he was dead.
‘There was just the smell of the gunsmoke and the blood on his shirt and the killers had gone.’
The English couple had just pulled into a motel car park with two friends for a two-week holiday in the Disneyworld resort of Orlando.
They were confronted by the robbers who demanded cash.
Postal worker Keith, from Chelmsford, Essex, refused to hand over his wallet, and the thugs moved towards Anne.
Keith stepped in to stop them — and paid with his life.
Waste
Deputy sheriff Carlos Pedilla said: ‘He fell to the ground and never regained consciousness.’
As Anne headed back to Britain last night, Keith's dad was making plans to collect his son's body.
He told US police: ‘It was such a waste.
He was such a good man.’
The killing follows a series of brutal attacks on British tourists.
In April, designer Julie Scott, 27, from Manchester, was shot dead by a junkie in New Orleans.
And last August, Oxfordshire housewife Rose Hayward, 59, was wounded by a mugger in Miami's Liberty City district.
Best slur
FORMER soccer hero George Best won undisclosed libel damages in the High Court yesterday.
Magazine Star Kicks admitted they were wrong to claim he had ‘a reputation for wild drug orgies.’
LIBEL WIN: George
The tights fantastic for Kim!
SLIP on these tights, girls, and you'll look a real smarty pants — just like sexy Kimberly here.
The funwear gives the impression you're fully dressed from top (well, middle) to bottom — boots and all.
It went on display at London's Hosiery Show yesterday.
And it gave a whole new meaning to tight trousers!
Picture: ARNOLD SLATER
Pinter drama
THE playwright Harold Pinter was among guests who fled in night clothes when fire broke out at a Brighton hotel yesterday.
Salon girl topless in a book of haircuts
A HAIRDRESSER whose boss slipped topless pictures of her into a style book for his male customers won a sex discrimination case yesterday.
Joker Laurence Garber also pasted up a sexy picture of part-time model Caroline Thrumble in his salon.
Angry Caroline, 26, told an industrial tribunal that Mr Garber seized the saucy snaps after she left them in the staff room at the Trim N Proper salon in Ickenham, Middlesex.
Invaded
She quit after three months in the job.
The tribunal chairman said: ‘Her privacy was invaded, but she does model and I do not think this was a very high level of injured feelings.
‘Any damages are not going to give her a holiday in the Caribbean.’
Earlier Mr Garber told the tribunal: ‘If a male member of staff belonged to the Chippendales and brought in photos I would have done the same.’
TORTURE BY PHONE
Pervert made women strip
SAMUEL JAMES
PHONE pervert Simon Wadland ordered women to strip naked after convincing them he was holding their husbands hostage.
Then he terrorised the hysterical wives into mutilating their private parts with needles and pins, a court heard yesterday.
Several victims were so afraid they wouldn't see their loved ones again they set fire to their pubic hair.
Married sheep-farmer Wadland, 29, was jailed for five years after admitting making threats to kill and being a public nuisance.
Prosecutor Nigel Godsmark said he preyed on 270 women over a three-year period.
Among them were a 14-year-old girl, a pregnant housewife and a 63-year-old pensioner.
At first Wadland picked out mothers and rang claiming to be holding their daughters hostage.
Then he began phoning wives.
Mr Godsmark said: ‘Monetary gain was not the motive.
He simply got pleasure from making such calls.
‘Twelve women were driven to injure themselves out of fear for the lives of their husbands or loved ones.
‘Some are still so frightened that they can't answer the phone.’
One woman was on the phone to Wadland when her husband returned home.
Hate
‘He walked in to see her standing in the kitchen naked with burnt pubic hair,’ said Mr Godsmark.
Wadland told Northampton Crown Court: ‘I am well aware I've done a lot of hurt and damage.
No one can hate me more than I hate myself.’
Tony McGeorge, defending, described him as a friendly, likeable and highly respected farmer.
But Judge Julian Hall told Wadland, of Woodford Halse, near Banbury, Oxon: ‘You violated and humiliated women with chilling disregard.’
A mucky message shocker for cops
PATRICK MULCHRONE
POLICE were probing an obscene call last night…on their own Telex system.
The message flashed to every machine in the force, saying ‘Superintendent XXXX is nothing but a big, obnoxious, useless c***.’
Even shocked chief constable David Wilmot received a print-out.
But while bobbies were chortling throughout Greater Manchester police, Supt XXXX was reported to be ‘incensed’.
Coded
The mucky message carried the name of a constable at the top.
And he was hauled in front of senior officers at Bolton police HQ yesterday.
But it is believed he was off duty when the telex was sent.
Colleagues fear someone may have used his coded authorisation to operate the machine.
MIRROR MONEY
Cold as debt
HOW TO COPE IF HOME HEATING IS BURNING A HOLE IN YOUR POCKET
ANDREW KEENAN /JOHN HUSBAND
ALMOST seven million British families are suffering below the official breadline.
They are having a real struggle to pay their heating bills, according to the Child Poverty Action Group.
With winter approaching and the slump  growing the situation looks like getting worse.
In 1988 the DSS abolished heating allowances for parents with young children, pensioners, the sick and people in poor housing.
The only help now offered is a cold-weather payment of £6 a week — but only if the temperature is an average zero  degrees for seven consecutive days.
So what can you do if your heating bills are burning a hole in your  housekeeping ?
Your first port of call should be the Citizens Advice Bureaux.
If you are in arrears they can tell you the best way of tackling the problem as well as helping to work out your budget.
They will even phone your gas or electricity company to negotiate repayments.
If you are on Income Support the CAB can calculate whether a prepayment meter or deductions from your dole is the best option.
But the wisest course of action is to tackle the problem at source and cut your fuel bills.
The official Energy Efficiency Unit suggests these cheap, easy ways of saving on heating costs: TO cut your bill by 10 per cent turn down your thermostat by one degree Centigrade.
A JACKET for your water tank will cost between £6 to £8 and should save you £15 to £20 a year.
A THERMOSTAT for you hot-water cylinder costs as little as £5, but can save you up to £15 a year.
The Government also gives grants for loft insulation and draft-proofing to people claiming Income Support, Community Charge Benefit, Housing Benefit, Family Credit and Disability Working Allowance.
If you are in any of these categories the standard  contribution is £10.70 for loft insulation and £7.50 for draft proofing.
Opt for the two and your share is £16.
Both are good investments, insulation costing £150 will will save you £60 to £70 a year, while draft-proofing worth £83 saves up to £40 a year.
Phone the Energy Action Grants Agency on freephone 0800 181 667 to see if you qualify.
You can also ask them for their three FREE booklets on energy saving.
The Child Poverty Action Group has also published the Fuel Rights Handbook, which explains your legal rights.
Get it from a library or phone 071 253 3406
Secret gay life of AIDS victim Denholm Elliott
HILARY BONNER
ACTOR Denholm Elliott who died from AIDS yesterday was a secret gay, it was revealed last night.
The twice-married 70-year-old star had been ill for three years.
His agent Jean Diamond said the cause of death was ‘AIDS-related TB’.
His death shocked colleagues.
But a gay friend said: ‘It was no secret that Denholm was bisexual.’
And former EastEnders star Michael Cashman said: ‘It was well known.
He was frequently seen in gay haunts.’
Hard-drinking Elliott, who once boasted of a ‘very active’ sex life, died at his home on Ibiza surrounded by his wife and two children.
Two months ago, his gaunt and haggard appearance on a TV ad shocked viewers.
But wife Susan, 47, denied her husband had AIDS and blamed his two-stone weight loss on a perforated stomach ulcer.
She said: ‘Denholm puts it down to years of booze.
Doctors said his stomach was like a teabag.’
Last night, as tributes flooded in, Susan and her children Jennifer, 27, and Mark, 25, stayed behind locked doors.
Elliott was one of Britain's most talented character actors who specialised in playing world-weary, upper-crust men who often drank too much.
Revered by fellow professionals, he was such a captivating scene-stealer that aspiring actors were told: ‘Never work with children, dogs or Denholm Elliott.’
He upstaged Eddie Murphy in Trading Places and gave Sean Connery and Harrison Ford a run for their money in Indiana Jones And The Last Crusade.
And he will be long remembered for his roles in The Missionary, A Private Function and Defence Of The Realm.
The crumple-faced star — known for his love of the good life — once said: ‘I'd rather stay in the second line.
‘As a character actor you get interesting parts, good money and enough time off to enjoy it.’
Elliott was educated at Malvern College, where his life was hell.
He once returned to his old school and told staff: ‘By the time I've paid my analyst as much as my father paid you, he may have undone the damage you did.’
After dropping out of RADA he joined the RAF in the war, was shot down in a bombing mission over Denmark and spent three years in a Polish PoW camp.
Passion
It was there that he developed his passion for acting, joining a prisoners' drama group.
After the war, he broke into films with The Sound Barrier in 1949 followed by The Cruel Sea in 1952.
But after a spectacular start his career faltered.
His 1954 marriage to Born Free star Virginia McKenna broke up and he hit the bottle.
In 1962, he married American actress Susan and by 1966 he was on the up again playing a seedy abortionist in the hit movie Alfie.
There followed a succession of unforgettable roles upstaging stars in Britain and the US.
They included taking over from Sir Alec Guinness as TV spy George Smiley.
In 1980 he won a BAFTA award for best actor.
He was made a CBE in 1988.
As rakish in real life as on the screen, Elliott had a passion for solo travel, fast motorbikes and playing the Stock Exchange.
He said of his marriage: ‘I still do things like dashing off to Bangkok.
‘It needs an understanding wife.
But Susan and I have a very open marriage.’
Last night, film director Michael Winner said: ‘When I heard he was ill my first thought was of AIDS because he was an active bisexual.
It is very sad.’
Wicked
Glenda Jackson, now a Labour MP, said: ‘He was a wonderful actor and wonderfully wicked to work with.’
Donald Pleasance said he was ‘upset and shocked’ and Joss Ackland said he was ‘a joy to work with’.
Elliott once said: ‘Actors should be like shrimps against sand — barely noticeable but registering their passing.’
But he was too great for that to be true.
SECRET: Denholm
FIRST LOVE: Elliott weds star Virginia McKenna
NEW LOVE: Elliott with second wife Susan
Rocky road
THE slump in car sales goes on.
Four per cent fewer cars were sold last month than in September last year.
Re-covered
STRUGGLING Municipal Mutual Insurance, which covers 90 per cent of local councils, announced last night that it is resuming full payment of claims.
OH GOD, WE'RE GOING DOWN…
Last words of crash jet pilot
MARTIN PHILLIPS
MARK DOWDNEY
ISRAELI pilot Isaac Fuchs knew he was going to die when he spoke his last five words.
‘My God, we're going down,’ he cried as his blazing El Al jet hurtled towards a huge housing complex in an Amsterdam suburb.
Seconds later, the 400-ton cargo plane exploded in a fireball as it smashed into two blocks of flats — killing all four aboard and several hundred on the ground.
Captain Fuchs got the first warning seven minutes after leaving Schiphol airport at 6.22 Sunday evening.
He told the control tower: ‘I have lost No 3 engine.’
His voice was calm and there was little panic, said tearful Dutch transport minister Hanna May yesterday.
But three minutes later Captain Fuchs knew he was in real trouble when the unbelievable happened — the jumbo's second starboard engine caught fire.
Still calm, he asked Schiphol for an emergency landing.
He told them: ‘I have to do it very quickly otherwise everything will go wrong.’
Controllers urged him to make for a remote runway which would take him over fields and small villages.
But he insisted on Runway 27 — flying directly over crowded blocks of flats in the suburb of Bijlmermeer.
‘It's my only chance,’ he told them.
He circled his crippled plane above the densely-populated suburb, dumping fuel in a lake.
But the jet carrying 114 tons of machinery, textiles and perfume, and 80 tons of fuel, was still too heavy.
As it dropped like a stone from 6,500ft, Captain Fuchs spoke for the last time.
The horror on the ground was watched by mother-of-four Gezda Mostaard, 42.
She saw the flaming jet slam into the block where her friends lived 100 yards away.
She said: ‘Its nose hit the third floor of the block with its wings tilted at an angle.
I think the steep angle may have saved many lives.
‘But then there was the explosion and screaming and people jumping from every floor.
‘I saw babies flung out from windows and people who were burning were jumping for their lives.
It was like hell.’
In the chill light of dawn, searchers worked grimly but without hope of finding anyone still alive under the tons of rubble.
The remains of a few victims were taken to a makeshift mortuary in a hangar at Schiphol.
Among all the debris, a grey sodden teddy bear was found near a woman's black shoe.
In the black and charred trees hung a macabre array of jeans.
Shocked
On the ground floor of the tower block, soccer fans had crowded into a club to watch highlights of the weekend's games.
Now the club lies under pulverised concrete slabs.
Wearing a black cape, shocked Queen Beatrix visited the crash scene with Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers.
Fire chief Hugo Ernst said it could take four days to retrieve all the bodies.
Officials fear the death toll could be up to 300.
But the final figure may never be known for the flats were notorious for sheltering illegal immigrants.
Outraged residents protested last night over the decision to allow the crippled aircraft to fly over their homes.
They were joined by air experts who claimed that the disaster could have been avoided.
They questioned whether air traffic controllers should have over-ruled Captain Fuchs and insisted on him using a remote runway.
Racing
It emerged yesterday that they thought they were dealing with a technical problem, not a full-scale emergency.
Fire engines were sent racing to Runway 27, but ambulances were left inside their station.
A Chinese Jumbo jet crashed in an almost identical way only ten months ago.
The China Airlines Boeing 747-200 cargo carrier also suffered a double engine failure.
Five crew died when the plane slammed into a hillside near Taipei four days after Christmas.
IMPACT: An arrow shows where the stricken Jumbo plunged on to flats in the complex visited by a shocked Queen Beatrix (inset) yesterday
PILOT’ Captain Fuchs
CHASM OF DEATH: The sliced-off section of one of the apartment blocks.
Hundreds of bodies are feared buried under the rubble Picture: HARRY PAGE
Yet another fine mess…
LAUREL AND HARDY ON THE TRAIL OF THE LOATHSOME WHINE
STEPHEN WHITE
LAUREL and Hardy went to the seaside yesterday…and found the Tories looking washed up.
The two funnymen booked their Brighton trip after Labour leader John Smith called John Major and Norman Lamont a bungling pair of jokers — the Laurel and Hardy of British politics.
And brimming with fun in bowler hats, the visitors raised more smiles than Downing Street's double act.
Security was so tight Stan and Ollie couldn't get into the Tory conference.
‘We've enough bloody clowns in here already,’ they were told.
But they were hot on the trail of a loathsome whine as the party in another mess pined for better days.
And the comic trippers did get to see the back of rebel Lord Tebbit, a sight that would have made Mr Major grin with relief amid the squabbles.
Our duo — lookalikes Graham Hardy, 32, and Bryan Barker, 35 — bumped into his lordship as he talked to TV interrogator Sir Robin Day.
But the peer disappeared before they could ask whether his favourite Laurel and Hardy film was Big Business or Blockheads.
Still, Graham and Bryan, both from Melbourne, Derbyshire, did have a few kind words for their rivals.
‘Major and Lamont are doing a pretty good job of impersonating Stan and Ollie,’ said Graham.
‘All they have to do is get the walk right.’
END OF THE PEER: Tory rebel Lord Tebbit turns his back on our Laurel and Hardy.
But, like John Major, they're not sorry to see him go Pictures: ROGER ALLEN
CLOWNS: Laughable Major and Lamont
ITCHING FOR A CHAT: Stan and Ollie wait their turn as his lordship talks to TV's Sir Robin Day
Girl, 4 saved by Brit hero
MARTIN PHILLIPS
HERO British postman Lance Roberts saved the life of a four-year-old girl engulfed in flames.
Lance, 23, was on his way to visit his brother Mark in one of the tower blocks when the jumbo jet fell out of the sky.
Mark, 26, said: ‘A woman was walking along like a zombie clinging to the little girl, but doing nothing even though the girl was completely engulfed in flames and sobbing.
‘Lance prised them apart and smothered the flames with his coat.
‘Then he carried the little girl to the nearest building and rushed inside a flat to shower her with cold water.
‘Parts of her clothing were fused to her body where they had melted on.
Horror ‘There were tears in her eyes, even though her face was burned.’
Rescuers who took the girl to hospital said Lance's quick thinking had saved her life.
Lance, who lives in another tower block near Mark, moved there from Cannock, Staffs, to find work.
Mark's wife Sharon spoke of her horror as the jumbo crashed.
She said: ‘The whole room lit up like daylight only it was red.
It was like hell on earth.’
YORKSHIRE girl Jackie Dawson, 21, who moved from Barnsley to Amsterdam with husband Andrew two years ago, gave birth to a son yesterday after rushing from her flat to help rescuers.
DRUG FEAR AS JOBS ARE AXED
TERRY PATTINSON
BRITAIN is set to become the smugglers' paradise of Europe, Customs officers warned yesterday.
Angry union chiefs said 400 job cuts would pave the way for a drug explosion.
Pushers were already selling to children and crime would soar as addicts sought money for drugs.
Mike King, national officer of the Civil and Public Servants Union, told a fringe meeting that drugs were pouring into the country.
But overworked officers at Dover had managed to inspect only 2,000 of the 2 million lorries which passed through Dover last year.
Other union chiefs warned the Government could lose millions of pounds by axing the jobs of 300 VAT inspectors.
Fowler in unity bid
PANICKING Tory chairman Sir Noman Fowler pleaded for party unity.
He warned of disaster if they continued tearing themselves apart — then dubbed Labour leader John Smith and deputy Margaret Beckett the ‘Whinge and Beckett’ of politics.
PLEA: Sir Norman
COUNCILS WILL FEEL THE PAIN
SHEREE DODD
HARD times are ahead for councils and vital local services, Local Government Minister John Redwood predicted.
He threatened tough action to control council spending — even if it meant painful limits on Tory authorities.
‘Next year is not going to be easy financially,’ he said.
‘It's a year when the Conservative virtues of efficiency and better value for money will be much needed.’
The warning was a grim signal that local government will be a major victim of the Cabinet spending battle.
It followed pleas for enough cash to prevent the new council tax becoming a disaster of poll tax proportions.
STORMIN' NORMAN PUTS THE BOOT IN
Tebbit wins standing ovation as he tears Major's policies apart
PM warned ‘You are in big trouble’
‘Premier should do what the people want…‘
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL /DAVID BRADSHAW
STORMIN’ Norman Tebbit hijacked the Tory conference yesterday as the war over Europe exploded into the most vicious confrontation in the party's history.
Lord Tebbit humiliated Premier John Major with a withering and sneering condemnation of his policies on Europe and the economy.
Mr Major seethed with rage as the former Tory chairman challenged his authority and declared: ‘The Government is in desperate trouble.’
In a venomous attack on the Maastricht Treaty, Lord Tebbit said it would be ‘reckless, perverse and bizarre’ to allow foreigners to decide Britain's future.
And rousing delegates to fever pitch, he asked: ‘Do you want to be citizens of a European Union?‘
Back came the prolonged roar: ‘No.’
Like a scene from a pantomime, he asked if they wanted a single currency and to have other countries interfering in Britain's immigration controls.
A cry of ‘No’ echoed around the hall.
After winning applause for his onslaught, the 61-year-old champion of Euro-sceptics left the rostrum — to a standing ovation and chants of ‘Nor-man, Nor-man’.
His arm aloft, he paraded through the Brighton conference hall before signalling for calm.
Last night Lord Tebbit continued his campaign against Maastricht on TV.
And he denied Mr Major would lose all credibility by not pressing ahead with the treaty.
Appealed
He told BBC's Six O'Clock News: ‘The Prime Minister's job is to do what the people of his country want, not what the leaders of other countries want.’
As for whether the Tories will win the next election, he added: ‘If we get the economy right, John Major will be returned.
If we don't he won't.’
Lord Tebbit appealed to conference to launch a bid for Maastricht Two — a treaty with no reference to economic, monetary and  union.
‘It's a task in which I stand ready to join John Major whenever he is ready to begin,’ he said.
He scoffed at the PM's declaration to bring the treaty before the House of Commons.
‘Yes, let's send a copy of what this treaty means to every home in Britain,’ he said.
Feasted
To laughter, he told Mr Major: ‘If I may say so, Prime Minister, send it to your Cabinet.
One of your Ministers today admitted on television he hadn't read it.’
Lord Tebbit called on Mr Major to win policies which put Britain ‘first, second and third’.
He said staunch Tory newspapers were calling for the resignation of Chancellor Norman Lamont — to follow that of David Mellor.
‘They want to bring down the Chancellor and thereby to undermine the Prime Minister himself,’ he said.
‘These are difficult days when the Daily Telegraph writes in that vein.’
He reminded Mr Major that he was Chancellor when Britain went into the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
And he said: ‘I hope you will stand by your Chancellor — it was not Norman Lamont's decision to enter the ERM.
He did his best to make the unworkable work.
‘The cost in lost jobs, bankrupt firms, repossessed homes, in the terrible wounds inflicted on industry, has been savage.’
Lord Tebbit's reception and the hostile — even abusive — barracking of pro-Euro speakers showed the Tory split.
Party giants Sir Edward Heath and Michael Heseltine also suffered the bird.
Hissed
The former Premier, who took Britain into Europe, was hissed every time his face appeared on giant screens.
And for the first time in the conference's 109year history, a speaker — pro-European Edward Giles of East Hampshire — was interrupted with cries of ‘b—ks.
Delegates who opened by saying they were against the motion, ‘to continue to build an open and outward looking Community’, were cheered.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd said later: ‘People always clap louder if they're opposed to something than if they're in favour of it.’
But even Mr Hurd was loudly heckled as he insisted Maastricht was good for Britain.
The seriousness was underlined when he warned: ‘Our party could break itself over Europe with consequences which would deeply damage Britain and only bring comfort to our opponents.
‘Let us decide to give that madness a miss.’
He warned there was no going back because to do so would make John Major's word worthless abroad.
WAVE OF SUPPORT: Tebbit greets delegates as he is given a standing ovation after his onslaught on John Major yesterday
Boos as Jill tells truth
HARRY ARNOLD
ILL-MANNERED Tories booed, hissed and slow-handclapped Brighton's Labour mayor as she told them the hard facts of life in Major's Britain.
They reacted as Councillor Jill Sweeting made a heartfelt plea for special help for her slump-hit town and called on the Government to release funds for new houses for the homeless.
Mrs Sweeting's speech of ‘welcome’ caught the party off guard.
She said many restaurants and shops in the town had been ‘fatally damaged’ by the recession.
The South-East ‘has felt the recession in every home, workplace, office, high street store and corner shop.
The recession has hurt, is hurting and shows no sign of letting up.’
Just 50 yards away her words were echoed by Roy Rice, manager of the recession-hit Churchill shopping centre.
Amid boarded-up shops, closing-down sales and owners fighting for survival he said: ‘This is like a ghost town.
No one comes here any more because they can't afford to shop.’
PLEA: Sweeting
McEnroe bow row
TENNIS champ John McEnroe yesterday slammed having to bow to the Royal box at Wimbledon.
‘It's archaic — one example of how completely crazy Wimbledon is,’ said the outspoken star.
But he told an Australian newspaper there was ‘nothing more beautiful’ than the centre court, adding: ‘There are unbelievable positives with these strange traditions.’
Fears for lost mum
FEARS mounted last night for a young mum who vanished with her estranged husband after a row.
Rachel Still, 23 — who was living with a boyfriend in Wilmslow, Cheshire — drove off with husband Phillip after meeting him for a talk.
Earlier Phillip, 28, was heard threatening her.
The couple's children, aged three and seven, are being cared for by a relative.
LESLIE FIGHTS BACK
SYDNEY YOUNG
BATTLING Leslie Crowther was showing a ‘slight improvement’ last night.
But the tragic star was still critically ill on a life-support machine after having a second blood clot removed from his brain.
The ray of hope came as his grieving wife Jean, 60, left his bedside to attend her mother Winifred's funeral.
Winifred, 90, died three days before Leslie crashed his Rolls-Royce on the M5 at the weekend.
Jean was comforted by four of her children at the service just yards from her home in Corston, near Bath.
Daughter Charlotte, 29, stayed at her dad's bedside in Bristol's Frenchay Hospital.
The rest of the family joined her there after Winifred's funeral.
Hospital spokeswoman Carol Gough said there were ‘signs of slight improvement’ in 59-year-old Leslie's condition.
Monitors showed his blood pressure and other vital activities had improved.
Leslie, who was suffering from a heart condition before the crash, had a clot the size of an apple removed on Monday.
GRIEVING: Jean
Grenades handed in
THREE hand grenades were among 476 weapons handed in to police during a month-long weapons amnesty in Greater Manchester.
Two were from World War Two, but one — surrendered to a Salford police station — was a modern East European device which could have been lethal.
Assistant Chief Constable John McKenzie Moore said: ‘It's worrying that it turned up.’
Fast delivery
MUM-TO-BE Lynne Adams, 36, gave birth to a girl on the M5 yesterday as husband Phil was driving her to hospital in Taunton, Somerset.
ONE OVER THE EIGHTH
GEORGINA WALSH
BEER drinkers could pay an extra 10p a pint — to ensure they get a full one.
Pint glasses must be an eighth of an inch taller from April 1994 to stop publicans serving short measures.
But landlords insisted yesterday that they need to raise prices to pay for them.
And a Campaign For Real Ale spokesman warned: ‘You are talking about 10p for about an eighth of an inch more liquid instead of froth.’
The Government brought in the new law after inspectors found that 97 per cent of ‘pints’ contained less.
But a publicans' spokesman said: ‘A landlord will always top up a pint with too much froth.’
PINT: Going up
Gold strike
A NEW seam of Welsh gold — used for every Royal wedding ring for the last 70 years — has been found at a mine near Dolgellau.
IT'S A WORK OF ART
Is it a blot on the landscape?
No…
IAN CAMERON
A RUSTY old gasometer which fed-up local residents want demolished because ‘it's a blot on the landscape’ has been compared to some of Italy's most beautiful buildings.
Conservation chiefs are insisting the 150ft high metal monstrosity must be preserved as a ‘national monument’ because it is held up by fancy Doric columns.
A spokesman explained yesterday: ‘Whoever designed them had knowledge of classical architecture.
They are in the manner of Filippo Brunelleschi.
‘And he, of course, was the architect of some of the finer domes in Florence during the 15th century.’
Now British Gas have been forced to scrap plans to pull down the 110-year-old hulk.
Even though they pointed out that it is useless — and will cost £400,000 to repair.
Fed-up Huw Parry, who lives in the shadow of the gasometer at Grangetown, Cardiff, said: ‘The decision is plain daft.
Bombs
‘Anyone living in Florence would have a heart attack if this thing was on their doorstep.’
Shopkeeper Huw, 36, added: ‘It's incredibly ugly — neither use nor ornament.
‘And it spoils our view of the sea.’
South Glamorgan Council also want the gasometer knocked down.
They claim it is driving new jobs away from the area.
Leader Peter Perkins said: ‘I'm all for keeping historical buildings.
‘But this gasholder is just absurd.
‘There's no doubt the decision was made by somebody living miles away without any thought for the people here.’
Even British Gas  were surprised at the decision to make their gasometer a listed building.
A spokesman admitted: ‘We are more used to councillors asking to rip these things down.’
The gasometer was rebuilt after being badly damaged by German bombs during the last war.
And last night the Welsh Office historic monuments department Cadw stood by their decision to preserve it.
A spokesman said: ‘We think the Doric columns supporting the panelled blocks are very interesting.’
WHAT A GAS Barmy conservation chiefs say that this rusting old gasometer compares with Florence's beautiful 15th century architecture
BEAUTY Classical influence that inspired the man from the gas company
Arrest no 4 in Maxwell probe
A FOURTH man was arrested yesterday over the Maxwell fraud scandal.
Robert Bunn, a former finance director of the Maxwell group of companies, was charged with plotting to defraud banks, and freed on bail.
Maxwell's sons Kevin and Ian and their American financial adviser Larry Trachtenberg are also on bail accused of a series of offences.
Bunn, 46, of London, is accused of being involved in dishonestly pledging shares as security for a loan from a 35-bank syndicate to the Maxwell Communication Corporation.
BUNN: Charge
Euro folk shun Hun
GERMANS worried about their image held a poll — and found less than 60 per cent of Europeans like them.
Seven of the 12 EC countries say Britain is more trustworthy.
AH!
IT'S DAIRY BOX DI
JAMES WHITAKER
ART critics reckon it's a sickly cross between a Disney scene and a choc box top.
But Princess Di was tickled pink yesterday by this new portrait.
And she went out of her way to praise artist David Hankinson as she unveiled his painting of her in fairy-tale pink gown complete with tiara, pearl drop earrings and gold watch.
Di halted the unveiling ceremony in the City of London, called David to the platform and told him she was ‘delighted’ with the picture.
Then she pointedly spent several minutes talking to him.
Art expert Brian Sewell was less impressed.
He branded the portrait ‘quite disgusting, pure chocolate box rubbish’ and scoffed: ‘What I want to know is, where are the Seven Dwarfs?
The Royal Family have clearly not learned from being surrounded by great works of art.’
The painting, commissioned by the City's Worshipful Company of Leathersellers, shows the princess overlooking the Cornish coast.
It will be presented to HMS Cornwall, a frigate ‘adopted’ by the company.
Mr Sewell said: ‘It would make me seasick before we left port.’
Griffin's Eye — Page 6 Feuding Spencers — Page 25 
PANNED: But Di was ‘delighted’ by this portrait of herself yesterday
ATTACK: Sewell
Golden rolldies
TEN packets of lavatory paper still in their 1910 wrappers sold for £176 yesterday in an auction at Sandon Hall, Staffs.
One for the rod
ANGLER Bill Scragg, 74, of Sandyford, Staffs, caught a trophy-winning 11lb 14oz trout after dipping his lure in whisky.
OCH AYE THE AAARGH!
BAGPIPES PUT WIND UP LILLY
Bizarre phobia baffles doctors
PATRICK MULCHRONE
HOOTS Mon!…
Sassenach Lilly Meaham is so terrified of bagpipes she has to lock herself in the loo every Hogmanay.
For the slightest skirl of the pipes makes the retired cleaner go WEAK at the knees, break out in a cold SWEAT and SHAKE uncontrollably.
‘The sound of Scotland the Brave has me faint with fear,’ said 60-year-old Lilly yesterday.
‘And Flower of Scotland makes me wilt.’
Harley Street psychoanalyst Michael Whitenburgh admitted it was the most bizarre case he had ever come across.
‘We treat people with all sorts of fears,’ he said.
‘But I've never heard of anything like this before.’
Baffled Lilly, from Anfield, Liverpool, added: ‘I've been like this for as long as I can remember.
‘I don't know why.
I've never even been to Scotland and my mother was certainly never chased by a Scotsman.
‘Everyone else — including my husband Frank — thinks it's hysterical.
To me, though, it's a very real problem.
‘A friend keeps inviting me to visit her in Scotland but I always turn her down.
‘I imagine there'll be a bagpipe player on every street corner.’
Sweat
Last night comic Bernard Manning had his own theory about Lilly's strange phobia.
‘Cold sweat, shaking, feeling faint…sounds more like an aversion to Billy Connolly than the bagpipes,’ he said.
And Scots comic Gregor Fisher — the man behind Rab C. Nesbitt — added: ‘Lilly may think she's never been to Scotland, but what about in a previous life?
‘Maybe she once fought the Scots and ended up with a bagpipe chanter in a nasty place.’
Bullseye host Jim Bowen said: ‘The pipes are enough to put the wind up anybody.’
OH NO: Piper Ken Whittacker makes Lilly squirm
SAS hero is killed by pal's blunder
AN SAS hero survived daring undercover operations during the Gulf War — only to be killed by a mate's tragic blunder on a peacetime exercise.
Lance Corporal Mark Richards, 29, was shot in the head while on a five-man patrol in the jungle of Belize in South America.
Seven SAS colleagues, their identities protected by a screen, gave evidence at an inquest in Hereford yesterday.
But the hearing was unable to decide who fired the fatal shots and an accident verdict was recorded.
The men were all part-time members of R Squadron, the Territorial Army unit attached to the SAS.
Some were novices who had never been on jungle training.
One trooper told the inquest his machine-gun jammed twice — then started firing by itself.
Bachelor Mark, from Abergavenny in Gwent, was in a team dropped behind Iraqi lines to pinpoint sites of Scud missile launchers during the Gulf War.
He won a commendation for bravery.
His father David said after yesterday's inquest: ‘It is a great relief to hear it stated publicly that his death was not caused by his own conduct.’
An Army inquiry will be held.
‘Orgies’ wife on trial for murder
BULLIED wife Linda Kelly wept with shame when her husband forced her to have sex with his best friend, a jury was told yesterday.
She sobbed as she took part in three-in-a-bed romps with Robin Wright — as her twisted husband Mick lay alongside watching.
The sex sessions were described at Newcastle Crown Court, where the 44-year-old woman has pleaded not guilty to the murder of her husband.
Snapped
The prosecution claim she blasted him with a shotgun because he was having an affair.
She claims she snapped after years of violence.
Robin Wright told the jury: ‘Mick told me he wanted Linda to make love to me.
It was his fantasy.
‘We had been drinking and went up to the bedroom.
Mick kept pushing Linda to have intercourse.
She was crying.’
There was a second orgy, and he said: ‘Afterwards I was disgusted with myself.’
Akabusi thief jailed
A DETECTIVE inspector's daughter was jailed for six months yesterday for stealing £3,000 from athlete Kriss Akabusi, who won a World Championship gold medal.
Bank secretary Lesley Smith, 29, admitted transferring money from his account at the NatWest branch in Fareham, Hants.
She also took £3,000 from another account.
Her husband Richard, 33, from Gosport, told Portsmouth Crown Court she had taken the money to repay debts.
Soul star dies
SOUL singer Eddie Kendricks, who led The Temptations group to a string of hits in the 1960s, has died of lung cancer in Alabama.
He was 52.
Fangerprints
A DOG is to be DNA ‘fingerprinted’ to discover if it is a pit bull.
Owner Andrew Martin, of Thornton Heath, Surrey, faces ‘danger dog’ charges.
Marry me…for a while
 WOMEN love white weddings — but they don't give a fig about their marriage vows.
And when they say ‘I do’ they certainly don't mean forever, a survey reveals today.
New Woman magazine found that most girls still want to get spliced.
But almost half would consider having an affair.
And 46 per cent of the under-25s said they didn't view marriage as their last romantic attachment.
SAMMY'S SO RACY IN TIGHTS
LEGGY model Samantha Bleby launches a new cycle in undie fashions — a pair of tights topped with Lycra bike shorts.
Makers Aristoc, who wheeled out the £3.99 Bodytoners in London yesterday, reckon they're top gear under figure-hugging clothes.
Or under nothing at all, for girls who Lycra to be different.
Picture: HARRY PROSSER
Kim's the tit for tat flasher!
FLASHER Kim Hanslip made a clean breast of things yesterday.
She admitted being the busty brunette who shouted at a man: ‘Get a load of these’.
And secretary Kim, 23, confessed she's flashed before in Preston, Lancs.
‘I'm the phantom flasher,’ she said.
‘I do it to give men a taste of their own medicine.
‘You cannot go out at night without one of them making an obscene remark or getting his tackle out.
This is revenge…tit for tat.’
BLIND MAN BEATS UP A BULLYING BULL TERRIER
Tony defends his guide dog
JIM OLDFIELD
A BLIND man fought off a bull terrier that attacked his guide dog — by jamming his fist down its throat and smacking it between the eyes.
The bullying Staffordshire terrier fled, leaving Anthony Wood and his labrador Questa with just cuts and bruises.
‘I gave it a really good thump.
It soon let go — it probably had a serious headache,’ Anthony said yesterday.
Anthony, 48, leaped into action to save Questa from being savaged as they walked down a street near his home in York.
Bull terrier Bronson had already done battle with two workmen — who fought it off with a shovel — before turning on Questa.
Anthony said: ‘I suddenly heard Questa yelping.
‘When I put my hand down to feel what was wrong I realised she was being attacked — but I didn't know by what.
‘I tried to pull the other dog's jaws back.
‘When that failed I stuffed my right hand down its throat to stop it biting and then smacked it twice between the eyes with my left.’
Anthony — who says he has ‘hands like leather’— added: ‘The dog could have killed my Questa.
‘I've had her two and a half years and would do anything to defend her.’
He spoke after Bronson's owner appeared before York magistrates and admitted not keeping a dangerous dog under proper control.
Darren Morris, 20, from York, was ordered to keep Bronson under control and out of the city centre.
PALS: Anthony and guide dog Questa
BULLY: Staffordshire
Crimper's £1,000 grope
A HAIRDRESSER who asked a teenage employee to push her buttocks against a letterbox so he could fondle them through it was ordered to pay her £1,000 for sexual harassment yesterday.
A tribunal was told that Francesco Pollicino, 57, also asked 17-year-old brunette Tracey Tofield: ‘What are those bumps down your jumper?’
But it rejected her claim that he told her to come to work in suspenders.
After the Newcastle upon Tyne hearing, Tracey — who now refuses to work for men — said: ‘I hope this is a warning to men harassing girls at work.’
LINDSAY SUTTON
DARIO GRADI'S Crewe are set to unveil a secret player against West Ham tonight — a trumpet player!
They hope trumpeter Richard Sutton, a full-blown Alex fan, can help blast them to success in their Coca-Cola Cup second leg clash at home.
The tunes played by the 25-year-old former London College of Music student have become a feature at the club this season and the Crewe directors intend to reward him with a free season ticket.
Richard believes his playing at matches inspires the team and he said: ‘I did it for a laugh at the first home game but now it's taken off.
‘I choose my moments to play very carefully.
For example, if the keeper makes a great save I might play ‘Superman’ or if a player gets sent off I play the funeral march.
‘It's done the trick so far.
At Scunthorpe I gave my first performance just after half-time — a blast of Star Wars.
A minute later we scored!’
CREWE'S TRUMPCARD WIND UP: Trumpeter Richard Sutton hits another high note for Crewe.
Picture: DENNIS HUSSEY
3AM NEWS THREE HURT IN WEST END BOMB BLAST
DAVID LEIGH
A BOMB exploded in the heart of London's West End early this morning injuring three people.
Two men and a woman were taken to hospital after the explosion outside a branch of the National Westminster Bank in Panton Street.
The  casualties were detained at the Westminster Hospital where the woman was being treated for back injuries and the men for shock.
Shop
The bomb had been left in a litter bin alongside the bank in the street close to the Haymarket.
One eyewitness, Steve Parsons, 23, a shopfitter working in a shop opposite the bank said: ‘There was a huge explosion.
It seemed to come from a bin outside the bank.
‘There was the sound of smashing glass as shop windows were blown in.’
Police immediately cordoned off the area.
Scene
The blast came at 1.48 a.m. not far from the Comedy Theatre in the street where there are several restaurants.
Anti Terrorists Squad Officers were at the scene and police believe that the bomb had been planted by the IRA.
 Trafalgar Square was sealed off as dozens of police closed down the area amid fears that other devices could have been planted in the area.
Westminster Hospital confirmed to-day that three  casualties had been admitted and were being treated.
A spokesman said: ‘At this stage it is too early to give any indication of their conditions.’
Jet was warned before horror
AIRLINES were warned to check the bolts which hold jumbo jet engines to the wings BEFORE Sunday's El Al crash.
Planemakers Boeing decided two weeks ago to recommend that the world's 500 jumbos should be examined for cracks in the four-inch long bolts.
And the messages were still going out when an Israeli cargo plane lost both starboard engines and hit an Amsterdam tower block — killing at least 250 people.
The alert was in response to a similar crash last year in Taiwan when two engines on a China Airlines 747 cargo jet went down soon after take-off.
Swissair received a copy of a service bulletin from Boeing last week.
British Airways will complete checks on their 31 Boeing 747s in 48 hours and Virgin Atlantic are doing the same.
Fallen
Boeing's call for checks within 90 days is purely ‘precautionary’.
There is no evidence the bolts caused Sunday's horror.
The Taiwan crash was last December.
Investigators could not check the bolts because they had fallen into the sea.
Boeing have had 15 reports of minute cracks in bolts in seven years.
And they issued the safety alert after summoning airline officials to their Seattle HQ.
PLEASE BREATHE…
I LOVE YOU, I LOVE YOU
THE FIANCEE of murdered British tourist Keith Thompson cradled him in her arms as he lay dying and kept saying: ‘I love you, Keith, please breathe,’ it was revealed last night.
Nurse Amanda Cadder saw the Essex post worker shot down in a Florida car park.
She and Keith's distraught fiancee Ann Sole desperately tried to save him with the kiss of life and heart massage.
‘I was paddling in blood,’ Amanda said.
‘I knew he was already dead but I just wanted to do what I could.’
The 29-year-old nurse, back at home in Swindon, added: ‘It was like something out of Cagney and Lacey.
Wound
‘I have been a nurse for ten years but I have never seen a bullet wound.
‘I opened Keith's shirt and saw a bullet hole just a little bigger than my middle finger nail.
‘I knew he was dead.
He died straight away.
‘Ann helped me try to resuscitate him.
But I think she knew in her heart of hearts that he was already dead.’
Moments earlier Amanda's husband Tony had stopped outside the Comfort Inn car park to let the car Keith was driving go first.
It gave the Cadder family the luckiest escape of their lives.
Amanda said: ‘I'm sorry it was them and glad it wasn't us all at the same time.’
The Cadders, who were in a hire car with their two young sons, were the only witnesses.
‘It was our last day at Disney World and we were coming home from the Magic Kingdom,’ she said.
‘It was about 11 o clock.
There was another car behind us, and the driver was obviously disorientated.
‘My husband said ‘Look at this bugger, he's obviously just arrived.
‘He didn't seem to know where the hotel entrance was so my husband pulled over and pointed it out to him.
‘The driver — I know now it was Keith — waved to say thanks and drove into the car park.
‘We drove in after him and stopped about six or seven spaces away.
I was leaning into the car to get the toddler out of the baby seat when I heard the shot.
‘Two people ran past us, they were both black Americans.
One was holding the gun.’
Keith, 42, and Anne lived at Springfield, Chelmsford.
Terror state — Page 4
THE only passenger on the jet, who died with three crew, had hitched a flight home to Israel to prepare for her wedding.
Anat Solomon, 23, was marrying an El Al security officer.