

BRITS DIE IN MONSOON JET CRASH
MARK ELLIS
TWO BRITONS were among 113 people feared killed yesterday when an Airbus jet caught in a monsoon smashed into a hillside and exploded.
Rescuers were trying to reach the crash scene 60 miles south of Katmandu in Nepal last night — but there was little hope of finding survivors.
The Thai Airways jet from Bangkok was minutes away from landing at Katmandu when it was told to divert because of torrential rain.
The pilot said he was changing direction — and vanished off radar screens.
Just before he reported a technical problem on the plane, then radioed to say everything was OK.
Forest
Army helicopters spotted the wrecked A310-300, carrying 99 passengers and 14 crew, on a steep forested slope in the Himalayan foothills.
The Britons were named as John Steele and Simon Carlo Petri.
A Thai Airways Airbus similar to the one that crashed in Nepal
POWER BOSS PAY STORM
IAN MILLER
NATIONAL Power boss John Baker's pay soared by 157 PER CENT last year, it was revealed yesterday.
The news fuelled the row over a string of huge rises for heads of former State-owned industries.
Chief executive Mr Baker, 54, saw his earnings  increase from £135,911 to £383,935 while his workers had to settle for a 5.5 per cent wage rise.
Labour's employment spokesman, Frank Dobson, fumed: ‘Doesn't he know this is a recession?
‘It is sheer, unbridled greed.
‘He's earning four times too much for doing half the job.’
Profits of National Power last year rose by £80 million to £514 million.
Gas probe
BRITISH Gas yesterday got the go-ahead for a Monopolies Board prices probe to squash official watchdog Ofgas attacks.
Aid for maid
PRINCESS Anne's former  lady's maid Linda Joyce — accused of stealing letters sent by Commander Tim Laurence — has won legal aid to sue Today newspaper.
Mirror shares bought
HEINZ boss Tony O'Reilly has bought five million Mirror Group Newspaper shares for £3 million in the last two weeks.
The tycoon, who is also chairman of Dublin-based Independent Newspapers, now has a 1.3 per cent shareholding in the group.
Fright for cricket ace
RADIO cricket commentator Jonathan Agnew survived a massive electric shock as he mowed the lawn yesterday.
The ex-England bowler badly burned his arm in the strimmer accident.
I'M INNOCENT TOO PROTESTS JASON
Sprinter ‘never took steroids’
DISGRACED Olympics sprinter Jason Livingston broke his silence yesterday to protest: ‘I am innocent.
I never knowingly took any steroids and I never would.’
But he admitted that clearing his name was going to be ‘the hardest battle of my life’.
Britain's brightest young track hope spoke out amid reports that two British weightlifters accused of taking drugs may now be cleared.
Livingston has gone into hiding since returning from Barcelona.
But he said: ‘What has upset me more than missing the Olympics is that people I like and respect are going to think I'm a cheat.’
The 21-year-old track star learned he was being banished from the Barcelona Olympics in a letter delivered to him at 12.30am on Wednesday.
He said: ‘I thought it was going to tell me that someone had died.
‘I was devastated by what the letter said because I never, never used steroids.
I abhor the use of drugs in sport.
‘I pleaded with the officials that the test result must have been a mistake.’
Tampering
Livingston said the only medication he took before the drugs test was for ‘a stinking cold’.
He said: ‘I bought cod liver oil, multi-vitamins and paracetamol.’
He had also taken a new Japanese product called Musachi, to replace the proteins lost through training and competitions — after getting the approval of team doctor Malcolm Brown.
Livingston said: ‘I gave that straight to the British doctor in Barcelona because that is the only thing I could even remotely think might be behind the drug result.
‘That — or someone tampering with the sample.’
Britain's Olympic athletics team spokesman Tony Ward confirmed that Livingston consulted Dr Brown.
He said: ‘The doctor cleared him to take the substance because the product contains only pure amino acids.’
Livingston dismissed speculation that he was following his idol Ben Johnson all the way to taking drugs.
‘How stupid can you get?
‘Johnson was a fine runner but he was also a fool,’ said Livingston.
But the young sprinter got a tongue lashing last night from his Dutch girlfriend Petra Huybrechtse.
Petra, 19, a member of the Dutch sprint relay team, blasted Livingston for his ‘stupid, stupid action’.
She said: ‘I am very angry that he has ruined everything.
‘He always told me he never would use drugs.
I believed him.
He talked often of his ambition to win gold at the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta.
‘He knew he couldn't do it in Barcelona, so perhaps that's why he took drugs.
‘I still find it very hard to believe.’
Nuts
Livingston's grandfather Harry Burke said the sprinter would have been ‘nuts’ to have used illegal steroids.
‘I believe he is innocent.
There must be something gone wrong somewhere — Jason is not that type of person.’
Mr Burke said Jason had already passed five other drugs tests before the Olympic Games.
Hiding Livingston
THE GIRLFRIEND: Dutch runner Petra blasted Jason for being ‘so stupid’
NEW TRIAL FOR BATTERED WIFE
HARRY ARNOLD
A WOMAN jailed for life for murdering her violent husband was granted a retrial yesterday.
After 10 years of torment, Kiranjit Ahluwalia, 36, threw petrol over sleeping husband Deepak and set him on fire.
But yesterday the Appeal Court quashed her murder conviction as ‘unsafe and unsatisfactory’.
Lord Chief Justice Taylor said a medical report on Indian-born Mrs Ahluwalia had been ‘overlooked’ at her trial three years ago.
It said she had a ‘major depressive disorder’.
This will now allow a plea of diminished responsibility.
Lord Taylor refused bail, but said the new trial should be held as soon as possible.
Mother-of-two Mrs Ahluwalia, of Crawley, Sussex, had been beaten by her husband while pregnant, hit in the face with a telephone and had her finger broken.
Her brother-in-law Sukhjit Valia said after yesterday's decision: ‘She will be able to put her defence properly.’
Ben's novel TV role
COMIC Ben Elton's best selling novel Stark is to be made into a £2.5 million TV mini-series by the BBC and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation.
Ben has adapted his zany thriller about ecological disaster and will play the lead.
BOOK: Ben
TRAGIC JESSICA'S DI DREAM COMES TRUE
Girl flies 4,700 miles for hug
SAMUEL JAMES
TRAGIC Jessica Finster's dream came true yesterday when she gave Princess Diana a big hug.
The four-year-old leukaemia victim had flown 4,700 miles for the magic moment.
And the overjoyed youngster was swept off her feet by her favourite royal.
‘Jess offered Diana a hug and the Princess lifted her off the ground,’ said her proud mum Pam, 32, from Florida.
‘There was a tear in everyone's eye.
It was just wonderful.’
The meeting came as Diana opened a police station in Wolverhampton.
Pam added: ‘The Princess asked how Jess's treatment was going.
‘And when she noticed I had two other children with me she laughed and said she knew what a handful they could be.’
Jessica — who has acute lymphoid leukaemia — has idolised Diana since first seeing her on American TV two years ago.
She, her parents, and brothers Chris, 16, and Dustin, four, were specially flown 4,700 miles from their US home by a charity.
Jessica said of Diana: ‘She was lovely and the hug was really nice.
I told her that I loved her.’
MAGIC MOMENT: Little Jessica throws her arms around Princess Diana
Three degrees
HOUSEWIFE Ivy Ashworth, 46, of Oldham, Lancs, and daughters Beverley and Rachel were all awarded university degrees yesterday.
Smalley's biggie
SMALLEY has won a prize as Derbyshire's best-kept large village.
115 TODAY…
THANKS TO BACON, EGGS AND BRANDY
THE oldest Briton alive was celebrating her 115th birthday today…with a tasty fry-up and a stiff drink.
Happy Charlotte Hughes puts her staying power down to regular habits.
Those include tucking into her usual bacon and eggs followed by a tot of brandy.
She said yesterday: ‘Healthy eating has a lot to do with living a good and honest life.
But I never eat or drink too much because it becomes bad for you.’
Charlotte has never been one to rush.
She didn't marry until she was 63 and had retired from teaching.
Then she enjoyed a leisurely forty years with her husband Noel, a former army captain, who died at 103.
Charlotte, believed to be the world's second oldest person, was born on the day Alexander Graham Bell launched his first phone company.
Special
She remembers and admires Queen Victoria as ‘a strong-minded woman who always had her own way’.
Charlotte will be wished many happy returns by family and other visitors to a nursing home in Redcar, Cleveland.
Her past celebrations have been memorable.
At 108 she took tea with Margaret Thatcher at 10 Downing Street.
At 109 and 110 she flew first class on Concorde to New York.
Today she expects the delivery man will bring her customary greeting from the Queen.
‘I mount them on the wall because they are very special,’ she said.
‘Hopefully there'll be a lot more messages from her because I think I'll go on to be at least 120.’
THE world's oldest known person, at 117, is Jeanne Louise Calment, of Arles, France.
CELEBRATING: Charlotte…
BLYN: STEPHEN WHITE
CHESHIRE VC LOSES HIS FINAL BATTLE
FRANK GILBRIDE
DAMBUSTERS hero Lord Cheshire died yesterday after losing his battle against a crippling illness.
He was 74.
The Victoria Cross winner, who led the Dambusters 617 Squadron in World War Two, had fought muscle wasting motor neurone disease for over a year.
The news was revealed by his wife Baroness Ryder — founder of the Sue Ryder charity — who was with him when he died.
As Group Captain Leonard Cheshire, he was the RAF's most decorated bomber pilot after taking part in over 100 missions.
He was also an official observer when the atom bomb was dropped on Nagasaki, Japan.
Spurred by the horrors he witnessed in war, Cheshire dedicated his life to caring for others after it was over.
Blow
His proudest achievement was the establishment of the Cheshire Homes for disabled ex-servicemen.
There are over 200 around the world.
Despite the pain and distress of his illness he said recently: ‘I know from the outside it looks like a blow but from my view things are different.
‘It's like being under fire in war.
When you're there it's not as bad as you'd imagined.’
In January he escaped a fire which engulfed the Cheshire Home where he was staying in Greatham, Hants.
He managed to drag himself onto a ledge to escape the flames and await rescue.
Last night Premier John Major said in a statement: ‘Leonard Cheshire was, in the true sense of the word, a national hero.’
HERO: Cheshire
Fast work
A THIEF at a fast food bar near Windsor Castle yesterday snatched an American tourist's handbag — containing 10,000 dollars, jewellery worth £23,000 and a mini-TV.
Your round, kid
YOUNGSTERS may soon be able to join their parents for meals or soft drinks in English and Welsh pubs.
Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke is considering a major shake-up of licensing laws — including letting under-14s sit in bars or family rooms with adults.
TOP GUNS SCARED TO FIGHT IN GULF
JILL TURNER
BATTLE-WEARY British pilots too scared to fight on in the Gulf War were secretly replaced, Whitehall admitted last night.
The admission followed revelations by former RAF ace Pablo Mason that some Top Guns had backed out of Tornado missions against Iraq.
He said: ‘In the Second World War they would have been branded as lacking in moral fibre and been shunned by their service colleagues.
In the First World War they would have simply been taken out and shot.’
The daredevil flyer — know to millions of TV viewers because of his handlebar moustache — made the disclosures in a book about the conflict.
Sorties
The Ministry of Defence confirmed: ‘It is something that happens.
‘The system can cope with this and there is understanding.’
The pilots were shifted to other work until able to resume sorties.
No disciplinary action was taken.
In his book, Pablo's War, the 41-year-old squadron leader said some pilots could not face repeated low-level attacks, dropping JP233 bombs on Iraqi airfields.
He explained: ‘We were all reluctant to carry on delivering these lethal weapons.
A few crew and individuals had already refused to go to war.
‘Others were approaching breaking point.’
The RAF said: ‘These days we have a different attitude to signs of stress and battle fatigue than they did, perhaps, in the two world wars.’
And Pablo, now retired from the RAF, added: ‘Thank God we have become more compassionate and sensible.’
TORNADO ACE: Pablo
LOUDMOUTH'S CLEAN SWEEP
STEPHEN WHITE
BRITAIN'S loudest man revealed yesterday that he competed for the title after neighbours complained about his  singing in the bath.
Roofer Clive Tibbett clocked up an ear-shattering 118.7 decibels in the shouting match — louder than a pneumatic drill and just short of the world record and the noise of a jet.
Clive, 28, from Middlesbrough, Cleveland, said: ‘I like a good sing-song when I'm having a bath, but I do get a bit loud and the neighbours can't hear the telly.
‘I entered the contest for a laugh.
I couldn't believe it when I won.’
YOUR SHOUT: Clive shows how he won the title
Baby joy for a mother aged 61
A WOMAN aged 61 has had a baby son.
A donor egg fertilised by her 51-year-old husband's sperm was implanted in her womb.
Joyful mother Liliana Contadora lied about her age when she first saw doctors in Bologna, Italy.
She had been yearning for a baby for 20 years after her only other child, another boy, was killed in a car crash as a teenager.
Praying
At 41, the experts told Liliana she was too old for a natural birth.
But yesterday, as she nursed the baby she had been praying so many years for, she said: ‘I never gave up hope.’
Liliana giving birth at such a late age has triggered controversy in Italy.
But she vowed: ‘I'll show everyone that even at my age you can be a good mother.’
COKE DRINKER IS SACKED
A WORKER was fired after nipping out for a Coke and ice during a 15-hour shift at a sweltering print works, a tribunal heard yesterday.
Jim Harwood's boss banned his staff from leaving the premises, except to go to the bank.
The £15,000-a-year machine minder, from Gillingham, Kent, was sacked unfairly by Tambryn Printing, of Bermondsey, south London, the Chelsea tribunal ruled.
On the ball
CRICKETER Anton Joyce hit a century in 36 balls — with nine sixes and nine fours — for the Woodhouse club in Leeds.
Joyride pair run over car owner
A FATHER was seriously hurt when he was run down by joyriders — driving his car.
Benito Marangon saw the Cortina roaring through a car park at his son's school.
Police said last night: ‘He called to the driver to stop and stepped in front of the car but it carried straight on and smashed into him.
‘He was thrown aside and seriously injured while the car sped off.
Outing
‘It was later found abandoned and burnt out.’
The car was stolen the day before from 41-year-old Mr Marangon's home in Cinderford, Gloucs.
He spotted it with two teenagers inside while meeting children from a school outing.
Mr Marangon was in hospital last night, recovering from a broken leg and dislocated shoulder.
TORTURED KILLER JAILED
A MAN who beat his unfaithful wife to death after she viciously grabbed his testicles was jailed for six years yesterday.
Former political prisoner Farouk Okullu told an Old Bailey judge he lashed out in desperation because his private parts were extremely sensitive following agonising torture he was subjected to in a Ugandan jail.
Okullu, 29, from Hounslow in Middlesex, admitted manslaughter.
ONE DRIP FROM DEATH ON MELTING MOUNTAIN
Climber's terror on ice ledge
PATRICK MULCHRONE
CLIMBER Robin Davies saw his life dripping away as he lay marooned on a melting ice ledge.
He was trapped 10,000ft up Mont Blanc with a broken leg.
As the sun shrank the ledge, he waited to plunge to his death into a crevasse.
But even as he braced himself for the end, Robin took a remarkable last photograph of himself for his family.
The 33-year-old physicist lashed his camera to an ice-pick and took the photo by setting the timer.
He hoped that the camera would be found and returned to his wife Tamara, 30.
Plucked
But minutes later, Robin's 16-hour ordeal ended when a rescue team heard his whistle.
An Italian helicopter plucked him off the mountain.
Father-of-two Robin was flown home to Hexham, Northumberland, where he was recovering in hospital last night.
Robin broke his leg on a solo climb of 15,771ft Mont Blanc.
He said: ‘It was terrifying.
I was sure I would die.’
LAST PICTURE: The photo taken by Robin on the ice ledge when he believed he was about to die
SAFE: Robin resting in hospital
Hooked on raw carrots
SCIENTISTS have  discovered an addiction to rival tobacco…raw carrots.
A report in the British Journal of Addiction says some carrot junkies eat up to five bunches a day and become desperate if deprived of their fix.
Addicts are easy to spot.
Their eyes and skin turn carrot-coloured.
Last song for Motown Mary
SOUL singer Mary Wells was given a Hollywood farewell — with superstars staging a Motown revue at her funeral.
Tearful fans swayed as Stevie Wonder, Smokey Robinson and Little Richard sang her songs.
Mary, 49, died — alone and broke — of throat cancer.
MIRROR COMMENT
Pound foolish
JOHN Major's economic obsessions are turning the damaging recession into a destroying slump.
He could do for us all.
HE WON'T cut the exchange rate of the over-valued pound because in his daydreams he sees it replacing the German mark as the strongest currency.
HE WON'T cut over-high interest rates, which are killing industry and throwing families on the streets, because that might affect the pound.
HE WON'T pause in his pursuit of zero inflation regardless of the need to encourage some spending to get factories working and shops selling.
Who says so?
EVERYBODY says so!
Everybody outside the financially secure, self-serving and blinkered Cabinet.
Crashing
Yesterday two building society chiefs joined big and small industry, traders, economists and even Tory MPs in demanding new policies.
They are worried there will be a further fall in house prices.
Their concern is totally justified.
It isn't only home-owners owing more in mortgage than their home is now worth who are suffering.
A collapsing housing market could bring what is left of the economy crashing down.
A revived housing market could lead the way out of the recession.
The way out of a hole, Mr Major, is not to dig DOWN but to build UP.
Glory, glory
LINFORD Christie's dad was ‘in gloryland’ yesterday over his once-wayward lad's gold medal triumph.
So are we all.
It WAS a glorious victory.
But the glamour of track events mustn't overshadow the historic achievement of Steve Redgrave in the less popular but equally tough sport of rowing.
He adds his l992 gold to those he won in l988 and l984.
Despite the drug scandal, Britain is doing well at Barcelona.
And we haven't finished yet.
Rockets kill 14
FOURTEEN people were killed and 97 wounded yesterday when guerrillas rained rockets and mortar bombs on the Afghan capital Kabul.
IRAQ: WE'LL GO IN AGAIN
IRAQ boasted yesterday that it would attempt another takeover of Kuwait.
The provocative outburst came as Iraqis celebrated the anniversary of dictator Saddam Hussein's first invasion in 1990 — which triggered the Gulf War.
The West largely dismissed the threat as propaganda.
But fears grew that Iraq has been breaking United Nations trade embargoes.
WAR: Saddam
TV man sneaks girl out of war
DAVID LEIGH
TV REPORTER Michael Nicholson told last night how he smuggled a nine-year-old girl out of war-torn Yugoslavia and took her home to his family.
The award-winning ITN newsman doctored his passport to pass Natasha Mihaljcic off as his daughter.
Natasha, abandoned by her mother as an infant, latched on to a news crew at an orphanage and refused to leave their side.
She joined a refugee convoy travelling 200 miles to Split on the Adriatic coast.
And when a relief worker asked Nicholson to take her to England, he agreed.
Nicholson, 55, said last night: ‘I know reporters are supposed to be neutral but I had a chance to help someone.
‘I forged my passport fooling Croat officials into believing she was my daughter.
‘And when we arrived at Heathrow I came clean, telling them Natasha was seeking asylum.’
She is now living with his family in Grayswood, Surrey, until her future is sorted out.
Nicholson said: ‘Everyone's been marvellous — local kids have been playing with her and bringing her presents.
‘Whether she stays here with us is her decision.
At the moment she's on an extended holiday.’
Face Of Fear — Page 10 
HELP: Nicholson
SMALL firms have become more pessimistic about their prospects, according to the Confederation of British Industry.
THE BOY RUN GOOD!
Pride of dad who cheered Linford on with a ditty
FRANK GILBRIDE
JOHN JACKSON
THE proud father of sprint king Linford Christie was in ‘gloryland’ yesterday after cheering his boy to Olympic gold.
James Christie, who watched the sensational 100 metres triumph on TV, revealed he urged Linford on with a good-luck rhyme.
He said: ‘I was sitting on the edge of my seat, jumping up and down, shouting, ‘If you win it's because you try and if you lose you must not cry’.
‘But he won.
When he did we all jumped up into the air.
We were all hugging each other.
I was in gloryland.’
James was speaking at his home in Shepherds Bush, West London, as members of his family gathered for a celebration party.
He went on: ‘We're going to have a jolly good time after waiting so long for this.’
But the 67-year-old teetotaller added with a grin: ‘I won't be drinking.
You don't need to drink to enjoy yourself.’
James and his wife Mabel, 64, taped Saturday's night's race and watched it over and over again until 4am yesterday, with daughters Anita, 24, and Anna, 25.
‘We must have seen it dozens of times,’ he said.
Proud
Mabel, who is recovering from a stroke, added: ‘I feel great.
If I could move as I used to I'd be running around and dancing in the street.’
Anna beamed: ‘As soon as he left the starting blocks it was clear to me he was going to win.’
And Anita, a model, said: ‘Linford has made us all so proud of him.
‘Just watch him go in the 200 metres.
We think he can win that as well.’
The 9.96 seconds it took for 32-year-old Linford to grab gold in Barcelona crowned a glittering career.
But James said his son had needed some firm, fatherly advice to keep him on the right track as a teenager.
He went on: ‘Linford was a bit special from about seven years old and we were told by teachers at secondary school he was very talented.
‘But as a teenager and a young man he was more interested in the women.
‘I told him if he wanted to be a great athlete he would have to stop chasing them.’
Linford heeded the words and never looked back.
Now he is even more determined to carry on racing.
Flopping
After becoming the oldest 100 metres winner in Olympic history, he said: ‘I'm 32, going on 23, and I feel pretty good.
‘Every year, they tell me I'm too old, but every year I do better, run faster, win more.’
Linford, who became an MBE in 1990, considered quitting athletics after flopping in last year's World Championships.
But dad James said: ‘I told him everyone has setbacks in their life.
You've just to get on and overcome them.
‘Now he's proved he's the best sprinter in the world.
Suffered ‘I think my advice helped to inspire him.’
The American who won the women's 100 metres gold came within two days of having both feet amputated, she revealed yesterday.
Brave Gail Devers was suffering from Graves Disease but it took doctors two years to diagnose the crippling thyroid illness.
Before they began treating it, the plucky 5ft 4in runner's hair fell out, she suffered from massive blood blisters and occasionally lost the sight of one eye.
Gail, 25, who slept with her gold medal round her neck over the weekend, said: ‘I've got to admit that I've been back and forth through hell on the way to Barcelona.’
Mirror Comment — Page 2 Gunning for Carl — Back Page 
PROUD: Mum Mabel with Linford when he was eight
JOY: Mabel and James with Anita, front left, and Anna, top right, begin the party Picture: STEVE NICHOLSON
PRIEST IN POP GIRL ROW SAYS I'M SORRY
TOM HAMILTON
A CATHOLIC priest said sorry to his flock yesterday after spending his holiday with a chart-topping singer.
But Father John Macdonald said he would not quit over his special relationship with divorcee Mary Sandeman — who as ‘geisha girl’ Aneka hit No 1 a decade ago with Japanese Boy.
The priest, who is in his late 40s, took 44-year-old Mary to a hideaway cottage in the Scottish Highlands for the holiday.
Yesterday he returned to his Fort William church soon after the story of the shared break appeared in a Sunday newspaper.
He appeared midway through early-morning Mass, which was being conducted by another priest.
And looking tense and grim-faced, he walked slowly to the pulpit and read a statement from a small piece of paper.
He told the congregation hesitantly: ‘We begin by acknowledging our own personal failings and by asking for forgiveness.
I am very sorry for any offence that has been caused.
The only thing I ask for is your support and your prayers.’
Later he brushed aside suggestions that he would quit by saying: ‘I am completely happy being a priest.’
He refused to comment on his holiday with Mary, who was divorced last year from his cousin Angus McKinnon, a doctor.
He said: ‘I am just happy to be back in my community.’
The priest then mingled with parishioners as they left church.
He told one elderly woman who had not read the story: ‘It may be worse than you think.’
Mary's ex-husband said last night: ‘I think he is a very foolish man.
You cannot do that sort of thing if you're a priest.’
He added: ‘I knew this would end up in the papers sooner or later.’
Mary now sings mainly Gaelic songs in clubs.
At her Dunblane home last night, she said: ‘I am very upset about the story.
I feel it can only damage a wonderful friendship.’
Her son said: ‘They are just friends — nothing else.’
TOGETHER: Father Macdonald and singer Mary
HIT: Mary as Aneka
VICTORY TRIBUTE HAS JEAN IN TEARS
JILL TURNER
LINFORD'S tribute to Ron ‘Mr Athletics’ Pickering touched the heart of the coach and commentator's widow Jean.
‘There were tears in my eyes and a lump in my throat,’ she said later.
‘I was very moved by it.
It was a very emotional moment.’
Millions of telly viewers had heard the sprint hero declare, after winning his gold medal: ‘This one's for Ron.
‘He would have been cheering loudest out there.’
Advice
And Jean, who watched Linford's 100 metres victory from the cosy living room at her home at Digswell, Herts, confirmed:
‘I know Ron would have been shouting for him.
Ron was so enthusiastic for young athletes to do well.
Like many athletes Linford often came to him for advice.
He's visited our house.
He had a high regard for Ron — especially on his stand against drugs.
Now Linford has shown the world that ‘clean’ athletes can win.
He's managed to rise above the drugs stigma which has hit the British team over the last few days.’
Jean's highly-respected husband, who often told her that Linford would reach the very highest level in his sport, died last year.
He had failed to recover fully from a major heart by-pass operation.
Surprise
Jean, surrounded by photographs of Ron, recalled that he and Linford first met in 1986.
That was the year when the young Linford Christie won gold in the European Indoor Championships.
The triumph came as a surprise to many fans…but Ron Pickering knew it was another step to even greater glory.
COACH: Ron Pickering
MOVED: Widow Jean Pickering with a picture of the victorious Linford
I'LL CLEAR MY NAME
Athlete to fight back
BANISHED weightlifter Andrew Davies protested his innocence last night and said he would take legal action to clear his name.
The 24-year-old athlete insisted outside his home in Caldicot, Gwent: ‘I am not a drug cheat.’
Davies arrived home at the time he should have been competing in the Olympics.
The Commonwealth triple gold medallist was tipped to win gold again in Barcelona.
He said: ‘My Olympics are over and now I intend to clear my name.
I cannot say more until I have spoken to my solicitor.’
Davies, 6ft 2in and 17st, spoke calmly but looked tired and strained.
He and weightlifter Andrew Saxton were expelled for using the drug Clenbuterol.
Davies says Saxton, who suffers from asthma, gave him the drug when he complained of having a tight chest.
Friends and supporters in Caldicot, who raised £500 towards his Olympics expenses, have said that they will stand by Davies.
He was given the freedom of the town two years ago.
NO CHEAT': Davies
JACKO'S BEATING THE FLU
GEOFF SUTTON
SICK pop idol Michael Jackson was on the road to recovery yesterday as furious fans slammed the way his Wembley concert was cancelled.
Doctors who visited the star — hit by flu — in his £1,000-a-night hotel suite said he should be fit to perform in Cardiff on Wednesday night.
Jackson sent a message to fans saying he was ‘devastated’ he was not able to do Saturday's show.
The 72,000 crowd were told it was off five minutes before he was due on stage.
Jacko added: ‘It is the worst thing in the world to let fans down.’
Disgusted
The cancelled show is due to be rescheduled.
But mum Lynne Allen, 29, of Bedford, said: ‘I'm disgusted.
Up to five minutes before it was called off, we were being told he was on his way.’
MESSAGE: Jacko
BLIND Nick Killen — who had to lose his sight to save his life — sent his hero Jackson a get-well message yesterday.
Nick, six, of Bradford, hopes to meet him at his Leeds gig.
Superloser dies
SUPERMAN artist Joe Shuster, who lost millions by signing away the rights to the comic book hero he helped create, has died in Los Angeles aged 78.
Jail snatch by copter
A JAILBIRD was whisked to freedom by a pal who hijacked a helicopter yesterday.
The Dutch pilot — forced to land in a courtyard at Zwaag prison — was found tied up in his copter 38 miles away.
Farmer is banged up
A FARMER was arrested yesterday after his illegal collection of 60 World War II shells and grenades exploded.
Boris Pintar, 44, told police he found the shells over the years while tilling near Gorizia, Italy.
SWIM POOL BUG ALERT
HUNDREDS of swimming pools are so dirty you could end up with a rash or tummy bug, health chiefs cautioned yesterday.
The warning follows tests of pools at schools, hotels, holiday camps and leisure centres in 196 local authorities.
Half had poor water while six per cent put users at ‘high risk’.
Poor kids' clothes slashed
FAMILIES in one of Britain's poorest boroughs are to have their school clothing grants slashed.
Leaders of Liberal-controlled Tower Hamlets in London have cut £500,000 from a fund giving cash aid for school clothes to 10,000 hard-up families.
The move was slammed by teachers and anti-poverty groups yesterday.
Local campaigners fear many pupils will play truant rather than face the taunts of classmates about their ragged clothes.
Kelvin McMahon, 24, of Hounslow, London, was charged yesterday with murdering Christopher Stanley, nine, found strangled in a wartime pillbox last week.
Going to pot
THE average British employee wastes a week and a half of work time a year waiting for the kettle to boil for tea, a report claimed yesterday.
Elephant tunes in to loving
A SEX-SHY elephant was in the mood for love at last yesterday…thanks to a top orchestra.
Five-ton Sahib turned from frigid to frisky during a specially-staged concert of rousing tunes.
Keepers say he is making the right moves with five females at Cricket St Thomas Wildlife Park near Chard, Somerset.
‘The orchestra seems to have scored,’ said park boss John Taylor.
‘We hope he puts his prowess to good use.’
The Midlands Symphony Orchestra was hired to play for Sahib and music-lovers.
Not a swift job!
WORKMEN have put off demolishing a warehouse at Eastwood, Notts, until 40 swifts nesting there migrate to Africa.
Donor plea brings in a crowd!
A PLEA put out for bone marrow donors when a schoolboy soccer fan was found to have leukaemia was answered by 750 would-be helpers.
None may prove able to aid 10-year-old Paul Mainwaring, of Aintree, Liverpool — but other patients could be saved by their kindness.
Family friend Pete Harkins said yesterday: ‘Chances of a match for Paul might be one in 50,000.
‘But the volunteers are now listed as potential donors for other cases.’
Who nicked Manilow?
POLICE are baffled after a gang stole 150 T-shirts — with Barry Manilow on them.
Ian Boyd, whose firm in Biggin Hill, Kent, printed the shirts for the singer's British fan club, said: ‘We don't want them back, but it would be nice to get paid.’
Police joked: ‘The thieves could plead insanity.’
TARGET: Manilow
Kids hurt in bus smash
FIFTEEN children were injured yesterday when their minibus crashed on a school trip.
The bus carrying English and French pupils on an exchange visit left the road near St David's, West Wales.
Three of the children were seriously hurt.
Dog bite keeps a man off crash jet
MARK ELLIS
A DOG saved his owner from being on the Thai crash plane — by BITING him.
The chow-chow sank his teeth into Ravi Bhatiasevi's arm when he tried to stop him fighting another dog.
 Businessman Ravi was in so much pain he cancelled his booking on the doomed airbus — which crashed in the Himalayas killing 113 people.
Two Britons are believed to be among the dead.
Ravi, 69, of Bangkok, said: ‘I couldn't believe my ears when I heard it was missing.
All I could say was ‘Thank God’.’
The plane hit a mountain during a monsoon while flying from Bangkok to Kathmandu.
Parents of Briton Simon Petri, 23, prayed he'd be found.
Valerie Petri, of Marlow, Bucks, said: ‘The longer it goes on the worse it looks.’
Student Simon was on the last-leg of an eight-month tour of Asia.
The other Briton, John Steele, is thought to be from the Home Counties.
MISSING: Simon
TAKING THE PLUNGE
With this barmy bungee dive, I thee wed
MARK ELLIS
WITH one bound, a bride and groom found out about the ups and downs of married life — just after saying: ‘I do’.
Immediately following their vows, the newly-weds dived head-first 170ft towards the Atlantic ocean…fastened to a bungee rope.
The bride, in a white wedding gown, and the groom, in a tuxedo, clung tightly to each other as they took the terrifying plunge.
Their ankles were harnessed to an elastic cord, which bounced them back up before they could hit the sea.
But still Timothy Ful Cher, 31, kept his arms firmly wrapped around Nony Tedjakasume as they dangled upside down above the water.
Walking down the aisle would have been too tame for Timothy, a carnival gaming agent from Florida, and Nony Tedjakasume, a computer analyst from Jakarta, Indonesia.
They arrived on a pair of elephants for the wedding on Steel Pier, an amusement centre in Atlantic City.
Scared
After the ceremony they were hoisted in a steel cage high above the Atlantic by a crane while Indian musicians played wedding music.
Next came a drum roll, followed by a wave and a thumbs-up sign from the newly-weds.
Then they leapt into the unknown…defying a state ban on the jump.
‘I feel great,’ said 27-year-old Nony afterwards.
‘I looked up so I wouldn't look down and get scared.’
GOING DOWN: Bride and groom take the plunge
WHO DARES GRINS: Relieved Nony wears a big smile as the harness is removed after the jump
FULL STRETCH: Newly-weds dangle upside down 
No rope jumper is killed
A YOUNG bungee jumper plunged to his death — after forgetting to attach the rope.
Spectators watched in horror as the 19-year-old daredevil smashed into the ground from the top of a crane.
Troy Hurtibese, who worked for a bungee team called the Adrenalin Rush Adventurers, died on the way to hospital.
It happened during a rock concert in Ontario, Canada, on Saturday night.
A police spokesman said yesterday: ‘Nobody checked to see that the cord was hooked up to the crane.
And he just jumped.’
‘MANIAC’ DEATH DRIVER
POLICE were last night hunting a ‘maniac’ driver who is said to have caused a crash which killed five people, including two young children.
Four others were injured in the head-on smash between two cars on the A45 near the outskirts of Northampton.
A police spokesman said a third car — believed to be a black Citroen — may have been responsible for the accident.
Four of the dead came from an American service family stationed at Brandon, Suffolk.
They had just set out on holiday in their Mazda car.
Their pet dog and cat were also killed.
PALACE IS RULED BY GAYS SAYS TOP TORY
They used Diana'
ANDY McSMITH
BUCKINGHAM PALACE is run by gays, a leading Tory claimed yesterday.
Former Defence Minister Alan Clark, once a Thatcher favourite, said the homosexuals who dominated the Palace establishment were ‘very suspicious’ of Princess Diana.
But they came to a working arrangement with her —‘and the price they exacted from her was this up-front crusading thing about AIDS.’
The super-rich Tory, who inherited a £40-million cotton fortune, says in a newspaper interview that the Queen is ‘all right’ and Diana is a ‘goddess.’
But he slams the ‘vulgarity, brutishness and maladroitness’ of other royals.
PRINCE CHARLES is dismissed as a ‘disappointment’ without ‘purpose or vision.’
FERGIE should receive no more State handouts.
Mr Clark, who quit the Commons in April, is the son of Kenneth Clark, author of the celebrated TV series Civilisation.
He plans to publish diaries about his years in office which will spark a storm in Westminster.
In the interview, Mr Clark admits meeting British firms in the mid-1980s to help them get round a ban on trade with Iraq's Saddam Hussein.
He did it, he says, to prolong the Iran-Iraq war because Iran was a threat to the West.
Mr Clark blasts his old boss, former Defence Secretary Tom King as ‘indecisive, blustering and bullying.’
He says Tory hardman Norman Tebbit was ‘roughed up quite a few times’ by Mrs Thatcher.
And, says Mr Clark, another former Thatcher favourite, Cecil Parkinson, loathed him.
This, he explains, was ‘partly because I used four-letter words in front of the Prime Minister.’
ATTACK: Alan Clark
£300m jet deal clinched
BRITISH Aerospace has won a £300 million contract to build 13 RAF Harriers, it was announced yesterday.
The two-seater training planes — to go into service from 1994 — have night vision equipment allowing them to be used on a battle frontline.
But they will mainly be used to train pilots in vertical take-off and attack missions.
Gangsters go to war over Pepsi
GANGSTERS smashed up a new Pepsi factory — to keep the black market price of the drink high.
The thugs struck days before production was to start in the Russian city of Kursk.
Police hunting the gang said yesterday: ‘Had it been brought on stream the price of Pepsi in the city would have dropped by half.’
DOCS' SUN PATROL
DOCTORS will be on duty at one of Britain's most popular holiday beaches — to warn that sunbathing can kill.
They will spend a week at Paignton beach, South Devon, later this month telling tourists of the link between sun-tanning and skin cancer.
Teams of doctors, nurses and skin care experts will also hand out T shirts and sun block as well as advice.
‘People are dying from too much sunbathing,’ said Dr Judy Evans, who is heading the project.
The number of skin cancer cases in Britain has doubled in 10 years, with the South West as the worst area.
The annual UK rate now stands at 11 to 14 per 100,000 of the population.
Greenpeace yesterday urged parents to protect their children from the sun during the hottest part of the day to avoid the damaging effects of the depleted ozone layer.
DEATH-PLOT WIFE'S JOY
FRANK CORLESS
A WOMAN who survived a murder plot by her greedy husband got a passport to happiness last night.
Talei Pennington, 21, who was adopted at birth, was given air tickets to Fiji to meet her natural parents.
Millions of TV viewers saw her gasp with surprise when Richard Madeley handed over the documents as a gift from ITV's Richard and Judy Show.
Talei said later: ‘I was thrilled to have found my real parents but I didn't know how I could possibly get out there.’
Her husband, John Pennington, of Southport, Merseyside, was jailed for 15 years in June for hiring a hitman to kill her for the £300,000 insurance.
After reading about the case, her natural parents phoned her mum and dad in Manchester.
Breakout mob seize a dumper
THIRTY prisoners used a dumper truck as a ram in a dramatic breakout bid.
The truck was commandeered by a mob who dragged its prison auxiliary driver to the ground before kicking him.
One inmate then aimed it at the perimeter fence of trouble-torn Lindholme jail, Doncaster, as other prisoners pelted warders with bricks.
Violent
Several officers were hurt.
But reinforcements were called in from nearby Moorland prison — and the escape was foiled.
Governor Peter Leonard, who launched an inquiry yesterday, said only prompt action by staff prevented a violent free-for-all.
The jail was hit by a serious riot last year — following another in 1988.
BALLOON PLUNGE
SEVENTEEN people in a hot-air balloon had a lucky escape when it hit a power cable and crashed.
Only two suffered injuries as the craft came down in a field at Pirbright, Surrey.
HOLD TIGHT!
BUS DRIVER FAILS A B-TEST
GORDON HAY
A BUS trip came to an unscheduled stop yesterday…as the driver was B-tested.
Passengers were left standing on the pavement at 8.30 am while police led him away.
Onlookers said they heard him admit that he ‘had a drink’ the previous night.
The police had been alerted by a transport inspector.
He told them he was unhappy about the way the bus was being driven on its route from Kent to central London.
So the double-decker's journey was brought to a halt at Holborn Circus.
Charged
Several stranded passengers looked on as the driver stepped down from the cab and was arrested.
Later, at nearby Snow Hill police station, he gave breath samples which were reported to be positive.
A police spokesman said yesterday:
‘A man has been charged and he will appear at the City of London Magistrates Court on Monday.’
Cobra kills ‘love a snake’ man
A SNAKE handler who set up a group to dispel people's fear of the reptiles was killed by a bite from his Egyptian cobra.
Larry Moor, 45, ran screaming for help from his home in Vancouver, Canada, but he died in agony within seconds.
The cobra is one of the world's deadliest snakes.
£3m for dead AIDS woman
AN AIDS victim won £3 1/2million damages — hours after she died from the disease.
The jury which made the award did not know that 56-year-old Susie Quintana had lost her long fight for life the day before.
They were locked away for the closing stages of the case in Denver, Colorado, to prevent the tragedy influencing their decision.
Mrs Quintana contracted AIDS through a transfusion of contaminated blood nearly 10 years ago.
She sued the blood bank.
Her husband Chris won nearly £750,000 damages over her loss in the same award.
MP FAILS B-TEST
A TOP Tory MP failed a breath test after driving through a police speed trap.
Government whip Sydney Chapman, 56, was arrested in his constituency of Barnet, North London.
HOME AXED KIDS' HELL
A CHILDREN'S home is being shut by a council after a damning inquiry report.
Investigators said the Ty Mawr home in Abergavenny, Gwent, was badly mismanaged, had too broad a mix of residents and had untrained staff.
Some workers were blasted for using ‘unacceptable violence’ by slapping and cuffing boys.
But the probe — which followed claims of beatings — found no evidence of ‘pindown’ -style cruelty.
IRA mall boast
THE IRA yesterday said one of its ‘active service units’ planted the eight firebombs found in a Milton Keynes shopping centre last week.
GLOBE-TROTTING MAJOR LEAVES GLOOM BEHIND
and so does Lamont
DAVID BRADSHAW
PREMIER John Major is on course for a gold medal for globe-trotting with his trip to the Olympics this week.
And Chancellor Norman Lamont was last night accused of sunning himself as the economy sinks into deeper gloom.
Mr Major's visit to Barcelona for the last two days of the Games will mean he has spent an astonishing 80 days out of recession gripped Britain in the 20 months since he came to power.
That puts even Lady Thatcher's efforts in the shade — in her final 20 months she managed just 71 days.
Mr Major's appetite for leaving the country's problems behind has seen him visit Rio de Janeiro, Bogota and Washington.
Closer to home, he's also been to eight European cities since the election.
And plans are being laid for jaunts next year to Japan, Australia, India, Pakistan, South America and the Commonwealth conference in Cyprus.
Mr Major's visit to Barcelona is billed as a boost for Manchester's bid for the 2000 Olympics.
Luxury
But he will slip away for a holiday in a luxury Spanish villa after the final ceremony.
And he returns to Spain in September for the Expo international fair.
Meanwhile Mr Lamont came under attack for spending the whole of August away from his desk.
Labour's Robin Cook accused him and the Cabinet of ‘sunning themselves on the deckchairs of Europe while watching the economy sink below the horizon’.
An angry Treasury spokesman denied Mr Lamont was taking all of August off.
The official said: ‘He is taking a 10 day holiday with his family in Italy.
‘Otherwise he is keeping in touch and working on his Ministerial papers — although he may not necessarily be in town.’
Mr Cook hit out as the Institute of Purchasing and Supply revealed factories are cutting production following a ‘significant’ fall in orders.
And the Oxford Economic Forecasting group predicted a further 1 per cent drop in output because customers are unwilling to spend.
Cartoon — Page 6 
APPETITE: Major
619% PAY RISE THAT PUT ONE BOSS ON £910,319
Losers rake it in too
GORDON HAY
PAINT chief Mike Hennessy has won a pay rise that every boss will envy — 619 per cent.
The amazing leap took his salary to £910,319, when his Kalon company profits increased by 57 per cent.
Mr Hennessy is just one of a string of bosses collecting rises that bear no relation to their firms' profits.
And some are even notching up big increases when their companies are LOSING money, a report reveals today.
Britannia Hotels has slumped to an £8.5 million loss.
But two directors — Michael Morton and Alexander Langsam — got ‘doubleyour-money’ 98 per cent rises to more than £4 MILLION each.
The details of boardroom mega-money come just days after the latest row over a privatisation pay rise.
Delighted
National Power chief executive John Baker got a 157 per cent increase that lifted his salary from £147,194 to £383,935.
The firms profits went up 18 per cent.
A survey for the independent Labour Research group discovered that:
376 directors are being paid between £250,000 and £500,000 a year.
69 are raking in between £500,000 and £1 million.
17 executives are on a staggering £1 million-plus.
Boots chief Sir James Blyth is among the bosses whose pay awards far outstripped rises in profits.
Sir James picked up a 67 per cent increase to £571,000 when profits went up seven per cent.
British Airways chief Lord King ‘must have been delighted with his 64 per cent pay rise as BA's profits rose by only 19 per cent,’ says the report.
And it adds: ‘Richard Oster, of the Cookson engineering group, may have been happy to make do on £628,611, a rise of only four per cent, as his company recorded a fall in profits of 65 per cent .’
BRITAIN'S highest-paid person is impresario Cameron Mackintosh — current salary £8,331,557.
BIG MONEY: Hennessy
BLACKS STAGE MASS STRIKE
MARK DOWDNEY
MILLIONS of black South Africans staged a national strike yesterday aimed at forcing the white government into a power-sharing deal.
But it did not stop the township violence — 36 blacks were killed just hours before.
Cities were deserted and factories closed in the protest — the biggest ever in the strife-torn country — called by ANC leader Nelson Mandela.
Trade union leader Jay Naidoo claimed the strike ‘represents the beginning of the end of the white regime.’
He said 95 per cent of blacks stopped work in the Johannesburg area.
But bosses alleged no more than two million workers stayed at home.
Most of the violence was between the ANC and Zulu rivals of the Inkatha Freedom party.
The government refuses to back down to what it calls ‘coercion’ and there is no sign of talks resuming between Mandela and President de Klerk.
LEADER: Mandela
Woman's work is done…at 65
ROGER TODD
WOMEN face having to work an extra five years under retirement age plans put to the Government yesterday.
The proposal — expected to be adopted within months — would save £3billion a year.
The Social Security Advisory Committee had been asked for its solution to the argument about when men and women should retire.
It ruled out a reduction in pensionable age for men because it would cost too much — and opted for 65 for both sexes.
Advisers say the change — aimed at meeting European Community moves towards equality for the sexes — should be phased in over a 15-year period.
Needy
Under a sliding scale, a woman aged 52 now would retire at 60 in 2000, a 51-year-old in 2002 at 61 and a 50-year-old in 2003.
And a woman aged 42 now would have to work until the year 2015 when she is 65.
The committee recommended that the £3billion a year saved should be used to help the needy.
But committee chairman Sir Peter Barclay said: ‘There is nothing to guarantee the Government will use the money in the way we want.’
‘RACIST’ KNIFED
A MEMBER of South Africa's far-right AWB organisation was stabbed in a London pub yesterday.
Anthony Travers, its London representative, later quit hospital against doctors' advice.
‘POTTY ROYALS NEED TO SEE SHRINK’
STEPHEN WHITE
THE ROYALS could all do with a long lie down — on a psychiatrist's couch, it was claimed yesterday.
For they are in need of intensive counselling to improve their ravaged family life.
But top psychiatrist Professor Stuart Fischoff says if Diana underwent treatment it could mean the end of her marriage.
He said: ‘If Charles is a cold fish and Diana needs someone warm they'd probably be better off apart.’
In a study, The Dysfunctional Royal Family, the professor said Diana's childhood anguish when her mother left home made its mark.
He added: ‘Unfortunately she then married a man who emotionally abandoned her as well.’
Charles was aloof to Diana and their sons.
The professor branded Prince Philip ‘distant, critical and dominating’.
The Queen was also ‘cool and aloof’ with Fergie slammed as ‘the brash and vulgar in-law’.
Even the Queen Mum — 92 today — didn't escape criticism in America's Ladies Home Journal as she can ‘abruptly withdraw affection’.
SLAMMED: Fergie
CHARLES was dealt a blow yesterday when his polo handicap was dropped by a goal for the second year — to a ‘rather ordinary’ 2.
His manager Major Ron Ferguson described it as ‘inevitable’.
He said: ‘It's not possible for the Prince to keep his handicap high — he doesn't have time to practise.
Other players knock a ball about six or seven times a week.’
POEM BY SOLDIER
THE poem read at the funeral (above) was written by soldier Stephen Cummins — killed by a car bomb in Ulster three years ago.
The 21-year-old soldier, of Portsmouth, adapted it from a verse by US poet Mary Fry.
He wanted it as his epitaph and left it in a letter passed to his parents on his death.
It was made famous by being used at a remembrance service for Falklands dead.
Do not stand at my grave and weep.
I am not there, I do not sleep.
I am a thousand winds that blow I am the diamond glint on snow.
I am the sunlight on ripened grain I am the gentle autumn rain.
When you awaken in the morning hush I am the uplifting rush Of quiet birds encircled flight I am the soft stars that shine at night.
Do not stand at my grave and cry.
I am not there, I did not die.
Denholm warned off booze
ACTOR Denholm Elliott has been warned off booze after a health scare.
The ‘English gentleman’ star spent five days in hospital with a perforated ulcer — and was told he was drinking himself to death.
Vodka-tippler Elliott, 70, is now recovering at his holiday home on Ibiza with second wife Susan.
Tea is another banned drink — and that's ‘killing him more’, said Susan.
ULCER: Denholm
Killer gondola
AN AMERICAN woman tourist drowned in Venice's lagoon after her gondola was capsized by a passing ferry's wake.
ALEX'S POSY OF LOVE
A SPECIAL posy of peach carnations on Rachel's coffin bore a tender message written on behalf of Alex.
It read: ‘You gave me all of your being, every moment of your time and always all your love.’
Another wreath came from police manning the incident room at Wimbledon station, where the probe into the brutal murder continues.
Bad loser
A MAN shot dead his opponent and a bystander after losing five dollars in a card game at Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
Murder case nurse moved
NURSE Beverley Allitt, who faces four charges of murdering children, has been switched from a Yorkshire jail to Rampton top-security hospital.
The 23-year-old's weight has fallen by more than 3st through eating difficulties — and she needs sustained medical treatment.
WEIGHT: Allitt
WIG NICKED FROM ‘RACIST JIBE’ QC
A SOLICITOR'S clerk stole a wig from a barrister he claimed racially insulted him, the Old Bailey heard yesterday.
John Sandiford was trying to get revenge by making the QC — now a judge — late for a case.
Lanre Oke, defending, said Sandiford, 29, was in the robing room at Southend Crown Court when Laurence Marshall came in and asked what he was doing.
During an argument Sandiford, of Barking, Essex, was upset by a remark and later admitted taking the wig and two collars.
He was given a conditional discharge.
Straight to the point
A FRENCH driver took it literally when he asked for directions and was told to ‘go straight over the roundabout’.
He got stuck in the middle in Wolverhampton and had to be rescued.
Kids rescued
COASTGUARDS slammed organisers of a race in Swansea Bay after 65 teenagers were rescued when gale force gusts capsized their dinghies.
4 bullets dodged by chase cop
A GUNMAN fired four shots at a policeman last night — but was grabbed before anyone was hurt.
A second man was also held.
But early today his role in the drama remained unclear.
The shots rang out at 11.30pm in King's Cross, central London, after a short chase.
A large part of the area was sealed off following the arrests as police carried out a fingertip search for bullets.
It is believed Scotland Yard marksmen were not involved.
Humdinger
A ‘HUM-LINE’ set up by Birmingham library chiefs for people who forget song titles has identified: I Heard My Goldfish Yodelling.
Hot news
TV NEWSCASTERS were forced to abandon their main evening bulletin yesterday when a fire broke out at TSW's Plymouth studios.
‘FIND CRUSHER’
AN escaped prisoner known as The Crusher was being hunted last night by police probing a nightwatchman's murder.
Geoffrey Dudgeon, 35 — on the run from a Leicester jail when James Doy was shot dead last week in Rotherham — was reported to have been seen in Southampton.
PACK ‘EM IN
THE world's first museum to the humble sardine has opened at Grau-du-Roi on the coast of southern France — and is hoping to be tightly packed with thousands of  visitors .
They will have to enter between three huge cans to see, among other things, more than 150 different tins.
Text hooks
FISHING is to be added to the curriculum next year at the Queen Elizabeth Comprehensive school in Corby, Northants.
Farmer shot by poachers
FARMER Ged Humphries was blasted with a shotgun after challenging two poachers.
Ged, 56, was left bleeding from the shoulder after he found the men hunting game birds on his land.
He said: ‘They were shooting in all directions but as I drove towards them on my tractor they started to run.
‘I thought they'd gone off my land and started driving back to the house but then suddenly felt a sharp pain in my back.
‘I was bleeding and realised I'd been hit.’
Ged was rushed to hospital and pellets were removed from his shoulder.
‘Doctors said the fact that I am well built was in my favour,’ said Ged, of Barn Hey Farm, Netherley, near Liverpool.
A police helicopter was scrambled and armed units joined a search for the gunmen.
The men were wearing dark green clothes and one was carrying a white sack.
They had a brown Doberman dog with them.
Vera fired over charity cuppas
BILL DANIELS
WAITRESS Vera Nicholls served up teas on a charity stall — and was sacked on the spot by her boss, who ran a cafe opposite.
Barry Jones boiled over when he saw 63-year-old Vera brewing up for a local hospice on her day off.
The charity cuppa cost 30p, while Mr Jones charged 60p.
Shocked granny Vera said last night: ‘I was washing up cups at the time and he told me he didn't agree with what I was doing.
‘When I protested he accused me of being lippy.
‘I am very upset because the stall was for a good cause.’
Mr Jones, 43, who runs the cafe in Ross-on-Wye, said: ‘I took exception to the fact that she was selling teas outside our door without informing me first.’
He said Vera could have her job back if she apologised.
Angry Vera replied: ‘Why should I apologise for helping charity?
‘I am not going back.’
Rings a bell
IRENE Aldis, who lost her wedding ring in 1932, got it back for her 102nd birthday after it was found in a field at Honingham, Norfolk.
Flight ale
A BEER-DRINKING budgie which escaped from owner Bob Ryan's home was found on the roof of his local in Hartlepool, Cleveland.
‘Suicide'caravans shocker
THOUSANDS of families are towing caravan deathtraps behind them on their holidays, a shock survey revealed yesterday.
In tests by Gloucester trading standards officers, more than 70 per cent of caravans were found to be over the weight limit.
Another survey, by West Mercia police, found 130 faults in 90 caravans.
Towing drivers are dicing with death, too.
Their safety mistakes range from ‘ill-advised’ to ‘suicidal.’
With caravan holidays more popular than ever, police fear a summer of tragedies.
Op fear wife in kidnap ordeal
FRANK GILBRIDE
A POLICEMAN'S wife was taken hostage at gunpoint yesterday — only 24 hours before facing a cancer probe operation.
The 42-year-old woman was forced to drive a raider who hijacked her car while fleeing from a bungled bank robbery.
During the terrifying 15-minute ride the Catholic mother of three recited decades of the rosary to herself to help get through the ordeal.
The masked robber finally bundled her out of her Honda Accord then sped off.
Today the detective constable's wife — who does not want to be named — faces exploratory surgery after a lump was found in a breast.
Brave
Last night, back home with her 38-year-old husband, she said: ‘I prayed to God that this was not the day I was going to die.
‘Being taken hostage was the last thing I needed after what I'm about to face.’
The brave mum, who has two daughters and a son, was out shopping with her husband in Friern Barnet, North London, when they saw a robbery going on.
They followed the raider then the off-duty policeman leaped out of the car and grabbed him.
But the thug pulled out a shotgun, ordered the officer to lie on the ground and jumped into the car.
VIDEO STAR'S FREEZE FRAME
THIS was how actress Nina Hartley faced a challenge…to make a show-stopping appearance at a video dealers' convention.
She slipped into a frock made of less tape than the average cassette.
And everyone froze at the Las Vegas meeting to view triumphant Nina's outfit.
But, as she revealed modestly, there was almost nothing to it.
Euro-jet reprieve
BRITAIN yesterday won a three-month reprieve for the £22 billion Euro jet fighter project.
At a four nation summit in Madrid, Germany agreed to delay a final decision on the fighter until November.
Top cop's fury
ULSTER police chief Sir Hugh Annesley took newspaper ads yesterday to deny TV claims of links between the RUC and Loyalist killers.
Hurd soothes UN chief
FOREIGN Secretary Douglas Hurd last night soothed UN boss Boutros Boutros Ghali — who lashed out at the British for treating him ‘like a wog’.
Mr Hurd said Mr Boutros Ghali, who wants more cash for the African famine, had reason to be exasperated.
Britain wants more UN peace efforts in Bosnia.
What's Happening To Us?— Pages 14 and 15
Casualty ‘risk’ to patients
PATIENTS' lives are at risk because hospital emergency departments lack staff and equipment, it is claimed today.
The number of consultants in casualty units should be urgently increased, says a report by National Audit Office boss Sir John Bourn.
FURY AT MAJOR GAG ON SLUMP
DAVID BRADSHAW
DESPERATE John Major has caused a storm by trying to stop newspapers telling readers just how badly the Government is doing.
The Premier has appealed to editors of Tory-supporting papers to lay off Chancellor Norman Lamont and hide the depth of the economic crisis.
Amazingly, he claims attacks on Government blunders are undermining chances of recovery.
The Sunday Times had already agreed to a ‘cease-fire’.
Readers were told it was ‘muting criticism’ even though Tory policies were wrong and would throw hundreds of thousands more people on the dole.
Slamming
Labour employment spokesman Frank Dobson said yesterday: ‘Major thinks if no-one mentions the bogey of recession, it will go away.’
Shadow Heritage Secretary Bryan Gould has written to the Sunday Times slamming its ‘extraordinary decision’.
The Woolwich building society yesterday appealed for the Government to take ‘urgent and decisive’ action to end the housing slump.
And as it was revealed house prices were still falling, Nat West chairman Lord Alexander said: ‘There is continuing, widespread deep recession in the UK.’
He called for a doubling of mortgage tax relief to £60,000.
The bank revealed it faced £864 million bad debts and 2,000 more staff would go by Christmas.
Muldoon dies
NEW Zealand's former Premier Sir Robert ‘Piggy’ Muldoon, 71, who recently had heart surgery, has died in hospital.
Flying start to marriage
BRIDE Gaynor Murray's honeymoon horror turned into a dream wedding gift — thanks to airline bosses.
Gaynor, 22, and husband Anthony were heartbroken when their flight to Cyprus was delayed by 24 hours.
But Cyprus Airways jetted to the rescue by putting them up in the honeymoon suite at Manchester Airport's Hilton Hotel.
They were treated to a candlelit dinner, champagne, flowers and given £100 to spend.
‘It was wonderful,’ said Gaynor, from Ashton, Lancs yesterday.
Two die as royals race yacht in gale:
TWO sailors died during gale-lashed Cowes Week yacht races yesterday…one a man competing against Prince Philip and Prince Edward.
The second victim was a 30-year-old woman who was hit on the head by a boom.
And a host of other crewmen were injured as sudden gusts caused havoc during the racing off the Isle of Wight.
The tragic yachtsman, a Tynesider in his 40s, was washed overboard as he tried to change a sail.
He died after 30 minutes in the water.
Last night sailors blamed upper-crust ‘Yachties’ for delaying rescue attempts by clogging vital emergency radio channels with chat about dinner parties.
In other incidents a man had the tops of his fingers sliced off, another broke a wrist and a third suffered a heart attack.
Prince Philip and Prince Edward, on board their 38ft Yeoman XXVIII, came fifth in their race.
Lonely heart-throb
ACTOR Kenneth Branagh — adored by millions of women — once appeared in a lonely hearts ad.
He was 16, still with mum and dad.
And in the Oh Boy magazine in September 1977, the lovelorn-lads section said of today's idol:
‘He'd like to write to a young lady of fifteen plus, over 5ft, not fussy about looks but please send photo.’
Branagh — maker and star of Henry V and married to actress Emma Thompson — says a mate sent his photo to Oh Boy.
About 150 letters then ‘landed on the mat’.
AD: Branagh
Euro switch
ELECTRICAL plugs and sockets throughout Europe are to be standardised — but the conversion could take up to 30 years, say experts.
JEALOUS JERRY'S LOVE QUIZ
Mick's ‘nights with Carla’
TINA WEAVER
JEALOUS Jerry Hall is quizzing staff at the chateau Mick Jagger bought for her — about claims he spent secret nights there with Carla Bruni.
The 49-year-old Rolling Stone wined and dined the sultry millionaire model at the French mansion behind Jerry's back, it was said last night.
Days ago Carla, 24, said: ‘I have only met Mick Jagger once and that was in New York two years ago.’
She says she had nothing to do with the couple's break-up.
But a servant at the £2 million mansion near Amboise — where Jerry, 34, is pondering her future — claimed: ‘I have seen Carla Bruni here several times.
‘She was with Monsieur Jagger between October and November.
‘Jerry doesn't know.
We haven't told her.
We are all very discreet here, you see.
But I think she suspects.’
Blasted ‘She hasn't asked me about it but she has put questions to other staff.
‘She would be very upset, desolated, if she knew.
Monsieur Jagger does not want his wife to know and we are loyal to him.’
The servant also said Mick phoned Jerry on Monday and blasted her for discussing their marriage in public.
‘He was very angry.
She is not permitted to talk to anyone about the marriage now.’
Jerry recently gave a ‘perfect family’ interview while Mick refused to take part, Hello! magazine claims.
Brave
She invited the magazine to photograph her and children Elizabeth Scarlett, eight, James, six, and Georgia, seven months, on holiday in Mustique this year.
Jagger apparently turned up unannounced and ‘didn't want to take part in the interview or even be photographed with his children.’
The magazine added: ‘Jerry put on a brave front, not letting a trace of the strain she was under show through.
‘She wanted the world to know her life was perfect when she knew it wasn't.’
SULTRY: Carla is said to have been at the chateau
ANGRY: Jerry got a blast from Mick (left) for talking about their love split
Fear for mother and kids
GORDON HAY
A DEPRESSED mum has vanished with her three mischievous sons after saying she could not cope with long school holidays and mounting debts.
Police launched a nationwide hunt for Dawn Loasby, 33, amid fears for their safety.
Husband Don, 36, said she dreaded six weeks with Daniel, eight, Daley, six, and David, five.
On Monday she took £25 cash, put the boys in the family's battered red Rover and left home in Wisbech, Cambs.
Destruction
‘It got to the stage when she dreaded waking up,’ said Don.
‘She was wondering what they were going to get up to next.
It was general destruction.
She just couldn't cope.’
They also had money worries — engineer Don found work only three weeks ago after three months' unemployment.
Police Insp Terry Knight said: ‘We are appealing for her to contact us.
If she is OK, we will respect her wishes.’
DEPRESSED: Dawn
Man drowns for dog…
A DOG owner drowned as he tried to rescue his labrador from a rain-swollen river.
Financial consultant Frank Pinnock, 43, dived into the river after the dog, George, slipped down a bank.
But he was swept away.
Wife Debra, 30, later hauled him out, but he died.
The couple were walking with son Matthew, two, at Huish Episcopi, Somerset.
The dog got ashore.
Flaming ‘eck
FIREMEN turn out to more false alarms in South Yorkshire — over 3,000 in five months this year — than real fires, says a new report.
Soldier shot
DOCTORS battled in vain last night to save a British soldier shot when he walked into an IRA ambush as he patrolled North Belfast.
Aunty Carol's throw of life
A LITTLE boy's quick-thinking aunt saved his life as a runaway car hurtled towards them.
She threw him over a wall.
And the Ford Fiesta crashed into it seconds after four-year-old Andrew Afflick landed on the other side.
His 21-year-old aunt Carol also leaped over the waist-high wall as Richard Ward struggled with the controls of his car.
‘It's a miracle we weren't mown down,’ said Carol, of Heworth, York, yesterday.
‘A split second later and that would have been it.’
Andrew's mother Janice, 23, who was walking with them in nearby Haxby, said: ‘The first thing I heard was Carol scream, then a bang.
‘She was incredible.
There was no time.
She just hurled herself and Andrew over the wall.’
Aunt and nephew were treated at hospital for cuts and bruises.
Mr Ward, of Wigginton, York, was unhurt.
Aunty Carol's throw of life
A LITTLE boy's quick-thinking aunt saved his life as a runaway car hurtled towards them.
She threw him over a wall.
And the Ford Fiesta crashed into it seconds after four-year-old Andrew Afflick landed on the other side.
His 21-year-old aunt Carol also leaped over the waist-high wall as Richard Ward struggled with the controls of his car.
‘It's a miracle we weren't mown down,’ said Carol, of Heworth, York, yesterday.
‘A split second later and that would have been it.’
Andrew's mother Janice, 23, who was walking with them in nearby Haxby, said: ‘The first thing I heard was Carol scream, then a bang.
‘She was incredible.
There was no time.
She just hurled herself and Andrew over the wall.’
Aunt and nephew were treated at hospital for cuts and bruises.
Mr Ward, of Wigginton, York, was unhurt.
Real scary ‘shoot-out’
A POLICE training exercise backfired yesterday when a mock gun siege appeared too real.
Police switchboards were jammed with reports from the public of a detective being shot and hostages taken near the sleepy seaside village of Boulmer, Northumbria.
BURGLARS' KITS ARE AUCTIONED BY COPS
It was like a crooks' convention
GORDON HUGHES
CAMERAMAN Sean Colborn got more than he bargained for at a police auction — he bought a do-it-yourself BURGLARY kit.
He thought he was getting an Olympus Trip camera and holdall — as advertised in the catalogue — for a bargain £10.
But inside the bag he found a device to unlock cars, a pair of bolt cutters, a two pound hammer and all the equipment needed to steal car radios.
Two hundred people in the audience in Barnsley bid for tools including jemmies, bolt cutters, axes, and sledgehammers.
‘It was like a burglar's convention,’ Sean, 35, from Wombwell, said yesterday.
‘There were dozens of holdalls like mine on offer, all containing the tools of the trade.
‘People were picking up bolt cutters for as little as £4.
‘I just went for a camera and when I opened the bag I couldn't believe what was inside.
It was all dodgy gear.’
South Yorks police said they were selling off property recovered from crooks — or unclaimed loot from robberies.
Tools
Sean said: ‘It's all right to sell off confiscated goods such as videos and TVs but not equipment for breaking into cars and houses.
‘This is just putting the tools that burglars use back into circulation.’
Now local Labour MP Terry Patchett is asking the Home Secretary to look into the case.
‘I had no idea that the police sold off items like this,’ he said.
‘They are virtually burglars’ kits.
‘I don't think the burglars in this area need encouraging by being able to purchase cheap tools.
‘It's awful to think some of these tools may already have been used to commit burglaries.’
A police spokesman said: ‘You can buy all of these tools at B & Q. It depends on what they are used for.
‘It is quite possible these tools have been used by criminals.
We are obliged to sell off property with recoverable values.
‘But obviously we don't sell anything like knives or firearms which have criminal overtones.’
Ho ho hoaxer gran is jailed
WIDOW Muriel Spence wept yesterday as she was jailed for an ‘outrageous’ festive fraud.
The greedy granny hired costumes and sent a squad of bogus Santas around pubs and clubs with collecting tins.
She recruited her children to help run the racket.
And they netted £10,000 from generous customers who believed they were donating to charity.
Spence, 57, of South Shields, Tyneside, contacted a hospital saying she wanted to raise funds for a children's unit.
Cut-price Then she used a consultant's ‘thank you’ letter to back her cheeky scam — even hiring the Santa outfits at half-price for her ‘good cause’.
Spence was jailed for six months at Newcastle.
John Spence, 22, was given a suspended four month sentence, David Spence, 17, a conditional discharge, and Irene Spence, 19, was fined £150.
COUPLE OF BIG YINS…
TV funnygirl Pamela Stephenson demonstrates that she's determined to be the star of this show.
To the delight of husband Billy ‘Big Yin’ Connolly, she squeezed into a tight red mini-dress and went right over the top.
The couple were guests at a showbiz party for movie tough-guy Arnold Schwarzenegger, in town to promote his new London restaurant.
Arnie must have been thrilled to get such a big turn-out.
Picture: ALAN GRISBROOK
HEY NUDE
A NUDE portrait of ex-Beatle Paul McCartney is to be revealed to the world — by his wife.
Photographer Linda persuaded Paul to bare all soon after they met in the late Sixties.
Now the Hey Nude picture will go on display at an exhibition of her work at a Bath gallery.
Its spokeswoman said: ‘I haven't seen the Paul nude yet, but I'm told it's in the best possible taste.’
BARING ALL: Paul
Deadly trail of hospital bug
MARTIN PHILLIPS
THE killer bacteria was found at Guy's Hospital a week before baby Dean Bunn died, doctors revealed yesterday.
Another child, who survived the bug, was found to be carrying it on July 15.
Guy's did not close the children's intensive care unit — where Dean and a second baby who died were treated — until later.
A second infected ward is now closed.
Nine other children have tested positive.
Two carriers were cleared of infection, one discharged and six are being treated.
Donal O'Sullivan, infectious disease control expert, said Guy's could not have shut wards sooner as the source had not been traced.
‘There is nothing more the hospital could have done,’ he added.
Paediatrics boss George Haycock said: ‘Both children were extremely ill and would probably have died anyway.’
EXPERT: O'Sullivan
SECOND TOT IN BUG STORM
GEORGINA WALSH
A SECOND family mourning the loss of a baby son yesterday accused hospital chiefs of ‘covering up’ a killer bug.
Tiny Kane Elmore died after becoming infected with the bacteria following heart surgery.
He was in the next incubator at Guy's hospital to first victim Dean Bunn.
Dean's parents spoke out angrily in the Mirror yesterday, after we had revealed the existence of the bug that they knew nothing about.
Their outrage was immediately echoed by Kane's parents — Craig Elmore and Julie Rolls.
But Guy's DID invite the couple to meet heart specialists yesterday.
Craig, 26, said doctors did disclose that Kane had caught a bug and antibiotics were not working.
But they were NOT told what the bug was — or that other babies were affected.
‘We only found out when we saw the Daily Mirror,’ said Craig, who lives with Julie and their three other children in Luton, Beds.
Picked
Julie, 22, said that Kane died in her arms.
She added: ‘The whole family is disgusted by this.’
Kane was born with a hole in the heart and other defects.
He died on July 28, 26 days old.
Dean Bunn died five days earlier.
The klebsiella bug was named on Dean's death certificate as a contributing factor.
Kane's refers to heart and kidney failure
But dad Craig said: ‘It must have been the same bug.’
Nine other children are affected.
Today Guy's doctors will meet Dean's parents.
TRAGIC: Julie — baby son Kane died in her arms
‘Put kid thugs in jail’
COURTS must be given powers to jail child thugs, MPs demanded yesterday.
They want to widen the law under which under-14s can be jailed only for murder or manslaughter.
Their move follows a judge's protest this week that he could not imprison a 13-year-old torturer who carved his initials on a boy's back.
Ivan Lawrence, Tory chairman of the Commons All Party Home Affairs Committee, said: ‘There must be flexibility in the worst cases.’
But reformers said jailing kids would make them worse.
WE PAID £100,000 AND GOT A SANDCASTLE
Fury at posh homes
SYDNEY YOUNG
FURIOUS homebuyers are set to sue the builder of their luxury estate after paying £100,000 for houses branded no better than SANDCASTLES.
Experts called in when the walls began to wobble discovered that more than SIX TIMES too much sand had been mixed with the cement in some properties.
Official building regulations specify a mix of one measure of cement to six of sand.
But a report on nine of the 80 homes has uncovered a ratio varying from one in 20 to one in 38.
Surveyor Chris Easton, who conducted extensive tests on the houses, said: ‘I think there is nothing else to do but demolish these homes.
‘I really cannot see how you can repair them.
They are worthless.’
A grim catalogue of up to 80 defects in 23 homes has been put together by the residents in Chessel Close at Bradley Stoke, near Bristol.
They include foundations 3ft too shallow, weak mortar and loose roofs.
The buyers, who paid up to £120,000 for their luxury homes before the property slump, have launched a High Court action against Lovell Homes.
Fair
They want all their money back and their costs paid in full.
Residents Association chairman John Streets said yesterday: ‘We have had enough.
‘We have been so sensible, fair and reasonable with Lovell Homes that it's probably been to our detriment.
‘They have made us offers and kept changing them all the time.
‘We've gone from feeling bitter to being determined to get what is rightfully ours.’
Neighbour Evelyn Dawson said: ‘You can push a screwdriver through some of the walls.
They are like sandcastles.’
The row comes less than a year after Lovell had to rehouse 17 families in nearby Kites Close after it was discovered THEIR homes were crumbling.
Spokesman Edward Rees said Lovell had offered repairs and a phased repurchase of the Chessel Close properties.
‘We have made offers to them which we believe go beyond our legal responsibilities,’ he said.
HOME AND CRY: Chessel Close buyers are bitter
FAN HURT BY JACKO LIMO
A MICHAEL Jackson fan was taken to hospital yesterday after the superstar's limo ran over her foot.
Lizzie Lowe, 13, from West London, was dragged to safety when hundreds tried to mob their idol as he left his London hotel for last night's Cardiff concert.
You Asda smile
CHEERFUL Liz Jones, 42, from Glasgow, beat 64,000 other Asda workers yesterday to become the company's Employee of the Year.
Rodney retrial
FOUR policemen cleared of beating black motorist Rodney King are to be re-tried in Los Angeles where 50 people died in race riots.
Lovesick exam boy tragedy
SCHOOLBOY Thomas Scollen killed himself after his girlfriend told him she was ditching him until after his exams.
Thomas, 16, took a massive overdose of painkillers and Pernod and then wrote a letter leaving everything he owned to her — including his footballer of the year trophy.
Thomas, from Blackhall, County Durham, and 15-year-old Joanne Lackenby began dating last Christmas and saw each until May.
He was found dead in bed at his home in June.
Joanne told an inquest yesterday: ‘I told him to stop calling until his exams had finished.’
Verdict: Suicide.
ARTHUR CACKETT WINS IN THE 400 MEATRES!
Phylis thanks local butcher
JOHN JACKSON
A NEW name has joined the ranks of Olympic sponsors — Arthur Cackett, family butcher.
Arthur's name was flashed round the world on TV when Britain's Phylis Smith ran in the 400 metres heats.
She had written ‘Hello to Arthur Cackett in Wolverhampton’ on her number bib.
And while big firms like Coca-Cola, Mars and Seiko forked out £18 million each in sponsorship, all it cost Arthur was a nice bit of sirloin and two turkey drumsticks.
But last night Olympic bosses gave Arthur the chop.
Fuss
Before Phylis ran in the final, an official said: ‘This is strictly against the rules.
Athletes are not allowed to advertise sponsors.
‘We might send an official to have a chat with Mr Cackett but more likely we will talk to the athlete about defacing her uniform.’
As TV cameras focused on Phylis before the race, she grinned and pointed to her vest.
There was no message — and she seemed to say: ‘Sorry Arthur, you've had your lot.’
Phylis, 26 — who finished last — said later: ‘I didn't intend to cause such a fuss.
I just wanted to say thank-you for Arthur's meat.’
Arthur, 47, said trade at his shop in Coven, near Wolverhampton, had not noticeably increased since Phylis's gesture.
‘In fact no one has said they saw it.’
Phylis, husband and coach Robert and three-year-old son Robert live nearby.
Arthur said: ‘We wondered if she would like a little sponsorship and agreed that when she competed we'd give her some meat.
When she qualified for Barcelona we gave her a nice bit of sirloin and two turkey drumsticks.’
Chickens
A British team official said the message was just ‘a light hearted gesture’.
Arthur is the second butcher to back Britain's Olympic team.
Judo silver medallist Ray Stevens praised the free range chickens from sponsor Bob Dove, of Battersea, London.
UP FRONT: Track star Phylis has a message for Arthur
BACKING: Butcher Arthur Cackett outside his shop yesterday
Porn traffic
A HARD porn film flashed on to an advertising board by rag day students caused a 90-minute traffic jam in Sydney, Australia.
INVADERS' WAR OVER ROCKALL
TWO Irishmen have declared war on Britain over a lump of rock.
Brothers Phil and Fergus Gribbon, of Co Donegal, have hired a trawler to invade the uninhabited isle of Rockall, 300 miles west of the Hebrides.
They plan to paint the Irish tricolour over the Union Jack.
Britain's 1955 claim to Rockall, which could be sitting on oil-rich reserves, is disputed by Ireland, Iceland and Denmark.
Torture boy is set free
AN OLD BAILEY judge was forced yesterday to revoke his sentence on a 13-year-old boy who tortured a pupil at his school.
The boy carved his initial, M, in his 14-year-old victim's back.
Judge Bruce Laughland ordered last week that the boy should be detained for three months.
But yesterday he said he did not have the power to pass the sentence.
Grave ‘I revoke it,’ he said.
‘Parliament has deprived the courts of any power of detention of a person of this age or what many people might think was any effective punishment for that grave crime.’
He said he would order the most Parliament would allow — a supervision order for a year and 90 days of supervised activities.
The boy admitted false imprisonment and wounding.
Two older youths were jailed for two years and 18 months.
SORRY: Judge Laughland
Tories get Mussolini
EMBARRASSED
Tory chiefs have learned that Mussolini is to speak at their party conference in October.
Neo-fascist MP Alessandra Mussolini, grand-daughter of the Italian dictator, has been asked to address fringe group Western Goals at Brighton.
Eldorado will run forever
ALEC LOM
THE flop soap Eldorado will run forever, BBC chief Jonathan Powell vowed last night.
Arriving in Spain on a morale boosting visit to the £10 million set, he angrily attacked calls for the show to be axed.
Mr Powell, the controller of BBC1, said: ‘The show has many, many, many more years viewing to come.
‘There are many good elements in it and we are steaming on.’
Although the sex ‘n’ sun soap's viewing figures have slumped from 10 million to just 2.8 million, Mr Powell declared: ‘Eldorado will run forever.’
The BBC chief also spoke of his ‘sadness’ at the departure of producer Julia Smith.
She quit the show last week on indefinite leave, suffering from exhaustion.
‘It is upsetting for the cast having worked with her for so long.
But she has to be allowed to work out what she wants to do,’ said Mr Powell.
He and the Beeb's head of drama Peter Cregeen spent two hours talking to executive producer Verity Lambert and staff on the set.
PLEDGE: Powell
Golden moment
THE only breeding pair of Golden Eagles in England have successfully reared a chick in Haweswater, Cumbria.
Ex-Dr Who Jon rushed to hospital
ACTOR Jon Pertwee was recovering in hospital yesterday after collapsing in a shopping centre.
The former Doctor Who and Worzel Gummidge star was promoting his new video in Leeds when he staggered and fell.
An ambulance took him to Leeds General Infirmary where it was found John, 72, was suffering from a vicious flu bug.
Shopping centre manager Christine Greenwood said: ‘He just keeled over.
He looked terrible.’
Jon's agent, Philip Ettinger, said: ‘He is quite comfortable.
‘But he's going to have to take it easy for a couple of days.’
RESTING: Pertwee
Loo, what a scorcher for mum
A HOUSEWIFE saw her bathroom ruined — when a toilet roll exploded as she was spending a penny.
The mother, who had dropped the paper in the bowl, dried it in her microwave for five minutes on high.
As she settled back down it continued to cook and burst into flames.
She fled from the bathroom in Stockton, Cleveland, unhurt.
But curtains and towels were burned.
A fire brigade spokesman said last night: ‘It's a serious matter — but it must have brought tears to her eyes.’
GOODBYE MUM
THE little daughters of murdered lecturer Elizabeth Howe wept yesterday as they said a last goodbye to their mother.
She was stabbed at York University 12 days ago, after arriving to teach English to Open University students.
And yesterday husband Jeremy led Jessica, six, and Lucy, four, into All Saints church, Bath, where the couple married.
A note from the girls on the coffin read: ‘I hope you miss us Mummy.
We do.
Goodbye Mummy — love Jessica and Lucy.’
A friend — Professor Ingastina Ewebank — used the words of poet Shelley for 34-year-old Mrs Howe: ‘great, good and joyous, wonderful and wise’.
A man has been charged with her murder.
KILLED: Elizabeth
It's Longleat holiday camp
THE new Lord Bath got the go-ahead yesterday for an £80 million holiday village at Longleat.
Six hundred villas will be built in the Center Parcs development at the Wilts safari park estate following an inquiry.
Lord Bath, who inherited the title after his father died in June, said from his Paris home it was ‘wonderful news’.
Six-Five Don dies
TROMBONIST Don Lang, who led the backing band on the 1950s BBC rock ‘n roll show Six-Five Special, has died of cancer in London.
He was 67.
The band, Don Lang and his Frantic Five, backed Cliff Richard and Tommy Steele.
His musician son-in-law John Danter called him ‘a well-loved guy’.
CANCER: Do
No can ride on my bus
DIY man Chris McGrath got the brush-off…when he tried to board a bus carrying a can of paint.
Chris, 42, of Longsight, Manchester, said he was told by the driver the half gallon tin might spill.
‘I couldn't believe it,’ he said yesterday.
‘I said it was sealed, but he wouldn't hear of it.’
Bus bosses are investigating.
Signed by Arfur-itic
WILEY Arfur Daley reckons he's found a new way to score against the police — by taking them on at soccer.
Arfur (George Cole) and Minder Ray (Gary Webster), desperate to save their favourite drinking hole from closure, form a team from the regulars called Winchester Athletic.
But when the old crocks play the Old Bill, it's more like Winchester Arthritic.
Terror of gale kids
THREE teenage air cadets collapsed with hypothermia as they fled a gale-lashed mountain yesterday.
A fourth — a girl — had an epileptic fit as rescuers brought them down from the Lake District peak at Ullswater in Cumbria.
They were among 28 Bristol cadets whose camp was wrecked by gales.
MEGA-RICH DUKE BANS CHARITY'S TEA LADIES
One week a year stall is ‘competition’
CLIVE CRICKMER
THE super-rich Duke of Northumberland has banned charity tea ladies from his castle — because he has opened his own cafe.
The decision rocked locals, who for just ONE WEEK a year raised money for their parish church during peak tourist season by selling cups of tea and coffee.
The tradition at Alnwick Castle, Northumberland, dates back years.
But parishioners have been told they are no longer welcome.
One, retired businessman Kenneth Kim, 65, said the duke — reckoned to be worth £140 million — was ‘pennypinching.’
The 38-year-old aristocrat inherited his title four years ago.
And Mr Kim added: ‘His father was a very thoughtful man.
He stood by old traditions.
‘The current duke is a different kettle of fish.
The castle has become more commercial.’
The church ladies had been allowed to sell tea in the castle for a week in August, netting around £2,000 for their cherished St Michael's Church.
Today they will hold a flower festival instead.
But one churchgoer said: ‘There is no way it will raise as much.’
The cafe is the duke's second new venture.
With the help of his actress friend, ex-James Bond baddie Barbara Carrera, he has recently moved into film making.
Yesterday his agent Rory Wilson said the tea lady ban was his idea — but the duke knew of it.
Mr Wilson added: ‘There is not room for two tea rooms in the same enterprise.
They are welcome to hold other kinds of fund raising events in the castle.’
STORM IN TEACUP: The Duke with friend Barbara
NUKE CLOSURE SHOCK
A MAJOR nuclear programme was halted by the Government last night — throwing doubts over Sellafield 2.
The Krypton gas-peril of the new reprocessing plant in Cumbria has been exposed by the Mirror.
Sellafield says plutonium produced there will feed new ‘fast breeder’ nuclear power stations.
But last night Britain's ONLY such plant — the jinxed Dounreay in the north of Scotland — was condemned to close in 1994.
There are no others in the world.
Greenpeace called it ‘a major body-blow for Sellafield 2’.
De Klerk rally call
MORE than 100,000 black nationalists, led by African National Congress chief Nelson Mandela, marched to South African President De Klerk's government office yesterday demanding power.
The rally in Pretoria was the country's biggest ever.
Later De Klerk hinted that power-sharing talks will soon re-open.
Help!
I've lost my tarantula on Dartmoor
A WALKER on Dartmoor became frantic when he lost his pet — a tarantula called Igor.
He phoned an animal helpline, which got the Devon moor's rangers to mount a search.
But the huge spider is still AWOL.
‘It was like looking for a needle in a haystack,’ said Claire Whitehead of the Friskie's Pet Care Helpline yesterday.
‘Apparently the man often took Igor to the moor for fresh air and exercise.’
‘It's going to get worse’
SHADOW defence secretary David Clark described the scenes in the detention camps as ‘quite horrific’.
SHADOW defence secretary David Clark described the scenes in the detention camps as ‘quite horrific’.
‘It is likely we have not seen the worst of the conditions,’ he added.
TV Penny puts her story first
BARRY WIGMORE
TV NEWSGIRL Penny Marshall, whose concentration camps report shocked the world last night, has proved her dedication to duty before.
She abandoned her honeymoon with fellow ITN reporter Tim Ewart to cover a story.
The couple were in the Caribbean when Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev was deposed in an abortive coup.
Penny, 29, then ITN's woman in Moscow, flew back to her post at once.
Yesterday she was visibly shocked by the conditions she witnessed in the Serb-run camps.
Penny said: ‘People had very serious allegations.
This must be cleared up.
The Red Cross must be allowed in.’
KEEN: Penny
‘Pig’ in safari outfit
JANI Allan met Eugene Terre Blanche when she was the star columnist on the South African Sunday Times.
Rumours of an affair spread after she wrote of being ‘impaled on the blue flames of his blow-torch eyes.’
But in court she described him as ‘like a pig in a safari suit.’
She brought the case after Channel 4 hinted at a romance in their 1991 documentary on Terre Blanche.
After the verdict she still insisted: ‘I have never been improperly involved with him.’
Jani banked £60,000 through successful libel actions against Options magazine and the London Evening Standard.
She is trying for a Fleet Street career — but vowed to carry on actions against the Daily Telegraph and Daily Mail.
Channel 4 said they would pursue their cash ‘with vigour.’
EYES: Terre Blanche
‘Pervert priest inquiry blocked’
A TOP Catholic public school was yesterday accused of hindering a police investigation into a pervert priest.
The accusation was made after Father Michael Creagh, 56, was jailed for nine months after pleading guilty to three counts of indecently assaulting a pupil.
Detectives from Reading family protection unit claimed that Douai Abbey School in Berkshire tried to withhold information about Creagh and pupils he was suspected of abusing.
Trust
Reading Crown Court heard that Creagh, a former deputy housemaster, began a sexual relationship with the 12-year-old in 1988, soon after the boy arrived at the £2,500-a-term boarding school run by Benedictine monks.
Judge Stanley Spence told Creagh: ‘You were a member of a religious community and in a position of trust — in loco parentis for that child.
‘What is particularly reprehensible is that the child sought counselling when he came to you about signs of puberty.
‘It was a double betrayal of trust.’
No loafing
WHEAT was cut, ground to flour and baked into bread in just 21 minutes to set a world record at Heckington, Lincs, yesterday.
Scandal hospital dispute is over
FRANK CORLESS
NURSES at scandal-hit Ashworth top-security hospital last night lifted their overtime ban after being told they were risking their future.
The warning was issued by acting manager Peter Green, who took over after a damning report claimed patients were manhandled and bullied.
Mr Green, who will oversee radical changes, said overtime was crucial to the smooth running of the Merseyside hospital.
He told staff: ‘If people don't want to go along with me there is no place for them in Ashworth.’
Terrify
The Prison Officers' Association announced that the action was being suspended because it would hit patients.
They imposed the overtime ban last week after two nurses were sacked for using a pig's head to terrify patients.
A POA spokesman said: ‘We have enjoyed the support of patients and it was never our intention to affect their care.’
Summaries of the report given to staff were said to be met ‘with a stunned silence’.
It was also presented to the 650 patients, who include dangerous killers.
Gunpoint ‘outrage’
RODERICK Newall appeared in court in a red T-shirt and shorts and told the magistrate: ‘I was arrested by Jersey officers at high seas and brought to Gibraltar at gunpoint.’
A spokesman for the suspect later blasted the swoop as ‘outrageous.’
He said police had had many chances over the past five years to interview or arrest Newall.
18-stoned to death
AN 18 1/2 stone woman has been accused of killing her landlady — by sitting on her.
The overweight 45year-old was believed to have suffocated her 65-year-old victim during a furious row.
She was arrested by police in Cairo, Egypt.
Mock war my foot!
AMERICAN Civil War fanatic Ray Loveslife-Brown will hobble into his next ‘battle’ on crutches — after blowing off a toe with his musket.
Ray, aged 29, from Upton Upon Severn, Worcs, was recovering in hospital yesterday.
‘MY DAD’ DE NIRO
KEVIN O'SULLIVAN
OSCAR-winner Robert De Niro is the father of a Hollywood nightclub singer's nine-year-old daughter, it was claimed last night.
Helena Lisandrello says she had an affair with the actor after they met at a party in 1979.
She has launched a paternity case in Los Angeles to get £5,000 a month child maintenance from the 49-year-old star.
De Niro — close friend of British model Naomi Campbell — has a 15-year-old son by his ex-wife Diahnne Abbott.
OSCAR: De Niro
Brothel next to cop club
UNDERCOVER cops did not have to go far to check on a suspected brothel — it was next door to a police social club.
‘Red light’ girls offered massages for £25 and full sex for £60 at the Eclipse Health Club just yards from the cops' Blue Lamp bar, Cardiff Crown Court heard yesterday.
Lorry driver Terrence Duncan, 37, of Bristol, denies living off the earnings of prostitution.
His wife Michelle, 34, denies six charges of controlling prostitutes.
The trial continues.
SHOOTOUT TERROR IN VILLAGE
A POLICEMAN was stabbed, an armed raider gunned down and a pensioner blasted in a village shoot-out yesterday.
People dived aside as undercover cops ambushed a post office raid.
A police sergeant, posing as a post office worker, was threatened with a shotgun, then stabbed in the chest.
As one gunman opened fire, police marksmen shot him in the hip.
An elderly man on his way to collect his pension in Brockham, near Dorking, Surrey, was hit in the ankle by a stray bullet.
Last night four men were being held.
Only the shot raider was seriously hurt.
Shot man chased by gang
A MAN was shot twice yesterday as he fled from five masked youths.
After being shot in the chest and back and attacked with machetes, Peter Pegnado, 31, jumped into his car.
Shoppers in Manchester's Moss Side watched in horror as he crashed into parked cars.
Chased by the youths, he ran across a dual carriageway and flagged down a driver who rushed him to hospital.
He was stable last night after an operation.
Tories are privatised
THE Tory party — £10 million in debt — has decided to privatise itself.
On the advice of City experts, a director general and a board made up of MPs, councillors and activists will run the ramshackle national organisation like a private company.
‘Day in prison’ prize is blasted
STEPHEN WHITE
A TRIP to jail for two is being offered as a star prize in a charity auction.
But the porridge ‘peepshow’ was slammed as ‘barbaric’by penal reformers yesterday.
The lucky winners will be ‘arrested’ by police and spend a day at Armley prison, Leeds.
Conditions at the overcrowded jail were described by a judge recently as ‘squalid’.
The Harewood House charity auction, hosted by the Queen's cousin the Earl of Harewood, is in aid of a new children's day hospital in Leeds.
The jail trip prize has been offered by prison governor Robin Halward.
But Samantha Sherratt of the Howard League for Penal Reform said: ‘I wouldn't want people paying money to come and look at me as if I was in a zoo or a fishbowl.
Closed ‘This type of thing verges on the barbaric.
It is wholly unacceptable and degrading.’
Armley's young offenders wing has been closed after a spate of suicides.
But a prison spokesman said: ‘We are very mindful of the fact that prisoners have their dignity.
‘We want people to see how money is being spent here and how we have improved conditions.’
A Harewood House spokesman said it was ‘nonsense’ to suggest that the winners would be ‘gawping’at prisoners.
New M-way stops on way
MOTORISTS have been promised relief at last from long motorway journeys without a loo stop.
Fast food chains like McDonald's are to be allowed to open new sites offering food, petrol and toilets 24 hours a day, Transport Secretary John MacGregor announced yesterday.
They will be able to build them wherever they like as long as they can buy the land, get planning permission and there is not another service station within 15 miles.
The AA said it was a ‘relief’.
Crowing, crowing…gone
A NOISY cockerel must be locked in a sound-proof box every night — because a neighbour can't stand his crowing.
Betty Jarvis, 72, moaned: ‘Sometimes I get woken at 3am.’
Now a court has imposed a cock-a-doodle-don't curfew on Horace to stop the dawn din in the village of Brook, Hants.
His owner, Beverley St John, 29, said: ‘It's ridiculous.
If you live here you should expect country noises.’
Short cut to court
A BUNGLING shoplifter tried to flog a pair of Marks and Spencer shorts — to the store detective who had followed him into the street after seeing him nick them.
Keith Clash, 27, was jailed for over two months at Bristol Crown Court yesterday after admitting theft and carrying an offensive weapon.
HOSPITAL WASHOUT
FRANK CORLESS
HOSPITALS are going short of clean sheets because their laundry is tied up — washing linen for a holiday camp.
Merseyside's Wirral Hospital Trust won a contract to do the dirty washing for Pontins and Trusthouse Forte hotels.
But while they were gearing up for the Hi-de-Hi job, Wirral's Arrowe Park and Clatterbridge hospitals went short of clean bedlinen.
One hospital worker said: ‘The holiday camp and hotel stuff is ‘income generation’ and being done as a priority.
‘No-one is very happy.
It's tragic that the Health Service is taking second place to a holiday camp.’
Local MP Frank Field demanded that patients should come first.
A hospital spokesman admitted there had been teething troubles.
Boys' home blow
TWO four-year-old boys from ‘intentionally homeless’ families who applied to be rehoused by their council have no legal claim, the Court of Appeal ruled yesterday.
LOYAL MUM IS FIRED
CLIVE CRICKMER
A RECEPTIONIST was sacked — for refusing to sign a pledge declaring she would not support her picketing son.
Maureen Linton's son Mark, 24, and her nephew were among 108 steel mill workers fired after a ten-day pay strike.
Boss Peter Scarff asked Maureen to sign a letter saying she would not back the ousted men.
And when she and two other women employees refused, they were fired on the spot.
Maureen, 44 — who had worked at the Gateshead mill for ten years — declared: ‘I couldn't have lived with myself if I had put my name to it.
‘They were asking me to snub my family.’
Mr Scarff said: ‘I couldn't carry on employing staff who supported the men and might have been able to leak sensitive information.’
Sprout in front
BRAVE stuntman Reg Morris, 46, will eat 3lb of Brussels sprouts in one go at a carnival in Walsall, West Midlands, to raise cash for charity.
Face value
VOLUNTEERS are to be paid £10 each to stand in police identity parades at Dunstable, Beds.
FURY OVER JAIL ‘PRIZE’
A JAIL visit being auctioned for charity was slammed as ‘barbaric’ by prison reformers yesterday.
The winning bidder will be ‘arrested’ by police and spend a day at Armley jail, Leeds, whose young offenders wing was closed down because of a spate of suicides.
But a spokeswoman for the Howard League for Penal Reform fumed: ‘If I was in jail I wouldn't want people paying money to come and look at me as if I was in a zoo.’
The auction — hosted by the Queen's cousin, the Earl of Harwood — is in aid of a children's hospital.
Organisers said that the successful bidder would lunch with the governor who had offered the prize.
Inmates would not be on view.
Not funny, Esther
SAMUEL JAMES
ESTHER Rantzen's That's Life show was rapped by TV watchdogs yesterday over a sketch showing a ‘blind’ man falling over a wall.
Millions of viewers saw presenter Howard Leader take the tumble wearing dark glasses and clutching a white stick.
The Broadcasting Standards Council ruled that the item was ‘insensitive’ to blind people.
And they upheld a complaint lodged by a viewer.
The film — screened last May — highlighted how difficult it was to reach a phone box in the middle of a roundabout.
The BBC said the story — presented in the slapstick style of silent films — was not intended to offend.
It believed viewers would see that the fun was being poked at the kiosk's location — not blind folk.
COMPLAINT: Esther
CLUEDO FAMILY STUMBLE UPON A REAL BODY!
SYDNEY YOUNG
A FAMILY hooked on the ‘whodunnit’ board-game Cluedo found themselves in a real-life murder mystery yesterday…after stumbling across a skeleton.
Shoe shop owner Nick Dando and his wife Melanie made the gruesome find while taking their daughters on a nature ramble in remote woodland.
When they discovered a pair of woman's shoes they decided to hunt for more clues, even joking that ‘we might find a body.’
But excitement turned to horror when the trail led to a woman's remains in a shallow grave.
The shaken family called in police.
The skeleton, that of a woman in her twenties, appears to have been hidden in woodland near Chewton Mendip, Somerset, for years.
Victim
Police are combing missing person lists across the country and have contacted the parents of London estate agent Suzy Lamplugh, who vanished in 1986.
Detectives will compare the teeth in the skull with 25-year-old Suzy's dental records.
A police spokesman said: ‘We do not believe it is Suzy Lamplugh, but we have to check to be absolutely sure.’
Nick, of nearby Radstock, said his family — wife Melanie and daughters Abigail, 12, Beth, 10 and Charlotte, nine — were looking for feathers when they found the shoes.
‘We are all great Cluedo fans and Melanie suggested to the girls that we all hunt for clues,’ he said.
‘We found a brown handbag and the girls were getting very excited.
‘I saw something white in a clump of leaves.
As I looked closely, I could see it was a skull.
‘I'm stunned that something which started out as a game turned so quickly into something so frighteningly real.’
CAR WRECKED BY A SPIDER
PRETTY Stephanie Stonier wrecked her car because she is terrified of spiders.
The 19-year-old beautician froze when the creepy-crawly suddenly appeared before her eyes — and she lost control of her Ford Fiesta.
It mounted a pavement, smashed a lamp-post and ended up on its roof in the middle of the road.
Stephanie and her sister Lorraine, 17, escaped with minor injuries in the crash near their home in Cudworth, Barnsley, South Yorks.
‘I've written off my car just because of a spider,’ Stephanie groaned yesterday.
‘But I've always been terrified of them.
‘The spider came down on a thread in front of me while I was driving.
‘I couldn't do anything but keep staring at it.
‘I lost control and crashed into the lamp-post.’
Sniffy smokers
SMOKERS are quitting the habit by spraying nicotine up their noses, the medical journal Lancet says today.
ONE YEAR TOGETHER
And the look in her eye says Jill Morrell and John McCarthy have managed to pick up the pieces of their love
CATHERINE O'BRIEN
SHE had feared that she would not know him any more…that his 1,943 days of hell as a hostage would have left them strangers.
Even in the heady days following his release, there was no hiding the hesitation in their eyes.
But today, a year since John McCarthy's homecoming, their worst dread has proved unfounded.
In pictures released to celebrate the anniversary, the happy-ever-after ending that everyone wanted is plain to see.
As girlfriend Jill Morrell, 34, fixes her loving gaze on John, 35, her radiant smile is telling the world: ‘We've made it.’
It hasn't been easy.
The couple gave just a hint of the trauma they faced in an open letter thanking the press for allowing them to put together the pieces of their relationship in private.
The letter says:
‘We have spent the time very quietly getting to know each other again, and in John's case, picking up with friends and family.
Dramatic
We have both been trying to return to some semblance of normality.
John has been getting to know the world as it is in 1992, and coming to terms with both dramatic political changes and the way friends have moved on in their lives.
It is still a daunting task.’
But it is a task with which John seems to be coping remarkably well.
The latest pictures, taken at the pair's Home Counties hideaway, show the former  Beirut captive as never seen before.
He sits at ease in their sunny back garden and takes a carefree stroll with Jill along a country footpath.
And there is no trace left of the gaunt figure who stepped out of a VC10 and on to the tarmac at RAF Lyneham.
Gone too from both of them are the dark circles under the eyes, the complexions grey with tiredness and lined with worry.
In their place are healthy-looking, fresh faces that carry the reassurance of a couple in harmony.
They have been spending their time writing a book telling both sides of their story.
Their friend and spokesman Mark Lucas said yesterday: ‘Writing it all down has been both painful and enjoyable for both of them.
‘They have been taking their time.
‘In the best romantic tradition, the most important thing for both of them is each other.
‘There are no marriage plans yet.
They are being admirably cautious.
Sparkling ‘They have all the time in the world and they are going to take it.’
Their book, due out next spring, is in three parts.
The first is John's account of his captivity.
The second tells of Jill's fight to win his release.
And the book concludes with thoughts on their future.
Even John's father Patrick said after visiting the couple: ‘I have no idea if they are going to get married.’
But, though there is no engagement ring yet on Jill's finger, that look in her sparkling eyes gives us all the best possible hope.
SIDE BY SIDE: The lovers stroll along a country path, facing the future, just happy to be together
REUNITED: The couple soon after John was freed
RELEASED: John's homecoming, a year ago today
LOOK OF LOVE: Eyes sparkling, Jill gazes at a relaxed John in the garden of their hideaway home…and her radiant smile reveals to the world that their romance has survived
OH GOD, NOT AGAIN
Holocaust fears over Yugo camps
MARK DOWDNEY
FURY at the Bosnian death camps spilled over last night as fears of a new Holocaust haunted a horrified world.
Political leaders were stunned by ITN pictures of starving inmates and beaten bodies.
And as pressure mounted for military intervention, NATO agreed to draw up plans to use force to make sure humanitarian aid gets through to the stricken region.
Bosnia claims that 120,000 Moslems and Croats are held in more than 100 Serb camps and that 17,000 have been killed.
The European Community under Britain's presidency said the Serb-run camps were ‘repulsive and despicable.’
It said it was ‘appalled by the blatant disregard for humanitarian principles.’
Demand
And it demanded that the camps be opened to international inspection.
Overseas Aid Minister Baroness Chalker condemned conditions at the camps as ‘beyond an acceptable level of humanity.’
The US has already called for a ‘war crimes’ investigation into reports of atrocities.
But even Yugoslav Premier Milan Panic admitted he had no control over what happened in Bosnia.
He said: ‘I couldn't do anything about Auschwitz and Dachau — and I can't do anything in Bosnia.’
The ITN film, providing the first real evidence of ill-treatment, increases pressure for military intervention.
NATO will now plan opening up a land corridor to the beleaguered city of Sarajevo for armed relief convoys.
It will study giving ‘stop and search’ power to warships monitoring sanctions in the Adriatic.
And it will plan how to monitor heavy weapons if a ceasefire takes hold.
The US Senate Foreign Relations Committee, the Pope, Iranian President Rafsanjani and Lady Thatcher have all backed intervention beyond humanitarian measures.
Risk
But yesterday Premier John Major again ruled out sending troops or air power to end the atrocities.
He said: ‘We cannot use force without disproportionate risk to the lives of civilians and our armed forces.’
1992: The despair of starving Bosnian prisoners in a Serbian concentration camp
1945: Pathetic victims of the Nazi Holocaust caged by barbed wire
Cob-bers
TWENTY Americans with the surname Coberly are flying to Britain next month to visit the Cotswold village of — Coberley.
Air hero jailed for defying car bans
STEPHEN WHITE
BATTLE of Britain hero Alexander ‘Sandy’ Black, 72, was jailed for 12 months yesterday after defying SEVEN lifetime driving bans.
The former Spitfire pilot, who won the Distinguished Flying Cross, just won't stay off the road, a court heard.
Last October he was sentenced to 18 months' jail — 12 months suspended — for reckless driving and driving while banned.
But Black, of Durranhill Road, Carlisle, was stopped again by police after his release as he drove along a narrow country lane.
Carlisle Crown Court was told that the fighter ace — who was shot down over Italy — was spotted by police while driving to see a sick friend.
Judge Alistair Bell re-activated the suspended sentence and imposed another six-month term to run concurrently.
He told Black: ‘I pronounce this sentence with regret, but the only way to stop you driving is to put you behind bars.’
Black admitted driving while disqualified and without insurance.
The RAF ace's first ban dates back to 1971 when he was banned for driving with excess alcohol.
Since then he has picked up 20 disqualifications and has served 12 jail sentences.
‘MISS MARPLE’ AUNTIE ON TRAIL OF JERSEY KILLER
Police quiz Nancy…then Navy tracks suspect
GEOFF SUTTON
PLAYBOY Roderick Newall was arrested on suspicion of his parents' murder after a ‘Miss Marple’ probe by his Auntie Nan.
Nancy Clark borrowed a leaf from the TV sleuth's book following the baffling murder of her sister Elizabeth and Elizabeth's husband Nicholas.
And this week the case took a dramatic twist with the high-seas arrest of Roderick, the dead couple's 26-year-old son.
He is being held in solitary confinement in Gibraltar, charged with murdering his parents in Jersey nearly five years ago.
Last night Jersey detectives confirmed that they had interviewed 54-year-old Nancy at her South London home.
Inspector Martin Thorn said: ‘I am not prepared to say what was revealed during our inquiries.’
Wealthy Nicholas, 56, and Elizabeth, 48, vanished from their blood-stained home and their bodies were never found.
Inquiries
With the mystery unsolved, TV star John Nettles, who plays the Jersey detective Bergerac, commented: ‘Everyone on Jersey has become a Miss Marple.’
Nettles started making his own inquiries.
And Auntie Nan decided to join the hunt.
Nancy is convinced the bodies were hidden in a cave or quarry in the north of the island.
She regularly tramped remote areas searching for clues.
Last month, Jersey police flew to London to gather fresh information.
Newall was arrested on Wednesday after his yacht was tracked in the Atlantic by the frigate Argonaut and another Royal Navy ship.
He was handcuffed and taken to a locker room where he was chained to a metal grille by the arms and legs.
Yesterday, the Argonaut's skipper, Captain Bob Stevens, told how the suspect was lured on board for a ‘routine’ check on travel papers.
Arrest
When he rowed to the frigate, machine-gun carrying police told him: ‘Hello, you are under arrest.’
Newall says he is innocent.
He is due to appear before a Gibraltar court next Thursday to await extradition proceedings — which he is expected to fight.
Experts warned last night that it could be up to a year before he is returned to Jersey.
DAD: Nicholas
MUM: Elizabeth
AMBUSH STORE IS RAIDED
A VILLAGE post office was raided early yesterday — hours after police ambushed an armed gang after the same target.
Thieves fled with £500 and £1,500 worth of cigarettes from the store in Brockham, Surrey, after unscrewing a door panel.
Stunned proprietor Les Copley said: ‘It's unbelievable.
They must have thought we were a soft touch.’
A policeman was stabbed, a raider shot and a pensioner blasted in Thursday's ambush.
Rape case man held
A MAN has been charged with raping a nine-year-old girl two years ago.
The girl was snatched from her bed as her family slept in their home near Middlesbrough, Cleveland.
Vernon Davies, 46, of South Bank, Middlesbrough, was remanded in custody yesterday.
Flo-Jo's soap
FORMER Olympic sprint ace Florence Griffith-Joyner has turned actress to star in the US soap Santa Barbara.
Body not Suzy
A WOMAN'S remains found in woods near Priddy, Somerset, is NOT missing estate agent Suzy Lamplugh, police said yesterday.
BLOODSTAINS LED TO BIG SEARCH
GEOFF SUTTON
NICHOLAS and Elizabeth Newall vanished just one month after inheriting £500,000.
When they disappeared from the Jersey bungalow, their kitchen table was laid for breakfast.
Washing hung on the line outside and their £10,000 car was in the drive.
Their passports were still in the home.
There was no sign of a forced entry and at first detectives on the tax-haven island were baffled.
But over the next months they became convinced the couple had been killed by someone they knew.
Their sons, Roderick and Mark, said they left their parents at their home at 2.30am after their champagne dinner.
They told police they returned six hours later.
The brothers flew back to Gatwick that evening.
Roderick flew to Jersey a week later to report his parents missing.
Four months later forensic experts found minute but widespread bloodstains in the bungalow.
They decided Mr Newall was butchered downstairs and his wife in her bedroom.
No trace of the bodies has ever been found.
Then a shop assistant on the island told police he had sold a young man scalpels, a pickaxe, a saw, spades, tarpaulins, rope, plastic sacks and torches on the day before the couple vanished.
But police failed to trace the man.
In January last year the island's Royal Court of Appeal decided the couple were dead.
Six months later their two sons inherited their parents' fortune as sole beneficiaries.
The wealthy couple's estate included the £500,000 inheritance, more cash, the home in Jersey, a villa in Spain — and the yacht on which Roderick was arrested.
VANISHED: Nicholas
VANISHED: Elizabeth
Rachel hunt cops helped to track him
BY a twist of fate, murder suspect Roderick Newall was being traced by Scotland Yard at the time ex-model Rachel Nickell was brutally killed on Wimbledon Common.
Jersey cops put out an alert to the Yard asking for assistance in tracking down the globe-trotting 27-year-old.
They had been tipped off that he could be staying with friends in South-west London.
Jersey assistant chief officer Barry Simpson said last night: ‘We were trying to trace Roderick at a contact's home in Wimbledon.
‘It just so happened that the Rachel killing was at that time.’
A Yard spokesman last night confirmed that Newall's name is on the Rachel murder inquiry files.
His name was one of hundreds on the ‘potential suspect list’ but he was not being treated as a priority.
It was revealed that Newall was staying with with friends in Fulham when Rachel was killed.
KILLED: Rachel
Diana's crunch holiday
JAMES WHITAKER
CHARLES and Diana arrived in Greece for a make-or-break ‘secret’ holiday last night — and immediately zoomed off in separate speedboats.
Diana climbed aboard one boat with children William and Harry for the short hop to their luxury yacht.
Then Charles jumped into a second speedboat with Princess Alexandra's husband, Sir Angus Ogilvy.
Cruising
Charles and Diana were said to have been ‘grim-faced’ when they arrived at Preveza airport on the tiny island of Levkas.
After a 20-minute coach trip to the harbour, they caught the speedboats to the yacht Alexander, on loan from Greek tycoon John Latsis.
The millionaire is also believed to be among the royal party on board the yacht, which boasts three speedboats, an eight-seater helicopter and a ballroom.
The royals will spend ten days cruising in the Ionian sea with friends, including Lord and Lady Romsey.
The media have been asked to stay away.
BREAK: Di
Royals splash out to have fun
JAMES WHITAKER
PRINCESS Di had a simply splashing time yesterday when she joined Charles and the young princes for a swim at a Greek island paradise.
The family dip came at the start of a nine-day summer cruise around the Ionian Sea.
Their first stop was Skorpios where billionaire tycoon Aristotle Onassis, his daughter Christina and her brother Alexander are buried.
Onassis called the island a heaven on earth, but to the Royals it was just a huge playground.
Said one observer: ‘Everybody joined in the fun including Charles.’
The royals are sailing with friends Lord and Lady Romsey and their two children on Greek billionaire John Latsis's 354ft yacht Alexander.
Their next port of call after their swim was nearby Lefkada where they stopped for lunch.
SWIM: Diana
Oscar sold for £32,000
THE first Hollywood Oscar ever to be auctioned was sold yesterday for £32,000.
It was put under the hammer in New York by Harold Russell, 78, who won the top supporting actor award for the 1947 film, The Best Years Of Our Lives.
Harold, who lost both hands in the US Army during the war, played a sailor in the film.
He needed the money for an eye operation for his wife.
WINNER: Harold
Smother horror
HORRIFIED health workers watched as a teenage mum tried to smother her baby THREE times in hospital, a court heard yesterday.
The tot, aged five months, had been suffering breathing difficulties.
The 17 year-old girl, from Cleveland, admitted cruelty at Southwark Crown Court.
The case was adjourned for reports.
Punch-up soap star must pay £1,500
NEIGHBOURS star Alan Dale was yesterday ordered to pay more than £1,500 to a bus driver he thumped.
Dale, 45, who plays Jim Robinson in the Aussie soap, punched driver Damien De Pace in the face and stomach as he took a coachload of British tourists to watch filming in Ramsay Street.
The actor had accused the driver of being a parasite.
‘He was taking advantage of us and the tourists,’ said Dale.
In a civil action for damages at Melbourne magistrates' court, Dale denied punching De Pace.
He said he just gave the driver an ‘actor's slap’ to the face.
But the magistrate awarded De Pace £800 compensation for anxiety and sleepless nights, £74 for dental bills and £640 legal costs.
In a criminal hearing last August, Dale was put on a good behaviour bond over the incident.
De Pace says he no longer takes tourists to Ramsay Street.
Neighbours will be filmed in London next week — at a Michael Jackson concert.
THUMP: Alan Dale
How to meter millionaire
METERMAID Tina Fuchs, 21, is to marry a millionaire she met when she slapped a parking ticket on his Mercedes.
Factory owner Peter Waltner, 25, spotted Tina writing the ticket in a street in Cologne, Germany.
When he failed to persuade her to cancel it, he asked her for a date — and romance blossomed.
Fumes ordeal
ELEVEN people were treated for the effects of fumes after a truckload of chemicals caught fire yesterday at the M62-A1 junction in West Yorks.
In the doghouse
BIKER David Bayley takes his dog Sophie walkies in Cradley Heath, West Midlands, by towing her in a house-shaped trailer.
Kites soar
RED kites have had their best breeding season for more than a century, with 79 pairs rearing 93 young, bird protectors said yesterday.
BABY WITH NO SMILE
JAN DISLEY
MUM Carol Brough smiles lovingly at her baby son Adam.
But she knows that only a miracle can make her six-month-old son beam back.
For little Adam's eyes were damaged in the battle to save his life, after he was born more than three months prematurely.
And because he has never seen a smile, he has never learned to give one.
Adam, who weighed less than 2lb at birth, survived septicaemia, jaundice and hernia surgery.
But the extra oxygen he needed affected his eyes, leaving him nearly blind.
Now Carol and husband Shaun, of Wombwell, South Yorks, are searching the world for an eye surgeon prepared to try to put a smile on Adam's face.
‘It's a slim chance, but we are determined to try,’ she said.
Picture: PHIL SPENCER
ALERT FOR 4st TEENAGE GIRL
PATRICK MULCHRONE
HEALTH chiefs have launched an international hunt for a frail anorexic schoolgirl after a warning that she could die unless she receives urgent treatment.
Sixteen-year-old Siobhan Conlan is 5ft 6in tall but weighs just four stone because of her wasting illness.
Immigration officials in Ireland and America were alerted yesterday after Siobhan and her two young sisters left their luxury home in Alderley Edge, Cheshire, with their Irish mum Eileen.
Cheshire social services chief David Whitehead said Siobhan was so weak she could hardly walk.
‘She would either have to be carried or put in a wheelchair.
‘If anyone has seen her they should contact us immediately.’
Doctors fear Mrs Conlan may have taken her daughter away because she thinks further treatment is futile.
Siobhan has been losing weight for two years.
SAVED — BY MY OWN LIFEBOAT
JOHN PEACOCK
BIG hearted Gaby Hills went racing at sea to raise money for a lifeboat — and had to be rescued after falling overboard.
Ironically, the rescue craft which arrived to haul her to safety was the boat she was helping to pay for.
Gaby was in an eight-girl crew taking part in a raft race near Southsea, Hampshire, when she lost her balance and plunged into the sea.
With the raft being swept away by the tide she couldn't climb back on board and was struggling when the lifeboat crew reached her.
Her team from the Lord Raglan pub, Wokingham, Berks, was unable to finish the race.
But the pub's other team came second.
The charity race helped raise £12,000 for the lifeboat which will be named Lord Raglan.
Pub landlord Nigel Moxham said: ‘We only realised after the race that Gaby had been saved by the boat we paid for.’
Dors son accused…
THE son of actress Diana Dors was accused yesterday of assaulting a boy of 11.
Jason Lake, 22, denied the charge.
A charge of assaulting the boy's mother was dropped after she refused to proceed with the case.
Musician Lake was bailed at Marylebone, London, on condition he did not see the boy.
BAIL: Jason
Ford rise
FORD is to put up the price of its K-reg cars by 1.8 per cent later this month.
Bosses say increased costs have forced the move.
Thief cops good life
AN old lag has vowed to go straight — because police treated him so kindly when he was banged up in their station.
The burglar spent four weeks on remand at Rotherham's Main Street nick.
Now he was written to his former hosts thanking them for ‘making my stay as easy as possible.’
FAITHFUL SERVANT DIES TRYING TO SAVE A JCB
Her boss launches £15,000 manhunt
STEVE ATKINSON
DEVOTED housekeeper Annie Bowman was crushed to death as she tried to stop a thief stealing her boss's JCB digger.
The 73-year-old spinster, who worked for three generations of the same family for 56 years, was dragged 30 yards before falling under the giant wheels.
Last night builder Michael Smyth offered a £15,000 reward to catch the killer of brave Annie.
Mr Smyth, 31, wept as he said: ‘She came to work for my nan and granddad when she was 16.
She was like a mum to me — the best woman in my life.
We will get the bastards, we will.’
Annie was just about to settle down to watch Coronation Street on television when she heard the JCB being driven away from outside the family home in Enfield, North London.
Grabbed
She ran out and grabbed hold of the cab.
But it did not stop — and she finally lost her grip.
The digger, which was parked at the house after being repaired, was dumped 350 yards away.
Family friend Dorothy Nicoll said last night: ‘Annie would have given her soul away.
‘She lived for the family and they all worshipped her.’
Mr Smyth, Annie's godson, vowed: ‘To the day I die I will not let this go.’
CRUSHED: Brave Annie
One arm and one leg?
You are fit
MOTORIST Steve Hopwood was turned down for a disabled parking pass — even though he has only one arm and one leg.
Father-of-two Steve said: ‘I thought they were joking when they said I was not sufficiently disabled.’
But Norwich social services bosses say he does not need the pass because he can hobble a quarter of a mile without help.
An official said: ‘If someone can handle their disability, it might not impair their mobility.’
Steve, 33, said: ‘I might as well ask the hospital to take the other leg off.’
Big Mac's a softie!
TENNIS star John McEnroe hits town — and the bottle.
But he was happy to show he was going soft — with a drink of fizzy pop.
Looking cool in casual clobber, Big Mac was thirst in line at a celebrity party in Los Angeles.
FROM OP TO THE ALTAR IN 18 HOURS
Emergency!
Nick has appendix out He hobbles down the aisle to wed
JOHN PEACOCK
HAPPY Nicholas Brennan was in stitches at his wedding — after an emergency operation.
Nick, 27, had his appendix out just eighteen hours before he was due to marry.
But he bravely went through with the ceremony.
The tough rugby player at first put the pain of his acute appendicitis down to the after-effects of his stag night.
Then he felt so ill that after the wedding rehearsal a doctor sent him straight to Reading's Royal Berkshire Hospital at 7 pm.
The race against time began.
AT 9 PM he was on the operating table.
AT 11 AM the next day he was feeling groggy but was allowed home with a supply of pain-killers.
AND AT 3.30 PM he was in church as planned at Henley-on-Thames for his big date with teacher Annabel.
Nick, who works in a Mars bar factory, hobbled to the altar and sat on a stool for most of the service.
And yesterday he was relaxing in the sunshine on honeymoon in the Seychelles.
Annabel's mother Joanna thanked surgeon David Birch and hospital staff for saving the ceremony.
Joanna said: ‘The wedding was in doubt for hours and Annabel was devastated.
‘We all thought that was it, it was all off.
‘But in the end it was a marvellous wedding.’
HITCH IN TIME: Nick and his bride
Tot takes bomb to show mum
A BOY of three picked up a terrorist car bomb in the street — and innocently took it home to show his mum and grandma.
But as Ryan Cosgrove handed over the oblong box, a red light flashed and it started ticking.
His mother immediately dumped the package in her driveway in Protestant West Belfast and called the police.
An army bomb disposal expert defused it.
A police spokesman said: ‘The terrorists subjected grandmother, mother and child to Russian roulette.’
It is thought the bomb was aimed at a member of the security forces.
Deaf drink driver gets message!
A DEAF mute who was stopped by police for erratic driving told a court yesterday that he'd been ‘chatting’ to his passenger in sign language.
But he was banned for a year — because he was well over the alcohol limit at the time.
He had been trying to find somewhere to park in London's West End, Keith Hylton told a Marlborough Street magistrate through an interpreter.
The 27-year-old labourer, of Wood Green, admitted drink-driving.
And the magistrate warned him: ‘You should not try to drive and use sign language at the same time.’
Jet crash miracle
AN RAF pilot escaped death by seconds yesterday when his multi-million pound Harrier jump jet crashed on take off.
Flt Lt Chris Huckstet ejected before the jet exploded into flames as it hit the runway at RAF Wittering near the busy A1 in Cambridgeshire.
No kidding
POLICE called to deal with three goats found wandering in the middle of a road in Grays, Essex, sent Pc Billy Kidd to sort it out.
MIRROR COMMENT
Double rip-off
COUNCIL TAX is the son of Poll Tax and even before it is levied is growing up as monstrous as its father.
The charge on homes it will impose from next April will be based on their value NOT next April, NOT April this year, but April LAST YEAR.
Only the Tories could refuse to recognise the value of homes is crashing.
Millions, particularly at the lower end of the eight Council Tax bands, could be forced to pay a band higher than their home will be worth.
That is like making people fork out VAT for goods they can't afford to buy or pay income tax on wages they haven't had.
Values
Tory policies in the l980s stopped council-home building, forced up house prices and compelled people to take on huge mortgages just to get a home.
Then they pushed up interest rates and forced down house values.
High interest rates and falling values mean MORE repossessions.
MORE families unable to move.
FEWER new homes and MORE unemployed building workers.
The Treasury Chief Secretary, Michael Portillo, is reported as saying the Government has a ‘presentational problem’.
He must mean it is trying to hide the hole in its head.
Air ban on scruff…
AIRPORT clerk Azelle McKee was banned from a flight and sent home to change — for wearing jeans.
Scottish airline Loganair said as a ‘privileged passenger’ Azelle, 19, was too scruffy.
She caught a later Belfast-Manchester flight.
THE BABY WHO LIVES IN AN OLD TOYOTA
Homes row leads to car ordeal for little Heidi
FRANK GILBRIDE
HOMELESS baby Heidi Grady is living in a rusty old Toyota in a public car park…right under the nose of the council which refuses to house her.
The 10-month-old tot sleeps on the car's back seat, lying in a jumble of old blankets and toys.
She eats cold babyfood because her father Steve, who cares for her, has no cooking facilities.
And while other babies can splash happily in warm baths, little Heidi has to make do with a quick sponge-down in a grubby public toilet.
For Steve, 38, is locked in a bitter battle with town hall housing bosses, who claim he and Heidi are not entitled to a council home.
The row began after father and baby were evicted from a council bed and breakfast — on the grounds Steve made himself homeless in the first place.
The furious dad packed his daughter and their few possessions into his 12-year-old Toyota Corona…and moved into the car park at council headquarters in Cromer, Norfolk.
They have been there since last week.
Steve says they have nowhere else to go.
Visits
Heidi's mum Christine, who is unable to care for baby because of severe post-natal depression, visits every day.
Social workers and health visitors make regular checks.
But no-one can offer any hope of a proper home for Heidi.
Steve admits:
It's very uncomfortable in here but Heidi is not doing too badly.
She's too young to know what's going on.
She thinks it's all a big game.
This is not the start in life I would like to have given her.
But it has not been too cold at night and hopefully this won't go on until the winter.
Some people say I am using Heidi, but this is her battle too.
The council forced it upon us.
Mum Christine, 37, who has now been evicted from her home too, is staying with friends, moving from place to place.
Close to tears, she said: ‘I wish Heidi was with me, but it's not possible right now.
‘I've no job and nowhere to live.’
The council found Steve a private flat.
But he claims he could not afford the rent out of his £61-a-week benefit.
Stewart Stackhouse, spokesman for North Norfolk's Tory-controlled district council, said Steve was not officially homeless because he chose to leave Christine's flat when they split.
best for the child.’
Now Steve's lawyer Martin Plowman is going to court in a bid to get the council decision overturned.
He said: ‘I can't see the justification for leaving a man with a little baby out in the street.’
RUSTY WRECK: But this X-reg Toyota in a council car park is the only home 10-month-old Heidi has
DEADLOCK: The Gradys are not officially homeless
SWEET DREAMS: One day Heidi may have a real home and a proper cot Pictures: BILL KENNEDY
Roy's Euro plea
FORMER Labour deputy leader Roy Hattersley warned the party not to do a U-turn on Europe yesterday.
He blasted MPs like Bryan Gould calling for a vote with Tory rebels against Maastricht.
Premier John Major has said he would call an immediate election if defeated over the treaty.
Mr Hattersley said this would lead to another Tory victory.
Handy man
CANADIAN Scott Killen, 30, shook hands with 25,289 people in eight hours at Seville's Expo 92 to grab a new world record.
I'll sue TV over Jani, vows Nazi
SOUTH African neo-Nazi leader Eugene Terre Blanche yesterday threatened to sue Channel 4.
It followed a failed libel action by journalist Jani Allan over a programme revealing their affair.
THREAT: Blanche
Ewe'll be sorry
RUSTLERS will get the trots if they eat two stolen sheep that had just been given de-worming chemicals, Northumberland police warned.
Coffee girl drives lover round blend
GEORGINA WALSH
JEALOUSY and betrayal are brewing in the latest episode tonight of TV's coffee ad romance.
In the last cliffhanger, downstairs lover Tony Head was caught sharing his Gold Blend nightcap with a mystery lady.
Tonight's episode 10 finds ‘on off’ girlfriend Sharon Maughan pouring cold water on Tony's feeble attempts to explain.
Then she flies off to Milan in search of a richer, darker continental flavour provided by smoothie Italian Marino Mase.
Designer-suited Mase — who has appeared in EastEnders, Return of the Saint and Godfather III — offers Sharon more than a sip of la dolce vita.
Tempt
Will she get an instant taste for it?
Or can our Tony tempt her back?
Nestle aren't telling — and it's easy to see why.
After four years of the screen romance, consumption of Gold Blend has leapt from two to ten million cups a day.
INSTANT ATTRACTION: Coffee ad girl Sharon goes continental with tasty Italian Marino Mase
 INSTANT BLISS: A kiss for hopeful Tony
Love's so hard for TV hunk
SOAP hunk Simon Gregson claims being a Coronation Street star has wrecked his love life.
‘It has actually reduced my pulling power,’ says the 18-year-old who plays tearaway McDonald twin Steve.
‘It seems to put girls off wanting to get involved with me — which I can understand.’
But beauties should not all rush at once.
Simon says in a soap fans' magazine: ‘I'd hate to be going out with some girl that all the boys were hassling or eyeing up.
‘It would make me very jealous and insecure.’
He adds sadly: ‘It's impossible for me to go on a quiet date as I get recognised everywhere and asked for autographs.’
POWER: Simon
Knifeman at nurses' party kills a guest
DAVID LEIGH
A GATECRASHER stabbed a man to death at a nurse's 21st birthday party in a hospital.
Three other guests — one a young nurse — were also slashed.
Pipe-fitter Michael Huntington, 29, was given emergency first aid by medics, and then rushed to the hospital's casualty unit.
But surgeons were unable to save him.
Dozens of guests were enjoying the party in the nurses' common-room at the Princess Alexandra Hospital, Harlow, Essex, when several gatecrashers burst in.
Stabbed
The dead man had moved to Harlow from Horden, Co Durham, only three weeks ago.
Murder squad detectives were questioning four men yesterday.
A spokesman said: ‘We are still seeking another man.’
A MAN was found stabbed to death yesterday after an all-night party to celebrate his engagement.
Isadore Johnson, 29, from London, had been staying at the party house in Northampton.
THE KRAYS…
YOU'VE READ THE BOOK, SEEN THE MOVIE, NOW PLAY THE COMPUTER GAME!
SAMUEL JAMES
JAILED gangsters Reg and Ronnie Kray are all set to rule the East End again — in a kids' computer game.
From behind bars, the notorious twins — already the subject of books and a film — have commissioned a firm to create a game based on their Sixties reign of terror in Bethnal Green.
Just like the bad old days, the idea is to get the brothers to take over as many places as possible.
There will be police chases round their old haunts, including the Blind Beggar pub in Whitechapel where Ronnie shot George Cornell between the eyes.
But the Krays' victims will NOT be featured.
Nor will the East End map show the Stoke Newington house where Jack ‘The Hat’ McVitie was stabbed to death by Reggie through the eye, neck and stomach.
The brothers' business partner, Richard Driscoll, said: ‘All the Kray gang will be there.
Kids will be able to be Reg and Ron or whoever they want.
Crime ‘We've spent thousands on the project and every Kray fan will want one for Christmas.
‘But neither Reg or Ron would ever condone crime and they are not trying to influence kids.’
A spokesman for Richard Branson's Virgin Games Store in London's Oxford Street said: ‘I can't see it taking off.
‘I don't think people are interested in the Krays anymore.’
The brothers, now 58, were jailed for life in 1969.
Reggie is in Blundeston jail, Suffolk, and could soon be free.
Ronnie, a paranoid schizophrenic, is held in Broadmoor and may never be released.
KILLERS: The Krays when they ruled by fear
Light fantastic
BRITONS spent £130 million on light bulbs last year, it was revealed yesterday.
Royal approval
THE Queen is so delighted with a bronze statuette of her at the Trooping the Colour by amateur sculptor Bob White, of Leeds, that she has asked to keep it.
My boy is a born fan
TINY Connor Grist became Britain's youngest paid-up soccer fan…at the age of 35 MINUTES.
Proud dad Mick, 33, of Rochester, Kent, dashed to enrol him in Third Division Gillingham's supporters club.
HOMES TO ‘PLUNGE BY 15%’
IAN MILLER /DAVID BRADSHAW
HOMES will fall another 15 per cent in value before they hit rock bottom, an influential City report has predicted.
It warns that unless the Government changes policy, the housing slump will continue until 1994 — with the South continuing to be worst hit.
The shock report from City bank Morgan Grenfell says 1.5 million borrowers now owe more on their mortgage than their home is worth.
It kills off lingering Tory hopes the economy is poised for recovery.
And with another big rise in the jobless expected this week, it increases pressure on Cabinet Ministers to cut short their holidays to help pull Britain out of recession.
‘This damning report blows away the the last remaining pretence that recovery is round the corner,’ Labour industry spokesman Robin Cook said last night.
Wrong ‘Banks and industrialists who have looked into the future know it does not work on present policies.
It is time Norman Lamont accepted he is out of step because everyone else is right and he is wrong.’
Morgan Grenfell say a Government rescue plan must now be ‘worth the gamble’ and urges doubling of mortgage tax relief limit to £60,000 and extending the stamp duty holiday to August 1993.
Boat speeds to a record
A GIANT £400 million powerboat beat the trans-atlantic record yesterday — by more than 21 hours.
The Italian 222ft Destriero sped 3,105 miles from New York to Britain in 58 hours 34 minutes.
BR ‘make the mugging easy’
ROGER TODD
BRITISH Rail booking clerks watched a man being attacked and robbed without lifting a finger to help him, it was claimed yesterday.
The mugged man even had to ask them to call the police, claimed the Victim Support group.
Group official Carol Bouziane said yesterday: ‘Three muggers beat up the man and stole his money and mobile phone in full view of two booking clerks.
Then they ran off.
The victim asked why the clerks hadn't bothered to help and was told they thought he was ‘mucking about with his mates.’
‘When he said he had been mugged, they said that sort of thing happened there about three times a day.’
The clerks then agreed to call the police and one mugger was caught.
Victim Support has asked for an apology for the ‘apparent inhuman treatment’ of victim Sohail Ahmed, 32, at Balham station, South London.
But a senior BR official said he was ‘completely satisfied’ with the clerks' reaction.
CHOIRMASTER NICKED IN CHILD PORN PROBE
Cops find his house ablaze
GORDON HUGHES
A CHOIRMASTER who teaches bible studies at a top private school has been arrested in a child porn probe.
Customs and Excise men investigating the import of obscene material swooped on the home of bearded Paul Bradburn.
But they arrived to discover the house had been set on fire by attempts to burn large quantities of ‘literature’.
And officers had to call in the fire brigade to put out the blaze.
Now Mr Bradburn, choirmaster at Northumberland's Hexham Abbey, has been suspended from his teaching post.
His future has yet to be decided by governors at Newcastle upon Tyne's £3,141-a-year Dame Allen boys school.
A customs officer involved in the case said Mr Bradburn had been under surveillance for weeks when he was arrested.
Burning ‘Our colleagues in Dover alerted us to his address because of a large amount of post he was receiving from Holland,’ said the officer.
‘When we arrived at the house it appeared there had been an attempt to destroy literature by burning it.
‘But the flames spread, and set his living room ablaze.’
Firemen wearing breathing apparatus were sent in to deal with the fire at Hedley-on-the-Hill, Northumberland.
The choirmaster was then arrested but has not yet been charged.
Mr Terry Willcocks, Principal of Dame Allan's School, said: ‘There will be an investigation.
‘Mr Bradburn has shown himself to be a fine teacher and a popular colleague.’
Mr Bradburn said yesterday: ‘I am hoping this will die a death.
‘I know I am being investigated but it is not something I would like to talk about.’
SUSPENDED: Bradburn
Raid fish ‘n’ sniffs…
POLICE dogs nosed in the fish during a drugs search at a chippy.
No drugs were found.
And yesterday angry Ray Fisher, 44, claimed he had to dump £5,000 worth of fish and other food sniffed by the dogs in the raid at Aspatria, Cumbria.
Comic Sid is booked
TRAFFIC cops stopped comedian Sidney Harbour and booked him — to appear at their social club.
Sydney, 41, from Blandford Forum, Dorset, said: ‘They found out I was a comedian while they checked my driving documents.
Then the police club at Taunton booked my act.’
Nun demo by 15 gays
FIFTEEN men dressed as nuns disrupted services at Westminster Cathedral yesterday in protest at recent Vatican condemnation of homosexuality.
The men, members of the gay rights group Outrage, paraded placards in front of the altar before leaving peacefully.
HOME…
THE SMALLEST BABY IN BRITAIN
JILL PALMER
BRITAIN'S smallest baby Kelsey Oakes — who weighed just 1lb 3ozs when she was born nearly four months early — is finally home from hospital.
She looked a picture of health as she was cuddled by her relieved mum Michelle and dad David.
Michelle declared yesterday: ‘I can't believe she is so perfect.
‘When I went into labour I was told there was no heartbeat and that even if she was born alive, which was unlikely, she was too early and small to survive.
‘But she's a real fighter.’
Now four months old, Kelsey tips the scales at a healthy 6lb 2oz.
And she is getting to know her five-year-old sister Eloise at home in Blackpool, Lancs.
Michelle was 23 weeks and four days pregnant when the little wonder arrived on April 3.
Premature
Kelsey's head was the size of an apple and she fitted in the palm of her mum's hand.
Such a premature baby has less than a 10 per cent chance of survival and a healthy life because the lungs are not fully developed.
Kelsey spent five weeks on a ventilator and still needed extra oxygen until last week.
But she appears to have beaten the odds and is breathing normally.
Her remarkable battle for life even looks like winning her a place in the record books.
Michelle contacted the Guinness Book of Records whose compilers agreed that the tiniest of tots deserves a special mention.
SO HAPPY: Michelle and David give Kelsey a ‘welcome home’ hug
Picture: DENNIS HUSSEY
SO TINY: Kelsey weighed just 1lb 3ozs at birth
999 cop car kills pub man
POLICE launched an inquiry yesterday after a man was killed by a patrol car.
Albert Rice was knocked down as he left a pub by a police Sierra racing to answer a distress call from two WPCs.
Mr Rice, 46, of Dartford, Kent, was found to be dead on arrival at hospital.
The accident outside the George public house at Gravesend followed violence in the town centre.
The two policewomen  radioed for help when they got into trouble trying to deal with the fracas.
Police said the patrol car had its blue light flashing and a B-test on the driver proved negative.
Dave's lawn has gawn!
SHOCKED David Salt spent £700 on a dream garden — only to see a 20ft crater open up and swallow his flowers and lawn.
David, 23, and wife Eileen, 24, had to move out of their home in West Bromwich, West Midlands.
Engineers suspect old mine workings.
A GEM IN DENIMS £100,000 JEANS ON SHOW
FLANKED by guards, model Lindsay yesterday gave the first public display of the world's most expensive jeans, £100,000 diamond-studded denims.
Like them, she looked dazzling at the show in Birmingham.
IT'S A IT'S A NIKE-MARE!
Games flops hit £ 1/4 m ads
GRAHAM BARNES
SPORTSWEAR bosses backed the LOSERS when they picked three world stars for a £250,000 Olympic advertising campaign.
Before the Barcelona games Nike executives told the Daily Mirror they had lined up racing certs for a nationwide billboard blitz.
Then they faced an admen's nightmare as one by one their heroes failed.
There was
THE HIGH FLIER, Ukrainian pole vaulter Sergei Bubka.
‘Spanish air traffic control has been notified,’ the poster said.
But Bubka flopped early in the competition.
Then there was
THE TRACK KING, Algeria's 1500-metre world champion Noureddine Morceli.
The admen trumpeted: ‘Ever heard the Algerian national anthem?
You will.’
Right slogan, wrong athlete.
Morceli trailed in seventh and the Algerian anthem was played for Hassiba Boulmerka who won the women's 1500 metres.
Oh, well, there was always
THE ROCKET MAN, America's 200-metre world champion.
Striker ‘You've just passed Michael Johnson,’ screamed the poster.
‘More than most athletes will do this summer.’
Off-form Johnson didn't even make the final.
Last night a Nike spokesman said: ‘Even the greatest athletes have off days.’
They have no plans to drop future campaigns.
But if you are an Arsenal fan…
BEWARE.
Next week posters of striker Ian Wright go up to fill the gap left by Gary Lineker's departure for Japan.
The billboard asks mockingly: ‘Gary who?’
FAILED: Pole vault king Bubka had an off day
FAILED: Champion Morceli was hit by a virus
FAILED: Sprinter Johnson had a niggling injury
ACTION MAN: But Johnson didn't make the final
TV Brits go nuts with a crisp £11/2 bn
STAY-at-home Britons are crunching their way through £1.5 billion of savoury snacks a year, a survey reveals today.
More than half the crisps, nuts and other nibbles are eaten at home in front of the TV, say market researchers Mintel.
Spokeswoman Margaret Rooke-Matthews said: ‘People are finding it too expensive to go to the pub.
‘They are staying at home in front of the TV with a bottle of beer and snacks instead.’
Sales of exotic snacks like tortilla chips have also soared.
Bull blasts double
Wolves 2, Aston Villa 2
WOLVES striker Steve Bull blasted two terrific goals against Aston Villa yesterday — to show Ron Atkinson just what he is missing.
The £2.5 million-rated forward, a long time target of the Villa boss, pounced twice to cancel out a brace from Villa midfielder Matthias Breitkreutz.
The German fired Villa into a two goal lead slotting home passes from the menacing Tony Daley in the first and 39th minutes.
But Bull, who has just signed a one year extension to his contract, struck twice with blistering shots in the 69th and 85th minutes.
The testimonial for former Wolves boss Stan Cullis marked the official opening of a new £2.5 million stand at Molineux, named after the man who guided the club to three championships and two FA Cup wins.
SWOOP AT FUNERAL PARLOUR
Rachel cops raid flat at undertakers
Suspect quizzed after M-way dash
NIC NORTH/FRANK CORLESS/ PATRICK MULCHRONE
POLICE hunting the killer of Rachel Nickell yesterday swooped on a flat above a funeral parlour.
They searched the flat as detectives drove student Simon Murrell from Liverpool to London for questioning about the Wimbledon Common murder of ex-model Rachel.
Murrell, 26, a former undertaker, is a regular visitor at the flat in Sutton, Surrey, where his sister lives with her common-law husband and their three children.
Detectives carried out a five-hour search.
Meanwhile Murrell, arrested on Sunday night after a tip-off, was on his way to London.
He faced a jeering 200strong crowd as he was hustled from Liverpool's Admiral Street police station.
Murrell, a grey blanket covering his head, was driven away in a green Rover to begin the motorway dash.
Speed
A police spokesman said: ‘We had to leave at speed because emotions were running so high.’
Newsmen gathered at Wimbledon police station in south-west London.
But Murrell was taken to another London station — and the police refused to say where.
Rachel, 23, was knifed in front of her two-year-old son Alex on Wimbledon Common on July 15.
Murrell may also be questioned about the murder of 19-year-old Katie Rackliff at Cove, Hants, six weeks earlier.
Scotland Yard refused to say whether Alex, who is three today, will be attending an identity parade.
The search at Sutton was launched by 10 detectives around 9.30am yesterday.
The first-floor flat is above John Knox funeral directors and ornamental masons in Stonecot Hill, Sutton — one of three funeral parlours owned by the Knox brothers, Paul and Stephen.
The others are at Wimbledon and Tooting in South London.
The flat is the home of Murrell's 31-year-old sister Karen, Paul Knox, 36, and their children — Michelle, 10, Crystal, six, and John, three.
They are on holiday in the Canary Islands.
Police were let into the flat by 35-year-old Stephen Knox, who said: ‘Simon has done funeral work for our company.
‘He used to help my brother out quite often.
‘In this game you need people like Simon who can be called up at a moment's notice.’
Bal Kundra, who runs the cafe next to the funeral parlour, said he saw Murrell at his sister's home four months ago.
Watch
Mr Kundra added: ‘He stays at the flat from time to time— perhaps two or three times a year.’
Another neighbour said: ‘Simon regularly visits the flat to see his sister and the kids.
‘Sometimes he'll help Paul with funeral arrangements — usually nothing more taxing than helping to transport and carry the coffins.’
Detectives arrested the suspect after a five-day undercover operation.
They kept watch outside the flat at Sefton Park, Liverpool, where he lives with Janice Dunmore and her two children — a girl of three and an 18-month-old boy.
On Sunday evening Murrell was arrested.
Yesterday, as detectives continued to search the area around the flat, Janice refused to answer reporters' questions.
She later ran out with the baby in a pushchair and took a taxi to the police station where her lover was held.
Last night, Janice was staying with her mother in Liverpool.
UNDER WRAPS
MURRELL, covered by a blanket, is driven from the Liverpool police station yesterday
MURDERED MUM: Knife victim Rachel
Fury at refugee bribes racket
MARK DOWDNEY /BARRY WIGMORE
OFFICIALS took bribes from refugees fleeing war-torn Bosnia, it was revealed yesterday.
Men handed over cash to guarantee seats on special trains to Germany.
Hundreds of women and children were left behind.
The racket was exposed at a refugee centre in Croatia.
Britain and America are close to agreeing the best way of protecting relief supplies to Bosnia, Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd said yesterday.
Starved
He denied that Britain was ignoring the plight of people being butchered and starved by Serbs.
Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown has set out to find death camps in the former Yugoslav republic.
But at the first, near Sarajevo, Muslims told him they were hungry but had not been maltreated.
Former premier Baroness Thatcher yesterday called for Western powers to launch air strikes against military targets inside Serbia.
DOLE CLERKS FACE CHOP
ROGER TODD/ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
DOLE clerks are facing the threat of unemployment themselves, it was revealed yesterday.
A new ‘efficiency’ drive, designed to streamline the benefits system, could put DSS staff on the other side of the counter.
The plan to pay all 25 benefits from the same office — rather than make claimants chase about between different centres -was announced by Social Services Secretary Peter Lilley.
It is likely to begin operating in a year to 18 months.
Mr Lilley said: ‘We have not worked out the number of staff reductions.
As we get more efficient there may be fewer jobs, but they will be more interesting.’
New fears emerged yesterday that benefits may be butchered, after the line-up of the Cabinet's public spending committee was revealed.
Downing Street said Commons leader Tony Newton and Lords Leader John Wakeham were included in case legislation was needed ‘on the benefits side’.
This fuelled  Opposition fears that the committee was set up to rubber stamp massive cuts in welfare payments.
Labour social security spokesman Donald Dewar said: ‘Claimants should not be made to pay for Government's economic incompetence.’
FEWER JOBS: Peter Lilley
Homes tax shock
DAVID BRADSHAW
OWNERS whose homes have crashed in value will have to pay the new council tax based on LAST YEAR'S higher prices.
The bombshell means that when bills go out next April, thousands could be up to £340 out of pocket.
Last night, Labour's local government spokesman Doug Henderson attacked the ‘double penalty’.
He said: ‘The Tories have slashed the value of their houses — but still expect them to pay the council tax as if nothing has happened.
‘The same chaos that we had with the poll tax is now emerging.’
The new tax, which replaces the poll tax, divides homes into eight valuation bands, with bills to match.
But since figures were worked out, many house values have plunged by 25 per cent.
The Environment Department said that families claiming to be trapped by the housing market slump would not be able to appeal.
£2m bill as hippies quit
HELL-RAISING hippies finally quit two sites in Hampshire last night — leaving behind a £2 million trail of damage.
More than 2,000 ‘New Age’ travellers set up camps in Romsey and Otterbourne.
The Government is now considering providing official sites for hippy rock festivals.
DEATH GANG'S TOLL OF BLOOD
JOHN HICKS
IN the past two years the UDA has matched the IRA death-for-death and carried out some of Ulster's most barbaric murders.
Last year its victims included 40 civilians.
This year it has already notched up another 13 murders.
The bloody roll-call includes the bookies massacre in Belfast when five Catholic punters were gunned down in February.
Among the victims was 15-year-old James Kennedy, whose last words as he lay dying were: ‘Tell mummy I love her.’
Flag
Unashamed, the UDA — under the flag of the Ulster Freedom Fighters — went on to shoot dead mother-of-two Philomena Hanna, 26, behind the counter of a Belfast chemist's.
The UDA was formed in 1971 as an umbrella group of Loyalists.
It was committed to the ‘defence’ of Protestant areas.
But it wasn't long before the killings began.
The UDA said it would target only known IRA men.
Instead, innocents died.
In 1974, UDA ‘muscle’ brought thousands on to the streets to enforce the Ulster Workers' strike which toppled the power-sharing executive.
Hundreds of masked UDA men manned road-blocks, intimidating workers and bringing Ulster to a standstill.
In the 80s, the organisation was riven by feuds and arrests which followed a probe into links with the security forces.
Tough boss John McMichael was blown up by a car bomb outside his home in 1987.
Police believe he was set up by Jim Craig, who ran the UDA's multi-million pound a year extortion rackets.
Craig was shot dead in 1988 in an East Belfast pub on the orders of a new hardline leadership out to clean up the gang's image.
The UDA now boasts 10,000 members, 30,000 fewer than in its heyday in the early 70s.
KILLED: Teenager James Kennedy
KILLED: Tragic Philomena Hanna
ONE OF OUR TRAINS IS MISSING
Theft' sends BR loco
ALAN LAW
BRITISH Rail thought they had a new excuse for late trains yesterday — THIEVES on the line.
They ‘lost’ one of their locos for 13 days.
And as they were fretting about it being nicked, it turned up in their own backyard.
The 75-ton monster was spotted by staff at Three Bridges station, a short train ride from busy Gatwick Airport.
The £1 million engine vanished on July 28 after being tracked by a BR computer at Redhill, Surrey.
Six days later it was officially listed as missing and frantic bosses sent out a fax to signalmen:
‘Someone has stolen one of our locomotives.
‘Could you please look around your yard/station/siding to see if it is there before we have to cancel trains because of lack of locomotives.’
BR even issued a description: ‘Approximately 54ft long, painted in a livery similar to InterCity colours, with the number 73117 on the side.’
After the engine turned up at Three Bridges a BR spokesman — skilled at blaming delays on ‘leaves on the line’— explained that lost trains did ‘occasionally occur’.
LOST: A train — have you seen one?
ANGUISH AS LITTLE ALEX IS 3
DON MACKAY
RACHEL'S son Alexander, struck dumb with terror after he saw her murdered, is three tomorrow.
For Alex, who cuddled his blood-stained mother, it will be a time of presents and smiles.
For his father Andre Hanscombe — whose love for his son has kept him going amidst the grief — it will be a time calling on all his reserves of courage.
There will be presents and a cake.
Everything will be done to make the occasion as ‘normal’ as possible.
But behind the strained, happy smiles there will lie the awful knowledge that Alex saw the killer — and was too young to understand what was going on.
As he clung to the bloodied body of his mother lying on Wimbledon Common, he cried: ‘Mummy, get up, get up.’
Grief
He was caked in mud and dirt after the attacker had fled.
Gifts poured in for the youngster.
And 29-year-old Andre was only stopped from killing himself in grief at the loss of his beloved Rachel for the sake of his son.
Woman in line for Halford job
A WOMAN has been shortlisted for a post left vacant after the sex discrimination battle involving Assistant Chief Constable Alison Halford.
Chief Supt Pauline Clare, 44, is one of five candidates up for the Merseyside job.
Stables saved
FRIENDS of racehorse trainer Will Pearce, who killed himself with a shotgun, have stepped in to save his debt-ridden stables.
Two days before Pearce died in June, one of his horses, Father Hayes, pulled off a £500,000 betting coup.
But Pearce, 45, who trained at Thirsk, Yorks., made only £8,000.
A Jockey Club inquiry found no rules were broken.
SHOT: Pearce
ANNE NAFFS OFF IN GAMES SNUB No2
Fury as she skips finale
JOHN JACKSON /JILL TURNER
PRINCESS Anne again sparked uproar last night — by snubbing the Olympic CLOSING ceremony.
The princess, a member of the organising International Olympic Committee, whipped up a storm when she missed the spectacular OPENING because her children were late arriving from London.
She flew home for ‘personal reasons’ before the games ended last night.
British officials in Spain said she had an ‘important engagement’ to attend.
But Buckingham Palace said last night that no official engagements were listed for today.
John Major also flew out before the games ended for a villa holiday in the mountains west of Madrid.
British officials hid their anger at the new ‘snub’.
But there were fears that Manchester's chances of staging the games in the year 2000 have been further damaged.
Clash
One official said: ‘It took us some time to explain away the opening ceremony episode.
Now this.’
On Saturday, TV viewers saw the princess comment crossly about Olympic crowd behaviour.
She clashed with IOC president Juan Antonio Samaranch.
An IOC spokesman said last night: ‘As we said after the opening ceremony, the non-appearance of the Princess Royal was noted by the top table.’
Lord Howell, the former Labour Sports Minister Denis Howell, said: ‘I think Princess Anne has become disenchanted with her role on the IOC.’
Remarkable, David — Page 6 £250,000 Nike-mare — Page 17 
CROWD ROW: Anne at Games
THORN AGAIN
BRITISH actress Rachel Ward is set to star in a sequel to TV's Thorn Birds — nearly a decade after the hit saga made her a worldwide star.
Hollywood executives are hoping Rachel will team up with her past co-star Richard Chamberlain to bring viewers a second helping of the Australia-based story about a priest who falls in love with a married woman.
ROLE: Rachel
Mellor's girl to ‘tell all’
ACTRESS Antonia de Sancha is to write a book about her affair with Heritage Secretary David Mellor, it was claimed last night.
And she may also play herself in a TV drama adaptation, according to her agent.
Sancha's publicity guru, Max Clifford, is quoted as saying: ‘Her idea is to write a book and then turn it into either a television drama or a documentary.
‘As Antonia is an actress, she would presumably play herself.’
But to avoid legal problems she might write the book as fiction, he said.
Actors Anton Rodgers and Timothy Spall have been suggested for the Mellor role, it was claimed.
NOVEL IDEA: Antonia
Spy quiz goes on
A COUPLE held under the Official Secrets Act were still being quizzed by Special Branch detectives last night.
The pair — believed to be jobless engineer Mike Smith and his wife Pam — were arrested in Kingston, Surrey, on Saturday.
Yesterday a court agreed to police holding them a further 36 hours.
Sheffield 1 Paradise 0
FOOTBALL fan Mike Crookes, 55, swapped a £1,500 holiday in the Seychelles — for season tickets to watch Premier League Sheffield United for the rest of the century.
The tropical paradise trip was a reward for 40 years' service with the Severn Trent water company.
But Mike, of Bamford, Derbys — a Blades fan for 50 years — said: ‘I've never been one for holidays.
I prefer to watch the football.’
A wee nip feels pinch
BRITONS are drinking a million fewer bottles of Scotch each month compared with a year ago.
Distillers yesterday blamed its ‘untrendy’ image and the recession.
Baton-charged
CONDUCTOR Ian Watson will be fed glucose by intravenous drip during a 12-hour marathon of Vivaldi music at London's Royal Festival Hall next month.
He will be too busy waving his baton to have a meal — so a doctor has agreed to operate the drip during the performance.
OK Jackie, make my evening!
AFTER all he's been through, movie veteran Clint Eastwood was real glad of this chance to meet British beauty Jacqueline Bisset.
The 62-year-old star could forget the punks who'd made his day as Dirty Harry.
And he could relax following the hard slog of his new Western The Unforgiven.
With actress Jackie, 47, the Hollywood party scene was set for a quiet chat and a bottle of champagne — maybe a magnum.
Second nature
FOUR-year-old Lucy Gill saved her epileptic dad Liam for the second time in two weeks by dialling 999 when he fell at their West Bromwich home.
Roadworks for smiles
A JOKE a day keeps the blues away in traffic jams.
That's the motto of car salesmen who have put up a gag board to amuse motorists.
Sample joke: ‘Why can't cars play football?
They've only one boot.’
Sales manager Rikki Johnstone said they got the idea after roadworks created traffic jams outside their garage at Winchester.
TEETER TERROR
PASSENGERS screamed in terror when a bus teetered on the edge of a 20ft drop yesterday.
The double-decker smashed through a fence and ended up perched precariously on a bridge parapet at Brighouse, West Yorkshire.
The 30 passengers — six on the top deck — included three pregnant women and several children.
Firemen secured the bus with ropes to stop it tumbling over the edge before escorting the petrified passengers to safety.
CAMPAIGNING LAW LORD DIES
LORD Devlin, the former Law Lord, has died aged 86.
After a distinguished career as a barrister and judge, he ‘switched sides’ in retirement to become a leading champion for victims of miscarriages of justice.
He campaigned on behalf of the wrongly-convicted Guildford Four and urged a complete overhaul of the appeal system.
The Archbishop of Westminster, Cardinal Basil Hume, described him as ‘an outstanding servant of truth and justice’.
Labour MP Chris Mullin, another leader in the Guildford Four case, said: ‘He was one of the few judges willing to face the possibility that the system to which he had devoted his life was capable of making serious mistakes.’
Lord Devlin was also chairman of the now defunct Press Council.
He died at his family's Wiltshire home after a short illness.
TRUTH: Lord Devlin
Brothel couple guilty
A HUSBAND and wife were convicted yesterday of running a brothel next door to a police social club.
The Bristol couple operated two ‘massage parlours’ in Cardiff.
Terrence Duncan was given a three-month suspended jail sentence for living off immoral earnings.
His wife got a four-month suspended sentence for controlling prostitutes.
Just kidding
A BEER garden was evacuated after a pet goat unearthed a dummy hand grenade as it gnawed a thicket at the Exeter Inn, Honiton.
999!
CABBIE I ROBBED IS NEAR DEATH
Thief stays with victim
GORDON HUGHES
A ROBBER got a guilty conscience when his victim Derek Ost collapsed in pain — he waited with him until the law arrived.
The 21-year-old had seized 58-year-old taxi driver Derek round the throat and grabbed his £68 takings.
But as he turned to flee, Derek slumped at the wheel, clutching his chest.
The worried crook grabbed Derek's radio and called his bosses: ‘I've just robbed your driver and I think he's having a heart attack.’
Then he told the astonished controller to call the police and an ambulance — and volunteered to sit with Derek until they arrived.
Police found the remorseful robber desperate to give himself up.
Derek, who suffered an anxiety attack, was taken to Sunderland hospital but released after a check-up.
Sympathy
His passenger was charged with robbery and will appear before city magistrates next week.
Det.
Insp.
Mattie Barkess said: ‘He did act with considerable sympathy towards his victim.’
Grandad Derek said yesterday: ‘The lad was a villain to start with but turned into a Good Samaritan.
‘I know he was very wrong to rob me but I'm grateful he had a change of heart when I took ill.
‘If he had just left me there I could have died.’
Taxi boss Dave Blyth said Derek did not give in without a fight.
‘His hearing aid and glasses were smashed so there must have been a bit of a tussle,’ he said.
LIES!
BUSH FURY AT SEX SLUR
‘Fling during arms talks’
STEWART DICKSON
FURIOUS President Bush last night blasted new claims that he had an affair with an English-born aide.
‘It is a lie,’ he stormed when quizzed by a TV reporter.
‘I'm not going to take sleazy questions like that.
I'm outraged.’
His anger exploded after it was alleged that he and divorcee Jennifer Fitzgerald, now 59, spent nights alone in a Swiss lakeside cottage.
Rumours about them had circulated for several years but this was the first time they had been linked by a named source — former US ambassador Lewis Fields.
Talks
The envoy was quoted as saying he arranged for them to share the house while they attended arms talks in Geneva in 1984.
Mr Bush was then vice president and his wife Barbara was in the US.
Mr Fields — now dead — said Mr Bush and Miss Fitzgerald had adjoining bedrooms.
A book by former US Congressional aide Susan Tranto claims he added: ‘It became clear to me that the vice-president and Miss Fitzgerald were romantically involved.
‘It made me very uncomfortable.
I am not a prude but I know Barbara Bush and I like her.’
Yesterday's disclosure — less than a week before the Republican convention — stunned Americans who have seen Mr Bush struggle in his bid for re-election.
Republicans accused the Democrats of launching a smear campaign.
Said one Congressman: ‘It's going to get very mean and dirty.’
Miss Fitzgerald — born in Andover, Hants — is referred to as ‘Jennifer With a J’ since singer Gennifer ‘With a G’Flowers claimed she had an affair with Democrat candidate Bill Clinton.
LOVE CLAIM: Jennifer
JURY CLEAR ASHDOWN MAN OF BREAK-IN
Amazing record of thief who tried to sell sex secret
Then they're told he had 230 burglary convictions
HARRY ARNOLD
THE MAN accused of stealing the memo which exposed Paddy Ashdown's love affair was cleared yesterday — only for the jury to hear that he is a professional cat burglar.
They acquitted Simon Berkowitz after he told them he was given the shock document, stolen from the Liberal Democrat leader's solicitors, in a pub.
The jury convicted him of just handling it, then heard that he has 244 previous convictions — 230 for BURGLARY.
Many of those were for breaking into solicitors' offices.
And every day Berkowitz, 45, was brought to court from Wandsworth prison, where he is serving three years for such an offence.
He was on bail for that when the Ashdown break-in at a London office was committed.
Berkowitz admitted trying to sell the memo — revealing Mr Ashdown's affair with his former secretary Patricia Howard — to the News of the World for £30,000.
He was jailed for two and a half years, to run consecutive to his present term, which means he has been sentenced to 21 years since 1973.
Judge Michael Coombe told him: ‘You have an absolutely appalling record for dishonesty.
‘You obviously have not the slightest regard for people's property or, in this case, people's feelings and rights of privacy.’
Bills
Bearded 6ft Berkowitz, a Brighton and Hove Albion soccer fan, was dubbed the ‘home and away burglar’ by police.
When his team played at home he confined his break-ins to the London area.
But when away, he burgled offices to pay for his hotel bills.
During one exploit, Berkowitz, whose home is in Hove, made a 17ft leap across rooftops — 75ft up — to escape police.
One officer said: ‘Any ledge, rooftop, drainpipe and he will use it.’
David Bate, prosecuting, described the Ashdown case as a story of ‘greed, opportunism and political muckraking’.
He dismissed the ‘man-in-a-pub’ story as ‘moonshine’.
In terms of excuses, the jury was told, it was second only to the old chestnut that ‘it fell off the back of a lorry’.
Berkowitz's plan to make a fortune from the document was thwarted when Mr Ashdown publicly revealed the affair.
Shortly before returning their 10-2 majority verdicts, eight members of the jury asked for headache tablets.
Detective Inspector Karen Young said later: ‘We are not proposing to re-open the burglary investigation.’
STILL SMILING: Berkowitz is driven back to jail
AFFAIR: Ashdown
EX-LOVE: Patricia
£10.5m haul
EIGHT men were arrested and 2 1/2 tons of cannabis worth £10.5 million was seized during swoops on two boats in Devon yesterday.
Cruel con by sex beast
A BOGUS social worker conned his way into a young mother's home and molested her two-year-old son, police revealed last night.
The man called at the house in Amesbury, Wilts, and said he was investigating allegations of sex abuse.
He took the little boy to another room for an intimate examination, leaving the 19-year-old mother outside.
The crime came to light three weeks later when the mum, anxious about the result of the ‘examination’, contacted social services chiefs.
Bernie's too blue for chief
JAN DISLEY
A POLICE chief is to snub his bobbies' big night out — because Bernard Manning is top of the bill.
Chief Constable David Wilmot believes big Bernard is too blue for the official cabaret.
He reckons his act — with its smattering of racist and sexist gags — is out of line with the force's aim to ‘treat everyone equally irrespective of race or gender’.
Mr Wilmot told his officers: ‘It's him or me.’
So they took a vote — and picked Bernard.
Fuss
Mr Wilmot's six assistant chief constables are likely to join the boycott in November.
Roly-poly Bernard could not understand the fuss last night.
He said: ‘I've done quite a few police jobs and appeared in front of the Royal Family.
‘If I'm good enough for royalty surely I'm good enough for Mr Wilmot.’
One bobby said yesterday: ‘It wasn't much of a choice.
I know who the lads would rather listen to.’
CHOICE: Manning
Fungus horror
MORE than 60 people have died and 600 are ill after eating poisonous toadstools they mistook for wild mushrooms in the Ukraine.
JR'S FUMING
DALLAS star Larry Hagman has urged Lady Thatcher to reject a job offer from Marlboro cigarette firm Philip Morris.
The anti-smoking campaigner — who played JR — wrote to the former premier to say many Americans were dismayed that she might become a consultant.
Lady Thatcher caused a storm by considering the lucrative offer.
LETTER: Larry
‘Sick’ stunt dole chop
GOVERNMENT plans to slash the dole bill were branded ‘sick’ yesterday.
Labour employment spokesman Frank Dobson said more than 300,000 people would lose out.
He called on Ministers to come clean over secret proposals to cut the unemployment benefit period from a year to six months.
Jap troops ate POWs
JAPANESE soldiers ATE prisoners in the jungle during the last war, it was revealed yesterday.
More than 100 Australians and Indians — some still alive — were victims of cannibalism in the jungles of New Guinea.
A Tokyo professor who studied secret papers, claimed the horror was hushed up after the war.
Prickled eggs
TWO hundred baby hedgehogs have been saved this year by RSPCA nurses who fed them scrambled eggs at West Hatch, Somerset.
Cave tragedy
POTHOLER Ellis Barker, 36, from Manchester plunged 60ft to his death yesterday as he explored a cave near Santander, Spain.
Give us this day our free Big Mac
Cathedral's deal for a fast supper
SYDNEY YOUNG
ONE of Britain's most famous cathedrals has wrapped up a fund-raising deal…with fast-food giant McDonald's.
Visitors to Salisbury Cathedral will be given a special voucher in the form of a parchment scroll.
And if they buy a Big Mac burger or McChicken sandwich at the firm's local restaurant, they'll be entitled to another one free.
The scheme has the reluctant blessing of the Bishop of Salisbury, the Right Rev John Baker.
But local councillors say it's a silly idea.
Salisbury district councillor David Parker, 45, said: ‘This is just a gimmick.’
Fellow councillor Tom Cowie added: ‘It's a pure publicity stunt.
‘The church and McDonald's will make strange bedfellows.’
History
Under the scheme, starting next week, 20,000 scrolls will be produced.
The scrolls, giving a history of the cathedral, will be handed to visitors when they leave.
The American-owned burger chain will give a slice of its profits from the extra sales to cathedral funds.
The bishop has complained about commercialised money-making projects in the past.
But the man behind the burger deal, cathedral chapter clerk Christopher Owen, said yesterday: ‘He did not make any objection to this particular promotion.’
A McDonald's official said: ‘This is not a publicity stunt.
‘It is an example of our support for a variety of worthy causes around the country.’
FUNDS: The cathedral
Vic dies in home he lost
A LONELY widower died in a blaze at his home yesterday — just hours before he was due to be evicted.
Tragic Victor Dudley, 59, who had fallen behind with his mortgage after losing his job, was heartbroken at the thought of leaving the house where he had lived for 30 years.
Fire chiefs said petrol had been used to start the fire in Willenhall, West Midlands.
Victor had apparently made no attempt to escape.
His beloved pet dog was found locked in a car with a note.
PARA MARIE IS ON CLOUD NINE
BRITAIN'S toughest regiment showed off its first female recruit yesterday — stunning Marie Radcliffe.
The 28-year-old blonde sailed through a gruelling training course, including dozens of parachute jumps, to win the famous red beret of the crack Parachute Regiment.
And she said: ‘I love the life and I am proud to be the first woman to join.’
Fearless Marie, from Elland, near Halifax, Yorks, added: ‘A lot of girls might think I am strange, but I am still a woman and feminine.’
Marie, who is in the Paras' territorial battalion, is also the first woman to join the regiment's elite Black Lanyards free fall parachute display team.
Marie, who is single, really enjoys mucking in with the lads.
She joked: ‘I get on well with all the guys, but if any of them get too frisky I can always use my army self-defence training to sort them out.’
When she's not playing war games, Marie has a job in the textile trade.
She said: ‘I have to do something normal after all that excitement.’
AT EASE: Marie relaxes after her gruelling training course with the Paras
AIRBORNE: Plucky Marie tries free-fall
LIBERAL Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown said last night he had seen ‘wretched and vile’ conditions at Serb-run prison camps he visited in Bosnia.
THAT'S NOT MY DYING MUM…
IT'S A DUMMY
Lies of spend spree boy, 12
A MOTHER lay dying on the floor of her home for a week while her 12-year-old son ignored her and lived it up with his pals, an inquest heard yesterday.
When a schoolfriend told a neighbour he had seen a body, the boy said it was a blow-up dummy his father had left lying around.
The son, who cannot be named for legal reasons, enjoyed a new-found freedom while his mum lay dying, the inquest was told.
He went through hundreds of pounds of his mother's money in a spending spree, buying friends extravagant gifts like computer games and going to amusement arcades.
He went to a party after his mother collapsed at their home in West London and even invited two school pals to stay.
Whenever worried friends asked after his mum, he told them she was out.
One concerned neighbour — who is now looking after the boy — eventually pushed her way into the flat and found the stricken woman lying on the floor of the front room with a sheet over her.
Freedom
She died in hospital a few days later.
The neighbour told the inquest: ‘He had the freedom of spending money and having a good time with his friends.
‘That is my conclusion as to why he did not contact anyone.’
His mother, who lived alone with her son, had suffered brain damage giving birth to him and was awarded £200,000 damages in 1990.
Hammersmith coroner Dr John Burton said: ‘The extraordinary thing is she did not die immediately but lay there for days and was virtually dead when she was found.
‘I make no comment on the account of her son, but it does seem that he concealed the fact that his mother was laying for days but it does not affect the cause of death.
‘She would have died anyway.’
The coroner made a ruling under the Children and Young Persons Act that the boy should not be named.
Pathologist Dr Christopher Foster said the 45year-old woman died as the result of a stroke.
Verdict: Natural causes.
Waiting lists soar after poll
WARN: Blunkett
HOSPITAL waiting lists jumped 11,000 in the three months after the general election, the Government revealed yesterday.
And 1,244 of the 926,939 people have waited more than two years — despite a Tory pledge this wouldn't happen.
Labour health spokesman David Blunkett warned cut-backs in public spending could increase waiting times.
Court ‘too easy on vice girls’
PROSTITUTES in Britain's worst crime area get the lowest fines in the country, it was revealed yesterday.
Hookers in London's King's Cross — where ex-Director of Public Prosecutions Sir Allan Green was nabbed for kerb-crawling — pay £27, against £55 nationally.
Labour MP Frank Dobson called King's Cross a ‘pimp's paradise’.
ARREST: Green
STARS STOOP FOR A CRUST
TV'S Bread stars Jean Boht and Jonathon Morris have found a new way of earning a crust — on stage together.
This is how the pair appear at Chichester, Sussex, in the Oliver Goldsmith classic She Stoops To Conquer.
Jonathon, 31, plays buffoon Tony Lumpkin.
And 56-year-old Jean, cast as Mrs Hardcastle, is sure he'll make a whole meal of his role.
Fun ride
A SPECIAL two-night package trip to flagging Euro Disney and Paris is being launched for £149 by British Rail.
TOP SOCCER YOBIS GIRL
AN attractive blonde was revealed yesterday as one of Britain's most vicious soccer thugs.
She's one of a ‘dirty dozen’ of girls who carry knives and CS gas in their handbags to battle it out at soccer riots.
The 21-year-old has been videoed putting a steel-capped boot into men who have been knocked to the ground.
Her record was outlined by Supt Adrian Appleby at the launch of a Hooligan Hotline, set up to trap offenders this season.
‘It's vital that people realise soccer violence is here to stay,’ he said.
Anyone with information should ring the free 24-hour service on 0800 515495.
Farmer's boy wins fight for fortune
A JOBLESS plasterer moved into a £100,000 farmhouse on 140 acres of land yesterday after proving he was the love-child of a wealthy farmer.
A DNA test showed that Wayne Jones, 23, was legally entitled to inherit the estate of dead bachelor Emlyn Jones.
The result ended a row which delayed Emlyn's funeral by three weeks after he died of a heart attack in May.
Affair
Wayne's mum MONICA insisted he was born after she had an affair with the farmer when she was 19.
Emlyn's council worker brother BILLY dismissed the claim, saying Wayne had no right to the farm at Cynonville, Glam.
Yesterday, after Billy moved out to let Wayne and Monica in, the new owner said: ‘I always knew mum was right.’
He added: ‘I want to farm the land — dad would have liked that.’
Go bananas for that hour glass figure
THE hairstyles and hour-glass figures are classic Forties film star.
But the stunning curves owe more to Nineties video techniques as top girl group Bananarama bounce back with their first single as a duo.
They are down to a pair of Bananaramas after the departure of Jacqui O'Sullivan.
Blonde Sara Dallin and sultry Keren Woodward, both 30, will release Movin' On next week.
In a bid to recreate the magic that brought them 27 hits, the girls have made a lavish video.
Complete with sumptuous sets and classical dancers it's a sort of Banana melodrama.
RIOT PRISONERS' DEADLY TRAP FOR WARDERS
They copied Columbo film
PATRICK MULCHRONE
RIOTING prisoners yesterday set a deadly trap for warders — copied from a Columbo TV murder movie.
They wired a barricade of steel chairs and bedsteads to the mains after seeing a film in which the victim is electrocuted the same way.
Prison governor Peter Leonard agreed the idea could have come from the TV movie Murder, Smoke And Shadows, starring Peter Falk as the shabby sleuth Columbo.
‘Wires had been ripped from the wall and deliberately attached to metal furniture in the barricades,’ he said.
‘Luckily we were on to their plan and switched off the power before we moved in.’
The prisoners, drunk on home-made booze, barricaded themselves in a dormitory at Lindholme jail near Doncaster, South Yorks, early yesterday.
They made no demands and refused to negotiate.
Warders in riot gear stormed the room after four hours and marched the 12 protesters to a segregation block.
Moved
They will be moved to other prisons.
Assistant governor Eric Pearson said: ‘One was so drunk he was barely conscious.
‘We found a container with the residue of hooch in it.
The rest had been drunk.’
Governor Leonard wants the rioters prosecuted.
He said: ‘If we deal with it ourselves we could only give out punishment of 28 days’ loss of remission.’
A Home Office inquiry will be held.
SLEUTH: Columbo 
SLEUTH: Columbo
TRAGIC 999 WARD RAP
A CASUALTY department where two pensioners died after being left for hours on trolleys in a corridor was condemned yesterday by a Government-ordered inquiry.
Poor management of beds meant long delays in admissions, said the report on King's College Hospital, London.
The accident unit was manned by overworked junior medical staff.
And hospital chiefs concentrated too much on specialist medicine and not enough on emergencies.
TYRANT MAKES SHIRTS FOR M&S
SERBIAN dictator Slobodan Milosevic is making a killing — with a £5million deal to make shirts for Marks & Spencer.
Labour's Robin Cook said Milosevic runs a factory producing school shirts.
Mr Cook called for the withdrawal of the import licence to ‘hit Milosevic in his own pocket’.
A Marks spokesman said: ‘We won't be placing any more orders.’
DEAL: Milosevic
MAN DENIES SPY CHARGE
A FORMER engineer with defence giants GEC Marconi denied a spying charge yesterday.
Michael John Smith, 43, from Kingston, Surrey, was accused under the Official Secrets Act.
The balding ex-quality systems audit manager stayed silent for a three-minute hearing at London's Marylebone court.
Smith was remanded in custody until next Thursday.
Outside the court his lawyer said: ‘Mr Smith denies this matter.’
Guests race after bride and zoom
MARATHON runner Dave Edwards and his bride want a quick end to their wedding today.
So they'll RUN to the reception two miles away — and 100 guests will be expected to leg it, too.
Bride Hilary McIntyre, 46, who will wear a fun-run outfit at Grimsby register office, said: ‘We love running, so why not save on wedding cars?’
Dave, 45, who has run 42 marathons, will wear top hat, tails…and shorts.
He joked: ‘I would rather just do the run — but I'm told I've got to go through with the ceremony as well.’
Youth, the jury
A SUMMONS for Old Bailey jury service has been sent to nine-year-old Justin Peters, of Dalston, East London.
Wetaway car!
ARMED robber Ed Rose, 55, was nicked in Sacramento, California, after his getaway driver took their motor to…a car wash.
Cluedo girl's lover suicide
THE lover of murder victim Asha Bostan killed himself in Japan in 1985, it was revealed yesterday.
A family hooked on the board game Cluedo found Asha'a body in Somerset last week, 14 years after she vanished.
KILLED: Asha
CRIME?
JUST BLAME IT ON THE OZONE
ROGER TODD
BRITAIN'S crime wave is being blamed on…global warming.
The hole in the ozone layer could be one answer to soaring crime, according to a new study.
Home Office researcher Simon Field studied 40 years of statistics and found that when the temperature rose a few degrees Celsius above normal:
VIOLENCE and SEX crimes increased by up to 3.6 per cent, BURGLARY rose by up to 2.8 per cent and CRIMINAL DAMAGE by up to 3.3 per cent .
But crime experts said unemployment and poverty were the obvious causes — and they dismissed the ozone theory as a load of hot air.
Professor Donald West, of the Cambridge Institute of Criminology, said: ‘It's ridiculous.’
I HATE YOU, BABE
Cher snubs Sonny's bid to end the feud
Peacemaker daughter is left sobbing
ROCK star Cher came face to face with ex-husband Sonny for the first time in five years…and loathed it.
There was no happy return to the Hippy days when they teamed up for the Sixties hit I Got You Babe.
Hopes of renewed love and peace soon went up in smoke.
Cher, 46, stuck her nose in the air, brushed past her ex-husband and said:
‘We are not friends.
We are not talking.
We have nothing to say to each other.’
The actress-singer was guest of honour at the opening of a new restaurant owned by Sonny Bono's daughter Christy.
Childish
Poor Christy, who was hoping for a reconciliation, was left sobbing on her father's shoulder.
Sonny, 56, said: ‘Cher is just being childish and immature.
‘I can't believe she is still behaving like this after all these years.’
Christy, 34, Sonny's daughter from his first marriage, invited her superstar stepmum to launch her Mexican restaurant in Santa Monica, Los Angeles.
Cher ignored Sonny's attempt to apologise for their years of bickering.
Sonny, who is mayor of Palm Springs in California, said:
‘I shouted out to her but she walked past without even looking.
‘I think you could consider that a brush off.’
The battling couple have frequently traded insults in books and through magazine interviews.
Sonny said: ‘She has to quit living in the past.’
But Cher had slipped away to the back of the restaurant.
She denied that she was planning to marry 26-year-old barman Rob Camiletti.
Cher said: ‘I am not engaged, I am not married and I am not pregnant.
‘And I am not talking to him in the other room.’
SUPERSTAR MUM: Cher and Christy get together at the restaurant opening
PROUD DAD: Christy with mayor Sonny
CHART STARS
Ice dollies
ICE lollies of sex symbols such as Madonna may soon be possible thanks to new technology, say Strathclyde university researchers.
Barry's a human bean -official
A MAN who thinks he's a baked bean got a passport yesterday showing that he IS.
Barry Kirk, 42, wears an orange jumpsuit and cape and paints his bald head orange.
He eats baked beans each day and takes baths in the tinned food.
After changing his name by deed poll to Captain Beany he needed a renewed passport to match his new identity.
And when he produced a photo of himself — completely orange — it was accepted by passport office staff at Newport, Gwent.
Likeness
‘At last I can travel abroad under my real identity,’ beamed Beany, of Port Talbot.
‘It was terrible having to be seen as a human being when all I wanted to do was be a bean.’
Passport official Malcolm Taylor said: ‘We were happy to deal with Captain Beany's request.
‘Even though his head was orange in the photo we were satisfied it was a good likeness.’
Mr Taylor added: ‘We did warn him there may be problems at frontier controls.’
Madcap bachelor Barry has raised thousands of pounds for charity with stunts as Captain Beany.
Stuck in jam
TWELVE vehicles got stuck in melting tar on the M1 in Northants yesterday — causing a 14mile tailback.
‘BOOTED OUT FOR BEING WHITE’
A RACE relations chief was sacked because he was white, an industrial tribunal heard yesterday.
John Onyett claimed that a boss told him: ‘I am sorry you were appointed because you are not black.’
And he said that one of his part-time staff secretly alleged that he discriminated against her.
Mr Onyett, 54, from Leeds, accuses North Yorkshire Racial Equality Council of discrimination against him.
The council denies the charge.
The Leeds tribunal heard that Mr Onyett had spent 25 years working with ethnic minorities.
Complaints
He was appointed director of the council when it was set up last year.
His York office had two part-time workers, one white and the other Malaysian-born Malar Ware.
He later warned the council's executive committee chairman Erica Wheeler that Mrs Ware's work was below par.
Mr Onyett said: ‘Marla Ware then started to produce a series of complaints against me, and my relationship with Erica Wheeler started to deteriorate.
‘Marla Ware and the chairman were friends.’
The hearing was adjourned.
Shelldorado prawn a hit
SEAFOOD fans are queueing to buy the Eldorado prawn.
Suppliers at Evesham, Worcs say it's ‘vile, rubbery and tasteless’.
Brits flee ram-jeep
BRITISH tourists fled yesterday when a gunman rammed his jeep into Australia's Parliament House at Canberra.
Retired teacher Clifton Moss, 68, smashed through three sets of doors after driving 700 miles.
NANNY ‘THREW BABY AT MUM’
FURIOUS nanny Sheila Beeson threw an eight-week-old boy at his mother shouting ‘Keep your damned baby’, an Old Bailey jury was told yesterday.
Solicitor Anita Longcroft said: ‘He flew through the air.
I instinctively put up my arms and caught him.’
The baby was unhurt in the upstairs-downstairs bust-up at wealthy Mrs Longcroft's London home.
Beeson, a 29-year-old state registered nurse from Southampton, denies cruelty.
The trial continues.
ACCUSED: Beeson
Slime gents, please!
REGULARS at a country pub hold their annual SLUG show this weekend.
Around 200 entrants will slug it out to find who has produced the champion slimy pest at the Dipton Mill Inn, Hexham, Northumberland.
A TOT was fighting for his life last night after a 999 ambulance went through a red light and smashed into his gran's car.
Six-month-old Daniel Flannery, who was on his 23-year-old mum Valerie's lap, has massive head injuries in Oxford.
OP ON YOUR BIKE, SONNY
LITTLE Thomas Hutchinson is wheeling his way to…an operating theatre.
With a helping hand from Sister Jacqui Littlewood, he sets off on a ‘police’ trolley bike for a minor op.
The battery-powered machine is just what doctors ordered to sooth youngsters' pre-op jitters.
South Yorkshire police donated them to Sheffield Children's Hospital — and they are working wonders.
A spokesman said: ‘Obviously the bikes can only be used by those fit enough.
Being wheeled to the theatre on a trolley can be daunting for some children, causing anxiety and stress.
But by telling them to take themselves on the bikes it keeps them occupied.’
Pony and trap
PONY-owners in Hampshire's New Forest have launched a Neighbourhood Watch-style campaign in a bid to ward off horse-thieves.
Guy's man is charged
A FORMER administrator at Guy's Hospital was last night charged with deception.
Roy Grimshaw, 43, allegedly conned his way into the job using false references.
He will appear before Tower Bridge magistrates on September 2.
THIS LOGO'S SEXIST RACIST AND LOOKS JUST LIKE TWO FINGERS!
So council pays out £200,000 to get rid of it
COUNCIL chiefs are to spend more than £200,000 to find a new logo…after their current red, white and blue emblem was branded aggressive, sexist and racist.
The burghers of Birmingham also reckon the chevron-shaped symbol looks like a two-finger salute.
They say its colour scheme conjures up thoughts of Union Jacks, bovver boys and patriotism.
And they are ready to spend a packet to find a more ‘people-friendly’ symbol.
A spokeswoman for the Labour-run council said yesterday: ‘This British flag image isn't one we want to project because we're a multi-racial city.
‘We have a large proportion of ethnic minority citizens.
We do not want to offend them.’
The symbol swap will involve a £200,000 operation to launch an international design competition.
More money will be spent changing the council's stationery, signposts and vehicle fleet.
Tory councillor Alan Blumenthal commented: ‘By spending all this money they are sticking the two-fingered salute up at their taxpayers.’
The chevron logo was introduced in 1985.
It was voted a flop by media consultant Vincent Hanna — presenter of Channel 4's A Week In Politics — who was brought in to revamp the city's publicity machine.
TOO OFFENSIVE: The Birmingham symbol
CRITIC: Hanna
Tania's looking cheeky
WE'RE used to Tania Bryer facing the camera, so here's a rear view of the TV-am weathergirl.
And doesn't she look cheeky in those figure-hugging pants.
The breakfast favourite displayed fine form at the London launch of Sky TV's Premier League football coverage.
Tania's career has never looked back…until now.
Picture: ALAN GRISBROOK
I'VE BEEN PLAYING AWAY FROM HOME
Soccer boss confesses
SOCCER boss Ken Bates last night confessed he is having an affair with a woman football writer.
And the flamboyant Chelsea chairman announced that his 11-year marriage to wife Pam is over.
Father-of-five Bates, 61, said he was having an ‘ongoing relationship’ with glamorous 42-year-old Suzannah Dwyer.
She is a mother of two who writes for the official Football Association magazine 90 Minutes.
Bearded Bates — a close friend of cheating Fun Minister and Chelsea fan David Mellor — dropped the bombshell to sports reporters after calling a press conference.
The newsmen thought he was going to talk about the club's prospects for the new soccer season.
But reading from a prepared statement in a shaky voice, he said:
My wife Pam has been for some time aware that I have been having an on-going relationship with Suzannah, who I believe is known to some of you.
Although Pam and I have lost something, we will remain good friends and companions.
The announcement came hours after Bates and ash blonde Suzannah, of Harrow, North London, lunched at La Famiglia restaurant in Chelsea's Kings Road.
The haunt was a favourite of Mr Mellor and his former mistress, soft-porn actress Antonia de Sancha.
There had been gossip about Bates and Suzannah, who has also written in The Guardian and Chelsea match programmes.
And it is thought the boss did a ‘Paddy Ashdown’ by coming clean before the affair was revealed in a newspaper.
He began his statement by announcing that Chelsea's Stamford Bridge ground, which had been threatened with closure, was safe.
But he added: ‘However, there has been a heavy price to pay and the continual publicity has been particularly hard on my wife Pam, whose fierce and unswerving support has been a very significant factor in the outcome.
‘The consequence has been that for some time, by mutual agreement, we have led more separate lives.’
Pam is Bates's second wife.
Their romance also began as an affair.
Last night Pam was at the couple's luxurious farmhouse home near Beaconsfield, Bucks.
She said she had ‘nothing to add’ to her husband's statement.
A man who said he was the manager of the Bates' 270-acre spread later blocked the track leading to the farmhouse with his Rover car.
An ex-boyfriend of Suzannah said: ‘She has a quiet, gentle personality and there was some surprise she would go for someone like Bates.’
The former love, who did not want his name revealed, said Suzannah had two grown-up sons.
HAVING A BALL White-bearded Ken Bates at a dance with wife Pam before the marriage rift
Unpaid tax nightmare
A NIGHTMARE looms for councils next year as they switch to the new council tax while still struggling to recover millions in unpaid poll tax.
Almost four million people in England and Wales were summonsed in the first half of this year for failing to pay.
Many then settled up, but 2.6 million defaulted.
WE WARNED OF FERRY FUMES 3 WEEKS AGO
Family ‘almost died’
FRANK CORLESS
A FAMILY told yesterday how they were almost overcome by fumes on killer ferry Celtic Pride THREE WEEKS ago.
Martin Appleby and his wife Harriet said they warned a ship's officer about the danger.
And the ferry bosses admitted they had received complaints ‘from time to time’— in writing and verbally.
The shock revelations followed the deaths of Catherine Tomlins, 15, and her brother James, 12.
The children were found dead in their cabin when the ferry docked in Cork on Wednesday after a stormy Irish Sea crossing from Swansea.
Experts believe the absence of water in the toilet allowed a lethal build-up of methane gas.
Mr and Mrs Appleby and their two children, from Wakefield, Yorks, fled from their adjoining cabins because of the foul stench.
Mr Appleby said he complained to a senior officer who made a note in the ship's log.
He said: ‘I just want to make sure they don't whitewash what happened to the Tomlins’ children.’
Cleared
Mr Appleby said he was told that one problem was that the crew didn't have time to clear the ferry properly because of the tight turnaround schedule en route.
Merchant navy sailor Derrick Channon, 51, from Plymouth, said he raised the alarm four weeks ago on the same deck.
He said: ‘I've never known anything like it in 15 years at sea.’
Another former passenger Geoff Lewis, of Milton Keynes, Bucks, said he was sickened by the smell last October.
Grieving father Garry Tomlins said at his Cork home that he could not accept that his children's deaths were a ‘freak, million-to-one’ accident.
He said: ‘The crew must have realised something was wrong.
‘Surely someone should have checked out the complaints more carefully.’
Marine investigators gave the Celtic Pride the all-clear to sail again yesterday after a preliminary probe.
A spokeswoman for Swansea-Cork Ferries said previous complaints had always been fully investigated.
AGONY: Page 1 yesterday
IT'S MISS THUGGY
STEWART DICKSON
THE widow of Muppet creator Jim Henson made the volatile Miss Piggy look like a pussycat when she ran into a pair of puppets at the centre of a legal battle, it was claimed yesterday.
Jane Henson turned into Miss THUGGY when she spotted Wilkins and Wontkins, two Muppet-style characters caught up in a copyright row, at a toy trade fair in the New York Hilton.
John Brady, whose company claims it owns licensing rights to the creatures, said: ‘Henson walked past our exhibit with some heavy-set gentlemen.
‘Then she came back and devastated it.
She knocked down walls and when a young woman asked her to stop, she reached back and slugged her.’
The Muppet war erupted after Jim Henson Productions, which has no official connection with Jane, filed a copyright infringement suit.
Brady — who says Wilkins looks similar to Henson's famous frog Kermit and Wontkins like a Polish ham with Muppet eyes — claims Jim Henson sold the rights in 1958.
MUPPET: Miss Piggy
WIDOW: Jane Henson
Kart-breaking
A GO-KART bought to keep kids out of trouble has been stolen from a youth centre in Cardiff after just a week.
TIP-OFF FOILS IRA BOMBERS
FRANK THORNE /MARTIN PHILLIPS
A SUSPICIOUS car dealer foiled a Provisional IRA plot to plant the biggest bomb ever in London.
The trader sold a Transit van to an Irishman for cash — and then contacted police.
The newly combined forces of MI5, Special Branch and Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist branch swung into action.
They followed the Irishman and other suspects for weeks and launched a series of dramatic raids only when they feared bombs were about to be planted.
Two vans were seized and at least five people arrested.
Weapons and ammunition were found — and stunned officers discovered up to two tons of crude, fertiliser-based explosives, frequently used in Ulster, and a small amount of Semtex.
They said there were sufficient explosives to build a bomb half as big again as the one which devastated the Baltic Exchange in the City of London on April 10, the day after the General Election.
That bomb, made from fertiliser chemicals detonated by a small quantity of Semtex, killed three people and injured 100.
Dragnet
No ready-to-use bombs were found in the raids.
And intelligence sources last night denied early reports that one van had slipped through their dragnet.
Security chiefs are confident that they foiled a summer bombing blitz on London.
Commander George Churchill-Coleman, head of Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist branch, praised the dealer's vigilance.
He urged everyone to report suspicious behaviour.
The police operation is believed to have begun more than five weeks ago
The terror suspects were tailed around the clock by surveillance teams of about a dozen officers each.
One Irishman was arrested in Cheshunt, Herts, and two Irishmen held at a house in Hanwell, West London, early on Wednesday.
Two Irish sisters were arrested at a rented house in Southall, West London.
All five were being held last night under the Prevention of Terrorism Act at top-security Paddington Green police station in London.
It is believed they are being questioned about the Baltic Exchange bomb, the explosion the same day at the Staples Corner motorway junction in North London and other offences.
TERROR BLITZ Devastation at the Baltic Exchange after the IRA bomb blast in April.
Three died.
BOSS: Churchill-Coleman
Pryor beats docs
AILING comic Richard Pryor is making a comeback — defying doctors who said he was finished.
Pryor, who has multiple sclerosis and underwent heart surgery, jumped on stage while in the audience at a TV comedy special in Los Angeles.
BACK: Pryor
‘Innocent’ killer Brit walks free
BRITON Karl Maxwell-Smith, jailed for 100 years for the murder of his Thai wife, was freed yesterday.
The 63-year-old sales engineer from Ashford, Kent, has served five years in the notorious Bankwang jail — dubbed the Bangkok Hilton.
He has always maintained his innocence, claiming his wife's 100ft fall from the balcony of their Bangkok flat was an accident.
And he sold all his possessions to finance appeals against his conviction.
But they all failed.
Maxwell-Smith was among 25,000 prisoners who were granted an amnesty on the birthday of Queen Sirikit of Thailand.
Teacher's shot dead
A PRIMARY school teacher was shot dead in front of a class by her estranged husband yesterday.
The 47-year-old is being hunted by police after fleeing Dorum, Germany.
PM's lad shelves hols for Tesco
DAVID LEIGH
PREMIER John Major's son James has landed a job — packing shelves for Tesco.
Student James, 17, gave the family holiday in Spain a miss to take a summer job near home in Huntingdon, Cambridgeshire.
James — who passed all eight of his GCSE exams — is currently studying for three A-levels.
His earnings will fall well short of his dad's.
Even if he worked a 40hour week, his £3-an-hour wages would only add up to £6,240 a year.
Dad picks up £76,324 for running the country.
The Tesco chain is largely owned by Dame Shirley Porter, former Tory leader of Westminster City Council.
One fellow worker said: ‘He's working very hard and getting on with things happily enough.’
BUSY: James
Creepy crisper
EXPERTS are trying to identify a baby snake which popped out of the toaster in Shelley Marshall's flat at Hove, Sussex, on her 24th birthday.
Helen murder: Man arrested
A MAN has been arrested over the murder of teenager Helen Gorrie.
The man, from Helen's home town Horndean, near Portsmouth, was taken for questioning on Wednesday but police only released news of his arrest yesterday.
Helen, 15, was strangled and sexually assaulted after ‘popping out’ for five minutes.
Fugitive ‘lost’ in river drama
A SUSPECTED caravan thief was feared drowned last night after diving into a raging river to escape police.
He and another man abandoned the caravan and plunged into the 15ft River Ouse in Selby, Yorks, when they spotted police chasing them.
The other man was rescued after an officer held out his truncheon and pulled him ashore.
K-REG SALES SLUMP
SALES of K-reg cars in the first 10 days of August were a big disappointment, it was revealed yesterday.
Sales totalled only 223,283 compared with 227,437 last year — a fall of 1.8 per cent.
‘If you were looking for a real boost to the industry then these first 10 days should have been much better,’ said a City analyst.
The best-selling cars, in order, were Ford Escort, Ford Fiesta, Vauxhall Astra, Vauxhall Cavalier and Ford Sierra.
Vauxhall said their dealers were ‘quite optimistic’ despite the 10-day figures.
THE Olympic gold won by cyclist Chris Boardman on the revolutionary new Lotus superbike has boosted the firm's car sales.
All 16 K-reg Esprit two-seater sports cars have been snapped up.
BEST SELLER: Ford Escort
GREAT GRANNY, 75, DOES A LINFORD TO SEE OFF BURGLARS
One-time track star sprints into race against crime
SYDNEY YOUNG
SPEEDY great gran Iris Blackwell gave two burglars a run for their money — at the age of 75.
The ex-running champ sprinted like her idol Linford Christie to try to catch them after they raided her home.
‘I ran after them like a demon and I'd do it again,’ Iris said yesterday.
The plucky pensioner returned to her flat from shopping to find the two teenagers rifling through her bedroom.
One of them hurled her on to the bed and snarled for her to shut up.
But Iris sprang up, hit him and shouted: ‘Get lost, you thieving swine.’
The raiders fled empty-handed and Iris — who hasn't competed in a race for 57 years — chased after them for more than half a mile.
She said: ‘I hit one of them over the head in the bedroom and then I got going.
I was scared of them but I wasn't going to let them get away so I gave them a good run for their money.
‘I used to be good at running, trained three times a week and I was always competing.
‘But the last time I ran was when I was 18.
I'm very unfit and my heart nearly jumped out of my skin.’
Iris, who cheered Linford on to win a gold medal in the Olympics, had a warning for the burglars.
Galloping
She said: ‘I'm disappointed I didn't catch them but if it happens again I'll get ‘em.’
The galloping granny, from Bristol, used to run the 800 yards and 4 x 400 relay for the Imperial Tobacco company where she worked on the shop floor.
Iris said: ‘I was glued to the telly when the Olympics were on.
I loved watching Linford — he did so well for Britain.’
A police spokeswoman said: ‘Coming home to find someone has broken in is most people's worst nightmare.
‘The fact she ran after the thieves shows how brave she is and how cowardly they are.’
SHE'S OFF!
Brave Iris chased thugs and said: ‘I'd do same again.’
Murder of party girl, 18
A TEENAGE girl was strangled after she left a family christening party early to watch TV, police revealed yesterday.
Ferzana Kauser, 18, was found with a ligature round her neck by her older sister Zatun at the house they shared in Bradford, West Yorks.
The party had been held in nearby Lidget Green to celebrate the christening of Zatun's three-week-old baby.
As police launched a murder hunt, relative Mohammed Riaz said the family was ‘devastated.’
He added: ‘Ferzana wanted to watch TV and couldn't do it at the family gathering.’
Envoy in spy drama
AN ENVOY believed to be a Russian double-spy is in hiding in Britain.
Viktor Oshchenko, a Russian diplomat in Paris who defected to the West, has refused to see officials from his country's London embassy.
FOR MY NEXT TRICK
IT'S the sort of thing you're called on to do all the time.
You know, wash a car with one hand and feed a bottle to a tiger cub with the other.
Still, TV girl Michaela Strachan proves she can do it.
She joined cub Melody for a charity car wash at West Midlands Safari Park, Bewdley.
It was a roaring success.
Girl, 16, raped by gang
A TEENAGE girl was kidnapped and raped by a gang while police hunted for her.
A passer-by told officers he saw the 16-year-old bundled into a car as she went to the shops.
She was driven several miles to a secluded country spot and assaulted for an hour.
The girl was dumped back in Newport, Gwent, and staggered into a house for help.
Four youths were being held last night.
Fears over shrub drug
DOCTORS warned yesterday about a new drug craze sweeping France.
Several teenagers have died after smoking or drinking the leaves or seeds of the datura shrub, found in woodland.
Buck to future
AN American has paid £3,000 to appear in the next Michael J. Fox movie for just five seconds.
Her cash will go to a charity.
Slump-hit chiefs dig into their pockets
BOSSES TAKE PAY CUT TO GIVE WORKERS A RISE!
‘We can afford to earn less’
SYDNEY YOUNG
THREE directors of a recession-hit company slashed £30,000 off their own wages — to give their loyal staff a pay increase.
Bosses Richard Bryan, Colin Stone and Brian Nathan couldn't afford to give their 141 workers a rise after their tool hire firm made a £291,000 pre-tax loss.
So the generous trio decided to dig deep into their own pockets to give the staff a four per cent boost.
Each boss took a £10,000 cut bringing their wages down to £58,000.
‘We simply wanted to give them a pay rise for trying their best,’ said company chairman Brian.
Delighted ‘We know what it's like to fall on hard times.
I think more company directors could consider this.’
The three former school chums founded the Brandon Hire tool company in Bristol in 1971.
Finance director Colin Stone, 44, said: ‘We can remember what it's like to have nothing.
We can afford to take a pay cut.’
Delighted workers said they were ‘the nicest bosses possible to work for’.
Area technical maintenance manager Pete Wootton, 32, revealed that the wage drop was just the latest generous gesture in a long line of good turns.
‘One of the bosses lent me his Jaguar Sovereign XJ6 for a week when my car broke down,’ said Pete.
‘And he lent me his boat for a family outing.
‘They're not snooty and they take us down the pub for a drink if we've done a good job.’
The Institute of Directors also welcomed the bosses' move.
Spokesman Andrew Hutchinson said: ‘It is a good principle of leadership.
They should be applauded.’
HATS OFF Delighted workers cheer pay cut boss Richard
Baker to aid Bush
PRESIDENT
George Bush yesterday drafted in Secretary of State James Baker to bolster his flagging bid for re-election.
Bush persuaded him to resign the top foreign policy post and become White House chief of staff, in charge of the campaign.
Baker, 62, said his decision was ‘one of the most difficult of my life’.
NEW JOB: Baker
CHELSEA LOVE CHEATS
Mellor and Bates…the fans who scored away
MARTIN PHILLIPS
THEY were playing at home at Stamford Bridge.
But two men in the Chelsea directors' box were soon to show that they enjoy the away game just as much.
Oh, and they share a passion for football, too.
Club chairman Ken Bates sits alongside his wife Pam.
He was all set to take an early bath from his marriage to have an affair with soccer writer Suzannah Dwyer.
Behind them is David Mellor, soon to be appointed Minister for Fun — and later to be dubbed Figure of Fun for his fling with actress Antonia de Sancha.
The whistle was blown on Chelsea fan Mellor's game.
And HE was the one to cry foul.
Bates, however, decided yesterday to play fair and own up about his mistress.
Ambition
It was in keeping with his image as one of the most flamboyant figures in football.
He has always gone through life doing things very much his way, courting controversy as he did so.
The 61-year-old son of a haulage contractor, Ken's first love was football and his ambition as a schoolboy at Ealing County Grammar School was to be a professional player.
Injury wrecked his plans but with the cash his haulage business brought him he became chairman of Oldham Athletic in his early thirties, then moved on to Wigan.
On Easter Saturday 1982 he made his most famous deal, picking up troubled Chelsea Football Club when it was in danger of closure — for £1.
He faced up to the notorious Chelsea Boot Boys with an electrified fence but was refused permission to switch it on.
Last month he announced he had won his eight-year battle to save Stamford Bridge from property developers.
Away from the cut and thrust of soccer management, Bates knew how to keep second wife Pam in her place.
She revealed: ‘He likes me to be in, no matter what time he is home, with a nice glass of wine waiting and the fire lit.
‘I don't make phone calls in the evening.
I sit and talk to him.
‘Sunday's are sacrosanct.
We don't go anywhere.’
Bates played along with it.
‘It's a family joke I cannot get dressed if she has forgotten to put out my underpants,’ he said.
But when he was once asked what was the most dangerous thing he had ever done he said: ‘Disagreed with my wife.’
AWAY MATCH: Fun fan Mellor's mistress Antonia
WAIT FOR THE FINAL WHISTLE: Silver-bearded Ken Bates sits with wife Pam in the Chelsea stands.
Behind them, David Mellor (circled) enjoys the match
WE SHAMED BOY BANDITS
BILL AKASS
THREE boy bandits were filled with shame when they saw pictures of their bungled wages snatch in the Daily Mirror, a court heard yesterday.
The 17-year-olds were met by armed police and our photographer Ken Lennox when they tried to grab £8,000 outside a credit firm.
We featured dramatic pictures of two of the masked boys pulling a replica gun on our front and centre pages.
And yesterday their lawyer told the Old Bailey: ‘It brought home to them the serious nature of what they had done.’
Help
Aaron Hayes, Daniel Williams and John Hughes were jailed for 15 months for conspiracy to rob and possessing an imitation firearm.
Judge Michael Coombe said he had taken into account that they turned to crime because of the slump.
They came from broken homes and were desperate to help struggling mums.
Hayes, who drew a knife during the raid bid in Lewisham, South London, had nine O-levels.
But he was forced to quit college to find work.
THE PHOTO HAUNTING ASHDOWN
THIS picture of a pitiful victim of the Serbs' terror camps was taken by Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown.
But the cancer victim insisted he was well treated.
He told Mr Ashdown: ‘We are being fed — not beaten.’
Describing his photograph, Mr Ashdown said: ‘He is one in a row of 150, crammed six rows to a cattle shed in the baking Bosnian heat.
‘He was an economist but he is now just a weak figure in a row which includes doctors, farmers, plumbers and painters — all equal in their misery.’
Mr Ashdown said UN troops should be sent to guard food convoys.
And he urged Prime Minister John Major to ensure Britain played its full part.
TOUR: Paddy
CARMEN'S REGRET
A NEIGHBOUR wept yesterday as she told how she refused to look after baby Farrah.
Childminder Carmen Azzopardi sobbed: ‘I can never forgive myself.
I won't ever forget it.
‘This is something which will haunt me for the rest of my life.
‘If I had only said ‘Yes’ then Farrah would today be home with her mum where she belongs.’
Bernadette Quli asked Carmen, who lives opposite her, to look after Farrah so she could return to work.
But Carmen, 40, turned her down because she felt she already had too many children on her books.
Carmen said: ‘Bernadette and her baby are both so beautiful.
‘But I was worried about taking on a baby so young.
I already have a lot of children to care for.’
TEARS: Carmen
DESPAIR IS THE KEY TO CRIMES
JO BECKERLEY
WOMEN who snatch babies are extremely cunning and disturbed.
They have usually planned their kidnap to the very last detail.
And their desperation to become a ‘mother’ makes them tough to find.
Police psychologist Barrie Irving said yesterday: ‘The women go to great lengths to cover their tracks well in advance.
‘They will tell neighbours they are pregnant and even visit doctors with fake symptoms.
‘They find accommodation where they set up a nursery, then sit back and wait for the right opportunity to arise.
‘Then they happily assume the role of motherhood and start to live out their fantasy.’
Dr Irving said a snatcher's emotional crisis could stem from infertility, the loss of a baby or a craving to be loved.
He put baby Farrah's kidnapper in the ‘caring, manipulative mould’.
YESTERDAY'S snatch brought back nightmare memories for Dawn Griffiths.
Her daughter Alexandra was just 36 hours old when she was taken from St Thomas's Hospital, London, in January 1990.
A woman posing as a social worker walked off with her and it was 15 days before Alex was found safe at a house in Burford, Oxon.
Dawn, 24, said at home in Middlesbrough: ‘It broke me up when I learned about Bernadette's baby.
‘I just sat and cried my eyes out.
‘I would ask the woman who has got Farrah to search her heart and think about the anguish she is causing the mother.
‘She must be sensible and give the baby back safely where she belongs.’
REUNITED: Dawn Griffiths with Alex
MY LOVER KEN'S GREAT PASSION
Bates mistress tells all in soccer magazine
Football, that is
BILL AKASS
THE mistress of two-timing soccer boss Ken Bates has revealed all about her lover's ‘great passion’— for football.
Yesterday it was also disclosed that glamorous Suzannah Dwyer told her devastated husband of her romance 24 hours before Bates went public with the news at a press conference.
She has now left home and is in hiding.
The 42-year-old sports writer interviewed the Chelsea boss six weeks ago when their blossoming affair was still a secret.
Her three-page article is published in this month's Goalmouth magazine.
In it, Suzannah talks of the Bates's ‘mischievous humour,’ his ‘personal touch’with fans, his ‘calmness under pressure’and his ‘passion’for the game.
She writes: ‘To meet him is to confront the unexpected, and a brain that operates so quickly you need to engage your own grey matter at the gallop.’
Suzannah's article gives the impression she has rarely, if ever, met 62-year-old Bates before.
Marriage
She refers to pictures of his family hanging on his office wall.
Goalmouth editor John Jackson said: ‘We asked Suzannah to do a piece on Bates.
But I had no idea of any relationship.
‘It was a complete coincidence.’
Suzannah — who has two sons John, 21, and Steven, 23 — returned to her home in Ruislip, Middlesex, on Thursday evening.
She collected an overnight bag and left.
An hour later, father of five Bates revealed his 11-year marriage to his wife Pam was over.
A friend who spoke to Suzannah on the phone said: ‘She sounded very nervous.
She said she was going away.’
A neighbour said: ‘Suzannah is about six foot tall and very attractive.
She is slim with blonde hair and looks like a catwalk model.’
Another neighbour said: ‘They seemed a really happy family.’
Yesterday Suzannah's husband, building surveyor Peter Marshall, refused to comment.
Meanwhile, Bates was turning his 270-acre Grange Farm, Bucks, into a fortress to keep newsmen at bay.
A gang of workmen put a fence up across the private lane leading to the house in Beaconsfield.
AFFAIR: Bates
Inflation rate no help for jobless
JOHN HUSBAND
ANOTHER drop in the inflation rate was cold comfort yesterday for the 2.74 million jobless.
It fell in July from 3.9 to 3.7 per cent— the lowest level for four years.
But it follows 27 consecutive months of rising unemployment and record business failures.
Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown said Britain still had higher inflation than Germany, Japan, France and the US.
Desperate
The country had also suffered a longer and worse slump than its competitors.
Last month's inflation fall — the biggest since 1967 — was the result of desperate summer sales by hard-pressed shops.
They slashed record sums from prices of clothes and shoes.
The Treasury said beating inflation was the best possible basis for economic recovery.
In the City, shares rose sharply after the better-than-expected figure.
Bowbelle sold
THE Bowbelle dredger which collided with the Marchioness Thames cruiser killing 51 has been sold to Brazil.
TRAGIC FERRY GIRL'S PROMISE
FRANK GILBRIDE
MOURNERS wept uncontrollably yesterday when they learned of the vow ferry victim Catherine Tomlins had made about her brother James who died with her.
In a secret notebook, the 15-year-old girl wrote of the mischievous 12-year-old: ‘I must love James more.’
The poignant vow was read out at the funeral service for the two children who died this week after being overcome by fumes in their cabin aboard the ferry Celtic Pride.
Five hundred mourners attended the service at the Sacred Heart Church in their home village of Glounthaune, Co Cork.
Hugged
Then the coffins, each carrying a single yellow rose, were driven five miles to the cemetery at Killcully.
At the graveside their parents, Garry and Maeve, held each other tightly and whispered ‘I love you’ to each coffin as it was lowered into the ground.
Then Maeve hugged their surviving son, five-year-old John, and Garry gave him three loving kisses.
John survived only because he could not settle in the cabin with his brother and sister.
His parents took him into their cabin.
As the children were buried, it was revealed the ferry is to be taken out of service — but not yet.
It will continue to sail between Swansea and Cork until Tuesday to fulfil bookings.
Inquiry
Work to improve the ship's sewerage system will then start in Swansea and go on until Friday.
The Irish shadow justice Minister Alan Shatter demanded an inquiry yesterday to see if charges of criminal manslaughter should be brought.
Demands for a British inquiry were rejected yesterday by the Transport Department.
GRIEF: Parents Maeve and Garry Tomlins hug son John Picture: BILL ROWNTREE
VICTIM: Catherine, 15
VICTIM: James, 12
PET SHOP BOSS NABS DRINK DRIVER CALLED McKITTEN
Citizen's arrest
DRUNK driver Gary McKitten had his collar felt by an angry pet shop boss.
Peter Beard chased and arrested McKitten after he was almost run off the road.
Mr Beard told magistrates: ‘I was so angry at this bloody menace.
‘I was afraid he would kill me, himself or someone else.’
McKitten, 26, overtook Mr Beard, forcing him to brake sharply, then drove for a mile on the wrong side of the road, the court at Chester-le-Street, Co Durham, heard.
Mr Beard, 42, later pulled in front of McKitten and blocked the road with his Fiat.
‘I put on my hazard lights and waved him to stop,’ said Mr Beard.
‘I told him I was making a citizen's arrest.
‘He could hardly stand.
I sat him down on the kerb and called police.’
McKitten, who was four times over the drink limit, was banned for three years and fined £350.
Mr Beard, of Northlands, Chester-le-Street, was commended for his public-spirited action.
Nanny is acquitted
A NANNY burst into tears yesterday as she was cleared of throwing a two-month-old boy at his mother in a fit of temper.
An Old Bailey jury that included nine women found Sheila Beeson, 29, not guilty of child cruelty.
Her counsel had accused little James Longcroft's parents, who live in Chelsea, London, of being ‘vindictive’.
Good little runner
A BABY ostrich called Linford after the Olympic flyer has become the first of his kind to be born in Britain outside a zoo.
He took 17 hours to hatch at an ostrich farm at Weeton, Lancs — egged on by ranger Philip Bowness, who used an African trick of whistling to encourage him.
Sally's sex life's gone for Burton
ACTOR Richard Burton's lonely widow Sally is desperate for a man…to give her ‘lots of sex and phone calls’.
Sally, 44, was left more than £3 million when her firebrand husband died eight years ago.
But despite almost doubling that fortune she can't find another Mr Right.
Sally told Woman's Journal: ‘I have an uncanny ability to pick the wrong man.
I've been single again for eight long years.’
SALLY: All alone
Nun murdered
A BRITISH nun, Sister Germaine-Marie Hussand, 58, has been found murdered with a French colleague at their home in Cameroon, Africa.
BUS MAN KILLED BY A CLIPPIE
A PASSENGER died from appalling injuries after he was beaten up by a woman bus conductor, it was revealed yesterday.
First she hurled insults about Dong Huibo's bottom as he sat on her Shanghai bus, then she attacked him.
When Dong, 24, leapt from the window to escape, the driver, also a woman, slammed her foot on the accelerator and sent him flying.
GIVE ME THE LOOT…
THIS IS A BOTCH-UP
A BUNGLING bandit botched three hold-ups in an hour — and ended up £200 worse off than when he started.
In RAID No 1 the hapless robber threatened Lloyd's Bank staff in Sunderland, Tyne and Wear, with a plastic water pistol.
But they refused to budge and he legged it.
RAID No 2 on the nearby North of England Building Society ended when staff shouted at him to go away.
RAID No 3 on a North of England Building Society in Spennymoor, Durham, finally went right and the raider nabbed £215.
But as he made his getaway, shoppers wrestled him to the ground forcing him to drop the stolen loot — along with £200 he had stashed in a pocket — and he fled empty-handed.
Sex life ruined by a horse
BUSINESSMAN Jeffrey Davies was awarded £60,000 damages yesterday after his sex life was ruined by a runaway horse.
Father-of-two Mr Davies, 38, from Gwent, saw his marriage crumble and businesses crash after the horse bolted into his Mercedes car.
The court heard that since the accident at St Mellons, near Cardiff, in 1989, Mr Davies was a nervous wreck and had been unable to have sex.
The damages will be paid by horse owner Mrs Pam Seward's insurance company.
Home draw
AN Iranian diplomat has been ordered to leave Britain in a tit-for-tat expulsion after British envoy Geoffrey Brammer was sent back from Tehran.
ARROGANT, POMPOUS, INFANTILE AND RUDE
What the Tory peer's sister-in-law thinks of him
He bangs his spoon when eating his egg
JAN DISLEY
TORY Chief Whip Lord Hesketh is a rude and pompous egomaniac…and that's just what his SISTER-IN-LAW thinks.
Jeanne Fermor-Hesketh came out with all guns blazing after a magazine paid tribute to the peer's ‘legendary charm’.
RUBBISH, she said in a letter.
In fact 41-year-old Hesketh was arrogant, self-important and given to ‘infantile tantrums and eye-popping rudeness’.
Mrs Fermor-Hesketh told The Spectator: ‘Quite possibly Lord Hesketh tones down his behaviour when in the company of those cleverer than himself.’
Or perhaps the deputy editor Simon Heffer — who penned the tribute — was confusing ‘legendary’ charm with ‘mythical’charm.
Mrs Fermor-Hesketh, 45, divorced the peer's brother, Robert, three years ago but still shares a home with him in Chelsea when she is not in Rome.
Last night she was unrepentant about her broadside at chubby Lord Hesketh, the Tory Chief Whip in the Lords.
She told reporters: ‘He is an egomaniac — no one would quibble with that.
‘He is an incredibly selfish man and his family has suffered because of it.’
Mrs Fermor-Hesketh said when she first met him she thought he was ‘dotty, loud and pompous but relatively harmless’.
Spoon
Now she says he is a ‘self-publicist and bully’ who surrounds himself with ‘court jesters and sycophants’in the Lords.
At home he was quite funny but ‘like a very large baby — he bangs his spoon when he's eating his boiled egg.’
She added: ‘He bawls his head off, he is not a grown man.’
The bow-tie wearing peer — a close friend of Lady Thatcher — was brought up by his American-born mother Kisty, who wears an eye-patch.
He has a 5,000-acre Northamptonshire estate and the family fortune allowed him to run a Formula One racing team.
Harold Brooke-Baker, of the top people's guide, Burke's Peerage, said the American side of the Hesketh family WAS ‘arrogant’ and ‘pompous’.
He added: ‘It's not unusual for Lord Hesketh to attract criticism.
I think he quite likes it.’
PRIVILEGED: Wealthy Lord Hesketh
CRITIC: Sister-in-law Jeanne with husband Robert
Magoo the heck's that
COCKNEY actor Bob Hoskins was last night tipped as the favourite to play grumpy cartoon character Mr Magoo in a new £27 million Steven Spielberg blockbuster film.
Warner Brothers has bought the rights to the animated Oscar winner.
FAVOURITE: Bob
TV JOCKEY IN RAPE SHOCKER
ALEC LOM
ACTRESS Audrey Jenkinson, who plays ambitious trainee jockey Mo in the BBC drama Trainer, last night told how filming a controversial rape scene left her a shaking wreck.
Fans of the £3.5 million series will see the attack next month.
Audrey, 24, said: ‘It was extremely frightening and upsetting to shoot.
Afterwards I was shaking with nerves.’
In the scene, Mo's dress is ripped by a drunken admirer.
Audrey said: ‘I talked to a lot of women jockeys to research my part and they told me men getting heavy with them is common in the racing world.’
SHAKEN: Audrey
Till dust us do part
EX-DUSTMAN Nick Johnson, 27, and his bride Jane Dennis, 26, travelled to their wedding reception in Middlesbrough, Cleveland — in a 10-ton bin wagon.
It was laid on as a surprise by Nick's colleagues at Norfolk county council.
He joked yesterday: ‘What a dirty trick!’
Centuries old
METAL detector fan Peter Laykin, 30, found an ancient brooch on the site of Durham County cricket club's new home in Chester-le-Street.
Showbiz lawyer accused
HOLLYWOOD lawyer Marvin Mitchelson, who made a fortune in showbiz divorces has money troubles of his own — with the taxman.
The US Internal Revenue Service is accusing him of lying about his accounts from 1983 to 1986.
He reported earnings of more than $1 million a year, but claimed massive expenses.
If he is found guilty, he faces up to 12 years in jail and a $1 million fine.
Michelson, who represented Mick Jagger's wife Bianca in her divorce, Bob Dylan's ex-wife Sarah and Rock Hudson's gay lover Marc Christian, denies the allegations.
He said: ‘I know the legal system works.
‘Since I know I am innocent, I am confident I will be exonerated.’
GIVE BACK DOG AND GET BMW
DESPERATE Diane Parkinson is offering her £12,000 BMW in return for her kids' pet dog.
Boxer pup Toby was snatched near her Blackpool home a fortnight ago.
Diane said: ‘We advertised for help, but all we got were hoax calls.
‘The offer of the car is our last hope.’
On the cheep
PHANTOM Radio, which plays country music, was launched by Sheffield schoolkids using chicken wire for an aerial.
Frozen out
THE RAF'S smallest station — at Jurby Head on the Isle of Man — is to be closed in July next year because the Cold War is over.
KING JUAN LEFT HIGH AND DRY
A SECURITY scare has scuppered plans by the King and Queen of Spain to visit a Tall Ships regatta today.
Royal bodyguards scrapped the tour in Liverpool because two million visitors are expected at Albert Dock.
King Juan Carlos and Queen Sofia, who last night joined Prince Andrew for an outdoor operatic New World concert in the city, were to have boarded some of the 100 vessels.
VISIT: Juan
IT'S A BOY!
NO, SORRY IT'S REALLY A GIRL…
Shock for mum
SAMUEL JAMES
PROUD mother Angela Thomas had a shock when she took her newborn baby son home and found the tot was a GIRL.
Angela, 20, was told by a midwife ‘It's a boy’ after giving birth in hospital.
She spent five hours cuddling the baby as relatives made phone calls to spread the happy news.
But when Angela arrived home and changed her baby's nappy all was revealed.
David Williams, manager of Singleton Hospital, Swansea, South Wales, yesterday blamed the gender mix-up on ‘a clerical error’.
But Angela, of Morriston, Swansea, said: ‘This sort of thing should not be allowed to happen in a modern hospital.
‘I had geared my mind after being told I'd had a son.
It took a long time to adjust after discovering the baby was a girl.’
Angela now has to choose a name for her 7lb 8oz daughter.
‘She was going to be Sean…but that was when she was a boy, if you know what I mean,’ she said.
FAREWELL SONG FOR POOL GIRL
FRANK CORLESS
THE heartbroken boy-friend of pretty Joanne Todd, who drowned in a swimming pool in Crete, said goodbye to her last night — with a song.
David Abdy, 18, had written to a radio station before the tragedy asking it to play  Madonna's ‘Crazy for You’ because he missed her.
Together
But last night he begged Newcastle upon Tyne's Metro FM to play instead ‘Now You're Gone’ by Whitesnake, the last song they had listened to together.
Joanne, 17, of Sunderland, lay dead at the bottom of the pool for 12 hours on Monday while people swam above her.
TEARS AS TESCO RIP UP TREES
GREEN demonstrators wept yesterday as trees were torn down to make way for a giant Tesco's.
Protestors had climbed lime trees in a desperate bid to stop them being destroyed.
But a crane uprooted four after cops hauled the climbers down and arrested one.
One  protester was taken to hospital with hypothermia.
Later Tesco pledged to replace the trees at Golden Hill, Bristol.
Paras face probe on shot PoWs
STEVE ATKINSON
AN official probe will be launched into allegations that British troops gunned down prisoners during the Falklands war.
Ex-Para Vincent Bramley describes the executions of Argentine PoWs and three captured US mercenaries in his book Excursion To Hell.
The Argentines were lined up on a cliff and their riddled bodies toppled into a mass grave below, he claims.
And he says British officers ordered the mercenaries to be shot to avoid embarrassing the US.
Prosecutions
Labour MP Tam Dalyell yesterday said: ‘The fact that these allegations are made in a book generally praising the conduct of British troops only adds to their seriousness.
‘Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind must make a clean breast of it.’
The Defence Ministry said yesterday's allegations in a Sunday paper serialisation of the book are being taken ‘very seriously indeed’.
An inquiry was ‘inevitable’ and prosecutions were not ruled out — even after ten years.
JOHN Major will be given a rough ride at the Tory conference in October over the Government's handling of the economy.
Delegates have submitted a number of critical motions.
HEAD SAVES REFUGEES
BILL DANIELS
A CRUSADING English headmaster has single-handedly rescued 11 terrified children from war-torn Yugoslavia.
Gerald Smith cut through red tape and bureaucracy to get the youngsters and nine adults out of a refugee camp in Slovenia.
Then he organised a coach to bring them to a new life in Britain.
Last night as the Yugoslavs camped out at St Peter's School in Northampton, Mr Smith, 52, said: ‘I believe these are the first refugees to come across as a group.
‘But I hope and pray they will be the first of many.’
Mr Smith launched the rescue after watching TV coverage of the atrocities in Sarajevo.
Then on Saturday he waited anxiously with the coach at an isolated spot on the Yugoslav-Austrian border.
Finally there was a harrowing 28-hour drive back to Britain — and a new life for the refugees.
Mr Smith said: ‘I cried when they turned up at the frontier.
‘Their lives had been hell and they were all very frightened.’
Azra Duric, 35, who fled with her two children, was forced to leave her husband behind.
But she said: ‘He will be happy we are no longer in danger.
‘Mr Smith has been wonderful.
We are all grateful for what he's done.’
Labour leaders yesterday urged Prime Minister Mr Major to crack down on economic sanctions with Serbia.
SAFE: Refugee Sabaheta Bambur and daughter Selma, one, with Mr Smith
BIRDMEN GO FOR BROKE!
INTREPID David Bradshaw broke the Great Bognor Birdman record yesterday — but winning the wacky contest cost him dearly.
David, a 19-year-old student, received the £100 prize for making the longest-ever powerless flight from the town's 30ft-high pier.
But his three-second, 89-metre flight ended in disaster when his £700 glider was wrecked as it crashed into the sea.
David, from Bognor, said: ‘It's a shame about the glider but I'm glad I got the record.’
Fourteen other entrants jumped off the pier in crazy costumes and strange flying machines.
The contest also ended in disaster for 12 men from Ford Open Prison, Sussex.
They spent three months building a mock aircraft — and it nose-dived straight into the sea.
Holy-day job
FOURTEEN volunteers aged 16 to 24 will help paint and clean London's Westminster Abbey as part of a restoration project this week.
Lovin' spoonful
SINGER Tom Jones has bought his wife Lynda a set of Welsh lovespoons he spotted when they visited Carreg Cennen Castle in Dyfed.
Tom now spends most of his time in Los Angeles while Lynda lives at their mansion in the Vale of Glamorgan.
STIRRED:Jones
Bag nut
A MAN from Atherton, near Manchester, who boasts a collection of 1,000 carrier bags, is called…
John Nutter.
Delivery vroom
MUM Jackie Bramwell, 35, gave birth to a baby boy on the hard shoulder of the A3M motorway at Rowland's Castle, Hants.
Blunder puts £60 on new tax bills
SHEREE DODD
MILLIONS of home-owners could be stung for more council tax because of a Government blunder.
Bills will increase by £60 a year after valuation officers bungled when working out charges based on property bands.
They over-estimated Britain's housing stock value, reckoning there were far more homes in the top price band than there are.
Promised
Now bills for other bands from next April will have to be increased to make up the shortfall, says the Local Government Information Unit.
It claims the mistake will add another £61 to the average £400 bill — promised by Michael Heseltine when he introduced the replacement for the hated poll tax.
Steve Lord, finance chief of the Association of London Authorities, said yesterday: ‘There will be 420,000 people in London paying £60, £120 or £180 too much as a result.
‘More than two million nationwide will be stuck with overpaying until the next revaluation which won't become effective until 1998.’
NO MORE MISTER NICE GUY
‘Lineker’ lout is sent off again
IAN CAMERON
FOOTBALL ‘bad boy’ Ian Jolosa is in trouble again…just days after a judge ordered him to clean up his act by watching Gary Lineker videos.
The 6ft 4ins striker was ‘sentenced’ to watch films of football's Mr Nice Guy after a court heard how he broke another player's jaw.
But on Saturday in his very next match, Jolosa, 28, was sent off again for twice attacking the rival goalie.
And yesterday he claimed that former England captain Gary — never even booked in his career — was SOPPY.
Jolosa stormed: ‘If he played in the same league that I do, he'd end up in trouble too.’
Earlier this month Jolosa was given a conditional discharge when he appeared in Newport Crown Court, Gwent, on an assault charge.
Judge John Prosser heard how he floored rival skipper Howard Sully with a punch.
Then he told him: ‘You've heard of Gary Lineker, haven't you?
‘He's never been sent off.
You must look at a film of him and do all you can to emulate his behaviour.’
Father-of-three Jolosa nodded in agreement.
But yesterday he admitted ignoring the judge's advice.
Joke ‘I treated his words as a bit of a joke,’ said Jolosa, of Cwmbran, Gwent.
‘I prefer action films like Rocky, Schwarzenegger and Kung-Fu.
‘That's more like the soccer games I have to play in, not all this soppy stuff.’
Jolosa started the season on Saturday with new club Abergavenny.
Their game against Bangor was the very first one in the newly-formed League of Wales.
But Jolosa was booked in the first half for kicking goalie Mark Davies.
Then he was sent off for charging him.
Said Jolosa: ‘It is bad being the first player sent off in the new league, but I was a marked man from the start.
‘I'm not a lout and a thug like I've been painted.
I just play a hard game of hustle and bustle.’
Team secretary David Morris said: ‘Ian only joined us three weeks ago because he had discipline problems at his last club.
‘Now he will be banned for a fortnight.’
‘Gary is soppy’
Ian Jolosa — told by a judge to watch Lineker videos.
CLEAN IT UP: Flashback to the court case
Del pal in soap
DEL Boy Trotter's favourite barman is moving to Brookside.
Actor Ken MacDonald, who plays barman Mike Fisher in Only Fools And Horses, is to play a petrol station manager in the Channel 4 soap.
NEW ROLE: Ken
Unlucky break
OXFORD United soccer star James Magilton, 23, has a suspected broken leg after being run over outside a nightclub
New clue to murder
POLICE were following a new lead yesterday after reconstructing the last walk of murdered Tracey Carey, 20.
Policewoman Trish Issacs dressed in identical clothes for the walk through Trowbridge, Wilts, to the house where Tracey was found with her throat slashed.
Dognapped
GLENCASE, a greyhound bitch worth £14,000, has been stolen from kennels near Aveley, Essex.
DESERTED HUSBAND DIES IN GAS BLAST
A MAN was killed yesterday when a blast ripped through his home days after his wife walked out.
Firemen found empty petrol cans and gas cylinders at the scene.
And last night it was believed 55-year-old John Meade may have killed himself in depression.
The giant explosion ‘obliterated’ his terraced home in Aldershot, Hants.
Strange
It came only moments after neighbours Dave and Ruth Young left for a day-trip with their four-year-old son Danny.
Neighbour Andrew Lawrence said:
‘It seems as if John had been waiting for them to leave.
‘He had been acting a bit strangely recently.’
Dave said: ‘John was a bit fiery but kept himself to himself.
‘He had been living in a caravan at the back of the house.’
Police inspector Clive Holman said:: ‘The separation obviously upset him.
‘I've never seen anything like it.’
HAPPY AS LARRY
JAN DISLEY
A BUILDER dumped 1,000 old records and tapes by a rock singer called Larry Lurex in a rubbish skip.
But 48 hours later John Boylan was digging them out again — for the singer with the daft name was Queen star Freddie Mercury before he became famous.
John, 39, found the record haul while renovating a Liverpool house and dumped them ‘because I'd never heard of Larry Lurex’.
Two days later his brother heard a radio quiz asking who Larry Lurex was before he was famous — and the answer was dead star Freddie.
John said: ‘We both dashed back to the skip and retrieved as many records as we could.’
About 400 were broken — but John said: ‘The survivors are worth at least £100 each and the two demo tapes a few thousand.’
MERCURY: ‘Larry’
DES O'CONNOR
IN our edition of 17 July, we reported the cancellation of a performance by Mr Des O'Connor at the Apollo Theatre, Oxford, on 16 July.
We now understand that this cancellation followed a contractual dispute between the promoter and Mr O'Connor's management, and the inadequacy of the promotion of the event, and was not due to any lack of public interest as suggested in our report.
Mr O'Connor's management decided it would be in the best interest of all concerned for the event to be postponed giving the theatre management seven days' notice, enabling ticket holders to be contacted.
We now readily accept that Mr O'Connor was not at the theatre on the night in question and that no backstage ‘bust-up’ took place, as we had suggested.
The Daily Mirror apologises to Mr O'Connor and regrets any embarrassment or inconvenience caused to him by our original report.
It's Burt and Tom…or is it Tom and Burt?
TIME was you could tell one superstar from another.
But with macho movie hunks Burt Reynolds and Tom Selleck it's not so easy.
Both sported a magnificent moustache, both wore a ten-gallon hat and both were dressed to kill at the Golden Boot Awards for Westerns in Beverly Hills last night.
The copycat cowboys even managed to turn up with a beautiful pardner by both their sides.
Despite the ten-year gap in their ages — Burt is 56 and Tom 46 — they could have been twins.
But the uncanny resemblance didn't bother the screen tough guys…after all, they know they're hot shots in their own rights.
DOUBLE TAKE: Reynolds with wife Loni Anderson at the awards
LOOKALIKE: Cowboy Selleck
CARRY ON LOVING ON THE CAMPUS
RICHARD GARNER
UNIVERSITY students are still sticking to a boozing, sexy lifestyle despite the recession.
A new survey shows that one in three students gets drunk once a week and also takes drugs at parties.
Campus girls will also have at least three sexual partners a year.
And despite the AIDS menace 20 per cent of the students questioned by Cosmopolitan magazine said they never used a condom.
The partying does take its toll with most students spending six hours a week ASLEEP in the university library.
There is also a price to pay.
One in three students is more than £500 in debt.
Misery of old
OLD folk living longer face an increasingly ‘grim and painful’ life, a report warns today.
More will suffer basic disabilities like not being able to walk or bath on their own.
But because of Government cuts there will be less help available with fewer able to afford care.
A spokeswoman for the independent Kings Fund Institute said: ‘There's a myth that old people have been getting fitter.
They aren't — they're just living longer.’
The Baker Street kids
SIXTH-formers will soon be able to study how to become a private eye.
A detective course is among a number of vocational studies planned to run alongside traditional academic courses from September next year.
Tom hits jackpot
RETIRED match maker Tom Hayes has struck it lucky — with a £10,000 Mirror Bingo jackpot.
Tom, 68, will share his win with his eight children, 14 grandchildren and five great-grandchildren.
‘I'm going to treat them all,’ he vowed yesterday after winning on No 87 in Game 223.
But first he'll buy wife Elsie, 73, a new three-piece suite for their home in Garston, Liverpool.
Then Tom, who worked for the Bryant and May match firm, will splash out on a greenhouse and a garden shed for himself.
Today's numbers — See Page 24
I'M SHATTERED
Docs spot Bill's broken nose…but miss his bust jaw, cheek, leg and foot
IAN CAMERON
DOCTORS treated road victim Bill Healey for a broken nose and then sent him home — failing to notice that he also had a fractured jaw, cheekbone, leg and foot.
After a night racked with pain, Bill's wife Violet took him to their local hospital where horrified doctors treated his multiple injuries.
The father of five's face was so badly busted he had to be fitted with a metal cage to keep the bones in place until they set.
Now his family have called in health watchdogs to probe the blunder at Nevill Hall Hospital, Abergavenny, Gwent.
Violet said: ‘You could see his jaw and cheekbone moving as he spoke — the suffering he went through was appalling.’
Bill's nightmare started when he was taken to hospital after being hit by a car as he returned home from a fishing trip.
Lorry driver Bill, 51, of Merthyr Tydfil, South Wales, said yesterday: ‘I was in so much pain I couldn't dress myself after I had been examined and needed a wheelchair.’
But doctors fixed his nose and sent him home.
Complaint
The next day Bill had X-rays at his local Prince Charles Hospital and his terrible injuries were discovered.
He said: ‘I'm disgusted that I was allowed out of the first hospital in that state.’
Nevill Hall deputy manager Alan Williams said: ‘I can confirm we have received a formal complaint.
It is being investigated.’
FOOTBALLER Tom Delaubenque, 23, was forced to hobble two miles home with a broken leg because an X-ray department was closed.
A doctor at Wycombe General, Bucks, told Tom to return the next day and refused to lend him crutches.
The hospital is investigating.
PAIN BARRIER: Doctors missed Bill's terrible injuries
GREAT TUM O'NEAL IS BIG DADDY
ONE-TIME movie hunk Ryan O'Neal lets it all hang out on the beach.
And what a lot of it there is…
These days, the muscle-bound star of Love Story and Paper Moon, now 50, just acts the house-husband, looking after Redmond, his seven-year-old son by lover Farrah Fawcett.
And judging by this shot of Ryan playing baseball near his California home, he's really huge in the role.
MUSCLES: The old Ryan
Maxwell in delay
KEVIN Maxwell, son of disgraced tycoon Robert Maxwell, yesterday succeeded in getting bankruptcy proceedings against him in London delayed two weeks.
IT IS REAL AND HAPPILY ALL TRUE…
SHE'S LOVELY, SHE'S TURNED AROUND MY LIFE
STAR WOODY TELLS OF HIS AFFAIR WITH MIA'S DAUGHTER
‘BUT HE IS OLD ENOUGH TO BE HER GRANDAD’
STEWART DICKSON
SMITTEN star Woody Allen told last night how his affair with Mia Farrow's ‘lovely’ young daughter had changed his life.
‘Regarding my love for Soon-Yi — it's real and happily all true,’ he admitted.
‘She's a lovely, intelligent, sensitive woman who continues to turn my life around in a wonderfully positive way.’
But while the 57-year-old movie-maker basks in the glow of his new love, the woman they left behind is broken-hearted, say her family and friends.
Mia's mother, veteran movie star Maureen O'Sullivan, last night branded Allen ‘a desperate and evil man’.
And she lashed her 21-year-old adopted grand-daughter for her part in the scandal.
Maureen, 81, stormed: ‘Soon-Yi has been foolish and misguided about an old man.
He's old enough to be her grandfather.
‘She's a very charming and pretty girl.
But what does a kid of that age know?
He has ruined Soon-Yi's reputation.
Crying ‘I am absolutely revolted, it's disgraceful.’
Mia, 47, is said to be so devastated by her daughter's affair with Allen she has been unable to eat.
Her mother added: ‘Mia has spent many nights crying.
‘But she still loves Soon-Yi.
Mia is devoted to her.’
It was no secret that the couple's weird relationship had been in trouble for some time.
Last Thursday their problems became public for the first time when Allen began a legal battle for custody of three of their children.
They are due to appear before a New York judge next week to present opening arguments.
Mia has hired a top firm of lawyers and will fight the move tooth and nail.
Allen claimed last night: ‘The last thing I wanted to do was go to court.
‘I tried agonizingly to work out the details privately but I was left with no alternative.’
He is expected to claim Mia is an unfit mother.
The lawsuit was a double betrayal for Mia, a devoted mother of 12 youngsters — four of her own and eight adopted.
Allen himself has admitted in the past: ‘Mia has a talent for mothering the way some people have green fingers for gardening.’
Friends say part of their problems stem from a bitter disagreement over Mia's wish to adopt yet more children.
The odd couple had been together — privately and professionally — for more than 12 years.
But they have never married and even maintain separate homes on opposite sides of New York's Central Park.
Their huge brood lives with Mia in her big, rambling apartment, littered with toys and overflowing with friends.
But the shy and introspective Allen habitually returned to his bachelor pad — after dropping in to kiss the children goodnight.
He has often remarked in wonder over the fact that they stayed together so long despite their differences.
An early star of TV soap in the Sixties series Peyton Place, Mia shot to international fame playing the starring role in the black magic chiller Rosemary's Baby.
She shocked the world with a short-lived marriage to Frank Sinatra, 30 years her senior.
Then she married and divorced top conductor Andre Previn with whom she had three sons — and adopted Soon-Yi.
Mia has since said she found true happiness with Allen.
‘Before I met Woody, I was lonely,’ she once mused.
‘I don't feel lonely any more.’
BEFORE: Woody, Mia and some of their kids on a night out.
Now the couple are waging a bitter custody battle
GROWING UP: Mia with a pig-tailed Soon-Yi and four more of the kids in 1980
GIRL IN A STORM: Mia with daughter Soon-Yi, whose affair with Allen has stunned her family
FURIOUS: Maureen
Happy Noel
MILLIONAIRE Noel Edmonds returns to Radio One for its 25th birthday celebrations — having joined the station as a £7-a-week DJ in 1968.
Heads you lose
REAL firemen freed Joe Grey, four, after he stuck his head between railings at Scunthorpe, Humberside, because he wanted to be rescued by TV's Fireman Sam.
NICK'S BIG NIGHT OUT WITH JACKO
SUPERSTAR Michael Jackson brought joy to six-year-old blind boy Nicholas Killen last night.
Nicholas, who lost both eyes to stop him dying from cancer, was Jacko's special guest at his open-air concert in Leeds.
The star gave him his autograph in Braille.
And afterwards Nicholas said: ‘He sounded just like the real Michael Jackson.’
Surgeons removed the brave boy's left eye three years ago after finding cancer.
Then this year they had to remove his right eye.
SO CLOSE TO DEATH
THIS is the chilling moment a young woman feared she would die…a knife held at her throat by a convicted murderer.
Massage parlour receptionist Monthira Boonsri, 18, was grabbed in Bangkok by the demented man, who insisted he wanted to see the prime minister of Thailand.
But her terrifying three-hour ordeal ended when police overpowered Khamton Omvaree, in his thirties — who had just been freed from a 10-year sentence under a royal amnesty.
Four are jailed in £14m gold trial
HARRY ARNOLD
THE last of the Brink's-Mat trials ended yesterday — with four more people going to jail.
They were sentenced for their part in laundering £l4 million cash from the robbery near Heathrow airport in 1983.
Jean Savage, 48, of West Kingsdown, Kent — the ‘Lady Goldfinger’ of the operation — got five years.
Property dealer Gordon Parry, 48, of Westerham, Kent, got 10 years; mini-cab boss Brian Perry, 53, of Biggin Hill, Kent, nine years; property dealer Patrick Clark, 53, of Chingford, Essex, six years.
The Brink's-Mat trials left Britain's taxpayers with a bill bigger than the £26 million robbery haul.
The latest trial alone — the twelfth in the eight-year saga — cost £8 million.
It included £1 million for guarding the Old Bailey jury after the first jury was nobbled and the case had to be restarted.
Other costs included video and computer hardware to demonstrate to the jury complicated financial manoeuvres.
It was the most expensive series of trials ever held in Britain.
The police are still hunting two men.
If caught, there will be trial No 13 — and another jumbo bill for the taxpayer.
JAILED: Savage
Vendetta ‘suicide’
A MAN feared murdered in a vendetta killed himself with a shotgun, police revealed yesterday.
Kevin Errington, 24, who had received threats after a fight, was found dead at his home in Carrville, Durham.
FIREBOMB ATTACK ON HUNT GIRL
DETECTIVES were yesterday looking for Animal Rights extremists who planted a firebomb under a huntswoman's car.
The bomb exploded as Sarah Godley's Ford stood outside her home in Westcott, Surrey, at 1am yesterday.
The car was not badly damaged.
Police believe the bomb did not fully explode.
Sarah, 31, a member of the Surrey Union Hunt, claims she is a target because she has filmed violence by hunt saboteurs.
AND DON'T RUSH BACK…
DAVID BRADSHAW
SUN-SEEKING Mr Lamont was given the cold shoulder yesterday when he was told he was NOT needed for a crisis meeting back in Britain.
The Chancellor stayed in Italy even though Premier John Major and Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd rushed back from their hols abroad for the emergency session over possible action against Iraq.
To rub sea salt into the wound, Mr Lamont was told his place on the Cabinet's overseas policy committee could be taken by his Number FIVE at the Treasury.
The only other absentee at today's meeting will be Trade Secretary Michael Heseltine, who is in far-off Fiji.
Last night financial experts hinted that Mr Lamont had been ordered to stay away because his return could cause panic in the City.
And Labour's trade spokesman Robin Cook said: ‘If I was him, I would worry why my colleagues seem so keen for me to stay away.
‘They know that while he is abroad he cannot answer the questions about what has happened to the promised recovery.’
Stabbing mystery
POLICE closed an investigation yesterday into the stabbing of fencing company boss Roy Miles — but would not say more.
Mr Miles, 45, from Bishop's Waltham, Hants, was found with a knife embedded in his neck earlier this month.
Caring cruise
CHARLES and Di put their marriage problems behind them on a 10-day Greek island cruise, it was revealed yesterday.
Instead, they devoted themselves to their friends and special guests, Lord and Lady Romsey.
For it was just weeks after a similar cruise with the Romseys and their children last year that the couple's daughter Leonora, five, died of cancer.
The royals flew home yesterday.
Tragedy of Robin who lost Marion
HEARTBROKEN husband Robin Hood killed himself because he couldn't face life without his murdered wife ‘Maid’ Marion.
The charity worker left a suicide note for his two teenage children saying ‘Please forgive me.
I can't live without mum.’
Then he hanged himself in the garage close to where he found battered Marion dying last week.
Last night his distraught sister Margaret Blaze, 49, said: ‘Now the murderer has two deaths on his conscience.
‘He killed Robin just as surely as he murdered Marion.
Bedside ‘Robin was in such a state of shock.
He spent 35 hours at Marion's hospital bedside and couldn't live without her.’
Police dismissed suggestions that Robin, 45, of Paisley, Scotland, was involved in the death of his wife, also 45.
Det Supt Bobby Redmond said: ‘He was not a suspect.
‘This man was missing his wife.
It is a double tragedy for the family.’
BANK WIFE KIDNAP ORDEAL
A BANK manager who paid a £40,000 ransom after a bogus PC kidnapped his wife told yesterday of their torment.
‘We both have been through a frightening, traumatic ordeal,’ said David Kerr.
The man seized wife Elizabeth, 37, at her home in Holmes Chapel, Cheshire, then called David at his bank demanding the cash.
He handed it over at a rendezvous — but Elizabeth was kept in her captor's car boot for another two hours before being dumped.
David, 37, added: ‘Her mental scars will take time to heal.’
CABBIE' RAPE CLUE
A T-SHIRT may hold a clue to the ‘cab driver’ rapist who kept a mum prisoner for 16 hours.
The 26-year-old woman was given the man's shirt and towelling dressing gown to wear after her sex ordeal, police revealed yesterday.
They want anyone recognising the shirt — with The Dude written above a cartoon of a man holding a Union Jack surf board — to contact them.
The man posed as a mini-cab driver and picked up the woman outside a pub in Brockley, south-east London.
He took her to a Forest Hill bedsit where he repeatedly raped her before releasing her.
A police chief said: ‘She struggled and was very badly bruised.’
The man drove to the pub after the woman rang for a cab.
It is thought he may have intercepted the cab company message on his radio.
Sari, sir…
ANGRY Richard Gere blamed a sari-clad hostess when he and wife Cindy Crawford were met by photographers at Heathrow yesterday.
‘Oh no,’ he snapped as the girl protested her innocence.
‘Why'd you tell them?’
Picture: VICTOR CRAWSHAW
Sally's game
GUESTS at Olympic star Sally Gunnell's October wedding will have to be great sports like her.
The gold-winning hurdler and fiance Jon Biggs will follow a morning marriage in Florida with a day of games like volleyball, the groom told Hello! magazine.
BRIDE: Sally
CRASH TOT SAVED
CLIVE CRICKMER
WOMAN doctor Shonagh Mitchell saved a newly-born baby's life when their ambulance crashed.
It overturned after hitting a car, shattering the incubator which was keeping tiny tot Victoria Elliot alive.
Dr Mitchell, 30, cut her face badly when she was hurled against the ambulance roof.
But she immediately snatched Victoria, who had been born only 32 hours before, and started giving her mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.
She kept up the desperate battle until another ambulance reached them near Hexham, Northumberland.
Then she refused to leave Victoria until the tot was safely in a special baby unit at Newcastle upon Tyne's Princess Mary Hospital.
Only then would she go for treatment for her injuries.
Victoria, who sustained cuts and bruises in the crash, was being transferred from a Carlisle hospital to Newcastle because she has a serious circulatory complaint.
PYLON-BURN HERO
BILL DANIELS
A QUICK-THINKING student nurse saved the life of a teenager who climbed a power pylon for a dare — and got a 132,000-volt shock.
David Scanlon, 19, dashed from his house when he heard a huge bang and found Tristran Harris, 18, at the foot of the pylon.
He had no heartbeat or pulse.
David battled for three minutes to restart his heart, then had him rushed to hospital where last night he was critically ill with burns and internal injuries.
At his home in Bartley Green, Birmingham, David said: ‘The lad was hurled 50ft to the ground.
He was bare from the waist up and badly burned.
His girlfriend was trying to give him the kiss of life.
Other girls were screaming.
‘I started heart massage but it took three minutes to get any sign of life.
I did what I could.’
HANDS OFF, YOU SEXY POOL GIRLS
CLIVE CRICKMER
A TEAM of women pool players really go below the belt to put male opponents off their stroke.
The saucy six RUN their hands up the men's legs just as they are about to make a vital shot.
They also RUB the blunt ends of their cues against the parts that other dears don't reach.
And if all that fails some of them have BARED their boobs to take the guys' eyes off the ball.
But now the fun is over for the pool table teasers from the Cattle Mart pub in Tow Law, Co Durham.
Local league officials have stepped in after one of the men's teams they beat protested: ‘We were indecently assaulted.’
Even worse, opponents' wives are turning up to keep a beady eye on proceedings.
Team skipper Sylvia Goodall, 55, said yesterday: ‘Some of the girls DID go to extremes — but it was really all in fun.’
And a male opponent admitted: ‘A lot of blokes thought it was great!’
MIRROR COMMENT
Sickener No 1
RED tape is strangling Lucy Roberts' chances of living a normal happy life.
And Lucy won't be five until November.
She has already suffered more than most adults suffer during a long lifetime.
Cancer cost her an eye when she was a baby and it could reoccur.
She lost her father when her parents split up.
Vital
Now, as we report on Page 15, she is to be parted from the nursery school children whose friendship has helped to restore her health and build her confidence.
Her mother, her doctor and her psychotherapist say that it is vital for her well-being that next month she goes to the same primary school as her friends.
Councillors in Harrow, North London, won't allow that because she lives outside the school's catchment area.
Bureaucratic bullshine.
Only a zombie would risk a child's health by refusing to bend a rule.
Sickener No 2
THE Tories have fallen back on a quack cure for the economic ills they are forcing upon our country — even higher prescription charges.
That's sticking a plaster on the cash haemorrhage of what will be the biggest sum a British Government has borrowed in a year.
The increase, from £3.75 for each item to more than £4, will sting the millions of people who fall between those entitled to free prescriptions and those with high incomes.
A burden for some which will become a breaking point.
That's not just the action of a bankrupt Government.
That's SICK.
BANK IS GLOOMY
THE Bank of England last night sank lingering Tory hopes that the recovery is just round the corner.
In its latest quarterly review, the Bank said the economy was still bumping along the bottom — just as it reported a year ago.
And the Bank admitted the outlook remains ‘very uncertain.’
Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown said: ‘The Government has lost its last remaining friend.’
Bomb quiz five freed
FIVE people quizzed over the IRA's City of London and Staples Corner bombings were released without charge yesterday as a seven-day deadline for holding them expired.
£4 PRESCRIPTIONS AS LAMONT WOES PILE UP
905,000 out of work for a year
Bankruptcies leap by a third
House prices are still plunging
DAVID BRADSHAW
IAN MILLER
PRESCRIPTION charges are set to soar to more than £4 as Chancellor Norman Lamont fails to heal Britain's sick economy.
The news that the ill may face an inflation-busting increase for the second year running was revealed yesterday as carefree Mr Lamont continued to holiday in Italy.
And it was coupled with devastating figures showing Britain had plunged deeper into recession.
Nearly one million people have been JOBLESS for more than a year and personal BANKRUPTCIES soared by a third to more than 16,000 in the six months to June.
HOUSE PRICES are still tumbling and the Government has slipped to more than £11 billion in the RED.
Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown last night blasted Mr Lamont's handling of the economy.
He warned it was having ‘disastrous’ consequences for patients, pupils, homeowners and the unemployed.
The rise in the £3.75 prescription charge — hinted by Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley — is due next April.
When the Tories came to power in 1979, Margaret Thatcher pledged to freeze the 20p charge.
But it will have soared by 2000 per cent with a 15th increase.
Mrs Bottomley admitted a rise was likely because the Government had run out of money.
She defended it, saying four out of five prescriptions were free.
Mr Lamont was urged to act again yesterday after it was revealed the number of long-term unemployed is the worst for four years.
Job fears and the mortgage debt trap are failing to halt the housing slump.
Half of Britain's estate agents saw prices fall during the last three months.
And 11 per cent more businesses have gone bust.
City accountants Peat Marwick warned: ‘With recovery still merely a hope we fear more bankruptcies.’
And bankers UBS Phillips and Drew predicted: ‘It is only a matter of time before the Chancellor's strategy falls completely apart.’
HOLIDAYING: Lamont is away from the gloom
Navel exercise
EVENING classes at the Horndean Centre, near Waterlooville, Hants, include belly dancing and American clog waltzing.
TORMENT OF TYCOON WHO TURNED KILLER
Ousted oil boss batters wife, then dies in sea
TOM MERRIN
MILLIONAIRE oilman David Elton killed his wife then drowned himself in a fit of despair after losing his high-flying job.
The tormented tycoon, who got a £1.26million pay-off eight months ago, failed to find another job.
And when his wife Jane announced that she wanted a divorce, 48-year-old Mr Elton finally cracked.
He battered 43-year-old Jane to death with a bottle at their £275,000 weekend home at Middleton-on-Sea, Sussex.
Her body was found in a pool of blood by her seven-year-old son Charles.
Hours later Mr Elton's body was washed up on a beach at Climping, two miles away.
A close friend of the tragic couple said last night that Mr Elton had been under stress since being ousted as a director of oil giant Ultramar.
He was also devastated by his mother's death last year.
‘The stress is probably the same, however rich you are,’ the friend said.
Letters
Housekeeper Anne Jackson told how Mr Elton had turned the sitting room of his £750,000 London flat into an office as he desperately hunted for a new job.
‘He would spend the week writing letters and sending off applications,’ said Mrs Jackson.
‘He was constantly on the phone making appointments.
‘But there was nothing on the horizon.
He had been very quiet lately and I think he was depressed.’
Jane was spending the summer holidays at the seaside with Charles and three-year-old daughter Victoria while her husband remained at the flat in Regent's Park.
Mr Elton joined the family at the week-end…and the stage was set for tragedy.
Charles found his mother's body in a bedroom at the luxurious thatched house.
The youngster phoned neighbours for help.
A police spokesman said: ‘He told them he could not wake his mummy who was found on the ground floor.’
The children are now being looked after by their nanny.
The couple had been married nine years.
Their plush London home provided a base for Jane's voluntary work with the Samaritans.
Two years ago they bought the seafront house as a weekend retreat.
They joined the local ‘weekender set,’ enjoying barbecues, dinner parties and tennis.
Then came the series of blows that shattered the oil boss's ideal world.
Neighbour Peter Bainbridge said last night: ‘They were the last couple on earth you could imagine this happening to.
‘They seemed so happy.
I know David was very upset about losing his job.
Gentle ‘But we never had any sign that they had problems with their marriage.
‘When Jane told us she had asked for a divorce it was a complete shock.’
Mr Bainbridge, 46, added: ‘David was a gentle giant, kind and generous.
‘We never saw them row.’
Another neighbour, Dr Charles Wright, said: ‘We knew they were having marital difficulties, but Jane wouldn't tell anyone why she wanted a divorce.’
Detectives are trying to trace Jane's two children from her previous marriage.
The youngsters, Rachel, 15, and 12-year-old Emily, are on holiday with their father in Canada.
£1.2m handshake
TYCOON David Elton's glittering career ended with a £1.26 million pay-off at the start of this year.
He had been one of oil giant Ultramar's youngest directors and worked for the firm for more than 20 years.
But the New York-based company's structure underwent a massive upheaval after industry rivals Lasmo won a three-month takeover battle last December.
Mr Elton — then principal executive director — left the following month.
He was one of seven bosses who shared an £8.1 million package, including £1.4 million to top up pension obligations, in one of Britain's biggest post-takeover settlements.
Mr Elton was a management consultant before he joined Ultramar.
HOUSE OF HORROR: The luxurious seaside home where Jane's body was found by her son
TRAGIC BOSS: David Elton
VICTIM: Jane Elton
Moo-sic's still herd
OPERA buffs made sure the show went on when a storm hit their open-air Carmen — they moved into a cowshed.
Beaufort Opera shifted their 30 singers, a full orchestra and 130 spectators into the farm building at Brownsea Island in Dorset.
CAROL'S MAN IS HURT
DAVID BRADSHAW
ITN cameraman Nigel Thomson, husband of newscaster Carol Barnes, was hurt in a mortar attack on a Sarajevo hotel yesterday.
Mr Thomson and colleague Jim Dutton both suffered hand injuries.
One man was killed in the attack on the Europa Hotel.
And last night refugees, including casualties and children, were feared trapped in the blazing building after it was hit by three mortar bombs.
Earlier, eight people died when fire rained on the city's crowded streets.
A convoy of 1,000 women and children will leave Sarajevo for Belgrade today.
Premier John Major broke off his holiday in Spain last night and recalled Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd from Italy for a meeting in a bid to save his Yugoslavian peace initiative.
Mr Major fears Serbian and Bosnian Moslems may boycott a London peace conference.
WORRIED: Carol
Maradona's ‘love child’
DISGRACED soccer star Diego Maradona has a second love child, it was claimed yesterday.
A 24-year-old boutique owner in Capri alleges her daughter named Alessandra was born after a fling with the Argentine and former Naples star — banned for taking cocaine.
Diego, married with two daughters, also has an illegitimate son in Naples.
FARRAH KIDNAPPER STRUCK DUMB
STEPHEN WHITE
BABY kidnapper Caren McSweeney is so stunned by what she did that she has been struck dumb.
Caren, 22 — who snatched six-month-old Farrah Quli — is suffering from ‘traumatic’ post natal depression.
A friend said yesterday: ‘What she did is eating away at her.
She relives every moment.
It's awful to watch what she's going through.’
Caren, who gave up her new-born twins for adoption, took Farrah from London after posing as a childminder.
They were found at Caren's Irish family home.
POSED: Caren
Hostage bride's baby joy
JAN DISLEY
THE Gulf War hostage dubbed the ‘Bride of Baghdad’ has had a baby girl…exactly two years to the HOUR after she was captured in Iraq.
Debbie Kitchen — whose wedding was filmed by Iraqi TV — cuddled tiny Samantha yesterday and said: ‘We're never going to be able to forget Iraq.
Every time she has a birthday it will bring back memories.
But she's worth it.’
Debbie and her husband Leslie were working at a Kuwait hotel when Saddam Hussein's troops invaded in August 1990.
The couple — who now run a pet shop in Hull — married while held at a nuclear plant in Basra, Iraq.
Film of the ceremony was beamed worldwide.
Bugs bunny
SHOPPERS have been warned not to buy rabbit meat in Latvian markets after 42 animals infected with lethal bugs were stolen from a research centre.
Dead girl gives six chance of new life
FRANK CORLESS
ORGANS from tragic schoolgirl Paula Moss have been used in SIX transplant operations.
Her heart went to a 57-year-old man, her liver to a baby of eight months, her kidneys to a teenage girl and boy, and her corneas were used to save the sight of two people.
Yesterday her mum Jane said: ‘I wish I had her back but it has taken away some of the emptiness to know that Paula lives on and she was able to help young and old.
‘It's quite a legacy for a 10-year-old.’
Paula, from Bradford, died in hospital from a brain tumour after being taken ill the day after her 10th birthday.
Only two weeks before, she told her mum she wanted a donor card in case anything happened to her.
Jane said: ‘It was just typical of her.
But I never thought I would be carrying out her wishes.’
DONOR: Paula
Tragic rocker
ROCK ‘n’ roll veteran Carl Perkins — who wrote Elvis's hit Blue Suede Shoes — has scrapped a British tour because he has cancer.
Bottle bank
PUBLICAN Nick Borst-Smith is selling 1919 Springbank whisky at £9,400 a bottle or £330 a dram at Doddiscombsleigh, Devon.
Sharon set for a Basic £16m
SEXY superstar Sharon Stone is set to become Hollywood's highest-paid actress.
Sharon could earn £16 million if her next film, Sliver, matches the success of Basic Instinct, which shot her to stardom.
She will be paid £1.4 million and then share in the profits.
In Basic Instinct she played a suspected killer chased by cop Michael Douglas.
The sex scenes between them caused a sensation.
Sliver producer Robert Evans said: ‘Sharon was the only one I wanted for the role.
I didn't even have a second or third choice.
‘Any girl on the screen who can cause you not to notice Michael Douglas is special.’
SENSATION: Sharon
LUCKY BEGGAR
Magistrate hands his lunch to tramp
JILL TURNER
A MAGISTRATE gave his packed lunch to a hungry down-and-out yesterday after the man begged to be jailed so that he could eat.
Tramp John Taylor, 69, pleaded from the dock: ‘Could I be put into custody?
I haven't eaten a meal or even had a cup of tea for a whole week.’
Big-hearted Dudley Thomas immediately left his courtroom and returned minutes later clutching the wrapped sandwiches his wife had made that morning.
He handed over the sarnies — ham and mustard in brown bread — to the usher, saying: ‘His need is greater than mine.’
As court officials and spectators looked on amazed, Mr Thomas, 46, added: ‘I just hope he doesn't mind the mustard my wife has put in them.’
Homeless Taylor was at Marylebone Court, London, after a night in police custody on a charge of threatening behaviour.
Bloke
The charge was dropped and he walked free, mumbling his thanks, after being bound over to keep the peace for a year.
As he tucked in outside the court, unshaven Taylor said: ‘That magistrate is a great bloke.
These are delicious.’
But Mr Thomas, who earns £40,000 a year as a  stipendiary magistrate, brushed off his gesture.
He said: ‘It was just a little touch of humanity.’
NUDE PHOTOS STUNNED STAR
HORRIFIED Mia Farrow ‘blew her mind’ when she found nude photographs of her adopted daughter Soon-Yi, it was revealed yesterday.
For the ‘highly-sexy’ pictures were her first inkling that her lover Woody Allen was having an affair with the 21-year-old beauty.
Movie star Mia — Allen's lover for 12 years — found the snaps while searching Soon-Yi's bedroom, a family friend said.
And she saw instantly that they were taken in Allen's Manhattan apartment.
When furious Mia confronted Allen, he admitted taking the photos — but DENIED having an affair with Soon-Yi.
Confronted
The family friend told how the photos came as a body blow to 47-year-old Mia.
She said: ‘Mia found them several months ago.
It was obvious they were taken in Woody's apartment.
‘She confronted Woody.
He claimed there was nothing more to it than just picture-taking.’
But another source said: ‘These pictures are very sexy poses which starkly show every part of Soon-Yi's body.’
The friend added: ‘Incredibly, two weeks ago, Woody asked Mia to marry him.’
IN LOVE Soon-Yi: Beauty wooed by Woody
Learn to say XXXX
PEOPLE emigrating down under should take lessons — in Aussie swear words, says a Sydney language professor.
It would help them adjust to the culture and tell them when they're being abused and how to answer back.
BE PREPARED
Ex-Guides boss runs a sex mag
KEVIN O'LONE
A FORMER Girl Guides boss is to edit a new sex magazine.
And Pauline Brown, who learned to Be Prepared when she herself was a Guide, says buyers should be ready for a raunchy read.
Pauline, ex-assistant editor of Guiding Magazine, will feature full-frontal male nudes in her latest publication Ludus, aimed at the modern miss.
She said yesterday: ‘Guiding Magazine was good fun but this is definitely much more exciting.’
Pauline, 25, announced that Ludus — Latin for game — would playfully ‘explore female sexuality’.
But she insisted: ‘It won't just be a ‘cor look at that’ -type of collection of photographs of nude men.’
And, she added, there would be no pictures of men looking too excited.
Naughty
Magazines are allowed to show a man's naughty bits only if they resemble a map of the Mull of Kintyre, Scots-born Pauline explained.
‘I was told that if the angle of the dangle goes any higher, it's against the law,’ she said.
Pauline revealed that her boyfriend was a fan of the magazine, which will be launched next month.
‘He loves it and has been very supportive,’ she said.
A spokeswoman for the Guides Association said yesterday: ‘She worked here for a short while and I suppose it was just a job to her.’
KNOW THE FORM
ONLY male naughty bits shaped like a Mull of Kintyre map will be allowed in the magazine, explained Pauline.
Eye spy Sarge!
KEEPING an eye out for crooks, it's TV cop Jon Iles and his real-life pal Lorna Ewin.
Jon, 35, was playing detective again at a London club in readiness for his return to The Bill as Mike Dashwood.
He comes back soon — promoted to Detective Sergeant.
And Lorna, 23 — who starred in the video Sensual Massage — will no doubt be watching.
Beadle boom
TV'S Jeremy Beadle has sparked a camcorder movie camera boom.
Sales topped 500,000 last year — over six times more than in 1986.
Circus horror
A TRUMPET player was shot dead by a stray crossbow arrow during a circus act.
The archer was trying to hit a balloon 30ft away in Aubenas, France.
Tarzan is top gals' top guy
MICHAEL Heseltine is the ideal calendar pin-up boy for career women, it was claimed yesterday.
The Tory Cabinet Minister, nicknamed Tarzan, beat all rivals in a poll of 200 high-flying female managers.
The survey by Executive Woman magazine and a calendar company said: ‘He scores all the points when it comes to what most business women would like to have up against their wall.’
And it added: ‘He's the thinking woman's crumpet.’
Heseltine collected 15 per cent of the vote, racing ahead of nearest rivals photographer Lord Lichfield and billionaire Lord Hanson.
Portly Sir Cyril Smith took fourth place — beating airline owner Richard Branson.
But Premier John Major did not receive a single vote.
IDOL: Heseltine
Bald truth
A LIFEBOAT was launched when a woman thought a sailor's bald head was a baby adrift in a motor launch off Brixham, Devon.
SAVE WITH THE MIRROR
MIRROR Group Newspapers has joined a great new venture to save readers money.
A new Moneysavers magazine containing discount coupons to use in shops is to be launched.
The magazine will be inserted in the Daily Mirror and Telegraph Magazine on Saturdays.
It will also be inserted in The Sunday Express Magazine, The People and The Sunday Mail Magazine in Scotland.
The launch date will be announced in two weeks.
TRAGIC LUCY CAN'T GO TO SCHOOL WITH PALS
Town hall deals new blow to cancer tot
RICHARD GARNER
SCHOOL bosses have barred tragic cancer victim Lucy Roberts from the school all her friends will attend — even though she is already a pupil in its nursery.
They are refusing to let little Lucy stay with her 42 classmates despite medical evidence that a move could be traumatic.
The decision is the third blow to blight the four-year-old's life.
As a tiny baby she was struck down by cancer which led to her losing an eye, and still faces further treatment.
Then her father walked out on her mother Marie when Lucy was just nine months old.
Now the tot faces leaving behind all her friends to start again in a class full of strangers.
‘I am absolutely devastated,’ said mum Marie, 28.
‘Lucy has lost an eye, lost her father and now she faces losing her dearest friends.’
Lucy has been attending the nursery unit at Vaughan first school in Harrow, North London, for a year.
Bosses of the Tory-controlled authority say she cannot stay in the school because she lives outside the priority area.
And they are unmoved by the fact that Lucy's grandmother — who cares for her while Marie works — DOES live in the priority area.
Now Marie may have to give up her job because Lucy's gran cannot travel to the new school.
The authority also ignored the advice of Lucy's psychotherapist Dr Alan Levy, who told how the loss of her father had affected Lucy deeply.
The authority said: ‘There has to be a limit to the number of children any school can take.’
Mirror Comment — Page 2 
ANXIOUS: Mum Marie fears for Lucy
TURNED AWAY: There's no room at the school for lonely Lucy Pictures: DALE CHERRY
Crash injures 13
THIRTEEN people were injured, four seriously, in an eight car pile-up on the A59 near Hessay, North Yorks, yesterday.
HANGMAN ALE'S A STRONG DROP
NIC NORTH
LANDLORD Dave Murray reckons his latest brew will go to the heads of boozers.
He calls his new ale Pierrepoint's Last Drop.
It's named after Britain's last hangman and is SEVEN per cent proof…double the strength of your average beer.
Dave dreamed up the evil pint in a cellar under Gastons, the pub his runs in Preston.
He decided to honour hangman Albert Pierrepoint, who died aged 87 last month, because he once ran a pub in nearby Much Hoole.
The tipple will be on sale from September and Dave reckons anyone brave enough to quaff it may well wake up feeling anything but ale and hearty.
And he's convinced it will pull in the customers.
‘It will go down a treat,’ he said.
And Dave believes Pierrepoint would have liked the joke.
At the Rose and Crown pub where the executioner was once landlord there was a sign on the bar warning: ‘No hanging around the bar.’
Brush with the law is just the job
POLICE station cleaner Ted Blight has been given a new job…looking after prisoners in the cells.
He is to keep an eye on them, transfer them between nicks when necessary and make sure they turn up in court on time.
His role will free more bobbies for beat duty.
And Inspector Brian Ward, in charge of the project at Chatham, Kent, said: ‘We hope it will have a calming influence on people, not being supervised by officers who arrested them.’
Ted, 51 — now trained in law and first aid — said: ‘As a cleaner I've had an insight into what goes on in the cells.’
One L of a girl
LEARNER-driver Jackie Richards, 39, of Gloucester, is taking her first lesson — a 900-mile trip from John O'Groats to Land's End for charity.
Bear necessity
RUPERT Bear is boosting tourism in Kent with an appearance tomorrow in Canterbury, where his creator was born.
RAIL-FALL OLIVE'S MIRACLE ESCAPE
BILL DANIELS
PENSIONER Olive Smith was run over by a train — and escaped with just a small head cut.
Horrified passengers saw Olive stumble and fall off a platform as an express roared in.
Amazingly, she slipped into a gap between the tracks and lay flat as the Intercity 125 rumbled over her.
Police and ambulancemen who rushed to Birmingham's New Street station expected to find she had been killed.
But Olive — who is in her 60s — was able to scramble back on to the platform.
Transport police said yesterday: ‘We were amazed she was alive and well.
‘The chances of surviving a fall under a train are almost nil.
She was lying full length and was helped back on the platform and she was able to sit up and talk.’
Last night Olive, of Wednesbury, West Midlands, was under observation in All Saints Hospital.
MYSTERY AS MUSCLE MAN DIES
SUPERFIT body-builder Bernard Ayre just managed to gasp out ‘I love you’ as he collapsed dying in his wife's arms.
And yesterday a coroner ordered tests to see if muscle-boosting steroids had caused his death.
Father-of-four Mr Ayre, 38, died at his home in Radyr, Cardiff, the day after complaining of constant pains.
His wife, Lesley, said: ‘He woke up early complaining he was thirsty.
‘He drank some water and just collapsed on me.
‘He told me that he loved me and that was it.’
MEET SEB'S LITTLE RUN!
OLYMPIC hero Seb Coe shows off the new girl in his life…and reveals that he's just Maddy about her.
Wife Nicky and the newly-elected Tory MP for Falmouth proudly propelled their first baby, five-week-old Madelaine, into the limelight for the first time.
Doting dad Seb is ‘delighted’ with his beautiful 8lb 7oz daughter.
But so far, Maddy shows no signs of taking after her speedy father.
She arrived two weeks late — forcing Seb, 35, to delay his maiden speech in the Commons.
Now he could be in the unfamiliar position of trailing in last…in the race among new MPs to speak in the House.
Maddy's birth took its toll in other ways too -especially on her dad.
‘I am too exhausted to even think about a speech now,’ Seb said, after the delivery.
‘My powers of concentration have been drained.’
Brit of crumpet
BRITONS spent £37 million eating a record 860 million crumpets last year — well over twice as many as we scoffed only six years ago.
The huge increase is partly down to last year's introduction of the finger-shaped crumpet, the first non-circular one since they first tickled English taste buds in the Middle Ages.
Kids just love them.
Sunday tea-time remains peak crumpet time.
King and clubs
PLANS to build a golf course near Tom King's Wiltshire home are being opposed by the former Defence Secretary.
LUCKY LESTER CHEATS DEATH IN RAF JET TERROR
His plane flipped upside down 
FRANK CORLESS/NIC NORTH
LESTER Piggott and three other jockeys came within an ace of death yesterday when an RAF jet missed their plane by just six feet.
The riders' six-seater aircraft was turned upside down after being caught in the Tornado's slipstream.
Lester said: ‘It almost blew us away.’
Fellow jockey Philip Robinson added: ‘We were so close you could see the whites of the pilot's eyes.
‘You won't come closer than that to dying without it actually happening.’
The terrifying near miss took place 4,500 ft above RAF Waddington, Lincs, as the riders were flying from Newbury to York races.
Four Tornados had just taken off — heading in loose formation towards the North Sea.
Suddenly one hurtled past the riders' Piper plane from underneath, sending the aircraft into a vicious somersault.
Close
The jockeys — Lester, Robinson, George Duffield and Michael Hills — were thrown heavily out of their seats.
Robinson said: ‘I thought the fighters were getting close.
‘Then one of them flew up in front of us.
It came within feet and we flipped.
‘It was like being in a car and hitting a brick wall.
The next thing I knew the pilot was screaming ‘Mayday!’’
Lester said: ‘It was terrifying.
We were all flung on to the roof.
We landed to see if any bits had dropped off — and some had.’
Lester, who failed to win any of his four races, and Duffield — who won the coveted Yorkshire Oaks — later flew back to Newmarket…in the same plane.
The plane's owners, ANT Aviation, said: ‘It was astonishingly close.
‘The result could have been terrible.
‘We had been given flight clearance.’
Last night, the CAA confirmed that pilot David Smith had filed a near miss report.
The Defence Ministry said the incident would be investigated.
FIGHTER: The Tornado slipstream flipped Lester's plane FRIGHT: Lester
Dying shame
SECURITY cameras are to be put outside the crematorium in Swansea to try to catch thieves who steal from mourners' cars.
Brother quizzed
THE brother of strangled schoolgirl Helen Gorrie was released without charge last night after being interviewed by police.
Labourer Jamie Gorrie, 20, of Horndean, Hants, had been helping with inquiries about his 15-year-old sister, who died 19 days ago.
VICTIM: Helen Gorrie
Curried Lamb
TWO of the top officials at the Meat and Livestock Commission are named Don Curry and Chris Lamb.
TRUCKERS' BEE TERROR
TWO lorry drivers were stung from head to foot by thousands of angry bees yesterday.
The swarm struck after Jack Ibbs tried to swat a queen bee from his cab in a lay-by in Upavon, Wilts.
And when trucker Brian Moore rushed to help, he was attacked.
Police found the pair writhing in agony in the road.
They were released from Salisbury Hospital last night after treatment for multiple stings.
Iraq blasts back
MARK DOWDNEY
ONE of Saddam Hussein's henchmen yesterday launched a bitter personal attack on Premier John Major and President George Bush over the allies' decision to send warplanes back to the Gulf.
Iraqi press officer Abduljabbar Mohsen rounded on Major calling him ‘the most stupid, most arrogant and silliest Prime Minister to rule Britain’.
And he called President Bush a ‘madman’ who ‘walks up and down the White House gardens in terror, moves forward like a lunatic, gazes with staring eyes’.
The outburst follows the allied decision to set up an exclusion zone to protect Shi'ites in Southern Iraq.
Iraq's EC ambassador Zaid Haidar said: ‘They are looking for military action to boost the re-election of Bush.’
Six RAF Tornados are expected to leave for Iraq from their base at Marham, Norfolk, by the weekend.
Two VC10s for mid-air refuelling and Hercules cargo planes will also go.
Mellor's like TV Rab say teenies
TINA WEAVER
MINISTER David Mellor's toes might thrill Antonia de Sancha — but Britain's teenagers find him a right turn-off.
They voted the Cabinet casanova with the gap-toothed smile and podgy jowls the unsexiest celebrity around.
He was lumped in the same class as telly slob Rab C. Nesbitt in a survey out yesterday.
Planet
Just Seventeen readers, aged 13 to 19, voted Beverly Hills 90210 star Luke Perry the sexiest person.
Soccer star Gary Lineker has the sexiest legs.
The lads' dream girl is top model Cindy Crawford.
But ‘most unsexy person on the planet’ is Esther Rantzen.
Last night Rab C. Nesbitt said his award was ‘a great honour.’
TURN-OFF: Mellor
TV boy's soccer joy
A BRAVE disabled boy's dream which moved millions has come true.
Anthony Dziendziel, ten, who conquered the loss of his feet with artificial limbs, told ITV's Telethon he wanted to play for Sheffield Wednesday.
Club shareholder Pam Revington fixed it and yesterday Anthony had a kickabout with the team.
It's och aye the no for Adrian
CLIVE CRICKMER
A SASSENACH called up for jury service in Scotland was sent home — because he couldnae understand the lingo.
Adrian Roberts, 51, has been bewildered by the tartan twang since moving north of the border from Sunderland three years ago.
He explained his problem as jurors were being sworn in at Edinburgh Sheriff Court to try a man accused of assault.
And he just about managed to make out the three words uttered by Sheriff James Farrell: ‘You are discharged.’
Speaking in his strong Wearside accent, demolition expert Adrian admitted yesterday: ‘I couldn't understand half of what people were saying.’
His Scots wife Martha said: ‘He can't make my family out at all.
I have to act as his interpreter.
‘Even then there are problems because he can't always understand me.’
A Scottish Office spokesman said: ‘Justice must not only be seen to be done — but heard to be done.’
Horny days over
DAREDEVIL Jose Rodriguez, 24, ran with the bulls at a festival near Madrid last year and lost a testicle when he was badly gored.
Macho Jose lined up for the same run at Leganes yesterday — and was wounded by another horn.
He decided to call it a day after doctors told him he had lost the other testicle.
Hue and cry
A SKIRT stolen from Pamela Shawcross's washing line at Westerham, Kent, was put back later with a note saying: ‘The colour didn't match.’
HERE COMES THE BRIDE 14 INCHES LESS WIDE…
Amanda sheds 7st
SAMUEL JAMES
SLIMMER of the year Amanda Colvill shed more than 7st so she could be a bride again…without looking all fat and wide.
The shame of watching a video of herself wobbling up the aisle at 16st 4lb had Amanda in tears.
Then husband Simon promised her an action replay if she could lose weight.
And for the second time that day, the bride vowed: ‘I will!’
Two years later — after Amanda shed 14 inches from her hips — the Colvills can BOTH fit into the skirt of her size 26 wedding outfit.
Now the happy couple plan a new ceremony to bless their marriage.
And they have a second honeymoon to go with their second wedding — Amanda's £1,500 Caribbean holiday prize for winning Slimming magazine's competition.
Amanda, 24, said: ‘When my wedding video was played at the reception I just wanted to hide.
‘I saw myself as others saw me…and it was horrible.’
Assistant bank manager Simon, 29, added: ‘Her size was not important to me.
Shape
‘But it was upsetting to see her so unhappy.
Now it's a joy to see her.
She is full of optimism.’
Amanda, of Chadwell Heath, Essex, had hoped to slim before the first wedding.
Then she discovered she was pregnant and the big day was  brought forward.
So she started her low-fat vegetarian diet after the birth of daughter Sarah.
She had no idea Simon had sent off her photo for the slimming contest until a letter arrived saying she was in the final.
Now 5ft 7ins Amanda is confident her switch to healthier eating habits will help her keep her new 9st 2lb shape.
And she cannot wait for her wedding blessing in December next year — on her fourth anniversary.
‘It's something really special for me to look forward to,’ she said.
‘And this time I'll be able to look at the video with pride.’
BROAD AND GROOM: Now Amanda AND Simon fit in her wedding skirt
BIG DAY: She's half the girl she was
Tomato super
EX-MINER Arthur Simcox, of Brown Edge, Staffs, has grown a 2lb 14oz tomato measuring more than 2ft round.
Journey's end
TEN athletes from Cornwall are hoping to complete an interrupted run from John o' Groats to Land's End — 13 years after setting off.
Death party hunt
POLICE last night named a man they want to quiz in connection with the murder of Michael Huntington at a nurses' home party 11 days ago.
He is Gary Johns, 27, who is known to visit north and east London, where he has friends and relatives.
Mr Huntington was stabbed after a group gatecrashed the party at Princess Alexandra Hospital, Harlow, Essex.
A 19-year-old man has been charged with murder.
Yard probe into Falkland deaths
SCOTLAND Yard is to probe allegations that British paras executed Argentine prisoners during the Falklands conflict.
A book called Excursion to Hell claims three prisoners were shot by two members of the 3rd Battalion Parachute Regiment in 1982.
The Ministry of Defence said Yard Commissioner Sir Peter Imbert would look for breaches of the Geneva Convention.
Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind passed the allegations to the Crown Prosecution Service which called in the Yard.
GO 4 1T drivers!
FLASHY drivers are expected to bid more than £2,000 for the registration number 123 GO at an auction in Edinburgh next month.
Thousands of plates from the DVLA at Swansea are going under the hammer.
Scottish drivers can buy NES 1E for £2,200.
And K 1LTS is on offer at around £2,500.
Bride n' gloom
TV soap star Sue Nicholls has put off her wedding to actor Mark Eden — because there was a queue when they went to a London register office.
‘But we'll do it eventually,’ said Sue — alias Coronation Street's Audrey.
WEDDING: Sue
‘Drunken cops on rampage’
A MOB of drunken, off-duty police officers caused mayhem on a train, it was claimed yesterday.
A report has been sent to Crown prosecutors.
An officer allegedly pulled the emergency cord as a joke.
Others are said to have abused passengers on the train from Peterborough to Harwich.
The officers, based at Peterborough, are still on normal duties.
Police are not taking action until they know whether the men face charges.
CUT OFF!
S0QUIRE AXES VILLAGERS' PHONE BOX
Bounders were parking near it
SYDNEY YOUNG
MILLIONAIRE squire Sir John Pollen has pulled the plug on the public phone box that has stood in his village for 30 years.
Now the locals have to trek one and a half miles to the nearest one.
Sir John, 72, ordered British Telecom to remove the box from the village green at Rodbourne, near Malmesbury, Wilts, because he was miffed that drivers kept parking by his £250,000 manor house to use it.
And BT couldn't put it anywhere else in the village — because he owns all the suitable sites.
Sir John, the seventh baronet of Redenham in Hampshire, who also has estates on the Isle of Wight and on a Scottish island, refused to discuss the matter yesterday.
But a local councillor, who asked not to be named, said: ‘It started when a driver parked his lorry by the box while he used the phone.
‘Another truck had to mount the verge to get by — and Sir John came out shouting.
‘That was in June, but he has wanted the box moved for years.
‘Rodbourne was a beautiful hamlet with just 100 residents, a church, a phone box and letter box.
Now we haven't even got the phone box.
It's becoming a ghost village.’
Sutch a fuss
THE annual conference of Screaming Lord Sutch's Monster Raving Loony Party in Devon next month may be covered by German TV.
Sex attack on bunny girl cop
TWO off-duty policewomen — one dressed as a Bunny and the other as a baby — were indecently assaulted by a businessman, a court heard yesterday.
The officers, aged 19 and 20, put on the fancy dress for a last night party at a camp for the disabled.
After they had returned to their tent, 46-year-old Michael White crept in.
He assaulted one as she sat in her sleeping bag then climbed into bed with the other, Guildford Crown Court heard.
The second officer said: ‘I got up and ran out of the tent.
I was terrified.
‘I was crying and running around in circles.
I didn't know where to go.’
Earlier, it was claimed, White, of Camberley, Surrey, had assaulted a woman volunteer at the camp near Farnham, Surrey.
He denies all three offences.
The case continues.
Don't worry, there's more!
NICOLA BRIGGS/ GEORGINA WALSH
SORRY, folks, if you didn't get a copy of yesterday's sensational Mirror.
So many of you wanted one that we rushed out an extra 403,000.
But there still weren't enough to meet the enormous demand.
Don't worry, though.
More of the world-beating copies are on sale today in areas that went short.
And yesterday's Bingo and Gold numbers are reprinted in case you missed them.
Daily Mirror sales spokesman Nick Thompson described demand as ‘just phenomenal’.
He said: ‘We were inundated with calls from members of the public and newsagents desperate for copies.
‘People have been buying the Mirror as a souvenir, snapping up five or six at a time.’
He added: ‘This sort of demand is virtually unmatched.’
The Mirror caused a sensation overseas as well.
Our news and picture desks in central London took scores of calls and inquiries from papers, magazines, TV and radio stations from as far afield as America and Australia.
Meanwhile, our scintillating issue left our British rivals for dead.
The Mail's front page pronounced tamely: Fergie is out in the cold.
And the Express did little better.
Neither, of course, had THE pictures.
UNBEATABLE: Mirror
SO DULL: Mail
FLOP: Express
MIRROR WAS RIGHT SAYS FERGIE'S MP
World clamours for a sight of our stunning poolside photos
BUT THE QUEEN IS NOT AMUSED
MARTIN PHILLIPS /DAVID BRADSHAW
FERGIE'S MP yesterday led a chorus of praise for the Daily Mirror's amazing pictures of the duchess's holiday romp with her ‘financial adviser’.
Tory Andrew Hunter — a guest at the Yorks' engagement party — branded Fergie's frolic ‘deplorable’.
And he added: ‘I do believe the public has a right to know, not least because she is largely financed by the taxpayer.’
Mr Hunter, whose Basingstoke constituency covers the Ferguson family's Dummer home, was backed by a host of other MPs and the overwhelming majority of Mirror readers.
But there was one notable exception to the flood of congratulations…the Queen.
Buckingham Palace issued a terse statement saying: ‘We strongly disapprove of the publication of photographs taken in such circumstances.’
Cuddled
The statement had the full backing of the Queen and Prince Andrew.
Our exclusive pictures showed how Andy's wife kissed, cuddled and cavorted topless with Texan John Bryan during a villa holiday in the South of France last week.
The photos, which sent shockwaves around the world, exposed the sham of Bryan's insistence that their relationship was purely professional.
And today — as we publish more evidence of their canoodling — the prospect of Andy and Fergie divorcing seems inevitable.
The title Fergie may or may not be allowed to keep is also certain to come under review, along with the cash settlement Bryan was supposed to be negotiating.
Tory MP Dame Jill Knight said Fergie had disgraced the title of duchess.
She added: ‘Frankly, I think she is an utter disaster from start to finish and was never going to make a member of the Royal Family.
‘The public has known that for some time.’
Labour MPs said Fergie's romp had badly damaged the monarchy and boosted demands for a review of the £10 million paid annually to the family by taxpayers.
Nigel Griffiths said: ‘Even monarchists have been disappointed at the sort of behaviour from some members of the Royal Family.
Leaped ‘There must now be a question mark over their future.’
There was no talk about ‘breach of privacy’.
But even those unhappy with the pictures felt Fergie had been foolish.
And an overwhelming majority thought the photos would not further calls for tougher press controls.
Mirror readers leapt to their phones to back our coverage — and blast the duchess.
Ardent royalist Dorothy Myers, a nurse of Rochdale, Lancs, said: ‘That woman has made the Royal Family into a laughing stock.’
Mary Mackie, 64, of Walton-le-Dale, Lancs, said: ‘It's not right she should be flouncing around with her fancy man.’
Housewife Rita Davis, of Ilford, Essex, said: ‘We would never have known what our taxes are going on if it was not for the Mirror.’
But Richard Eccleston, of Doncaster, Yorks, said: ‘Fergie should be left in peace to sort out her life.’
The Mirror's pictures made headline news around the world.
BBC radio's World Service, which broadcasts to scores of countries, called them ‘a real old-fashioned scoop’.
And Australian TV showed people clamouring to buy the paper.
IN THE SHADE: Bryan climbs above the sunbathing duchess
ANGRY: The Queen rides out at Balmoral yesterday Picture: JIM BENNETT
TENDER MOMENT: John Bryan strokes Fergie's hair as they sunbathe together by the pool in the South of France
TAKING A DIVE: Swimsuited Fergie prepares to leap into the villa's pool
CARRIED AWAY: Fergie takes a trip across the water on the shoulders of her ‘adviser’
ANOTHER TOW JOB FOR BRYAN
IT'S business as usual, Bryan insisted as he finally emerged from his Chelsea home to face the press — but he hadn't reckoned with PC — Police Clamper — Nigel Legge.
To ironic press cheers, copper Nigel squatted down to immobilise Bryan's hired Astra after it collected a succession of parking tickets — and Bryan then had to call in an executive minicab to whisk two companions off to lunch.
CAN'T GO!
PC Nigel fits the clamp to Bryan's hired Astra.
Pictures: KEN LENNOX
MUST GO!
‘Busy’ Bryan tries to fob off waiting press
Reader offers £5 for Mirror
COPIES of the Daily Mirror were changing hands for £1 or more yesterday — and one desperate punter offered £5 to get his hands on one.
ATS Tyre Services, at Camden, North London, had a copy.
‘A customer walked in this morning and offered us a fiver for it,’ said an assistant.
‘He reckoned it will be a collector's item.
But we wouldn't sell it.
We'll keep it.
‘The newsagent across the road arrived with a huge pile of Mirrors at eight o'clock and he'd sold out by 10.
They're like gold dust.’
Pint
At Windsor, Fergie's neighbours snapped up every available Mirror before breakfast.
In London's West End, The Falklands pub was offering a free pint for a paper.
Nearby, newsagent Ahmed Halawa sold out within minutes of opening at 7am.
‘People were saying they would pay £1.50 for a copy,’ he said.
Harrods sold out.
And one Fleet Street news vendor sold copies from under the counter at £1 each.
Mum murder quiz
A MOTHER was being questioned by murder squad detectives last night after the bodies of her two young children were found at their home.
The children, aged nine and five, are believed to have been drowned.
Their bodies were discovered in a flat at Peacehaven, Sussex.
Police broke news of the tragedy to their father who was taken to nearby Newhaven to give a statement to detectives.
PREVIN SLAMS WOODY IN SEX ABUSE STORM
Music maestro rages at comic's affair
‘I'm so shocked’
STEWART DICKSON
LOVE cheat Woody Allen was blasted last night by Mia Farrow's former husband Andre Previn.
The world famous conductor spluttered with rage when asked about the 57-year-old film-maker who has split with Farrow and started an affair with her daughter Soon-Yi.
Previn, 63, who adopted Soon-Yi when he was married to Mia, said:
‘You couldn't print what I think.
As a father I don't have a colourful enough vocabulary.
‘My opinion of Allen gets lower by the day.
I am terribly shocked and saddened that Woody chose to have a relationship with Soon-Yi.
‘It is an unspeakable breach of trust which has caused a great deal of  anguish in the family.’
Previn's attack came after Mia, 47, lashed back at Woody with a video tape.
She alleges that the tape shows her seven-year-old daughter Dylan describing how she was molested by Allen.
Allen, who is seeking custody of Dylan and two other children, denies the sex abuse claims.
Mia was stunned when she found nude photos of 21-year-old Soon-Yi taken in Woody's apartment.
Allen held a rare press conference on Tuesday to refute charges of sexually abusing Dylan and his four-year-old son Satchel — and accused Mia of demanding £4 million to drop the allegations.
Police in Connecticut are investigating the charges.
The sex scandal has left the family emotional wrecks, it was revealed last night.
Maria Roach, godmother to one of Mia's 11 children, said: ‘The whole family was in psychiatric care for several months.’
FURY: Allen denies charges
ATTACK: Andre Previn
Macaws dumped in a bin
TWO rare birds stolen from London Zoo have been discovered dumped in a rubbish bin.
The hyacinthine macaws, worth £25,000 as a breeding pair, were found at Henley, Oxon.
The male was dead and its mate ‘just alive’, a zoo official said yesterday.
They were probably ‘stolen to order’ by a gang whose deal fell through.
Bomb fear cripples rush hour
RUSH-HOUR commuter traffic was thrown into chaos last night after a phoned bomb threat closed six London main-line railway stations.
Hundreds of thousands of commuters faced delays while police searched the stations — Victoria, King's Cross, St.Pancras, Charing Cross, London Bridge and Cannon Street.
Surrounding roads were jammed and buses were filled to over-flowing as commuters switched from Underground lines following the coded warning.
Mum charged
HOUSEWIFE Tracey Evans, 31, of Peacehaven, East Sussex, was charged yesterday with murdering her sons Nicholas, 9, and Lee, 5.
US Navy rescues sick Brit
BRITON Michael Ford called in the US Navy when he fell ill on a Greek holiday — and was treated like an admiral.
A launch was sent to Rhodes to whisk fever victim Michael, an RAF mechanic, into the aircraft carrier Saratoga's hospital.
Cured Michael, 30, from South Shields, Tyne and Wear, said: ‘They were amazing.’
The black hole of coal-cutter
HOUSEWIFE Ruth Watkins got a sinking feeling yesterday — when a 470ft deep hole appeared outside her front door.
Workmen laying lines for a cable TV company accidentally broke through the covering of an old coal shaft.
And experts estimate it will take 1,000 tons of rock to fill the 12ft-square hole.
Ruth, 64, surveyed the void in the pavement outside her Bristol semi and said: ‘I was horrified.
I could have been killed.’
The 230-year-old shaft was covered 100 years ago.
TINY SPIDER EATS WOMAN
KEVIN O'SULLIVAN
A WOMAN faced losing all her limbs last night after being bitten by a tiny spider.
Valerie Slimp, 39, was fighting for life as the venom from the deadly Brown Recluse Spider attacked the cells in her body.
Mrs Slimp was bitten at her home in San Bernardino, California.
By the time doctors discovered what was wrong, the tissue in her legs and arms had already been eaten away.
Expert Dr Rick Vetter said: ‘The Brown Recluse — also known as the Violin Spider because of its shape — is more dangerous than the notorious Black Widow.
The spider, a native of America's Mid-west, is so tiny humans do not feel the bite.
It can take a month before you know you are bitten.’
Pair quizzed on cab rape
A MINICAB driver and a woman were arrested yesterday by police probing a rape and kidnap.
The pair were quizzed over the abduction of a woman who underwent a terrifying 15-hour ordeal after calling a cab to collect her from a pub.
They were held in Gypsy Hill, South London.
London's boozers the worst
BOOZY Londoners are the country's top tipplers, according to official figures.
There are three times as many arrests in the capital than in the rest of the country.
The Home Office says 682 people per 100,000 are convicted or cautioned for drunkenness in London.
The average for England and Wales is 207.
Merseyside is second worst with 498.
ADAM THE FAITHFUL
THEY'VE been together now for 25 years…and it don't seem a day too much.
In fact, beaming Adam Faith and his wife Jackie looked as chuffed as a couple of kids after celebrating their silver wedding at a top London restaurant.
Adam, 52, and former dancer Jackie had their marriage put to the toughest of tests in the early days.
They suffered the heartbreak of losing three children through premature births.
Then Adam, star of Budgie and Love Hurts, needed vital surgery after a heart scare five years ago.
Now though, life is just great.
And one happy couple are looking forward to another 25 years together.
Picture: ALAN GRISBROOK
Tragic hol girl's exam triumphs
A SCHOOLGIRL killed in a road smash while on holiday won FOUR A-level passes with A grades, it was revealed yesterday.
Ceri Marsden, 17, sat the exams before going on a family trip to Cyprus where she and her sister Sian, 14, died in the crash.
Margaret Hemmings, her headmistress at Ystrad Mynach, near Caerphilly, said the results showed Ceri had ‘a brilliant mind’.
NHS ‘LEAPING IN THE DARK’
HEALTH ministers were accused of a massive ‘leap in the dark’ yesterday as they prepared another shake-up of the NHS.
Hundreds more hospitals are to opt out of health service management and the Government wants to revamp the bureaucracy to cope with the changes.
Regional authorities face the chop and a smaller number of new committees will keep an eye on the self-governing trusts.
Already, 156 hospitals have left the NHS since trusts were set up two years ago.
A list of 151 next in line to go was published yesterday.
Remaining NHS hospitals will be urged to opt out in 1994.
Shadow health minister Dawn Primarolo warned: ‘The commitment to yet more opting out is a leap in the dark, putting at risk the very foundation of the NHS.
All we have is reports of cut-throat commercialisation, expanding privatisation, and cuts in services but not in waiting lists.’
THIRTY nurses are among nearly 100 staff facing the axe in a cost-cutting exercise at Cardiff's Royal Infirmary.
Ale and hearty
GERTIE Clark marked her 105th birthday in Melton Mowbray, Leics, with her normal daily tipple — two bottles of Newcastle Brown Ale.
Stinker's bank ban
BUSINESSMAN Brian Jones has been banned from every branch of a bank for a series of stink-bomb attacks.
He was upset that Barclays tried to check his credit-standing without telling him.
Now Brian, 43, of Tickenham, Avon, tows around an 18ft high sign: ‘You are WORSE off with Barclays.’
How tutu kind of you
RUSSIA'S famous Kirov ballet company are feeling the chill — they can't afford tights.
Now 100 pairs donated by the Northern Ballet company based in Halifax, Yorks, are to be shipped by coach along with spare tutus, other clothes and 30 pairs of ballet shoes to their struggling fellow-dancers in St Petersburg.
Man on cab rape charge
A MINICAB driver was charged yesterday with the rape and false imprisonment of a 26-year-old woman last week.
Philip Miller, 38, of Norwood, South London, is to face Tower Bridge Court today.
A woman arrested at the same time as the man was still being quizzed last night.
MERCY MISSION OF TRAGIC MUM
THE heartbroken mother of transplant donor Paula Moss is leaving England to work as a missionary.
Jane Moss said yesterday that the double heartbreak of her daughter's death and the murder of her own mum 11 years ago made her want to care for the needy.
The 34-year-old divorcee explained: ‘Those two tragedies have given me the strength to want to help others.’
Paula, 10, died of a brain tumour in April.
Her organs were used to save four people's lives and give sight to two more.
Her last wish was that she should be used for transplants.
Jane's mum Mary, 50, was beaten to death for just a few pounds in 1981.
A 33-year-old man is serving life for the killing.
Jane, of Bradford, said: ‘I visit the graves often and the thought came to me that there are people in desperate situations needing help.’
Now she plans to work in Romania or Africa.
‘I've done some nursing and I want to put it to good use,’ she added.
GIFTS OF LIFE: Paula
TOM THUMB BOY CAN WALK TALL AT LAST 
Leg-stretch ops add 8ins
GORDON HUGHES
TOM Thumb schoolboy Steven Green is walking tall — thanks to pioneering leg-stretch operations which have added eight inches to his height.
BEFORE the ops, the 2ft 8ins six-year-old was waist-high to most of his classmates.
But NOW, proud Steven is shoulder height…and he's still growing.
Mum Anne, 28, declared: ‘He's making excellent progress and the family is thrilled.
He really is a brave lad.’
Steven added: ‘It's just great.’
Now he can ride a bike and play football with his mates and brother Daniel, five.
But the boy — a victim of the growth-stunting disease achondraplasia — had to go through the pain barrier to achieve it.
These are the steps Steven had to take.
Surgeons broke both his legs below the knee.
Pins were inserted into the breaks and steel bars attached to the bones.
Plucky Steven had to have another operation.
Each day mum Anne adjusted the bars to stretch the bone to help his legs grow longer.
She turned a key four times a day — a quarter of a millimetre at a time.
Steven, of Haworth, West Yorks, had the first operation at Sheffield Children's Hospital two years ago.
Now with the bars removed he is proving a handful for his mum.
Surgeon Michael Saleh travelled to the continent to study the stretching technique before operating.
Mr Saleh said: ‘He was the youngest to have the treatment and still is.’
Steve, named Child of Achievement last year, was expected to reach just 3ft 6ins before the surgeons began their work.
They believed he would grow by six inches — but Steven added another two for good measure.
He could eventually grow to five feet or more.
Mum Anne said: ‘He'll have further stretch operations to face when he's nine and 14.
‘He should hopefully be a normal size for his age then.’
AFTER: Proud Steven is happy to be growing up
BEFORE: Tiny Steven
Sell-out Mirror's on top of the world
NICOLA BRIGGS
WE did it again.
Your world-beating Daily Mirror was another sell-out yesterday.
We were ready for the rush — and had printed an extra 400,000 papers.
Many newsagents were cleaned out of Mirrors by 8 am.
All over Britain it was the same story — with shops re-stocking their shelves as the rush to read our stunning scoop continued.
Readers were also still snapping up copies of Thursday's paper after we rushed out 403,000 extra to meet the overwhelming demand.
A WH Smith survey of 600 newsagents across the country showed their sales of Thursday's paper were up by 17 per cent.
In Ashford, Kent, an amazing 31 per cent more Mirrors than usual were sold.
Daily Mirror sales spokesman Nick Thompson called the boom ‘unbelievable’.
Sensation
He said: ‘People were fighting for copies.
‘We were again flooded with newsagents wanting more papers.
‘And we were ready for the clamour.’
He added: ‘We made special checks of the train stations to make sure the commuters got their copies.’
The Daily Mirror has caused a sensation overseas, too.
Papers abroad realised they just could not match us — and didn't even bother to try.
The three leading Belgian dailies simply reproduced our Page One on their front pages to tell the story of ‘Fergie and Johnny’.
And they devoted columns to discussing the possible effects of our exclusive pictures on the future of the royal family.
It was the same story in Germany and Holland where our issue also made the headlines.
Switzerland's French-language tabloid Le Matin said the Mirror photos had ‘provoked the most serious royal crisis since the 1936 abdication of Edward VIII’.
Le Parisien declared in France: ‘Fergie takes top off, crown trembles.’
And the Italian daily La Stampa described the situation as ‘Monarchy in the mud’.
Excitement
It added: ‘This explosion deepens the cracks in a monarchy which a number of Britons have for some time regarded with a mixture of indifference and contempt.’
The Mirror was also big news in America, where one weekly tabloid The Star planned extra editions.
The New York Daily News described Fergie as ‘The Duchess of Vulgarity.’
But L'Humanite, the French pro-communist paper refused to get excited — and ignored the royal scandal completely.
READ ALL ABOUT IT: A London buyer yesterday
READ ALL ABOUT IT: Let's get the inside story
READ ALL ABOUT IT: One woman buys in bulk
Girl Friday's family history of mischief
JOHN Bryan's glamorous personal assistant has a history of mischief herself.
Blonde Julia Delves Broughton, 31, is a member of the family at the centre of the movie White Mischief.
The film is the story of decadent British aristocrats who did not give a damn for anything but their own pleasure.
Main character is Sir Jock Delves Broughton, Julia's grandfather.
Sir Jock was accused of murdering his wife's lover in Kenya in 1941.
He was cleared at a celebrated trial and later committed suicide.
Fergie and Andrew were guests of honour when the film was given its world premiere in London four years ago.
Julia's father Sir Evelyn, 76 — son of Sir Jock — boycotted the film, saying it was ‘rubbish’.
I'M HERE, BOSS: Bryan's assistant Julia goes about her work yesterday
CARING PRINCESS EASES THE PAIN
JAN DISLEY
PRINCESS Diana put the royal family's agony behind her yesterday…to comfort the dying.
While others at Balmoral were losing sleep over the Fergie scandal, Diana was up at dawn preparing for a surprise visit to terminally-ill cancer patients.
She shared a 6.55 am scheduled flight from nearby Aberdeen to Humberside with thirty businessmen and oil-rig workers.
Then she was driven without fuss to the Dove House hospice at Hull.
And for eight hours she devoted herself to sufferers and staff — smiling, chatting and listening.
A hospice spokesman said later: ‘It was a lovely surprise for everyone.
‘When she opened the hospice in June, she gave no indication that she intended to come back.’
Diana's arrival gave a big boost to patients, said another visitor 74-year-old Frances Smee, whose husband Joseph, 78, has bone cancer.
‘They all think she's wonderful,’ added Mrs Smee.
As the princess left, hospice chairman John Cumming said:
‘She met all our residents and spent a great deal of time chatting with them.
‘Among them were people she had met on her earlier visit.
‘It was certainly a lovely day.’
A Buckingham Palace spokesman said: ‘She wanted to see much more of the workings of the hospice.’
Face of comfort DIANA spent eight hours visiting a hospice for sufferers from cancer yesterday.
Mellow pages
AUTHOR Ken Andrew, of Bournemouth, Dorset, has had his first racy novel published — at the age of 98.
I'm broke Borg tells a court
MARK DOWDNEY
FORMER tennis champion Bjorn Borg — being sued for £400,000 — claimed yesterday: ‘I am more or less bankrupt.’
The cash is being claimed by 11 Swedish companies following the collapse of the star's fashion business.
They say he personally guaranteed the debts.
Borg, 36, who won the Wimbledon singles title five times, denies this.
He made £60 million as one of tennis's biggest stars but lost a fortune in disastrous business deals.
Pay-off He has also been ordered to pay £2 million to first wife Mariana Simionescu, and hand over cash to Jannike Bjorling, his son's mum.
Borg is currently negotiating a pay-off for his second wife, Italian singer Loredana Berte, too.
He said in court in Stockholm: ‘I ‘ve done nothing wrong.
‘I don't want to sit in court, it feels unpleasant.
I want to play tennis.
Tennis is my life.’
COURT: Borg
Home loan fear as pound slides
ANDY McSMITH
NEIL SIMPSON
DEARER mortgages loomed last night as the pound slumped to its lowest-ever level on world money markets.
And the Government was forced to admit that the shattered economy shrank by 2.4 per cent last year — the biggest annual fall since records began in 1948.
Now Chancellor Norman Lamont will find himself facing a full-scale sterling crisis when he flies home from his Italian holiday next week.
Strict EC money system rules could force him to raise interest rates.
This would hit struggling homebuyers and businessmen, plunging Britain deeper into recession.
Flopping
Central banks from round the world were drafted in yesterday to stop the pound's slide.
But they couldn't stop it flopping to 3.79 German marks — just a fraction above the lowest permitted level.
And the Government's disastrous economic figures would have been even worse but for millions of pounds income from North Sea oil and gas.
IRA kill holiday woman
A WOMAN holidaymaker was shot by an IRA gunman in Belfast last night to bring the grim death toll in the Ulster troubles to 2,999.
Mother of four Isabella Leyland of Rochdale, Lancs., was hit in the back as the gunman opened fire on a security patrol.
The 41-year-old victim — visiting her mother in Belfast — was collecting photos from a camera shop just before leaving for Britain and home.
A man passerby caught in the same hail of bullets was wounded in the arm.
1,000 RATNER JOBS GO DOWN THE PAN
‘Crap’ boob blamed
JOHN JACKSON
RATNERS, the jewellery chain whose profits plunged after its boss branded one of its lines ‘total crap’, announced yesterday it is to close 180 shops.
The move, which follows a £122.3million loss last year, is expected to cost 1,000 jobs.
A further 150 Ratners stores in the United States will also shut down, making a total of 330.
Although the recession was said to be the major cause, blame was also aimed at tycoon Gerald Ratner, whose father founded the firm and built it up to become Britain's biggest jewellery chain.
Last year, after announcing a profit of over £112million for the previous year, Ratner told the Institute of Directors that a cheap cut-glass sherry decanter was sold for £4.99 because it was ‘total crap’.
Shares
And he said his company's 99p set of earrings would not last as long as a Marks and Spencer prawn sandwich.
Ratners shares immediately plummeted and the value of the company fell by £496million.
Ratner, 42, stepped down as chairman but stayed on as chief executive.
He was forced to sell his Thames-side mansion at Bray, Berkshire, for £1.5million — £700,000 less than he paid for it in 1988.
His family was moved to a modest family home nearby, although they retained their other house in Mayfair, London.
New chairman James McAdam, brought in to replace Ratner and try to halt diving sales, said yesterday: ‘Adverse publicity after the conference contributed to the particularly poor performance of the 250-shop chain’.
Gerald Ratner, who earned £615,000 a year when chairman of his then thriving family firm, was not available for comment yesterday.
BOSS: Gerald Ratner…firm's profits plummeted
IN DE MONEY
NO wonder David Mellor saw something special in Antonia de Sancha.
She arrived home from a foreign holiday yesterday considerably richer than when she left.
While other holidaymakers end up changing their last few pesetas and returning to bills on the doormat, bronzed Antonia was laughing all the way to her agent Max Clifford.
He revealed that the once-struggling actress has already netted £50,000 from interviews since news broke of her affair with Minister for Fun Mr Mellor.
Antonia, 31, spent two weeks in the Caribbean with a girl pal.
‘She is doing very well,’ Mr Clifford beamed.
‘Offers have been flooding in — even since she's been away.
She has made £50,000 from just saying nothing.
Now she's ready to talk about what she wants.
‘But she's not doing a kiss-and-tell…not yet,’ he said teasingly.
LAUGHING: Tanned Antonia, back in London and in the money yesterday
LOVER: David Mellor
Pate of the art
BALDIE Jim White has covered his embarrassment…by having a ‘wig’ tattooed on his head.
Jim, 58, from Blackpool, had suffered constant jokes since losing his hair at 24.
AIR FARES WAR
TERRY PATTINSON
BRITISH Airways launched a new fares war yesterday by slashing the cost of winter flights.
Return trips on trans-atlantic routes will start at £229 from October until the end of next March.
That is £150 less than the current summer rates and £70 off last year's prices.
The reductions bring BA's fares into line with the APEX autumn fares of rival Virgin.
Cheapest flights will be to New York, Newark, Washington and Boston.
Other APEX returns announced by BA include £289 to Chicago and Detroit, and £309 to Los Angeles, San Francisco and Seattle.
Increased competition from US companies has caused the price cuts with more airlines now being allowed into Heathrow.
MIA BEAT ME, SAYS DAUGHTER
Storm over nude photos
STEWART DICKSON
LIVID Mia Farrow beat her adopted daughter Soon-Yi with a chair after finding out about her affair with Woody Allen, it was claimed yesterday.
She also cursed and punched the 21-year-old beauty — and then cut up her clothes, it was alleged.
Soon-Yi told friends that Mia went wild after finding nude photos of her in film-maker Allen's Manhattan apartment.
Woody, 57, and Mia, 47, were lovers for 12 years.
They are now locked in a bitter custody battle over their three children.
After Mia confronted Allen over the pictures, she telephoned Soon-Yi and ordered her: ‘Stay in your room until I get home!’
Soon-Yi, who was adopted by Mia and her former husband, conductor Andre Previn, said Mia cursed and hit her — and then locked her in her room.
Scream
A friend of Soon-Yi said: ‘Mia would wake her daughter in the middle of the night and scream at her: ‘Look what you've done to me — how could this happen?’'
Mia's publicist John Springer said: ‘I'm unaware of any angry reaction Miss Farrow had to her daughter's affair but it would be understandable.’
Soon-Yi has reportedly moved into Allen's apartment which faces Mia's across New York's Central Park.
Another of Mia's children, 14-year-old Moses, repeated allegations that Allen had sexually abused his seven-year-old adopted daughter Dylan.
Moses said: ‘He should be locked up.
He is a sick man.
He once threatened to punch my teeth out.’
Connecticut police say they are investigating a complaint.
Allen strenuously denies the allegations.
ACCUSER: She says Mia beat and cursed her
OUTBURST: Angry Mia
Stinking drunk
POLICE gave a driver a shower before B-testing him after he fell into a slurry pit while trying to flee at Uckfield, Sussex.
Patient is strangled
POLICE searched a hospital yesterday after an ex-patient was tied up and strangled with a scarf.
The 62-year-old woman was found in a disused psychiatric ward at Maidstone Hospital, Kent.
Help, my nude is plastered
A NUDE model had to be cut free by firemen yesterday after she got plastered — literally.
Her adoring artist boy-friend encased her in plaster of Paris to take a mould for a life-size statue of her.
But it set rock hard and he couldn't free her.
Nor could doctors after a 999 crew rushed her to hospital in Bath.
They had to call the Fire Brigade, who managed to chip her free with special power tools.
A spokesman later said: ‘She has lost her eyebrows and lashes and is very red — but apart from that she's unharmed.’
High hopes
UNFINISHED Canary Wharf, at 50 stories the tallest office block in London, is to be a new tourist attraction with a £3 charge to view from the top.
Down & ouch
PARACHUTIST Val Dargonne, 32, of Hove, Sussex, made a jump for charity — then broke her ankle as she slipped getting into her car.
Wig ‘n’ pier
ANGLER Arthur Davis cast his line off Dover pier in Kent — and hooked the wig he'd lost in the sea a week earlier.
TV FANS DRIVE DOT SO BATTY
ALEC LOM
HOUSEWIFE Dorothy Gregg is swapping the Last Of The Summer Wine for a bit of peace — on the Costa Eldorado.
She and husband Tom have bought a villa a stone's throw from the BBC's Spanish soap set — so they can get away from tourists at home!
Dorothy's Wrinkled Stocking tearoom — named after broom-wielding battleaxe Norah Batty — has been overrun with trippers since BBC chiefs chose to feature it in the evergreen Pennine series.
Coachloads descend in the hope of spotting Compo, Clegg and Foggy.
The tearoom kitchen, at Holmfirth, West Yorkshire, doubles as Compo's bedroom.
But the fame of the place has driven Dorothy, 59, to buy a home in Mijas, ten minutes from Eldorado.
Retired bobby Tom, 64, explained: ‘It's so quiet and peaceful out there — just what you want at our age.’
Dorothy said: ‘We groan and bear all the attention from tourists that Summer Wine has brought here, so now we're looking for a much quieter life out there.
‘But even if Eldorado becomes a hit like Last Of The Summer Wine, I certainly WON'T be opening a Spanish tea-room.’
COSTA-BOUND: Dot
Horror of attic body
WORRIED mum Pamela Pilbro spent three weeks searching for her 20-year-old son Philip — unaware that his decomposing body was hanging from rafters in the attic.
An electrician made the grim discovery when he went into the loft at Milton Keynes, Bucks.
Bubbles has a fun farewell
FUN-LOVING Lady ‘Bubbles’ Rothermere was given a fizzing funeral yesterday — with Frank Sinatra's recording of New York, New York.
As her coffin was carried to the grave, Ol' Blue Eyes sang the line: ‘Start spreading the news, I'm leaving today.’
And the the song brought affectionate smiles to the faces of 200 mourners saying farewell to the wife of newspaper owner Lord Rothermere.
The ex-actress, who died ten days ago at 63, was famed for her flamboyant personality.
Message
And the service in a village church near the Rothermere family estate at High Hurstwood, Sussex, matched her exuberant lifestyle.
The music also included Sinatra's My Way and Louis Armstrong's What A Wonderful World.
Lord Rothermere laid a heart-shaped wreath with the message: ‘I miss you and will miss you and your courage, your fun and your laughter all the days of my life.’
FLAMBOYANT: Bubbles
‘Jobs for the girls’ probe
AN estate agency which has only two men among its 22 staff is being investigated by the Equal Opportunities Commission.
But Lesley Beattie, owner of the York-based Friends Estate Agency, yesterday denied that she is biased against male employees.
Mrs Beattie, 37, said: ‘When I find a man who can recall the colour of a lounge carpet in the third house of six visited that day, then I will happily interview him.
‘Men just look at the roof and the brickwork.
Women view a home.’
Soccer star's shame
FORMER Fulham footballer Gary Cobb was given a suspended jail sentence yesterday for attacking a detective.
He sat shame-faced as a court heard that his career was in tatters because of the stag night brawl.
Cobb, 23, of Luton, Beds, had tried to stop police struggling with a friend, West London magistrates were told.
BRAWL: Cobb
Stripped
THIEVES who raided Swansea City football club's laundry room stole kit worth £300.
SLEEVE HORROR
A TRAIN snagged a student's sleeve and dragged him to his death.
Nick Hartwell, 23, of Llanfair Clydogau, Dyfed, died as he tried to cross the track at the station in Marseilles, France.
Big Ed's caught napping
COMIC Eddie Large is to star in a video ‘nasty’…showing him grunting and snoring in his sleep.
Eddie's actress wife Patsy Ann Scott secretly filmed the roly-poly star as he snoozed in bed.
Bobby Davro will show her video next month in a new BBC series in which he pokes fun at his pals.
SNORES: Large
‘LETHAL WEAPON’ BUS DRUNK IS SENT TO JAIL
Coach ‘like a bomb’ says JP
A COACH driver who climbed into the cab of his ‘lethal weapon’ for a 300-mile trip while almost three times over the drinks limit was sent to jail yesterday.
A furious magistrate told Terrance Long: ‘You might as well have been driving a bomb!’
It was only by chance that Long was prevented from driving his 72-seat National Express double-decker from London's Victoria coach station just after midnight.
An off-duty cop spotted him slumped in the driver's seat fumbling to find the ignition button to start the trip to Penzance.
The prosecution at Horseferry Road court, Westminster, said there was only one passenger aboard the coach when Long was arrested.
The defending lawyer told magistrate Terence Maher that Long, 48, turned to the bottle after his wife divorced him three years ago.
Binges
Since then he had succumbed to sporadic drinking binges.
Long had quit his job because of the incident and was unlikely to get another.
The magistrate told Long: ‘You put yourself in charge of a lethal weapon and posed very grave dangers to innocent members of the public.’
Long, of Perranporth, Cornwall, pleaded guilty to being drunk in charge of his coach on August 7.
He was jailed for two weeks and banned from driving for 18 months.
And the magistrate advised him to join Alcoholics Anonymous.
MAJOR RON IN HIS JIM JAMS…
FERGIE'S dad Major Ron Ferguson, who is no stranger to scandal, was seen in his striped pyjamas yesterday.
He threw open a bedroom window at his farmhouse in Dummer, Hants, and yelled to waiting newsmen: ‘You are wasting your time.
Please go away.’
Major Ron, 60, later drove to Cardiff to greet children from war-ravaged Kuwait.
He joined civic leaders and medical experts from Mid Glamorgan council, who are helping handicapped children from the Gulf kingdom.
The major put on a show of support for Fergie with other guests.
Referring to a polo match last year to raise money for needy Kuwaitis, he said: ‘It was a great pleasure to me that my daughter presented prizes that day.’
In Dummer's pub, the Queen Inn, demand for Fergie's Fizz — a champagne cocktail introduced in her courting days — fizzled out.
BUSH WHACKS CLINTON THE ‘POT SMOKER’
George battles back
‘I bite bullets — he bites nails’
MARK DOWDNEY
GEORGE BUSH came out slugging yesterday — and savaged the White House contender Bill Clinton.
Off came the gloves as Bush ridiculed his Democrat rival as a marijuana-smoking, Vietnam war draft-dodger.
Delighted Republicans chanted: ‘Hit him again, harder, harder’ as Bush waded in.
And they got a huge boost hours later when it was revealed that the president had made a spectacular recovery in the polls.
A CBS News poll showed him neck and neck with Bill Clinton, who had been way ahead for months.
The president accused Clinton of planning the biggest tax increases seen in US history.
He taunted him as a ‘waffler’ during the Gulf War.
‘While I bit the bullet, he bit his nails,’ sneered Bush.
But last night Bill Clinton hit back branding Bush a ‘fearmonger’ who is ‘untrustworthy’.
He said: ‘George Bush took credit for every victory around the world, but refused to take responsibility for any problem here at home.’
And in a speech lasting more than an hour, he accused the Republicans of lying to keep the power, prestige and perks of presidency.
Jeered ‘The national Bush crowd thinks it belongs to them,’ he told a meeting in Detroit.
‘They will say or do anything to hold onto it.’
The Bush broadside came on the last day of the Republicans' convention in Houston, Texas.
He jeered at the Arkansas Governor's ‘evasive’ statements on balancing the US budget.
‘He's like that on a lot of issues, first one side, then the other.
He's been spotted in more places than Elvis Presley.’
On Clinton's plans to rescue the US economy, the president snarled: ‘I guess you'd say his plan really is Elvis economics.
America will be checking into the Heartbreak Hotel.’
The president also promised sweeping tax cuts if re-elected.
Pledge
The pledge was attacked by Clinton's camp as ‘a blatant attempt to buy this election.’
Democratic party chairman Ron Brown added: ‘George Bush has already said he would do anything to win this election.
Now he has proved he will say anything to win.’
HALLELUJAH!:
Confident Bush signals victory, supported by wife Barbara
SAVAGED: ‘Waffler’ Bill Clinton
CHARLES' HUG WAS SO CARING
DAVID LEIGH
CARING Prince Charles helped his close friend Lady Romsey come to terms with the death of her child from cancer, she reveals today.
Speaking for the first time publicly about the death of Leonora, five, Lady Romsey praises Charles for his ‘incredible caring and understanding.’
She says: ‘He's made a big difference to my being able to get through it.
He's always doing things quietly and behind the scenes and he's always there with that one little touch to encourage you to keep going.’
Leonora's cancer was diagnosed as the couple holidayed with Charles and Di in Majorca.
‘Prince Charles put his arms around me — it was automatic compassion,’ Lady Romsey tells Woman magazine.’
Smelly the elephant on £1000 a week!
ANNA the elephant is earning more than £1,000 a week for her owners — just by doing what comes naturally.
Gardeners reckon her manure is pure gold.
And they are happy to pay £5 for a five-litre tub to spread on their roses.
Anna, a nine-year-old Burmese elephant, can produce an awful lot of valuable muck — enough to fill 30 tubs a day.
With production going full steam ahead seven days a week, three-ton Anna's earnings for her bosses at Whipsnade wild animal park, Beds, have soared to around £55,000 a year.
Bun
That puts her on a par with big earners like doctors and airline pilots.
But her keeper Graham Frost says Anna doesn't want to get stinking rich.
‘All she needs is a pat on the trunk and a sticky bun,’ he said.
A Whipsnade spokesman said: ‘I think a lot of people are buying our half-size £3.50 tubs as an original gift for their friends.
‘But I believe most of them go to gardeners.
I've heard people say it's great for roses.’
Wedding hell
RAIDERS stole jewellery, bank cards and cash worth £2,200 from the home of honeymooners Ian and Toni Hunter at South Ockenden, Essex.
FLY DO!
Janet gets a jet fax proposal
AMAZED Janet Johnson listened aboard a packed airliner as her boy-friend proposed from 3,000 miles away — using the pilot as a go-between.
The Caledonian Tri-star carrying 400 passengers and crew fell silent as the loudspeakers announced: ‘This is your captain speaking.
Will you listen very carefully?
‘I've just received an important telex.
It's for Janet Johnson…
Colin says will you marry him?’
Janet, 30, burst into tears and blurted out ‘I will’ as fellow passengers applauded and flocked to buy her champagne.
Cabin crew immediately flashed her reply from Bangor in Maine to Colin Gardener waiting anxiously at his home near Wigan, Lancs.
Medical rep Janet was coming home after winning a trip to Jamaica.
She said yesterday: ‘The proposal came out of the blue.
‘I was so stunned.
I love Colin dearly but we've never even discussed marriage.
Even so I had no hesitation accepting.’
Romantic Colin had sent the telex to Orlando airport but the aircraft had already taken off.
The message was then diverted to Maine where the Tri-star was re-fuelling.
The captain presented Janet with the fax as a keepsake.
BACK DOWN TO EARTH: Beaming Janet and Colin toast their future
NHS waste cash on a VIP guide
HEALTH chiefs have spent £3,000 — producing a glossy 30-page guide to organising royal visits.
The £12 a copy book tells what brand of tea to buy and how to stop VIPs getting lost.
Hard-up hospital bosses slammed it as a waste.
But North West Thames health authority, which produced it, said: ‘The cost was surplus from our budget and was never meant for patient care.’
Four killed in plane horror
FOUR men died when their plane smashed into a mountainside at the weekend.
Rescuers last night spotted the wreckage strewn at 1,500ft on the isle of Jura, off Scotland.
The single-engine Socata vanished from radar screens after taking off for Mull from Blackpool on Saturday.
The victims were believed to be a Lancashire textile boss and three friends.
FURY AT CBI BID FOR WAGE FREEZE
TERRY PATTINSON
CBI chief Howard Davies angered union leaders last night by urging a pay freeze for millions of Government and town hall workers.
The new boss of the Confederation of British Industry says any rises should be based on improved efficiency.
But TUC economic committee chairman Rodney Bickerstaffe called the proposal, coming on top of bumper increases for bosses, an ‘insult’.
PAY rises are falling, with many deals now below the 3.7 per cent inflation rate, according to a new report.
PLEA: Mr Davies
Holiday Brits in cell ordeal
BUNGLING police looking for a Mafia drugs ring swooped on four ‘suspects’…a British holiday couple and their two children.
Bradford engineer Mike de Garis, 36, was held for 36 hours in a cell in Faro, Portugal, before police realised they had boobed.
His wife Sue, 36, daughter Michelle, 12, and son Mark, nine, were held in a cell seven hours.
Fun-gun hell for war kids
TWO boys from a war-torn country went on a fun outing in Britain…and recoiled in terror.
The Croatian youngsters dived for cover when a starting gun was fired during a police dog display.
The boys, on a two-week holiday, were quickly comforted at the show in Bridgend, South Wales.
A trip organiser said: ‘They reacted as if still at home.’
AL LIKES TO STRUT STUFF
SHAMED former law chief Sir Allan Green confesses today: ‘I like performing in public’.
But the former Director of Public Prosecutions — who quit after he was caught kerb-crawling in King's Cross, London — is talking about acting on stage.
Sir Allan, 56, is one of hundreds of famous folk who reveal the secrets of their schooldays in Old School Ties, published today.
He told its authors: ‘I took part in a number of school and house plays at Charterhouse and so acquired a taste for performing in public.’
Pop singer Samantha Fox was rapped for being too sexy in a school musical, she reveals.
Sam, 26, played the female lead in a version of the movie hit Grease.
But she was told to tone down her act after the first performance
Sir Alec Guinness's head refused to put him in the school play — thinking he would never make it as an actor.
SHAME: Green
Soldier is accused of shooting sentry pal
A TEENAGE soldier was last night accused of killing a colleague on sentry duty.
Sapper Paul Bartlett, 20, collapsed with a bullet in his head outside Gibraltar Barracks at Minley, Hants.
Police said he was shot by a standard issue SA80 rifle, one of the Army's deadliest weapons.
Seventeen-year-old Michael Nield, who had also been on guard duty, was immediately arrested.
Prank
He was charged with manslaughter and will appear before magistrates at nearby Aldershot today.
Earlier a detective had said: ‘We believe the shooting was the result of a prank.
‘We think one soldier had been playing with the weapon when it went off.
‘It is clear there are no terrorist implications.’
Nield, from Cheshire, joined up as a boy in a junior leaders battalion before passing out into the Royal Engineers.
Mum is a pain in the past
SHARP-EYED doctors have relieved Brenda Panting of her 19-year-old pain in the rear.
A simple X-ray spotted an inch-long needle left in the 56-year-old mum's bottom when she was giving birth to her daughter, Jane, in Rotherham, Yorks.
They had blamed everything from arthritis to a bowel condition.
Brenda, from Bridlington, says the £800 compensation offered is ‘derisory’ and is to fight for more money.
Ravin' mad
A POLICE hotline set up to take calls about a rave party in Stafford got two complaints — about the noise from a police helicopter.
ASHES FLASHES
Rockets send Jeff to heaven
STEPHEN WHITE
A FAMILY paid their last respects — then alerted air traffic control before firing their dad's ashes into the heavens inside 28 sky rockets.
Brilliant bio-chemist Jeff Thorp went out with a bang as the rockets exploded at 300ft, scattering his cremated remains in a shower of silver, green and red stars.
His daughters Elizabeth, nine, and Jane, 19, lit the blue touch paper in an eccentric hillside ceremony watched by friends and relatives.
Widow Janet, 43, said: ‘Jeff wanted a jolly affair.
It was his dream to colour the sunset with his ashes.’
Airliners were warned to stay clear of the area for the 15-minute service on Kerridge Ridge, overlooking Jeff's home in Rainow, near Macclesfield, Cheshire.
Wicked
Janet added: ‘My husband had a wicked sense of humour and had to have the last laugh in life and death.
‘But we didn't want to cause a plane crash.’
Heart attack victim Jeff, 72, planned his send off down to the last detail.
He consulted with the crematorium to find out that his 15-stone frame would leave 4lbs of ashes.
Jeff, who invented ICI's first heart drug, checked with rocket scientist mates who told him that one huge rocket was out of the question.
He decided the best way was to divide his remains into 28 smaller launches.
Jeff even carried out trial runs using rockets stuffed with coal dust.
Meticulous Jeff had hoped for a fine, calm evening — but it was misty and windy.
Despite the weather the blast-off went ahead as planned.
‘Everything went perfectly,’ said 18-year-old son Peter.
‘Dad would have been proud.’
FINALE: Family with rockets and (inset) blast-off Pictures: KEVIN FITZPATRICK
JEFF: Firework send-off
Copter duo cheat death
TWO men had a miracle escape yesterday when their helicopter burst into flames and crashed after hitting a power line.
Pilot James Rimmer and Bob Taylor, who won the flight in a pub draw, were comfortable in hospital at Warrington.
Little fall guy
A BOY aged three fell from a sixth floor balcony in Murcia, Spain, bounced off a sunshade on to a clothes line and escaped unhurt.
Yobs taunt soccer girl
SOCCER fans hurled abuse at actress Eve Barker as she filmed at half-time.
Eve, 23, who plays a striker in a men's team in a BBC drama, said the Chelsea and QPR fans were ‘disgusting’.
Ring masters
A COURSE in circus performing will teach students in Bristol how to be trapeze artists, acrobats — and clowns.
FARRAH AND HER TOY BOY
HOLLYWOOD beauty Farrah Fawcett steps out with a guy she loves — her son Redmond.
Seven-year-old Redmond, whose father is Farrah's longtime darling Ryan O'Neal, coolly sipped a soft drink while strolling alongside the former Charlie's Angel in Los Angeles.
Farrah, 45, is said to be shopping for a challenging film role.
But her boy, who already has one success in the can, would settle for a shiny new toy.
WE WARNED TEN AGO ABOUT TRAGIC KIDS
Outcry over double death
GEORGINA WALSH
TWO children were strangled only 10 days after police were warned that they were in danger, it was claimed yesterday.
Angry neighbours said they had repeatedly alerted officers and council officials after Jason Harry, six, and his sister Natalia, five, were heard screaming week after week.
Social workers decided they would be safe with their 23-year-old unmarried mother.
But the youngsters were found dead in their beds after she walked into a police station at the weekend.
Stephen Piacentini, 79, who lives next to their home, said he heard the children's cries on Saturday — only hours before their deaths.
He went on: ‘They were really bad screams, like when kids are getting hurt.
They were bloodcurdling.’
Screaming
His daughter Liz, 53, added: ‘I called the police last Wednesday week because it was so bad.
Other people called too.
‘The children were screaming, ‘No mummy, please no.’
It sounded like someone was torturing them.
‘Police said they couldn't do anything because social workers believed their mother was good enough to look after them.’
Officers who found the youngsters' bodies were horrified by the scene and some wept as they left the flat in Tottenham, North London.
Neighbours claimed the children's mother, Sharon Dawson, had been unwell for months.
Sid Walcott, 49, said she had shouting matches with her boyfriend, the children's father.
He added: ‘A few months ago she went berserk.
Her mum got her into hospital but Sharon discharged herself.’
Police said the family was monitored by Haringey social services.
Lad's pals pay for his new ears
A SCHOOLBOY born without ears is to get a pair of artificial ones.
Friends have chipped in to raise £7,000 to pay for the delicate operation.
Craig Kendall, 12, who suffers from a rare bone disease, grew his hair long to stop spiteful playground taunts.
But last night at his home in Bradford, he said: ‘The first thing I'm going to do is have it cut.
I want short back and sides like my mates.’
Mum Dorothy, 37, said: ‘He's over the moon about the operation.’
First-time girls
A THIRD of women prisoners have no previous convictions, compared with 11 per cent of men, says a new report.
Cops robbed
RAIDERS broke into Derbyshire police HQ at Ripley yesterday and stole the wheels from an impounded 160mph Ford Cosworth.
Pension fight off
THE Government has forced robbed Mirror pensioners to scrap a vital court case.
It insists it will claim legal costs if the pensioners lose it.
Pension campaign leader Ken Trench last night said: ‘It's a shoddy way to try to stop us fighting for our rights.’
TORIES ‘DOZE TO DISASTER’
THOUSANDS of jobs are at risk as the Tories ‘sleepwalk’ their way through Britain's crippling economic crisis, Labour warned yesterday.
Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown slammed the ‘arrogant complacency’ of Ministers who did nothing for homeowners, the unemployed or small businesses.
ATTACK: Brown
STREETS AHEAD WITH TV HOTEL
A LUXURY £12 million hotel with a TV theme is to open just a stone's throw from Coronation Street.
Granada, makers of the top soap, are turning an old studio into the Victoria and Albert hotel, with each of its 132 rooms named after hit programmes.
In it there will be a Weatherfield Suite — inspired by the fictitious town in which the Street is located.
Guests at the Manchester hotel will see souvenirs and reminders from the company's most popular programmes.
There will be a Krypton Factor room for the energetic, A Kind Of Loving for the romantic and even a conference suite named after the inventor of TV, John Logie Baird.
A spokesman said: ‘You might find a half-finished script in your bedside drawer or a prop on the writing desk.’
There will be touch of a programme in each room.’
And there will be no danger of fans taking a shine to the ‘special effects’.
The spokesman added: ‘Most of the items will not be moveable.’
DADS ARE BIG BABIES!
EXPECTANT fathers are a pain, a doctor said yesterday.
French expert Michael Odent claimed dads present at the birth — like rock star Rod Stewart, actor Michael Caine and Prince Charles — often gasp and groan as though in agony.
Some fathers-to-be even put on weight, added the doctor, who has a London clinic.
STAR POP: Rod
Anguish of bride
HEARTBROKEN bride-to-be Liza Pickles fears she will have to cancel her September 12 wedding in Bradford — because her fiance is trapped in war-torn Bosnia.
Legal executive Liza, 24, said the Bosnian army would not let 25-year-old boxer Senad Pezerovic, who had fought with them as a volunteer, travel to Austria to get a visa for Britain.
Brits saved as cruise ship sinks
MORE than 500 passengers and crew were plucked from the sea after a luxury cruise liner sank yesterday.
They dived overboard as the 13,000-ton Royal Pacific went down within 15 minutes of being hit by a large trawler.
At least 12 Britons were among survivors rescued by two passing ships.
Seven people are still missing and two bodies have been found.
The collision happened off Malaysia 48 hours after the Greek-registered ship left Singapore on a voyage advertised as a ‘cruise to nowhere’.
A hole ‘as big as two buses’ was ripped in its side.
Mature student
TERRY Tyacke, 66, of Trowbridge, Wilts — who left school with no qualifications — has passed his 17th A-level exam.
SKYDIVER LANDS ON BABY'S PRAM
JAN DISLEY
TODDLER Robert Boardman narrowly escaped death when a parachutist flattened his pram.
The two-year-old was snatched to safety by his quick-thinking dad Bob seconds before the off-target skydiver swooped down, frantically yelling at crowds to get out of the way.
Bob also threw himself on top of three other children to shield them.
But his estranged wife Christine, 39, was knocked out and had a leg broken.
Nine other people were slightly hurt and parachutist Chris Lomax suffered arm and leg injuries.
Bob, 39, said: ‘Robert would have been a goner if I hadn't got there when I did.
The skydiver came from behind us and crushed his pram.’
Chris plunged into the group as hundreds of people watched an Army display team in Bolton, Lancs, on Saturday.
Bob, from Bolton, added: ‘I don't think it should have gone ahead.
It was windy.’
The Army is investigating the incident.
You rotten radio rats
WIVES and girl-friends jammed a radio phone-in yesterday to brand their men ‘rats’.
They poured out tales of two-timing and desertion to DJ Steve Penk at Piccadilly Key 103 station in Manchester.
He said: ‘It was phenomenal, the phones were going all day.
Luckily my own wife hasn't called.’
HEADACHE PILL LEFT ME PARALYSED BLIND & DUMB
JAN DISLEY
SCHOOL dinner lady Christine Aspland was paralysed, blinded and struck dumb by a simple headache pill, doctors believe.
The 43-year-old mum went through six weeks of agony after her skin literally peeled off.
And medical experts say the horrific condition may have been brought on by a paracetamol tablet.
Chris was three days into a holiday in Cornwall when she fell ill.
Her body turned purple and broke out in enormous blisters.
The skin on her back and legs began to come off.
Her throat swelled up until she needed a tracheotomy.
And all her internal membranes began to disintegrate.
Anguished husband Ron, 60, could only grip her fingertips to show her he was there.
Raw
And her identical twin sister Anne could only tell she was sobbing by her trembling chin.
‘It was like something you read in a horror story — only worse,’ said delivery man Ron yesterday.
‘There was no skin on her back and legs.
She looked like a piece of liver.’
Amazingly Chris, from Parson Cross, Sheffield, pulled through.
At the city's Royal Hallamshire Hospital, consultant David Gawkrodger said her illness — toxic epidermal necrolysis — only strikes one in a million people.
Its main cause in adults is severe drug reaction.
Chris said: ‘It was horrendous.
All I knew was pain.’
PAIN: Chris and twin Anne Picture: PHIL SPENCER
Olympic gold in a toad
THE golden secret of China's Olympic swimmers was revealed yesterday — their medal haul was down to a potion made of toad skins, birds' nests and dried snakes.
The creepy brew was dished out to the squad in Barcelona and helped them win four gold and five silver medals.
There wasn't a murmur of disapproval from the drug testers — all the ingredients were natural and contained no chemical stimulants.
The Chinese say the ancient remedy fights fatigue, builds stamina and ‘increases achievements by 100 per cent’.
WHO LOVES YA, EMILY?
FILM star Emily Lloyd looks demure as she enjoys a night at the movies in Los Angeles with new boyfriend Nick Savalas.
Emily, 21, is famous for playing the spoilt brat in films like Wish You Were Here and Scorchers.
But she behaved perfectly with Nick, son of Telly Savalas, the lollipop-sucking TV tec Kojak.
Major's brother is too hard up to go to Butlin's
GEOFF SUTTON
THE Prime Minister's elder brother has been forced to scrap his annual holiday at Butlin's…because of the recession.
Terry Major, 59, has been going to Butlin's at Bognor Regis in West Sussex for 20 years.
But this year the Premier's lookalike brother can't afford it.
‘The sensible thing to do, the most important thing for anyone, is to pay the mortgage first,’ he said.
While the Prime Minister, his wife and daughter enjoyed a luxury villa holiday in Spain, Terry and wife Shirley stayed at home in South London.
Terry has only been abroad once in his life — to Germany when he did his National Service.
‘John and I like different sorts of holidays,’ he said.
‘I'm happy going to Bognor.’
Missing Bognor — See Pages 2 & 3 
HOLS: The Premier
NO HOLS: Terry
DIANA
AS TAPES MYSTERY DEEPENS…
THE REAL TRUTH ABOUT HER NOW
and her secret cash for battered wives
CATHERINE O'BRIEN/ TINA WEAVER
PRINCESS Diana has sent a secret cash gift to a battered wives' refuge that the Mirror has been campaigning to save.
Her donation was revealed last night as two voice experts gave verdicts on a recording said to feature Diana chatting intimately to a man on the phone.
One dismissed the tape as an amateurish hoax.
The second said that there were ‘many questionable areas’ in the recording.
But while the mystery deepened, the princess put royal problems behind her — and set off at daybreak on her second trip in four days to comfort cancer patients at a hospice.
Diana sent a personal cheque for a ‘substantial amount’ from her Charities Trust Fund to help women at the Chiswick Family Rescue in London.
Director Sandra Horley had written to Diana's office explaining that the pioneering sanctuary was under threat through lack of funds.
‘I told her about the suffering of battered women and of the desperate need to make sure they have somewhere to run,’ said Mrs Horley.
‘I felt guilty writing because I know she is always besieged by charities asking for help.
‘I thought she might give us a mention but to get a personal donation like this is more than we could ever have hoped for.’
Diana asked for the amount of her cheque, dated August 10, not to be disclosed.
We launched the Mirror Woman Rescue Chiswick Appeal last month.
So far readers have raised £13,400, which will go a long way towards safeguarding the centre's future.
As refuge staff were still celebrating the royal windfall, the princess was on her way from Balmoral to the Trinity House hospice in Blackpool.
Diana, who had visited the hospice last month, spent six hours yesterday chatting to its forty surprised patients — and having musical fun.
Nurse Gabby Timson, 20, said: ‘The last time she came we were singing.
Sing-song
‘This time she asked, ‘Have you got your guitar?
I fancy a sing-song.’'
The princess sang along with old favourites such as The Streets Of London and My Liverpool Home — plus the hospice hymn Give Me Oil For My Lamp.
‘She really enjoyed herself,’ said Gabby.
Diana also had a poignant reunion with the parents of Louise Woolcock, who died a fortnight ago from cancer at 21.
Louise met Diana at the hospice a year ago and again last month.
Yesterday Louise's father Phillip said: ‘She expressed her condolences and her admiration for Louise.
She's easy to talk to — it was like meeting a friend.’
He recalled that only last Friday Diana had travelled to a Humberside hospice.
And he said: ‘When she's got problems of her own yet takes time out to do this, it leaves me tremendously impressed.
You have to be impressed.
‘She made this a wonderful day for us and eased the pain tremendously.’
See Mirror Woman tomorrow 
GIVING HOPE: Diana sent a ‘substantial’ cheque for battered wives
POOL PLEA BY FERGIE
EXILED Fergie stayed out of sight at home yesterday — and called in a maintenance team to check the pool at her rented mansion.
Police and private security guards kept photographers well away from the rented lodge in Wentworth, Surrey.
But there were no poolside frolics because of steady rain.
HOME: Fergie
LOANS SET TO SOAR
DAVID BRADSHAW
PREMIER John Major flew home from his Spanish holiday yesterday — ready to kill off the last lingering hopes of early economic recovery.
He has ordered a crippling interest rate rise this week if the Pound comes under renewed pressure.
The crisis has also forced Chancellor Norman Lamont to cut short his holiday as the Bank of England tries to stave off a run on the Pound.
It will use huge sums of foreign reserves to prevent sterling falling below its floor with the German mark in the exchange rate mechanism.
But if that fails, interest rates are set to rise.
Downing Street said the Government would ‘do whatever is necessary’ to keep the Pound within its ERM band.
Labour trade spokesman Robin Cook said: ‘An interest rate rise would be a terminal blow to home owners and factories low on orders.’
Tory MP Michael Spicer called for lower rates ‘to avoid this very grave recession turning into a slump’.
But Ian Amstad, of Bankers Trust investment bank, said: ‘Mr Lamont will be lucky to get away without raising rates.
The situation is developing into a crisis.’
Taking A Pounding — Page 6 
ORDERS: Major
HOW, THE BROTHER HALF LIVES
WHILE Terry had to stop at home, brother John soaked up the Spanish sunshine in a luxury holiday home on loan from an old friend.
Just like last year, the Premier, wife Norma and daughter Elizabeth relaxed at the eight-bedroom country hacienda in Candeleda near Madrid.
Mr Major has now flown home to deal with the economic  crisis.
HONOURED GUESTS: John, Norma and local mayor
‘I like to go round the park in Bognor and photograph squirrels’
WHY THIS YEAR TERRY WON'T GET HIS HOLIDAY SNAPS
(THE GREY ONES, OF COURSE, Mr MAJOR) I HAVE MET SUCH INTERESTING PEOPLE AT BUTLIN'S
GEOFF SUTTON
THE Prime Minister's brother revealed what he enjoys most on the sunny South Coast.
‘I like to go round the local park in Bognor and photograph squirrels,’ he says.
But this year John Major's elder brother Terry is missing out on his annual Butlin's holiday.
With the economy in the doldrums and the Pound struggling to keep its head above water, it was no time for Terry to splash out a couple of hundred quid beside the seaside.
Instead, he and wife Shirley are staying at home in South London.
Terry, who closely resembles the Prime Minister, said: ‘Shirley and I love Butlin's.
Always to Bognor, oh yes.
‘We've made interesting friends there and we like it.
‘We go self-catering in our own little chalet and it's our house for the week.
I can shut the world out and simply unwind.’
But Terry added: ‘These are tight times for everybody.
‘Like everyone else, I have to look after my money and husband my resources.
‘I've been keeping some by for a rainy day.
But living necessities have to come before holidays and trips out.’
Proud
Father-of-two Terry, 59, is proud of his 49-year-old brother.
But the two live worlds apart.
JOHN has the Premier's pay and perks — £79,000 a year, his official Downing Street residence and use of Chequers, plus his £250,000 home at Huntingdon.
TERRY lives in a modest terraced house on a small pension and his wife's earnings.
JOHN struts the world stage, rubbing shoulders with presidents and princes, on a hectic round of chauffeur-driven engagements.
TERRY likes the quiet life and doesn't drive.
He retired early from electrical work because of a slipped disc.
And although he and John lead separate lives, being the Prime Minister's brother does have advantages.
He said: ‘I've met lots of interesting people that I would never have seen before and I've even had some nice letters.
‘One lady invited us to go to her cottage for a holiday.
‘I suppose we could have gone but I would have preferred the holiday camp.’
A week in a chalet would have cost the Majors £214 — less if two friends shared.
But Terry could take his wife for a three-night self-catering break for as little as £20 each.
Terry said: ‘Shirley has a week off in September and we may well go down to Butlin's.’
FEELING THE PINCH: Stay-at-home Terry Major outside his London house, No 7 Picture: BILL KENNEDY
WISH WE WERE THERE: One of the water-world treats at Butlin's
What he'll miss
HARD-UP Terry Major will miss out on treats at Butlin's.
Cabaret stars he might have enjoyed include singers Chas and Dave, the Beverley Sisters, Gerry and the Pacemakers and comic Stan Boardman.
Terry won't be taking a dip in the waterworld either.
Heated to 84F, it boasts flume rides, a wave machine and tropical rainstorms.
He has also kissed goodbye to free films and sing-alongs.
But Butlin's said: ‘Even in recession there is no need for Mr Major to go without his Butlin's holiday.’
IT'S A FAKE, SAYS TV VOICE EXPERT
NIC NORTH
THE mysterious Princess Di tapes were dismissed as amateurish fakes by a voice expert last night.
He heard them alongside recordings of Di speaking at a conference and said that although there were similarities, the voice patterns of the unidentified woman did NOT match Di's.
The expert made his judgement on Sky TV — owned by Rupert Murdoch who is also boss of the paper which printed a transcript of the tapes.
Another analyst also cast huge doubts on their authenticity.
Catherine Charlton said: ‘There are similarities between the woman on the tape and the princess but there are many questionable areas.
‘Diana's voice is more open, less nasal, than the one on the tape.
‘There are also differences in pronunciation of sounds and words.’
Torment
Mrs Charlton, who does work for British and US universities, added: ‘There are many, many indications that it could be somebody who is very good at mimicry and improvisation.’
Mrs Charlton said of the conversation: ‘The tone of the tape is unnatural for an intimate couple.
‘It is odd that they said so many things to identify themselves within a few short sentences.’
Earlier, Buckingham Palace again tried to distance itself from the riddle.
A spokesman said: ‘We have not said it was a hoax.
We have not offered any opinion as to what its nature is.
‘We have simply said we are not taking it seriously.’
On the tapes, a woman — allegedly Di — is heard telling a man about the torment within her marriage.
The Palace said: ‘It is inconclusive in terms of voice quality.’
Tory MP Geoffrey Dickens claimed the recordings might have been leaked to blacken the Royal Family and warned that ‘evil forces’ could be at work.
He said: ‘Special Branch should now be called in to flush out what I suspect is a politically-motivated mole operating within the palace.’
Griffin's Eye — Page 6 Johnny Come Lately — Centre Pages
Loans set to rise as sick £ flounders
NEIL SIMPSON/ IAN MILLER
DEARER interest rates loomed last night as Britain's shattered economy took a double walloping.
Trade figures showed we slumped £934 million into debt last month.
And the pound reeled, wiping almost £10 billion off share values.
The Government beat putting up interest rates by the skin of its teeth.
But many experts think it is only a matter of time before Chancellor Norman Lamont is forced to raise them.
‘The sky is the limit now for interest rates,’ warned top City broker Paul Turnbull.
‘They must go up, and they could go to 12 or 13 per cent.
‘Economic policy in the UK is a shambles.
We should never have joined the ERM.’
Feared
A rise in interest rates would be disastrous for millions.
It would mean more job losses, dearer mortgages and more firms going bust.
The July trade gap was £200 million worse than most experts feared.
City economist Nick Parsons said: ‘The figures are desperately disappointing.
‘We are now talking about if, not when, the UK economy ever recovers.’
Labour branded the figures ‘shocking.’
Libs want licensed brothels
A NETWORK of state-licenced brothels should be set up, say the Liberal Democrats.
Demands to scrap anti-prostitution laws are to be debated at their annual conference.
A motion from the Selly Oak constituency says reform is needed to curb health risks and to stop growing violence.
Registered brothels could be governed by the laws affecting any business, the conference in Harrogate, North Yorks, is to be told.
Party chiefs said an inquiry into sex-for-sale may be set up — with prostitutes giving evidence.
Yes, I'm off
THE boss of the TSB bank, Don McCrickard, 55, has quit amid rumours of a boardroom row and said ‘yes’ to an estimated £600,000 pay-off.
Vandals spray Eubank house
VANDALS have daubed a sick message at the new home of death-drive boxer Chris Eubank.
They sprayed the words ‘Kevin, R.I.P.’
in bright yellow paint on the wall of the £600,000 Hove mansion.
Eubank, the WBO super middleweight champion, was stunned when he saw the message yesterday.
It was a grim reminder of the moment he knocked down and killed road worker Kevin Lawlor earlier this year.
Kevin, 33, was hit by Eubank's Range Rover as he drove along the London-Brighton road.
Enraged
Eubank, 26, denied careless driving when he appeared in court at Haywards Heath last week.
He was found guilty — but fined just £250.
The size of the penalty enraged Kevin's family.
Aunt Christine Smith stormed: ‘He might as well have run over a dog.’
Eubank moved into his new home two weeks ago.
His brother Simon removed the graffiti.
Kevin's sister-in-law Susan said: ‘Many people were very disturbed by the way the case went.
‘But no matter what he has done we can't condone anyone vandalising his house.’
Now top children's hospital is hit by killer bug
JILL PALMER
A KILLER bug involved in the deaths of two babies at a leading hospital has now hit world-famous Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital in London.
It was discovered in the cardiac intensive care unit where 10 children were recovering from open-heart surgery.
The unit was immediately closed, all heart operations cancelled and new admissions halted.
The outbreak comes less than a month after the bug struck 11 children in the intensive care unit at Guy's Hospital, London.
Two of them died.
Isolated
Four young children in Great Ormond Street have been infected.
The germ, a strain of klebsiella which is resistant to most antibiotics, was found during routine screening.
The six other young patients were clear and were immediately isolated from the infected four.
‘The four children were not showing any signs of infection but during routine screening, which we carry out every week, we discovered they had the bacteria,’ said a hospital spokeswoman.
‘The four children are being nursed under strict infection control procedures and every precaution has been taken to prevent further spread.’
The unit was reopened yesterday.
Jagger and Jerry in secret weekend bid to mend marriage
TINA WEAVER
MICK Jagger and Jerry Hall have spent a secret weekend together in a bid to thrash out their marriage troubles.
Mick flew to Texas to join his wife several days ago, fellow Rolling Stone Ronnie Wood revealed last night.
‘I haven't heard how they got on but I saw Mick just before he went and he was very positive,’ said Ronnie.
‘He wants to sort things out.’
Ronnie, who arrived at Heathrow from Los Angeles with wife Jo yesterday, predicts rock's most famous couple will be together again before long.
‘They are old friends and they have been through a lot worse than this over the years.
I am sure they will be back together soon,’ he said.
Ronnie saw 49-year-old Mick in Los Angeles and asked how he was coping with the separation.
‘When I asked him about it he told me: ‘Leave me alone — I'm working.’
‘But he and Jerry have been through a lot together and I'm sure they will sort things out,’ he added.
Jerry, 36, flew to her mother in Texas 12 days ago after spending two weeks at the couple's Loire Valley chateau pondering her marriage problems.
She had blamed Italian supermodel and heiress Carla Bruni for their split.
There has been talk linking Jagger and Carla, 25, since last year.
Spotted
Then she was said to have been his holiday companion in Thailand in April this year.
But Carla has denied ever having an affair with Mick and says she has never even been to Thailand.
Carla said: ‘He's far too old anyway.’
Meanwhile Mick is reported to have been seeing glamorous 21-year-old Aussie model Peta Wilson in Los Angeles.
The couple were spotted doing a raunchy snake dance in a nightclub after Peta attended a riotous party he threw.
Mick and Jerry have had plenty of ups and downs in their 15 years together.
At first, Jerry was believed to be the woman who could tame Mick.
But rumours of his ‘flings’ have long plagued her.
Last night, Mick's mother Eva said: ‘It's too early to say anything.
Time will tell.’
COURT MAN IN 30ft LEDGE DEMO
A MAN perched precariously on a crumbling ledge yesterday — threatening to jump and protesting his innocence of a burglary conviction.
Lenny Roberts began the dramatic demo by climbing out of a window at Birmingham's Victoria Law Courts.
Crowds watched as court staff and police tried to grab him to stop him plunging 30ft on to spiked railings.
Roberts moved along the 6ins ledge to the corner and said he would jump if anyone tried to get him back inside.
Nurses living opposite said Roberts shouted to them he had served 10 months' jail for a burglary he did not commit.
After more than an hour his solicitor arrived to talk to him.
And as Roberts leaned in a window, police grabbed him and bundled him in.
A chunk of the 150-year-old stonework crashed to the ground in the brief struggle.
Police said they had no idea why Roberts was at the court as he was not due to appear on any charges.
GOTCHA!
Police grab Roberts as he leans in a window to talk
HE'S IN: Masonry crashes from the ledge as Roberts struggles
PROTEST: Roberts shouts his innocence
Serbs told: You'll be out in the cold
SERBIA will be told tomorrow that it faces total isolation unless it halts the killing in Yugoslavia.
The warning will be delivered by John Major when he opens the London peace conference.
A third Royal Engineer was wounded as heavy fighting raged in Sarajevo.
The Serbs claimed 1,700 artillery shells fell on their positions in the past 24 hours.
Catapult boy shot
A 16-YEAR-OLD boy who fired a catapult at a low-flying Sri Lankan air force helicopter yesterday was wounded when the copter's gunner mistook him for a Tamil terrorist and shot back at him.
HOLIDAY BRITS FLEE HURRICANE ANDREW
150mph wind set to pound Disney coast
MARK DOWDNEY
THOUSANDS of British holiday-makers were among a million people who fled Hurricane Andrew yesterday.
The tropical storm smashed through the Bahamas, killing at least four people, and headed for Miami and other resorts in southern Florida.
Weathermen said heavily-populated areas faced severe damage early today from winds of over 150mph.
They feared 12ft tidal waves would lash the Atlantic coast from West Palm Beach to Miami and the Florida Keys.
The Association of British Travel Agents said its members were moving hundreds of British tourists to safety in Orlando.
A spokesman said Thomsons had flown 114 people out of the Bahamas.
‘Others are being moved by coach and plane from Miami to safer areas in north Florida.’
Rosie and Mike MacCullum, from Manchester, were among Britons ordered to leave the Hawaiian Hotel in Palm Beach.
Party
Mike watched TV warnings of the approaching hurricane.
He said: ‘It's frightening to see the eye of the storm taking a direct aim at you.’
Helen Praschma, manager of hotel flats in Fort Lauderdale, said: ‘We have moved three English families.
‘One London family wanted to stay and have a hurricane party.
But it's much too dangerous.’
Many Americans found shelter in churches and community centres — but hundreds more were turned away when they got crowded.
Fights erupted outside supermarkets as shoppers battled for parking spaces in desperate efforts to stock up with canned goods.
FOREIGN Office said last night it was sending a Royal Navy frigate and supply ship to help in Bahamas.
TERROR: Satellite film of hurricane near Bahamas
Castle recruits son of Reagan
ROY Castle is to be joined as a presenter on TV's Record Breakers by Ronald Reagan Jnr — son of the former American president.
Reagan will present wacky American records including unicycle skipping and cherry pip spitting.
RECORD: Roy
Scarlett aged 61!
AN actress old enough to be drawing her pension begged to play glamorous Scarlett O'Hara in a sequel to Gone With The Wind.
US TV producers in Atlanta, Georgia, turned down Pat Dail, 61 — despite her claim that she could ‘act 24’.
It's love-all when Elton sees stars
STEWART DICKSON
POP king Elton John holds court with tennis legend Billie-Jean King, actress Elizabeth Taylor and her husband Larry Fortensky.
They teamed up for an after-show celebration after Elton and rock star Eric Clapton thrilled fans at a huge outdoor concert in New York.
Elton, 45, had special words of thanks for Liz and Larry.
The couple have been two of the multi-millionaire showman's biggest supporters in his campaign to help AIDS charities.
Liz, Larry and Billie-Jean were among thousands who packed the Shea baseball stadium to see Elton play.
The Rocket Man's performance was out of this world.
Stick with it
BORED workers at a Cardiff boutique super-glued pound coins to the pavement — and watched people try to pick them up.
WIFE VOWS TO FIGHT FOR JAILED BRIT
BRAVE Julie Ride pledged yesterday to win her husband's freedom from an Iraqi jail.
She declared: ‘We will not let him sit there for seven years.
‘We are trying our best to get him out before that…as quickly as possible, and we will see him soon with any luck.’
Her husband Paul, a 33-year-old catering manager, was caged in one of Iraqi tyrant Saddam Hussein's jails last week.
He was convicted of entering the country illegally, though it is believed he accidentally strayed over the border from Kuwait, where he was working.
Clasping their 17month-old son William, Julie, 31, from Walthamstow, East London, added: ‘I don't want this little chap to go through life without his dad.’
She dismissed allegations that Paul was spying as ‘silly nonsense’.
Asked what message she would like to send to him, she said: ‘I love him.
As long as he knows that he is loved and being thought about.
‘But if I can keep my sense of humour, I hope that we will be all right.’
PLEDGE: Julie yesterday
HUSSEIN'S CANCER OP
KING Hussein of Jordan DID have cancer, it was confirmed last night.
Malignant cells were discovered in tests after the king had a kidney removed on Thursday at the world-famous Mayo Clinic in the US.
But a senior aide said: ‘The cancer was in the very early stages.
It was contained totally and has not spread anywhere else.’
The 56-year-old king's personal doctor also announced that Hussein is ‘recovering very well.’
He is expected to leave hospital to return to Jordan in a few days, and won't need any further treatment, the royal doctor added.
‘WELL’: Hussein
WOODY ‘SO WONDERFUL’
ANTHONY HARWOOD
MIA Farrow's adopted daughter spoke for the first time yesterday of her ‘wonderful’ affair with Woody Allen.
Soon-Yi, 21, said the 57-year-old film-maker was never a father-figure to her.
She said: ‘I have a wonderful relationship with Woody.
I admit it's offbeat but let's not get hysterical…
I'm not a retarded under-age flower who was raped or molested by some evil step-father — not by a long shot.’
Soon-Yi was adopted by Mia and her ex-husband, conductor Andre Previn.
She told Newsweek magazine that Mia, Allen's lover for 12 years, was hot-tempered and terrified her children.
Soon-Yi said Mia's claim that Allen had molested his seven-year-old daughter Dylan was ‘ridiculous’ and driven by a desire for revenge.
OFFBEAT: Soon-Yi
Fancy dress fiend jailed
GOOD Samaritan Michael White was jailed for a year yesterday for sex attacks on two off-duty policewomen after a fancy dress party.
White, 46, who helped out at a holiday for the disabled near Farnham, Surrey, fondled the girls — dressed as a bunny and a baby — following the end-of-camp party.
Switched on
RADIO Wyvern, of Worcester, won a ‘noise consciousness’ award yesterday after producing a series of jingles urging listeners to keep the volume down.
LITTLE BELTER
Lou puts dad on the mat
FIONA MCINTOSH
NOT many men get the better of judo hero Ray Stevens…but he's a pushover for his little lad.
And three-year-old Louis brought Britain's Olympic silver medallist down to earth with a bump when they clashed.
‘It's just play-fighting for me,’ said Ray, as he landed with a bone-crunching thud.
‘But Louis really means it.
He thinks he's a judo star in the making — and, he might well be!
He already insists on wearing a black belt like mine.’
The workout at a club in Fulham, London, was Ray's first since his arrival home from Barcelona — and our dramatic picture of him being greeted by Louis.
But unemployed Ray, 29, fears he may miss the next Games in 1996.
‘Without sponsorship it will be impossible to continue,’ he said.
HEADING FOR A FALL: A flick of the wrist from little Louis sends his Olympic judo hero dad Ray flying Pictures: KEN LENNOX
CRASH LANDING: Louis roars in triumph as dad hits the deck with a thud
THAT'S MY BOY: And Ray can still raise a smile as he gives Louis a leg up
FLASHBACK: Louis greets Ray after the Olympics
Tragedy of pals in mountain air crash
JAN DISLEY
TRAGIC businessman Bob Watts was killed in an air crash days after becoming a grandad, it was revealed yesterday.
Mr Watts, 55, an experienced pilot, died with three friends after his plane hit a mountain on a remote Scottish island.
And last night his widow Millie, also 55, said he had just celebrated the birth of first grandson Jonathon.
‘He was the apple of his eye,’ she said.
Mr Watts, from Ribchester, Lancashire, was flying the group to a shooting event on Mull.
Alarm
Textile boss Trevor Balmforth, 60, of Clitheroe, builder John Greenwood, 46, of Slaidburn, and fishmonger Ian Shaw, 53, of Waddington, were also killed.
The crash happened on Jura island on Saturday.
But the alarm was only raised 30 hours later when a hotelier phoned to ask why their reservations had not been taken up.
Your fry-ness
THREE fire engines raced to Buckingham Palace yesterday — to deal with a chip pan blaze in guards' quarters.
‘Flowerpot’ is £100,000 Ming vase
A RARE Chinese vase worth up to £100,000 has been used for years as a flowerpot.
Antiques expert Guy Schwinge spotted it while  valuing a house at Dorchester, Dorset.
He said yesterday: ‘It is a beautiful Ming-style vase dating from around 1725.
‘But the owner didn't have a clue it was so  valuable .’
The vase will now be auctioned in Dorchester next month.
MY WONDER BROTHER
STEPHEN WHITE
HAPPY Neil Greenwood yesterday hugged a little wonder — brother Brett.
The tot, Britain's most premature surviving child, had just come off the danger list after a three-month fight for life.
Brett weighed a mere 1lb 5oz and was as short as a watchstrap when he was born seventeen weeks early.
And parents Christine and Mark, both 22, had to buy him dolls' clothes from toyshops because he was so small.
Doctors at Leeds General Infirmary gave him a one-in-ten chance of living.
But yesterday, at 4lb 2oz and 17 inches, he moved to a hospital nearer the family's Hebden Bridge house.
Soon he will go home to join Neil for good.
And consultant Malcolm Levene said: ‘I'm confident he'll lead a normal life.’
MIGHTY MITE: Baby Brett, now 4lb 2oz, with brother Neil yesterday
Picture: PHIL SPENCER
TINY MITE: Brett weighed 1lb 5oz at birth
Brit mum murder as baby sleeps
A YOUNG English mum has been brutally murdered in front of her two-month-old daughter in Spain.
A horrified neighbour found Kay Gannon, 20, slumped over the bathroom sink in her apartment with a knife embedded her back.
Police at Calpe, near Benidorm, say she was washing her hair when the crazed killer struck.
Comforted
All the time her daughter lay asleep nearby in a cot.
Kay, from London, moved to the resort with her parents Sean, a carpenter, and Elaine.
Last night they were being comforted by British friends at the resort.
Detectives say Kay's Spanish boyfriend, Manolo, is not a suspect.
A baffled Civil Guard spokesman said last night: ‘We have no leads to go on.
‘There are no signs that she was sexually assaulted.
‘It could be the killer was somebody who had just been passing by the apartment block.’
£10,000 on the House
LUCKY Betty Atkins scooped £10,000 on Mirror Bingo and plans to spend some of her winnings on home improvements.
Betty, 61, also has in mind a dream holiday and gifts for her three children and two grandchildren.
The win made it a double celebration for Betty and husband Arthur.
News of the windfall came just after the couple chalked up 40 years of marriage.
Betty, of Norwich, Norfolk, called house on 16 in Game 224.
Today's Numbers — Page 20 
CELEBRATING: Betty
Super, grass
A CRIME hotline in Warwickshire which offers rewards of up to £500 for tip-offs has nailed its 5,000th villain.
Now fly me boomerang back, sport
EX-POSTIE Geoff Luxton's parcel went an extra 10,000 miles — because he was 20 yards out with the address.
Geoff, who lives near Perth, Australia, sent a package to number 88 instead of 84 in the road in his old hometown of Blackpool.
The local postie failed to deliver it and it was returned down under.
A Post Office spokesman said: ‘The usual postman is normally very reliable.
Perhaps he was on leave or off sick.’
999!
TV SHOW SAVED ME FROM KILLER BEE STING
Husband minutes from death with rare allergy
SYDNEY YOUNG
A MAN nearly killed by a bee sting told yesterday how his life was saved — by the TV  programme 999.
Rod McCallum collapsed with a rare allergic reaction.
But quick-thinking wife Philippa recognised the symptoms from the show and called an ambulance.
Hospital doctors said Rod was minutes from death when they gave him emergency injections.
Keen sailor Rod, 41, of Nutley, East Sussex, was taking part in a yachting festival on the Isle of Wight when disaster struck.
As they drove back from a barbecue the bee stung Rod's arm.
He joked to Philippa that he might react as badly as the sting victim on the TV show two weeks earlier.
Presenter Michael Buerk had reconstructed the true story of how the man was rescued by helicopter after collapsing by a canal.
But minutes after Rod and Philippa reached their holiday flat Rod's speech became slurred, he could barely walk and he lost his co-ordination.
Philippa remembered Buerk's advice on severe allergic reactions and called an ambulance.
Frightening
Rod said: ‘I was shocked to be told that if I had waited any longer before seeking help I would not have survived.
‘I couldn't talk and realised it was serious.
I tried to tell Philippa to hurry but I couldn't get my words together.
‘It was frightening.
I've been stung before but I never reacted like this.’
Philippa, 41, said: ‘One minute Rod was joking about it and the next he was acting strangely.’
Rod has told Buerk in a letter: ‘Had it not been for your series I would probably have gone to bed and not woken up.’
Michael Buerk said: ‘I am delighted that Rod benefited from the safety information which is a key feature of 999.’
VICTIM: A joke to Philippa, then Rod collapsed
ADVICE: Buerk
A day to forget for Mr Memory
MEMORY whizz Tom Morton, who has instant recall of more than 20,000 telephone numbers, has had an experience he wants to forget.
Tom, 27, turned up a week EARLY for an appointment at Granada TV to show his skills.
‘It was terribly embarrassing,’ said Tom, who is to attempt a memory record for Britain to get into the Guinness Book of Records.
‘I can remember phone numbers, decks of cards, all the Olympic medal-winners going back a century but I couldn't remember the right day on which to turn up — at least I wasn't a week late.’
Cabbie Tom, of Blackpool, Lancs, also has a weakness for faces.
He said: ‘I was sitting in the TV station next to a large man with glasses and beard and I felt I knew him.
He said he was Peter Ustinov.’
Cops save bride Sarah's big day
BRIDE Sarah Mustoe's big day was saved from disaster by something borrowed and something blue — a police car with a flashing light.
Two traffic police dashed Sarah and her father to the church when her vintage wedding car broke down.
Weeping Sarah, 28, and dad Albert were stranded in the rain as the driver battled to start the engine.
PC Roy Evans and his partner spotted them — and sped them to the church in Cheltenham, Gloucs, with blue light flashing and siren blaring.
Sarah wed Ian Hodson, 27, just 15 minutes late and insisted on posing for pictures with the officers.
‘They are heroes,’ she said yesterday.
Albert said: ‘They even held her train as she walked in so it didn't get wet.’
The police said: ‘We were happy to help.’
Tiger eats toddler
A TIGER snatched a five-year-old girl from a van full of tourists after smashing a window with a paw and dragging her away by the head.
Her partially-eaten body was found an hour later in a national park near Bangalore, southern India.
COUNCIL KNEW SAD KIDS WERE AT RISK
TWO youngsters who were strangled after warnings that they could be at risk were put on a council child protection register in June, it was revealed yesterday.
Social workers were due to visit the youngsters yesterday.
But six-year-old Jason Harry and his sister Natalia, five, were found dead at the weekend after their unmarried mother Sharon Dawson, 23, went to a police station.
Neighbours said they had repeatedly reported hearing children's screams.
It was claimed that the children lived mostly with their grandmother, Cynthia Dawson, near their home in Tottenham, London.
Haringey council said a full inquiry had started into the deaths.
Ah so…
Gary has a swot at goal
NIGEL PAULEY
SOCCER ace Gary Lineker has set himself a tough new goal — learning Japanese in just six months.
Gary, 31, wants to master the tricky language before his multi-million pound move to Japan.
He reckons his success on the field depends on learning the lingo.
The ex-England captain and his wife Michelle, 27, start twice-weekly three-hour sessions with a private tutor today.
‘It's going to be tough,’ said Gary yesterday.
But he added: ‘The players who've enjoyed the biggest success abroad have been those who've blended in and learned the language.’
Gary, who speaks Spanish, found that out when he played for Barcelona.
His move to Japan's Grampus Eight club hinges on the health of his baby son George, who is recovering from acute myeloid leukaemia.
‘George finished his treatment three months ago and is doing well,’ said Gary at the launch of his BBC children's show We Are The Champions.
LESSONS: Lineker
Altar-gether
FORTY thousand Moonies in Seoul and 10,000 couples around the world will wed today in a mass service linked by satellite.
Wheel love for Nigel!
FORD Cortina nut Nigel Barnes set out on honeymoon yesterday — to CORTINA in Italy.
He and bride Mary plan to drive his 25-year-old Mark 2 to a Ford Cortina rally at the Dolomites' ski resort.
Then after returning home to Gloucester, Nigel, 29, will start restoring his other five models.
TAR SWAMP TRAPS CARS
PETER KANE
HUNDREDS of motorists drove into a gooey mess as heavy rain turned a newly-laid road into a swamp.
The contractors immediately offered to pay for new tyres to replace those caked in bitumen.
But as scores of motorists flocked to a nearby tyre centre to take advantage of the offer, the firm called a halt to the deal.
A voluntary group whose ambulance ground to a halt on the two-mile stretch of the B1077 near Watton, Norfolk, had to pay £300 for new tyres.
Insurance broker Gerald Rudkin, who runs the ambulance, said: ‘The road was like glue.
Tyres ended up like bitumen snowballs.’
Mr Rudkin now plans to ask the contractors' insurers for a refund.
A spokesman for contractors May-Gurney said: ‘There will be a full investigation.’
So whose loin is it?
TV COMIC Tony Slattery has sketched himself for a charity auction — starkers.
Tony's full-frontal is one of dozens of celebrity self-portraits to be sold at Sotheby's, London.
NAKED: Tony
Stinking drunk
DRINKERS out to disguise their boozing are swigging £3.60 pints of garlic beer.
Restaurant boss Torbjorn Olsson, who sells the stuff in Soho, London, said: ‘When they get home, their breath stinks of garlic not beer.
It's also good for keeping vampires away.’
Fact or fake?
Clues to ‘Di tape’ riddle
‘Only close pals would have known of visit’
Scorn of the voice experts
STEVE ATKINSON
THE CASE FOR
IT'S the tape that's caused a new storm for the Royals, still reeling from the scandal of Fergie's holiday snaps.
But is the 23-minute chat really a lovey-dovey phone call between Princess Di and an admirer?
Or just an elaborate hoax?
We examine the case for and against.
Beeb in royal bust-up show
THE BBC is to make a £2 million television drama about the fictional break-up of the Royal Family.
The four-part series includes a king crowned late in life, a PM who took over in mid-term and a princess snubbed after being pictured on holiday with another man.
The BBC said the show was planned before recent royal controversy and will be screened next year.
It is based on a novel by House Of Cards author Michael Dobbs.
FERGIE'S BOOB OVER 10ft FENCE
FERGIE fenced herself in yesterday — and dropped a clanger.
Workmen added 4ft to the top of the 6ft-high wooden fence round her Wentworth, Surrey, hideaway to stop prying eyes.
But she has not got planning permission.
Runnymead Council said: ‘You need permission for fences over 6ft 6ins.
If anyone complains we'll investigate.’
Allyn Fencing, of Byfleet, did the rush job — ordered by Surrey police through the county council.
A spokesman said: ‘We do a number of security jobs but this was nothing special — just some cheap and cheerful run-of-the-mill fencing.’
Surrey police said: ‘We never discuss security.’
Even Fergie's original fence broke the rules of the posh private estate.
Major Christopher Cloclough, secretary of the estate's road committee, said: ‘Normally we only allow shrubs about 7ft high, not wooden fences.
But in her case we allowed it for obvious reasons.’
CLANGER: Fergie
EDDIE THE EAGER…
BUDDING actor Prince Edward will mimic brother Charles as he treads the boards tonight.
And his role will mirror the Andy-Fergie marriage crisis.
Edward portrays rich, bumbling Arthur Gower in the Victorian comedy Trelawny Of The Wells.
Arthur falls for fun-loving actress Rose Trelawny but she finds his family too stuffy and returns to her old pals.
But a mutual friend brings them together again.
Edward is cast opposite petite blonde Hannah Welfare in the play at Haddo House, Aberdeenshire.
It was not known last night if any of the royals would travel from Balmoral to watch him in action.
CURTAIN UP: Edward
‘Mr Bingley’ blow
PROFITS at the Bradford and Bingley building society, Britain's seventh largest, have slumped by £14 million because of the housing crisis.
In the first six months of this year, the society wrote off £26 million to homebuyers who have failed to keep up payments.
Society boss Geoffrey Lister said he did not expect any economic recovery in the immediate future.
‘A renewal of confidence in the UK will only take place through a change in Government policy,’ he said.
Love bite
JEALOUS wife Dolores Reeves bit the tattooed name of an old flame out of her hubby Melvin's arm in Oklahoma.
PRINCESS EVEN DID GILBEY'S IRONING
TINA WEAVER
MARKETING hot-shot James Gilbey is one of Diana's closest friends.
Over the past 13 years they have often lunched together, sitting at a specially reserved corner table in the Princess's favourite San Lorenzo restaurant.
Gilbey was the main source for the recent book on Diana.
He claimed she had frequently discussed her alleged suicide attempts with him.
Afterwards the Palace instructed the princess to cut contact with him.
But he insists they have spoken since and that that ‘should speak for itself’.
Gilbey knew Diana when she was a teenager sharing a flat with two friends.
He was a regular visitor, escorting the girls to the theatre and parties.
Diana was so chummy with him she even used to iron his shirts.
There have been conflicting reports about much of the 36-year-old bachelor's background.
He was educated at top school Ampleforth — not Eton as many believe.
Passion
It has also been said he is heir to the famous Gilbey gin family.
But he is only distantly related.
Young Gilbey's passion was cars and he skipped going to university to move to the bright lights of London.
He worked for BMW for sometime in 1988, before acquiring the Holbein Motor Company with his friend Tom Dodd-Noble.
‘We are good friends,’ said Mr Dodd-Noble.
‘He's understanding and a good listener.’
A former colleague at Holbein's often spent nights on the town with Gilbey.
He said: ‘We'd all go out together.
Girl
‘He was a single young man like all of us.
He had no specific girlfriends.’
Mark Matharu, a director at Holbein's, said:
‘There was one girl who regularly met him.
I believe it was his girlfriend.
He was also rather fond of a secretary here.
‘Women just liked him.’
Others who know him well describe Gilbey as a ‘sensitive fellow who would spend hours at drinks parties standing chatting quietly with some pretty woman’.
Slimly-built Gilbey resigned from Holbein in February last year when the firm was reported to have been hit by the recession with large debts.
It survived and is still trading but Gilbey now works from his Norfolk home as marketing manager for Team Lotus.
According to friends, only two women have figured high in Gilbey's life.
He went out with Georgina, daughter of retired Lloyds' underwriter Jack Gore, for three or four years.
Shortly after they separated she married an old schoolfriend of Gilbey's, the Earl of Arundel.
Gilbey went on to date Alethea Savile, the 29-year-old daughter of the Earl of Mexborough.
‘I am his girlfriend and have been for sometime,’ she said last night.
The earl said: ‘My daughter is a good friend of James Gilbey's.
As far as I know they are not engaged.’
CAR-MAD: Gilbey
OUR BOYS GET COVER
BRITISH troops in Sarajevo are now armour-plated against the snipers — thanks to the Mirror.
We revealed that Royal Engineers were being ferried around in canvas-topped lorries.
Two were hit by shrapnel from a mortar bomb at the weekend.
Now Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind has ordered they must use armoured personnel carriers borrowed from the French.
A defence spokesman yesterday said: ‘We didn't send armoured vehicles there because we didn't think it was dangerous.’
Wok a shock…£17.50 a tot!
COMPANY boss Vic Barrett was slugged with a £140 bill after ordering four large brandies in a Chinese restaurant.
But he says he'll go to court rather than pay for the round which works out at £17.50 a measure.
Vic, 44, had just finished a £12-ahead meal with six workers from his typesetting firm when he ordered the doubles.
A spokesman for the Summer Palace Chinese restaurant in Horsforth, Leeds, said Vic had ordered the best — a Remy Extra Perfection brandy costing £300 a bottle.
The restaurant is taking legal advice after Vic offered £20.
JASON IS EAR AGAIN
SINGER Jason Donovan and girl-friend Tara Owens had a mixed bag of memories yesterday as they returned to Britain from a romantic holiday on the island of Bali.
Jason, 24, picked up an Indonesian souvenir — plus an ear infection which, he protested, forced him to stay in bed for days.
Lovely Tara, 19, was saying sweet nothings.
Picture: DENNIS STONE
TEARS FOR MUM IRA KILLED ‘BY MISTAKE’
Brave Rebecca, 12, leads 1,000 mourners
JOHN HICKS
HOLDING a single red rose and brushing tears from her pale cheeks, little Rebecca Leyland led 1,000 mourners behind her mother's coffin yesterday.
She reached up and gently touched it as the pall-bearers halted at the spot where her mother, on holiday from Rochdale, Lancs, was gunned down by mistake by an IRA sniper in Belfast last Friday.
Then, comforted by her father Brian, sister Catherine, 15, and brothers John, 21, and Gerard, 19, the brave 12-year-old led the sad procession on to the Holy Cross Church in Crumlin Road.
There she heard Father Myles Kavanagh lash the assassin who shot 41-year-old Isabel in the back.
Catholic Mrs Leyland had left Belfast 20 years ago — to escape the bloody violence in Ulster.
But she returned this month to visit her sick, elderly mother Bessie.
And, as she walked innocently along a street to collect holiday snaps before returning to Lancashire, she was cut down by a bullet meant for a soldier.
Apology
The IRA apologised the next day.
But that was not good enough, said Father Kavanagh.
He told the packed church: ‘The gunman went out to kill a British soldier and he missed.
Instead he killed Isabel.
‘It's not enough to say ‘I'm sorry’.’
Among the dozens of floral tributes at the church were many from Rochdale.
SHOT IN THE BACK
Isabel Leyland, cut down as she went to collect holiday snaps.
Mum knife horror
A YOUNG mother cut her throat with an electric carving knife in her bedroom — while her husband and two sons were downstairs.
Lalita Nayee, 31, had bought the machine just two hours earlier at an Argos store.
Her body was found by her husband, who has not been named by police, at their home in Crawley, Sussex.
He was yesterday caring for the boys, aged four and six.
‘Your neck's broken’
GORDON HUGHES
POLICE launched a massive hunt for accident victim Christine Jessop — to warn her she had a broken neck.
They scoured a city for four hours and had a dramatic plea broadcast on two local radio stations:
‘If you hear this, lie down immediately.’
Finally they found her strolling back to her flat in Sheffield, South Yorks.
But Christine, 37, insisted on going home for a snack before an ambulance took her to Royal Hallamshire hospital.
Christine was X-rayed after being hit by a car.
But doctors did not spot the hairline fracture until a routine check on the plates after she left.
The hospital said last night: ‘All X-rays are reviewed by a senior radiologist.
He was concerned that she should be further examined.’
Christine, still in hospital, refused to comment.
Police said: ‘We were told to find her quickly and tell her to lie still on the floor.’
Diesel do nicely
A GALLON of diesel will cost 8.2p less — 204.1p — at BP stations from midnight tomorrow because of the strength of the pound against the dollar.
Wota melon
A RECORD 26lbs melon grown in Jimmy Walker's greenhouse in Middlesbrough, Cleveland, is to be raffled for charity.
British Gas to cut bills again
ALAN LAW
BRITISH Gas is to cut its charges by 2 per cent from October — the second reduction this year.
The first cut — of 3 per cent— was made on July l after the industry's watchdog, Ofgas, threatened court action over excess profits.
British Gas was clearing nearly £l, 500 million a year.
The second cut comes four weeks after Board of Trade president Michael Heseltine announced a Monopolies and Mergers Commission review of the privatised gas industry.
Checking
Ofgas said yesterday that it would be checking that the 2 per cent October cut was enough.
Deputy director general John Dorken promised to ‘press for further cuts if we consider they are justified.’
British Gas said the July-October reductions would mean a saving of £27 a year for a three-bedroom, centrally-heated semi-detached home.
Tot dies in candle blaze
TODDLER Natalie Godfrey, who hated sleeping in the dark, was killed yesterday when a candle set fire to her bedroom.
The three-year-old's sister Lucy, five, was fighting for her life after the blaze at their mum Denise's home in Great Chesterford, Essex.
Family justice
A MAN turned up for Old Bailey jury service yesterday — and found he was due to try his 20-year-old son for burglary.
He was sent home.
YOU STINKER!
Smelly shoes put Chris on top of world
JAN DISLEY
SCHOOLBOY Chris Gill is the first of the phew — his trainers were yesterday voted the smelliest in Britain.
Now the young Scot with the auld reekies plans to go one better — by flooring the opposition in the world finals in America.
Dad George reckons it'll be a cinch.
‘We don't look for his trainers, we sniff them out,’ he said.
‘They really are awful.’
And Chris, 13, said proudly: ‘I entered because my mum's always complaining about the pong and my pals at school joke about my smelly feet.
But I've had the last laugh.
It's brilliant.’
The little stinker, from Ecclefechan, Dumfries, won a contest run by a firm of insole makers.
Entrants were invited to send their left trainer in an air-tight packet to Atlantic 252 radio station.
There, DJ judges Charlie Wolf and Sandy Beach bravely opened the parcels, took a deep breath…and sniffed.
Before you could say ugh, Chris was the champ.
His 116 rivals were left standing.
Spokesman Graham Dwyer said: ‘It was pretty atrocious.
‘We had pungent smells coming from the studio for weeks.’
Chris is off to Montpelier, Vermont, for the world finals later this year.
Mum Julie, 31, who will go with him, said: ‘I always said he'd win something with his trainers, but I didn't think it would be a trip to America.’
SHOE, WHAT A TORTURE: Chris, George and trainer
IRA FIREBOMB BLITZ
STEPHEN WHITE
IRA firebombers blitzed a military museum and a shopping centre early yesterday.
The attack began when incendiary bombs went off on two floors of a museum in Shrewsbury Castle, Shropshire — causing £250,000 damage and destroying many irreplaceable relics of three famous regiments.
At the same time a bomb set fire to a sofa in a furniture store — but was put out by the store's sprinkler system.
Later another partially ignited device was found in a second furniture shop but caused only minor damage.
The blitz caused rush-hour chaos as police and firefighters searched for more bombs.
The railway station was evacuated and busy commuter roads sealed off.
Scotland Yard anti-terrorist squad officers last night travelled to examine the scene of the attacks and the remains of the devices.
Girls with a touch of TV class
JOLLY hockey-sticks…it's Joanna Lumley and Jennifer Saunders all dolled up like a pair of overgrown schoolgirls for a St Trinians-style TV comedy.
The pair will co-star in a new BBC 2 show, Absolutely Fabulous, written by Jennifer.
And she warned that not all viewers will take a shine to their taste for booze, cocaine and bed-hopping.
‘I suppose it'll shock a lot of people,’ admitted Jennifer, 33.
But Beeb bosses are sure the jokes will be uniformly excellent.
Xmas is now or never…
SYDNEY YOUNG
GLOOMY Patrick Quinn is serving up Christmas dinners — because he thinks people will be too hard-up to buy them in December.
He has already sold more than 40 turkey roasts at his restaurant since starting the £3.95 special on Monday.
And one local firm has booked a table for 10 at Splinters in Redland, Bristol, because they ‘don't think they will survive for another four months’.
Patrick, 41, said: ‘We all need a bit of light relief and the whole country could be bankrupt by Christmas.’
Just Great!
THE Great Western pub in Wolverhampton — owned by Holdens — is Britain's finest boozer, the Campaign for Real Ale said yesterday.
‘Cheat’ bowlers start racism rumpus…
COLIN PRICE
THE furious Pakistani cricket team started a racism row last night after England batsman Allan Lamb accused them of cheating by tampering with the ball.
In a Mirror exclusive headlined ‘How Pakistan Cheat At Cricket’, Lamb said the tourists had got away with murder all summer.
But pace bowlers Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis said in a statement: ‘We are amazed that a fellow professional has stooped so low as to make such unfounded comments.
‘We can only guess at Allan Lamb's motives in the Daily Mirror, but we hope they are nothing so base as money or, even worse, our nationality.’
Team manager Intikhab Alam described Lamb's remarks as ‘a cowardly attack’.
Northampton captain Lamb was yesterday banned for two matches by his club and fined heavily — not for his comments, but for failing to clear them with the county.
Last night defiant Lamb said: ‘I stand by what I said.
The truth is the truth.’
Full story: Pages 38, 39 and Back Page Griffin's Eye — Page 6 
‘TAMPERED’: Ball
ROW: Allan Lamb
MIRROR COMMENT
Up the creek…
LIKE the boy on the burning deck, Chancellor Norman Lamont stood on the Treasury steps yesterday and ignored the carnage around him.
But it was bigoted political  obstinacy , not courage, which induced him to refuse to devalue the pound.
To maintain at all costs its value against other currencies within the European Community's exchange rate mechanism.
To continue to support the mechanism despite it failing in its obligations to cushion speculation against Sterling.
And to take not one step to stop the economy from sinking beneath the waves.
His reckless stance cost Britain a BILLION pounds propping up the pound and may well yet force up interest rates.
That would destroy more small businesses and large companies, even more people would be made unemployed and more families would lose their homes.
That could lose Mr Lamont his job but it was John Major who took Britain into the ERM with an over-valued pound.
It is John Major who is scuttling the ship.
When things go badly wrong, Tory MPs and party activists call for a ritual human sacrifice.
That ALONE would offer no change, no relief, no hope.
If Britain is to be saved from the disaster of Mr Major's own making, it is the policies as well as the men who will have to go.
Queening it
YESTERDAY, the Daily Mirror asked YOU, our readers, to say whether Diana should eventually be our Queen.
The response — on the day it was revealed she was the voice on the tape — was as staggering as it was overwhelmingly a vote for the Princess.
At 7pm last night, 51,136 of you had said YES and only 7,065 had said NO.
The Princess of Wales is without challenge, without doubt, without question, the brightest jewel in the crown.
Buckingham Palace please note.
WHAT CRISIS MEANS TO US
THROUGHOUT the crisis over the falling pound, experts keep talking about ERM and interest rates.
Below we explain how they affect our lives.
Q Exactly what is the Exchange Rate Mechanism?
A It is an 11-nation club where all the members agree to keep the value of their currencies within fixed bands.
Q What does it do for us?
A It should stop wild swings in exchange rates and force down inflation.
Q So why is it we are seeing such chaos now?
A Investors are buying the strong German mark and selling the pound.
Q What is meant by propping up the pound?
A The Bank of England is buying the pound to try to stop its value falling.
Q Will this stop British interest rates going up?
A Probably not.
The pound needs to be stable long term.
PRINCE HITS AT ROYAL SPONGERS
BILL AKASS
PRINCE Michael of Kent has launched a thinly veiled attack on freeloading members of the royal family.
He warned them: ‘You can't have all the perks without pulling your weight.
‘If you have privilege you have no option but to accept some kind of obligation.’
The prince's remarks follow massive public anxiety over the Duchess of York's jetsetting antics at the taxpayers' expense.
He told Majesty magazine that the royals will have to work hard to justify their existence.
‘We're very visible, so let's put that to some use,’ he said.
‘Let's represent people and organisations, be a voice to put things across.
We can set an example.
Revelations
‘The family have a certain mystique which people look up to because they want to.
You can't have it both ways.’
Prince Michael, 50, gave the interview at the time of revelations over the state of Charles and Diana's marriage.
He said: ‘I think the present hoo-ha will die down.
But it does erode respect.’
ATTACK: Michael
Caught on the hop!
CAR worker Dave Baxter nearly lost his manhood on the production line.
Father-of-two Dave needed seven  stitches after his overalls caught in a roller at Ford's Halewood plant.
‘I was so embarrassed,’ said Dave, 38.
Screams in dark
ANGLER Reg Davies told yesterday how he thought it was ‘kids mucking about’ when he first heard the six friends screaming as he fished from Llandudno pier.
‘It was pitch black and I couldn't see anything,’ said Mr Davies, of Kirkby, Liverpool.
‘So I shouted to them to shut up.
‘That's when one of them yelled back ‘We aren't messing about, we're all bloody drowning’.’
After he and a pal raised the alarm, they stood helplessly watching helicopters and lifeboats scour the area and listening to the cries gradually getting weaker in the darkness.
‘It was horrible,’ said Mr Davies.
‘It went on for about an hour, and although we couldn't see anything we could feel what was happening to them.
Someone was shouting ‘Hurry up and help me.
I'm in the water, not a boat’.’
Gunman plea
GUNMAN Albert Dryden, 53, who shot dead a council chief outside his Co Durham home, is appealing against his life sentence for murder.
Jets give Saddam ‘back off’ warning
MARK DOWDNEY
TYRANT Saddam Hussein must ground his warplanes by this afternoon — or have them blasted from the skies.
President Bush laid down his ‘if it flies, it dies’ ultimatum last night as Allied fighters prepared for combat missions over southern Iraq.
He slammed Saddam's ‘brutality’ in bombing and strafing rebel Shi'ite civilians.
Six RAF Tornados will leave Britain for the Gulf today to join in the crackdown.
Zone
The jets, from RAF Marham, Norfolk, will join US and French aircraft in enforcing the ‘no-fly’ zone.
Based at Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, they are expected to have mainly a reconnaissance role.
The Americans already have at least 200 planes and 24,500 troops in the area.
Saddam is believed to have already removed his fixed-wing aircraft and helicopter gunships from the banned area south of the 32nd parallel.
Topless beauty sacked
A BEAUTY queen contestant was sacked yesterday after parading topless in front of millions of TV viewers.
Julie Ramirez, 22, suddenly whipped off her bikini top before the judges, while competing to represent the Dominican Republic in the Miss World contest.
When shocked organisers rushed her off stage, Julie threatened to return naked.
‘The devil got into me,’ she said later.
Fore!
It's a python
A PLAYER fled a crazy golf game in panic after one hazard turned out to be a live PYTHON.
Police were called and they summoned the help of reptile expert Wayne Roach to take the python from the course on the Isle of Sheppey, Kent.
WARLORD STORM
Serb quits Yugo bid for peace
ANDY McSMITH
A SERBIAN warlord stormed out of the London peace conference on Yugoslavia yesterday — claiming he could wreck the vital talks.
Radovan Karadzic, leader of Bosnia's Serbs, protested that his war-torn republic was not fully represented.
But his gesture was shrugged off by organisers of the 40-nation conference because Karadzic was only there as an observer.
Premier John Major warned of stronger sanctions against those in the conference who could end the war.
Singling out the Serbs, he threatened: ‘No trade.
No aid.
No international recognition or role.
Economic, cultural, political and diplomatic isolation.’
Martin Bell exclusive — Page 9
Sly rolls in the barrels
SUPERSTAR
Sylvester Stallone, told hotel staff in Rome to scour the city — for Guinness.
Sly snapped up 12 kegs of stout from a downtown bar and threw a party for the cast of his latest film Cliffhanger.
SEARCH: Sly
Bomb kills nine
A BOMB hidden in a flowerpot killed nine people and wounded 100 at the Air France desk at Algiers airport yesterday.
Huntsmen fined
TWO workers with the Quorn, Prince Charles's favourite hunt, were fined at Loughborough, Leics., yesterday on gun charges after shooting a fox.
BT's hot little number
GEORGINA WALSH
DIALLING the Caribbean is as easy as 192 for hundreds of phone callers.
They simply ring directory inquiries — and get straight through to Barbados.
Instead of the operator asking them what number they want, they hear the sunny voice of Mary Brooks in Bridgetown.
Mary, who works for a publishing firm, said last night: ‘People are speechless when I tell them where they're calling.
We've been taking at least one call a day for more than a year.’
British Telecom chiefs paled when the Mirror revealed the cock-up.
Directory calls cost 45p.
Barbados, which involves dialling 14 digits, costs 79p a minute standard rate.
‘It's most bizarre,’ said a BT spokesman.
CALL SIGN: The BT logo
Son held as Brit mum is murdered
A STEPSON was under arrest last night after a British mother was beaten to death in her farmhouse home.
Patricia Hollett, 45, was found by a neighbour in the village of Mazeres, near Toulouse.
She was flown to hospital by helicopter in a coma but died of multiple skull fractures.
French police said they had arrested her stepson, 27-year-old Trevor Keith Hollett, who had allegedly confessed to the murder.
Mrs Hollett has two daughters Karen, nine, and Paula, seven.
The family bought the house two years ago and moved there permanently at Easter.
RACING BOY, 4, GETS SPONSORED BY SHELL
And he can't even ride a bike…
SAMUEL JAMES
RACING driver Oliver Oakes has fixed up a sponsorship deal with Shell — at the age of FOUR.
Little Oliver zooms round the track at 65mph in his £1,000 go-kart — before he has learned to ride a bike or tie his laces.
Shell bosses were so impressed with his skill that they offered to supply his lubricants and clothing for five years.
And they may increase their backing as he gets older.
Oliver races his go-kart at indoor tracks near his home in Lowestoft, Suffolk.
His mum Pam, 37, said: ‘He says he wants to be like Nigel Mansell and win the world championship.’
Experienced
She added: ‘I'm not worried about him driving so fast.
He's been driving the go-kart for 18 months so he's really quite experienced.
‘If we tried to stop him doing it he would just take it up again when he was older.
‘We're not pushing him.
If he gets fed up with it he'll just stop and we won't mind.
Dad Billy, 35, who runs a truck company, used to race Formula Ford cars.
And Oliver's brother Jordan, three, has already had his first spin in a go-kart.
Chris Earle, Shell Oils business development manager, said: ‘When Mr Oakes told me about Oliver's talent we just had to get involved.
‘To see him driving around a track at 65mph is an incredible sight.
‘Maybe he will be the world champion one day.’
ALL HUNKY DORY, CLEO
IT must have been a tough one for Cleo Rocos.
Should she cling to the rippling muscles of her bronzed young hunk, Dreamboy David, or turn to the more mature, devilishly witty charms of London window cleaner Barry Hunter?
Sexy actress Cleo pondered the dilemma at the launch of the equally saucy women's magazine Playgirl.
Bafflingly for Barry, his hairy chest, toothy grin and even his ale and hearty tum couldn't win her over.
Just when he thought all the best girls loved a baldie.
Picture: BILL KENNEDY
TANKER TERROR
Families flee river of flames
CLIVE CRICKMER
PEOPLE fled in terror yesterday as a crashed petrol tanker exploded in a fireball, sending 7,000 gallons of blazing fuel roaring up the street.
Driver David Knight, 47, his trousers alight, scrambled to safety moments before the petrol ignited.
Prise
But there were fears that an old man seen near the spot just before the crash could have perished under the tanker.
Last night rescuers used airbags to prise the wreck a few inches off the ground.
But they could not say whether anyone had died until the tanker was hoisted clear later.
Horrified residents escaped over back garden fences as the flaming petrol cascaded down the street.
Luckily, their homes were spared as the fire flowed away from houses.
Two people in a minibus involved in the crash — driver Ian Cantle, 32, and passenger Amanda Mason, 26 — were slightly hurt as they scrambled clear.
Fireman Ken Horn said: ‘It was simply a miracle that we did not have a very serious casualty list.’
A police spokesman said: ‘It was like a scene from Beirut.’
Thirty parked cars were swallowed up as the fireball in Lochmallen Terrace, Sunderland, sent a huge plume of smoke over the city.
Two hundred people were evacuated and a swimming pool cleared as firemen fought the blaze for three hours.
Car hire girl Lorna Wilson, 30, who saw the crash just yards from her office, said: ‘The driver seemed to appear from nowhere just as the whole place went up in flames.
‘He flung himself onto a grass verge and beat out his blazing trousers.
‘He is the luckiest man alive.
‘A few moments later and he would not have stood a chance.’
Last night Mr Knight, from Hartlepool, was comfortable in hospital.
AFTERMATH: Burned-out cars lie covered in foam after firemen battled to put out thousands of gallons of blazing fuel from the tanker
WRECKED: Thick smoke billows from the overturned tanker as the burning petrol engulfs the street
Caught out
TWO anglers were winched to safety by RAF helicopter yesterday after getting cut off by the tide at Severn Beach, Avon.
THE NUMBER IS UP
WHITEHALL chiefs are to keep tabs on phone calls made by civil servants in office time.
Big Brother will log the date and length of calls with a new £250,000 computer system.
A Science Ministry spokesman said: ‘We are not doing a Dianagate — there is no question of anybody listening in to conversations.
It is good housekeeping.
We want to see who is making most calls and how costs can be cut.’
The system will initially log calls of 35,000 workers, but could be extended to cover all 500,000 civil servants.
LILI TO FIGHT MOB
A WOMAN is to take over the toughest job in Italy — fighting the Mafia.
Naples-born Liliana Ferraro, 48, will replace Judge Giovanni Falcone who was killed by the mob.
Ferraro, who is separated from her husband, was Falcone's deputy in charge of penal affairs in Rome's Justice Ministry for ten years.
Now she will be a target for the Mafia's bullets because she knows all of Falcone's secrets.
She was also one of the founder members of a super pool of judges which brought more than 450 Mafia members to trial.
GAMBLER STABS BET SHOP GIRL TO DEATH
Desperate battle with robber
IAN CAMERON
BETTING shop manager Sian Collier was stabbed to death after being robbed of a few hundred pounds by a regular punter.
Sian, 24, was counting out the day's takings after the last race when the killer struck.
Eighteen stone Sian bravely fought for her life but collapsed with nine stab wounds in her back.
Police found her lying in a pool of blood with the murder weapon nearby.
The long-bladed knife had snapped in two from the ferocity of the attack.
Detectives think Sian was killed because she recognised the man — and were last night sifting through hundreds of betting slips for clues.
Sian was alone in the Ladbrokes branch in Newport, Gwent, counting out the takings — just £350 — when the man walked in on Tuesday evening.
She was slashed on the hands as she struggled with him.
And as she lay dying the heavily bloodstained thief pocketed the cash, shut the front door and walked off among rush hour crowds.
Savage
Four hours later police broke in after being alerted by Sian's husband Andrew — worried that she had not returned to their home in nearby Pontypool.
Det Chief Supt Mark Waters, head of Gwent CID, said yesterday: ‘It is one of the most savage murders I've ever seen.’
Sian, manager of the shop for a year, worked alone on Mondays and Tuesdays — and had asked her bosses to install a security system after recent violent crimes in the area, it was revealed.
Nearby launderette manager Philip Podmore said: ‘She was terrified of working alone because of the lack of security.’
Ladbrokes put up a £10,000 reward for the capture of the killer.
But they would not comment on security at the shop.
VICTIM: Sian Collier
Jane says a Fonda farewell
KEVIN O'SULLIVAN
ACTRESS Jane Fonda last night bowed out of movies.
The Oscar-winner's shock decision brought down the curtain on a glittering 30-year screen career.
Jane, 54, said: ‘I won't be in films again.
I walked away with hardly a glimpse back.’
But the superfit star added that she WILL make one of her work-out tapes each year.
Jane, who won the best actress award for her role in Coming Home, recently married media tycoon Ted Turner.
Legend
She vowed to devote most her time to Ted, boss of America's CNN news network.
‘Yes, I'm in love and I'm in a new life that is fun,’ she explained.
Jane, daughter of film legend Henry Fonda, left Hollywood last year and moved to Turner's buffalo ranch in Montana.
She was dubbed ‘Hanoi Jane’ in the sixties after slamming America's involvement in Vietnam.
FIGHTING FIT: Jane
Hippies' toll
KEEPING hippies away from the summer solstice at Stonehenge this year cost £247,000, Wiltshire police revealed yesterday.
I'M A SOAP STAR
Miss Pears is best bar none
NIC NORTH
LITTLE Sophie Johnson starred as a soap queen yesterday — and poured cold water on the show.
Sophie's angelic looks had won her the 1992 Miss Pears title in the face of 20,000 challengers.
But the three-year-old celebrity whose picture will now appear on the soap firm's cartons kept her excitement under wraps.
Asked how she felt, she replied coolly: ‘No comment.’
Mum Clare — a 37-year-old solicitor who travelled from Swanland, Humberside, for Sophie's London coronation — explained:
‘She's a proper little madam, I'm afraid.’
And Madam certainly didn't think much of the photographers snapping away at her.
‘They're horrible,’ she announced.
FACING FAME: Sophie grips her crown.
Pictures HARRY PROSSER
REIGNING: The soap queen
Car baby seats warning
PARENTS were yesterday warned to check car baby seats for a fault which could prove fatal.
Defective plastic studs which easily come loose and could choke a child have been discovered on ten Spanish-made seats.
Mums found their babies sucking the studs after pulling them off.
Consumer affairs minister Baroness Denton said: ‘Anyone who bought a Cosatto Go Safe Extra or a Go Safe Plus seat should check the waistband and ensure the stud is well fastened.’
Safe crackers
STAFF at a bank in Birmingham couldn't open their safe yesterday because it was still set to stay shut on August 26, last year's Bank Holiday.
Black wedding
BRIDE Tessa Burr, 31, will wear a black dress and arrive by funeral car for her church wedding in Cheltenham, Gloucs, on Saturday.
MY HAT!
A NEW LOOK FOR MIKE
TV celebrity Anne Diamond presents her latest spectacular — a new image for her husband Mike Hollingsworth.
Anne, 37, was invited to choose Mike an outfit at a London fashion event.
She selected a £225 grey-green wool suit, £23 shirt and £20 silk tie.
And TV executive Mike, 46, felt so smart he raised his hat to her.
FIRE GIRL No 2 DIES
THE sister of fire death girl Natalie Godfrey lost her fight for life early yesterday.
Lucy Godfrey, five, suffered massive burns in the blaze at Great Chesterford, Essex, which claimed her three-year-old sister on Tuesday.
Car tot's ‘trespass’
HOMELESS Stephen Grady — living with 11month-old daughter Heidi in an old car — faces being moved on tomorrow.
North Norfolk council will ask a court to stop him trespassing on its Cromer HQ car park.
The council said: ‘We offered to help him find private accommodation.’
Curse of Casey, 8
THE world swearing championship has been won by a girl — aged EIGHT.
Angelic-looking Casey Kramer beat cursing drunks in the contest in the Australian outback.
Proud dad Rod, from Sydney, said: ‘Casey loves to swear and she's pretty good at it.’
I forgot wife on M-way
A HUSBAND drove for six hours before realising he'd left his wife behind at a motorway service cafe — 450 miles back.
He only noticed when he arrived home near Milan from their hols.
Alerting police, he explained his missus, 24, normally sat in the back and talked non-stop.
‘I never listened to her so I didn't notice she wasn't with me,’ he said.
His stranded wife had no cash.
Police who put her on a train said she got home a day after her husband…and ‘in a foul mood.’
DAD CUDDLES A BABY TO DEATH
GORDON HUGHES
DOTING dad Alan Burgess fell asleep cuddling his baby — and crushed the life out of her.
Tragic six-day-old Natalie died of a brain haemorrhage when Alan slumped forward, squeezing her skull.
He had been afraid to lay her in her cot because she had wind, a Manchester inquest heard yesterday.
The coroner recorded an accident verdict — and ended another nightmare for 28-year-old Alan and his common-law wife Helen Anderson, 32.
Police arrested them after the tragedy and held them for two days on suspicion of unlawful killing.
‘Some people pointed a finger at us,’ said Alan after the inquest.
‘But the inquest has shown we were not to blame.’
The couple were taking turns to cradle Natalie in bed at their Rusholme home when the accident happened.
Stalemate
RAIDERS at a Co-op in Milton Keynes, Bucks, only took a box of crisps past their sell-by date.
MIRROR COMMENT
Stop these snoopers
THE phone scanners' target for today could be YOU.
As the Royals have learned to their cost the law is so lax that it actually encourages widespread snooping.
Terrorists, blackmailers, burglars, business rivals and the nosey-parkers next door can legally buy and  install a phone scanner.
The law says they cannot legally use the scanner except to listen to BBC, commercial and community radio stations and navigation information broadcast for public consumption.
But who is going to buy a scanner, starting price £100, just to tune in to broadcasts they could hear more clearly on the radio?
Quality
It is the logic of the asylum to sell scanners without restriction and then say they shouldn't be used for the purpose most people buy them.
Snooping by scanner is entirely different from the pictures of the Duchess of York  cavorting with her ‘financial adviser’.
It affects the quality of life of everybody because nobody can be sure their calls are safe from prying ears.
That means we are, indiscriminately, all open to embarrassment, blackmail or mockery.
And who of us has never made a phone call we didn't want others to overhear?
Scanners cannot be uninvented.
But they should be licensed and licences should be granted only under the most stringent conditions.
Our freedom, all our freedoms, are too precious for anything else.
The dashing major
GEORGINA WALSH
GULF WAR hero Major James Hewitt is a charmer who loves the high life — and prides himself on his royal friendships.
He met Diana in 1988 when he was given the job of coaching Prince William in horsemanship.
A grateful Di rewarded him with expensive presents — including a diamond-studded tie-pin and a gold and silver alarm clock.
The polo-playing major's ex-fiancee, Emma Stewardson, 29, has told how Hewitt stood her up to visit Diana at Highgrove in Gloucestershire.
She said: ‘After one of his trips to Highgrove he came back raving about the solid gold service.
He liked things like that.’
Singer Maggie Moone, a 39-year-old divorcee the major has wined and dined, says warmly: ‘He's a very kind and lovely person.’
Hewitt commanded a tank squadron during the Gulf War.
Diana wrote him affectionate letters signed ‘Dibbs.’
The major was also writing to Emma and a mother-of-three who worked in a northern factory.
In a saucy note he told her: ‘It's funny you like men with moustaches.
I have grown one and I twist it at the ends (the moustache too).’
Life's fun without a handicap!
Duchess is a fair way off — and her sporty husband has a swinging time
Fergie tiff ‘on a tape’
RONALD RICKETTS
HAPPY Prince Andrew has a ball on the golf course…unaware that he is about to be at the centre of a new royal taping scandal.
A phone tiff between him and Fergie was recorded by an eavesdropper, it was reported last night.
The call, said to show the unhappy state of their  marriage , was made in a ship-to-shore chat from HMS Campbeltown two years ago.
It was picked up on a £300 scanner near Andrew's naval base at Portland, Dorset.
And as the prince played a round with bubbly brunette Gillian Petrie, it was revealed that the tape, containing a veiled threat that the Duchess would flee to her mother in Argentina, had been handed over to the Queen's lawyers.
Andrew partnered 31-year-old Gillian for a game of golf two days after scandal-hit Fergie left Balmoral as a royal outcast.The prince and his pal hit it off right away — emerging as the winning pair against Gillian's husband Bob and Mandy Cruickshank, daughter of a royal housekeeper.
The foursome spent three fun-filled hours on the highland course at Ballater.
Andrew clinched a five-and-four victory by sinking a putt on the 14th.
Mother-of-two Gillian said later: ‘The prince was very relaxed and happy.
‘He is a good golfer and we had a good time.’
Slice
Her 33-year-old husband, captain of the Ballater club, chipped in: ‘The prince enjoyed his round very much.’
But all did not go smoothly for Andrew, who took up golf three years ago.
He sliced his drive on the 18th hole of the 6,094yard par 69 course.
Then he landed in a bunker, shot over the green and putted twice.
A following golfer said: ‘Even that didn't upset him.
He seemed not to have a care.’
After the fun was over, Andrew drove eight miles back to the royal estate.
And he didn't have to explain where he'd been to a wife who has different ideas of a swinging time.
Public Opinion special — Page 13 
FUN CLUB: It's tee-hee for Gillian, Bob, Andrew and Mandy, enjoying a great time as a golfing foursome in the highlands
FERGIE: Ship call tape
BIG SHOT: Delighted Andrew clinched the match
Monster is after Jacko
NICOLA BRIGGS
SUPERSTAR Michael Jackson has a rival in a new series of Pepsi adverts…the terrifying man-eating monster from the Alien films.
The 60-second commercial is now being shown at cinemas following the launch of Alien 3 across the country.
The ad may also appear on television.
Pepsi spokesman David Metherell said: ‘We have to keep in touch with teenagers’ interests.
Music has served us well in the past.
We have featured stars like Michael Jackson and will continue to do so.’
In fact, the company plans to release a new TV commercial featuring Jacko next January.
Pepsi hopes the monster ad will help it in its battle with Coca-Cola for the billion-dollar soft drinks market.
The creature is seen chasing two teenage boys — but all is saved when one tosses him a can of Pepsi.
JACKO: Pepsi superstar
HE'S UNDIE SUSPICION
A SUPERMARKET assistant recognised a man who tried to pay for goods with a stolen credit card — because she'd seen him as a strippergram.
When police showed staff at Tesco's a security video of the con-man, the girl told them: ‘I've got a photo of him in his Union Jack underpants.’
The man, who was in his 20s, fled after trying to pay for £70 worth of food at the store in Fiveways, Birmingham, with a stolen Barclaycard.
A police spokesman said: ‘The  assistant has given us some vital information even though it must have been embarrassing for her.’
Day-trip Britain
MOST hard-up Britons cannot afford a holiday this year.
Less than half of all adults are going abroad.
The rest are taking cheap day trips, says a Gallup poll for the Visa Delta credit card group.
Fair cop, bro
PC TONY Spong arrested a man at a burgled petrol station — and found it was his brother.
He was jailed yesterday at Chelmsford.
DAMPENER
FORECASTERS dampened Bank Holiday hopes last night.
The outlook is wet, wet, wet, the Met Office warned.
Showers are expected over the whole country — but the south-east may get a dry spell on Saturday and Sunday.
OUTLOOK: Grim
TYCOON FREED
FALLEN tycoon Alan Bond was freed from a 2 1/2-year jail sentence yesterday to await a retrial on dishonesty charges.
His voice breaking with emotion, the 54-year-old Australian businessman said outside prison near Perth: ‘I was innocent in the first place.
I am going to spend some time with my family.’
He was released on £40,000 bail after serving three months.
An appeal court said fresh evidence presented last month could have had a bearing on the jury's original verdict.
The former brewing, media and property magnate went bankrupt in April owing millions of pounds.
ET ace gambles £20m on black
STEVEN Spielberg, director of ET and the Indiana Jones epics, is to gamble £20 million on making the most expensive black-and-white film ever.
He believes colour would ruin the harrowing true story of Schindler, an Austrian tycoon who hid Polish Jews from the Nazis.
RISK: Spielberg
Hearty monster
A 45-FOOT dinosaur which lived 200 million years ago may have had eight hearts, say scientists writing in the medical journal Lancet.
MORE than half Britain's councils will still be chasing up old poll debts five years after the tax was abolished.
A massive £1.8 billion is still uncollected.
Gnash & grab
A WOMAN flung herself at a mugger and bit off his right ear when he snatched her bag in Milan.
Lennon lad's dash ‘n’ carry
SINGER Julian Lennon looks to have got a bit carried away with his shopping.
Here he is with his hands full after a buying spree in a corner shop.
Fitness fan Julian — son of Beatles idol John — loaded up with health foods when he dashed to the store near his Los Angeles home.
There's no mistaking the 29-year-old rocker when he's out and about with his shopping list.
Like so many celebrities he stands out…by wearing shades.
De Lorean is to hand back £5m
JOHN HICKS
SWINDLING carmaker John De Lorean has finally been forced to give back £5 million to British taxpayers.
The surprise payment was hailed as a triumph by the receivers of the Belfast car company which collapsed ten years ago.
But an estimated £30 million of loans and grants is still missing.
De Lorean, 62, raised the money by selling his £7 million New York penthouse.
The cash will be handed to Belfast's Industrial Development Board, which backed his ill-fated car firm.
PAYING: De Lorean
New car sales hit
NEW car sales have fallen to their lowest level since 1980, it was revealed yesterday.
Just 33,000 cars were registered in July — and only 13,000 by private motorists — a drop of eight per cent on the same time last year.
Recession-hit businesses have been blamed for the slump.
Company cars make up 60 per cent of the sales.
But with falling profits many employers have cut back on the perk.
I leave my last penny to council
DESERT Rat hero Theo Pyke left 1p to his local council — in payment of a poll tax bill he had already settled.
Theo, 75, was threatened with bailiffs even though he told officials he had paid the bill.
He collapsed after returning home from the latest run-in and, sadly, died several days later.
In his will, Theo finally put an end to the squabble writing: ‘I bequeath my last penny to Havant council.’
Laugh
His wife Jean, 70, said: ‘When I saw that it was the only laugh I have had since Theo's death.
He thought Havant council was public enemy No 1.’
A council spokesman said: ‘We cannot comment because we haven't received anything yet.
The ironic thing is that he doesn't owe us anything anyway.’
MORE than half Britain's councils will still be chasing up old poll debts five years after the tax was abolished.
A massive £1.8 billion is still uncollected.
Never too late
WARTIME pilot Edgar Raspison has written an apology to the people of Ludlow, Shropshire, for cutting off their electricity when he crashed into power lines 49 years ago.
Trawler ‘sunk by a sub’
THE owner of a trawler which sank with the loss of all six crew claimed yesterday it was hit by a submarine.
Alan Ayres, 53, showed underwater video film of his wrecked boat, Pescado, which he said proved that she had been sunk by a sub.
He accused the Ministry of Defence of being involved in a cover-up.
Police investigating the sinking off the Cornish coast last year have appointed a salvage firm to raise the wreck from the sea bed 240ft down.
The operation could cost up to £250,000.
But an MoD spokesman said last night: ‘We are certain no UK or allied submarines were responsible.’
Billy Ray takes a breaky
HEY, y'all.
Country star Billy Ray Cyrus is having a good ol' stay in the big city.
The Kentucky hunk who sings Achy Breaky Heart took it easy, visiting folks at a London radio station.
But as he left, Billy Ray, 31, indicated to fans that he had only two finger-lickin' minutes to spare.
Picture: ALAN GRISBROOK
Father took first bullet
IT all started with dad-of-three John Gallagher, a 29-year-old Catholic shot through the heart as he ran for cover in Armagh on August 14, 1969.
Like many other innocent victims of The Troubles, he was in the wrong place at the wrong time.
The bullet came from a line of ‘B Specials’— the now disbanded riot squad made up exclusively of loyalists.
By the following dawn two more civilians were dead, including nine-year-old Patrick Rooney.
Just a few hours earlier British troops had been sent on to the streets of Northern Ireland.
With the violence showing no signs of ending, thousands of soldiers must still maintain a military presence.
KILLED: Grim toll began with John Gallagher
9-iron curtain
RUSSIA'S first championship golf course is being built near Moscow by Bristol-based HTC Project Management as part of a £100m leisure complex.
30,0000 Death toll in Ulster passes grim milestone
Man gunned down on bus
JOHN HICKS
A MAN murdered on a bus last night became the 3,000th person to die in 23 years of Ulster violence.
The tragic toll was reached at 8.30pm when gunmen boarded a bus outside a Catholic club in Republican West Belfast and singled out their victim who they shot at point-blank range.
The man, in his late teens or early twenties, died instantly.
Two others were injured.
It is believed the victim may have been a member of the Irish People's Liberation organisation.
But no group claimed responsibility.
In the last week, both Protestants and Republicans have been vying with each other to grab the headlines by claiming the 3,000th victim.
Now the milestone has been passed — and there is still no end in sight to the slaughter and suffering.
The killing started on August 14, 1969.
Since then 2,082 civilians, 436 soldiers, 188 full-time members of the RUC and 97 Reservists and 197 members of the former Ulster Defence Regiment have died.
The biggest single loss of life was suffered by the Army on August Bank Holiday Monday, 1979, when 18 soldiers were killed in a double IRA bomb attack at Warrenpoint, County Down.
The worst single loss of civilian life was when the loyalist Ulster Volunteer Force bombed McGurks bar in North Belfast, killing 15 Catholics on December 4, 1969.
The RUC's blackest day was on February 28, 1985 when the IRA mortar-bombed the RUC station in the border town of
Newry, Co Down, killing nine officers.
Boys in glue
A POLICE campaign against illegal flyposters in Dorchester, Dorset, has backfired.
The latest posters advertise the police ball.
Beatles hits net £85,000
TWO hand-written Beatles' Sergeant Pepper lyrics were sold for a total of £85,000 at an auction of pop memorabilia yesterday.
John Lennon's lyrics for A Day In The Life fetched £44,000 and Paul McCartney's hit She's Leaving Home went for £41,000 at Sotheby's in London.
Both were snapped up by anonymous telephone bidders who paid three times more than expected.
A gold basque worn by Madonna was sold for £9,000.
SALE: McCartney
Brit girl bitten by croc
BRITON Susie Carswell was bitten by a crocodile as she swam at a tourist resort.
Horrified holiday-makers saw the five-foot reptile clamp its jaws round her leg after she and a pal went for a dip in a national park pool.
They had gone ahead of their Australian guide and he did not have a chance to warn them the creature — usually docile — lived there.
Susie — who is in her 20s and comes from Sheffield — needed seven  stitches after the attack at Kakadu east of Darwin.
Park official Fred Haala said some trippers had been harassing the crocodile.
He added: ‘They didn't warn Susie it was there.’
Holiday horror for kids
FORTY children collapsed with suspected food poisoning on a coach bringing them home from France.
The children spent two days in hospital at Macon, near Lyons, before being flown home yesterday to their worried parents.
Driver David Humphreys, 30, who works for Grey-Green coaches, said he alerted the hospital when the youngsters — aged from seven to 17 — started vomiting.
Hospital staff advised him to drive on, but an hour later he turned back when more children and four teachers from Northgate High School, Dereham, Norfolk, fell ill.
He told bosses everyone who was sick had eaten eggs.
FIDDLER ON THE HOOF
‘Nigel's run off with our robe’
SYDNEY YOUNG
PUNK violinist Nigel Kennedy got a dressing down yesterday — for failing to return a £400 robe he borrowed 14 months ago.
The maverick maestro, who prefers life in scruffy clothes, was lent the gold-trimmed gown by Bath University when it awarded him an honorary degree for musical ability in June last year.
But Nigel took the cloak home with him and it's been another string to his bow ever since.
Now the university has asked the fiddler: Can we have it back, please?
Spokeswoman Veronica Warner said: ‘Mr Kennedy seems to think he was given the gown, but that's not quite right.
Borrowed
‘It was quite clear at the time that it was just being borrowed.
‘If he has now changed his mind, he has to inform the university in a rather more formal way.
‘We don't want a public disagreement with one of our honorary graduates.’
Nigel, 34, and his girl-friend Brix Smith both created a stir when they arrived for the ceremony.
Brix, 28, was dressed like a St Trinian's schoolgirl.
Nigel sported pink sunglasses, pink-striped T-shirt, leather trousers and winkle pickers.
He slapped startled dignitaries on the back with a cheery ‘How ya doin', man?’ and informed the vice-chancellor: ‘See ya later, mate.’
But he did bow to tradition by topping his wacky gear with the gown and a mortar board.
A spokeswoman for Nigel said yesterday: ‘I'm sure he didn't realise it was only a loan.
‘Anyway, he's been too busy to think about this.’
PRIZE PAIR: Nigel with the borrowed gown and Brix at last year's ceremony
Arrest ‘piracy’
THE arrest at sea of murder suspect Roderick Newall was compared to piracy yesterday.
The Royal Navy intercepted his yacht and he was accused of killing his parents in Jersey.
But his lawyer said in Gibraltar he was held illegally.
Red's too hot for romeos
LADIES in red may get the eye, but they seldom get the guy, says a study into the colours of love.
Potential Romeos are intimidated by the sizzling shade, claims American researcher Carlton Wagner.
This is because ‘women in red do not seem approachable.’
But men do fancy girls wearing blue — especially on blind dates.
White also appeals due to its association with innocence and purity.
But black is the biggest turn-on because it communicates sensuality and mystery.
‘Rock’ girl drug rap
DEATH on the Rock witness Carmen Proetta appeared in court yesterday, accused of possessing LSD.
She and her 56-year-old husband Maxi were bailed until September 10 by a court in Gibraltar.
Mrs Proetta, 50, was the central figure in an ITV documentary in which she claimed that three IRA terrorists there were shot dead in cold blood by the SAS in 1988.
BT BOSS BEATS BID TO JAIL HIM
DON MACKAY
BRITISH TELECOM boss Iain Vallance was let off the hook yesterday when a bid to jail him was thrown out of court.
Businessman Racch-Paul Bedi wanted the BT chairman and two top executives sent to prison for breaking a court order.
Mr Bedi, from Brentwood, Essex, had won an order preventing BT from cutting off his phone in a row over an unpaid bill.
But the phone WAS cut off — and although it was reconnected, Mr Bedi claimed his five days without a line cost him £5,000.
A City of London County Court judge rejected the jail application on a legal technicality.
After the case Mr Bedi vowed to fight on over the unpaid bill which, he claims, was sent to the wrong address.
Court out
WORMS stopped play in the Wiltshire tennis championships after heavy rain drove scores of them on to the Marlborough courts.
We'll give up hols to save cat
A FAMILY gave up their holiday to pay £700 for a life-saving operation on their cat Tilly.
The two-year-old tabby was horrifically injured in a road accident.
Half its face was ripped away, and its tongue and one ear were almost torn off.
Vet Steve Gillian told David and Pauline Drury and their 16-year-old twins, Beverley and Paul, the cat would have to be put down if it did not have the operation.
‘We didn't care what it cost,’ Pauline said at their home in New Mills, Derbyshire.
‘It was no hardship to sacrifice our holiday.
‘Mr Gillian worked wonders and Tilly's fine.’
Horseplay
TWO ponies became so amorous in their horse box that they sent it plunging off a road and down a bank near Islip, Oxon, yesterday.
Cops hit the road
A NEW national police force may be created to deal solely with traffic problems, it was revealed yesterday.
The plan comes from the powerful Association of Metropolitan Authorities with the aim of cutting road accidents.
Neil's wife is a TV hotshot
SOCCER star Neil Webb may be struggling to find top form.
But his wife Shelley seemed in great shape yesterday as she prepared to kick off a TV career.
Shelley, 29, is to present the BBC 2 sports show Standing Room Only.
And Manchester United's Neil will be watching.
Journalist Shelley said: ‘Neil and I argue about football all the time.
But he's started looking at me as if to say, ‘Perhaps she does understand after all.’'
HUSBAND: Webb
CLEANED OUT!
Burglars take kitchen sink, fireplace and even the loo
SAMUEL JAMES
WIDOW Eva Bell returned from a visit to her sick mother to find thieves had stripped her seaside guest house of all its contents — including the kitchen sink.
And yesterday Eva, who had poured her life savings into the six-bedroom house, was left devastated and penniless.
Almost every piece of furniture was missing, including 1930s art deco items she had spent years collecting.
Antique clocks, light fittings, a fireplace, mirrors, carpets and curtains were stolen.
The thieves even removed doors, floorboards — and a toilet.
Care
Eva had left her £350,000 house overlooking the sea at Rottingdean, Sussex, in the care of a man who claimed to be a solicitor while she went to look after her 85-year-old mother in Czechoslovakia.
She said: ‘I got home with a couple of bags and discovered a horror of horrors.
‘Everything had gone — furniture, my clothes, fittings and all my personal possessions.
‘I had medals my father won fighting for the resistance in the Second World War and pictures of my late husband and my mother.
They were all taken.’
Rent
She added: ‘I put my life and my memories into this house and now everything is gone.
‘I wasn't insured and the things stolen were worth £150,000.
I can't replace them, I can't rent out rooms and I can't pay the mortgage.
‘At least I don't have to worry about the bailiffs because there is nothing left to take.’
COLD COMFORT: Eva crouches before the remains of a fireplace
NOWHERE TO GO: The bathroom's bare
Budding star
GARDENER Robin Marks, of Stoke Mandeville, Bucks, has named his new purple and white dahlia Steffi Graf, after his favourite tennis star.
KEEGAN BOY WONDER TO FACE DRUGS TRIAL
SOCCER star Darron McDonough, Kevin Keegan's first signing for Newcastle United, is to stand trial on a drugs charge.
The 29-year-old midfielder elected to have the case heard by a Crown Court when he appeared before magistrates at Dunstable, Beds, yesterday.
He is accused of possessing 10 milligrammes of amphetamine sulphate, known as speed.
McDonough was still playing for Luton Town when he was arrested at the Ritzy nightclub in Dunstable in February this year.
A few weeks later he was transferred to Newcastle United for a fee of £90,000, becoming the first player to be signed up by soccer legend Keegan as new manager of the First Division club.
The magistrates adjourned the hearing until October 8, when committal proceedings are likely to take place.
CHARGE: McDonough
Fun rescue is for real
FIFTEEN expert cavers practising underground rescues had to break off — to find a young potholer trapped in agony after a fall.
They found the 16-year-old boy and carried him safely to the surface at the Dan-yr-Ogof caves near Swansea.
Road runner
A NEW street in Kettering, Northants, is to be named Christie Way after Olympic sprint ace Linford Christie.
Exodus at Icke second coming
DAVID BRADSHAW
GREEN party boss Sara Parkin has quit over plans to resurrect ‘Son of God’ David Icke.
She dramatically resigned after hearing that he has been invited to speak at the Green party conference next month.
Icke was the party's national spokesman 17 months ago when he donned a turquoise tracksuit to announce himself the son of God on a mission to save the world.
That included orders from on high to cheat on his wife by sleeping with a disciple, he has declared.
The former TV sports host predicted a series of natural disasters.
But Sara, standing down as Green chairwoman, suggested the only disaster has been the party's huge decline.
And Icke's speaking engagement at a fringe meeting of the Wolverhampton conference — against the wishes of the entire party executive — was the final straw.
Ms Parkin blamed a ‘small number’ of rank and file members.
She slammed internal bickering and said the Greens, who polled just 0.5 per cent in April's general election, have become a ‘liability’ for the environmental cause.
Icke said he was ‘very honoured.’
The prophet admitted he hadn't foreseen his second coming.
GREEN RETURN: Icke
QUITTING: Sara
Queen's trooper in  bid to smear Diana
BILL AKASS
PRINCESS Diana was the target of a smear attempt last night — by a former trooper in the Queen's bodyguard.
Sensational claims were being made about Di and her friend Major James Hewitt.
The allegations come from one of the major's Household Cavalry troopers who has now quit the regiment.
He is said to have signed a sworn statement saying he spied on the couple alone together — and has sold the story to a Sunday newspaper.
The new threat came as bachelor James Gilbey — said to be the man recorded on the Di ‘love tapes’— was reported to fear that a SECOND tape may exist.
Polo-playing Major Hewitt, 34, was first drawn into the royal circle as riding instructor to Diana and Prince William.
The princess visited the handsome bachelor in barracks near Windsor and exchanged letters and gifts.
He is mentioned on the bugged ‘love tapes.’
The woman on the tape, named as Diana, speaks of kitting out Major Hewitt from ‘head to toe’ in trendy clothes.
At his barracks in London's Knightsbridge yesterday, the major refused to comment on the new allegations which are understood to have been made by a junior officer or private.
He said: ‘It is my policy not to say anything to the press.’
Bored
Major Hewitt is one of a group of young Army officers thrown into the royal circle through their service with the Household Cavalry.
To the princess, stifled by court life and bored with stuffy young courtiers, Hewitt was a breath of fresh air.
He drives a £20,000 TVR sports car, dresses in ‘designer’ gear — and she found him fun.
One royal observer says: ‘He was the envy of fellow officers and inevitably developed a crush on the princess.
‘He's very discreet and extremely civil — but he never answers questions about Diana.’
As a Life Guards officer, Major Hewitt earns around £32,000 a year — leaving a mystery over how he pays for his expensive life style.
Last night, the Ministry of Defence said they would not be taking action against the ‘snooper’ trooper — unless the information he divulged breached national security.
A spokesman said: ‘The Official Secrets Act is a matter of official secrets, not gossip.’
DIANA stayed out of sight for the third day running on her Scottish holiday at Balmoral yesterday.
She has hardly been seen since the ‘love tapes’ scandal erupted.
TARGET: Diana
FRIEND: Hewitt
INSTRUCTOR: Hewitt with Di, Wills and Harry
PALS: Princess Diana presents polo-playing Major Hewitt with a trophy
Tory's son on Thai drug rap
ANDREW DRUMMOND
THE son of a Tory party worker is being held on drug charges at a filthy Bangkok jail.
Tom Besly, 28, was arrested after Thai police allegedly found cannabis at his lodgings.
He has asked his father Richard, a retired Grenadier Guards lieutenant colonel and Tory Central Office employee, to send him cash.
Besly, who is being held in a cell with 100 other inmates, said: ‘Don't worry.
I'll be all right.
‘I hope to be home in two weeks or so.’
After his arrest, Thai police discovered that his visa had expired.
He said: ‘I've been told they will drop the charges against me for £15, as it is not a serious offence.
‘But they want to deport me and I can't get out without a ticket which will cost another £600 to £700.’
His father said last night: ‘I have been through the usual Foreign Office channels.
‘They hope he will be on a plane home over the weekend.’
His son is being held at Bangkok's Immigration Detention Centre, regarded by British Embassy staff as the worst jail in the city.
The cells are run by Chinese or Burmese Mafia units who beat inmates.
JAIL MISERY: Tom Besly behind bars yesterday
UN's set to stop big guns pounding Bosnians
MARK DOWDNEY
BIG guns pounding embattled Bosnians could fall silent under UN control within 11 days, under a deal agreed last night.
The formula was part of peace talks in London aimed at ending the misery in the former Yugoslav republic.
A total ban on military flights was also accepted.
Premier John Major, who co-hosted the conference, said the concessions had been the result of ‘concerted pressure’ on the warring factions.
He said he hoped they had laid the foundations for peace — but admitted obstacles could lie ahead.
The talks will re-open in Geneva next week, under Lord Owen who was confirmed as the new EC peace envoy.
Nine civilians, including a boy of 11, died in a horrific mortar attack by Serb forces yesterday.
Twenty other people were wounded.
Many are critically ill.
Force
The Serbs struck as Bosnian families emerged from their cellars in the Bosnian capital Sarajevo to look for food.
From their position in the hills, the forces lobbed three mortar bombs into the crowded streets.
The force of the blast hurled bodies into the air.
Women ran screaming with children in their arms, and old folk tripped over one another trying to escape the slaughter.
Seven victims died instantly and two on the way to hospital.
The atrocity lent a new urgency to UN Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali's announcement at the London talks that extra Western troops are to go to Bosnia.
Rail firm crashes
ONE of the biggest private users of the rail network is to go into liquidation because it cannot afford British Rail's rates.
Charterail — set up two years ago to draw freight from the roads — also blamed its collapse on ‘unfruitful discussions’ with transport minister Roger Freeman.
The firm's crash will come as a blow to the Government's rail privatisation plans.
PRICE CUTS IN STORE AT MARKS & SPARKS
HIGH Street giant Marks & Spencer yesterday revealed plans to slash prices in all its 300 stores — to woo back lost shoppers.
Reductions in food, fashion and home furnishings are on the cards this autumn.
And the move could trigger a bargain bonanza with major stores waging a new price war.
The cuts follow a drop in sales and are a clear sign of the depth of the recession.
M&S spokesman Brian Hudspith said: ‘We will be reducing prices on a whole range of goods and freezing the prices on the rest.
What we will be doing is to generate extra business by boosting customer confidence.
‘Up to now we have maintained our margins while others have cut prices.
‘By lowering our costs over the last two years we feel we can now pass some of those savings on to customers.’
The company made a £670 million profit last year — six per cent up on the previous year.
But sales of £4,930 million showed a fall of 1 1/2 per cent.
M&S insists that it will not be cutting quality or raising prices on other products to counter the discounts.
A massive advertising campaign will be launched in a few days.
Mr Hudspith denied that the firm was caught in a price war.
He added: ‘We planned this new value- for-money drive some time ago.’
But there is little doubt that price cuts in M&S food halls are intended to protect sales in premier products — which have been hit by price-cutting competitors.
Fashion and furnishing mark-downs look sure to provoke a response from rivals.
2,100 JOBS SLASHED AS SLUMP DEEPEN
Swan Hunter and Jaguar hit by falling orders
ALAN LAW
TWO top firms axed more than 2,100 workers yesterday because of falling orders.
Faced with a deepening slump, Tyneside shipbuilders Swan Hunter announced 1,400 job losses, and Jaguar cars 700 losses.
Another 100 jobs are being shed by Iveco Ford Truck.
Last night union leaders said the cut-backs were a ‘tragedy.’
And engineers' president Bill Jordan declared: ‘This is bad news for Britain.
It means that the recession which ought to be ending is gathering pace.’
The Swan Hunter losses — to take place between December and next spring — will hit 725 full-time and 700 short-term workers, leaving 2,200 on the payroll.
They follow the firm's failure to win any of the last Type 23 frigates from the Ministry of Defence, or any substitute work despite a worldwide search.
Joint Chief Executive Roger Vaughan said: ‘Our orders run through to the end of 1994.
We must ensure our employment levels are in line with that work until new orders are won.’
The axe at Jaguar's Coventry plant will cut the workforce to 7,300 from 12,000 only three years ago.
Workers have boosted productivity by 30 per cent.
But production has slumped by 45 per cent because of the plunge in demand — and there's no end in sight.
Faced with losses of £1,500,000 a week, chairman Nick Schele said the company would have closed by now if it had not been taken over by Ford.
He said: ‘We are looking at frightening levels of loss which an independent company could not sustain.’
The firm will ask for voluntary redundancies.
But it is likely that some job losses will be compulsory.
Blow
Chief union negotiator John Allen said it was another ‘hammer blow’ for the industry.
The Iveco cuts — at Langley, Berks — will mean the hourly-paid workforce has been more than halved to 660 since June, 1990, union chiefs said.
Transport Workers convenor Jock Campbell said: ‘This is a disaster.’
GLOOM: Swan Hunter, where 1,400 face axe
Yes, we know, we know…
JOHN COPPOCK
MORE and more company bosses are on the fiddle in the recession, a new report reveals.
Record numbers are being caught with fingers in the till — like ex-Mirror chief Robert Maxwell.
A survey by Director magazine shows that 337 bosses were prosecuted in the last financial year.
The Department of Trade caught 31 bosses red-handed — a rise of about 50 per cent.
The number of directors jailed rose from seven to 16.
The magazine's managing editor Tom Nash said: ‘People get desperate in the recession — particularly entrepreneurs who have seen their businesses go bust.’
OH BLAST IT SQUIDGY, I'VE SQUASHED THE CAR
(About time The Sun hit one spot on)
PETER KANE
PRINCESS Diana's shy pal James Gilbey finally met the press yesterday…in a head-on road smash.
The handsome admirer, said to have called Diana ‘Squidgy’, crunched his company car as he tried to dodge a photographer working for The Sun.
It was the first time that 36-year-old Gilbey had been seen in public since being named as the man on the phone in the love-tapes scandal.
Freelance cameraman Andy Styczynski, 32, spotted the elusive bachelor at the wheel of a white Rover Montego — and chased after him in a VW Golf GTi.
The photographer cut into private land owned by Gilbey's Team Lotus motoring bosses at Ketteringham, Norfolk.
And moments later the two met face to face — as their cars crashed into each other on a winding single-track road.
Last night police confirmed they were investigating the accident.
They had a report that Gilbey hurried off to the Lotus HQ, laughing as Styczynski shouted: ‘Are you going to sort out this mess, mate?’
Both men were taken to hospital.
Gilbey, a marketing consultant, was treated for minor cuts and bruises.
Styczynski had x-rays after saying that he had pains in his chest and pins and needles in his arms.
Later he was released.
Police said: ‘Both cars were considerably damaged.’
A witness reckoned both were write-offs.
A Lotus spokesman said: ‘Mr Gilbey does not want to talk.’
Gilbey had been booked to fly to Brussels with members of the Lotus team heading for Sunday's Belgian Grand Prix.
But he didn't turn up at Stansted airport.
It is thought unlikely that he will appear at an event attended by the international Press.
CRUNCHED: Gilbey's Montego (left) and the cameraman's Golf after the head-on crash that followed a chase  yesterday 
BRUISED: Diana's friend Gilbey
FORD SPARK CHEAP CAR WAR
FORD slashed up to £1,000 off the price of new cars and vans yesterday.
Under the month-long offer, basic models will be £200 cheaper, with the maximum discount on high-performance cars.
Vauxhall retaliated by knocking up to £1,150 off 1992 Novas and Cavaliers not fitted with catalytic converters.
From 1993, all new cars registered in the UK must have the anti-pollution device.
DIANA stayed out of sight for the third day running on her Scottish holiday at Balmoral yesterday.
She has hardly been seen since the ‘love tapes’ scandal erupted.
Bosses pile on gloom
BRITAIN'S bosses forecast more gloom yesterday — with many expecting the recession to worsen.
A survey by the Confederation of British Industry found bosses do not believe recovery can start before next spring -and only then if there is an interest rate cut.
Many firms believe production will fall — and more jobs are expected to be lost.
After the survey, Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown accused Premier John Major of turning Britain into a wasteland.
Meanwhile Chancellor Norman Lamont managed to win support for the pound from the EC yesterday.
Finance ministers declared their opposition to devaluation.
This could help stave off a damaging rise in interest rates.
ATTACK: Gordon Brown
OFF WITH HER HEAD
Fergie…consigned to the dustbin of history
STEPHEN WHITE
IMPULSIVE Fergie lost her head again yesterday.
Only this time, it was found rolling around in a dustbin.
The duchess was brutally given the chop by the Louis Tussauds waxworks on Blackpool's Golden Mile.
And her once proud position in the royal line, between her husband and father-in-law, is now an empty space.
The gallery sent her to the guillotine after seeing the Mirror's pictures of her South of France frolics with John Bryan.
Director Ken Spencer said cheekily: ‘We did think of recreating a tableau of the Mirror pictures but we decided against it.
It's a shame she had to go.’
And the most popular figure left in the waxworks?
Ken replied without hesitation: ‘It has to be Princess Diana.’
ONE MISSING: Fergie's spot between Andrew and Philip is now vacant
HAS-BIN: Fergie's head goes out with the rubbish yesterday at the waxworks Pictures: ANDREW STENNING
Crash kills 82
AN Aeroflot jet crashed in fog in the Russian city of Ivanovo, killing all 82 people on board, it was revealed yesterday.
Boy drowns
A BOY of four drowned yesterday after being swept three miles down a flooded river near Ammanford, West Wales.
He has not been named.
ALL PART OF THE JOB SAYS BOMBED TV GIRL KATE
Shrapnel hit helmet
NIGEL PAULEY
DAREDEVIL TV reporter Kate Adie last night shrugged off a brush with death in Bosnia, insisting: ‘It's all part of the job.’
A piece of shrapnel hit her helmet when six mortar bombs rained down outside the BBC's base near the UN headquarters in Sarajevo.
She and her crew were wearing body armour during the attack, but metal splinters pierced shuttering around the building and smashed into their room.
Kate, 46, who arrived only hours earlier to replace wounded BBC colleague Martin Bell, said: ‘It's business as usual.
This won't stop me doing my job.
‘It is one of the day-to-day hazards facing reporters out here.’
Her researcher, Anthony Massey, said: ‘The shrapnel flew between us and a piece bounced off Kate's helmet.
‘It didn't seem too threatening but it was still hot.’
Kate, a veteran of several battle zones, added: ‘This is without doubt the most dangerous place I have ever worked in.’
Three years ago, the Sunderland-born reporter escaped death when bullets whistled past as she broadcast during the Tiananmen Square massacre in Beijing.
A person standing next to her was hit but blood-spattered Kate carried on.
Killing
A British firm pledged yesterday to send medical supplies to Sarajevo after she passed on an appeal from doctors treating sick babies in the besieged city.
Staff at Cardiff-based Rimer-Alco volunteered to work over the bank holiday to prepare special oxygen machines to be flown out next week.
As the killing continued in Sarajevo, hopes of relief hit another setback with a delay in the silencing of heavy guns pounding the city.
Under an agreement made in London, the UN is to take control of Serb mortars and artillery.
But embarrassed officials admitted that similar deals in the past had come to nothing.
BATTLING ON: Kate shrugged off attack
WOUNDED: Reporter Martin Bell
SMOOTHIE WASIM IS A FAST MOVER
DEMON fast bowler Wasim Akram can get movement off the smoothest surface — even the dance floor at Stringfellow's.
The Pakistani star was happy to demonstrate his overarm technique as he cuddled stunning fiancee Huma, who in that dress is no stranger to bodyline.
And everyone agreed that the swinging couple had a ball at the London nightclub.
Picture: FRANK DORAN
So corny Cleese
COMIC John Cleese is crazy about cornflakes.
He chose the cereal as his favourite recipe.
‘It's simple to make and delicious,’ he insists.
And in Basil Fawlty-style he suggests an alternative to milk — Coca-Cola sprinkled with basil.
He even gave The Vegetarian magazine his method: Buy cornflakes, pour them out and add milk!
EXAM KIDS FEAR DOLE
A RECORD number of 16-year-olds will stay on at schools and colleges next month — but for many it is simply a way of avoiding the dole queue.
The massive increase in the number of GCSE candidates opting to continue in education is being trumpeted by the Tories as a success story.
But Labour points out the recession has left youngsters with little choice.
Unemployment among 16 and 17-year-olds has DOUBLED in just two years to one in six, says a report today.
Almost 900,000 young people are out of work — and the problem is worse in the South East.
Straight up…it's the Euro banana!
JOHN COPPOCK
A SMALLER, greener Euro banana is on its way to Britain's fruit counters…and it will cost shoppers MORE.
We currently import most of our bananas from South America and the Caribbean.
But under the EC's 1992 single-market laws, which come into force at the end of the year, imports from non-member nations will be cut.
Instead, we'll have to unzip more Euro bananas.
They're not as big and not as yellow but likely to be more expensive than the current price of around 49p a pound.
Growers in Italy, Greece and the Canary Islands will benefit.
But the traditional banana-producing countries are banding together to save their skins.
A spokesman for Caribbean exporters said: ‘It will cost us millions in lost income and lead to higher prices in Europe.’
NEW RULE: Bananas
Eldorado boost by rival boss
CHANNEL 4 boss Michael Grade last night slammed BBC chiefs for failing to boost morale on the sinking soap Eldorado.
Grade said a message of support from Beeb top brass would lift the cast in Spain.
‘Win or lose you must support your creative people,’ he said at the Edinburgh TV festival.
‘As and when the show does come good they will be the first to say, ‘We always knew it would.’’
Mr Grade said the first episode, showing Pilar, played by Sandra Sandri, bra-less and riding a horse, was ‘worth a year's licence fee’.
It was Mr Grade, a former BBC boss, who gave the go-ahead to the hit soap EastEnders.
STUNNING: Sandra
NIPPED IN THE BUD DARLING!
Cathy's hopes hit as film is panned
ALEC LOM
TV DARLING Catherine Zeta Jones's dream of Hollywood stardom was nipped in the bud last night.
Critics in America savagely panned her first big movie, Christopher Columbus: The Discovery.
Catherine, 23 — Mariette Larkin in TV's The Darling Buds of May — hoped her US film debut would lead to universal fame and fortune.
But although she escaped personal attack, the reviews of the £20 million blockbuster were far from ‘perfick’.
The film was branded a ‘colossal washout’ by influential Hollywood scribe Duane Byrge.
Another team of Tinseltown experts on Variety magazine predicted it would be 1992's biggest box-office flop.
And one leading agent reckoned the film would make just £2 million.
‘This film will go totally undiscovered,’ he said.
Catherine plays explorer Columbus's seductive girlfriend Beatriz.
Blasted
The all-star cast includes veteran Marlon Brando.
But even he was blasted for his portrayal of the evil inquisitor Torquemada.
He ‘looked like a character out of kids’ TV show Sesame Street,’spat one critic.
The movie, shot in France and Spain, goes on general release across the USA today.
Catherine may attend its British premiere in a fortnight's time.
The critics reserved their worst words for the relatively unknown George Corraface, who plays Columbus.
Hollywood columnists dismissed his performance as ‘bland’.
One suggested that his ‘swashbuckling manner’ was more suited to a musical.
HAMMERED: Brando
ALL AT SEA: Catherine as Beatriz was looking forward to big-screen success
Unemployment among 16 and 17-year-olds has DOUBLED in just two years to one in six, says a report today.
Almost 900,000 young people are out of work — and the problem is worse in the South East.
TV CARLA'S FURY OVER ‘DEVIL DOG’
COMEDY writer Carla Lane blasted the law yesterday after a setback in her fight to save a pit bull terrier.
A judge said he had no power to lift a destruction order on the dog.
The pet automatically faces death for being unmuzzled in public— even though it was ill.
Animal-lover Carla, 57, who created TV hits Bread and The Liver Birds, was in court to support an appeal to spare the dog.
She has put £1,400 towards a campaign to change the ‘insane’ Dangerous Dogs Act.
Panic ‘The Government built it in a day out of panic — it was not properly thought out,’ she raged after the hearing at Isleworth Crown Court, Middlesex.
The court heard that Mark Cichon, 25, removed the muzzle when his aunt's pit bull began coughing, then  vomited .
The judge refused to refer the case back to magistrates.
But the dog has a stay of execution to allow a High Court appeal.
CAMPAIGN: Carla
Small adds
SIX girls in the small ads department of the Essex Chronicle in Chelmsford, Essex, are all pregnant.
Jeremy's perfect match
WIMBLEDON star Jeremy Bates finally found time to wed his childhood sweetheart yesterday — because it did not clash with any tennis dates.
Jeremy, 30, and Ruth Leech were due to marry earlier this month but the love-match was called off because Jeremy had to play a tournament in the States.
Yesterday it was Ruth's turn to keep the British No 1 waiting — she arrived five minutes late for the ceremony at Weybridge, Surrey.
Jeremy admitted he got anxious and added: ‘It's funny — I never get nervous before a tennis match.’
MIXED DOUBLE: Happy pair Jeremy and Ruth finally play their love match
IN ACTION: Ace Jeremy on the courts
Shady lady
MADCAP Teresa Bond raised £80 for charity by trudging around Whitstable, Kent, for five hours — with a lampshade on her head.
2-week tot set for new heart
JILL PALMER
TINY Daniel Burke, just two weeks old, is set to become the world's youngest heart swap patient — if a donor can be found.
The tot was raced by ambulance from Manchester to the world's premier heart transplant unit at Harefield Hospital, Middlesex, when he was 24 hours old.
Doctors immediately put out a Europe-wide alert for a suitable donor.
But time is running out.
Scan
Last night Daniel's father Jason made a dramatic plea for someone to save his dying son's life.
‘He is so small and so dependent on us, we must do something to save him,’ said Jason, 20, from Flixton, Manchester.
‘It is a miracle he has survived this long.’
A routine scan when mum Lynette, 19, was three months pregnant first alerted doctors to the baby's problem.
But they did not realise how serious it was until Daniel was born.
The left side of his heart had not grown properly in the womb.
Now his only chance of life is a new heart.
WAITING: Daniel
GARDENER IS KILLED BY SHEARS
GARDENER Philip Hodges bled to death after falling on shears as he cut a hedge.
One blade speared his jugular vein.
The tragedy happened when he slipped on wet grass at the home of 75year-old retired Brigadier Tim Pierson in Fownhope, near Hereford.
Philip, 36, ran into the house clutching his neck as blood pumped from the wound.
The brigadier tried to stem the flow with a tourniquet.
But Philip, a father of three, died before an ambulance arrived.
Island fling
EXPLORER Gerald Kingsland, 62 — who inspired the film Castaway — has had scores of replies to an ad for a girl to join him on an island.
TV bear is stolen from his station
PADDINGTON
Bear was last night safe and well after being stolen from his home on Platform One.
The bear from Peru was taken from the glass dome which has been his home at Paddington station for 25 years.
Five youths were arrested after police spotted them outside with the 3ft high mascot.
Two Canadians were charged with stealing the TV bear and causing criminal damage.
They will appear in court today.
Police said: ‘We fed Paddington marmalade sandwiches.
He was quite happy.’
SAFE: Paddington
First thirst
PLUMBER Peter Rowe, 53, has bought the Wheal Basset Inn at Carnkie, Cornwall — the pub where he had his first drink 38 years ago.
Simon's lift for judo ace
POP star Simon Le Bon has helped out hard-up judo ace Ray Stevens — by lending him his car.
Ray, 29 — whose state benefit was stopped — couldn't afford to take his silver medal to his mum in High Wycombe, Bucks.
Simon stepped in after they met at Barcelona.
Oh, XXXX!
A HUGE Aussie-style pub ran out of beer and shut after two of its bosses, and £3.5 million takings, disappeared from Expo 92 in Spain.
Telly star serves up cheer for homeless
ALEC LOM
TV ACTRESS Louise Lombard last night revealed her secret life — feeding London's hungry down-and-outs.
After a day's filming, the House Of Eliott star spends four hours serving toast and bacon butties.
Louise, 21 — Evangeline in the lavish BBC drama — helps out in the crypt of St Martin-in-the-Fields church off Trafalgar Square.
‘The people you meet there are tragic,’ she said yesterday.
‘Many are perfectly normal — except that they've hit on hard times.
‘They're in a Catch 22 situation.
They have no money, so they have no accommodation, so they can't find a job.
It's very sad.’
She blames the Government for failing to do enough to help.
Louise will be back on screen next Sunday when a new House Of Eliott series begins.
CARING: Louise
Price of TV fame
JOHN HICKS
THE 3,000th victim of Ulster's violence paid the price of a brief moment of fame, it was revealed last night.
Hugh McKibben, 21, a Gaelic footballer, was blasted to death by two unmasked gunmen in front of team mates on their club bus in Belfast late on Thursday.
Two other men were hurt.
Terror
McKibben had appeared on TV last week escorting the coffin of terror boss Jimmy Brown — and that cost him his life.
The two killings are part of a vicious power struggle within the Irish People's Liberation Organisation over a huge drugs racket in West Belfast.
And the violence continued yesterday as father-of-two Paddy McErlean narrowly escaped death.
McErlean, 26, the husband of a former Sinn Fein councillor, was ambushed by Loyalist hitmen as he and his teenage brother drove to work from his home in Dunloy, Co Antrim.
Bullets ripped through the car and he was hit in the chest and leg.
But he managed to speed out of the line of fire and drove a mile before calling for help.
He was ‘satisfactory’ in hospital last night.
Security Minister Michael Mates said yesterday that no amount of killings would win terrorists a place at the conference table.
‘It is time it all stopped,’ he said.
‘It is utterly futile and will not change a thing.’
DEATH MARCH: Hugh McKibben, in the white shirt, escorts terrorist Jimmy Brown's coffin.
It was to cost him his life
WHEN WILL WE EVER LEARN?
As Ulster mourns its 3,000th victim, the daughter of Britain's first murdered soldier has her 21st birthday
‘He is not forgotten’
LIVE CRICKMER
GILL SWAIN
THREE thousand people, most of them innocent civilians, have been murdered in Ulster in the last 23 years…for nothing.
There have been 34,000 shootings and 10,000 bombings.
Yet not one outrage has brought peace an inch nearer.
Behind the savage and futile blood-letting lies unimaginable suffering — families robbed of their loved ones, more than 33,000 injured and maimed and a generation of children brought up in the menacing shadow of the bomb and the bullet.
Yesterday, the unyielding men of terror tried to claim the province's 3,001st victim.
Today, the Mirror looks back to the first tragic deaths in one of the world's longest and more bitter conflicts.
When will it ever end?
When will we ever learn?
THE daughter of the first British soldier killed in the present Ulster troubles celebrated her 21st birthday yesterday as the scarred province marked its grimmest milestone.
Jasmine Roberta never knew her father, gunner Bobby Curtis.
The 20-year-old trooper was shot dead in a Belfast riot six months before she was born.
And yesterday Jasmine, whose three-year-old son Robert is named after her father, vowed: ‘For all our sakes I want this to be a happy  occasion with no thoughts of Ulster.’
Her mum Joan, 42, said: ‘Today of all days we want to put Ulster out of our minds.
‘I feel so sorry for all the families who have suffered.’
But however hard she tries, Joan will never forget February 6, 1971 when Bobby was shot dead in hate-filled Belfast.
The young Geordie had turned down his parents' pleas not to join up.
It was peacetime.
What could happen?
Then the riots blazed and he was plucked from barracks, given a month's emergency training and sent into the streets.
Bobby was too happy to be bothered.
He'd just had a letter from Joan telling him she was pregnant and had already chosen the name Jasmine if the child was a girl.
He'd been there a week when violence flared around his squad of green and frightened youngsters.
The soldiers ran — but Bobby could find no cover.
At 1.25am a bullet smashed into his chest.
Joan's only comfort was the child she was expecting.
But when Jasmine was born they put Joan in a room by herself at the hospital so she couldn't see other fathers cuddling their first-born as Bobby would have done.
She said: ‘I didn't cry much — just a little weep for what might have been.
Happy ‘I'm happy now, really, for the first time since he died.
It's something I thought I'd would never feel again.’
Joan, of Newcastle, is now happily married to supermarket butcher Tom Mallin.
They have a son Scott, 13.
Jasmine is also married and the proud owner of a gold wedding ring — her father's.
She said: ‘Mum gave it to me.
It means so much.
I'll treasure it always.’
BOBBY'S GIRL: Jasmine with her young son Robert, named after his father Picture: TOM BUIST
DEAD: First Army victim Bobby Curtis
Air crash 5 go on to work
FIVE cool businessmen stumbled from the wreckage of their crashed plane…and smartly stepped off to work.
Astonished Humberside airport workers watched the bosses pause only to check their briefcases and take souvenir snaps of their twin-engine plane.
It overshot the runway and plunged into a 12 foot ditch after flying the five from their engineering firm in Chigwell, Essex.
Design manager Ian Cheetham, 30, said calmly: ‘It was no big deal and we had to get to a very important meeting with clients.’
I DID IT FOR LOVE SAYS GUN RAIDER, 74
Old Charlie is freed by judge
A ROBBER aged 74 was freed yesterday after a judge heard how he carried out an armed raid for the love of his wheelchair-bound mistress.
Old lag Charlie Cowden, who has a serious heart condition, feared 73-year-old Rosie Hiscock would end up in a home if he died.
Armed with a loaded airgun, two smoke bombs and a knife, he held up a building society to provide her with a nest-egg.
Staff sounded the alarm and he fled empty handed…straight into an ambush by armed police wearing helmets and body armour.
The grey-haired bandit tore off his stocking mask, sank to his knees and gasped: ‘Mind my heart.
Three days ago I was in hospital on oxygen.’
He told detectives he carried out the raid at Radlett, Herts, because he was worried about crippled Rosie, his mistress for 25 years.
He was struggling to live on £54 a week and faced a £100 electricity bill.
The smoke bombs were to create a diversion, he explained.
Cowden said he tested one before the raid, ‘but my pipe gave off more smoke.’
He added: ‘I was never a violent man.
It frightened me more than the people behind the counter.’
Cowden, from Kilburn, North London, admitted attempted robbery and was given a suspended two-year prison sentence.
Pushed
He walked from the Old Bailey into Rosie's arms — then pushed her away in her wheelchair.
‘This is the end of my criminal career,’ he said.
‘I have hung up my guns for good.’
The court heard that Cowden, a former professional conman, had a string of convictions going back 53 years.
After his wife died, he dedicated himself to caring for Rosie.
The crazy robbery plot was hatched with a friend, also in his seventies.
They met while in prison.
And, the court was told, the caper was just like the film Best of Friends in which Kirk Douglas and Burt Lancaster play two old lags who decide to pull off a final robbery.
But Cowden's pal betrayed him -and the police were waiting.
FREEDOM: Charlie wheels Rosie away from court
HIJINKS WITH ROSIE: The couple after the case
Ogling fish is a sex finned
A SEA-LIFE centre is trying to cure a kinky fish of staring at girls' breasts.
George the 4ft-long grouper spends his days peering down visitors' cleavages at Blackpool, but ignores men.
Expert Mike Stephenson said: ‘It's embarrassing.
George has big round staring eyes.
We may get a mate in the hope he'll transfer his attentions.’
Gourd blimey
GREEN-FINGERED Les Gyllenship, 71, has hired a crane to lift a 120lb pumpkin out of his garden in Plymouth.
ORDEAL OF WASP MAN
HEARTLESS motorists ignored pleas for help from a driver as he fought for his life after being stung by a wasp.
Alan Hirst, 39, who has a rare allergy, injected himself with adrenalin after he was stung at Bawtry, Doncaster.
Finally, a shopkeeper dialled 999 as he fell into a coma by the road.
Alan said yesterday: ‘I still can't believe they were so callous.’
FURY OVER BANK BOOB
AUSSIE tripper John Lambert found a British bank did not give a XXXX when he handed back £1,000 they handed him by mistake.
Instead Barclays asked him for an extra £15 commission on his traveller's cheques.
Angry John refused to pay and yesterday a spokesman for the bank at Ashton-under-Lyne admitted: ‘There was a bit of a mix-up.’
…PAGE: 13…
EDTN: 1
Fine Outlook
SAILORS who break the eight-knot speed limit at Poole harbour, Dorset, face radar traps and hefty fines.
MURDER COURT DRAMA
AN 84-year-old man collapsed in court with a suspected heart attack yesterday as he was charged with the ‘mercy’ killing of a 94year-old widow.
Former dockyard worker Jim Smith slumped to the floor gasping for breath.
The Portsmouth Court case was halted while he was taken to hospital where he was later said to be ‘comfortable.’
Smith is accused of murdering Mrs Emily Emms at the rest home in Southsea, Hants, where they both lived.
Reely great!
LUCKY Graham Frith, 35, went fishing for the first time and caught almost 50 trout on the River Test in Hampshire.
‘Appen house is haunted
A GHOST called Percy is teaching toddler Jasmin Griggs to speak in a northern accent.
Now mum Nicola, who is fed up with 20-month-old Jasmin saying ‘ayup’, wants to move from her housing association home in Buckland, Portsmouth.
Nicola, 23, claims the ghost has also thrown a kitchen chair at her.
Easy Street
FOUR couples who have lived in adjoining houses in Radcliffe on Trent, Notts since 1952 are throwing a champagne party to mark 30 years of being ‘the best neighbours in Britain.’
£7 m for a tragic car girl
A GIRL of eight paralysed as a baby in a car crash won a possible £7 million damages in the High Court yesterday.
Louise Sugden, of Newbury, Berks, was being driven by her father.
Insurers will meet the award.
Damages will be paid as Louise gets older.
She could receive more if she lives well into old age.
Ulster's 3,001 dead
A SOLDIER was killed by an IRA sniper last night — victim No. 3,001 in Ulster's grim death toll over the last 23 years.
He was hit as an eight-man patrol returned to base in the IRA stronghold of Crossmaglen, South Armagh.
This year's death toll stands at 58 — all but four of them civilians.
When Will We Ever Learn?— See Pages 8 and 9
3,000 UN men go in
MORE than 3,000 United Nations troops are to be sent into war-torn Somalia to protect food supplies, the Security Council decided last night.
The move comes after bandits stole half of the food aid sent to save starving millions in the devastated country.
GALES KILL 6 IN ROAD TRAGEDIES
JIM OLDFIELD
A MAN and two teenage girls lay dead for hours in their wrecked Land-Rover after it careered off a country lane in a gale.
A motorist found the three — driver Liam Brighton, 26, Justine Carter, 17, and Julie Armstrong, 18 — at Tarporley, Cheshire, yesterday.
Three other people were killed and three seriously injured yesterday when two cars crashed in driving rain near Waverton, Cumbria.
The victims have not been named.
A teenage girl was seriously injured when a distress flare she found washed up on the beach at Margate, Kent, exploded in her pocket.
Cyclist George Rimmington, 72, and motorbike rider Graham Brown, 29, were seriously injured after crashing in a gale near Scunthorpe.
In central London, a middle-aged woman had a lucky escape when a 40ft tree crashed down on to an open-top bus on Victoria Embankment.
She was sitting on the top deck and was cut and bruised by branches.
Three parked cars were crushed.
Several people were injured in a 12-vehicle pile-up on the M25 near Wisley, Surrey.
Two divers who died searching a wrecked ship off Swanage, Dorset, were named yesterday as Ivan Woolf, 51, from Ilford, Essex, and medical student Elizabeth Green, 23, from Newmarket, Suffolk.
HAVOC: This tree wrecked three cars when it fell on London's Victoria Embankment
Picture: Bill ROWNTREE
MARK ELLIS
MASS graves containing the bodies of 200 Moslem civilians killed by Serbs have been found in Mostar, southwest Bosnia, it was claimed last night.
CHILDREN IN ABUSE HORROR
200 kids ‘victims at homes’
JIM OLDFIELD
MORE than 200 children are believed to have been abused by staff at council homes in a 20-year catalogue of sexual assaults, beatings and humiliating punishment regimes.
In the biggest-ever inquiry of its kind, 30 police officers have been working for a year, taking 1,500 statements from youngsters.
The probe centres on all seven children's homes in Clwyd, North Wales, and several more in neighbouring Gwynedd.
Seven people have so far been charged with a variety of offences, a police source revealed yesterday.
He added: ‘This is just the beginning.’
The inquiry, ordered by bosses at Clwyd County Council, is expected to take another year.
Incidents
John Hanson, 24, is suing over incidents he claims took place while he was in care from the ages of 12 to 15.
He said: ‘The police seem to be doing a very thorough job.’
John says he was punched and thrown through a window by a member of staff.
He said: ‘Although I was never sexually abused, others were.
One boy of nine used to be let out to spend weekends with a bachelor priest.
‘That kid came back with painted toenails and was very distressed.’
Clwyd's director of social services John Jeavons — one of the men who ordered the probe — was not available for comment yesterday.
Nazi fire blitz on refugees
THREE immigrants were injured in firebomb attacks by German neo-Nazis at the weekend.
Mobs of Right-wing thugs set ablaze a tent city housing refugees outside Leipzig and torched a hostel in Zielitz.
Another gang fired a pistol through the window of a hostel in Poettmes, narrowly missing an Albanian family.
Saddam's ‘no-fly’ fury
FURIOUS Saddam Hussein vowed yesterday to ‘confront with all means available’ the US-led allies' no-fly zone over southern Iraq.
He claimed it was part of a plot to split his country so the West could control its oil supplies.
The tyrant's statement said Iraqi leaders were ‘determined to reject the bold aggression’.
The zone was imposed to protect persecuted Shi'ites.
Scouts found safe
THREE 14-year-old Scouts were found yesterday after being trapped for 18 hours in torrential rain on a Lake District mountain.
They were suffering from hypothermia and were flown by helicopter to hospital.
Richard Morris, Paul Rayner and Kevin Greenhill, from High Wycombe, Bucks, were trying to win the Chief Scout Award badge when the rain forced them to shelter in a tiny tent they were carrying.
OH WELL, BACK TO NORMAL
It's another Blank Holiday as rain, gales and floods batter Britain
NICOLA BRIGGS
BRITAIN'S August Bank Holiday reverted to normal yesterday — wet, windy and woeful.
Torrential rain and gale-force storms left many coastal roads impassable.
Beaches were deserted — some even closed by police as 40ft waves pounded seafronts.
It was all so different from this time last year, when the sun shone brightly and millions crammed sands from Bournemouth to Blackpool.
But it was all so traditional for a British summer Bank Holiday.
In Bournemouth yesterday the beach was deserted as rain-soaked families trudged to shops and cinemas.
Around the Dorset coast at Lyme Regis, mammoth waves roared over the promenade, badly damaging even a tank-like, £23,000 Range Rover.
Hundreds of fans at the Reading Rock Festival were stuck with their cars and vans in thick mud last night.
Many had already packed up and fled after their tents flooded or blew away.
Radio One's 25th birthday concert at Sutton Park, West Midlands, rocked to the sound of downpours and the swish of brollies.
Homes in east Kent were flooded and abandoned cars tossed in the air as the sea crashed over the coastal road at Sandgate.
In Sidmouth and other Devon coastal towns it was the same sorry, stormy story.
The prom at Southsea, Hants, was closed as 60mph winds threw up rocks and boats sank after being ripped from moorings.
And the seafront of the Humberside resort of Bridlington was declared an exclusion zone by police after similar havoc.
In Blackpool, sandcastles were replaced by sandbags — handed out to hoteliers and shopkeepers on the flooded prom.
And workmen were out repairing damage to the illuminations, due for switch-on at the end of the week.
Cross-Channel ferry services were hit.
And the 52mph winds which swept London were thought to be a record for the month.
Refuge
The AA said normally-packed roads were deserted.
One London couple who did venture out were left regretting it.
They sought refuge at an M4 service station — only to emerge after a a meal to find their caravan had been stolen.
The weather outlook is just as gloomy for today.
Forecast for the final day of the August Bank Holiday — yes, you've guessed it: Wet and windy.
It's unfortunate timing for the publication today of a new league table of Britain's top resorts.
But a survey by holiday company Goldenrail shows Blackpool still most popular.
Torquay has moved into second spot, with Bournemouth sliding from runner-up in 1991 to sixth this year.
At least London's Notting Hill Carnival got off to a trouble-free start.
There were only 23 arrests — the lowest for 20 years.
A police spokesman said: ‘We aim to build on the success of last year.’
Shame the British weather couldn't say the same.
FANCY A DIP?
Huge waves swamp Lyme Regis yesterday
POUNDED: Even a Range Rover is badly damaged by the sea
ONE WITH THE WIND: Sole brave soul in a London park
WHEELS ON MIRE: Mudbath at Reading rock festival
WET, WET, WET: Fans at Radio 1's Sutton Park beano
BOURNEMOUTH ‘92: The near-deserted beach yesterdayPicture: IAN CHRISTY
BOURNEMOUTH ‘91: The only problem last Bank Holiday was finding a spot on the sunbaked sands
COMMENT
DUTY CALLS…
MIRROR
NEITHER the Queen nor her officials have done anything to stop the crisis facing the Monarchy.
The nation is beset with rumour and counter-rumour of alleged liaisons, tapes and the activities of the security services.
Yesterday, The Mail on Sunday wrote of a plot against the Princess of Wales by an inner group of courtiers.
Today, the Daily Mirror reveals the contents of a letter written on what appears to be Buckingham Palace notepaper and said to be from one official to another.
The letter may well be a fake but the worrying fact is that it proves there is a dirty tricks campaign designed to blacken the name of the Princess.
Campaign
A few months ago, such a campaign would have been unthinkable.
But in yesterday's papers it was widely claimed that friends of the Prince of Wales are behind a campaign of vilification.
Whatever the truth, it is seriously damaging to the Crown.
If the crisis is not to spiral completely out of control, the Queen must put her foot down.
She needs to give in public and in private her full personal support to the Princess.
The old Royal adage of never complain, never explain just won't do any longer.
Dahmer family sued for £25m
THE family of U.S. cannibal killer Jeffrey Dahmer is being sued for £25 million.
Martha Hicks, mother of his first victim, said they should have known he was ‘deviant and destined to cause death’.
Dahmer is serving life for murdering 17 men, including 15 butchered in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
KILLER: Dahmer
FILM BOSS GETS £15m PAY-OFF!
MOVIE boss Barry ‘Killer’ Diller has had a staggering £15 million payoff from media tycoon Rupert Murdoch.
The ruthless 20th Century Fox hatchet man also cashed in nearly £10 million worth of company shares.
Diller, 50, who earned £5 million a year as Fox chairman, was forced to resign earlier this year after profits slumped.
His record pay-off cost more than this year's dividends to all the shareholders in Murdoch's News International company.
YOU EVIL BITCH…
YOU ARE TRYING TO CRUCIFY ME
Fury as priest ditches Monika in baby scandal
GEOFF SUTTON/GEORGINA WALSH
TEACHER Monika Kocanek told yesterday how her Catholic priest lover turned on her when she revealed she was pregnant.
Monika, 27, said: ‘He screamed at me: ‘You evil bitch.’
He began shouting and screaming in a total panic.
He was terrified that he would be caught.
‘When I told him I was determined to have our baby he said: ‘You are trying to crucify me.’
’ Monika claims 38-year-old Father Christopher O'Neill ran out on her before the birth of their daughter Jennifer.
Yesterday, cuddling three-month-old Jennifer at her home in Bedford, she told how the passionate affair began — and how she was left to bring up her daughter on her own.
The couple met when Father O'Neill became parish priest at Holy Cross Church in Bedford.
Monika said: ‘We developed a deep friendship and one night after we'd drunk a lot of rum at my house, he tried to kiss me.
‘I was shocked but he told me it was inevitable.
I didn't see anything inevitable about an affair with a priest who had taken a vow of celibacy.
‘But several days later he came straight out with it and asked me if I was on the Pill and would I go on holiday to Scotland with him.
‘I guess I felt flattered.
We went to the remotest part of Scotland and had a gorgeous peaceful time.
‘We stayed at a guest house as Mr and Mrs
O'Neill.
‘Someone asked if we were on honeymoon.
Sexually he certainly knew what he was doing.’
During the four-month affair, Monika spent most nights with her lover.
She says he talked about leaving the priesthood to be with her.
Monika continued: ‘Now I know it was all double talk.
‘I believe we loved each other, but when it came to the crunch he couldn't leave the priesthood.’
Drummed Monika, who taught religious studies at St Thomas More RC School in Bedford, told Father O'Neill she was pregnant last September.
‘When it became clear I was going to have the baby, he left me,’ she says.
Within a week the priest was drummed out of Bedford — and Monika faced the full force of the Church Establishment.
There were visits and phone calls to her and her family.
She took her plight to the Bishop of Northampton, the Right Reverend Leo MacCartie, who listened quietly and told her: ‘Father Christopher will receive prayer and counselling and will then be moved to other parts.’
Monika was left isolated — yet still trapped within the Church.
She never received the one thing she wanted — a pledge from Father O'Neill that he would share in the future of baby Jennifer.
She last spoke to the priest five months before the birth and has since lost her teaching job.
Faith ‘Our baby is without a father because he has not been man enough to face up to his responsibility,’ she said.
‘At least I am true to my Catholic faith, even if he isn't.’
Father O'Neill went to St Joseph's Primary School at Bolton, Lancs.
He was ordained in Dublin two years ago and returned to Bolton to give his first mass at St Joseph's Church near his home.
Monika is now taking legal advice in a bid to force the missing priest to shoulder his responsibilities.
But she has vowed that she will not take financial help from the church.
‘I will not take a penny of collection money to pay for Jennifer,’ she said.
PROUD MUM: Monika with Jennifer.
‘How could anyone walk out on her?’ she asks Picture: HARRY PROSSER
LOVE AFFAIR: Father Christopher O'Neill…he took Monika on holiday to Scotland
Everyone has a sex life…it's no one else's business
FRANK BOUGH DEFIANT AS SECOND SCANDAL BREAKS
‘I FREELY ADMITTED MY LIMITATIONS’
NIGEL PAULEY
SMOOTH TV frontman Frank Bough lost his cool yesterday after being named in kinky sex allegations splashed across a Sunday newspaper — for the second time in his career.
The veteran broadcaster, pictured visiting a vice den which specialises in £80 ‘Miss Whiplash’ sessions, declared: ‘Everyone has a sex life, it is no one else's business.’
After reading a copy of the Sunday Mirror, he added: ‘This is an utter disgrace.’
The former breakfast TV star — who was shattered by a sex and drug orgies scandal in 1988 — added:
‘I was turned over four years ago and freely admitted my sexual limitations.’
His wife of 37 years, Nesta, stood by him during his first public humiliation.
SHE said at the time: ‘I know this will not happen again because of the shame it has brought on his family.’
Yesterday Nesta drove into their £600,000 mansion near Maidenhead, Berks, to prepare Sunday lunch for a group of friends.
Mum-of-three Nesta insisted: ‘I haven't read it and I don't want to know anything about it.’
Bough, 59, had successfully rebuilt his career and recently hosted ITV's Rugby World Cup coverage and LWT's Six O'clock Show.
He faced reporters yesterday outside his luxury home by the Thames and was handed a copy of the article.
He took it into his garage and emerged five minutes later looking pale and drawn.
Bough said: ‘It is pure pornography.
This is just regurgitated garbage dressed up as something new.
‘It is time someone put a stop to this.’
He politely declined to pose for pictures with Nesta and added: ‘I have nothing else to say today…but I will say plenty when the time comes.’
The man once dubbed ‘Uncle Frank’ for his genial style, wandered deep in thought around his garden.
HE didn't seem to notice the pouring rain despite being dressed only in a white shirt, yellow slacks and slippers.
Comedian Ernie Wise, a next-door-neighbour, said: ‘Poor old Frank does seem to keep shooting himself in the foot.
‘I feel sorry for the man.
I just can't understand it, I suppose it is an overwhelming desire.’
Bough tried to put his troubles behind him as guests arrived for a lunch yesterday held behind drawn curtains.
Nesta greeted the visitors with hugs and kisses.
Shortly afterwards Bough popped across to his garage and returned with a bottle of champagne.
Later the former Grandstand presenter said: ‘It's just been a normal family Sunday lunch.
I have nothing more to say.’
Griffin's Eye — Page 6 
SHATTERED Frank had family Sunday lunch yesterday as he put a brave face on more embarrassing stories
TOGETHER: Nesta and Frank before the latest revelations
LUXURY: The Boughs' plush home by the side of the Thames
Riding hat
FIREMEN will pedal two bikes topped by a 10ft yellow polystyrene helmet on a 500-mile charity ride from High Wycombe, Bucks.
JOHN HAS CARS ON THE BRAIN…
BURLY John Evans is heading for the record books again today — by balancing a car on his nut.
John, 45, will lift a Mini before crowds at a Nottingham holiday show.
In the past year, builder John has already carried off one stunt after another.
Once, he piled 66 milk crates on his head — 42 more than the previous record.
But today John, from Marlpool, Derbys, is set to exceed his crate expectations.
No doubt it will be a big weight off his mind.
Scent crazy
ROMANTIC men will lavish £150 million on perfume for women this year out of an annual trade worth £400 million.
OFFICIAL!
SMOKING IS A KILLER SAY DOCS
JILL PALMER
SMOKING kills…and that's official.
For the first time in Britain, doctors can include it on death certificates as the cause of death.
The move, which doctors have welcomed as a huge step towards showing the true level of smoking-related deaths, follows lengthy talks between the British Medical Association, the Census Office and coroners' representatives.
Dr Fleur Fisher, head of the BMA's scientific division, said: ‘Smoking is now recognised as a major cause of early preventable death.
This move will improve statistics showing this.’
Inquest
Until now, red tape required an inquest if a doctor thought smoking had contributed to death.
This caused long delays and confusion.
Now doctors can simply include smoking as a cause of death on certificates.
The BMA said a similar method in Oregon, in the US, showed tobacco contributed to 23 per cent of all cases.
About 100,000 deaths a year in Britain are attributed to smoking.
It causes heart disease, lung cancer, bronchitis and emphysema.
ASH, Action on Smoking and Health, said the new move meant that for the first time the true toll of smoking would be seen ‘in black and white’.
Mum dies in cop car smash-up
A MOTHER-of-three was killed instantly when her car was in a pile-up with a police Volvo answering a 999 call.
Marcia Fleat, 39, was going to work at an old folk's home when her Vauxhall was hit as it pulled out of a junction.
Two officers in the Volvo, which had its blue light flashing, were on their way to help a colleague being attacked in Romsey, Hants.
A JOYRIDER aged 21 died yesterday when a stolen car somersaulted into a garden after a 60mph police chase in Bristol.
Tasteful touch
JAPAN's ANA airline is to provide braille menus for blind passengers.
A joyrider of 21 died yesterday when a stolen car somersaulted into a garden following a 60mph police chase in Bristol.
FIVE BELLIES ACCUSED OF ASSAULT ON LOVER
Police called to Gazza pal's home
CLIVE CRICKMER
SOCCER ace Paul Gascoigne's burly buddy, Jimmy ‘Five Bellies’ Gardner, has been accused of assaulting his sweetheart.
Gardner, 27, was charged after police were called to the terraced home he shares with Joanne Gibson and their two-year-old son Liam.
A spokesman said they found 22-year-old Joanne, of Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, nursing a swollen and bruised face.
Hassle
Neighbours saw police lead Gardner away from the house.
He will now appear at Gateshead Court accused of causing actual bodily harm.
Gardner has been released on bail.
Last night, it was believed he and Joanne squabbled over his ‘pasta and pizza’ lifestyle in Rome.
‘Five Bellies’, who earns nearly £40,000 a year as Gazza's companion and minder, has been staying in the Italian capital since the soccer star joined Lazio.
It is thought Joanne wanted him to stay on Tyneside.
Gardner refused to discuss his row with Joanne.
He said: ‘I'm sick of all the hassle.
I've got nothing to say.’
GAZZA, 25, faces a lawsuit from a man he punched in a late-night brawl last year.
He was conditionally discharged by Newcastle magistrates in December after admitting assaulting railway worker John Beach.
Now Mr Beach, 34, is taking private action to claim compensation for injury and loss of earnings.
PALS: Gardner and Gazza ham it up in the sun
LOVERS: ‘Five Bellies’ Gardner with Joanne, mother of his two-year-old son
Under-hound
FIREMEN dug out a terrier which got stuck underground — behind the Hole in One pub at Portishead, near Bristol.
Safe sex drive…
CABBIES are to be asked to sell condoms in a one-year trial in north-east Derbyshire after neighbouring Chesterfield council rejected the idea.
HOLIDAY TRAGEDY OF ‘CURED’ CANCER GIRL
She dies on way to pool
CLIVE CRICKMER
LITTLE Elizabeth Mead went on holiday with her joyful family to celebrate a cancer cure.
But as her parents took her for a swim, she collapsed without warning and died.
Last night the grieving couple were still baffled by the tragedy that struck down six-year-old Elizabeth a week after doctors said they expected a full recovery from a brain tumour.
Dad Bruce, 41, said: ‘We are devastated.
We can't understand what went wrong.
One day we were celebrating Elizabeth beating her tumour, the next we were mourning her death.’
The plucky youngster had four operations and radio and chemotherapy during her four-year battle against the illness.
She was so weakened by the treatment that her parents had to teach her to walk and talk again.
Then came the day of joy when doctors at Newcastle upon Tyne General Hospital said they did not expect any more problems.
Collapsed
The family drove from their home at Whitley Bay, Tyne and Wear, for a weekend break at Ayr in Scotland.
Elizabeth collapsed as she walked to the pool with her dad, mum Arlene, 32, and their two other children — Caroline, 10, and David, 9.
Chiropodist Bruce massaged her heart while a nurse gave the kiss of life.
But they could not save Elizabeth.
The family have no criticism of the doctors.
Bruce said: ‘They did everything they could.’
He added: ‘She was such a friendly little girl — always happy despite what she went through.
‘She would give me a hug and a kiss when I came home from work.’
An inquest will open this week.
SUDDEN DEATH: Elizabeth Mead…brave four-year fight against cancer
NOW ‘ER INDOORS IS ARFUR'S NICE LITTLE LEARNER
Catchphrase in dictionary
PAULINE WALLIN
MINDER star Arfur Daley has talked his way into the Oxford English Dictionary, it was revealed yesterday — and it's thanks to ‘Er Indoors.
Arfur's missus has never appeared on screen but her shady husband's description of her will appear in the famous reference work's next edition.
Mind you, it has taken her 13 years to get there — that is how long the series has been running.
A senior assistant editor with Oxford University Press wrote to makers Euston Films with news of the new entry, the Edinburgh TV Festival was told.
Compilers of the work had noticed the expression ‘Er Indoors kept cropping up in newspapers and magazines.
‘The phrase has passed into popular usage,’ said an OED spokesman.
Arfur — played by actor George Cole — first referred to his long-suffering wife as ‘Er Indoors back in 1979 in episode three of the first series.
The phrase was coined by writer Leon Griffiths, who was also responsible for other Daley gems like ‘nice little earner,’ and ‘the world's your lobster’.
Griffiths died earlier this year, aged 62.
Minder's executive producer John Hambley said: ‘The dictionary entry is a wonderful tribute to Leon's skill with words.’
George Cole is over the moon.
‘He loves the idea,’ said Mr Hambley.
SHADY: Arfur
Blaze hero saves six
A HERO motorist dived six times into a blazing car to save a family from a fireball.
Colin Jones, 31, plucked four children and two adults to safety after their Montego hit a van and burst into flames on the M18 near Doncaster.
Colin, from Middlesbrough, said: ‘I just got on with it.’
Last night, all the family were seriously ill in hospital.
FURY AT NEW FEES BY BANKS
Blow for 24 million customers
JOHN COPPOCK
BRITAIN'S big banks stirred up a storm last night after threatening to charge customers for using their own money.
The banks want to re-introduce charges for people who stay in credit — not just those who run up overdrafts.
It means around 24 million current account holders would have to pay a fee every time they drew a cheque or used a hole-in-the-wall cash machine.
They would also be charged for paying regular bills by standing order.
Scared
The banks planning to bring back charges are Barclays, NatWest, Midland, Lloyds, TSB and Abbey National.
The Midland, which introduced free banking in 1984, said: ‘You don't get anything for nothing any more.’
But customers will have little say in the matter.
Banks are too scared to re-introduce charges on their own — so they plan to act together.
The move immediately angered MPs.
One said: ‘If it happens we may press for an inquiry by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.’
Free banking was brought in by the big banks to fight off the challenge of building societies, who were offering high-interest accounts.
But the banks — who last year recorded total profits of around £2billion on personal accounts — claim the cost of running the system has now become ‘unsustainable’.
Bye, Dickie old darling
WELL, love, here goes Dickie Attenborough off to make his acting comeback — at 69.
Sir Richard flew off with wife Sheila Sim yesterday for Hawaii, to work in front of the camera for the first time in 15 years for Steven Spielberg's latest film Jurassic Park.
The Oscar-winning director joked: ‘At my age it's a bugger trying to remember the lines.’
But he regards Spielberg as ‘a charming man’.
A darling, in fact.
Hero cop's dampener
A POLICEMAN dived into a canal to pull a driver from his crashed car — then booked him for going through a red light.
Officer Marco Pisano, 30, gave Simone Predico, 22, the kiss of life before handing him a ticket in the Italian town of Lodi.
FIASCO
How do you think they would feel if our findings were wrong?
Can you imagine what a scandal that would be — SPORTS COUNCIL SPOKESWOMAN AFTER THE BAN
Drugs ban on Olympic stars may be lifted
We're hoping — Andy has been through hell
BILL AKASS /JOHN JACKSON
THE great Olympic drugs scandal turned to fiasco last night.
Britain's two banned weightlifters were waiting for phone calls that would send them back to Barcelona.
And sports chiefs were examining claims that the disgraced strongmen were wrongly branded as cheats because of an incredible mix-up over the RULES.
Just 24 hours earlier a Sports Council spokeswoman, defending the drug tests, declared: ‘How do you think the competitors would feel if our findings were proved wrong?
Can you imagine what a scandal that would be?‘
Shambles
And as urgent talks went on in London and Barcelona, the words returned to haunt the top officials trying to sort out the shambles.
Weightlifters Andrew Saxton and Andrew Davies were hoping to be back in time for their events tomorrow and on Monday.
But any last-minute reprieve may come too late.
The pair, both 25, have been through two days of hell — and team-mates fear the nightmare may have damaged their medal chances.
The lifters were tested three weeks ago and were booted out of the Olympics for taking Clenbuterol.
Saxton, from Oxford, insisted he had used the drug for his asthma and given a dose to Welshman Davies when he complained of a ‘tight’ chest.
Clenbuterol IS a banned drug during and outside competition.
The row centres on a technicality — whether the proper testing procedure was carried out.
Lists
A Sports Council source said last night that the confusion may have arisen over separate lists of banned drugs and when they apply.
But a council spokesman said: ‘We stand by our findings.
‘We are confident the tests were carried out correctly.’
The third Olympic Briton sent home, sprint star Jason Livingston, is not affected.
IN BARCELONA last night travel plans were made in the hope that the ban will be lifted.
A decision is expected early today.
Olympic spokeswoman Caroline Searle said: ‘There is a possibility of their reinstatement.
‘Obviously if there is some problem with the tests we would welcome them back.’
IN BRITAIN, the wrangle was blasted by critics who saw it as a possible blow to Manchester's hopes of hosting the Olympics in the year 2000.
Labour MP Bob Cryer said: ‘The authorities had better clarify the position as rapidly as possible.
‘It would cause endless difficulties if their decision happened to be misplaced, dozy or ill thought-out.’
The athletes' families were waiting anxiously.
Saxton's mum Beryl said: ‘We have got everything crossed.’
Neighbour Stuart Partlett said: ‘We're hoping he gets the all-clear and shows them all by taking the gold.
‘This has been an utter fiasco.
Andy has been put through absolute hell.’
WAITING: Saxton…hopes for reprieve
WAITING: Davies…denies he cheated
£75,000 fine for Channel 4
CHANNEL 4 and independent programme makers Box Productions were yesterday jointly fined £75,000 over their controversial documentary on Loyalist murder squads in Ulster.
The High Court imposed the fine for contempt of court for refusal to obey an order to name the informants who told of links between the RUC and Loyalist gangs.
Although still refusing to comply, they will face no further punishment.
Channel 4 chairman Sir Richard Attenborough said later they faced an impossible dilemma —‘whether to reveal identities we had undertaken to protect, at risk to human life, or whether to come into conflict with the law.’
BOSS: Attenborough
Model Carla's dash as she is linked to Mick…
JILL TURNER /RICK SKY /TINA WEAVER
CATWALK queen Carla Bruni skipped her home yesterday amid rumours of a romance with Mick Jagger.
A maid arrived at the 23-year-old model's £500,000 Paris flat expecting to find her.
But instead, Carla had left a note saying: ‘I have gone abroad.
Please take any messages.’
The maid insisted the Italian beauty — whose ex-loves include rock stars and royalty — had ‘finished with men’.
And she added: ‘Mick Jagger has not been here.
She does not know him.’
Earlier this year Jagger was said to have been spotted holidaying in Thailand with Carla — days after Jerry Hall had his third child.
Rubbish
The stunning brunette, who earns more than £40,000 a week and is heiress to the Ceat tyre company fortune, has always denied the stories.
She claimed: ‘I hardly know the man.
‘They told me I was in Thailand with him but I have never been to Thailand in my life.’
But last night a source close to Jagger said: ‘All that stuff she has been saying about hardly knowing him is rubbish.
‘Mick and Carla have been together quite a lot.
They were in Thailand after Jerry gave birth six months ago.’
Jagger and Carla were introduced by ex-boyfriend rocker Eric Clapton at a Stones concert in America.
Jerry blames Carla for her split with Mick and is believed to have confronted her rival.
Lunatic
‘I rang Carla and told her to leave my man alone but she put the phone down on me,’ Jerry is reported to have said.
The young model's former loves include Prince Dimitri of Yugoslavia.
And flamboyant tycoon Donald Trump was so besotted with the Italian aristocrat he told everyone she was his girlfriend.
Carla replied: ‘Trump is obviously a lunatic.’
However rich or famous her lovers are, Carla, who admits she has been AIDS-tested, insists on one thing — safe sex.
‘I use a condom even if I have a long-term relationship,’ she has said.
‘I've had lovers who think just because I look fresh and pretty they don't have to wear one.’
LEGGY LOVELY: Carla dressed to thrill in an evening gown split to the waist
ANIMAL-LOVER Jackson is talking to London Zoo chiefs about a possible financial rescue.
Planners' telly snub for Geldof
ROCK scruff Bob Geldof's bid to turn a house into a breakfast TV studio has been sunk by planners.
Bob and his wife Paula Yates wanted to use the building for their new Channel Four show, which starts next month.
But the council in Lewisham, South London, refused permission because of fears that the 40 studio staff would disrupt the street.
Bob's TV company, Planet 24, has applied to convert another house, in Highgate, North London.
STUDIO BLOW: Bob
Defence-less
A LAWYER's wallet was stolen from a room at Brighton magistrates' court while he defended a man accused of — stealing wallets.
Beaten by video
NEARLY two out of five video owners find it difficult to programme their machines for recording because it is too complicated, says a Mintel market research report.
And 6 per cent— mostly elderly — say they are totally baffled and cannot use their recorders at all .
Just for kicks
MARTIAL arts expert Ian Womersley, of Hemsworth, West Yorks, smashed a record 4,032 roof tiles with his feet in 9 mins, 19 secs.
Weary Julia's El of a break
ALEC LOM
THE BBC's ailing soap Eldorado was rocked last night by the surprise departure of series chief Julia Smith.
The veteran producer — who masterminded the launch of EastEnders — announced she was taking ‘an extended break’.
BBC insiders also confirmed that actress Kathy Pitkin has been axed from the cast.
Her character — child bride Fizz — will leave the show in two months' time.
Julia Smith's duties will be taken over by Verity Lambert, head of Cinema Verity, the show's independent producers.
A statement from the company said the project had proved ‘totally exhausting’ for Julia.
Earlier this summer Julia said that she felt shattered by the show's punishing schedule.
The £10 million sun and sangria soap was set up from scratch in just six months.
But it has flopped in the ratings.
Latest figures show it is attracting only 4.4 million viewers.
EXHAUSTED: Julia
YUGO DEATH CAMPS
THOUSANDS of civilians are being slaughtered, starved or tortured in Serbian concentration camps, it was claimed yesterday.
An ex-prisoner said 1,350 people were murdered in a month at Brcko in northern Bosnia.
They were shot or had their throats cut, Alija Lujinovoc told a New York newspaper.
A former prisoner named Mehu said 1,000 Moslems and Croats were in metal cages without sanitation in a death camp at Omarska in northern Bosnia.
He said groups of 10 to 15 intellectuals were executed every few days.
Mehu claimed: ‘They would take them to a lake.
You'd hear shots.
They never came back.’
Red Cross officials have been refused entry to the two camps.
LABOUR accused the Government last night of ‘callous indifference’ to the plight of Yugoslav refugees.
Face of Fear — Page 10
Eldor-sad-o
PATRICK MULCHRONE
TV BEAUTY Kathy Pitkin is ‘devastated’ after being axed from the BBC's struggling soap Eldorado.
Her father Terry said yesterday: ‘She is terribly upset.’
But he would not reveal how his daughter's character — child bride Fizz — would be written out.
‘That would spoil the programme's storyline,’ said Terry, a stage manager on the Spanish set.
Ex-model Kathy, 17, from Alderley Edge, Cheshire, was said to have lost her job while on holiday.
How To Save Eldorado — Page 6 
AXED: Kathy
Hostel is ‘tipped’ £10,000!
YOUTH hostel chiefs will learn today whether a £10,000 tip handed over by a tourist is genuine.
The American visitor wrote out the cheque after staying at the £16-a-night City of London hostel.
He said: ‘Everybody's been so kind here.’
Today the bank will tell YHA boss George Logan if the cheque has been cleared.
Mr Logan, 54, said: ‘He normally stayed at top hotels.
But he was economising because he'd been robbed in Spain.’
CHAINSAW HORROR
A FARMHAND was killed when his chainsaw cut through an 11,000-volt electricity cable.
Mark Williams, 28, from Tavistock, Devon, was cutting a hedgerow when the blade jammed on a branch.
As he yanked it free the saw shot up and scythed into the cable.
HAVE A THIRST CLASS HOLIDAY
BEER drinkers should head for Portugal and wine lovers for Italy, according to a new holiday cost-of-living survey.
And Thailand is the place for T-shirts, Canada for car hire and Australia for camera film.
But tourists who want value for money should avoid buying a postcard in Bahrain or hiring a deckchair in Japan.
The American Express survey compared holiday prices in more than a dozen countries and came up with these contrasts:
BEER is cheapest in Portugal and Thailand, dearest in Canada and Germany.
WINE costs least in Italy and is most expensive in Thailand.
FILM is cheapest in Australia and costs most in Italy.
DECKCHAIR hire costs nearly £17 in Japan — but is free in the Bahamas.
LUNCH in Thailand is a tasty £1.70 but in Italy will cost you more than £23.
Bahrain is the place to go if you enjoy driving.
Petrol costs only 14p a litre.
But try not to get ill.
A visit to a GP in the Arab state costs more than £56.
Taxi rides are cheapest in Portugal, where the cabbies charge only 18p for a one-mile city trip.
If you like night life and are heading for the Far East, don't go to Japan.
Entry to a night-club can cost up to £128.
Thailand's a lot cheaper — £1.58 will get you into a Bangkok nightspot.
Lightning boy saved by shoes
SCHOOLBOY Brian Linkin cheated death when he was struck by lightning — because he refused to take off his smelly trainers.
The £50 rubber-soled shoes earthed the massive electric shock as the bolt hit Brian, 12, in his bedroom.
And that saved the boy who had insisted on wearing his treasured trainers in the house.
Mum Lynn said at their home in Faversham, Kent: ‘We have kidded him since he bought them for school camp that he hasn't taken them off.
‘I'm glad he didn't that night.’
High! we're big fans of yours, Ken
CORONATION STREET star Bill Roache has a high old time with two big fans.
TV's Ken Barlow climbed on a huge chair to chat to 7ft 3ins Rob Bruintjes (left) and Britain's tallest man, 7ft 6ins Chris Greener.
Rob and Chris, in town for a Tall Persons Club gathering, wanted to meet Bill because he was the sort of guy they could look up to.
THE Street's publican Alec Gilroy is to quit the Rovers Return — for a life on the ocean wave.
Alec, played by Roy Barraclough, will get his dream job next month when he becomes entertainments boss on a luxury liner.
And long-suffering wife Bet — actress Julie Goodyear — will be left to pick up the pieces.
Roy, 56, who has played Alec in over 500 episodes, said earlier this year he was returning to his first love, the theatre.
GOING: Roy
ART HAUL IS RECORD
ROBBERS stole paintings worth £25 million in the French Riviera's biggest art theft.
The owner, tycoon Antony Tannouri, 46, had planned to sell the masterpieces after getting a £23 million tax demand.
GOAL DEN
Dennis Irwin gave Manchester United a 3-2 victory over Norwegian champions Rosenborg in Trondheim last night.
United produced spectacular football before a 9,500 crowd to go two-up at half time through Brian McClair and Paul Ince.
The Norwegians fought back with goals from Karl Loken and Scammel Frud but Irwin struck the winner with a 20-yard free kick in the 71st minute.
IRWIN: Winner
Killer bug shuts down baby ward
JILL PALMER
A CHILDREN'S ward at world-famous Guy's Hospital has been closed after two babies died.
The tots were struck down by a superbug in the intensive care unit at the London hospital.
Seven other children under seven were infected by the deadly bacteria.
A major investigation was underway last night.
Meanwhile, the unit remains closed and all children's heart operations have been halted.
The dead babies were both under three months old.
The germ — a vicious strain of Klebsiella — was identified on July 23 when the first died.
Critical
It took several days to confirm the outbreak and the unit was not closed until a week later.
A hospital spokeswoman said: ‘The bacteria may have been a contributing factor in these deaths.
Both were still critical after heart operations.’
Two of the seven survivors have been sent home from Guy's, the Tories' flagship opt-out hospital.
The other five are responding to treatment.
The wards have now been cleaned and staff are being screened.
‘We are trying to trace the source of the infection,’ said the spokeswoman.
Klebsiella is a common bacteria, but the rare strain found at Guy's is resistant to most antibiotics.
Guy's bacteriologist Dr Norman Simmons said last night: ‘If it gets into surgical wounds it can cause infections and blood poisoning.’
Six babies were killed by an unidentified bug at London's Brompton Hospital 2 1/2 years ago.
OUTBREAK: Guy's
YUGO TROOPS CALL SNUBBED
SHEREE DODD
THE Prime Minister yesterday dismissed calls for troops to be sent to halt atrocities in former Yugoslav republics.
John Major claimed that neither the British public nor the international community would support the move.
‘We are not dealing with an orthodox war, a single enemy, a front line or clearly identifiable targets,’ he said in a letter to former Foreign Secretary Lord Owen.
It was written in response to Lord Owen's call for military intervention to end the bloody civil war and ‘ethnic cleansing’ by Serbs.
Lord Owen warned: ‘The one thing the world will not forgive is if the morally outrageous happenings in Yugoslavia become victims of the governmental holiday period.’
His plea came as America confirmed Serbs had set up concentration camps in which thousands of Bosnian and Croatian civilians were detained or tortured and killed.
One 63-year-old freed prisoner revealed that captives were kept in metal cages without sanitation or adequate food.
A bus in which two children were killed by snipers reached Croatia yesterday with 40 other youngsters from the Bosnian capital Sarajevo.
Safe at last— Page 9
SNAP!
Di and Kanga share a love of their prints
Charlie's angels fall for the same frock
JAMES WHITAKER
TWO blonde beauties in Prince Charles's life have fallen for the same attraction.
It's a multi-coloured silk floral print dress.
And it looks almost as dazzling on his Aussie pal Lady ‘Kanga’ Tryon as it does on Princess Diana.
But Kanga's is only a copy of the frock that's one of Diana's favourites.
The princess bought hers in 1988 before going on a visit to Australia.
She has since packed it for other tours.
And lately she's worn it twice on British engagements.
Hopped
The dress proved such a hit that the London company who made the original for Diana turned it into an off-the-peg line.
That was when Kanga, who owns a fashion firm, hopped in to try on and buy the lookalike number.
And she sported the frock alongside Charles at a Windsor polo match.
Designer David Sassoon said: ‘It's very flattering that both ladies enjoy wearing my dress.’
The two women have already met in their twin outfits.
They doubled up laughing.
FIRST BLOOM DIANA'S latest outing in the original dress, a favourite which was made for her in 1988.
Picture: DAVE CHANCELLOR
SECOND FLOWERING: Kanga, with Charles, wears a copy.
Picture DAVE BENETT
Kray wife's phone agony
THE wife of Ronnie Kray received a death threat during weeks of abusive phone calls from one of his friends in Broadmoor.
Kenneth Shoane, 66, was bound over for two years by Maidstone Crown Court in Kent yesterday for making threats to kill Kate Kray, 35.
TARGET: Kate
£170,000 thank-you to window cleaner
SYDNEY YOUNG
SPINSTER Nina Vessey took a shine to her window cleaner — and left him £170,000 in her will.
Stunned Sam Vardon, 63, was first employed by Nina while a struggling lad setting up his round after the war.
She paid him eight shillings — or 40p — a week to work at the 16-room house she had inherited.
Father-of-three Sam never forgot her kindness and popped in every day for FORTY YEARS to chat and do odd jobs.
Shy Nina, who was related to the Wedgwood pottery family, left him her run-down mansion and contents worth £170,000 when she died aged 83.
Saved
Sam, of Bedminster, Bristol, said yesterday: ‘I couldn't believe it.
‘She was like a mother to me.
Nina didn't have any family so I suppose I became her ‘son’.
‘She spent Christmas with me and my wife Pam and I took her dog for a walk.’
Sam has stopped working but said the windfall would not change his life.
He added: ‘I have my own little semi and had already saved enough for my retirement.
‘I would have loved to live in Nina's house but it was too big.
‘It has now been sold and the money is in the bank.
I would rather she was still here, though.’
WINDFALL: Sam
Amanda de Cadenet FC
SOCCER skipper Andrew Wakelin has named his side Amanda de Cadenet — after his TV heroine.
‘Now I can say I scored with Amanda de Cadenet,’ joked the cheeky striker, 25.
His move stunned league officials in Bournemouth.
But his team-mates are quite happy to play for Amanda, 19 — ex-host of Channel 4's The Word.
FANS: Amanda
GRIN AND TONIC
THERE was a bright moment when the Queen Mum, keen to cheer up her troubled family, suggested they go indoors for a birthday tonic.
‘Let's have one more drink before lunch,’ she told her less than bubbly guests.
They had plenty to celebrate with, too.
Moments earlier a well-wisher in the crowd had stepped forward to give the Queen Mum a bottle of her favourite tipple — gin.
WHAT WE HAVE HERE ARE NURSES NO BETTER THAN THUGS
Lawyer's blast as report reveals catalogue of cruelty at hospital
‘The screws will get me if I have to go back’
GEOFF SUTTON
PATIENTS at top-security Ashworth hospital have suffered a devastating decade of brutality and torture at the hands of sadistic staff, a report reveals today.
The workers, though a minority of the Merseyside institution's 600 staff, have been responsible for a catalogue of cruelty, it says.
And last night lawyer Peter Edwards, who represents a third of the inmates, said: ‘What we have here is nurses who are no better than thugs.’
The report, which follows an official inquiry into the state of the hospital, tells how:
A BRAIN-DAMAGED patient was used as a human ashtray by staff who pulled out his trouser waist and flicked ash inside.
ANOTHER had his head submerged in a kitchen sink by a nurse who was ‘testing his breaking point.’
A LOBOTOMY patient was tormented by staff who put pictures of brains on his locker.
A LIVE snake was sent to a disturbed inmate as a ‘practical joke.’
A PATIENT'S hand was held on an electric hotplate.
A MAN who adored his pet dog was told by a nurse: ‘I've run it over.’
WOMEN were stripped and left naked in solitary confinement.
HOMOSEXUAL patients were victimised as public announcements mocked them and a gays-only toilet was set up.
Degrading
A former nurse said yesterday: ‘The whole regime in Ashworth was inhumane and degrading.
‘It was like something out of the film One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest.
If anything, it was more brutal.’
The report, by an inquiry team headed by QC Sir Louis Blom-Cooper, also reveals rampant racism and extreme Right-wing bigotry.
Racist staff called black patients ‘nigger.’
Swastikas were stamped on files and British National Party recruitment posters were plastered around wards.
BNP stickers were found bearing the slogans: Love the White Race, Outlaw Homosexuality and Protect Us From AIDS.
The report says the management was so weak it failed to control the savagery and racism.
And staff members went to war on each other.
Anyone who tried to blow the whistle on the violence was intimidated or threatened.
Hate
The same fate awaited nurses who tried to treat patients properly.
And Nazi supporters orchestrated a hate campaign against colleagues belonging to the Royal College of Nursing.
RCN branch chairman Dave Riley told the inquiry that homes were daubed with the words ‘scab’ and ‘bitch.’
Bricks were thrown through windows and dog muck pushed through letterboxes.
Nottingham University lecturer Tony Thompson, a member of the inquiry team, said yesterday: ‘Staff were subject to some manipulation by what can only be described as evil people.
‘It was very disturbing to hear of patients being referred to as ‘nigger’.
Allegations of racism and nationalist behaviour were rife — which shows a system and an institution that is quite sick.’
The report says drugs were used to sedate troublesome patients.
Porn films were brought on to wards and there were allegations of patients being sexually abused.
Last week two nurses were sacked for dressing a pig's head as a patient and parading it in front of acutely disturbed women.
Ex-inmate Tony Cohla told yesterday how the thought of ever returning to Ashworth makes his blood run cold.
Bruising
He said: ‘I was punched and kicked and saw a dozen staff beating people up.
If I have to go back I'm scared for my life.
The screws will get me.’
Patient's father Tom Stephenson claimed his son Ian suffered four years of abuse.
The dad said: ‘He had a broken nose and bruising to his genitals, groin, eyes and body.
‘It was dreadful and not something I ever imagined could happen in a British hospital.’
Mental health groups are appalled by the report.
Ian Bynoe, legal director of MIND, called it the ‘tip of the iceberg’ and demanded a probe by the European Commission for Human Rights.
The Prison Officers Association were hostile to the inquiry throughout.
And branch spokesman Ron Lawton said yesterday: ‘Some of the most dangerous people in the country are held in these special hospitals and that seems to be pushed into the background.
‘People are giving lip-service to security and are hell-bent on therapy above anything else.’
The hospital's POA chief Dave Preece welcomed the report.
But he said rumours that a Nazi cell was operating in Ashworth had never been substantiated.
WHERE BRUTES REIGNED: Ashworth hospital's patients were tormented by sadists among the staff
CHAKA IS SO BROKE
FALLEN pop idol Chaka Khan is bankrupt, it was revealed last night.
Chaka, who had a series of hits in the Eighties, including the classic I Feel For You, has told a Los Angeles court she has £500,000 debts.
Garages have fill of crime
PETROL stations are closing early in crime-ridden areas because staff are scared of late-night attacks.
The revelation comes as an oil industry survey claims 84 per cent of forecourts were hit by crime last year.
Staff at seven per cent of stations were the victim of a violent assault, with all-night stations worst-affected.
Drivers filling up and speeding off without paying was the top crime, with 55 per cent of stations hit.
Half were victims of credit card fraud while 41 per cent were targets for shoplifters.
Robber runs into a right old trap
CLIVE CRICKMER
THIEF Gary Singlewood fled into a building from which there was no escape — a castle.
He was being chased by have-a-go Jeremy Waller after snatching a camera case from a schoolgirl.
Singlewood, 17, ran into the courtyard of Durham Castle in a desperate bid to shake off his pursuer.
And there he stayed as porter Mike Creamer slammed shut its heavy oak door.
Police were called and he swapped his castle for a cell.
Daft
Singlewood, of Coundon, Co Durham, was yesterday given two years youth custody for theft.
Steelworker hero Jeremy, 25, said: ‘I couldn't believe he was daft enough to run straight into a castle.
‘It was certainly poetic justice.’
Judge Denis Orde awarded Jeremy £150 from public funds at Newcastle upon Tyne Crown Court.
First they shoot children fleeing from war…then they bomb their funeral
WHAT IS HAPPENING TO US?
MARK DOWDNEY
AN OLD lady went in grief to bury her grand-daughter yesterday.
She left the funeral in agony with a huge shrapnel wound in her arm.
Ruza Glavas, who was mourning a victim of war, became a target herself as six mortar bombs rained down on a Sarajevo cemetery.
It was a heartless, outrageous act, even in Bosnia, where hatred burns deep.
The mourners were relatives of 14-month-old Vedrana Glavas and two-year-old Roki Sulejmanovic, killed when snipers ambushed a bus-load of children fleeing from the civil war last Saturday.
As Ruza fell wounded, the dead girl's mother Svetlana screamed: ‘My daughter is dead and now they've injured my mother.’
Ruza, who was carried to safety by newsmen, may lose her arm.
Attack
Svetlana was in deep distress before the bombs exploded.
She arrived at the graveside to find her daughter had already been buried.
A mortar attack 30 minutes earlier forced frightened staff to hurriedly fill in the two tiny holes and run for cover.
Seventeen-year-old Indira Hadziomerovic said in despair: ‘What is happening to us?
We lived together happily for many years and now it has come to killing each other 's babies.
I used to read books about love.
Now I just read news about death.’
At least the terror is over for 42 other children in the ambushed bus.
They arrived in Germany clutching toys but still in shock.
The scars of Bosnia will take a long time to heal.
OUTRAGE: BBC reporter Kevin Connally (left) and Reuter's Kurt Schork (centre) help carry Ruza Glavas to safety after the mortar attack on the cemetery
SAFE AT : The death-bus children sit in a transport plane in Split, Croatia, waiting to fly to Germany
STINK OVER GRUBBY BR
Record complaints
ALAN LAW
DIRTY and late trains made British Rail more unpopular than ever last year — with a record number of complaints.
Passengers also moaned about cancelled and overcrowded coaches and the lack of services.
Complaints to the BR watchdog have now doubled in five years and there's little hope of things improving.
Urgently
The annual report from the Central Transport Consultative Committee warns that unless cash is ploughed in ‘we will still not have the rail system we so urgently need’.
Shadow Transport Secretary John Prescott said yesterday: ‘This is a major indictment of BR.’
He accused the Government of ignoring the watchdog's warnings and ‘intentionally allowing’ services to run down by starving them of money.
Committee chairman Major General Lennox Napier said he was ‘alarmed’ that some services were at ‘skeleton levels’.
One in six of the total 8,371 complaints — up 3.9 per cent on last year — concerned late trains.
UN may abandon stricken Sarajevo
MARK DOWDNEY /DAVID BRADSHAW
UN FORCES threatened last night to quit Sarajevo — where a massive battle has shut the airport and cut off food aid.
It would be a massive blow to peace hopes if the UN pull out — and a nightmare for the 350,000 civilians who face starvation without mercy flights.
But as the battle raged on, UN spokesman Mik Magnusson said: ‘There comes a time when we have to assess the situation.
I guess that time has come.’
He added: ‘We have had one man killed and six badly injured in the last few days.
We cannot go on indefinitely.’
The warning came as Lady Thatcher made a dramatic plea for arms and military aid for Bosnia.
She said they were desperately needed to prevent ‘an even greater catastrophe.’
Her call sharply stepped up the pressure on Prime Minister John Major who has so far ruled out military intervention in the savage civil war.
But the escalating crisis may now force Western leaders to use military air power to protect relief efforts.
Britain and the US are backing — reluctantly — a UN Security Council resolution to use ‘all necessary means’ to get aid to the people.
More than 13,000 Serbs, Croats and Moslems are involved in the fiercest fighting since the war in Bosnia began.
Red Cross officials are trying to confirm reports that 1,200 people had been massacred at a Serb detention camp at Lukavac.
Radio ham Chris Thorndyke, 45, from Bury St Edmonds, Suffolk , said she picked up the report.
The Legacy of Yugoslavia — Page 6 
PLEA: Thatcher
NO GAY, SAYS LIZ
FILM legend Liz Taylor has turned down the chance of a comeback…playing a lesbian rancher.
Liz, 60, was offered the part in the film, Even Cowgirls Get The Blues.
But she's hoping to star with Paul Newman in a thriller about a couple who become targets for a killer.
HOPING: Liz
BIG SHOPS RAPPED OVER FOOD BUG HAM
Bacteria in third sold
JAN WALSH
TOP STORES were slammed yesterday after a third of their ham was found to be contaminated with food bugs.
Bacteria tests on 232 samples — also taken from butchers and delicatessens — were ‘unsatisfactory’ claims a Which? survey.
And 14 of them had ‘very low’ levels of listeria — a serious food bug.
‘There is clear evidence of poor hygiene, even in well-respected High Street supermarkets,’ said editor Sue Leggate.
Consumers' Association inspectors posed as customers and bought ham from 86 shops.
Worse
They were branches of Asda, Co-op, Gateway, Tesco, Morrisons, Safeway, Sainsburys and Waitrose.
Samples also came from 27 butchers and 27 delis in Leeds, Reading and South London — and they proved to be worse.
Tests of all the ham showed half sold loose had bugs compared with six per cent of pre-packed.
Stores were found to be much cleaner than delis and butchers with just one per cent rated ‘poor’.
Which? demanded training for everyone handling food.
Rejected
It also proposed that firms be allowed to trade only if they pass cleanliness inspections.
Supermarkets yesterday rejected the findings and said their own bug tests were negative.
Alert on killer washing machine
THOUSANDS of women are using a washing machine that could kill, it was revealed yesterday.
The Italian made Candy turbomatic 38D has a fault that can make it burst into flames, an inquest heard.
But even though the makers recalled them last year to be modified, more than 35,000 still have not been returned.
Now Rotherham coroner Stanley Hooper is to write to President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine.
Widow Eleanor Bellamy, 82, of nearby Aston, died from smoke inhalation when her machine caught fire, the inquest was told.
Anthony Smith, of the Consumers' Association, said they had received 21 complaints about the machines — 12 of them describing serious fires.
Failing
He said: ‘The letters we received don't point to customer misuse but components failing prematurely.’
Anthony Games, of distributors Kelco, said the danger should have been stressed more in the instruction books.
But he claimed the fault in a thermostat developed if people repeatedly stopped the machine before its cycle was completed.
The machines are no longer on sale, he said.
The coroner recorded an accident verdict.
Jon Darwin, solicitor for Mrs Bellamy's family, said later: ‘We will now consider if there is potential for a civil claim.’
DI CANCER HEROINE DIES
CANCER heroine Louise Woolcock, 21, who captured the heart of Princess Diana, lost her battle for life yesterday.
She died in Trinity Hospice, Blackpool, exactly a week after Di opened its day centre — named after Louise, who lived in Poulton, Lancs.
Di wrote to her after the ceremony thanking her for all the work she had done for fellow cancer sufferers and for raising £40,000 towards the centre.
Despite contracting cancer three years ago, Louise worked hard to win a place at Leeds University to study German.
But her condition worsened and she was forced to give it up.
In the last few weeks she became a local radio presenter.
DJ Ceri Glyn, whose show she took over, said: ‘She was charming, funny, brave, strong and unselfish.’
BRAVE: Louise
ROYAL PRANG
JINXED Prince Edward was left high and dry yesterday when his yacht ran aground on the rocks.
The prince and two crewmates in the 35ft The Ashes were carved up by another yacht in a race at Cowes, Isle of Wight.
Edward, who was at the helm, was given no room to turn and ploughed onto the rocks just five minutes after the start of a three-hour race.
The yacht was pulled clear by speedboats an hour later.
The prince told his rescuers: ‘Have a beer on me.’
Unlucky Edward ripped a spinnaker while sailing on Saturday and was in another race in which a yachtsman died.
STUCK: Edward
Hot money
JOBLESS Darren St John gobbled 5lb of strawberries in two pints of chilli-flavoured gravy to raise £450 for charity at Henley, Oxon.
CELL OF THE CENTURY!
RIOT JAIL TO GO PRIVATE
ANDY McSMITH
A RIOT-wrecked jail is to be privatised — after being rebuilt for £83 million.
Sell-off plans for Strangeways in Manchester slipped out when application forms for bids went out.
The proposals to test the market for Tory jail sell-offs enraged Labour MPs and prison guards.
Home Office Minister Peter Lloyd admitted: ‘The announcement has come out earlier than we intended.’
Strangeways — scene of Britain's longest jail riot in 1990 — is to reopen next May.
The prison service will be able to bid against private firms to decide who runs it.
Duty
Mr Lloyd said yesterday: ‘My duty is to get the management able to provide the most constructive and positive regime for prisoners and to secure the best value for money.
‘If that can be done by private firms, then that is what I must go for.’
But Shadow prisons minister Joan Ruddock said: ‘Labour has deep reservations about private prisons run on the basis of price.’
Prison officers' leaders claimed that the Tories wanted to destroy jobs — and the plans would reduce jail security.
Ivor Serle, chairman of the Strangeways Prison Officers' Association, said: ‘Private firms cannot provide the security prison officers can.
‘There will be many escapes.
The population of Manchester and Salford will find it difficult to sleep peacefully in their beds.’
Brian Caton, vice-president of the Prison Officers Association, warned his members could strike if widespread sell-offs go ahead.
Remand
Steven Shaw, of the Prison Reform Trust, said prisons were run privately 200 years ago until the state was forced to take over.
Britain has one private jail — Wolds on Humberside.
It takes remand prisoners.
A second in Blakenhurst, Hereford and Worcester, is due to open next year.
FLASHBACK: Rooftop protest in 1990
Tortoise raid ends in shell shock
HEALTH inspectors swooped on a flower stall suspected of illegally selling tortoises — only to find they were made of stone.
They were tipped off by a person claiming that the stand in West Bromwich, West Midlands, was not licensed to sell the reptiles.
Jim Haywood, of Sandwell council's environmental health department, said: ‘The tortoises looked so lifelike that one of our officers bought one for his garden.’
TOP PILOT DIES OF ALTITUDE SICKNESS
SAMUEL JAMES
A TOP British pilot has died of altitude sickness in the Himalayas while leading a probe into an air crash.
Father-of-three Gordon Corps, 62, collapsed at 11,500ft on a mountain and died as he was being carried down to a base camp.
Mr Corps, who was used to flying at 40,000ft in pressurised jets, fell victim to the thin air going up Talkuassir mountain in Nepal.
Altitude or mountain sickness attacks the lungs or brain and can cause seizures or comas.
It can rapidly result in brain damage or death.
Mr Corps was leading eight Airbus Industrie investigators to the scene of a Thai Airways crash last Friday.
Several of the team were taken ill.
Mountain
Two Britons were among the 113 killed when the Thai jet hit a mountain north of Katmandu.
Mr Corps, who lived in Toulouse, was one of Britain's most experienced pilots.
In 40 years, he flew more than 100 aircraft, including Concorde.
‘Gordon was held in the highest regard,’ said an Airbus spokesman.
LEADER: Pilot Gordon Corps
BUSH JOINS THE OUTCRY
PRESIDENT Bush last night demanded the camps be opened for inspection.
He said: ‘We will not rest until the international community has gained access.’
As harrowing details of the camps emerged, outraged Americans urged Bush to order immediate military action against Serbia.
DEMAND: Bush
JACKO kept fuming police waiting for nearly an hour as he went on a midnight shopping spree — for new toys.
The star and a ten-year-old pal popped into Toys R Us at Cardiff which opened specially for them.
Police had to wait before giving Jacko an escort to the M4.
TOY SPREE: Jacko
Tern up for book
A RARE lesser-crested tern has reappeared at Minsmere, Suffolk -more than 200 miles from the Northumbrian colony where it was last seen a fortnight ago.
Empty hotel boss goes on holiday
BUSINESS is so bad for Cornish hoteliers Roy and Anita Simmonds they gave up and went on holiday themselves — in the middle of their peak season.
A series of cancellations by coach parties left their Rosslyn Hotel in Falmouth with no bookings at all.
So they left the chef in charge in case any passing trade should appear.
Then they did their bit for the tourism industry — by taking a break in Dorset and Hampshire.
Roy, 62, said: ‘We were fed up sitting down and waiting for people.
We have never known such a shortage of guests.’
BARONESS FREED
STEPHEN WHITE
SWINDLING Baroness Cecilia de Stempel slipped out of jail early yesterday after serving less than 2 1/2 years of her seven-year sentence for cheating her aged aunt out of her fortune.
She was picked up outside the gates of Askham Grange open prison near York by her son and daughter.
De Stempel, 58, was jailed for conning her aunt out of £500,000.
The old lady died penniless.
The baroness had her jail term cut for good behaviour.
OUT: Cecilia
MARTHA'S BURNING REVENGE
GREEN-eyed rivals tried to oust the reigning champ of a best kept garden contest — with a scorched earth policy.
They sprayed weedkiller on pensioner Martha Welsh's prized lawn to ruin her chances.
But they didn't reckon with her burning ambition to win a third time.
Martha, aged 78, has persuaded organisers of the village contest at Croston, near Chorley, Lancs, to overlook her bald patch.
IT SHOULDN'T HAPPEN HAPPEN TO A DRINK DRIVER
No ban…because he was taking dog to the vet
GORDON HUGHES
BOOZY Ian Shepherd escaped a driving ban yesterday — because he was taking his badly injured dog to the vet when he was stopped by police.
Jobless Shepherd told a court his labrador Flash was savaged by a pit bull terrier as he took her for a late-night walk after drinking at a local club.
He admitted driving with excess alcohol but said he shouldn't be banned.
The magistrates agreed — and fined him £250.
Chairman Judith Eyles said: ‘You were responding to an acute emergency and had made considerable efforts to avoid driving.’
Shepherd, 34, from Wakefield, West Yorks, said he had three pints of beer before taking Flash on her walk.
He told the court at Wakefield: ‘I was grappling with the pit bull for about 10 minutes to get it off and I also got bitten.’
Shepherd phoned the police and taxis, but could not get help.
Some taxi firms said they did not want blood in their cars.
Others could not get to him for half an hour.
‘I thought Flash was dying and had no option but to put her in the car,’ Shepherd said.
Police stopped the BMW travelling at speed just before midnight with only one headlight on.
An officer drove the dog to the vet in Shepherd's car while he was taken to the police station.
After yesterday's case Shepherd said: ‘Flash is now recovering but faces a further operation.’
Tasha's a smasha
SHE'S the child of two movie stars.
And Natasha Wagner looks every inch a Hollywood beauty.
Robert Wagner's 21-year-old daughter by the late Natalie Wood stepped into the spotlight at a Californian showbiz bash.
She stole the scene.
‘If this is what they call a good camp, think how the other poor bastards are suffering’
MISERY INSIDE A SERB HELL-HOLE
BARRY WIGMORE
THE horror of life in Serb concentration camps was exposed last night in a harrowing ITN film which showed a new Holocaust in the making.
Now the names Omarska and Trnopolje have been carved alongside Belsen, Buchenwald and Auschwitz on the bloody tombstone marking man's inhumanity in war.
Moslem captives, once strong, proud and free, have shrunk to skin and bones, fed a meagre diet of bread and beans in the Serb camps.
Some have shaven heads.
Others tremble as they limply carry spoon to mouth.
The pictures were screened by ITN after their reporter Penny Marshall was given access by the Serbs to the camps near the north Bosnian town of Prijedor.
Penny saw only about 80 of the 1,400 prisoners held at Omarska.
An eagle-eyed escort of Serbian guards monitored her crew.
In a medical centre they found dreadful cases of malnutrition, scabies and diarrhoea.
Scared
And these people were the ones the Serbs were willing to show them.
If Omarska was what they call a good camp, how are the poor bastards suffering in others?
In places, the Serbian army had to ask the local Serbian militia permission to visit the camps.
Sometimes they were turned away.
Many of the prisoners to whom ITN spoke were too scared to talk in front of the TV cameras.
But away from the lenses they told of torture, rape and mass-executions.
One group said that 150 fellow-prisoners had been killed after the death of 10 Serbian soldiers in a Moslem village.
And they gave ITN a film to smuggle out which they said was proof of beatings.
Those pictures also brought back memories of the Nazi death camps.
They showed a young man whose swollen back was a mass of cigarette burns and bruises.
Behind him was a broom which could have been used to batter him.
Another set of photos showed a blood-stained sink.
Yet more featured an emaciated man, clad only in underpants, lying face-down on a bed, his ribs and backbone pushing against his skin.
‘We were given very, very limited access,’ said Penny.
‘But we saw enough.
Challenge
‘We saw terribly old men, some paper-thin, too terrified to speak.’
ITN was given access to the camps seven days ago after the leader of the Bosnian Serbs, Radovan Karadjic, challenged journalists to see for themselves that prisoners were well treated.
‘Serbs are being tortured and murdered by the Bosnians,’ he claimed.
But the reporters were sure that five of the seven camps they saw were special ‘show camps’ for refugees rather than victims of Serbia's ‘ethnic cleansing.’
Only in Trnopolje and Omarska, they felt, were they beginning to see the truth beneath the facade of propaganda.
Yet these are the ‘good’ camps.
There have undoubtedly been worse  atrocities in areas where no one can go.
BREADLINE: Prisoners queue for their meagre rations of thin soup at Omarska
FACES WITHOUT HOPE: Bosnian captives peer blankly from a barbed wire compound in the Omarska camp.
Serbs say they are well treated but the ITN crew saw sick and emaciated men, many too scared to talk
PROOF LEFT: This smuggled picture of a filthy sink, covered in bloodstains, stands silent witness to the brutality of the Serbs
RIGHT: A young man poses in secret, displaying to the camera his swollen back covered with bruises and cigarette burns.
FAR RIGHT: A camp inmate lies face down on his bed to show his emaciated body, ribs pushing against his skin
TAKE THAT, RAT
Fury at bust travel boss
‘You're a bastard and thief and deserve to be locked up for the rest of your life’
SYDNEY YOUNG
A PENSIONER hurls water over broke travel boss Valere Tjolle yesterday in raw fury at his lost holiday.
The astonishing attack came as enraged creditors branded the disgraced coach chief ‘scum,’ a ‘cheat’and a ‘fraud.’
They had been told they had NO chance of a refund after Tjolle declared himself bankrupt, even though he removed £400,000 from the company before it collapsed.
One outraged victim Gail York, 23, yelled: ‘You're a bastard and a thief and deserve to be locked up for the rest of your life.’
Tjolle's cut-price company went bust last month owing more than £12 million.
More than 30,000 customers lost their money and 2,500 others were stranded abroad.
Elegant
Yesterday, 200 creditors at a Bristol meeting sat silently as Tjolle — who refused to answer questions — said: ‘I have let you down, but have nothing to hide.’
But when liquidator Robert Buller disclosed that Tjolle had put £14,000 A WEEK into his own account for seven months before the collapse, and had appeared to trade insolvently, rage erupted.
The unnamed pensioner, limping with a walking stick, was cheered as he hurled a jug of water over the 47-year-old boss.
The customer left the room cursing.
Gail ripped up a brochure and chucked it at Tjolle.
As he sat pale-faced and impassive, she screamed: ‘I don't know how you can hide behind your solicitor and say absolutely nothing.’
Then she burst into tears and showed Tjolle her slashed wrists.
Distraught, she said: ‘I had a nervous breakdown.
It took us 18 months to save for a holiday.
Now we can't afford one.’
One man produced a newspaper cutting showing Tjolle's elegant £350,000 Bath home.
The company chief, who also has a £1 million manor house at Seend, Wilts, took the microphone to say: ‘I had to file for bankruptcy yesterday.
‘All of my property and assets are seized, including my home.’
Report
Creditors faced with disaster greeted his emotional outburst with cries of ‘Aah, shame.’
Housewife Pat Owen told how she lost £15,000 after making a block booking for Euro Disney.
‘You've no guilt, you're a bastard,’ she told Tjolle.
French travel boss Leon Sarkis claimed Land Travel took £23,000 of his money days before liquidators moved in.
A group of deaf people were left penniless after their holiday was cancelled.
Mr Buller said the company had appeared to trade while insolvent for the last 18 months.
He claimed the Government knew — but failed to take action.
Shadow consumer affairs minister Nigel Griffiths said last night the scandal looked like Trade Department negligence.
FURY: Enraged Gail York screams at impassive Tjolle at yesterday's stormy meeting of customers who lost their dream holidays
BP axes jobs as slump worsens
DAVID BRADSHAW
OIL giants BP will axe 1,500 jobs in the UK this year — part of a worldwide cut of 11,500 workers.
The company dropped the bombshell as it plunged £711million into the red in the first half of the year.
And it described the outlook as ‘extremely uncertain’.
Barclays deepened the gloom with first-half profits collapsing from last year's £378million to £51million.
The bank's chairman Sir John Quinton warned that the recession could last two more years.
Danger
Some 1,500 jobs at Barclays are expected to go before Christmas.
But Treasury Minister Stephen Dorrell shrugged off soaring unemployment and  bankruptcies as ‘short-term problems’.
He added: ‘It is a fallacy to imagine that Government can affect this week's or next week's figures.
‘The important thing is to avoid the danger of talking ourselves into a sense of almost terminal gloom.
We must not be panicked by short-term problems.’
Labour accused the Government of ‘breath-taking complacency’ over the growing economic crisis.
JULY car sales were down 8 per cent.
‘I'LL SHUT CAMPS’
SERB Premier Milan Panic yesterday vowed to shut down the Yugoslav torture camps within 30 days.
‘They will have to be dismantled,’ he said after agreeing an exchange of 1,500 prisoners with Croatian leader Franjo Greguric.
But it is feared Serbs in Bosnia will refuse to obey him.
An escaper from one Bosnian camp and two other witnesses reported scores of prisoners being raped and beaten.
‘Eviction’ MP fury
TORY MP John Townend was urged to quit last night after calling for three mental health patients to be evicted from a council bungalow.
He told BBC Radio Humberside that he backed neighbours in Bridlington, East Yorks, who claim their lives are being ruined.
And he attacked his own party's scheme to house mentally handicapped in the community.
Furious listeners demanded he resign.
The mental health charity MENCAP said his comments were ‘insensitive.’
DIRTY L-TESTER GETS 4 MONTHS
A DRIVING examiner who groped four women as they took their L-tests was jailed for four months yesterday.
Clinton Hadley fondled the breasts of his victims, aged from 18 to 26, and tried to make them strip ‘to relax’, a jury was told.
After the attacks they were all told they had won their driving licences.
Hadley used the tests as ‘a happy hunting ground’, Oxford Crown Court heard.
He had described the candidates as ‘putty in his hands’.
One, a music teacher, had her bosom stroked about 15 times.
A travel agent and a probation officer were also caressed in their cars.
And the examiner was arrested only after he made passes at a military policeman's wife.
Hadley, 35, a father of two from Great Barr, Birmingham, denied four indecent assaults but was found guilty.
The judge, Recorder Seagroatt, told him: ‘I am sure that you intended no permanent harm but these ladies felt humiliated and threatened.’
GROPER: Hadley
Race girl is quizzed
TOP female jump jockey Jacqui Oliver was released last night after being questioned by police probing a bank fraud.
TOP female jump jockey Jacqui Oliver was released last night after being questioned by police probing a bank fraud.
Jacqui, 27, and several others were bailed by Cambridgeshire police.
IRA man is freed
AN IRA jailbreaker was freed on £750,000 bail yesterday.
Maze fugitive Jim Smyth, 38, was released in San Francisco after being held for passport offences.
MPs demanded official protests.
Smyth — on the run for nine years — was jailed for 20 years in 1978 for trying to murder a prison officer.
CURB ON HIPPIES' PAY-OUT
A CRACKDOWN on easy cash for the shaggy army of New Age travellers was promised yesterday.
Social Security Minister Nicholas Scott said hardship payments will be ended for childless claimants who are not taking ‘reasonable steps to find work’.
The Government hopes this will end the spectacle of freeloading hippies waiting for their cash before moving to new sites.
NEW AGE: A hippy
RON TAKES MICK OUT OF JAGGER
COULD it be that Rolling Stones star Ronnie Wood is mimicking his old mate Mick Jagger?
It certainly looks like a friendly Mickey-take of old rubber lips.
Ronnie, 45, made a good impression as he posed with his wife Jo, 36, at a New York party.
The event launched the veteran guitarist's first solo album for ten years.
DISNEY CLOSES HOTEL
WORRIED Euro Disney is to close a 1,100-room hotel near its Paris theme park for the winter.
The decision was reportedly taken after it became clear that the French Disneyland would not make its expected profit this year.
The hotel is one of six near the site.
Euro Disney thought it would attract 11 million fun-seekers by September.
By July, less than four million had visited.
It denied reports of plans to lay off 5,000 workers.
Helen pair freed
TWO teenagers quizzed over the murder of schoolgirl Helen Gorrie, 15, were last night released without charge by police in Horndean near Havant, Hants.
THAT'S BETTER, ROD
NOW ITS HIS TURN TO HOLD THE BABY
THE OLD ROCKER'S FINALLY PICKED UP HOW TO BE A DAD
JOHN PEACOCK
VETERAN rocker Rod Stewart got to grips with fatherhood at last yesterday.
He actually picked up and held daughter Renee — less than a fortnight after leaving model wife Rachel Hunter to share the tiny burden with a nanny.
And beaming proudly the 47-year-old superstar declared at London's Heathrow airport: ‘Never let it be said that I don't carry the baby.’
It was at Heathrow that millionaire Rod had first appeared off-hand about ten-week-old Renee when the family flew in from France.
Asked if he would hang on to the tot, he replied: ‘No way — no, no.’
But yesterday he happily grasped the handles of her frilly carrycot as the Stewarts set off for Los Angeles.
And he rested sleeping Renee on his lap in the back seat of an airport buggy while Rachel, 23, sat with the driver.
Singing
Rod, who hoped Renee would doze for the whole flight, was on his way to record an album.
‘I'll be up and singing in the morning,’ he announced cheerily.
Baby, if he keeps on grabbing his chances as a dad he could even become top of the pops.
LAP OF LUXURY: Happy Rod holds Renee in her carrycot as Rachel takes the front seat of an airport buggy.Pictures: VIC CRAWSHAW
GRIPPING SCENE: Proud pop picks up the tot he once refused to carry
FLASHBACK: Rachel's turn
Girl's donor plea
AN appeal went out last night for a heart-lung donor to save cystic fibrosis sufferer Gale Staley, 21, who is critically ill in a Leeds hospital.
Women's taxi peril
MOST women assaulted by taxi or minicab drivers never report the crime, the women's Company magazine claims today.
It says unlicensed minicabs are the most dangerous form of public transport.
Rovers' Roy strip tease
TOP firms will discover today who has won the battle to sponsor cartoon soccer hero Roy of the Rovers in his comic.
Editor Dave Hunt says the name will be splashed across Melchester Rovers' strip next season.
SPONSOR: Roy
WOMEN'S CASH HEADACHE
NIC NORTH
MONEY has replaced sex as women's biggest headache, a survey reveals today.
Twenty years ago, cash troubles rated only tenth in their list of concerns.
But the recession has changed all that, says Good Housekeeping.
Mirror agony aunt Marje Proops told the magazine her mailbag includes many more cries for help about debt than pleas for advice on orgasms.
New worries since 1972 include AIDS and the environment.
1972's top worries: 1.
Improving sex, 2.
Contraception, 3.
Women's lib, 4.
Personal growth, 5.
Living with a partner, 6.
Population explosion, 7.
Human rights, 8.
Careers, 9.
Children, 10.
Money.
1992's top worries: 1.
Money, 2.
Children, 3.
Careers, 4.
Ageing parents, 5.
The environment, 6.
AIDS, 7.
Mid-life crisis, 8.
Second marriage, 9.
Personal growth, 10.
Self-image.
WORRY: Marje
GOOD TO SEE YOU DI!
HAVE A KIPPER
ROGER TODD
PRINCESS Diana picked up some unusual souvenirs on a day at the seaside…two pairs of kippers.
They were handed to her at Blackpool, where a royal aide gave the go-ahead for marriage guidance workers to present the fish.
Di was also given potted shrimps, packs of Fishermen's Friend lozenges, and a stick of rock each for William and Harry.
Mrs Kathleen Hayward, local chairman of Relate, said: ‘For good measure we filled a goodie bag with a history of the town and some brochures about the Grand Theatre.
‘We couldn't afford anything like a silver plated model of Blackpool Tower.
‘The princess really laughed when I told her she was getting kippers.
‘We don't know if she ate them.’
GIFT: Kippers
VISIT: Diana
TRACEY IS AXED
BRITISH funnygirl Tracey Ullman has disappeared from a smash hit movie.
Trailers featuring the zany actress in the comedy Death Becomes Her were seen by cinema-goers across America.
But when the film, starring Bruce Willis and Meryl Streep, was released, a change in the storyline led to the chop for Tracey's part.
NO TRACE: Ullman
Toddler crushed by lorry
A PLAYFUL toddler was crushed to death in front of her parents in a tragic accident yesterday.
Nineteen-month-old Tasha Thornhill had crawled under a truck drawn up outside her home in Gosport, Hants.
She stayed there unseen as her parents chatted to the driver, family friend Keith Morgan.
It was only when Keith drove off that they realised to their horror where mischievous Tasha had got to.
But it was too late.
Her little body lay crushed in the street by the lorry's huge wheels.
A police spokesman said last night: ‘It was a very tragic accident.
‘The girl was dead when the ambulance arrived.’
AAH!
THE WHIFF OF JACQUES DELORS…
ANTHONY HARWOOD
AN AMAZING number of British women reckon they might dab a spot of Jacques Delors behind their ears.
They think he is a PERFUME…while others suspect they've seen clothes he designed, or clocked him behind the wheel of a racing car.
In fact, if the answers given by 40 per cent of women quizzed for a new survey are anything to go by, the EC president might as well Jacques it in…
And it is not just the top man's name which some women find baffling about Europe.
Cheese
More than half those polled for Woman's Own reckoned the ECU was anything from toothpaste to an exotic animal, while 90 per did not have a clue what ERM stood for.
Maastricht was said to be a Dutch cheese or the European Court.
Most women had strong views on EC membership, with 45 per cent saying it cut the chance of war.
For those still baffled, ECU is the European Currency Unit, ERM is the Exchange Rate Mechanism and Maastricht is the Dutch town where a unity deal was agreed.
EC CHIEF: Delors
Saddle sore
CHEEKY thieves stole the outsize saddle used by 6ft 2in jockey Alan Jones from his car in Bristol.
RACHEL MURDER: MAN HELD
Police swoop on undertaker
He faces quiz over TWO killings
NIC NORTH /PETER WILSON
POLICE hunting the killer of devoted mum Rachel Nickell arrested a former undertaker in a swoop on his flat last night.
The 26-year-old man will also be questioned about the murder of teenager Katie Rackliff six weeks earlier.
He was being held at a Liverpool police station overnight and will be driven south today for questioning in London.
Former model Rachel, 23, was butchered in front of her two-year-old son Alex on Wimbledon Common last month.
Like hairdresser Katie, 19, she was stabbed repeatedly and sexually assaulted.
Detectives arrested the suspect at his home in Toxteth after a lengthy cat-and-mouse game involving surveillance experts.
Officers are planning to raid five addresses in London after applying for search warrants.
The man was picked up following a tip-off from a member of the public.
Rachel's savage murder in broad daylight — in the shadow of the famous Windmill landmark — sickened hardened detectives and shocked the nation.
Her boyfriend, despatch rider Andre Hanscombe, 29, helped in a reconstruction with little Alex and a friend who bore a resemblance to Rachel.
Police believe there are several key factors which link the man being held to that killing:
He was staying with relatives in Wimbledon on the day of the murder, July 15.
He was in the area at the time — 9.45am.
He matches the description of a man seen on Wimbledon Common shortly after the attack.
The man, who cannot be named for legal reasons, was on police bail in Liverpool after being arrested over a burglary.
He lives in the first-floor flat with his common law wife and two children.
Opposite the four-storey block is the parish church.
Police spent more than four hours combing the man's home and land around it.
Officers with garden tools made a fingertip search of lawns, shrubs and parking areas in Toxteth Park.
It is in the heart of the city's student bedsit land.
Residents saw police rummaging through dustbins before the contents were taken away.
One said: ‘The people in that flat are really quiet, they keep themselves pretty much to themselves.
Attractive
‘The police didn't talk to us about it.’
Officers from two murder squads are considering several key connections between the killings of Katie and Rachel.
Both victims were attractive, long-haired and well-spoken.
The murder scenes are just 25 miles apart and linked by the A3.
Both were stabbed with such violence that ribs were broken with the force of impact.
‘There are some striking similarities between the two cases,’ said a Scotland Yard spokesman.
Katie's half-naked body was discovered on June 7 near a cemetery in Cove, Hants.
She had spent the previous evening at Ragamuffins nightclub in Camberley, Surrey.
Katie, from Hawley, Hants, had been staying with a pal at the time of her murder after a row with her parents two weeks earlier.
Police investigating Katie's death will also want to interview the suspect in London.
Hunt
Senior officers from Scotland Yard had already met Hampshire detectives to compare computerised information.
Detective Superintendent Dirk Bougard, who is leading the hunt for Katie's killer, said: ‘We have been to Wimbledon.
‘Because the murders were committed so close together we are looking into possible links between the two.’
He said the murder squads were now ‘cross referencing’.
A Scotland Yard spokesman said after the meeting with Hampshire officers: ‘We are examining a possible link.
‘The apparent similarities and some differences are currently being checked out.’
After Rachel's killing there was a heartbreaking search for her parents Andrew and Monica on holiday in North America.
Her brother Mark broke the news after they were traced by Canadian police.
Police from both squads have held a case conference with serial rape expert Ann Davis.
Ms Davis is highly regarded at the Metropolitan Police's forensic science laboratory.
She specialises in linking and helping to solve violent crimes by comparing the perpetrators' methods.
RACHEL: Killed in frenzied stabbing
KNIFE MURDER: Pretty teenager Katie
GRIEF: Rachel's boyfriend Andre fights back tears
RECONSTRUCTION: Girl traces Rachel's last steps
SADNESS: Rachel's dad Andrew and brother Mark
WALK IN THE WOODS: Rachel and Andre pose for a happy snapshot with baby Alex, who was later to witness his mother's horrific death
GRIM: Andre carries Alex to death spot
LOCAL LANDMARK: The windmill at Wimbledon Common
IN LOVING MEMORY: Wreaths laid at the spot where Rachel died
BACKLASH ALERT AS TERROR GROUP IS OUTLAWED
RIOT POLICE SET FOR UDA REVOLT
JOHN HICKS
THOUSANDS of troops and police were on red alert in Ulster last night after the outlawing of the feared UDA terrorist group.
A savage backlash was expected from the 10,000strong Protestant organisation which has murdered more than 700 people.
Mass arrests of UDA chiefs could start within hours of the government ban, which officially began at midnight.
And anti-riot police were on standby as a huge security ring was thrown around Loyalist ghettos.
The shock ban follows the UDA's increasingly vicious murder campaign — mainly against innocent Catholics.
Anyone belonging to the UDA — Europe's biggest paramilitary group with an estimated 2,000 members actively involved in terrorism — faces up to ten years in jail.
Defiant
Ulster Secretary Sir Patrick Mayhew's announcement was welcomed by nationalist leaders on both sides of the Irish border.
But after a secret meeting the UDA's seven-man inner council vowed there would be no surrender.
A statement said: ‘We will always be there to defend our communities.’
They claimed the ban had been imposed because of pressure from Dublin.
This was strongly denied by Sir Patrick.
He said he was satisfied the UDA was engaged in organised terrorism.
Labour's Shadow Ulster Secretary Kevin McNamara said the ban would not stop the killings.
But it demonstrated the abhorrence of terrorism by all decent people.
Unionist MPs lashed the government for not outlawing Sinn Fein too.
Other outlawed Loyalist terror groups include the Ulster Volunteer Force, the Ulster Freedom Fighters and the Red Hand Commandos.
It is believed that the UDA could now change its name in a bid to get round the law.
ANY CLOTHES WILL DO!
Loincloth star and the amazing dream prize
SAMUEL JAMES
A STAR who prances about wearing next to nothing covered himself in glory yesterday…as best-dressed man of the year.
Kiddies' favourite Phillip Schofield popped on a dark green jacket, black trousers, multi-coloured silk tie and trendy round specs to collect his award.
But then any clothes would have been more suitable than the skimpy loincloth that he sports on stage every night in the long-running London musical Joseph And The Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat.
Phillip, 30, beat soccer hero Gary Lineker and driving ace Nigel Mansell to win the title.
The clean-cut TV and radio presenter announced he was delighted — but not half as happy as his mother.
Bachelor Phillip said: ‘Out of all the things I've done or commendations I've received, I think this is the one she is most proud of.’
And, giving his mum credit for his stylish success, he added: ‘All the years of saying, ‘You're not going out like that,’ have finally come to fruition.’
Phillip was voted tops by the British Shops and Stores Association.
Glittering
They presented him with his glittering prize — a gold and diamond lapel pin — at the National Exhibition Centre in Birmingham.
Phillip was chosen for the honour because of the natty suits he sometimes favours.
But, confessing to the odd moment of scruffiness, he pointed out: ‘I have to admit that I do still like the comfort of shorts and a T-shirt.’
And he reckons that the little costume in which he sings Any Dream Will Do is pretty amazing, too.
STAR STYLES: Girls fell for fashionable Phillip (above) yesterday, just as they do when he's stripped to play Joseph (left).
Picture: DICK WILLIAMS
Spender the big saver!
TV COP Spender has been branded a meanie — after offering screen extras HALF the normal rate of pay.
Actor and singer Jimmy Nail, who is producing and directing the next series of his show, is offering would-be actors just £30 to appear.
The BBC and ITV normally pay extras £58 a day plus overtime.
Spender bosses say normal rates do not apply because the show is an independent production.
Assistant director Brian Binns said: ‘We can only pay what we have got.’
Filming starts in Gateshead next month.
‘MEAN’: Jimmy
TOUGHER L-TEST
LEARNER drivers may soon have to take a written exam as part of their tests.
They would be quizzed on: NIGHT driving; COPING with fog; MOTORWAY travel; HOW to treat ‘vulnerable road users’; CAUSES of accidents; COMMON mechanical faults; REACTING to emergencies; and ENVIRONMENT-friendly motoring.
Written answers would replace spoken replies to examiners' questions about the Highway Code.
The shake-up was outlined yesterday in a consultation paper from the Driving Standards Agency, which conducts the tests.
Roads Minister Kenneth Carlisle said: ‘If candidates had a more thorough knowledge of the Highway Code and other safety matters they would be more prepared when they take to the roads by themselves.’
QUIZ: The Code
WE FLAMING DO!
IT'S THE RED-HOT WILLEYS
Couple's big day was a scorcher
JIM OLDFIELD
THE wedding of red-hot lovers Kirsty and Karl Willey was such a scorcher it nearly set the town alight.
First the newlyweds had to flee their hired Rolls-Royce when it went up in flames.
Then their wedding night in a luxury hotel was cut short at 6am — because of a fire alert.
Finally the Willeys went for a celebration Sunday lunch…and had to make do with cold cuts because there had been a fire in the pub kitchen.
Even their parents got in on the act, when the Mercedes hired to take them to the reception blew up.
Washout
As they prepared to fly out to Greece on honeymoon, Kirsty, 20, said: ‘We reckon there will be a lot of empty seats on the plane when people hear about this.
‘Who would want to fly in a jet with us?
We are being billed as the last of the red-hot lovers.’
The couple, from Grimsby, Humberside, first feared their wedding was going to be a washout because of torrential rain.
Chemical worker Karl, 20, said: ‘As we pulled up in our white Rolls, people began screaming at us to get out.
‘We were a bit shocked when the fire brigade arrived to cover it in foam.’
Kirsty added: ‘Most people remember their weddings when they see a white Rolls go by.
With us, it's going to be fire engines.’
FRY THEE WED: Kirsty and Karl fled
THAT'S MY DAD!
Tears of joy and golden smiles as olympic aces are welcomed home
IF he had been running a 100 metre sprint final, little Louis Stevens couldn't have scampered any faster yesterday.
Clutching a Union Jack, three-year-old Louis hurtled into the arms of his dad, judo silver medallist Ray Stevens, with joy written all over his face.
Then he locked his father in a grip Ray himself would have been proud of.
There's no defence against that kind of welcome — and Ray, 29, was completely thrown.
He said: ‘I'm on top of the world.
I never expected to do so well, and still can't believe it.’
Jobless South Londoner Ray fought huge odds to win a medal.
He has struggled on social security to bring up Louis with girlfriend Debbie Blount.
He had to rely on a kind-hearted local butcher who gave him two chickens a week to build up his strength.
And he has had to recover from two knee operations.
Garry Herbert, who coxed oarsmen Jonny and Greg Searle to gold, almost collapsed as he fell into girlfriend Nichola Harris's arms.
Millions of TV viewers saw Garry weep as the national anthem was played.
And yesterday he said: ‘I think I'll cry every time I watch the race.’
Rower Steve Redgrave, clutching his third successive gold medal, was met by wife Ann and daughter Natalie, 14 months.
The couple laughed as Natalie chewed the medal, then threw it on the floor.
Little Louis could teach her a thing or two about how to welcome home a champ…
2 DRUNKS ARE NICKED DRIVING THE SAME CAR
You take wheel, I'll use pedals
TOM MERRIN
TWO boozy pals were caught by astonished police after they set off in a car — with BOTH of them driving.
Invalid Richard Browning steered the Triumph Dolomite while Colin Smith operated the clutch and changed gears.
The dual control antics of the two drunks was spotted on police video, a court heard yesterday.
Smith, the car's owner, told magistrates at Eastbourne: ‘It was just one of those things that happens after a few bevvies.’
Smith and Browning, both in their twenties, from Hailsham, Sussex, confessed to jointly drinking and driving.
Neither of them had a driving licence or car insurance, the court was told.
Banned
Browning was unable to drive unaided because of his disability, said prosecutor Linda Saunt.
At first police thought Smith was driving.
But a closer look at the video recording showed that both men were helping each other to drive.
Unemployed Smith was banned from driving for 18 months and fined £500.
Sentence on Browning was adjourned until October.
The court was told that he faced another drink-driving charge and would be in hospital for the next six weeks.
Shopping dad foils gem raid
A DAD took his family out shopping — and ended up catching a jewel thief.
Sales agent Lindsay Wright was driving to the village supermarket with his wife Sally and sons Daniel, 10, and Thomas, 7, when he spotted the thief roaring away from the jeweller's shop.
He chased the stolen Ford Escort — which ploughed across the village green — into a cul-de-sac.
Police arrested a man in a car park.
Lindsay, 38, of Knowle, near Solihull, West Midlands, said later: ‘It beats shopping at Tesco and certainly livened up a dull afternoon.’
12 ‘babies’ inside mum
A WOMAN is pregnant with 12 embryos, it was revealed yesterday.
The mother, who already has twins, had been using a fertility drug.
But doctors treating her near Tel Aviv, Israel, said there was no chance of all embryos surviving.
NatWest in card chaos
A COMPUTER blip could have messed up the statements of millions of credit card customers, it was revealed last night.
NatWest is to contact its 5 million cardholders to tell them about the problem.
And millions of customers with other banks who have their accounts processed through the same system could also be hit.
Cards affected include Visa, Mastercard and Access.
A NatWest spokesman promised that no one would lose money as a result of the errors.
BRIT TROOPS TO GO IN
BRITAIN is preparing to send thousands of troops to Bosnia after reaching a deal with the US and France last night.
They drew up a UN resolution agreeing to use force if needed.
But the troops will only go in for humanitarian reasons including the protection of supplies.
The resolution refers specifically to detention centres and humanitarian aid.
It will go before the Security Council today.
Favoured option is for the US to provide air cover while Europe protects relief convoys.
But this could change and there may be a role for the RAF's top guns.
Common Market chief Jacques Delors yesterday joined former premier Lady Thatcher in urging Europe to intervene in the war.
PLEA: Lady Thatcher
WOMAN COP IS TV DOUBLE
THE POLICEWOMAN who cracked the Ashdown case could have stepped out of the award-winning TV drama Prime Suspect.
Karen Young's glamorous looks would make her a role model for actress Helen Mirren who tracked down a serial killer in the hit series.
After the end of the hearing yesterday, Det Insp Young, 33, said: ‘As far as I know they did not base the character on me.
I just followed a hunch.
‘I used the only fact I had about the man who had dealt with the News of the World.
‘They said his name was Simon so I punched it into the computer and went through the alphabet for burglars.
Luckily, our man's name began with a B or I would have been there all night.’
As for working with men, Det Insp Young, who led 12 officers, said: ‘I never think about the difference in sex.’
ACTRESS: Mirren
SUCCESS: Karen Young Picture: BILL ROWNTREE
Water ad won't wash
A BOAST that Britain's tap water is the best in Europe was blasted yesterday.
The Advertising Standards Authority told the ‘Big Ten’ water companies to drop the claim.
A complaint by Friends of the Earth over an advert was upheld.
The conservationists say our water fails to meet EC levels for nitrate, lead and aluminium.
Cheaper bills on the way, says BT
PHONE bills are set to fall for four years in a row from next August, it was announced yesterday.
British Telecom has reluctantly agreed to a new price formula after being rapped by watchdog OFTEL.
The cuts apply to domestic and business bills.
It could mean up to £10 off the average bill, but BT say it will take months to work out exactly how much you will save.
BT will peg overall price increases to a lower limit, related to inflation.
Nearly 20 million callers and five million firms will benefit — as long as the rate of inflation does not rise to above 7.5 per cent.
The cost of fitting a new phone also drops — from £152.75 to £99.
Gold in Virginia
SMOKER Martin Southworth found a £1 coin in his tobacco as he rolled a cigarette at his local in Clapham, South London.
Spelling put to the test
SCHOOLKIDS who are bad spellers will be docked exam marks in a Government crackdown announced yesterday.
Teachers must also mark down GCSE work containing poor grammar.
Schools Minister Baroness Blatch said: ‘Accurate writing skills are a requirement of the world.’
Over the limit
NEW speed limit signs on a road at Brockenhurst, Hants, have to be painted again — because resurfacing contractors tarred over them.
 TORY CLIMBDOWN ON REFUGEE BAN
‘It's still not enough’
DAVID BRADSHAW /MARK DOWDNEY
THE Government was forced to climb down last night in the face of outrage at the deportation of Yugoslav refugees.
Home Office Minister Charles Wardle promised to ease rules which have led to 36 Yugoslavs being denied asylum despite the civil war in their country.
The U-turn came as UN chiefs refused to accept 28,000 refugees in a desperate bid to pressurise the Serbs into allowing them to stay in Bosnia.
Mr Wardle promised a relaxation in checks which denied asylum to anyone who had first passed through another European country.
He added: ‘What we are saying is we will treat very sympathetically Yugoslavian applications for refugee status.’
But the United Nations, refugee organisations, Britain's Euro partners and MPs all said it was still not enough.
They had condemned the deportations and renewed attacks on Britain's refusal to actively take in refugees.
Labour home affairs spokesman Tony Blair accused the Government of leaving its European neighbours to cope with the forced exodus.
‘In the name of humanity and civilisation, the Government should accept at least part of the international burden,’ he said.
And Liberal Democrat president Charles Kennedy fumed: ‘This appalling action is typical of the lack of direction the Government has shown.’
The UN move followed a Serbian order that 28,000 Bosnians must leave their republic in one of the biggest single acts of ‘ethnic cleansing’ seen yet.
Convoy
But the UN believes that by accepting the outcasts it will be encouraging the Serbians.
Instead, officials are sending a convoy of food and medicine to the border and will try to persuade the refugees to stay.
The UN escorted buses carrying more than 300 mothers and children out of the Bosnian capital Sarajevo yesterday.
PROMISE: Wardle
DOLE-LIGHT ROBBERY
TOM MERRIN
TWO more British Olympic medallists told yesterday how they have been hit by dole office meanies.
Judo aces Ray Stephens and Kate Howey have had money stopped just like archer Simon Terry — as revealed in the Mirror.
Kate, 19, of Andover, Hants, who won a bronze medal, said: ‘You bring honour to your country and they stop your money.’
The DSS said they were not paid because they were unavailable for work.
Silver-medallist Ray, 29, of South London, said: ‘I met Princess Anne and John Major there but that seems a sick joke now.’
HONOUR: Kate
WILLS'S LOONY NOSH-UP
KEVIN O'SULLIVAN
HUNGRY royal cowboy Prince William tucked into an amazing dish on his Wild West holiday — a loony burger.
American bar owner Jim Loran served up the speciality of the house — a six-inch wide burger in an ordinary-size bun, topped off with a huge helping of fried mushrooms and three cheeses.
The feast was one of the highlights of the 10-year-old prince's stay on a ranch in Montana.
Jim, nicknamed Loony Loran, said: ‘William didn't finish the whole thing.
But then again, very few people do.
‘As you can imagine, it is a pretty filling meal.
‘He seemed to enjoy it.
There wasn't much left.’
Jim joked: ‘I'm thinking of renaming it the royal loony burger.’
FEAST: Wills
Star Glenn's home again
VETERAN film star Glenn Ford has gone home from hospital after two months of fighting for his life.
Glenn, 76, had a series of operations in California following heart and lung problems.
OPS: Glenn
Stress makes us sick
BRITAIN'S workers went sick for a record number of days last year — with stress the biggest cause.
Days lost through sickness passed 500 million for the first time.
And 35 per cent of the total involved stress-related illnesses such as heart disease, depression and hypertension.
The figures also showed a huge rise in female absence and alcohol or drug dependence, says Manchester stress expert Rowland Goodwin.
‘WHEN YOU THINK OF ALL THE TEMPTATIONS, IT'S A WONDER THAT ANYONE'S STILL MARRIED’
MICHAEL CAINE on Jagger, Jerry and the problems of staying together
ROALD RYNNING
WHEN he heard about their break-up, Michael Caine could hardly believe it.
‘I saw Mick and Jerry two days before it came out in the papers and they seemed absolutely fine,’ he says.
‘I had been with both of them twice that week and they never seemed any different from the way they always were.
So I was flabbergasted.’
He pauses, his mind running over the sort of life the couple led, the pressures, the way the split might have come.
‘Rock ‘n’ roll people, like with Mick, they're always away from their family.
God knows the temptations there are far worse than being an actor.
It's just unbelievable…
‘Yes, when you think of all the temptations and pitfalls, it's a wonder anyone stays married for long.’
Caine, the Cockney charmer who won worldwide acclaim playing the womaniser in Alfie, knows about all about temptation.
On screen and for real.
‘The thing about showbusiness marriages is that you are both rich and famous in a very glamorous world.
That's very attractive to everybody.
‘On top of that, you are meeting the most beautiful — or handsome — people all the time.
So the temptation to stray is much worse.
‘Plus,’ he adds thoughtfully, ‘most people who end up in show business are extremely emotional people anyway.
And kind of slightly nuts.’
So how about his own marriage?
The 59-year-old star has been married to the striking Shakira for 22 years, he says — though actually it's 19.
‘And there have never been any pressures.’
His secret?
‘I don't spend a massive amount of time away from my family.
If I get a movie script which means that I've got to be away from home for a long period then I turn it down.’
As we talk, he is filming The Muppet Christmas Carol.
In October, his latest restaurant venture opens in Chelsea Harbour, and the thriller Blue Ice, which he produces as well as stars in, hits the cinemas.
He also has an autobiography coming out.
Yet Michael Caine still manages to spend a lot of time with his wife.
‘Neither of us is very show business, and we're very happy together.’
He says it warily.
‘I hate making statements like that.
Next thing, it could be like Mick and Jerry.
You see Shakira and Michael Caine divorced and you say, ‘Jesus Christ, he was talking about how happy they were three weeks ago’.’
Caine feels that celebrity marriages are not helped by the Press.
Stories newspapers print, he believes, sometimes have a lot to do with showbusiness marriages breaking up.
‘If someone is innocent and the Press starts printing stuff, the other partner may think ‘Well, they must have done it’.’
That, he reckons, played its part in Mick and Jerry's case.
Caine gives interviews — but one he won't touch is the schmaltzy Hello magazine.
He has heard about the ‘Hello curse’, where loving couples tell in the glossy how good life is together…and immediately head for a break-up.
‘We don't even answer the phone to Hello.
We want to stay happily married.’
When a couple part, Caine is reluctant to interfere.
‘The biggest mistake you can make is to go to someone who's just separated and say, ‘I'm glad you left him or her.
I hated them’.
‘Two weeks later, they're back together.
And now they both hate you.’
With 72 films and an Oscar under his belt, Caine has had an extraordinarily successful career.
There has been no shortage of material for his autobiography, What's It All About?
Rather, it has been a question of what he should leave out.
‘It's not going to be all romances and girls and all that,’ he says matter-of-factly.
‘I'm not going to tell how many women I've slept with because I'm happily married and want to stay that way.
‘Everyone knows there were a lot of girls before Shakira and I'm not about to go back over all that.
‘It wasn't important, otherwise I would have been married to the ladies in question.
So I've only written about the women who were important in my life — my mother, my daughters and my two wives — and I write about them deeply.
His reminiscences filled 700 pages.
‘But they won't publish it all.
It'll be like 350.
‘There was a lot of repetition.
But, thankfully, I have two marvellous editors.’
Shakira, 44, has read her husband's book as the pages came off the press.
‘She tore a few pages out and threw them in the bin.
She said ‘That's not going in!’.’
He laughs, not the least upset by his wife's censorship.
‘I just said to her, ‘You throw away what you don't like, I don't care’.
She only took out three pages, so it can't be bad.’
Away from the hurly-burly of the film world, Caine finds in Shakira the peace and calm he craves.
They live in a Chelsea Harbour flat and a £2 million country house in Oxfordshire.
And he claims he has never had the slightest desire to leave her.
‘I've never met a woman more beautiful than my wife,’ he says, ‘so there has never been the temptation.’
SPLIT Jerry was with Mick for 15 years before their life together fell apart
DEVOTED With Shakira, his wife of 19 years.
Caine turns down  scripts if it means being away from home for too long
MAGNETIC: Like all rock 'n' roll stars, Mick must have been constantly tempted
School classes getting bigger
MORE than a million schoolchildren are being taught in classes of over 30, a Government report reveals.
Most are in primary schools where the average class size has shot up from 26.1 to 28.8 in two years.
Secondary school classes have also grown, with more pupils staying on rather than face the dole queue.
NUT union boss Doug McAvoy warned: ‘The picture is in fact far worse than this.’
FEAR: McAvoy
MAN, 27, FREED TO WED SCHOOLGIRL LOVER, 15
Good luck, says judge
A MAN accused of having sex with a 15-year-old schoolgirl walked free yesterday — so that he can marry her.
Judge Kenneth Richardson ordered charges to be dropped against the 27-year-old and said: ‘Beyond wishing you a happy married life, I do not wish to say any more.’
Beaming, the love-struck man walked out of the Old Bailey dock into the arms of his fiance.
The court heard that the girl is pregnant by him and the baby is due to be born shortly after her 16th birthday in two months.
Aftab Jafferjee, prosecuting, said the couple and the girl's parents were happy for not guilty verdicts to be entered.
The girl had gone to police to have her lover arrested for having sex.
He added: ‘Maybe this was in a fit of pique when the relationship was down rather than up.
‘She has given her final view today and although only 15 and a half, she knows her own mind.’
The judge was told that although the girl's father was due to appear in court as a witness, he had not turned up at the hearing because the couple now planned to marry.
Judge Richardson agreed there was no useful purpose in getting a conviction for unlawful sex.
The couple, of Acton, West London, cannot be named to protect the girl's identity.
He cried and lived…
POISON FUMES KILL HOLIDAY FERRY KIDS
THEY SLEPT AND DIED
PATRICK MULCHRONE
A BOY OF five survived a ferry tragedy which killed his brother and sister yesterday — because he cried.
Catherine Tomlins, 15, and her 12-year-old brother James suffocated while sleeping in their fume-filled cabin.
Little John Tomlins should have been in the same room.
But he could not settle when he was put to bed.
His parents took him into their adjoining cabin when he wept — and saved his life.
The older children's bodies were found after their mother Maeve went to wake them at 8.30am on the overnight Swansea-Cork ferry Celtic Pride.
A noxious sewage-type smell — thought to come from the boat's toilet system — had engulfed their cabin, which was locked from the inside.
Crewmen helped the alarmed mother to break down the door.
They found James lying near the C-deck cabin's toilet and Catherine on the floor.
The ship's doctor tried to give them the kiss of life but they could not be revived.
Numb
Their devastated father Garry — a computer company executive who left England for a new life in Ireland 20 years ago -said: ‘I am so numb at the loss of my two beautiful children.
My world has disintegrated.’
The family were nearing Cork on their way home from a holiday in England and Wales — during which they called on the children's grandparents in Milton Keynes.
They were among 518 passengers with 120 cars aboard the Anglo-Irish operated ferry, which is registered in Poland.
Last night Irish Marine Department officials confirmed that the sewage system on the 20-year-old boat had led to the children's deaths.
They specified modifications which must be carried out on the ship before it will be allowed to sail again.
The ferry's flag flew at half mast as the probe went on at Cork's Ringaskiddy port.
SURVIVOR: John Tomlins
VICTIMS: James and Catherine, who suffocated in their cabin during an overnight voyage after a holiday
Little John not told of deaths
FRANK GILBRIDE
FIVE-year-old survivor John Tomlins still does not know that his brother and sister died in the ferry tragedy.
John's granny Luise Tomlins said the youngster's parents want to break the news to him gradually.
‘Garry and Maeve intend to take their time in getting it over to him in a way he will understand,’ said 72-year-old Luise, of Milton Keynes, Bucks, yesterday.
John escaped death because he could not settle in the doomed cabin where 15-year-old Catherine and 12-year-old James were sleeping.
His parents took him into their adjoining room — and saved his life.
Catherine and James are to be buried in their home village of Glounthane, near Cork, today.
SURVIVOR: John
JAGU-AAARGH
FOR SALE Only one not-very-careful driver
Guardian hack grinds £415,000 supercar to a standstill
NIC NORTH
BLUNDERING John Samuel halted Jaguar's new dream machine in its tracks yesterday — by blowing up the engine.
Motor writer John was test-driving the £415,000 supercar when he accidentally hit first gear…at NINETY.
There was a mighty bang and the 217mph Big Cat groaned to a stop with £20,000 of engine damage.
Last night, though, Jaguar had forgiven the hapless hack.
A spokesman said: ‘We have accepted his apologies and have no wish to screw the poor guy.’
Guardian writer John, 60, had flown to Austria with other newsmen to test out the gleaming XJ220 on a racing circuit near Salzburg.
It is the world's most expensive and fastest production car and is hugely sought after.
Rock stars Mick Jagger and Elton John are among 1,500 people desperate to get one of the 350 models.
It proved its mettle in trials by shrugging off a 30mph crash into a 100-ton concrete block.
But it couldn't cope with John's test drive.
He was drilling the car through a bend at 90mph when he went for third gear — and hit first at 7,000 revs.
A Jaguar source said: ‘The engine screamed and there was something of a bang.
At that speed in first gear the revs went through the roof and the car coasted to a halt.
‘The head and valves are damaged and we estimate the engine rebuild will cost about £20,000.’
Paces
The spokesman said the car should not be driven much faster than 40mph in first.
And last night John insisted he was doing only 40 to 50 in second.
He said: ‘Jaguar people told me some valves were already bent through test-driving.’
Luckily, Jaguar had two other Big Cats on standby to show their paces.
That, for the record, is 60mph in four seconds and 100mph in eight.
The prospect has got prospective buyers drooling.
They had to send a £50,000 deposit.
Jagger even offered a £250,000 down payment.
The ‘winners’ will be chosen by lottery.
Later, as luckless John flew home, news of his blunder took the Guardian by surprise.
Deputy editor Jonathan Fenby said: ‘I know nothing of this.
It's very embarrassing.’
MASCOT: The badge that brings a glow of pride to Jag owners everywhere
ELTON: He's desperately hoping to be a Big Cat owner
VISION OF LIVELINESS: This is the Big Cat that purred along at ninety yesterday…until John brought her to a shuddering halt by blowing up the engine
JOHN: Wrong gear
TEAR THIS SHIP APART
Grieving father's demand after ferry death trip
I won't rest until until I ensure this never I ensure this never ever happens again
We have lost 2 great kids
IAN CAMERON /FRANK GILBRIDE
THE father of ferry-fume victims Catherine and James Tomlins called for the death boat to be ripped apart last night.
Grief-stricken Garry Tomlins said: ‘Something terrible has happened to my family.
It must not be allowed to happen to anyone else.
This ferry must be pulled apart if necessary to find out what went wrong.
‘And every other ferry with cabins must be examined.’
Mr Tomlins, speaking at his home in Glounthane, outside Cork, added:
I smelled a sewage sort of smell during the night and another passenger reported it to the crew.
But nothing was done as far as we know.
There has got to be a full investigation.
We have lost our two lovely children.
They were in the prime of their lives and something went terribly wrong.
Nothing can be done for them now.
But I will not rest until I ensure that this never happens again to other young people.
It is awful, just awful.
Despite high winds and choppy seas, Mr Tomlins and his wife Maeve slept soundly in their cabin during the Celtic Pride's 10-hour crossing from Swansea to Cork.
Sick
But two other passengers were taken to hospital after the ferry docked, both suffering from the effects of fumes.
Traveller Victoria Cooper said: ‘The smell was awful — just like you get from a gas cooker.
Several people were sick.’
She added: ‘There was bedlam on board.
It is incredible that this can happen on a British ship.’
Passenger John Keane, of Newmarket, Co Cork, said: ‘I got up to go to the toilet at 6 o'clock and noticed this very strong, striking smell.
‘It was the sort of smell that would make you sick, like raw sewage.
‘Later all the shouting began in the corridor outside my cabin.
A woman and a man were obviously very upset.’
Mr Keane said he heard the voice of a man with a European accent ‘saying something about gas and that we should get out of our cabins’.
The Tomlins family were returning from a week-long holiday in England and Wales.
After visiting a garden festival in Ebbw Vale, Gwent, they went on to stay with Mr Tomlins' parents in Milton Keynes, Bucks.
Then they headed for Bath before catching the ferry home.
The dead children's distraught grandfather Trevor said last night: ‘Garry took us all out for a big family meal and then on Sunday we had a lovely picnic by a lake.
‘Everyone was so happy because we don't see much of Garry, Maeve and the kids.’
Retired post office worker Trevor, 74, said Garry was ‘absolutely hysterical’ when he phoned yesterday with the tragic news.
The grandfather added: ‘He was too upset to tell me how they died and I didn't want to ask him.
‘Maeve and he idolised those kids.
‘James and Catherine were doing well at school and had their whole lives in front of them.
‘They were lovely, lovely children.’
Bosses of operators Swansea-Cork Ferries went to the ship as soon as they learned of the tragedy.
They joined police and investigators from the Irish government's marine department.
Company spokesman Denis Reading refused to comment on the passengers' reports of a foul smell.
But Irish Marine Minister Dr Michael Woods ordered the Celtic Pride to remain in port while surveyors examined the vessel.
Then company staff worked late into the night to make necessary repairs.
Finally, permission was given for the ferry to resume its scheduled services from 9am today.
The company expressed its ‘deepest sympathy’ to the children's family.
THE ONE WHO LIVED: Five-year-old John Tomlins
THE ONES WHO DIED: Victims James and Catherine Tomlins in their school uniform
THE PARENTS: Garry and Maeve Tomlins at home with their pet dog Tara
Sly's son in murder plot quiz
RAMBO star Sylvester Stallone's son is to be quizzed over an attempted murder plot, it was revealed last night.
Police are probing allegations that Sage, 16, hatched a bizarre plan to kill his dad's handyman.
Sly's Mr Fixit Tommy Schuessler claims the boy filled his car's steering system with rocks.
Tommy told Los Angeles police his Ranger went out of control and skidded to a halt within inches of plunging off a Hollywood Hills cliff.
Sly, 44, who is filming a thriller Cliffhanger, said: ‘This is trumped-up nonsense — Schuessler is being vindictive.’
Detective Andy Monsue said: ‘We will see Sage.’
Bleeding us dry
Storm over watchdog's report that water bills will double
CONSUMERS MUST PAY FOR PERFECTION
GEORGINA WALSH
A SHOCK forecast of soaring water prices unleashed a flood of fury last night.
Bills for an average household are set to double by the end of the decade and rocket to £345 by the year 2005, says a report from the water watchdog Oftel.
The poor will feel the shock waves most.
Already the number of people cut off has risen from 8,426 annually in 1989, the year of water privatisation, to a record 21,286.
And the number of summonses issued for non-payment is running at 900,000 on current average bills of £170.
Last night Oftel and its chief Ian Byatt were accused of failing to act in the public's interests.
Critics claim that that consumers will, in effect, be SUBSIDISING the major industrial polluters who continue to evade prosecution.
Friends of the Earth water campaigner Linda Stupples said: ‘The report fails to discuss the real options and blindly assumes the consumer either has to pay up or put up with polluted water.
‘The Government's failure to implement the ‘polluter pays’ principle means that water consumers and the environment are being forced to pay while the polluters make a getaway.’
Fines
FoE estimate that 12 million people receive drinking water contaminated at some time by pesticides.
And while pollution incidents for 1991-92 reached an all-time high of 29,524 (National River Authority figures), there were a meagre 536 prosecutions.
Total fines were just over £1 million.
Ofwat too are concerned about the quality of our water supplies.
And chief Byatt insisted bravely at yesterday's London press launch of, The Cost Of Quality that the document was only intended to open up public debate.
The choice was between having water of ‘supremely high standard’ and very high bills or accepting ‘a tiny bit of risk’and lower bills.
A European Community drinking water standard required ‘large amounts of money’ to be spent so tiny traces of pesticides were removed from supplies.
‘It is not true to say that because we are not meeting EC directives absolutely that the water is poisoned,’ said Mr Byatt.
‘If people want to pay for perfection that's fine by me.’
But Friends of the Earth hit back: ‘Ofwat is in danger of becoming an apologist for Government inaction and water company profits.
‘It has failed to debate the key question of who should pay for the clean-up of contaminated drinking water.’
Labour too reacted angrily to the watchdog's report.
Their Citizen's Charter spokesman Brian Wilson said: ‘Ofwat's failure to deal firmly with the greed of the privatised water companies leaves them with little credibility when alleging a need for huge further increases.
Confused
‘If you act as a rubber stamp you cannot also expect to be taken seriously as a watchdog.’
Mr Wilson added: ‘The cost of improving water quality has become hopelessly confused with the cost of financing huge profits for the privatised water companies.
‘People are prepared to pay for cleaner water but they are reluctant to finance salary increases of several hundred per cent for chairmen who have been handed the privatisation jackpot.’
The salaries of the Top Ten water company chairmen range from £51,000 a year to £160,000 — a 290 per cent surge since sell-off.
When Ian Byatt was asked about the ferocious profits made by the water companies, the former Treasury mandarin (salary around £70,000 a year) observed that too much profit-bashing would kill incentive to improve efficiency.
And he was lukewarm about putting a cap on prices as Oftel has done with telephone charges.
Last year the combined profits of the Top Ten were £1.5 billion.
They are expected to reach £1.65 billion this year.
The Water Companies' Association was obviously pleased with Mr Byatt's performance.
A statement said that 70 per cent of existing profits is being reinvested on improving standards.
It added: ‘On average water services cost each household 46p a day for delivering 840 pints of water and safely disposing of it after it has been used.
Cost
When Britain's water companies went private in 1989 it was predicted that the cost of improving water services would be £28 billion over a decade.
Now the industry says the cost will be £60 billion and blames the EC for demanding ‘impossible’ standards for drinking water.
In the turbulent world of the water industry there could be a few more shocks in the pipeline.
CONCERN: Mr Byatt
PROTEST: Friends of the Earth hit out at polluters
 120mph joyride
A GANG of joyriders, one of them aged 14, raced along a motorway at 120mph in three high-powered cars last night — with their lights off.
The high-speed chase began after police spotted the gang with the stolen vehicles at the M1 Woodhall Services near Sheffield.
A boy was arrested after one car crashed.
Lucky types
TYPISTS rang up an average pay rise of 7.6 per cent last year — almost double the rate of inflation.
London secretaries average £18,624.
Baby ‘tyre necklaced’
A BABY ‘necklaced’ with burning tyres was one of five people killed in another night of violence in Johannesburg's black townships, the South African police said yesterday.
POsh new look
THE first open-plan, computerised Post Office was unveiled in London's Edgware Road yesterday -part of a £50 million face-lift to cut queues.
Wayne pain in Spain
ALEX TONER
WAYNE
McCullough's silver medal in Barcelona was harder earned than even he was aware of.
A hospital scan revealed yesterday that the Irish boxer had fought from midway through the second round of the final with a cracked cheekbone after being caught with a vicious right hook.
McCullough said: ‘At first, a trapped facial nerve was thought to have caused the numbness in my face.
But the tests proved it was a cracked cheekbone.
The doctors said they didn't know how I managed to carry on in such pain.’
Hero McCullough even went on to take the third round in his victory over the tough Cuban Joel Casamayor.
WAYNE: Hero
A SNIPER killed US television journalist David Kaplan in a convoy taking Yugoslav Premier Milan Panic into Sarajevo for peace talks.
Wogan's weirdos
AXED Terry Wogan is on the hunt for guests with ‘wacky, tacky’ stories to tell in a bid to shed his bland image, it was revealed yesterday.
A researcher on Terry's late-night comeback show has been ordered to find people with ‘quirky’ yarns to tell.
The new image will be a big gamble for the star whose Wogan Show was axed last month because it had run out of steam.
It was replaced by the soap Eldorado, which is struggling to get audiences equalling those of Tel's show at its lowest ebb.
COMEBACK: Terry
Slagged off
CLIFF Richard's 1963 hit Summer Holiday is being re-recorded in Geordie dialect by Newcastle ‘maneaters’ the Fat Slags.
UP HEEL…
DOWN DEL
PLUCKY Derek Collett got the hang of a new TV game yesterday — with a little help from his screen rivals.
Del, 33, from Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire, will be up against man mountains Hawk and Saracen in LWT's autumn show, The Gladiators.
The 11-stone father of three will face them in a series of physical contests.
But the big two, weighing 35 stones between them, reckon he's got no chance.
Picture: KEN LENNOX
QE2 captain in switch
THE captain of the QE2 ordered a course change six minutes before the ship ran aground off Massachusetts last week.
Captain Robin Woodall said in Boston yesterday he overruled a local pilot because he felt the vessel was too close to shoals.
Passengers were evacuated after the QE2 was holed.
She may not be fit to sail for a month.
MEET MY BABY
Kidnap girl took Farrah home for a family party
‘I was bouncing her on my knee’
STEPHEN WHITE
THE kidnapper of baby Farrah Quli proudly paraded the tot as her ‘daughter’ at a family party, it was revealed last night.
As Farrah's parents went through hell, Caren McSweeney showed off the six-month-old to customers at an Irish pub claiming she was called Chloe.
Her duped parents, Noel and Sadie, looked on with pride and stood drinks all round.
And locals who said that McSweeney had given birth to twins bounced Farrah up and down, never suspecting they were holding the most wanted baby in Britain.
Six hundred miles away Farrah's heartbroken parents — who last night arrived home in London amid joyful scenes — were pleading for their loved one's return.
The next day McSweeney was arrested.
But she was set free as a report was prepared for the Irish Director of Public Prosecutions.
No request has yet been made for extradition.
McSweeney, 22, turned up with Farrah at her parents' home in Cratloe, near Limerick, on Friday after snatching the baby from London.
An impromptu pub party was immediately arranged to celebrate McSweeney's homecoming and the surprise arrival of the new ‘grandchild’.
Farrah was dressed in a new white romper suit with pink trimmings.
Pub regular Martin Reddan, 26, said: ‘I was handed the baby and bounced her up and down on my knee.
‘She was a lovely, jolly little child with the most beautiful big eyes.
‘Earlier, I had seen a picture of Farrah in the paper.
Cheerful
‘But I never connected the baby I was holding with the baby who was kidnapped.
‘I thought she was one of the twins who had come to visit.
‘She was obviously being well looked after and was really cheerful and smiling.
I'm shocked thinking about it.’
Another regular said: ‘Everyone knew about the twins — but nobody had ever seen them.
‘Caren loves children.
If there were ever any youngsters in the bar she would rush over and start fussing over them and playing games with them.
‘But she could be very childish.
‘Sometimes it is like talking to a 10 or 11-year-old.
God help her now.’
McSweeney left Limerick last summer after splitting with her boyfriend.
She travelled to London and last Thursday, posing as a childminder, snatched Farrah from her home in East Ham.
She was spotted catching the Holyhead-Dun Laoghaire ferry.
Later, after a phone tip-off, she was discovered at her family's large, detached bungalow three miles from the party pub.
Waiting
Farrah was sitting strapped into a pushchair.
A police spokesman said: ‘There was no resistance.
They were waiting for us.’
Farrah spent the night at a hotel less than two miles from the bungalow after being reunited with her parents, Bernadette and Shane.
Limerick Regional Hospital paediatrician Michael Mahoney said: ‘Farrah is in perfect health.’
Irish police said there was nothing unusual about McSweeney being released without charge.
Police bail does not exist in Ireland.
A suspect is charged before a court and then released on bail — but that cannot happen in this case until the Irish DPP gives the go-ahead.
Police said: ‘If the DPP decides that proceedings should be taken she will be rearrested.’
Every mother's nightmare — Page 
SAFE AT LAST: Kidnapped Farrah
REUNITED AT LAST: Bernadette and Shane with Farrah Picture: PAT MAXWELL
SWOOP: The house were Farrah was discovered
BLOW FOR LAMONT
SHEREE DODD
DESPERATE Chancellor Norman Lamont's hopes that shoppers will spend their way out of the slump took a triple bashing yesterday.
Bosses revealed July's High Street sales showed their biggest fall since records began in 1983.
Credit giant Barclaycard said fear of unemployment is forcing one in three card holders to slash spending.
And car loan experts HPI announced no end to the slump in new car sales.
Mr Lamont, who is on holiday in Italy, is banking on a spending boom to boost the economy.
But despite extra sales, many shopkeepers are facing ruin.
Worst-hit are clothing and shoe stores where sales crashed even with up to 70 per cent price cuts.
HOPES: Lamont
There are some rolls a film star just has to grab…
PATSY TAKES HER QUEUE
NICOLA BRIGGS
ONE day you're a movie star, the next your rolls are rather less grand.
But who cares when you're waiting to play your greatest part…as a mum.
Patsy Kensit, star of Absolute Beginners and Lethal Weapon 2, took the extra burden in her stride.
Blonde Patsy, who is eight months pregnant, looked a far cry from the willowy screen siren bedded by Mel Gibson.
But she made light work of polishing off the shopping at a supermarket near her West London home.
Patsy, 24, wearing a loose-fitting dress and comfy sandals, filled eight carriers when she unloaded her trolley.
Her husband, Simple Minds singer Jim Kerr, was nowhere in sight when she loaded the bags of goodies into her BMW.
But Patsy decided she needed a hand with the unpacking and phoned him from the car on the way home.
Jim, 31, duly obliged — by greeting her barefoot in Holland Park.
KEEPING A CHECK: Patsy makes sure nothing is forgotten
TAKING THE STRAIN: Pregnant Patsy with her hands full
ROLL MODEL: Pregnant Patsy grabs a packet of loo paper at her supermarket Pictures: ANDREW MURRAY
‘MIRACLE’ OF BOAT FAMILY
TOM MERRIN
A SHIPWRECKED family were alive last night thanks to a ‘chance in a million’ rescue.
Six-year-old Michael Smith and his parents were spotted by a passing yacht as they clung to a tiny buoyancy bag in darkness.
Michael was already slipping into a coma after three hours in the cold seas.
The family's ordeal began when their Wayfarer dinghy capsized in the Solent off the Isle of Wight.
Michael, his father, Mark, 37, and mother Anna, 36, were given hot showers aboard the yacht Walkabout Two and then airlifted to St Mary's Hospital on the Isle of Wight.
Lifeboat coxswain Dave Kennett, who went out to the yacht, said: ‘It was a chance in a million they were seen.
‘They were all suffering very badly from the cold.
Young Michael would almost certainly have died quite soon.
‘And I don't believe his parents could have lasted too long either.’
The family, from Corfe Mullen, Dorset, returned to their home last night after treatment for shock and hypothermia.
On tot of the world
JOYFUL Bernadette and Shane Quli hold Farrah aloft for all to see…the ghastly ordeal is over.
Before them stood a crowd of overjoyed neighbours who had shared their sorrow and now could share in their happiness.
Among them was Carmen Azzopardi, who had been racked with guilt after turning down a request from Bernadette to mind Farrah.
She said: ‘I'm so glad it's over.
I've been crying myself to sleep.’
Another neighbour, Denis Grainger, said: ‘I've got my own bottle of champagne to celebrate with tonight.’
Asked what it was like to be home, Shane gestured to the crowd and said: ‘Do I really need to answer that?’
Fast learner
SPEEDWAY star Simon Wigg, 31, is learning to ride on the open road at Aylesbury, Bucks.
The ex-British champ has never sat an L-test.
Bad Samaritans
TWO ‘Good Samaritans’ helped a woman in a wheelchair across a busy Nottingham street — then snatched her purse.
Pet beauty slugs it out
A PET slug called Princess beat 100 others yesterday for the title of Most Beautiful Slug in a pub contest at Hexham, Northumberland.
Owner Kathryn Barrow said: ‘I'm so proud I'd cuddle her if I could.’
Hard-boiled
A BOY told by US Vice-President Dan Quayle to spell potato with an E is to report on the Republican Convention for New York radio.
BATTLE FOR FAMINE VICTIMS
A US army team flew into Kenya yesterday to organise a massive food airlift to save neighbouring Somalia's starving millions.
The first flight of a giant air armada that will race 145,000 tons of supplies to the devastated country will take off next Monday.
Without the aid, more than 1.5 million will die within weeks in war-torn Somalia, say experts.
Hundreds of thousands have already starved to death.
SHE'S HOME!
SUPER BABY BUNTING
Kidnap Farrah back to streamers and balloons party
ANTHONY HARWOOD /JOHN HICKS
KIDNAPPED baby Farrah Quli returned home last night to a rapturous bunting-and-bubbly welcome.
Overjoyed family and friends had festooned her house with colourful  balloons , streamers and banners.
And as six-month-old Farrah arrived back from Ireland with mum Bernadette and dad Shane, throngs of neighbours sent up a deafening cheer.
Kissing and cuddling the tot she feared she would never see again Bernadette, 24, had just one word for the emotional homecoming: ‘Brilliant.’
Shane, 31, said: ‘It's like when Farrah was born.
She is born again.
The ordeal was a nightmare.
Now it's the start of an eternal dream — the dream of having my girl back.’
The couple rushed through the crowd to carry Farrah indoors.
Then minutes later they re-emerged to hold the baby aloft before enjoying the party of a lifetime.
Champagne corks popped inside the East Ham home and there was a special chocolate pudding for Farrah, who was passed from hand to hand.
Bernadette's tearful sister Rosie, who had flown in from Germany, said: ‘All the relatives are giving Farrah lots of hugs and kisses.
‘Everyone wants to be near her.
She looks fantastic and is bearing up really well.’
Joy
The Qulis — who were met by police at Heathrow — had flown back from Dublin after collecting Farrah from Limerick.
Before they left the Irish capital, they told how pure joy replaced unbearable anguish when they learned their little girl had been found safe.
Shane declared: ‘We are in fairytale land.
It's the end of all our nightmares.
‘I don't even want to think about what it was like for those 52 hours when Farrah was missing.
‘God forbid that this should happen to anyone ever again.’
Bernadette added: ‘When I saw Farrah lying there safe it was like giving birth all over again.
It was so very, very emotional.’
Asked if Farrah instantly recognised her parents, Shane said: ‘Not really.
‘She was tired and sleepy but soon woke up when we came to her side.
She's a very routine girl.’
Neither Shane nor Bernadette condemned the 25-year-old abductor for the torment she had given them.
Instead, generous Shane said: ‘You could say we're lucky it was she who abducted her.
‘At least Farrah is safe and well and for that we are grateful.
‘Farrah had the right abductor…if there is such a thing.’
Alert
Assistant police commissioner Barney Curran, who masterminded the nationwide alert, said:
‘No one can help feeling sorry for anyone who could do something so drastic.’
Late last night, there was still no room for condemnation in the Qulis' hearts — just happiness at holding their daughter again after the most shattering experience of their lives.
Shane beamed: ‘After all this, it might take me a year to get my breath back.’
OH, SO HAPPY: The Qulis show off Farrah after returning to a massive welcome from neighbours last night
Picture: STEVE KING
REUNITED: Bernadette and Shane with Farrah Picture: PAT MAXWELL
JOY: The family pictured soon after the reunion
AGONY: Bernadette's despair
Star tailor dies
SHOWBIZ tailor Tommy Nutter, 49, whose customers included stars like Elton John and Michael Jackson, yesterday died of AIDS.
REFUGEE HOTEL BLITZED
DAVID BRADSHAW
REFUGEES including children were trapped in a blazing Sarajevo hotel last night after it was hit by three mortar bombs.
At least one man was killed.
Earlier eight people died when bombs rained on the city's crowded streets.
Violence erupted hours after a UN convoy which braved fighting to deliver supplies to Gorazde returned safely to the capital.
A convoy of 1,000 women and children will leave Sarajevo today for Belgrade under an agreement between warring forces.
Meanwhile John Major broke off his holiday in Spain last night to fly home in a bid to save his Yugoslavian peace initiative.
And he called back Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd from Italy for an emergency meeting today.
Mr Major is concerned about a threat by the Serbian and Bosnian Muslims to boycott next week's London peace conference.
HOME: Hurd
I'M QUITTING, SAYS FERGIE NANNY
‘Row over Royal pal’
FRANK GILBRIDE
FERGIE'S nanny has quit amid reports that the Duchess has invited her Texan millionaire pal Johnny Bryan to move into her home.
Alison Wardley, 24, spent four years looking after little princesses Bea and Eugenie.
But she has now handed in her notice and will leave the £15,000-a-year job in a fortnight.
Last night there were rumours that she had rowed with Bryan and was fed up of his ‘bossy’ style.
Her insurance broker father Harold, 57, said ‘No comment’ when asked about the reports.
‘This was a very difficult decision for Alison to make,’ he added.
‘She has been with the Yorks for four years and has become very attached to the children.
‘But the format changed and she decided it was time to move on.’
Alison's mother Irene, 47, said at the family home in Withington, Manchester: ‘She feels it is time for a change.
‘I don't know anything about her rowing with this Texan gentleman.
Splitting ‘But then Alison never discusses anything that goes on in the household.
She never has and never would.’
Fergie moved into £4,000-a-month Romenda Lodge, in Surrey, after splitting up with Prince Andrew earlier this year.
And our sister paper the Sunday Mirror revealed yesterday she had given 37-year-old Bryan a room there.
But she and the children are expected to join Andrew for the Royal Family's annual get-together at Balmoral in Scotland today.
Bryan, who spent a week holidaying with Fergie in the south of France, was back at his Chelsea home last night.
He refused to comment on his relationship with the 32-year-old Duchess.
LEAVING: Nanny Alison with Princess Be a
BOSS: Fergie
‘BOSSY’: Bryan
THE MERSEY FLEET…
2 MILLION WATCH ARMADA'S  LEAVING OF LIVERPOOL
Tall Ships' amazing farewell
TWO million people swamped both banks of the River Mersey yesterday to watch a sail-past by an armada of the world's finest sailing ships.
The Tall Ships had sailed from all corners of the world to Liverpool to commemorate the 500th anniversary of Christopher Columbus's voyage of discovery to the New World.
And yesterday, after a week-long stay, 73 vessels, ranging from the massive Russian four-master the Sedov to the Boa Esperanca, a replica of Columbus's boat, set sail for home.
Police estimated that two million people and a quarter of a million cars flooded into Liverpool and the Wirral, and 42 miles of no waiting cones lined the roads.
Dozens of motorists faced fines of £100 to recover parked cars which were towed away.
Port
Small pleasure craft buzzed around the square-rigged giants of the sea as they left Liverpool in scenes reminiscent of the turn of the century when the port was the gateway to the Americas.
Hundreds of trippers who had paid for a front-row seat in a grandstand overlooking the departing flotilla left in anger when they were told the scaffolding viewpoint was potentially unsafe and would not be used.
They were told they would be given refunds, and had to join the rest of the crowds on the dockside and promenades.
But 200 American millionaires had a grandstand view from the luxury cruise ship Royal Viking Queen which anchored in the river and sounded a salute on her sirens.
The British sail training ship the Sir Francis Drake stood at anchor opposite her, firing salvo after salvo of maroons, and a fire tug saluted with jets of water fired high above the mastheads.
The only incident to mar the event was when revellers aboard a high-speed powerboat rammed an anchored yacht in the early hours of the morning.
Four people aboard the yacht were thrown from their bunks, and were treated in hospital for cuts and shock.
And one man will appear in court this morning charged with wasting police time after a hoax bomb call was made to stop nine helicopters flying pleasure flights from the front at New Brighton.
Nigel Green, chairman of the Grand Regatta Columbus Committee said: ‘It's been a superb display which has lived up to every expectation.
Welcome
‘All the crews were overwhelmed by the welcome they were given in Merseyside after they arrived from Boston.
‘It is eight years since the Tall Ships last raced to the Mersey.
‘And after this they are all saying that they want to come back again.
Perhaps one day they will.’
ROPED IN: One of the crews lines up in the rigging for the sail-past
SHIPPING OUT: A four-masted Russian sailing vessel towers above other boats as the fleet cruises past the Liver Building
GIVING women pleasure is what most men worry about when making love, says a survey in Chat magazine.
And teenage boys spend an hour sprucing themselves up in front of the mirror before hunting for a date, say market analysts Mintel.
SLUMP CUTS £86,000 OFF LAWSON PAD
NEIL SIMPSON
FORMER Tory Chancellor Nigel Lawson, blamed by many for causing the housing slump, has been forced to slash the price of his luxury home by more than a quarter.
The Old Rectory at Stoney Stanton, Leics, was put on the market in 1990 for £325,000.
But with Britain gripped by recession, there were no takers.
So last year Nigel — now Lord Lawson of Blaby — chopped off £40,000.
And now he's had to knock off another £46,000, making it a bargain basement snip at £239,000.
‘It just shows that no one is immune from the property slump,’ said David Hare, president of the National Association of Estate Agents.
Falling ‘If you want to sell, you've got to be prepared to cut your price — even if you were once in charge of the economy.’
WITH prices now falling one per cent every three months, 1.6 million people could have homes worth less than their mortgages by the end of 1993.
Even if prices rise one per cent a quarter, the Bank of England warns, 600,000 families will still find themselves with ‘negative equity.’
GOING CHEAP: Lawson
Debbie's tanker terror
STUNNED Debbie Watson had a lucky escape when a 20-ton milk tanker careered into her cottage.
Debbie, 30, was asleep upstairs in her £130,000 thatched home as Gary Harmes tried to stop his lorry.
It hit one house before crashing into the hallway of Debbie's 400-year-old home in Donyatt, Somerset.
Debbie was unhurt and Gary was bruised and cut a finger.
She said: ‘The worst thing was ringing my husband to tell him.’
Horror in play park
LITTLE Jolene Watkins, 11, was fighting for life last night after being crushed by a runaway car which hurtled into a play- ground.
People living nearby rushed to lift the car off her.
It had been parked on a hill above the park in Newport, Gwent.
WE'RE GOING IN!
Our troops off to Bosnia
RAF fighters target Saddam
DAVID BRADSHAW
ANDY McSMITH
BRITAIN last night pledged its forces to two of the world's bloodiest conflicts.
Up to 1,800 troops will be made available to the UN to ride shotgun on food convoys in stricken Bosnia.
And the RAF was ordered to shoot down any of tyrant Saddam Hussein's aircraft menacing Shia Moslems in Southern Iraq.
Warning off the Iraqis, Premier John Major said: ‘We have seen in the past that they will lose.
If they fly in the area they will be well aware we are likely to attack.’
The dramatic announcement came after a key No 10 meeting.
Ministers decided the worsening Yugoslav crisis demanded that Britain play a bigger role in the heart-rending task to help two million starving people.
Troops will now be offered to the UN to aid mercy missions — but not to combat a bloody guerrilla war.
The Defence Ministry said last night: ‘They are not there to fight a full-scale war.
If that occurred we would have the option to pull them out.
Medicine ‘They are there to escort food and medicines where it is needed.’
Britain DOES expect the UN to take up its offer of at least some troops.
But it hopes its contribution will form part of an international force protecting food convoys.
The move came as relief operations to Sarajevo airport were suspended after a brave RAF pilot saved his plane when it was fired on while taking off.
The giant cargo aircraft was delivering mercy supplies.
As it left Sarajevo the pilot realised that hostile gunners had ‘locked-on’ to the plane.
He took ‘difficult and dangerous’ evasive manoeuvres.
But the Hercules was locked-on to again and, as it was manoeuvring, the crew believe they were fired on by anti-aircraft shells.
SIX RAF Tornados and two refuelling aircraft will form part of an allied force policing the skies over Southern Iraq.
They will enforce an air exclusion zone south of the 32nd parallel from which Saddam's warplanes will be banned.
A British official said last night: ‘If we find an Iraqi aircraft in the air there, we will shoot it down.’
Murder
The move follows the ‘systematic murder’ of hunted Shia Moslems living in the marshes of the blitzed region.
Horrors include the bombing of civilians and unconfirmed reports that napalm has been used.
The get-tough policy also follows harassment of UN inspection teams hunting Saddam's secret arsenal of high-tech weaponry in the wake of the Kuwaiti conflict.
Now Gulf War allies Britain, the US and France have lost patience.
A blunt ultimatum will be delivered to Iraq's UN ambassador in the next few days.
Sick and poor are to suffer
A NEW rise in prescription charges would tax the sick and punish the poor, Labour health spokeswoman Dawn Primarolo said.
Many patients would be unable to pay for the treatment prescribed by their doctors.
She added: ‘Even allowing for inflation, prescription charges have already increased by a staggering 650 per cent since 1979.’
ATTACK: Dawn Primarolo
DIANA FUMES AT CIGS BOSSES
BILL AKASS
CRUSADING Princess Diana lashed out yesterday at smokers who look down on alcoholics and junkies.
She suggested that dependency on cigarettes should be seen as another form of drug addiction.
The princess coupled her criticism with a veiled attack on Britain's multi-million-pound tobacco industry.
Non-smoker Diana told a congress on alcohol and drug abuse in Glasgow: ‘Sadly, many people still regard addictions as a moral weakness.
‘A number of these self-appointed moralists even choose to make such judgments from behind a cloud of cigarette smoke.
‘Presumably they regard cigarette smoking as morally neutral and non-addictive.’
Diana, who described the ‘horror’ of drugs and alcoholism, added: ‘Addiction is a fast-growing malignancy which destroys almost everything in its path.
‘Even those who make money out of it — not just the pushers and dealers — are destroying the society in which they may wish to appear affluent.’
More than 14 million Britons smoke.
Diana's outburst was welcomed by the anti-tobacco group ASH.
CRUSADER: Di yesterday
Diver beats killer shark
A SCUBA diver was in hospital last night after surviving a 20-minute battle with a man-eating shark.
The monster grabbed Ron Duguid, 26, by the arm and refused to let go despite being shot by a speargun.
Then another diver dragged the shark by its tail to the beach at Lantana, Florida, where it was shot dead by a policeman.
Drinker's sea SOS
SAILOR John Worthington went for a drink — and triggered an air-sea hunt.
A rescue helicopter was scrambled after his empty dinghy was spotted floating out to sea.
But John, 57, had forgotten to tie it up after clambering aboard a yacht off Barrow, Cumbria, for a kip.
The hunt ended when John, from Manchester, woke next morning.
Wife Beryl last night said: ‘Three shandies and he's anyone's.’
TYSON TRIAL BLOW
BOXER Mike Tyson's bid to get a new trial was thrown out of court yesterday — by the judge who sentenced him to six years for rape.
His lawyer had tried to cast doubt on Desiree Washington's motives for pressing charges.
Attorney Alan Dershowitz said her father spoke of movie rights to the case, saying ‘that's where the money is’.
An agreement between Desiree and her lawyer was the ‘smoking gun’ that proved their case.
Judge Patricia Gifford dismissed the claims at Marion County's supreme court, Indianapolis.
CLAMP ON GIPSIES
ANDY McSMITH
GIPSIES and New Age travellers could have their caravans confiscated under new rules announced yesterday.
And a law forcing councils to provide gipsy sites is to be scrapped.
Councils will get sweeping powers to impose fines and tow away caravans illegally parked on private land.
If the fines can't be paid, vehicles will be impounded, Housing Minister Sir George Young said.
Instead, gipsies will be encouraged to BUY land and apply for permission to turn it into a site.
Sir George said: ‘If people want to adopt a nomadic style of life they must remain within the law and should do so at their own expense.’
Stevie's Wonderful
SINGER Stevie Wonder was jubilant yesterday after a San Francisco appeals court ruled he did not steal his hit song I Just Called To Say I Love You.
‘I just called to say I'm happy and I mean it from the bottom of my heart,’ said Stevie.
Writer Lloyd Chiate had claimed the song was based on one that he wrote.
HAPPY: Stevie
Jensen goes bust
LUXURY car maker Jensen is set to go into liquidation — after selling just ONE car this year with NO outstanding orders.
The company, whose cars were driven by stars such as Clark Gable, Cliff Richard and Henry Cooper, blames the recession for its collapse.
Bosses of the West Bromwich firm, which is famous for the Interceptor model, have called in business advisers.
Creditors will meet on September 8.
BALMORAL HIT BY BOMBSHELL
THE Fergie pictures will rock the foundations of Balmoral Castle today.
The Queen and her family are on the Scottish estate for their annual holiday there, which the monarch regards as her favourite break.
Normally she and Prince Philip would sit down at 8.15 sharp for a breakfast of kippers and kedgeree.
But they are unlikely to have much of an appetite this morning.
The moment the Queen was warned the photos would appear in the Daily Mirror, she ordered copies to be made available to her as soon as possible.
But nothing could have prepared her for the intimacy of the pictures.
Summons
Now, instead of a day walking on the estate's 50,000-acre grounds or picnicking on the heather-clad hills, the Queen and the duke are likely to send out a summons to Andy and Fergie, who are staying close by.
Andy, who has a passion for golf, will have no chance of a game on the estate's private nine-hole course.
Fergie will certainly not join the Queen and Princess Anne for a horse ride by the banks of the River Dee.
And other royals such as Prince Charles are likely to cancel any leisure plans they had while the family crisis summit goes ahead.
CROWNING GLORY
Fergie's antics plunge Royal Family into its biggest crisis for more than half a century
‘Stop…or the monarchy may not survive’
HARRY ARNOLD
THE amazing revelations of Fergie's holiday exploits with John Bryan plunge the Royal Family into a new crisis today.
And the Queen may now find that the monarchy faces the greatest threat to its survival since Edward VIII's abdication over his affair with an American divorcee 56 years ago.
The British people's tolerance of other people's foibles and failings is legendary.
But it has its limits.
Mothers throughout the country will be outraged at Fergie's behaviour.
And husbands as well as wives will regard the topless pictures of the duchess in Bryan's company as a betrayal of Andrew and of her marriage vows.
Andrew's track record before settling down was pretty sensational, of course.
But since the marriage split was announced in March, he has carefully avoided seeking out the company of other women, and has concentrated instead on seeing as much of his children as possible.
Now, however, comes the news of Fergie's frolics.
PRINCE Philip will share the Queen's anger that the Royal Family's laundry is being washed more publicly than at any other time in half a century.
The family's longer-term problem will be far harder to tackle.
The Queen for her own part will have to face up to the fact that, however perfect her public role, she has dismally failed in private to give her children the guidance they needed for stable marriages.
And she has failed to take action to limit the damage to her family's image each time scandal has threatened.
With Prince Philip, she has to share the blame for the disastrous decade which has engulfed the royals.
And unless the trend is halted, and Charles and Diana's marriage saved, the monarchy may not survive.
A senior courtier said last night: ‘The Queen has been deeply saddened by the events which have affected her immediate family in recent years.
‘She is first and foremost a mother and she shares all their sorrows.
‘The latest events you describe can only add to her unhappiness.
She will be distraught.’
The events may also turn out to be Fergie's biggest folly financially.
Her kisses and cuddles with Bryan could drastically reduce the payout she would receive as part of a divorce settlement.
No official figure has been put on the sum.
In private, as much as £4 million has been discussed as a realistic figure.
But that much money will not be paid in one lump sum.
THE Queen's lawyers will insist on monthly or annual instalments.
And the agreement may insist that the duchess should never act in a way that brings the royal family into disrepute.
It does not help Fergie's case that the financial expert who has been advising her about the settlement is the same man she has been cavorting with in the south of France.
A lawyer specialising in divorce said last night: ‘At the very least, the Duchess of York's hand will be severely weakened by adverse publicity of this nature.
‘Quite simply her bargaining power has diminished.’
The future of Beatrice four, and Eugenie, two, is less likely to hinge on their mother's behaviour.
Both sides have agreed in principle that if a divorce is pursued, the couple will retain joint custody with Fergie given day-to-day ‘care and control’ and Andrew unlimited access.
The lawyer said: ‘A mother would have to behave in a much more outrageous way for a court to decide she is unfit to have care and control of her children.
IT would have to be demonstrated, for example, that she was placing them in moral or physical danger with her lifestyle.’
But Andrew may be so outraged at his wife's topless antics that he could decide to fight for custody of his children after all.
A Family Division lawyer remarked last night: ‘The Duke of York would not be the first husband to be enraged by a photograph of a man lying on top of his wife.
‘And he wouldn't be the first man to become deeply jealous when he sees another man apparently usurping his role as a father.’
LONG TO REIGN OVER US?
The royal family is under a new threat
Double peak horror
A BRITISH mountaineer who plunged 2,000ft to his death in the French Alps lost his girlfriend in a similar tragedy, friends revealed last night.
Post-graduate student Matthew Walsh, 22, from Swindon, Wilts, fell while attempting to climb the north face of Mont Blanc on Tuesday — two years after his girlfriend Katy Choules was killed while climbing in America.
ANNEKA MERCY RUSH
ANNEKA Rice rose to a speedy challenge yesterday when she was asked to help refugees in Africa by equipping a hospital at a camp in Malawi IN ONE WEEK.
The star of BBC1's Challenge Anneka broke into scheduled TV shows at 8pm to ask for viewers' help.
She'd been set the huge task by Christian Aid on behalf of a family who fled to the camp from neighbouring war-torn Mozambique.
Rose and clown
AN orange and yellow rose developed at Colchester, Essex, has been named after funnyman actor Michael Crawford.
STRIPE ME!
WE'RE UP WEST, PHIL
LEGGY Danniella Westbrook — Sam in TV's EastEnders — put on a pair of classy striped pants for a trip to a wine bar party in London's more glitzy West End (or WestEnd as the BBC might call it).
Co-star Steve McFadden, who plays Phil Mitchell, settled for a bomber jacket with blue jeans.
And if Danniella thought he looked out of place, she didn't show it.
Picture: DAVID KOPPEL
KO FOR MR SICKIE
BRITISH Telecom's ‘Mr Sickie’ who took more than three years off with illnesses withdrew his claim for unfair dismissal yesterday.
Engineer Michael Stoneham, 43, was retired on medical grounds after taking 1,158 days off sick at the BT depot in Clerkenwell, London.
In one year alone he took 334 days off.
He was once absent 227 days with a broken shoulder after he fell off a ladder and was away another 25 days with a head cold.
His representative told a London tribunal it was now clear he had consented to medical retirement.
Stoneham, from Wapping, East London, was ordered to pay £200 costs.
PAYING: Stoneham
SO MUCH TO LEARN
‘SHE HAS BLOWN IT NOW’
MARJE PROOPS
LAST Tuesday I mused on the problems the Queen was facing with her family.
Little did I know how serious they were.
What a stupid, blundering, insensitive, indiscreet girl Fergie is.
She doesn't know the meaning of the word discretion — probably can't even spell it.
Or else she is so indifferent to the feelings of other people that she simply shrugs her well-fleshed shoulders and doesn't give a damn who she hurts in her pursuit of thrills.
If ever there was a tiny glimmer of hope that her marriage to Andy could be salvaged she's blown it now.
Not only has she caused enormous damage to the already fragile monarchy but she's humiliated the man she's still married to.
Despite the rugged image, Andrew seems to be very soft about Fergie — even, maybe, a bit intimidated.
I get the feeling he's turned a blind eye too often.
Exploits
But Fergie's latest exploits have opened his sleepy eyes to what those tatty holiday snaps actually reveal.
They show a girl who failed to understand that when you marry a man, you also marry his family and in this case a family uniquely different from any other.
A family with a long tradition of service at the head of which is a woman of very strong high moral values.
Fergie fans will argue she's separated from Andy and the marriage is effectively over.
As a free agent, if she wants to lark around topless and snog in the sun with Bryan, what's it got to do with anyone else?
Which brings me back to that word — discretion.
If she wants whatever it is she gets out of this relationship, no one can deny she's entitled to it.
But while she is still a fully paid-up member of the Firm, the Firm is entitled to expect her to cover her tracks, as well as her breasts, when she must be fully aware she's a vulnerable target for a sharp-eyed photographer.
Larking
The Queen must be appalled at Fergie's indifference to the effect her snogging will have on the children.
I dare say those two small kids had a great time larking around with mummy and ‘uncle’ Johnny.
But wait till Bea goes back to school and the other kids jeer: ‘Saw your mum's topless snaps in the paper…‘
Even the most indulgent husband would find it hard to forgive this foolish wife.
She's a sexy, cheerful, lively and uninhibited girl who married the wrong man.
It happens in too many families.
When, though, you marry into the Royal Family, one romp too many means headlines you and they could very well do without.
MARJE PROOPS
HAPLESS BIRTHDAY
RONALD RICKETTS/ NIC NORTH
PRINCESS Margaret will celebrate her 62nd birthday today — but it will not be a time for partying.
Previous birthday bashes at Balmoral for the Queen's sister have been marked by Scottish dancing and champagne.
But in the wake of the Fergie picture scandal, she will spend today offering support to the rest of the Royal Family.
Margaret, who is divorced from Lord Snowdon, is the Queen's closest ally after their mother and always rallies around her in times of crisis.
The royals will try to shrug off their problems and put on a good show for Margaret.
Buckingham Palace refused to comment on the princess's birthday plans and said:
‘It's a private holiday.’
ALLY:MARGARET
45 killed as coach plunges off road
TIM BROWN
FORTY-FIVE people were killed last night when an excursion coach careered off a Spanish motorway and plunged down a steep embankment.
The victims were crushed to death when the coach turned over in the air and smashed into the ground roof downwards.
Only seven people lived through the crash — and all were seriously injured.
The coach was on its way from Barcelona to the Expo 92 World Fair at Seville.
Children
It ran off the road after failing to negotiate a tight bend on the A7 motorway about 60 miles north of the Mediterranean city of Valencia.
Rescuers had to cut their way through the chassis of the mangled coach to reach the dead and injured.
A fleet of more than 20 ambulances took the victims — believed to include several children — to hospital.
The crash is the latest in a recent spate of bus and coach accidents in Spain.
In May, 30 people were killed in three smashes within a two-week period.
FURY AT DEATH-CRASH MILLIONAIRESS
She has never said sorry for killing bride
She rang therapist instead of ambulance
BILL DANIELS
A WEALTHY socialite was branded ‘callous’ by a grieving family yesterday — because she has never said sorry to them for killing their daughter.
The furious attack was launched after divorcee Ann Fenton, former wife of a millionaire, was fined £1,500 for driving offences.
She was blamed for a crash which killed bride-to-be Teresa Power, 26.
Minutes after the tragedy Mrs Fenton, 50, drove off with a friend.
She used a car phone…but not to send for an ambulance or police.
The call was to her therapist.
Teacher Teresa's bitter family said in the seven months since the accident they had not received one expression of remorse or sorrow from Mrs Fenton.
‘Even today, after all this time, she has not had the guts to say sorry to us,’ said Teresa's father Stephen Power, 57.
Foggy
Mrs Fenton, who runs a wine business and lives in a £500,000 house on the outskirts of Stratford upon Avon, admitted careless driving, failing to stop after an accident and failing to report an accident.
She was fined £500 on each charge and banned for 12 months by the town's magistrates.
Her white Mercedes 500 SL slammed into the teacher's Vauxhall Nova on a foggy main road near Stratford last January.
The court was told she had ignored a Give Way sign at a junction and had driven on to the main road at about 40 mph.
But after flagging down passing motorists, Mrs Fenton drove off in a friend's car.
Her lawyer said she did not then know the consequences of the accident.
Mrs Fenton walked straight past the Power family and Teresa's boy-friend Mark Hitcox as she left court.
It was only after being mobbed by newsmen that she showed emotion.
She burst into tears and said: ‘It should have been me and not their lovely daughter.
It was terrible.’
DRIVER: Mrs Fenton arrives at court yesterday
CRASH VICTIM: Teacher Teresa Power
TV rent row at funeral
A HEARTLESS company rep interrupted a funeral gathering — to try and repossess a telly.
In front of stunned mourners he told grieving widow Linsay Robinson to ‘pay up or else’.
The TV rental firm's rep called at her home in Redcar, Cleveland, shortly after her husband's funeral.
Linsay, 28, had to hand over £45 given to children Cheryl, four, and Samantha, seven.
‘It was awful,’ said Linsay, whose husband Stuart, 30, died in a road smash in Libya.
‘The man said he was leaving with either the money or the set.’
Radio Rentals director Rod Walker said yesterday: ‘I can only apologise.
It is not company policy to go as far as this.’
WRONG-COURSE JOCKEY COSTS PUNTERS £100,000
Chump Charlie blows big race
MARK DOWDNEY
SIX lengths ahead, only yards to the winning post…it should have been a doddle for Irish jockey Charlie Swan.
But then young Charlie dropped the biggest clanger of his racing life.
After clearing the final fence, the 24-year-old chump took the WRONG turning.
And punters saw £100,000 in winning bets vanish as the 13-8 favourite King Taros charged up a dead-end.
The blunder on Melbourne's Sandown race track is likely to cost Charlie £12,000 in prize money.
For he was suspended for five weeks for careless riding.
Trainer Michael O'Leary was also hopping mad.
He said: ‘I worked my guts out to get King Taros right to win the race and look what happened.
It's a disgrace.’
Charlie, the Irish cross-country champion from Tipperary, complained: ‘It wouldn't have happened in Ireland or England.’
Markers
He said he had only a brief look at the course before the race.
He was driven round the wrong way in a car in heavy rain.
Charlie said there should have been markers to show the jockeys where to switch from the steeplechase course to the proper course.
Stewards said Charlie's penalty would have been harsher had it not been his first race.
The jockey, who had flown to Australia for a series of big races, plans to appeal today.
DEJECTED: Charlie after the race
FERGIE…
IN CONFERENCE WITH HER FINANCIAL ADVISER
‘It's completely absurd to suggest that there is anything unprofessional in my friendship with the Duchess.
I am acting in a purely professional manner’
HE was acting by royal command, lending a professional ear to the Duchess of York's marriage troubles.
Their relationship, he said, was approved by the Queen and was ‘business only’.
But observers who saw Fergie in conference with her financial adviser found that kissing and cuddling was high on the agenda for the poolside sessions.
These were days of wine and laughter in the shimmering heat of St Tropez.
John Bryan and topless Fergie exchanged tender glances and whispered confidences like lovers do.
They shared the same cigarette and frolicked in the pool.
HE massaged her legs and kissed her foot.
SHE rubbed sun cream on his balding head.
Twice in recent weeks I have asked John Bryan if he is having an affair with Fergie.
Absurd
Each time he laughed easily and said No.
He has told me: ‘It is completely absurd to suggest there is anything unprofessional in my friendship with the duchess.
I am acting in a purely professional manner.
‘I really don't care if people think I am having an affair with her.
We know what is what.’
This was a typical day at the secluded hideout: 11am.
Fergie appears at the pool.
If daughters Beatrice, four, and two-year-old Eugenie are there she does not go topless.
If they are absent, she does.
NOON or 12.15pm.
Bryan joins Fergie, greeting her with a kiss.
They spend the next hour or so chatting before going in for lunch.
2pm.
As the children rest after lunch, Fergie and Bryan return to the pool.
4pm.
The girls join them for a final splash in the pool.
COOLING-OFF PERIOD: A welcome splash in the pool
MAN AT THE TOP: Now the agenda calls for some intense discussions
PRESSING ENGAGEMENT: Bryan joins Fergie.
Her arms encircle him…and she holds him close
THERE'S THE RUB: A quick dab of sun cream by the Duchess…and Bryan's baldness is protected from sunburn
POOLSIDE PARTNERS: Bryan snuggles up to Fergie to share a  whispered confidence.
A friend snoozes on her lounger in the blazing heat of the French Riviera
SOLE MATES: Bryan plants a tender kiss on Fergie's foot after massaging her legs.
A giant inflatable cockerel perches between the couple, ready for the next session in the  magnificent pool
THE TENDER TOUCH: Fergie leans over to kiss Bryan.
When the children are taken off to play, the couple smooched the happy hours away
LIGHTING-UP TIME: A break in negotiations and a shared cigarette
MAYOR LATE BY MONTHS
MAYOR Middi Haines waited 45 minutes in the rain to wave off two charity cyclists — then discovered they had pedalled away four months earlier.
Mark Holder and Colin Drury, both 22, had planned to leave for Germany this week.
But they set off in April — and forgot to tell the town hall.
Officials at Swindon, Wiltshire, went ahead and organised a civic send-off.
Middi said yesterday: ‘I was very annoyed — they should have had the courtesy to tell us.
After 45 minutes we felt a bit silly.’
FIGHTING THE FLAB THE FERGIE WAY
MARY RIDDELL
CRASS she may be, vulgar perhaps.
Or, if one is applying the most charitable interpretation, simply larger than life.
Just how much larger seemed to occur to Fergie as she lazed in a sun lounger by her French swimming pool.
Her daughters were absent.
Her financial adviser, Mr John Bryan, had temporarily abandoned his horizontal summary of the European exchange rate mechanism.
Custard
There was nothing to distract the duchess from the inescapable fact that one's stomach and hips had acquired that unfortunate texture halfway between a satsuma and a helping of lumpy school custard.
One's thighs — as a cursory prod confirmed — appeared to be modelled from sun-softened Plasticine.
Cellulite is the technical term for this affliction.
As Fergie, a veteran of diets and exercise regimes, knows all too well, shifting it is very hard work.
There are, however, various techniques a girl can employ to reduce excess poundage without risking over-exertion.
She can hoist one leg in the air and lower it slowly.
This exercise is helpful for those whose bottoms have grown to resemble a blancmange.
Cockroach
She can lie on her back like an inverted cockroach while waggling her legs in the air.
This will flatten the stomach, not to mention all but the most robust of deckchairs.
Still some room for improvement?
Time perhaps for a final burst of exercise.
Try a bracing dash up to the pool, followed by a plunge into the deep end.
Or, as the Palace will no doubt be recommending to the duchess in due course…take a running jump.
A BIT PODGY Fergie gives her thighs a pat…and gets that sinking feeling as her hand carries on plunging into rolls of flesh.
Time to yearn for a botty beautiful
JUST KEEP GOING Phew, this exercise lark is blooming hard work, and I'm not used to that.
Still, better keep it up till dear Johnny gets back.
Now, leg stretched and r-o-l-l back those muscles.
PERHAPS THIS WILL TIGHTEN IT UP Make like a cockroach, the manual said.
I hope this is right as I've not seen many.
Blow it, who wants to look like an insect anyway.
BLIMEY LOOK AT THAT The hand moves up for a squeeze on the hips.
Fergie frowns as she discovers she's more than skin and bone
BETTER EXERCISE Nothing for it but to have a jolly good workout lifting one's leg.
OH NO, LOOK AT THAT TOO Just when one thinks one's getting on top of it one finds a bit of a tum.
If only those French chefs wouldn't cook such lovely meals
AH, TO HELL WITH IT I know, maybe a swim in this scallop-shaped pool will help to get rid of some of this excess baggage.
It's certainly one thing I'm absolutely brill at.
Making a big splash, that is…
Stunning silence
READERS have overwhelmingly backed the Mirror's exposure of Fergie's frolics.
The Press Complaints Commission had received only one complaint by last night.
The commission was stunned by the lack of protest.
A spokesman said controversial stories about top people normally sparked a lot of reaction.
But he stressed: ‘We had one letter of complaint and no phone calls at all— a deadly silence, which is extraordinary.’
Tape riddle of ‘love call to Di’
MALCOLM BALFOUR
PRINCESS Diana was at the centre of a mystery last night after a US paper claimed she had been recorded chatting to a man declaring his love for her.
According to the National Enquirer: ‘The 20-minute tape has been offered for sale to newspapers around the world by a secret source.’
The source alleged that in the recording — said to be a phone conversation during 1989 — the man called Di ‘darling’ and gave her the nickname ‘Squidgy.’
The Enquirer said that the caller was heard promising to show her ‘real passion’.
The man is also said to have repeatedly told her ‘love you, love you.’
But the paper admitted experts could not positively identify the voices.
Superkid gets six of best!
BRILLIANT Matthew Woodcraft, 18, was hailed as Britain's new superbrain yesterday.
He matched the record of six A-level passes at grade A — AND got top marks in the Cambridge entrance exams.
‘You really can't get better than that,’ said David Frost, head of his comprehensive school at Headingley, Leeds.
Matthew took exams in maths, further maths, economics, chemistry, physics and general studies.
Miguel Nogales, also 18, of Aylesbury, Bucks, had similar success.
Top film man dies
DIRECTOR John Sturges, whose all-action films included The Magnificent Seven, Bad Day at Black Rock and The Great Escape, has died of emphysema aged 82 in California.
Grand, mum!
ROBERTA Russell, 39, and her daughter Lisa, 19, each gave birth to a baby on the same day at Wolverhampton's New Cross Hospital.
So hose a naughty dog then
HEIDI the rottweiler was in the doghouse yesterday after she stopped firemen reaching a kitchen blaze.
Heidi's owner John Small had gone out, forgetting her lunch, cooking on the stove.
A neighbour smelled burning and dialled 999 — but Heidi stopped the fire-crew in their tracks.
They were about to call for padded suits when ex-jockey John got home at Maidenhead, Berks.
‘They'd have been all right if they'd been firewomen — she loves women,’ he said.
Major ‘evicted’ by builders
PREMIER John Major will be ‘homeless’ when he returns from his Spanish holiday next week.
For builders are busy making his official Downing Street residence safe from terrorist attack.
The work was ordered after an IRA mortar attack blew out windows at Number Ten last year.
Mr Major, who normally sleeps in a top-floor flat above his office, will be found other accommodation in Whitehall.
Details are being kept secret.
Road worthy
GRAN Dot Ransom, former mayoress of Warwick, has passed her driving test at the first attempt — at the age of 70.
Paper reels kill man
A WORKER was crushed to death between two massive reels of paper.
Christopher Picton, 34, of Avon Way, Colchester, Essex, became trapped as the reels, weighing two and a half tons, were being loaded on to a lorry.
The tragedy happened at a transport depot in the town.
I HEARD LITTLE PRINCESS CALL HIM DADDY
The Fergie Scandal…shock new revelation that will break the Queen's heart
FERGIE'S daughter Eugenie called John Bryan ‘Daddy’ on their sunshine jaunt, it was revealed last night.
The confusion of the two-year-old princess will come as a heartbreaking blow to the Queen, already stunned by the Mirror's amazing photos of Fergie's poolside romps with ‘financial adviser’ Bryan.
The Queen told staff at Balmoral: ‘Those pictures have ruined my holiday.’
Now Eugenie's apparent doubts about who her father is will fuel arguments over child custody as lawyers work out a deal for Fergie's separation from Prince Andrew.
The cameraman who took the pictures at a French villa near St Tropez told the Mirror: ‘I definitely heard the child call out the word ‘Daddy’ to that bald man.
‘You could quite clearly hear the noise from the pool at times.
Eugenie uttered the word while she was playing with Bryan.
‘Of course I was surprised.
I just wondered what the Queen would say, let alone the duchess's husband.’
Kissed
He added: ‘Bryan seemed to be going out of his way to play a father's role with the children.
‘One of my pictures showed him hugging both little girls in the pool.
‘He played a lot with them and, of course, he kissed Fergie while the girls were watching.
‘They seemed to accept him as a father figure.’
As the scandal raged on, clearer indications emerged about the separation arrangements.
The Royal Family, closing ranks, may insist:
Andrew should have custody of Princess Beatrice, four, and Eugenie — fifth and sixth in line to the throne.
Fergie should be made to surrender the title Duchess of York.
She should be given a generous financial settlement — on condition that she does not sell her memoirs of life among the royals.
But the duchess is said to have dug in her heels by telling Buckingham Palace: ‘You take my kids and it's no deal.’
A royal insider said: ‘Fergie's only remaining shot is the threat that she could reveal all.
She has been facing them down.
Whisked ‘Andrew has always regarded her as a good mother but he can no longer turn a blind eye to her behaviour.
‘Since the separation the princesses have been whisked from one holiday hotel to another and moved house.
‘John Bryan was the surrogate father to them during a most impressionable time.
‘Now they have witnessed him kissing and cuddling their mother and they must be aware that their real father is deeply upset.’
A MASSIVE 86 per cent of Britons think Fergie should lose her title if she separates permanently from Andrew, said an ICM poll for the Sunday Express.
GRANDCHILD: Eugenie yesterday Picture: CHRIS GRIEVE
GRANDMA: The Queen yesterday
REAL DAD: Prince Andrew yesterday
MAN IN THE MIDDLE: Bryan with the little princesses at the villa where Eugenie called him Daddy
DUCHESS IN DISGRACE: Fergie cools off on the holiday that landed her in hot water
HEADING HOME: Fergie and Bea at Heathrow, with Eugenie tucked in behind
But fly don't!
ROMANTIC radio newsman Graham Whyte proposed to girlfriend Claire Ward while the pair were wing-walking 2,000 feet above a Merseyside air show — but she turned him down.
Grounded Graham, 33, has pledged to try again to wed the 27-year-old engineering worker.
But Claire said: ‘He'll get over it’.
PAY rises are falling, with many deals now below the 3.7 per cent inflation rate, according to a new report.
PAULA HITS JOB MUMS
OUTSPOKEN TV star Paula Yates told working mums yesterday: Stay at home with your kids, you'd be better off.
Paula, who works herself and leaves her three daughters with a nanny, said: ‘Most mothers, after they have paid for child care, travel and unexpected expenses, are earning negligible amounts.’
The wife of rock knight Bob Geldof added: ‘It's not worth it, and they might find they get enormous satisfaction staying at home.’
Paula, 32, who has branded working mums selfish in the past, said: ‘Women have been horribly deceived.
‘They go out to work and then come home and do the bloody housework.
It makes me furious.’
Sue Monk of the National Council for One Parent Families, said: ‘These comments are a bit rich coming from a woman with a wealthy husband and no money worries.’
ANGER: Paula
First class
KATHLEEN Parker, 64, of Swindon, Wilts, got a letter 90 minutes after it was posted in the town.
Jim fixes it for burn boy
KIND-HEARTED Jimmy Savile has fixed it for a badly-burned Romanian boy to have surgery in Britain.
Durham ambulancemen had been trying to raise £2,000 to fly the 11-year-old youngster from  Transylvania .
When Sir Jimmy heard their appeal he chipped in £1,000.
KIND: Sir Jimmy
MY LIFE OF TORMENT BY VOICE ON ‘DIANA LOVE TAPE’
DON MACKAY
MYSTERY deepened last night over tapes claimed to be recordings of a lovey-dovey chat between Princess Di and a man.
A woman's voice is reported to say that her husband ‘makes my life real torture’.
The man comforts her and they blow kisses to each other during an intimate phone call in which she tells of her marriage misery.
It was still not clear last night whether the tapes were an elaborate hoax.
But the Mirror has read a transcript of the 2year-old recording and found much of it to be inconsequential gossip.
Furious
Buckingham Palace shrugged off the furore, saying: ‘We are not taking the story seriously.’
And Scotland Yard confirmed it was not getting involved.
However Di was said to be furious about the tapes, which a book says are of her voice.
And the Royal Family is still reeling from the Mirror's exclusive pictures of Fergie's poolside antics with John Bryan.
Di has frequently told friends she fears that her conversations were bugged and uses a mobile phone more and more.
In the recordings, the man is heard repeatedly calling the woman ‘darling’ and referring to her by pet-names ‘Squidge’and ‘Squidgy’.
At one point a child calls out in the background.
The woman breaks away from phone and replies: ‘In my bathroom, Harry.’
Pouring out her heart about her marriage, the unnamed woman says: ‘It's just so difficult, so complicated.
‘He makes my life real, real torture, I've decided.
‘But the distancing will be because I go out and…
I hate the word…conquer the world.
‘I don't mean that.
I mean I'll go out and do my bit in the way I know how and I leave him behind.
‘That's what I see happening.’
Two electronics enthusiasts with a radio scanner are said to have made the recordings on New Year's Eve 1989, when Princess Di was at Sandringham.
On one tape the man vows to give the woman ‘real passion’ in 1990 and declares: ‘Love you, love you, love you, love you, love you.’
The woman replies: ‘You're the nicest person in the whole, wide world.’
At another stage she asks: ‘What did you say about babies?’
The man replies: ‘Nothing.’
She goes on: ‘I thought you did.’
He says: ‘No, I thought you said it was just a hot flush.’
The woman says: ‘Yes, a very hot flush.’
Her caller is also heard saying: ‘Squidgy, laugh some more.
‘I am happy when you are happy.
I cry when you cry.’
He says it is nice to be able to help her and asks: ‘You don't mind it, darling, when I want to talk to you so much?’
She replies emotionally: ‘No, I love it.
‘I've never had it before.
It has been suggested that they refer to the Duchess of York when the woman says: ‘The red-head is being actually quite supportive.
I don't know why.’
But the man hints it is because the redhead is trying to ‘get back in’ with the family.
The conversation refers to ‘His Nibs’ asking Jimmy Savile to help the redhead with her publicity to ‘sort her out’.
In one of the tapes the woman complains: ‘Bloody hell.
What I've done for this ----ing.
I can't stand the innuendos.’
She goes on: ‘I can't stand the confines of this marriage.’
Several copies of the recording have been circulated and transcripts are set to be published next month in a book about the royals called Fall Of The House Of Windsor.
Husband and wife authors Nigel Blundell and Sue Blackhall claim that voice experts in America have said they are ‘100 per cent certain’ it is Di on the tapes.
But a royal expert who heard one said: ‘There is a huge question mark because the woman's voice sounds more like an Essex girl than a Sloane.’
FURIOUS: Di
Anne is so cool
PRINCESS
Anne stood just feet away from ex-husband Mark's new flame yesterday — but studiously ignored her.
Blonde beauty Jane Thornton, 32, virtually rubbed shoulders with Anne at the Gatcombe Park Horse Trials.
Mark, 43, didn't have much time for Jane, either.
He was too busy running the event.
Nail-biter
RECORD-breaker Fenra Wolf, 37, of Brimington, Derbys, stood barefoot on a bed of nails for 58 seconds while holding 400lbs of cement.
30-PLUS CLASS WAR
RICHARD GARNER
BRITAIN'S crowded classrooms have been branded a ‘public disgrace’ by the ex-head of the National Curriculum Council.
Duncan Graham was the first boss of the council set up by the Government to decide what should be taught in schools.
He says the national curriculum was based on limiting classes to 30.
‘It is a public disgrace that the number of classes over 30 is going up again,’ says Mr Graham.
More than a million children are now taught in classes of 30 plus.
In the newsletter of the Campaign for State Education, Mr Graham calls on the Government to ban larger classes.
He was backed by Doug McAvoy, leader of the National Union of Teachers, who said: ‘You can't have a national curriculum fairly delivered if you have 40 children in a class in Lancashire and 28 in London.’
Mr Graham, 57, took early retirement after clashing with then Education Secretary Kenneth Clarke.
Stone's son ‘was beaten by gang’
ROLLING Stone Ronnie Wood's teenage son was knocked to the ground, kicked and punched in an unprovoked attack, a court heard yesterday.
Jesse Wood, 15, of Richmond, London, told Isleworth Crown Court he was beaten by a gang screaming abuse.
Benjamin Turner, 18, of Twickenham, London, denies harming him and affray.
The trial continues.
VICTIM: Jesse
Kinky jabber nabbed
A JILTED lover who took revenge on women by jabbing them in the rear with knitting needles has come unstuck.
Guo Weichang had stabbed 20 women on Shanghai buses before he was seized by a police chief on the same bus as the 21st.
WORST DRIVER GETS 6 MONTHS
ROD CHAYTOR
A MAN branded Britain's worst motorist was jailed for six months yesterday after clocking up his 12th drink-driving offence.
Jeremy Smith's lawyer told magistrates: ‘If Nigel Mansell is everybody's favourite driver, he, because of his record, has to be Britain's most wretched.’
Smith, 29, was already serving a 30-year ban when he crashed after drinking four pints of lager, the court at Leicester was told.
He reversed into another car near his home following ‘a motorised pub crawl’.
Smith, who has been jailed seven times in the last ten years, admitted driving with excess alcohol, while disqualified and without insurance.
He was banned for another three years.
£1M LAWYERS' BILL FOR A DIVORCE
ROGER TODD
TOP judges have launched a probe into sky-high divorce costs after a couple had to pay lawyers a record £1 million.
They are concerned about the way people can be milked because of‘rottweiler tactics’ within the profession.
But solicitor Ray Tooth, who represented the wife in the £1 million split, said yesterday that it had been an exceptional case.
He added: ‘Most that take some time in court average costs of £250,000.
‘I've done many at between £100,000 and £250,000.
‘The people we deal with have four homes, 20 bank accounts and numerous businesses.
‘I'm the first to tell someone if they can't afford my fees of £225 an hour, plus VAT.’
The £1 million case, and one which cost an ordinary couple £60,000, prompted the President of the High Court's Family Division, Mr Justice Stephen Brown, to set up a team of judges and lawyers to examine fees.
Former matrimonial solicitor Helen Garlick, who has just published the Which?
Guide To Divorce, said: ‘Courts are often horrified by the costs run up by lawyers.
‘Many create bitterness among couples and encourage them to escalate the war.’
She added that one couple spent £400 battling over who would have their 40 Elvis Presley discs.
Another ran up £8,000 costs fighting over two rugs.
FURY AT ‘NOSEY SNOOP’
ROD CHAYTOR
SNOOP Cyril Reenan was branded a prying sneak yesterday for eavesdropping on the intimate phone conversation.
Shocked neighbours united in condemnation of radio ham Mr Reenan.
And his local postman Ronald Manning said bluntly: ‘He's just a nosey bugger.’
The retired bank manager, who claims to be a Di fan and a royalist, said he ‘sweated’ over whether to destroy the tape or approach the princess about it before he decided to hand it to a newspaper.
But postie Ron dismissed the explanation as ‘hogwash’.
As he waited for a colleague delivering mail to Mr Reenan's £300,000 Oxfordshire home, Ron said: ‘One minute he's talking about going to Diana, the next he's gone to a newspaper.
‘If I did something like it in the Post Office, I would be sacked.’
His postman colleague Gerald Rouse said: ‘I'm glad he wasn't my bank manager.’
He added: ‘This is a real nobs’ area of Abingdon — all doctors and bank managers and the last place you would expect something like this to be done.’
Aerial
Mr Reenan, 70, was only glimpsed briefly yesterday, sneaking a glance out of the window of his home in a private road.
But still clearly visible to neighbours was his 20ft garden aerial.
Mr Reenan and his wife Phyllis connected it to a £1,000 airwaves scanner which they use to earwig calls made on mobile phones.
Student Benedict Mills, 18, whose family live next door and use a cordless Freeway phone, said: ‘I didn't know he was earwigging as a hobby.
‘It's not a pleasant thought that he could have been listening to, and taping, our conversations.’
A nearby resident said: ‘I think it's terrible — no better than listening with an ear to a keyhole.’
Furious radio hams feared Mr Reenan's behaviour would give them all a bad name.
One, architect Robin Pearce-Boby, 62, said: ‘I find it dreadful that a man in his position could do something so awful.
‘Listening in to private conversations is bad enough.
Taping them is despicable.
But then to pass them on to a third party is heinous.’
UNDER FIRE: Reenan at home yesterday
THE VERDICT IS YOURS
She works tirelessly for those in need…but is it enough to weather storm?
DO YOU STILL WANT DIANA TO BE OUR QUEEN?
YES RING 0891 525 521 NO 00891 525 522
MARY RIDDELL
IT WAS a bitterly cold February day and the crowds were swarming over security barriers on the desolate streets of Harlem.
This was the final stop for the Princess of Wales on her first visit to New York.
It could not have been a bleaker one.
In the decaying ward of an AIDS hospital, she picked up a dying seven-year-old boy and cuddled him to her.
And then she walked to the cavalcade which would whisk her to her flight back to London.
How natural to bask in the luxury of Concorde, congratulate herself on a triumphant trip, sip a glass of champagne and forget what she had seen.
Instead she fidgeted in her seat, unable to relax, as the Mirror's royal photographer Kent Gavin and I looked on.
When Gavin spoke to her detective, she joined in.
It was clear she could not banish the image of the dying child.
‘It's so sad,’ she said.
‘I'm still thinking about him.’
She confessed, too, to the tension she had felt throughout her US tour.
It was a rare admission of weakness.
So often compelled to be distant, at close quarters she is frank, informal, funny, direct and possessed of an uncanny ability to charm the least star-struck.
‘You could spend hours waiting for her to turn up,’ says a former royal watcher.
‘You could be cursing the job and her.
And then she would speak to you and you would feel this huge surge of adrenalin.’
That charm is one ingredient in a package which is part natural, part manufactured.
Diana, quite simply, is the princess who reinvented herself.
Perfection
She swapped plumpness, flowered frocks and mousey hair for leanness, strict tailoring and blonde streaks.
Her poor academic record was traded in for the sharpest of wits, her gaucherie for poise.
Perfection was the object and perfection is what she achieved.
I have watched her at the opera, where she glittered.
I saw her at her father's funeral, where her dignity was exemplary.
But behind closed doors, only months after she charmed New York, she was allegedly pouring out a mixture of misery and banal chat on the phone to a male admirer.
True or not, it is indisputable that the flawless public facade masked private despair.
Her marriage was in trouble, her husband cold and unloving, her emotional and physical health eroded by bulimia.
And still, where Fergie's behaviour merely offered dire warnings — Never misbehave; Never give in to self-indulgence; Never, ever, buy bikini bottoms two sizes too small — Diana provided hope.
If in the early days she was chiefly responsible for shifting a lot of blue eyeliner and baseball caps, she gradually became an inspiration to the frail, the disadvantaged and the miserable.
Her compassion and kindness, rather than her stylishness, qualified her uniquely one day to take over the role of Queen.
Today those qualities have been, if anything, enhanced.
It was her inevitable fate that an imperfect marriage and the relentless scrutiny of the modern royals would fray away the mantle of the Fairytale Princess.
It is her triumph that she no longer needs it to survive.
SO DISTANT: Diana sits apart from Prince Charles at a ceremony in Spain
SO TOUCHING: Making an elderly woman's day with a few kind words
SO SAD Tears at the end of an official visit
SO HEARTWARMING: A night at the opera, left.
Visiting a centre for disabled toddlers, above And stroking the head of a patient at Great Ormond Street children's hospital, below
SO HAPPY Cries of delight as Princess Diana gets a thorough soaking during a day out at a theme park with little Prince Harry
ELBOW-RADO!
Six stars are axed in bid to save ailing soap
PAULINE WALLIN
SIX more Eldorado stars were given the chop yesterday in a desperate bid to revive the £10 million sun and sangria soap flop.
But BBC chiefs denied rumours that they would all be wiped out together in one spectacular coach crash.
Instead the characters will be phased out gradually over the next six months.
OUT goes sexy toyboy Dieter Schulez, played by pin-up teenager Kai Maurer.
OUT goes restaurant owner Bunny Charlson (played by Roger Walker), just weeks after it was revealed his screen wife Fizz (Kathy Pitkin) was also leaving.
OUT goes handyman Snowy White (actor Patch Connolly), Arnaud Leduc (Mikael Philippe), and the Hindle brothers (Darren Newton and Jon Morrey).
Confused
Eight of the original 30-strong cast have now been fired since the soap — set on Spain's Costa del Sol — was launched just seven weeks ago.
As well as Fizz, it was revealed last week that Trine Svendsen, played by 14-year-old Danish actress Marchell Betak, is also being written out.
Executive producer Verity Lambert claimed last night Eldorado confused viewers by having too many characters.
She said: ‘We are honing down the cast in order to develop the story lines in more depth.
‘We decided that 30 was a far too unwieldy number.
‘In a serial like Eldorado not all the characters can succeed in capturing the imagination, and successful drama has to evolve.
‘But we are very sorry to lose some really fine actors.
‘They have worked extremely hard.’
Ironically, the soap's ratings have recently picked up.
Official figures show 6.5 million watched last Wednesday's show — up by 1.3 million.
ADIOS: Mikael Philippe
ADIOS: Darren Newton
ADIOS: Dieter Schulez
ADIOS: Jon Morrey
ADIOS: Patch Connolly
HOP IT: Bunny, actor Roger Walker, follows screen wife Fizz, Kathy Pitkin, out of the BBC soap
Owen lands peace job
FORMER SDP leader Sir David Owen is to lead the new peace drive in Yugoslavia.
He was yesterday chosen by John Major to replace Lord Carrington who resigned the post of EC peace envoy.
BRAVE WENDY, 10, WINS RACE FOR A NEW HEART
Don't die, parents told transplant girl
CLIVE CRICKMER
DESPERATELY-ILL schoolgirl Wendy Walker has battled back to life to repay her loving parents' amazing devotion.
Doctors warned a month ago that she could die ‘in hours’ without an urgent heart transplant.
But while the search went on for a suitable donor, Evelyn and Peter Walker kept a constant vigil by their ten-year-old daughter's hospital bedside.
Then, over and over again, they whispered: ‘We love you so much.
Please don't give up now, for our sakes.’
Finally on Monday doctors found a suitable transplant heart.
And after a five-hour operation, brave Wendy was ‘going along just fine’ yesterday.
She was even able to squeeze her mum's hand.
‘It was a magic moment,’ said Evelyn, 41, from Dundee.
‘Now I can't wait until I can give her a big hug.’
Dad Peter, 43, added: ‘We never lost hope.
Plucky ‘Wendy's a plucky kid, and we couldn't let her down by giving the wrong vibes.
‘She had to know we were there fighting alongside her.’
Wendy, who was taken ill after being struck by a mystery virus, received a man's heart almost twice the size of her own.
Surgeon Colin Hilton said: ‘It was like putting a quart in a pint pot.
But thankfully, everything fitted.’
Last night a spokesman at the  Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, said: ‘Wendy is a real fighter.
‘Her progress will be slow because she has been so critically ill.
‘But if anyone deserves to live, she does.’
BATTLING BACK: Wendy Walker before the op
30,000 WEDDINGS?
THAT'LL BE £10m PLEASE
Moonies' monster marriage ceremony
MARK DOWDNEY
HERE come the brides — all 20,000 of them — for the wackiest wedding of the year.
By their sides are 20,000 grooms, lined up to take part in the world's biggest chorus of ‘I do.’
In all, 60,000 took part in yesterday's bizarre wedding ceremony, carried out by the Moonies in Seoul's Olympic Stadium.
Ten thousand couples joined in through a TVlink-up with five other countries.
And they each paid a fee which put £10 million into the Moonie coffers.
Most of those who took part had only just met.
Thousands of others wed clutching only a photograph of their partner.
Many couples could not even speak each other 's language.
The ceremony was conducted by the Rev Sun Myung Moon, founder of the Unification Church, which claims two million followers worldwide.
Officials said every couple had been personally matched by Moon using photos and a computer.
The church provided 800 buses to take couples and relatives to the stadium.
Test
Each couple was given a sponge cake and a can of barley soda before the ceremony.
Officials also demanded that 20,000 foreigners taking part underwent an AIDS test before being approved.
Moon led the couples through their vows sitting on a stage wearing a white and gold crown.
‘Father, thank you, thank you,’ the newly-weds screamed.
At least 50 brides fainted.
There will be no mass honeymoons.
Church rules forbid sex until 40 days after the wedding.
The cult leader, who recently served 14 months in a US jail for tax evasion, is the father of 13 children.
CROWN: Rev Moon
IT'S WEDLAM: Twenty thousand couples mass for world's biggest wedding in Seoul's Olympic Stadium
LADY DAWN ‘IS JUNKIE HOOKER’
SAMUEL JAMES
THE aristocratic former wife of a Scottish earl is now a prostitute and a junkie living in a high-rise council flat, a court heard yesterday.
Lady Dawn Kennedy, 31, was remanded in custody accused of falsely claiming she had been raped by three men.
Prosecutor Edwin Beltrami said she had been arrested after failing to appear before Thames magistrates, London, in May.
He added: ‘She has been living off prostitution and is a heroin addict.
Divorced ‘She also contacted police again, under a different name, to make a further allegation of rape and another sex offence.’
Lady Dawn, who lives in Bow, East London, was divorced from Lord Charles Kennedy, the Earl of Cassillis, in 1989.
Rick Shearman, defending, said: ‘She has now been raped four times.
‘When someone is down on their luck, as she obviously is, friends are very difficult to find.’
BEHIND BARS: Lady Dawn leaving court
LONG TO REIGN OVER US!
YES You want Queen Di
Your landslide vote of confidence for love tape Princess
READERS' VERDICT YES:51,136 NO:7,065
GEOFF SUTTON
THOUSANDS of Mirror readers yesterday voted a massive 7-1 in favour of Diana becoming our next Queen.
The astonishing show of support came on the day it was revealed that tapes of an intimate phone call between Di and a male friend are almost certainly genuine.
In one of the biggest-ever Mirror phone-ins, 51,136 of you said a resounding YES to our question: Do you still want Diana to be Queen?
Only 7,065 said No.
And hundreds of callers said Charles should never be King.
Furious
They blamed the Prince for the ‘torture’ his wife is suffering.
Last night there was more evidence of the couple's unhappiness when it was disclosed that they had a furious row at Balmoral shortly before the ‘love tapes’ were published.
Their late-night shouting match was so noisy it kept staff awake.
In the 2 1/2-year-old tapes, a man believed most likely to be bachelor James Gilbey is heard calling Di ‘Squidgy’ and ‘Darling’as the Princess talks of her torment.
But the lovey-dovey conversation didn't even dent readers' affection for the caring Princess.
Patricia Robinson, 55, of Peterborough, said: ‘If the tapes are genuine they have no bearing on who Diana is now.
I wish the other Royals were more like her.
‘I have no confidence in Charles and would not be happy to see him King.’
Essex reader Dee Evans said: ‘Diana is wonderful and has to be Queen — but Charles is not fit to rule.
‘He is out of touch and has behaved cruelly to Di.’
And Barbara Merifield, of Bedlington, Northumberland, said: ‘It's about time Charles and the rest of the Royals took a leaf out of Diana's book.’
Meanwhile, Di and Charles's private anguish exploded into a slanging match at Craigowan Lodge, a mansion inside the Balmoral estate.
Shouting
A royal insider said: ‘They were keeping the others awake by their shouting.
It was before the tapes were published — but it was impossible to make out what the argument was about.’
Di is known to be bored by the riding-shooting-fishing routine which the Royals love on their Scottish holiday.
She is now expected to leave the Highlands after a miserable break.
First there was the scandal of Fergie romping with John Bryan, pictured exclusively in the Mirror.
Then came the ‘love tapes’ controversy.
Yesterday you sent the sad Princess the best message she could ever have — we need you.
And now you've asked the question — do you want Charles to be King or would Di be the better monarch — here's your chance to answer it.
Give us your fun verdict by dialling the numbers below.
Who would make the better monarch?
CHARLES: 0891525 540 DIANA: 0891 525 54 
SLAMMED: Charles
BY APPOINTMENT: The Royal coat of arms
Yesterday's Mirror
Charity in cash row
A ROW hit the NSPCC last night over plans to accept £50,000 from callers listening to the Di tapes.
The charity said the cash, from the cost of calls to a special number, ‘will be put to good use’.
But vice-president Lady Anglesey said: ‘We shouldn't accept.
It makes an unhappy situation worse.’
Taxing time at Palace
THE Queen could soon be paying tax on her private fortune, it was revealed yesterday.
Stung by growing criticism of the Royal Family, she has already started palace talks with her solicitors over ending her tax-free status, according to reports.
Her Civil List payments, which have been fixed until the end of the century, would not be affected.
Hurricane roars on
HURRICANE Andrew roared through Louisiana yesterday bringing more tornados and floods.
At least one person was killed and 75 injured.
Thousands were left homeless.
The hurricane is now heading towards Mississippi.
Find lost Jo pleads mum
THE weeping mum of missing Briton Joanne Walters yesterday pleaded for help in finding her.
Jill Walters spoke in Sydney, Australia, where nanny Joanne, 22, and pal Caroline Clarke, 21, vanished in April.
MISSING: Jo
Bogus PC ‘led cops’
A FORMER marine masqueraded so successfully as a policeman that he led a team of real officers on a job, a court heard yesterday.
David Wheatley, 28, lived in a fantasy after failing to be taken on by the Force.
He was conditionally discharged at Marylebone court, London.
SOCCER CON ALERT
POLICE swooped to crush a soccer forgery racket they fear could spark a Hillsborough-style tragedy.
Premier League clubs were alerted after a dangerous crowd surge at Sheffield United's clash with Manchester United left fans injured.
Later 32 season ticket slips were found to be forgeries.
Another 30 forgeries were found at Sheffield Wednesday's match against Chelsea.
Thirteen fans have been arrested.
Police fear that if crowds are swelled beyond capacity by fans using illegal tickets spectators could be crushed.
Red tape puts bite on Ivy, 80
PENSIONER Ivy Groves was down in the mouth yesterday — because Government red tape will leave her without false teeth for weeks.
Eighty-year-old Ivy's gnashers were lost by Southend hospital when she had a hip operation.
But new rules for NHS dentists are delaying her new set and Ivy can only take liquids.
A friend said: ‘This is holding up her recovery.’
BUGGY OFF!
CHAOS AS INVALID DRIVES AT 8mph ON A1
CLIVE CRICKMER
DISABLED John Pearson caused traffic chaos when he took a wrong turn on to one of the country's busiest roads…in his 8 mph invalid buggy.
Huge jams built up behind the 74-year-old pensioner as he crawled for five miles along the inside lane of the dual-carriageway A1.
Other angry motorists blew their horns and flashed rude two-finger salutes when they finally managed to overtake him.
And his electrically-powered Sungift 400 buggy was nearly blown over every time a juggernaut roared by.
But flustered John's ordeal only ended when police went to investigate what was causing the two-mile tailback near Gateshead.
An astonished officer found him still clinging grimly to the controls as he trundled along at a snail's pace.
After being pulled over, John sheepishly explained that he had taken a wrong turning for his home in Gosforth, Newcastle upon Tyne.
Shaken
Chief Inspector Peter Barella, of Northumbria police's traffic division, said yesterday: ‘The poor old chap was very shaken by his experience.
‘He had created serious congestion on a busy trunk road.’
After a ticking off,
John was given a police escort back home — along the quietest streets in the area.
Last night he was too embarrassed to talk about his blunder.
Wife Marguerita said: ‘This has been very upsetting for both of us.
‘The less said about it, the better.’
OOPS: John, in his buggy, is told off by the law
Jacko's pillow pay-off
A PILLOW case which pop idol Michael Jackson flung from a London hotel window was auctioned for £440 yesterday.
Jacko had scribbled on the side: ‘I love England with all my heart.
Let's heal the world — I love you.’
Schoolboy fan Joe Boxall, 13, from Hertfordshire, caught it outside the Dorchester earlier this month.
Top price at the pop  memorabilia sale was £4,100 for a crucifix pendant Madonna wore on stage.
An old suit belonging to the late Freddie Mercury went for £2,640.
BABY JOY FOR MIRACLE OP LAURA'S MUM
Family secret is out
GORDON HUGHES
BRAVE transplant tot Laura Davies is to get a new baby brother or sister, it was revealed yesterday.
An American doctor has confirmed that mum Fran is pregnant again.
The news came as four-year-old Laura was discharged from a Pittsburgh hospital.
Ring
Fran — who flew Laura to the States for her life-saving liver and bowel operation — could not wait to ring home to Eccles, Manchester.
‘I've got some great news,’ she told her mother Barbara Cooper.
‘Sit down and I'll tell you — we're having another baby.’
Fran, 26, and husband Les wanted to savour the magical moment before making a public announcement.
But yesterday, news of the baby — due in December — was out.
‘Isn't it great,’ Barbara told the Mirror.
‘But it was supposed to be a secret.’
Laura — who already has a brother, Lewis, two next month — was at death's door just ten weeks ago.
She desperately needed a liver and bowel transplant.
Her plight touched the hearts of people around the world who raised £650,000 for her to undergo surgery in Pennsylvania.
King Fahd of Saudia Arabia donated £150,000.
Laura underwent surgery in June.
Despite relapses, she fought back.
Now she is enjoying simple pleasures like a trip to the park again.
Last night, Laura was allowed to leave hospital.
But she must attend a clinic twice a week.
Laura still needs several months treatment and her parents do not want to leave her side.
But they face a big medical bill if Fran gives birth in Pittsburgh.
She has asked if she can have her baby on the NHS in the States.
But health officials say that would be impossible.
SUPER SMILE Mum Fran and brave little Laura are looking forward to the new Christmas baby.
Cop shake-up
SEVERAL black generals are to be appointed in a major shake-up of South Africa's police force, the Government said yesterday.
THE VOTE
You asked for it, so here she s HM QUEEN DIANA THE FIRST
The princess puts one over on Charles in our fun phone-in
Accompanied by her husband
GEOFF SUTTON
LONG live Queen Diana!
More than twice as many readers reckon Di would make a better monarch than Charles, an exclusive Mirror poll revealed yesterday.
We asked you to choose between the two Royals in a fun phone-in.
And while 7,476 voted for Di only 2,885 plumped for Charles.
The verdict came on top of an earlier Mirror phone-in in which readers voted a massive 7-1 in favour of Di becoming our next Queen.
It proved yet again that despite the Di ‘love tapes’ controversy the Princess is still the jewel in the Royal crown.
Remote
Almost 60,000 readers took part in our first poll.
Hundreds accused the Prince of becoming increasingly remote.
Diana could never become Queen unless Charles is King.
But she has said she does not believe she will be crowned.
As you have shown yet again, that would be the worst possible news for Britain's beleaguered monarchy.
Diana: 7,476 Charles: 2,885 
LONG MAY SHE REIGN!
Our mock-up makes your dream come true with Princess Di crowned as the next Queen — and Charles in a supporting role
God speed, say brave widows
THE widows of two Gulf War airmen sent a heartfelt message of good luck yesterday to the Tornado crews and their loved ones.
Anne Lennox and Liz Weeks told how the new crisis has ‘opened old wounds’ and said: ‘We wouldn't want families of British servicemen to go through the pain we had to endure.’
Their husbands Garry Lennox, 35, and Kevin Weeks, 37, died in the first days of the Gulf War 19 months ago.
The squadron leaders' Tornado crashed on a sortie over Iraq.
Anne, 35, was pregnant with her second child, now 16 months old and named Matthew Garry after the hero father he never knew.
Liz, 36, was left the single parent of Amy, now five.
Yesterday the pair cradled their youngsters in an emotional meeting at Anne's home near Tadcaster, Yorks.
Liz, from King's Lynn, Norfolk, said: ‘I am just sorry that families we know could be going through the same feelings we had when our men left for the Gulf.
‘It opens old wounds for us every time Saddam Hussein is mentioned.’
Anne said: ‘Life has changed completely for us.
But a lot of people have short memories.’
Together with Cornish mother-of-two Lynn Hicks, whose navigator husband Steve died in the Gulf, the pair are now locked in battle with the Ministry of Defence.
They want money from the £3 million Gulf Trust Fund to educate their children.
They have been told they must take means tests.
Anne said: ‘It's stalemate.
I try hard not to be bitter but it's not easy.’
REMEMBERING: Widows Liz, left, and Anne, sharing their grief yesterday
VICTIMS: Garry, left, and Kevin
Mud keen
MORE than 250 women have applied for 40 jobs as mud wrestlers, earning £250 a week with a firm based in Crawley, Sussex.
Mickey: Second man is charged
A SECOND man appeared in court yesterday accused of attempting to murder Welsh soccer star Mickey Thomas.
Mark Gorevan, a 26-year-old businessman, of Eaton Avenue, Rhyl, North Wales, was remanded in custody until next Tuesday by magistrates at Prestatyn.
STAR: Thomas
AND FINALLY…
SOCCER RESULTS GET THE RED CARD FROM NEWS AT TEN
SAMUEL JAMES
NEWS at Ten bosses have axed the football results round-up from nightly bulletins.
And last night they were branded spoilsports after claiming not enough viewers are interested in the national game.
Programme chiefs denied it was sour grapes after ITV lost the battle with BSkyB to screen live Premier League matches.
But the famous Bongs! will have a hollow ring for millions of soccer fans anxiously waiting for news of their teams.
Screen pundit Jimmy Greaves fumed: ‘I reckon they should keep the football results and drop News at Ten.’
Sheila Spiers, of the Football Supporters' Association, said: ‘This is a real kick in the teeth.’
Strange
And Mark Irwin — editor of weekly soccer magazine Shoot!— said: ‘It seems a strange decision, especially at a time when you can hardly turn on the telly without some soccer being screened.
‘I just don't see the logic.
For millions of fans News at Ten is the first opportunity to get that night's results.’
Even the Football Association got involved in the row.
Spokesman David
Bloomfield said: ‘If 30 million people can watch England in the World Cup surely some of those would be interested in the football results.’
Veteran newsreader Sir Alastair Burnet, who retired last year, often amazed viewers with his knowledge of the game as he ad-libbed through the scores.
But ITN were unmoved last night.
A spokeswoman said: ‘This was purely an editorial decision and was nothing to do with BSkyB.
‘It has been taken in response to market research indicating that the majority of viewers are no longer interested in football results.’
But a football insider said: ‘You don't have to be a mastermind to work out the reason.’
ANGER: Greaves
BURNET: Soccer fan
SNORERS' FREE HOLzzz
SNORERS are being offered a free night's sleep in a top hotel…to test the new soundproofing.
And just to make sure the volunteers sleep soundly they'll be given a slap-up meal and as much wine and port as they want on the house.
Twelve snorers are needed to test out new fittings to muffle noise at the £100-a-night Swallow Hotel in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear.
General manager Nick Burrows said: ‘We want people to write a snoring CV supported by evidence from a partner who has lived with the noise.
‘It would be helpful if applicants could record themselves on tape.’
Dads' double
IDENTICAL twins Mark and Paul Adams became fathers of girls yesterday when their wives gave birth at a Reading hospital.
PLEASE SAVE MY MUM…
I LOVE HER VERY MUCH
Girl, 10, makes desperate plea for heart donor
LITTLE Adele Wragg has made a heartbreaking public appeal in a desperate bid to save her mother's life.
Mum Cheryl needs a heart-lung transplant but she has been waiting in vain for a donor since January.
Without telling her mum, Adele, 10, wrote to her evening paper, urging: ‘Please save my mum — I love her very much.’
And brave Cheryl, 35, who was born with major arteries the wrong way round, wept when she read her daughter's plea.
Only child Adele wrote after reading about a local teenager who died waiting for a swap op.
She wrote: ‘My mum is waiting for a heart-lung transplant.
I am sorry that Gale Stanley lost her life because she couldn't get a donor and I know how her mum and dad must feel.
‘You have to be patient waiting for a donor and I am not very patient.
‘I think everyone should have a donor card because, when your life has gone, you could save someone else's.
I just wish everyone would carry a donor card.’
Yesterday, Adele, of Firth Park, Sheffield, said: ‘I have a smashing mum.
I love her very much, and I do not like to see her getting worse.
‘We still have some good times together, but she cannot do things she once did.
‘What I want most is for my mum to be well.
Then she could come to dancing classes, swimming, or on school trips like other mums do.’
Divorcee Cheryl coped with her illness until six years ago when she began to deteriorate.
She said yesterday: ‘I am proud of Adele.
I just broke down in tears when I saw the letter.
‘No one has ever done anything like that for me.’
HUG OF LOVE: Adele with mum Cheryl yesterday Picture: PHIL SPENCER
Going for a pong…
MILLIONAIRE composer Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber plans to spend £20,000 to take the pong away from his dairy farm.
He aims to protect neighbours from the mess and smell by draining muck and manure into two ponds — well away from their homes.
Sir Andrew is seeking planning permission for the work near Newbury, Berks.
FARM: Sir Andrew
Bottle of juice kills pensioner
A PENSIONER died — after dropping a bottle of fruit juice on his bare foot.
The wound was so deep that Clifford Taylor, 72, bled to death before he could raise the alarm, police said yesterday.
A relative found his body slumped on the floor of his home in Polsham, Somerset.
A neighbour said: ‘It is a tragedy, he was such a popular local figure.’
Widower Mr Taylor retired as chairman of the governors at nearby Coxley School in July after 15 years service.
QE2's return
THE liner QE2, which ran aground off the US coast three weeks ago, will cruise again on October 4 after repairs.
Brit's mum in plea to Saddam
MARK ELLIS
THE mother of a British cyclist held in Iraq appealed to Saddam Hussein to free him yesterday.
Widow Iris Wainwright made her plea as British and US jets enforced a no-fly zone over the south of the country.
Mrs Wainwright, 61, of Halifax, West Yorks, fears globe-trotting son Michael will be used as a human shield by Saddam.
‘Let him come home,’ she pleaded.
‘It is his 42nd birthday on Monday.
The greatest present we could wish for would be to see him safe and sound.
‘I am just hoping and praying he is not going to be used as a human shield.
That is my greatest fear.’
Michael is accused of entering Iraq illegally as he travelled to Australia.
A second Briton, Paul Ride, 33, has been jailed for seven years on a similar charge.
Yesterday, Paul's wife Julie, 31, met Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd who pledged to do everything possible to free him.
As they spoke, US planes dropped leaflets warning Iraq not to fly in the south or seek allied jets by radar.
HELD: Michael
Royal ghost house
ANDY and Fergie's Dallas-style mansion — dubbed ‘Southyork’ by the locals — is now a £1,000-a-day ghost house and should be turned over to the homeless, it was claimed yesterday.
Fergie and the little princesses have moved out of the £5 million mansion at Sunninghill, Berks, and moved into a lodge at nearby Wentworth.
Andrew intends to move back into his old bachelor pad at Windsor Castle when his Balmoral hols are over.
And yet ‘Southyork’ is still guarded by 16 police — costing the local taxpayers £350,000 a year — and kept spick and span by a full team of servants.
The house is ‘as dead as a dodo’, said an insider yesterday.
And local Labour leader John Tompkins called it a scandal, adding: ‘If the house is vacant, it should be used for the people here who have nowhere else to go.’
MOO-ving on
TV writer Johnny Speight, creator of Alf Garnett, is selling his Rolls-Royce with its number plate MOO 16.
Sleeping killer is cleared
KILLERS can get away with murder if they convince courts they were sleepwalking, a judge in Canada ruled yesterday.
The decision followed the freeing of a man who killed his mother-in-law.
Kenneth Parks said he was sleeping the night he drove 14 miles to her home, let himself in, and beat her to death.
The Supreme Court in Toronto backed his claim that he had not intended to kill her.
THEY'VE ADDER SHOCK
A FAMILY fled from their new council home yesterday — because it is infested with snakes.
Anthea Slyman, 38, and daughters Allison, 14, and Ceri, 12, are staying in a boarding house while pest controllers hunt the serpents.
They were left in the house in Ystradgynlais, near Swansea, by a previous tenant who kept 16 non-poisonous species as pets.
REST IN PEACE, SON
I see no end to it all
PATRICK Rooney was nine years old when he became the first child to die in Ulster's violent era.
It was just after midnight on August 15, 1969.
His father remembers the time, the date and the agony as if it were yesterday.
And Cornelius Rooney says: ‘I still blame myself for Patrick's death.’
Yet the ex-soldier had faithfully followed the advice of James Chichester-Clarke, then Northern Ireland Prime Minister: ‘Stay indoors, away from the trouble.’
Violence was erupting outside the Catholic family's ground-floor flat in a Falls Road tower block.
Police armoured cars equipped with heavy Browning machine guns were blasting away.
‘I moved the six kids into the back bedroom for safety,’ Cornelius said.
Carried ‘I knew the police were firing tracer bullets but I thought we would be safe at the back.
‘Suddenly the bullets ripped right through the walls.’
No specified targets for those police bullets were ever established, despite years of inquiries.
But one ended Patrick's life before it had properly started.
His mother Alice said: ‘I picked him up and there was a big hole in the back of his head with blood everywhere.
‘A neighbour carried Patrick up the road in the middle of all the shooting waving a white shirt.
He got him to hospital and the doctors said that he lived for 70 minutes, but he was dead by the time we got there.
‘The rioting and shooting just went on and on.
We couldn't even bury him from our own home.
‘The funeral was from my sister's house.
She was shot dead by Loyalists five years later.’
A year after Patrick's death Alice had another son.
She named him Patrick and one of her 12 grandchildren bears the same name in memory.
Three photos of her dead son hang on the walls of their council terraced house.
And the family regularly visit his grave.
Alice said sadly: ‘I'll never know why my Patrick died.
But it seems he died in vain.
We're no nearer peace.’
GRIEF: Parents Cornelius and Alice at Patrick's grave
TRAGIC: Patrick, nine
The angel of mercy
TED OLIVER
NO one has more reason for bitterness than Joyce McCartan.
Thirteen members of her family have died in Ulster's years of violence, including her youngest son Gary, who was murdered by a Loyalist gunman shortly before his wedding day.
But Joyce has never stopped believing that peace will come to the grim back streets of Belfast.
She and other women, Protestant and Catholic, are working to establish a string of small businesses which will give jobs to kids who might otherwise join the terrorists.
It has earned 64-year-old Joyce an MBE.
‘We don't preach or beat the drum,’ she says.
‘We get out and raise money to build things.’
Joyce, a Protestant who married a Catholic, has brought up eight children.
She said: ‘Just before Gary was killed, he told me his girlfriend was pregnant.
Now, thank God, I have the loveliest wee grand-daughter.’
One victim, Joyce's 21-year-old nephew Jimmy, was savagely tortured before he died.
He was hung from the rafters, stabbed 200 times and shot.
‘I don't know why so many of our family have been murdered,’ says Joyce.
‘Not one of them was involved in anything.’
She adds: ‘The two sides are suffering just the same.
‘You have to look forward and try to stop kids getting involved.
‘Give them work and hope and the chance of a better life.’
HOPE: Joyce
DOCS HELD HOSTAGE
TWO doctors were held at knife-point by a patient kept waiting to see a psychiatrist, a court heard yesterday.
Michael Zimmetri, 47, admitted two charges of falsely imprisoning the men after a three-hour wait at Sunderland General Hospital, Tyne and Wear.
He was jailed for two years by Newcastle upon Tyne Crown Court.
FUNERAL CAR PLOUGHS INTO MOURNERS AS DRIVER DIES
JOHN HICKS
MOURNERS ran for their lives as a funeral car hurtled towards them after the driver slumped dying at the wheel.
The two-ton limousine ploughed into grieving relatives and friends walking behind the hearse.
Three women hit by the runaway car were cut and bruised — and one suffered a broken leg.
Doctors and nurses among the mourners rushed to give the kiss of life to the driver, funeral director Leslie Adams.
But he died in an ambulance on the way to hospital.
Mr Adams, 53, suffered a massive heart attack as the funeral procession left St Cedmas Parish Church in Larne, Co Antrim.
Mourners screamed and dived out of the path of the car.
The limo swiped a row of parked cars before stopping.
One mourner, Ann O'Neill, said yesterday: ‘There was chaos.
The funeral car just took off.
It was terrible.’
Widow
Hundreds attended the funeral of doctor's widow Hilda King, 74.
A spokesman for the dead driver's firm said: ‘We are all devastated by this tragedy.
‘Fortunately no one was seriously injured.’
Bit of rough
FILM star Liz Taylor is using her expertise in gems and men to launch a male perfume — called Rough Diamonds.
FOLLOWING our revelation yesterday of claims about Di and her friend Major James Hewitt, it was reported last night that a photo exists of him stripped to the waist as he chats to the princess.
The dashing major declared: ‘I have heard rumours but I was her riding tutor — and that was all.’
MILLION FLEE HOLS RAIN
SIMON FERRARI
MORE than one million are fleeing rainy Bank Holiday Britain.
And those planning day trips at home face four miserable wet or windy days.
The London Weather Centre said: ‘It's going to be unsettled in all parts.
I couldn't say which area would be best for a trip — probably southern Spain.’
About 845,000 passengers are expected to fly out from London's Heathrow this weekend with another 332,000 going from Gatwick.
The Association of British Travel Agents said: ‘Favourite destinations are in the Mediterranean.’
But Florida is also popular now Hurricane Andrew has passed.
The gloomy Bank Holiday is a blow for Britain's tourist industry, which has seen trade fall by 25 per cent in most resorts.
Blackpool tourism boss Barry Morris said: ‘People are frightened of spending money.’
£12m SECRET OF THE KLEENEZE SALESMAN
Door-to-door Ivan's fortune
A DOOR-to-door salesman who peddled cloths and brushes for 30 years left £12 million in his will, it was revealed yesterday.
Tycoon Ivan Leech carried on selling for cleaning-aids company Kleeneze despite his secret fortune.
Customers had no idea that the chirpy pensioner who served them with soap and a smile was so wealthy.
But Ivan, who died aged 84, did not forget Minehead, the Somerset town he loved.
He left £10 million to charities including scores of donations in the town.
The other £2 million he left to relatives and friends.
Father-of-two Ivan, who lived modestly, struck rich 10 years ago when a distant cousin left him £8 million.
He immediately began making anonymous donations to charity — but stayed as an agent with Kleeneze.
Brandy
Then in June, Ivan died in a freak fire at his seafront nursing home.
He dropped a lighted match in his lap, tried to douse the flames with brandy, and turned into a fireball.
Friend Jim Parsons said yesterday: ‘He was a delightful man.
‘He always gave anonymously to charity.
He didn't want any fuss.
He secretly helped just about everyone in the town.’
Ivan gave cash to local sports organisations — including £100,000 to Minehead FC — as well as schools and the disabled.
Jim added: ‘He had a heart of pure gold.’
A spokeswoman at the Kleeneze HQ in Bristol, said: ‘Mr Leech was a very popular figure.
We had no idea he was so wealthy.’
Sue Holland, cook at Ivan's nursing home, said:
‘He was a lovely old fellow but nobody would have guessed he was a multi-millionaire.’
Ivan's legacies include £1.96 million each to Cancer Research and the Tuberous Sclerosis Association.
His name is set to live on — the RNLI, which received £980,400, is to name a lifeboat after him.
GIVEAWAY: Kind Ivan
16 DEAD IN BLOODBATH
MARK ELLIS
At least 16 people were killed when an artillery shell exploded in a crowded Sarajevo market yesterday.
Scores more were seriously injured as the blast scattered human remains across stalls in one of Bosnia's worst atrocities.
Rescuers slung bodies on to pick-up trucks from gutters streaming with blood.
Dazed survivors screamed out for loved ones as they wandered through the rubble.
Serb forces besieging the city were accused of deliberately targeting civilians.
Fighting
Fierce fighting continued throughout the day in the former Yugoslav state while UN officials arrived to oversee the agreed handover of Serb heavy artillery peace-keepers.
The only hopeful sign came with the ending of the siege of Gorazde.
RIDDLE OF GILBEY'S HOLIDAY COTTAGE
PETER KANE /DON MACKAY
JAMES Gilbey, the man who was taped telling Princess Diana he loved her, was at the centre of a new mystery yesterday.
The handsome Lotus marketing manager is reported to have rented a luxury cottage 25 miles from the Queen's Sandringham Estate in Norfolk.
And on Friday he went to London's High Court in a bid to stop a newspaper from interviewing the owner of the property, wealthy Jackie Ralli.
But last night Mrs Ralli denied 36-year-old Gilbey had actually booked the cottage and said she was baffled about why he should try to stop her speaking to the Press.
‘I was approached by a friend who knows Mr Gilbey but I have never met him,’ said Mrs Ralli from the doorstep of her £500,000 mansion in Hardingham, Norfolk.
‘There was a suggestion that he might be interested in taking a cottage.
But he hasn't booked one yet.
‘I have not got a clue why he wanted the cottage.
‘This is all confusing for us.
We know nothing about it all.’
She added that she had no idea why Mr Gilbey had wanted to stop her speaking about his plans to rent a property.
But the mystery deepened when a friend of the Rallis', Lady Sarah Bagge, insisted Gilbey HAD rented a house.
She said: ‘Mr Gilbey made a booking for their cottage by telephone.
‘The couple have never met him.
The booking was made last Monday and a letter was sent to him confirming it.’
Gilbey, who works for the Norfolk-based Formula One racing car firm Team Lotus, is said to want the property, called the Thatched Cottage, in the autumn and winter.
The oak-beamed four-bedroom house stands surrounded by apple trees in almost an acre of land in the village of Snetterton, just a mile from a racing circuit.
Gilbey was not available for comment yesterday.
HOME FROM HOME: The luxury Norfolk cottage at the centre of the ‘has he or hasn't he?’ riddle
FOR RENT: A suitable country address for the well-heeled
Genuine or fake…the vital pointers for and against
THE case for believing the letter may be genuine is backed by several facts.
The notepaper is topped with an authentic Buckingham Palace crest and details about the attitude of the princess would be known only to close friends and aides.
The letter, dated June 23, refers to reaching an agreement for a Sunday Times article presenting ‘a more balanced picture’ than that given by the Morton book serialisation which portrays Diana as victim of a loveless marriage.
On June 28, five days after the letterhead date, the Sunday Times did carry a major article supporting Prince Charles.
While the Morton serialisation ran as expected — with the headline Saint Diana — the other article indicated that Charles was a husband deeply wounded by his wife.
Unnamed friends of the prince were quoted as saying that he would never be involved in a slanging match with Diana.
He was described as a man whose voice was important ‘on the world stage’.
Image
The article ended: ‘The prince's image has been badly damaged and statesman-like behaviour cannot compensate for a young wife throwing herself downstairs in an attempted suicide while her husband strides to go out riding.
‘Unless, of course, that picture is not quite true.’
THE CASE for a forgery rests mainly on the claims of Palace sources who argue:
Buckingham Palace notepaper can easily be obtained by outsiders.
The note is not written in ‘house style’.
And, they claim, they would never refer to Buckingham Palace as ‘the House’.
It is suggested that the letter comes from within the Palace.
But royal officials poo-poo the claims.
They say that the handwriting at the top bears no resemblance to that of any Press office staff.
Amazing text of the leaked note
‘THANK you for taking time out of your busy schedule to see me.
It was much appreciated.
To bring you up to date.
We have reached agreement with the Sunday Times.
They will start putting forward a more balanced picture next Sunday.
Quite how this will work out remains to be seen.
The anomaly of running the serialisation in one section and contradicting its contents in another does not worry them.
I wish I had as few reservations.
Our conversations with the other newspapers continue apace.
It should only be a matter of time before they return to common sense and reason.
Then nine tenths of the rubbish they've been printing for the last few weeks will be seen for what it is.
Despite our progress, no satisfactory way of countering the Morton book the way we did with Lady Colin Campbell's has yet presented itself.
The idea has been mooted of throwing our weight behind her version.
As you know, it was uncannily accurate and she is by all accounts a crashing snob.
Her friends here in the House say she would make an excellent mouthpiece, but I am not so sure.
I find her difficult to handle and my soundings are that she is deeply unpopular in Fleet St. She is also said to be extremely bitter about the way she has been treated and evidently stands to make millions from various lawsuits.
Under the circumstances, I see no point in using her, but wonder what your thoughts are.
I fear we are no nearer to enlisting The Princess's co-operation.
She still maintains it is not for her to disassociate herself from people over whom she has no control.
In my opinion, she is relishing the martyr role, and isn't in the least embarrassed that we all know she has never tried to kill herself or do many of the things Morton has her doing.
When I confronted her with the chapter and verse of her part in arranging for tip the press off about her visit to Mrs Bartholomew, she was adamant in her denials.
Short of telling her that the Morton and
Campbell telephones are bugged — and you know what she would do with that information — we must accept her protestations of innocence and lose the…‘
The first page of the letter ends here in mid-sentence.
‘JOB JINX’ CABINET
ANDY McSMITH
FORTY thousand families hit by the jobs crisis have a Cabinet Minister for their MP.
New figures show that in the 20 constituencies represented by the Cabinet, nearly 69,000 people are on the dole — an increase of more than 38,000 in two years.
In John Major's home town of Huntingdon, there are 4,046 registered unemployed compared with 1,418 in 1990 — up 185 per cent.
The biggest increase, 322 per cent, is in Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley's Surrey South-west constituency.
Chancellor Norman Lamont, Employment Secretary Gillian Shephard, Trade Secretary Michael Heseltine and Social Security Secretary Peter Lilley have increases ranging from 101 per cent to 276 per cent.
Shadow Employment Secretary Frank Dobson commented: ‘Unemployment begins at home with these Ministers.
‘And if this is what the Tories do in their own backyard, God help the rest of us.’
Pair's close encounter
VERA Daniels, 66, was reunited yesterday with long-lost brother John Stokes, 63 — last seen in 1942 — after tracing him to a village TEN MILES from her home in Newcastle-under-Lyme, Staffs.
Party peril for parents
EIGHT teenagers in 10 go to parties at homes with parents away, a Yellow Pages survey shows.
But unlike the lad in their TV ad, only one in six would call in urgent professional help to repair any damage.
‘It's me or your ghost’
LANDLORD Roy Tolan has become obsessed with a new woman in his life — a glamorous ghost.
The Grey Lady haunts Roy at his historic boozer, The Old Duke William, in Tong, Bradford.
And now his live-in lover Janette Simon has warned him: ‘It's me or the ghost.’
Roy, 37, even leaves Janette in the dead of night and goes down to the bar hoping to catch a glimpse of his beloved spirit.
He said: ‘She appears when I am alone clearing up the bar.
Once she gave me a wink and she has even pinched my bum.’
But Janette said: ‘I'm getting fed up hearing about her.’
TELLY RACE TO FILM MAXWELL
TYCOON Robert Maxwell is at the centre of a ruthless new struggle — with ITV and the BBC racing to screen his life story first.
Scottish Television want Maigret star Michael Gambon in the title role for their £1.2 million movie, with Ivan Kaye — Jewish TV detective Sam Saturday — as the young Maxwell.
BBC producers are after film and stage veteran Albert Finney.
Gambon, 51, is one of the few actors big enough to play the mountainous Maxwell.
But STV drama boss Nigel Pickard said he wanted more than just a lookalike.
‘Maxwell was a monster but he was also very charismatic,’ he said.
‘He had to be to fool so many people for so long.
‘Michael Gambon is a fine enough actor to convey that charisma while being utterly ruthless at the same time.’
STV hope to start on the film — likely to be called Captain Fantastic — early next year.
TARGET: Gambon
GIRLS MAKE 40% OF ABUSE CALLS
FORTY per cent of phone pests trapped by British Telecom were WOMEN, it was revealed yesterday.
Spurned lovers and ex-wives were nabbed making obscene calls thanks to a new high-tech tracing system.
The women either screamed abuse down the line or remained chillingly silent when their former partners answered.
Two thousand pest callers were caught out by a new tracing scheme launched with the help of police in West Yorkshire last month.
The system means calls can be located in just 30 seconds at the push of a button, including those made from mobile phones, call boxes and even abroad.
Around 400 calls were sexual, of which almost half were made by women.
Chief Insp Roger Worton, of West Yorkshire police, said: ‘We didn't expect that and it is rather surprising.’
Kids in abuse horror
MORE than 200 children are believed to have been sexually assaulted and beaten by staff at council homes over the past 20 years.
Police officers have taken 1,500 statements from youngsters during the last year.
The council-ordered probe centres on all seven children's homes in Clwyd, North Wales, and several in neighbouring Gwynedd.
Pregnant surprise
MORE than four out of every ten pregnancies are unplanned, according to a survey out today.
And nearly a third of 2,000 women questioned for the Me magazine survey admitted having unprotected sex.