

Crime, power, and ideological mystification
Murder!
Rape!
Robbery!
Assault!
Wounding!
Theft!
Burglary!
Arson!
Vandalism!
These form the substance of the annual official criminal statistics on indictable offences (or the Crime Index offences in America).
Aggregated, they constitute the major part of ‘our’ crime problem.
Or at least, we are told so daily by politicians, police, judges, and journalists who speak to us through the media of newspapers and television.
And most of us listen.
We don't want to be murdered, raped, robbed, assaulted, or criminally victimized in any other way.
Reassured that our political leaders are both aware of the problem's growing dimensions and receptive to our rising anxieties, we wait in optimistic but realistic anticipation for crime to be at least effectively reduced.
But apart from the number of police rapidly increasing, their technological and quasi-military capacities shamelessly strengthened, their discretionary powers of apprehension, interrogation, detention, and arrest liberally extended, and new prisons built or old ones extensively refurbished (all with money the government claims the country has not got to maintain existing standards of education, health, unemployment welfare, and social services), nothing much justifies the optimism.
The number of recorded serious crimes marches forever upward.
During the decade 1970–80, serious crimes recorded by the police  increased for nearly every category: violence against the person rose by 136 per cent, burglary by 44 per cent , robbery by 138 per cent , theft and handling by 54 per cent and fraud and forgery by 18 per cent .
These increases were not merely artefacts of an increased population available to commit serious crimes.
For even when the changing population size is controlled statistically, crimes continue to rise.
Thus in 1950, there were 1,094 per 100,000 population.
This rose to 1,742 by 1960, then to 3,221 by 1970, and reached 5,119 by 1980.
From 1980 to 1981 they rose a further 10 per cent, to reach an all-time record.
Ironically, as ‘our’ crime problem gets worse, the demand for even more ‘law and order’policies increases, even though these are blatantly having no effect on the level of serious crimes.
At least not on the level recorded by the police.
The result, so we are told, is that the ‘fear of crime’ has now been elevated into a national problem.
Techniques for avoiding victimization have become a serious preoccupation: more locks on doors and windows, fewer visits after dark to family, friends, and places of entertainment, avoidance of underground and empty train carriages, mace sprays or personal alarm sirens held nervously in coat pockets, a growing unwillingness to be neighbourly or engage in local collective enterprises, furtive suspicious glances at any stranger, and attempts to avoid any encounter except with the most trusted and close friends.
Who are these ‘villains’ driving us into a state of national agoraphobia?
We are told a fairly accurate and terrifying glimpse can be obtained of ‘our’ Public Enemies by examining the convicted and imprisoned population.
For every 100 persons convicted of these serious crimes, 85 are male.
Amongst this convicted male population, those aged less than 30 years, and particularly those aged between 15 and 21 years are over-represented.
Similarly, the educational non-achievers are over-represented — at the other end of the educational achievement ladder there appear to be hardly any criminals, since only 0.05 per cent of people received into prison have obtained a university degree.
The unemployed are currently only (sic ) 14 per cent of the available labour force, but they constitute approximately 40 per cent of those convicted.
Only 4 per cent of the general population are black, but nearly one-third of the convicted and imprisoned population are black.
Urban dwellers, particularly inner-city residents, are over-represented.
Thus the typical people criminally victimizing and forcing us to fear each other and fracture our sense of ‘community’ are young uneducated males, who are often unemployed, live in a working-class impoverished neighbourhood; and frequently belong to an ethnic minority.
These villains deserve, so ‘law and order’ campaigners tell us ceaselessly in their strident moral rhetoric, either short, sharp, shock treatment, including death by hanging or castration  by chemotherapy —‘off with their goolies’— or long, endless, self-destroying stretches as non-paying guests in crumbling, insanitary, overcrowded prisons constructed for the redemption of lost Christian souls by our Victorian ancestors.
If only these ideas were pursued vigorously and with a vengeance morally justified by the offender's wickedness, then ‘our’ society would be relatively crime-free and tranquil.
So ‘law and order’ campaigners tell us.
It is tempting to call all this hype — but that would be extreme!
‘Conventional’ crimes do have victims whose suffering is real; steps should be taken to understand and control these crimes so that fewer and fewer people are victimized.
A radical criminology which appears to deny this will be seen as callous and rightly rejected.
Furthermore, those crimes so carefully recorded and graphed in official criminal statistics are more likely to be committed by young males, living in poor neighbourhoods and so on.
A radical criminology which appears to deny this will be seen as naive and rightly rejected.
Finally, there are very good grounds for believing that the rising crime wave is real — material conditions for large sections of the community have deteriorated markedly.
A radical criminology which remained insensitive of this would be guilty of forgetting its theoretical roots and rightly rejected.
So the official portrait of crime and criminals is not entirely without merit or truth.
None the less, before galloping off down the ‘law and order’ campaign trail, it might be prudent to consider whether murder, rape, robbery, assault, and other crimes focused on by state officials, politicians, the media, and the criminal justice system do constitute the major part of our real crime problem.
Maybe they are only a crime problem and not the crime problem.
Maybe what is stuffed into our consciousness as the crime problem is in fact an illusion, a trick to deflect our attention away from other, even more serious crimes and victimizing behaviours, which objectively cause the vast bulk of avoidable death, injury, and deprivation.
At the same time, it might be prudent to compare persons who commit other serious but under-emphasized crimes and victimizing behaviours with those who are officially portrayed as ‘our’ criminal enemies.
For if the former, compared to the latter, are indeed quite different types of people, then maybe we should stop looking to our political authorities and criminal justice system for protection from those beneath us in impoverished urban neighbourhoods.
Instead maybe we should look up accusingly at our political and judicial ‘superiors’ for being or for protecting the ‘real’culprits.
If we do this, we might also cast a jaundiced eye at the view that serious criminals are ‘pathological’.
This has been the favourite explanatory  imagery of mainstream positivistic criminology.
It was, however, an explanation that only remained plausible if crimes were indeed committed by a minority of individuals living in conditions of relative deprivation.
For whilst this was true it was obvious, at least to the conservative mind, that ‘something must be wrong with them’.
However, if we look up rather than down the stratification hierarchy and see serious crimes being committed by the people who are respectable, well-educated, wealthy, and socially privileged then the imagery of pathology seems harder to accept.
If these upper- and middle-class criminals are also pathological, then what hope is there for any of us!
Wanting to avoid this pessimistic conclusion, we might instead entertain the idea that these powerful persons commit crimes for ‘rational’— albeit disreputable — motives which emerge under conditions that render conformity a relatively unrewarding activity.
Having rescued the powerful from ‘abnormality’ we might do the same for the powerless.
Maybe they too are rational rather than irrational, morally disreputable rather than organically abnormal, overwhelmed by adversity rather than by wickedness.
If these are the lessons of prudence, then standing back from the official portrait of crime and criminals and looking at it critically might be a very beneficial move towards getting our heads straight.
However, there is an agonizing choice to make between at least two pairs of spectacles we might wear to take this critical look.
We could wear the liberal ‘scientific’ pair, as did many young trendy academics during the 1960s and early 1970s when the stars of interactionism and phenomenology were in the ascendant.
Or we might wear the radical ‘reflexive’ pair, whose lenses have been recently polished to a fine smoothness by those same trendy academics who have now entered a middle-age period of intellectual enlightenment!
These spectacles do provide quite different views on the official portrait of crime and criminals.
Liberal ‘scientism’: partially blind justice
One way of getting a clear perspective on those crimes and criminals causing us most harm, injury, and deprivation is to excavate unreported, unrecorded, and non-prosecuted crimes.
This can be achieved by sifting evidence from numerous self-reported crime studies and criminal victimization surveys.
This is undoubtedly an important exercise for it leads us to reconsider the validity of official criminal statistics and the more extreme pronouncements made directly and uncritically from them.
What lessons are there to be learnt from the results of these surveys?
First, there is much more serious crime being committed than the official police records indicate.
The emerging consensus is that one serious crime in three (excluding burglary and car theft) is reported to the police.
This knowledge can and does add fuel to the alarmist ‘law and order’ fire: ‘it's even worse than we imagined!’
Second, although the official portrait of criminals is not untrue, it is inaccurate.
It is more like a distorting mirror; you immediately recognize yourself, but not quite in a flattering shape and form familiar to you.
Thus self-report data indicate that serious crimes are disproportionately committed by the young uneducated males amongst whom the unemployed and ethnically oppressed are over-represented, but the contribution they make is less than the official data implies.
There are, it appears, more serious crimes being committed by white, respectable, well-educated, slightly older males and females than we are led to believe (Box 1981a: 56–93).
To the liberal ‘scientific’ mind, there are two problems here of ‘slippage’, one more slight than the other.
Too many people fail to report crimes because they consider the police inefficient; we need to restore police efficiency in order to increase the reportage rate and hence obtain a better more reliable gauge of crime.
The second, more important slippage, is that the administration of criminal justice is fine in principle, but is failing slightly in practice.
The police pursue policies of differential deployment (for example, swamping certain parts of London where the West Indian population is prominent) and ‘methodological suspicion ’(that is , routinely suspecting only a limited proportion of the population, particularly those with criminal records or known criminal associates).
Coupled with these practices are plea-bargaining (negotiating a guilty plea in return for being charged with a less serious offence) and ‘judicious ’judicial decisions (which take as much notice of who you are as they do of what you have apparently done).
In other words, the police, magistrates, judges, and other court officials have too much discretion.
The result is too much ‘street-justice’, ‘charge-dealing’, ‘plea-bargaining’, and ‘disparate sentencing’.
In these judicial negotiations and compromises, the wealthy, privileged, and powerful are better able to secure favourable outcomes than their less powerful counterparts (Box 1981a: 157–207).
This slippage between ideal and practice reveals a slightly disturbing picture.
The process of law enforcement, in its broadest possible interpretation, operates in such a way as to conceal crimes of the powerful against the powerless, but to reveal and exaggerate crimes of the powerless against ‘everyone’.
Furthermore, because a substantial section of this criminalized population is stigmatized and discriminated against, particularly in the field of employment, its reproduction is secured; many of them, out of resentment, injustice, or desperation, turn to more persistent and even more serious forms of crime.
This vicious circle increases the over-representation of the powerless in the highly publicized ‘hardened’ criminal prisoner population.
The outcome of these processes is that the official portrait of crime and criminals is highly selective, serving to conceal crimes of the powerful and hence shore up their interests, particularly the need to be legitimated through maintaining the appearance of respectability.
At the same time, crimes of the powerless are revealed and exaggerated, and this serves the interests of the powerful because it legitimizes their control agencies, such as the police and prison service, being strengthened materially, technologically, and legally, so that their ability to survey, harass, deter, both specifically and generally, actual and potential resisters to political authority is enhanced.
To the liberal ‘scientific’ mind, a solution of this second and more important slippage would involve a strict limitation on police and judicial discretion and less stigmatization either by decriminalizing some behaviours, or imposing less incarceration (Schur 1973).
The adoption of these policies would narrow the ‘official’ differential in criminal behaviour between the disreputable poor and the respectable middle-class so that it approximated more closely the actual differences in criminal behaviour — at least criminal behaviour as defined by the state.
Radical ‘reflexiveness’: artful criminal definitions
Although an enormous amount of carefully buried crime can be unearthed by this liberal ‘scientific’ excavation work, we will still be denied an adequate view of those whose crimes and victimizing behaviours cause us most harm, injury, and deprivation.
Through radical ‘reflexive’ spectacles, all this excavation work occurs so late in the process of constructing crime and criminals that it never gets to the foundations.
Those committed to self-report and victimization surveys do not start off asking the most important question of all: ‘what is serious crime?’
Instead they take serious crime as a pre- and state-defined phenomenon.
But by the time crime categories or definitions have been established, the most important foundation stone of ‘our crime problem’ has been well and truly buried in cement, beyond the reach of any liberal ‘scientific’shovel.
Aware that liberal ‘scientists’ arrive too late on the scene, radicals resolve to get up earlier in the morning.
Instead of merely examining how the law enforcement process in its broadest sense constructs a false  image of serious crime and its perpetrators, they suggest we should consider the social construction of criminal law categories .
This involves not only reflecting on why certain types of behaviours are defined as criminal in some historical periods and not others, but also why a particular criminal law comes to incorporate from relatively homogeneous behaviour patterns only a portion and exclude the remainder, even though each and every instance of this behaviour causes avoidable harm, injury, or deprivation.
Some sociologists have pondered these issues and come to the conclusion that criminal law categories are ideological constructs (Sumner 1976).
Rather than being a fair reflection of those behaviours objectively causing us collectively the most avoidable suffering, criminal law categories are artful, creative constructs designed to criminalize only some victimizing behaviours, usually those more frequently committed by the relatively powerless, and to exclude others, usually those frequently committed by the powerful against subordinates.
Numerous researchers (Chambliss 1964; Duster 1970; Graham 1976; Gunningham 1974; Hall 1952; Haskins 1960; Hay 1975; Hopkins 1978; McCaghy and Denisoff 1973; Platt 1969; and Thompson 1975) have produced evidence consistent with the view that criminal law categories are ideological reflections of the interests of particular powerful groups.
As such, criminal law categories are resources, tools, instruments, designed and then used to criminalize, demoralize, incapacitate, fracture and sometimes eliminate those problem populations perceived by the powerful to be potentially or actually threatening the existing distribution of power, wealth, and privilege.
They constitute one, and only one way by which social control over subordinate, but ‘resisting’, populations is exercised.
For once behaviour more typically engaged in by subordinate populations has been incorporated into criminal law, then legally sanctioned punishments can be ‘justifiably’ imposed.
In a society such as ours, populations more likely to be controlled in part through criminalization,
‘tend to share a number of social characteristics but most important among these is the fact that their behaviour, personal qualities, and/or position threaten the social relationships of production….
In other words, populations become generally eligible for management as deviant when they disturb, hinder, or call into question…capitalist modes of appropriating the product of human labour…the social conditions under which capitalist production takes place…patterns of distribution and consumption…the process of socialization for  productive and non-productive roles…and…the ideology which supports the functioning of capitalist society.’
(Spitzer 1975:642)
However, this argument needs qualification.
It does not maintain that all criminal laws directly express the interests of one particular group, such as the ruling class.
Clearly some legislation reflects temporary victories of one interest or allied interest groups over others, and none of these may necessarily be identical or coincide with the interests of the ruling class.
Yet the above argument does not demand or predict that every criminal law directly represents the interests of the ruling class.
It recognizes that some laws are passed purely as symbolic victories which the dominant class grants to inferior interest groups, basically to keep them quiet; once passed, they need never be efficiently or systematically enforced.
It also recognizes that occasionally the ruling class is forced into a tactical retreat by organized subordinate groups, and the resulting shifts in criminal law enshrine a broader spectrum of interests.
But these victories are short lived.
Powerful groups have ways and means of clawing back the spoils of tactical defeats.
In the last instance, definitions of crime reflect the interests of those groups who comprise the ruling class.
This is not to assume that these interests are homogeneous and without serious contradictions (Chambliss 1981).
Indeed, it is just the space between these contradictions that subordinate groups fill with their demands for legal change.
It might be objected that even though some criminal laws are in the interests of the dominant class and that others which are obviously not in these interests are ineffectively enforced, thus making them dead-letter laws, it still remains true that laws proscribing those types of victimizing behaviours of which we are all too aware and which set the nerve-ends of neo-classical/conservative criminologists, such as Wilson (1975) and Morgan (1978) tingling with fear and loathing,are in all our interests .
None of us wants to be murdered, raped, or robbed; none of us wants our property stolen, smashed, or destroyed, none of us wants our bodies punched, kicked, bitten, or tortured.
In that sense, criminal law against murder, rape, arson, robbery, theft, and assault are in all our interests, since in principle we all benefit equally from and are protected by their existence.
Without them life would be ‘nasty, poor, solitary, brutish, and short’.
This is all true, but it is not all the truth.
For some groups of people benefit more than others from these laws.
It is not that they are less likely to be murdered, raped, robbed, or assaulted — although the best scientific evidence based on victimization surveys shows this to be true (Hindelang, Gottfredson, and Garofalo 1978)— but that in the criminal law, definitions of murder, rape, robbery, assault, theft, and other serious crimes are so constructed as to exclude many similar, and in important respects, identical acts, and these are just the acts likely to be committed more frequently by powerful individuals.
Thus the criminal law defines only some types of avoidable killing as murder: it excludes, for example, deaths resulting from acts of negligence, such as employers' failure to maintain safe working conditions in factories and mines (Swartz 1975); or deaths resulting from an organization's reluctance to maintain appropriate safety standards (Erickson 1976); or deaths which result from governmental agencies' giving environmental health risks a low priority (Liazos 1972); or deaths resulting from drug manufacturers' failure to conduct adequate research on new chemical compounds before embarking on aggressive marketing campaigns (Silverman and Lee 1974); or deaths from a dangerous drug that was approved by health authorities on the strength of a bribe from a pharmaceutical company (Braithwaite and Geis 1981); or deaths resulting from car manufacturers refusing to recall and repair thousands of known defective vehicles because they calculate that the costs of meeting civil damages will be less (Swigert and Farrell 1981); and in most jurisdictions deaths resulting from drunken or reckless people driving cars with total indifference to the potential cost in terms of human lives are also excluded.
The list of avoidable killings not legally construed as murder even in principle could go on and on.
But the point should be clear.
We are encouraged to see murder as a particular act involving a very limited range of stereotypical actors, instruments, situations, and motives.
Other types of avoidable killing are either defined as a less serious crime than murder, or as matters more appropriate for administrative or civil proceedings, or as events beyond the justifiable boundaries of state interference.
In all instances, the perpetrators of these avoidable ‘killings’ deserve, so we are told, less harsh community responses than would be made to those committing legally defined murder.
The majority of people accept this because the state, by excluding these killings from the murder category, has signified its intention that we should not treat them as capital offenders.
As the state can muster a galaxy of skilled machiavellian orators to defend its definitions, and has, beyond these velvet tongues, the iron fist of police and military physical violence, it is able to persuade most people easily and convincingly.
It may be just a strange coincidence, as Vonnegut often suggests, that the social characteristics of those persons more likely to commit these types of avoidable killings differ considerably to those possessed by individuals more likely to commit killings legally construed in principle  as murder.
That the former are more likely to be relatively more powerful, wealthy, and privileged than the latter could be one of nature's accidents.
But is it likely?
The criminal law sees only some types of property deprivation as robbery or theft; it excludes, for example, the separation of consumers and part of their money that follows manufacturers' malpractices or advertisers' misrepresentations; it excludes shareholders losing their money because managers behaved in ways which they thought would be to the advantage of shareholders even though the only tangible benefits accrued to the managers (Hopkins 1980b); it excludes the extra tax citizens, in this or other countries, have to pay because:(i) corporations and the very wealthy are able to employ financial experts at discovering legal loopholes through which money can be safely transported to tax havens;(ii) Defence Department officials have been bribed to order more expensive weaponry systems or missiles in ‘excess’ of those ‘needed’;(iii) multinational drug companies charge our National Health Services prices which are estimated to be at least , £50 millions in excess of alternative supplies.
If an employee's hand slips into the governor's pocket and removes any spare cash, that is theft; if the governor puts his hand into employees' pockets and takes their spare cash, i.e. reduces wages, even below the legal minimum, that is the labour market operating reasonably.
To end the list prematurely and clarify the point, the law of theft includes, in the words of that anonymous poet particularly loved by teachers of ‘A’ level economic history, ‘the man or woman who steals the goose from off the common, but leaves the greater villain loose who steals the common from the goose’.
The criminal law includes only one type of non-consensual sexual act as rape, namely the insertion of penis in vagina by force or threatened force; it excludes sexual intercourse between husband and wife, no matter how much the latter is beaten by the former to exercise his ‘conjugal right’; it excludes most sexual acts achieved by fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation — thus a man may pose as a psychiatrist and prescribe sexual intercourse as therapy to a ‘gullible female’, because he knows the law will regard this as acceptable seduction rather than rape; it excludes men who use economic, organizational, or social power rather than actual or threatened force to overcome an unwilling but subordinate, and therefore vulnerable female; it excludes the forced insertion of any other instrument, no matter how sharp or dangerous.
Thus out of a whole range of ‘sexual’ acts where the balance of consent versus coercion is at least ambiguous, the criminal law draws a line demarcating those where physical force is used or threatened from those where any other kind of power is utilized to overcome a female's resistance.
The outcome is that  men who have few resources other than physical ones are more likely to commit legally defined rape, whilst those men who possess a whole range of resources from economic patronage to cultural charm are likely to be viewed by the law as ‘real men’ practising their primeval arts-and that is something the majesty of the law should leave alone!
The criminal law defines only some types of violence as criminal assault; it excludes verbal assaults that can, and sometimes do, break a person's spirit; it excludes forms of assault whose injuries become apparent years later, such as those resulting from working in a polluted factory environment where the health risk was known to the employer but concealed from the employee (Swartz 1975); it excludes ‘compulsory’ drug-therapy or electric-shock treatment given to ‘mentally disturbed’patients or prisoners who are denied the civilized rights to refuse such beneficial medical help (Mitford 1977; Szasz 1970,1977a, 1977b); it excludes chemotherapy prescribed to control ‘naughty’schoolboys, but includes physically hitting teachers (Box 1981b; Schrag and Divoky 1981).
The criminal law includes and reflects our proper stance against ‘murderous’ acts of terrorism conducted by people who are usually exploited or oppressed by forces of occupation.
But it had no relevance, and its guardians remained mute ten years ago, when bombs, with the United States' and allied governments' blessing, fell like rain on women and children in Cambodia (Shawcross 1979), or when the same governments aid and support other political/military regimes exercising mass terror and partial genocide against a subjugated people (Chomsky and Herman 1979a, 1979b).
The criminal law, in other words, condemns the importation of murderous terrorist acts usually against powerful individuals or strategic institutions, but goes all quiet when governments export or support avoidable acts of killing usually against the under-developed countries' poor.
Of course there are exceptions — the Russian ‘invasion’ of Afghanistan was a violation of international law and a crime against humanity.
It may well have been, but what about Western governments' involvement in Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Chile, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Suez, and Northern Ireland?
Shouldn't they at least be discussed within the same context of international law and crimes against humanity?
And if not, why not?
Thus criminal laws against murder, rape, robbery, and assault do protect us all, but they do not protect us all equally.
They do not protect the less powerful from being killed, sexually exploited, deprived of what little property they possess, or physically and psychologically damaged through the greed, apathy, negligence, indifference, and the unaccountability of the relatively more powerful.
Of course, what constitutes murder, rape, robbery, assault, and other  forms of serious crime varies over historical periods and between cultural groups, as the changes and contradictions within and between powerful interest groups, and the shifting alliances of the less powerful bring about slight and not-so-slight tilts of society's power axis (Chambliss 1981).
But it is not justifiable to conclude from this that criminal law reflects a value-consensus or even results from the state's neutral refereeing among competing interest groups.
It is, however, plausible to view criminal laws as the outcomes of clashes between groups with structurally generated conflicting interests, and to argue that the legislators' intention, or if that is too conspiratorial, then the law's latent function, is to provide the powerful with a resource to reduce further the ability of some groups to resist domination.
Needless to stress the point, it is a resource eagerly used to punish and deter actual and potential resisters and thereby help protect the established social order (see Chapter 6).
Nothing but mystification
Unfortunately for those committed to the radical ‘reflexive’ view, there is nothing but mystification.
Most people accept the ‘official’ view.
They are very aware and sensitized to muggers, football hooligans, street vandals, housebreakers, thieves, terrorists, and scroungers.
But few are aware and sensitized to crimes committed by corporate top and middle management against stockholders, employees, consumers, and the general public (see Chapter 2).
Similarly there is only a fog, when it comes to crimes committed by governments (Douglas and Johnson 1977), particularly when these victimize Third World countries (Shawcross 1979) or become genocidal (Brown 1971, Horowitz 1977), or by governmental control agencies such as the police when they assault or use deadly force unwarrantedly against the public or suspected persons (see Chapter 3), or prison officers (Coggan and Walker 1982; Thomas and Pooley 1980), or special prison hospital staff when they brutalize and torture persons in their protective custody.
Few people are aware how men, who on the whole are more socially, economically, politically, and physically powerful than women, use these resources frequently to batter wives and cohabitees (Dobash and Dobash 1981),sexually harass their female (usually subordinate) co-workers, or  assault/rape any woman who happens to be in the way (see Chapter 4).
But we are very aware of female shoplifters and prostitutes, and those poor female adolescents who are ‘beyond parental control’ and in ‘need of care and protection’, even though this is a gross misrepresentation of female crime and though the relative absence of serious female crime  contradicts the orthodox view that crime and powerlessness go hand in hand (see Chapter 5).
Few people become aware of crimes of the powerful or how serious these are, because their attention is glued to the highly publicized social characteristics of the convicted and imprisoned population.
It is not directed to the records, files, and occasional publications of those quasi-judicial organizations (such as the Factory Inspectorate in the UK or the Federal Drug Administration in the US) monitoring and regulating corporate and governmental crimes.
Because of this, people make the attractive and easy deduction that those behind bars constitute our most serious criminals.
As this captive audience is primarily young males amongst whom the unemployed and ethnic minorities are over-represented, it is believed that they, and those like them, constitute our ‘public enemies’.
Had the results of self-report/victimization surveys and the investigations of quasi-judicial agencies been publicized as much as ‘official criminal statistics’, and had the radical jaundiced and cynical view of criminal definitions been widely publicized, then the mystification produced by focusing exclusively on the characteristics of the prison population would not be so easily achieved.
Instead, there would be a greater awareness of how the social construction of criminal definitions and the criminal justice system operate to bring about this misleading image of serious criminals.
Definitions of serious crime are essentially ideological constructs.
They do not refer to those behaviours which objectively and avoidably cause us the most harm, injury, and suffering.
Instead they refer to only a sub-section of these behaviours, a sub-section which is more likely to be committed by young, poorly-educated males who are often unemployed, live in working-class impoverished neighbourhoods, and frequently belong to an ethnic minority.
Crime and criminalization are therefore social control strategies .
They:
(i)
render underprivileged and powerless people more likely to be arrested, convicted, and sentenced to prison, even though the amount of personal damage and injury they cause may be less than the more powerful and privileged cause;
(ii)
create the illusion that the ‘dangerous’ class is primarily located at the bottom of various hierarchies by which we ‘measure’each other, such as occupational prestige, income level, housing market location, educational achievement, racial attributes — in this illusion it fuses relative poverty and criminal propensities and sees them both as effects of moral inferiority, thus rendering the ‘dangerous’class deserving of both poverty and punishment;
(iii)
render invisible the vast amount of avoidable harm, injury, and deprivation imposed on the ordinary population by the state, transnational and other corporations, and thereby remove the effects of these ‘crimes’ from the causal nexus for explaining ‘conventional crimes’committed by ordinary people.
The conditions of life for the powerless created by the powerful are simply ignored by those who explain crime as a manifestation of individual pathology or local neighbourhood friendship and cultural patterns — yet in many respects the unrecognized victimization of the powerless by the powerful constitutes a part of those conditions under which the powerless choose to commit crimes;
(iv)
elevate the criminal justice into a ‘community service’— it is presented as being above politics and dispensing ' justice for all' irrespective of class, race, sex, or religion — this further legitimates the state and those whose interests it wittingly, or otherwise, furthers;
(v)
make ordinary people even more dependent upon the state for protection against ‘lawlessness’ and the rising tidal wave of crime, even though it is the state and its agents who are often directly and indirectly victimizing ordinary people.
Not only does the state with the help and reinforcement of its control agencies, criminologists, and the media conceptualize a particular and partial ideological version of serious crime and who commits it, but it does so by concealing and hence mystifying its own propensity for violence and serious crimes on a much larger scale.
Matza captured this sad ironic ‘truth’ when he wrote:
‘In its avid concern for public order and safety, implemented through police force and penal policy, the state is vindicated.
By pursuing evil and producing the appearance of good, the state reveals its abiding method — the perpetuation of its good name in the face of its own propensity for violence, conquest, and destruction.
Guarded by a collective representation in which theft and violence reside in a dangerous class, morally elevated by its correctional quest, the state achieves the legitimacy of its pacific intention and the acceptance of legality — even when it goes to war and massively perpetuates activities it has allegedly banned from the world.
But that, the reader may say, is a different matter altogether.
So says the state — and that is the final point of the collective representation [i.e. ideological construction — author].’
(Matza 1969:196)
For too long too many people have been socialized to see crime and criminals through the eyes of the state.
There is nothing left, as Matza points out, but mystification.
This is clearly revealed in the brick wall of  indignation which flattens any suggestion that the crime problem defined by the state is not the only crime problem, or that criminals are not only those processed by the state.
There is more to crime and criminals than the state reveals.
But most people cannot see it.
2 Corporate crime
‘I can be free only to the extent that others are forbidden to profit from their physical, economic, or other superiority to the detriment of my liberty.’
(Émile Durkheim)
Although there have been few studies of public opinion and corporate crime (Cullen et al.1982; Newman 1957; Reed and Reed 1975; Rossi et al.1974; Schrager and Short 1980; Sinden 1980; Wolfgang 1980), they do provide a window on what can best be described as ‘collective ignorance’.
The one indisputable fact these studies revealed is that the majority of those interviewed were not familiar with the extent of, or damage caused by, corporate crime and amongst the ‘knowledgeable’ minority, few were able to define it with any precision.
Public awareness of corporate crime has certainly increased recently, but none the less there is still more misinformation and mystification about this type of crime than about ‘conventional’ crime.
The root cause(s) of this collective ignorance is not too difficult to uncover.
Corporate crime is rendered invisible by its complex and sophisticated planning and execution, by non-existent or weak law enforcement and prosecution, and by lenient legal and social sanctions which fail to reaffirm or reinforce collective sentiments on moral boundaries.
In addition, the type of media to which the majority of people  expose themselves under-reports corporate crime, especially in comparison with‘conventional’ crimes.
Popular television crime series, such as Kojak ,Minder ,The Sweeney ,Softly, Softly ,Starsky and Hutch ,Hill Street Blues ,Shoestring ,The Professionals ,The Gentle Touch , and Z Cars , never focus on corporate criminals, and hardly ever refer to a related but different type of upper-world crime, the white-collar criminal.
Even when they deal with upper/middle class offenders, as in Columbo , it is not because they have committed corporate crimes, but because they have committed the stereotypical conventional crime of murder.
A similar ideological one-sidedness holds both for newspapers and films (Chibnall 1977; Cohen and Young 1980; Winick 1978).
The majority of people are therefore continually exposed to a portrait of crime in which the background consists of murder, rape, robbery, and theft, and the foreground is full of characters mainly drawn from poor, disorganized, lower-class neighbourhoods.
No wonder that corporate crime is not viewed by many people, including most criminologists (!), as a pressing, serious social problem.
Whereas public ignorance of corporate crime is understandable, this latitude should not be extended to those criminologists who argue that our professional efforts should be directed, as they have been traditionally, towards street crimes rather than suite crimes.
Foremost amongst these ‘neo-classical/conservative’ criminologists is James Q. Wilson, whose book Thinking About Crime reached the list of American Best Sellers.
He considers (1975: xx)‘predatory street crime to be a far more serious matter than consumer fraud, anti-trust violations etc…because predatory crime…makes difficult or impossible the maintenance of meaningful human communities’.
In two senses, Wilson and other similar-minded authors fail to substantiate their position.
First, they fail to discuss empirically the relative seriousness of corporate compared with ‘conventional’ crime.
If, objectively, corporate crime is the more serious, in the sense that more people are avoidably killed, maimed, and robbed and that the last of these aggregated far exceeds the value of ‘conventional’ theft, then that in itself would justify prioritizing its study.
Second, the majority of those suffering from corporate crime remain unaware of their victimization — either not knowing it has happened to them or viewing their ‘misfortune’ as an accident and ‘no one 's fault’.
But the absence of public apprehension over corporate crime does not justify it being ignored by criminologists; rather, it should justify creating a publicity campaign to create an awareness of corporate crime.
If the bulk of the community are being criminally victimized in ways they do not understand or realize, surely that too is sufficient reason for prioritizing the study of corporate crime.
A growing awareness of corporate crime
Over forty years ago, Sutherland's (1940, 1945, 1949) contribution to our knowledge and understanding of corporate crime was so significant that it led Mannheim to comment that if there were a Nobel Prize for Criminology, ‘Sutherland would have been one of the most deserving’(1965: 470).
Sutherland demonstrated that corporate crime was widespread and virtually endemic in contemporary national and transnational corporations.
It flowed from a degree of social disorganization within these corporations and also from patterns of differential association amongst its higher-level officials.
Its cost, in terms of money lost, was unimaginably enormous.
Any criminology which did not devote considerable effort explaining and publicizing corporate crime would, in his view, have failed in its scientific duty.
Although it is now clear that Sutherland's attempt to fit, indeed squash, corporate crime into his theory of differential association has not proved comfortable, and that his concentration on the economic as opposed to the physical and social effects of corporate crime made his study too one-sided, it none the less did, at the time, constitute a rich legacy to bequeath to criminology.
Sadly it was a legacy scorned by its putative beneficiaries.
With the exception of some work by disciples of Sutherland (Clinard 1952; Cressey 1953; Hartung 1950), the study of corporate crime remained a deserted and neglected area for nearly two decades.
And then, following Ralph Nader's (1965) exposure of the car industry's products as being ‘Unsafe At Any Speed’, the President's Task Force Report on crime (1967), and Watergate's revelation of massive corporate funds being paid illegally to curry political favours and de-stabilize South American democratic governments, there was a renew-ed interest in crimes committed in the good name of major corporations.
In his presidential address to the Society for the Study of Social Problems , Wheeler (1976) claimed that ‘the patterns of illegal activity that lie at the core of large-scale corporate, industrial society…have been almost totally neglected’.
He partly supported this belief by the fact that of the 3,700 books or articles listed in the two-volume Criminology Index (Wolfgang, Figlio, and Thornberry 1975) which reviews theoretical and empirical work in criminology from 1945 to 1972, there were only ninety-two, or about 2.5 per cent, dealing with white-collar or corporate crime.
And if the former is subtracted on the grounds that crimes against corporations are dissimilar to crimes for corporations, then just over 1 per cent of the listed material referred to corporate crime.
He urged his audience to attend to this neglect, for the topic was clearly a pressing social problem.
In another presidential address, this time to the  Society for the Psychological Study of Social Issues , Stotland (1977) spoke on the topic of ‘white-collar criminals’ and argued that although we were beginning to know something about the people who commit white-collar and corporate crime, we ought to intensify our efforts.
Towards the end of the decade, these efforts were clearly being made.
Five books of readings on corporate, governmental, and powerful crimes have been produced (Geis and Meier 1977; Geis and Stotland 1980; Ermann and Lundman 1978; Douglas and Johnson 1977; Johnson and Douglas 1978).
There have been research monographs on corporate crime and law enforcement processes in America (Clinard and Yeager 1980), Australia (Hopkins 1978), Britain (Carson 1981; Carson and Martin 1974), and Canada (Goff and Reasons 1978).
In addition there has been a detailed examination of corporate behaviour in the North Sea oilfields (Carson 1981) and transnational pharmaceutical corporations (Braithwaite 1983).
Bequai (1978) has ‘summarized the facts’ of corporate and white-collar crime, and Conklin (1977), Ermann and Lundman (1982), and Pearce (1976) have proposed some theoretical understanding.
Finally, just to document the shift in concern about corporate crime, Clinard and Yeager state that:
‘Of 28 social problems textbooks published between 1964 and 1978, a total of only 110 pages discussed the importance of large corporations to society; of these pages only 11 mentioned corporate crime and all but one of these pages were contained in two textbooks published in 1978.
Approximately 96 per cent of all social problems textbooks mentioning, generally briefly, either corporations or corporate crime were published in 1972 or later.’
(Clinard and Yeager 1980:13)
This all testifies to a growing recognition of corporate crime as a social problem, and a gradual, shocking realization that the victimization rate is higher and causes more suffering than conventional crime.
There is also a growing sense of dismay that attempts to contain and control corporate crime are largely absent or ineffectual.
However, for us to improve our ability to control corporate crime, it is first necessary to grasp just what it is we might want to control.
Corporate crime — definition and illustrations
‘Oh, but you who philosophize disgrace
and criticize all fears,
Bury the rags deep in your face 
For now's the time for your tears.’
(from ‘The Lonesome Death of Hattie Caroll’, Bob Dylan)
It is essential to conceptualize as precisely as possible the nature of corporate crime.
Clearly, like many other crimes of the powerful, corporate crime is a ‘legitimate racket’— to recall Al Capone's famous phrase — which displays the ‘triumph of money over conscience’.
But it has to be formulated more precisely if it is not to be confused with other crimes which have the dubious distinction of sharing these aphorismic characteristics.
For instance, corporate crime is clearly committed for the corporate and not against it.
Thus, such crimes as embezzlement and other examples of employee theft will not be included in this discussion of corporate crime.
Conklin (1977:13) suggests the following definition:
‘Business crime is an illegal act, punishable by a criminal sanction, which is committed by an individual or a corporation in the course of a legitimate occupation or pursuit in the industrial or commercial sector for the purpose of obtaining money or property, avoiding the payment of money or the loss of property, or obtaining business or personal advantage.’
Although Conklin is absolutely right to concentrate on the economic dimension of corporate crime, for ultimately it is always about money, it does obscure the fact that in pursuing economic goals there are physical as well as economic impacts, and these are sufficiently important to demand inclusion in any conceptualization.
For this reason, Schrager and Short's definition (1977: 409) is worth considering:
‘Organizational crimes are illegal acts of omission or commission of an individual or a group of individuals in a legitimate formal organization in accordance with the operative goals of the organization which have a serious physical or economic impact on employees, consumers or the general public.’
A number of points contained in this definition need to be spelt out.
It clearly does not fall into the easy trap of arguing that for crime to exist there must first be intention.
Any discussion of crime must be cognizant of the fact that serious adverse consequences can and often do follow from being indifferent to the outcome of one's actions (or inactions).
To avoid considering these consequences on the grounds that they were not intended is not only to be blind to much human suffering, but also to accept the relative positions of intention compared with indifference on a  common-sense hierarchy of immorality.
In this conventional hierarchy, it is morally worse to intend harm than to be indifferent whether harm results from one's behaviour.
But, as Reiman argues (1979: 60–1) this common sense can be turned on its head.
If a person intends doing someone harm, it cannot be assumed that s/he displays a disdain towards humanity, although it is clearly directed towards the particular intended victim.
However, if indifference characterizes the attitude a person has towards the consequences of his/her action, then s/he are indifferent as to who suffers — it could literally be anybody — and this does display disdain for humanity in general.
In this sense, the intent to harm someone may be less immoral (or at least no more immoral) than to be indifferent as to whom is harmed.
Evil should not be unrecognized merely because it is as banal as indifference; indifference rather than intent may well be the greater cause of avoidable human suffering, particularly in the case of corporate crime.
Schrager and Short may not go this far, but they are certainly right to stress that corporate crime should be conceptualized so as to include acts of omission as well as the more obvious acts of commission.
Second, they stress that the pursuit of organizational goals is deeply implicated in the cause(s) of corporate crime.
But it is important to realize that these goals are not the manifestation of personal motives cast adrift from organizational moorings, neither are they disembodied acts committed in some metaphysical sense by corporations.
Rather, organizational goals are what they are perceived to be by officials who have been socialized into the organizational ‘way of life’ and who strive in a highly co-ordinate fashion to bring about collectively their realization.
Of course, these strivings to realize organizational goals may become crystallized in standard operational procedures.
These confront new employees at all bureaucratic levels as ‘solid facts’ to be learnt and practised rather than queried and altered.
Thus the dead hand of the past presses heavily on the head of the present and gives corporate criminals a genuine sense of irresponsibility because they feel the corporation acting through them as mere passive intermediaries.
Third, although Schrager and Short's definition directs attention to physical as well as economic consequences of corporate crime, it neglects important victims, namely other corporations and organizations (Vaughan 1980).
Through such corporate crimes as bribing foreign and domestic governmental officials, price-fixing, mergers and take-overs, fraudulent advertising, espionage, and patent violation, some competing corporations are forced into bankruptcy, others' capacity to compete is impaired, and still others are robbed of resources vital to maintaining their market position.
Of course, these corporate crimes  against other organizations ultimately have human victims, such as shareholders, taxpayers, Third World poor, and so on , but none the less it is important to see that corporations sometimes commit crimes against other corporations because this focuses our attention on a vital factor in the cause of such behaviour — namely competition under conditions of scarce or diminishing resources and markets.
Schrager and Short's definition therefore needs to be amended with the addition ‘general public and other organizations ’.
Finally, Schrager and Short focus on ‘illegal’ acts, but they do not stress that this refers to acts punishable by the state regardless of whether they are subsumed under civil, administrative, or criminal law.
It is essential however, to make this point strongly.
Corporate crime is crime irrespective of whether it is only punishable by an administrative body, or whether it merely violates individuals' civil rights.
It might be wondered why much corporate crime is dealt with by administrative agencies rather than criminal courts, but that does not justify excluding corporate acts regulated by administrative agencies from the study of corporate crime.
However, does even this wide definition go far enough?
Ought it also to include those forms of deaths, injuries, and economic deprivations which are not as yet covered by criminal, administrative, or civil law, even though they are violations of ‘human rights’(Schwendinger and Schwendinger 1975).
This clearly raises enormous philosophical and political issues, and may if pushed to an extreme position, risk losing any sympathetic reception for the study and control of corporate crime from those of liberal sensibilities.
Consequently this chapter settles on Schrager and Short's amended definition of corporate crime whilst remaining sensitive to those avoidable harmful corporate acts which are excluded.
The implications of this will be considered later when the ability of transnational corporations to shape new legislation relating to corporate activities is discussed; this ability clearly enables corporations to prevent some of the avoidable deaths, injuries, and economic deprivation they cause from being included in new administrative regulations or criminal laws.
Before proceeding to estimate the costs of corporate crime, one last distinction needs to be made.
In addition to crimes for corporations (corporate crimes) and crimes against corporations (employee crimes), there are also criminal corporations .
These are corporations deliberately set up, taken over, or controlled for the explicit and sole purpose of executing criminal activity.
An example of this is provided by Hopkins (1980b) in his analysis of an oil corporation which was established and run by a single family.
He shows how the family used the corporation to execute a series of financial deals which possibly resulted in shareholders  of that and other related companies losing over A$22 millions.
A recent study of long-term fraud in the United Kingdom (Levi 1981) also documents how companies are set up with the deliberate intention of using them to obtain goods on credit for which payment is never intended to be made.
Although the crimes of criminal corporations are clearly serious, they should be kept analytically separate from corporate crime.
Of course, such separation may not always be easy when dealing with real events.
But none the less, it is better to start off with some conceptual purity or relatively homogeneous phenomenon in order first to describe better the extent of that particular type of crime, second to facilitate its sociological understanding, and finally to evaluate the likely effectiveness of possible control/regulation proposals.
CORPORATE CRIME KILLS
Whereas a person involved in the American Mafia could say, quite reasonably, ‘what's all the fuss about, we only kill each other’, the same could not be said in defence of some corporate crimes.
When these result in avoidable death, and they do, then it could be anyone who just happens to be there — employees, consumers, ordinary citizens.
Thus, in September, 1976, a fire aboard HMS Glasgow, which was at the time under-going repairs in the Swan Hunter shipyard, resulted in the death of eight workers.
The fire was the result of the company failing to provide a proper safe environment for such work (Health and Safety Executive 1980: 15).
Following a hoist accident at the power station Littlebrook Dee, Kent, on I September, 1978, four people died and five were seriously injured.
The cause of this was identified as the company's neglect of safety equipment (Health and Safety Commission 1980: 16).
In 1972 at Buffalo Creek, West Virginia, 125 people were killed when a carelessly maintained dam burst (Stern 1976: 3) and at Willow Island, West Virginia, fifty-one people died when a cooling tower collapsed as a result of safety violations (Kennedy 1978).
Early in 1979, fifty people lost their lives as a result of an explosion aboard the tanker Betelgeuse whilst it was anchored at Bantry Bay in County Cork.
An Inquiry headed by an Irish High Court Judge, Mr Justice Declan Costello firmly placed the responsibility for this on two corporations, Total and Gulf, ‘who deliberately decided not to carry out necessary repair work costing a mere £130,000 because they intended to sell the tanker' (The Observer 27.7.80: 2).
Similar considerations appear to have preyed on the minds of Ford executives during the early 1970s.
According to Dowie (1977), this auto-company sold the Pinto model for a period of six years even though they knew from their own test researchers that the product, which had been rushed from design to production in the short period of twenty-five months instead of the planned forty-three, was dangerous.
The trouble was the improperly designed fuel tank; this tended to fracture, particularly after rear-end collisions.
Dowie claims that between 500 and 900 burn deaths resulted from ensuing explosions.
During the period 1969–79 there were, according to the Department of Energy, 106 fatalities on or around installations in the British sector of the North Sea.
According to Carson (1981) many of these were avoidable and only occurred because safety standards which applied to onshore industries did not apply to offshore installations.
In 1976 twenty-six men died in the Scotia mine, which was unsafe and had been the subject of 652 citing-for-violations of safety regulations (Caudill 1977).
And so on…
CORPORATE CRIME INJURES
In the early 1960s over 300 consumers suffered adverse side effects from taking the chemical MER/29 which was advertised as medically beneficial to heart sufferers.
These 300 suffered from a series of various iatrogenic complaints, including occasional disruption of the reproductive system, loss of hair or a change in its colour and texture, and a variety of eye disorders including the development of cataracts.
Ungar (1973) alleges that the test results on which Merrell secured permission from the Federal Drug Administration to market the chemical substance were proven to be ‘doctored’, thus concealing the extent to which the company knew of the drug's adverse side-effects.
But this example of corporate induced injury pales beside one which followed closely afterwards.
As a consequence of taking the prescribed drug thalidomide, something like 8,000 pregnant mothers in the United States, Germany, Japan, Britain, Ireland, Sweden, Australia, Canada, Brazil, Italy, and Spain gave birth to monstrously deformed babies.
The company which had discovered and later granted licences for the drug, Chemie Grunenthal of Germany, had criminal charges brought against them for deliberately falsifying the test data and concealing the truth about the drug's serious side effects (Sunday Times Insight Team 1979).
Not only are many consumers injured by corporate crime; thousands of employees too suffer from ‘accidents’ at work (which are in fact not pure accidents but events which spring directly from the conditions of production and are in that sense avoidable) or work-induced diseases, such as asbestosis, lung cancer, and mesothelioma.
CORPORATE CRIME ROBS
For seven years prior to 1961, twenty-nine electrical corporations, including some of the best known names in the country, such as General Electric and Westinghouse, conspired illegally to fix prices on large, mainly government contracts, so as to avoid competition and hence reap enormous illegal profit (Geis 1967; Smith 1961).
In July 1977, Revco Drug Stores, one of America's largest discount drug chains, was found guilty of computer-generated double-billing schemes that resulted in the loss of over a half-million dollars in Medicaid funds to the Ohio Department of Public Welfare (Vaughan 1980).
A well known Swiss-based pharmaceutical company was suspected by the British government of overcharging the National Health Service for the drug Valium; their agreement to repay £4.5 millions tacitly admitted guilt but not what proportion of their ‘extra-legal’ profits this sum represented.
But these and other financial swindles pale into insignificance when compared to the Equity Funding Scandal (Blundell 1978; Dirks and Gross 1974; Soble and Dallos 1974).
The directors and executives of Equity Funding simply made up insurance policies to inflate the company's business and hence improve its share prices.
When the whistle was finally blown on the crime by a disgruntled ex-employee, thousands of policy-holders and share-holders simply lost all or a substantial part of their savings or expected pensions, amounting to somewhere between two and three billion dollars.
All the above examples of deaths, injuries, and economic losses caused by corporate acts are not the antics of one or two evil, or mentally disturbed, or relatively deprived senior employees.
Rather they represent the rational choices of high-ranking employees, acting in the corporation's interests, to intend directly to violate the criminal law or governmental regulations, or to be indifferent to the outcome of their action or inaction, even though it might result in human lives obliterated, bodies mangled, or life-savings lost.
The physical, economic, and social costs of corporate crime
The physical effects of corporate misbehaviour are difficult to quantify precisely.
But if what is sought is merely a gross comparison between the damage of corporate and ‘conventional’ crimes, then the current level of official information available provides sufficient facts to get the ratio in perspective.
Thus workers die of avoidable industrial diseases and accidents, and it is sobering to compare these with the conventional  crime of homicide.
Reiman (1979: 75) estimates that in 1972 the number of persons in the USA dying from occupational hazards (diseases and accidents) was 114,000, whereas only 20,600 died from being shot, cut, beaten, or poisoned, and being recorded as a homicide case.
If there were a time clock for murder, it would show one every twenty-six minutes.
But as Reiman so graphically points out:
‘If a similar crime clock for industrial deaths were constructed…and recalling that this clock ticks only for that half of the population that is in the labour force — this clock would show an industrial death about every four and a half minutes!
In other words, in the time it takes for one murder on the crime clock, six workers have died ‘just trying to make a living’!’
(Reiman 1979: 68)
A similarly disturbing picture emerges if we consider the relevant data for Britain.
In the table below (Table 1 ), which shows data for the years 1973–79, the combined number of employees dying from fatal accidents or occupational diseases (most of which are avoidable if employing corporations obeyed government regulations and designed safe production schedules or paid for hazard-free work environments) far exceed the number of homicide cases recorded by the police.
Furthermore, this comparison becomes even more shocking when it is remembered that the population at risk of being killed at work is less than half those who could be ‘murdered’.
In other words, to obtain an initial fair comparison we would have to multiply the industrial related deaths by at least a factor of two and compare that figure with the number of recorded homicide cases.
The result is approximately seven to one!
But even this ratio puts the best possible light on the contribution made by employment to the avoidable death toll.
For although we can be fairly sure that the recorded homicide figure is reasonably valid, we cannot have the same confidence in the data on occupationally related deaths.
The cause of death is frequently ambiguous and pinning it down to occupational environments, which may have been experienced years or even decades ago, is clearly no easy matter.
Furthermore, in the processes of socially constructing the cause(s) of death, there are considerable social forces directed towards minimizing the number of deaths certified as occupationally induced.
Since such fatalities are frequently avoidable , each one is an indictment of corporate practices, and consequently wherever pressure can be brought to bear, either in the process of recognizing a fatal disease-causing work condition or in the enforcement practices, corporate officials will lean towards favouring those definitions and arrangements which minimize the recording of deaths as arising from occupational  hazards.
Thus executives have successfully prevented most forms of cancer from being included in the list of occupationally-induced illness, even though the documentation on carcinogenic work environments is substantial (Epstein 1979).
In the endeavour to minimize the contributions work environments make to avoidable fatalities, state officials also play a significant part.
They will probably err on the side of caution whenever attempting to unravel the cause of death because recording it as occupationally induced requires the subsequent payment of industrial death benefits.
Evidence consistent with this view came to light recently whilst Yorkshire TV was making a documentary on asbestos.
It discovered ‘that death certificates often do not mention asbestos diseases even when the coroner has conclusive and documented evidence that they were the cause of death.
As a consequence, spouses and relatives have been prevented from claiming compensation’(Cutler 1982).
These two forces tend to depress the level of recorded occupationally induced death below a level it would be otherwise.
Therefore, to re-echo Reiman: you stand more chance of being killed avoidably at work than in any other sphere of your life, including being at home!
But don't feel safe staying at home!
The long arm of the corporation's grim reaper is not deterred by such agoraphobic precautions.
Consumers may be poisoned in their beds by improperly tested medical drugs, they may be killed over their dinner tables by unhygienically prepared food, they may be blown up to God knows where by the neighbourhood chemical complex exploding, and they may become fatally diseased in their living rooms by industrial pollution.
For example, a recent chilling national survey of pollution and its chronic effects on the lives and deaths of American citizens concluded that approximately 9 per cent of all deaths, that is , 140,000 a year, may be attributable to air pollution.
It was because of this shocking rate of avoidable death that the British Society for the Social Responsibility of-Science published Asbestos — Killer Dust in 1979.
In this report, it accused the asbestos industry of deliberately pursuing profit in the face of known dangers, and ‘in the light of the damage done to people working in the industry and likely to occur in the future,…it is simply incredible’ that nothing much is done about it.
It concluded that those responsible should be treated like criminals who allow dangerous cars on the road.
But it is clear from the Asbestos Advisory Council's latest Report (1980) that this will not happen, so they remain, in Swartz's (1975) chilling words, ‘silent killers at work’, far more deadly than the phantom killer of the opera.
But unfortunately this is not how most people see it.
When they think of mass   murderers, they normally think of one person killing unlawfully a handful of other people.
But when many people die from known carcinogenic work-conditions or their employer's refusal to put right unsafe equipment, machinery, or buildings, this is normally seen as a ‘disaster’, even though their deaths were easily avoidable.
In the case of asbestos for example, there has been a voluminous medical literature on its direct link with asbestosis, lung cancer, and mesothelioma.
Of course employers can claim unawareness of obscure medical journals.
But during a series of lawsuits against Johns-Manville, Pittsburgh Corning, and other asbestos manufacturers, it was revealed that they did know directly from their own scientific researchers whose implicatory findings were sup-pressed (Ermann and  Lundman 1982: 68–9).
Table 1 Homicides finally recorded by the police compared with fatal occupational accidents and deaths from occupational diseases, England and Wales, 1973–79
Maybe the only, but significant difference between the two is that corporate crimes ‘kill more people than are murdered by acts that come to be listed as criminal homicide in the (American) Uniform Crime Rates’(Geis 1975: 93).
On the occasions when corporate negligence, indifference, or apathy does not result in employees, consumers, or the public being killed, it often leaves them seriously injured or ill.
Thus in Britain from 1973 to 1979 there was an annual average of 330,000 non-fatal accidents at work.
The vast bulk of these were not caused by employees' carelessness or stupidity but by the conditions under which they are obliged to work.
These put pressure on employees to take risks — even violating the corporation's own safety standards.
But in this contradiction between productivity and safety, between speed and conformity to regulations, which does the corporation prioritize?
A clear answer is given in Carson's (1981) analysis of the other price paid for North Sea oil.
He claims that when oil companies were faced with the contradictory demand for speedy exploration and extraction and the requirements of safety they, with successive British governments' blessing, chose speed.
Consequently most accidents, and there were nearly 500 of them during the 1970s, were not the result of employee thoughtlessness but emerged directly out of the contradictory demands made upon the workforce.
Also during the period 1973–79, there was an annual average of nearly 14,000 persons diagnosed as suffering from an occupationally induced disease.
The number of persons injured or made ill at work far exceeds the number against whom indictable crimes of violence, including rape and indecent assault, were committed.
Thus in 1977 over 340,000 persons at work in the UK suffered through accidents and occupationally-induced ill health compared with 93,500 persons victimized by indictable crimes of violence.
If we multiply the former figure by a factor of two to obtain a roughly comparable population at risk size, we arrive at a ratio of seven to one in favour (sic ) of work-induced avoidable suffering.
The magnitude of this ratio, rather than the exact validity of the aggregate figures on which it is based, ought to be stressed, for it reveals just how much more objective damage is caused to persons at work than members of the public experience through ‘conventional’ criminal violence.
But even these comparisons understate the excessive amount of corporate-induced death and suffering because they omit any reference to consumers physically harmed by the sale of improperly researched substances, dangerous or poisonous products, and so on, or citizens physically harmed through industrial air pollution.
According to the American National Commission on Product Safety (1971: 1) approximately 20 millions out of a total population of over 250 million are seriously injured annually by consumer products, with 110,000 resulting in permanent disability and 30,000 resulting in death.
And according to the American National Cancer Institute, one of the major causes of lung  cancer is ‘neighbourhood air pollution from industrial sources of inorganic arsenic’(Reiman 1979: 78).
Other types of cancer were also found to be higher in geographical areas where chemical plants were situated.
So if consumer and citizen avoidable death and injury were added to workers avoidably killed and injured, then the ratio between corporate criminal violence and ‘conventional’ criminal violence would clearly put the former in an extremely unfavourable light.
Indeed, it would be seen as a major source of avoidable and illegal human suffering.
This conclusion should not be seen to reflect callous indifference to individuals who have suffered miserably or fatally at the hands of persons committing ‘conventional’ crimes; their agony is real and should never be ignored.
But neither should we enable this sympathy to blind us to the greater truth that more persons suffer, many fatally, from corporate crime than ‘conventional’ crime.
If we are to prioritize the study and publicization of one, surely it should be that which, in objective terms, causes more human suffering rather than the other which is perceived by the public to be the more serious even though they are clearly wrong.
In Pretty Boy Floyd , Woody Guthrie caught poetically the awesome and terrifying instrument through which corporate officials economically harm others.
He wrote:
‘Now as through this world I ramble,
I see lots of funny men,
Some rob you with a six gun,
And some with a fountain pen.’
This irony was not lost on a US judge.
‘In our complex society’, he said, ‘the accountant's certificate and the lawyer's opinion can be instruments for inflicting pecuniary loss more potent than the chisel or crowbar’(Morgenthau 1969:17).
Robbing others, directly or indirectly, is a major form of corporate criminal activity.
Price fixing (Geis 1967; Smith 1961) and illegal monopoly pricing (Klass 1975) both mean that customers pay more than they would under competitive conditions; bribing corrupt officials (Braithwaite 1979b; Jacoby, Nehemlis, and Ells 1977) may mean reducing competitors' profit margins or even driving them into bankruptcy; illegal mergers and take-overs and other shady financial manoeuvres may result in many shareholders being defrauded (Hopkins 1980b); misleading advertising as well as trimming production costs may result in customers buying goods whose quality fails totally to match manufacturers' glossy claims, thus leaving a swindled consumer population (Moffit 1976); corporate tax evasion and avoidance may mean more average taxes paid by individual members of the public (Vanick 1977).
Given the relative invisibility of these crimes, even to those victimized, the fact that they are infrequently reported to or detected by relevant authorities, the absence of any centralized data-collecting agency, and the inconsistent publication of those that are collected, it is impossible to quantify with any accuracy just how serious corporate crime is in economic terms.
Furthermore, the figures involved are so astronomic as to be literally incomprehensible.
The public understands more easily what it means for an old lady to have five pounds snatched from her purse than to grasp the financial significance of 25 million customers paying one penny more for orange juice diluted beyond the level permitted by law.
The public tend to focus more on the one penny than on the quarter of a million illegal profit and conclude that the incident is insignificant.
But it is not.
There have been attempts to estimate the economic cost of corporate crimes and render these in a meaningful fashion (Bequai 1978: 1; Clinard 1978: 83–102; Conklin 1977: 2–8; Geis 1975: 95–7; Hills 1971: 167–68; McCaghy 1976: 205; President's Task Force Report 1967: 47–51; Stotland 1977:180–82).
Although authors have arrived at different figures, thus reflecting the inherent difficulty and speculative nature of the task involved, they have been unanimous in one conclusion: persons are deprived of far more money by corporate crimes than they are by ordinary economic crimes, such as robbery, theft, larceny, and auto-theft.
Conklin (1977: 4) estimates that in 1977 these four offences in the USA accounted for between $3–4 billions compared with the annual loss of around $40 billions resulting from various white-collar crime, of which consumer fraud, illegal competition, and deceptive practices account for at least half.
Johnson and Douglas (1978: 151) point out that the Equity Funding scandal, ‘perhaps one of the largest securities and investment frauds ever perpetuated on the American public,…involved more losses than the total losses of all street crime in the US for one year’.
In a similar vein, Geis (1978: 281) writes that ‘the heavy electrical equipment price-fixing conspiracy alone involved theft from the American people of more money than was stolen in all of the country's robberies, burglaries, and larcenies during the years in which the price fixing occurred’.
Whether we are consumers or citizens, we stand more chance of being robbed by persons who roam corporate suites than we do by those who roam public streets.
Furthermore,in the aggregate we stand to be robbed of far more by these fine gentlemen acting in the good name of their corporation than by the common rogues apparently acting from some morally worthless motive.
Finally, there are the social consequences of corporate crime compared  with ‘conventional’ crime.
A number of writers have recently argued very strongly that the latter is more corrosive to social life.
Thus Wilson writes:
‘Predatory crime does not merely victimize individuals, it impedes and, in the extreme case, even prevents the formation and maintenance of community.
By disrupting the delicate nexus of ties, formal and informal, by which we are linked with our neighbours, crime atomizes society and makes of its members mere individual calculators estimating their own advantage, especially their own chances for survival amidst their fellows.
Common undertakings become difficult except for those motivated by a shared desire for protection.’
(Wilson 1975: 21)
And echoing this sentiment, a British criminologist claims:
‘If the cities are to be saved as centres of a civilized urban life, and not plunged into gutted and fearful waste-lands…delinquency will have to be tackled as a problem with high priority — perhaps as the urban problem.
City life cannot exist without security in its open spaces, some unarmed trust and reciprocity.
In Britain…there is a mass exodus of skilled workers and middle class groups from the metropolis and other inner cities…these areas are left with heavily welfare-dependent populations; the old, the sick, the handicapped, the uneducated, the dull, the retarded, and the unskilled.
What is not realized…is that although the movement from the cities has many other long-term causes, delinquency has now ceased to be merely a symptom of urban breakdown (if it ever was)…and has become a major contributor to it.’
(Morgan 1978: 21)
Furthermore, she argues that unless some inroad is made now into reducing or containing the problem of street crime, the loss of community will spread outwards, like a cancerous growth, to desirable middle-class areas in the city.
At an abstract level, these arguments are probably true.
Beyond historically determined levels of societal tolerance, crime is dysfunctional to social life.
But the issue is, on which type of crime ought we to be concentrating?
Surely the deleterious consequences street crime has on our sense of community pale beside the way in which corporate crime fractures the economic and political system.
Thus Conklin, reiterating the President's Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration of Justice, writes that:
‘such offences ‘are the most threatening of all — not just because they are so expensive, but because of their corrosive effect on the moral standards by which American business is conducted’.
Business crimes undermine public faith in the business system because such crime is integrated with ‘the structure of legitimate business’.
Such crime reduces willingness to engage in commercial transactions.
Stock manipulations and frauds undermine the capitalist system, which requires public investment for capital.
The discovery of fraud through adulteration and mislabelling of grain which is shipped abroad has created distrust among foreign businessmen who purchase grain from American companies.’
(Conklin 1977: 7)
Writing on another type of corporate crime, Braithwaite argues that:
‘Bribery and corruption by large corporations are most serious forms of crime because of their inegalitarian consequences.
When a governmental official in a Third World country recommends (under the influence of a bribe) that his country purchase the more expensive but less adequate of two types of aircraft, then the extra millions of dollars will be found from the taxes sweated out of the country's impoverished citizens.
For a mass consumer product, the million dollar bribe to the civil servant will be passed on in higher places to the consuming public.
While it is conceivable that bribes can be used to secure the sale of a better and cheaper product, the more general effect is to shift the balance of business away from the most efficient producer and in favour of the most corrupt producer.
The whole purpose of business-government bribes is after all, the inegalitarian purpose of enticing governments to act against the public interest and in the interests of the transnational.
Every act of political corruption rewards corruptibility in politics and exacerbates the social selection into public office of those who are most adeptly corrupt.
To the extent that politics and government administration become more corrupt, then to that extent will men and women of high principle find entry into politics repugnant.
Transnational corporate corruption is therefore perhaps the most pernicious form of crime in the world today because it involves robbing the poor to feed the rich, and brings into political power rulers and administrators who in general will put self-interest ahead of the public interest, and transnational corporation interest ahead of national interest.’
(Braithwaite 1979b: 126)
Whether one agrees with the sentiments expressed by Wilson and Morgan on the one hand or the President's Commission and Braithwaite on the other is not a matter of blind prejudice, but of weighing carefully  the relevant evidence.
From the evidence presented above — and this is merely illustrative of the evidence available — it should be clear that corporate crime ought to be a prioritized concern because it is the more serious.
This concern should focus first on understanding ‘how it is possible’ for corporate crime to be endemic in our ‘law and order’society, and second, and hopefully flowing from this understanding, ‘how can it be contained or regulated?’
But before proceeding, a caveat needs to be made.
Prioritizing corporate crime has to be set in context.
It has been neglected relative to the study of conventional/street crime.
To argue now for its prioritization means no more than demanding as much attention be given to it as there is to street crimes.
There is no concealed value judgement here that street crimes are less of a social problem, particularly if the degree of fear and apprehension experienced by the majority of citizens is considered.
Citizens in inner-city areas are desperately worried and rightly so, about street crime.
That terrain, so proudly occupied by the radical Right's law and order campaigners, has to be won back, and Ian Taylor's (1982) recent attempt, following earlier sorties of Platt (1978) represents the appropriate move from the Left.
But whilst the law and order debate ebbs and flows over the political terrain, there is a strategic need to establish a second front where radical criminology takes on corporate crimes and crimes of other powerful institutions and privileged people.
Explaining corporate crime
‘The greatest evil is not now done in those sordid ‘dens of crime’ that Dickens loved to paint.
It is not done even in concentration camps and labour camps.
In those we see its final result.
But it is conceived and ordered (moved, seconded, carried and minuted) in clean, carpeted, warmed and well-lighted offices, by quiet men with white collars and cut fingernails, and smooth-shaven cheeks who do not need to raise their voices.
Hence, naturally enough, my symbol for Hell is something like the offices of a thoroughly nasty business concern.’
(C. S. Lewis,The Screwtape Letters and Screwtape Purposes )
ORGANIZATIONS ARE CRIMINOGENIC
Merton's (1938) attempt to explain crime as a response to anomie — the disjuncture between cultural goals of success and legitimate opportunity structures through which success might be realized — has been reproduced over 110 times, a fact which in itself testifies to the importance of this analysis.
Because of, rather than despite its fame, it has been  subjected to a prolonged critical attention (Clinard 1964; Lemert 1967; Taylor, Walton, and Young 1973; Thio 1975).
Among the various criticisms of Merton's analysis one is particularly relevant to any discussion of corporate crime.
Anomie only offers a plausible account of deviant motivation if the cultural goal of success is as unidimensional as Merton suggests and if the pursuit of this goal is prevalent amongst those with blocked legitimate opportunities.
Many critics point to empirical evidence which fails to support these conditional clauses.
They argue that industrialized societies are characterized by a plurality of cultural goals and these vary systematically among individuals in different strata and many individuals in the lower strata have limited and realistic ambitions.
This makes the simple characterization in Merton's analysis unacceptable,at least as a motivational account of why lower-class persons might commit crimes .
This criticism would not be valid if anomie analysis were applied to corporate crime.
For the one characteristic organization theorists (Blau and Scott 1962; Etzioni 1961; Parsons 1963) agree on is that corporations, like all organizations, are primarily orientated towards the achievement of a particular goal — profit — at least in the long run.
In the short run, other goals, such as growth through acquisition or increased market share may be emphasized.
Diversification, particularly into potentially competing industries might become a preferred short-term stratagem.
For instance, the American oil industry has fairly recently expanded into the solar, sea, and wind energy industries so that in the long run competition between alternative forms of energy can be regulated.
Finally, vertical expansion so that suppliers can be controlled may also be a short-run goal.
But in the final instance, these short-run goals are pursued with a green glinted eye focused on long-run profitability.
This defining characteristic — it is a goal-seeking entity-makes a corporation inherently criminogenic, for it necessarily operates in an uncertain and unpredictable environment such that its purely legitimate opportunities for goal achievement are sometimes limited and con-strained.
Consequently, executives investigate alternative means, including law avoidance, evasion, and violation and pursue them if they are evaluated as superior to other available strictly legitimate alternatives.
Environmental uncertainties for a corporation are so numerous as to defy classification, but none the less, there are five important sources of problems which potentially interfere with a corporation's ability to achieve its goal(s) easily without bending, evading, or breaking legal regulations.
These sources are:
Competitors — technological breakthroughs; price structure; marketing techniques; mergers; new or expanding markets;
Governments — extending regulations to cover more corporate activities either through new laws or tougher enforcement of existing laws;
Employees — any collusive activity, but especially those joining trade unions pursuing ‘militant’ wage settlements and making ‘radical’demands on altering conditions of work/employment;
Consumers — especially when demand for product is elastic and consequently fickle, or when ‘consumerism’ is prevalent and making highly visible any dubious corporate practice;
Public — especially through a growing ‘environmentalist’ sensitivity to conserving fresh air, clean countryside, and natural resources.
The contradictions between corporate goal-achieving behaviour and each of these environmental uncertainties creates a strong strain towards innovative behaviour which can stretch over the spectrum law abiding — law avoiding — law evading — law breaking.
Examples of the last possibility can be associated with each of these environmental uncertainties.
Thus:
Competitors — espionage, arson, patent copying; bribery and corruption to influence those in new or expanding markets, such as government officials in developing economies (Braithwaite 1979b; Jacoby, Nehemlis, and Ells 1977); price-fixing to squeeze out new competitors or to rationalize competition (Fuller 1962; Geis 1967; Smith 1961); mergers or take-overs in violation of anti-monopoly legislation (Snider 1978).
Governments — tax evasion through to avoidance especially for transnational corporations (Vanick 1977); illegal campaign funds to politicians in return for promises (Chambliss 1978); bribing state officials in return for later lucrative employment; fraudulent information to prevent, influence, or repeal legislation (Schrag and  Divoky 1981: 94–127; Sunday Times Insight Team 1979: 90–116; Ungar 1972); exporting illegal behaviour to another state where it is not illegal (Braithwaite 1979b); fraudulent billing of government body (Klass 1975; Vaughan 1980).
Employees — pay less than legal minimum wage; non-recognition and harassment of trade unions (Krisberg 1975:44; Pearce 1976:97–100; Weiss 1978); refusal to make work conditions safe or properly inspected/maintained (Ashford 1976; Swartz 1975).
Consumers — fraudulent advertising, misleading sales behaviour; false labelling of products (Rothschild and Thorne 1976; Schrag 1971; Moffit 1976); manufacture and distribution of untested and dangerous products (Dowie 1977; Vandivier 1972; Sunday Times Insight Team 1979); exportation of products which are safe and healthy in one cultural environment but poisonous in another (Muller 1974; Chetley 1979); selling adulterated goods; selling goods at ‘over-inflated prices’(Monopolies and Mergers Commission 1980).
Public — pollution of air and land; depletion of scarce resources; increased tax bill (because of corporate tax avoidance schemes); refusal to make safe areas of contact between corporation and public (Stern 1976); bribery and corruption to undermine the democratic process (Braithwaite 1979b; Ermann and Lundman 1982:106–26).
From the above argument a simple hypothesis can be inferred:when these environmental uncertainties increase so the strain towards corporate criminal activity will increase .
Of course other factors will need to intervene to transform this motivational strain into actual behaviour; that they frequently do intervene can be judged from the following research.
Staw and Szwajkowski attempted to test the following hypothesis: ‘when the organization is located within a scarce environment, one method of coping with intra- and extra-organizational demands may be to perform activities which are legally questionable…the more scarce the environment of a business organization, the more likely it will engage in activities which are considered unfair market practices or restraints of trade’(1975: 346–47).
Their dependent variable constituted 105 large companies (drawn from the 500 largest firms in the US) which during the period 1968–72 were involved in trade litigation for committing, or having being accused of committing, one or more of the following: price discrimination, tying arrangements, refusal to deal, exclusive dealing, franchise violation, price fixing, foreclosure of entry, reciprocity, allocation of markets, monopoly, conspiracy, and illegal mergers and acquisitions.
Their independent variable consisted of the firm's financial performance, particularly return on equity and return on sales compared with the remaining non-litigated top 500 firms.
The results of their analysis strengthens their belief that ‘environmental scarcity does appear to be related to a range of trade violations’(Staw and Szwajkowski 1975: 353).
It appears therefore that these types of corporate crime serve not only to reduce environment uncertainty but point to resource procurement (i.e. grabbing more) as a particularly important organizational source of motivation to commit these crimes.
BRINGING CUNNING PEOPLE IN TO DO THE DIRTY WORK
‘The Lilliputians look upon fraud as a greater crime than theft, and therefore seldom fail to punish it with death; for they allege that care and vigilance, with a very common understanding, may preserve a man's goods from theft, but honesty has no defence against superior cunning.’
(from Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's Travels )
Although corporate crime represents an attempt to resolve some contradictions between pursuing a limited number of organizational goals and environmental constraints, it is an attempt initiated and implemented by individuals .
Organizations per se do not plan, think, or act; there are human agents eagerly willing to accomplish these in its good name.
Consequently, whilst corporate crime cannot be understood without grasping the fact that it stems from contradictions between a corporation's goal(s) and its environment, that understanding remains one-sided if individuals are left out of the analysis.
Traditionally, individuals have been the central feature of attempts to understand corporate crime, but unfortunately for criminology, it was their pathological characteristics which were advanced as the cause of their deviations.
Consequently, the unity between organizational demands and officials' behaviour was fractured and until this was healed, understanding corporate crime remained crippled.
As the vast bulk of corporate crime is initiated (if not always implemented) by high-ranking officials, two processes need to be considered:(i) whether factors associated with upward mobility in corporations are inherently criminogenic; and (ii) whether the social-psychological consequences of success within a corporation are criminogenic.
Stotland (1977) drew a portrait of the executive's motives for being prepared to go along with corporate crime.
He argued that these were: a desire to secure career advancement or at least not prejudice career chances; a willingness to push matters in order to measure his own cleverness and particularly dexterity at getting around the rules; to experience the satisfaction which comes from having the power that goes both with high corporate status and criminally victimizing other organizations or persons; a need to maintain his position within the peer group or family network.
However this sketch hardly rises above a ‘Dallas'-type description and Stotland failed to provide any empirical grounding for his arguments.
Furthermore, it offered only a static picture of the corporate executive and fails to visualize him as caught in and conditioned by organizational processes of career advancement.
To move beyond this inadequate description, Gross (1978) argued that we should analyse the social characteristics of corporate criminals first by visualizing what qualities these organizational positions demand, and second by considering whether younger corporate officials who preen themselves to fit this image are more likely to succeed in their career.
In other words, we should examine in detail the career mobility patterns within and between corporations, for those who succeed are more likely to have just those qualities which corporate crime requires.
Gross examined over one dozen research projects on corporate career mobility and was able to discern some ‘distinctive features’ of those who attain ‘top positions’.
They had fought their way to the top, often against strong competition — their ambition, and not their meekness, enabled them to inherit the heavenly positions of top management.
They were not so much intelligent as shrewd — their organizational sense enabled them to sniff out the golden chance and grasp it firmly, it enabled them to strain forward rather than stand back waiting passively to be asked.
They had the moral flexibility to meet shifting organizational demands and still enjoy the sleep of the just — their ability to relativize other moral imperatives whilst constantly prioritizing the pursuit of organizational goals did not make them necessarily immoral, but it did facilitate a moral flexibility others denied themselves.
Nothing succeeded so much as success for the organization.
Putting these distinctive features together, Gross concluded that:
‘the men at the top of organizations will tend to be ambitious, shrewd and possessed of a non-demanding moral code.
Their ambition will not be merely personal, for they will have discovered that their own goals are best pursued through assisting the organization to attain its goals.
While this is less true, or even untrue at the bottom of the organization, those at the top share directly in the benefits of organizational goal achievement, such as seeing their stock values go up, deferred compensation, and fringe benefits…
Further, being at or near the top, these persons are those most strongly identified with the goals of the organization…they believe in the, organization, they want to attain its goals, they profit personally from such goal attainment.
So they will try hard to help the organization attain those goals.
Finally, if the organization must engage in illegal activities to attain its goals, men with a non-demanding moral code will have the least compunctions about engaging in such behaviour.
Not only that, as men of power, pillars of the community, they are most likely to believe that they can get away with it without getting caught.
Besides, they are shrewd.’
(Gross 1978: 71)
Not only does the promotion system mean that people who rise to the top are likely to have just those personal characteristics it takes to commit corporate crime, but these are also reinforced by the psychological consequences of success itself, for these too free a person from the moral bind of conventional values.
That sociologists have been partially blind to this possible contributory cause of corporate crime springs ironically from the central position Merton's famous essay ‘Social Structure and Anomie’(1957) played in forming criminological consciousness.
In this, he explored the effect of anomie — the disjuncture between cultural goals and the availability of legitimate means to achieve these goals — as a possible source of crime.
He argued that since crime, as officially recorded, was greatest amongst the working class, it followed that anomie too must be greatest in that social stratum.
This analysis obscured Durkheim's original formulation (1898) in which anomie was conceptualized as normlessness, as a condition of moral deregulation.
This led him to focus on the top social stratum as the primary location of anomie, for it was power and not poverty that facilitated too easily the personal achievement of socially inculcated cultural ambitions.
Furthermore, once achieved, these targets no longer constrained individuals' aspirations or behaviour; instead, successful individuals experienced a release from moral and social binds.
In a condition of pure individuation, the successful experience the sensation that anything and everything is possible.
Looking over the abyss of infinite possibility, they find it easy to slip into endless striving and pursuit of whatever is, at that moment, desired.
As Durkheim, comparing poverty and wealth, put it:
‘Poverty protects against…(subjective deprivation) because it is a restraint in itself.
No matter how one acts, desires have to depend upon resources to some extent; actual possessions are partly the criterion of those aspired to.
So the less one has the less he is tempted to extend the range of his needs indefinitely.
Lack of power, compelling moderation, accustoms men to it…
Wealth, on the other hand, by the power it bestows, deceives us into believing that we depend on ourselves only.
Reducing the resistance we encounter from objects, it suggests the possibility of unlimited success against them.
The less limited one feels, the more intolerable all limitation appears.’
(Durkheim 1951: 254
In Simon and Gagnon's further analysis of the ‘anomie of affluence’, they construct a typology of possible responses to the too easy achievement of cultural goals.
One major response, of particular relevance to understanding how executives can initiate and implement corporate crime, is called the ‘conforming deviant’.
They described this response as closely resembling Durkheim's original view on anomie and its consequences.
They write:
‘Having acquired the means of gratification, such persons must explore the dimensions of pleasure in search of modes of gratification; given the over determined character of their pursuit of the unreachable, their quest for new experiences begins to consume them.
Reinforcing this quest for the extraordinary, which by definition  should bring them quickly to the margins of deviance, is the fact…that one of the frequent rewards of achievement is an immunity to many of the sanctions that constrain and punish the less successful.
Wealth insures a protective primary group as well as differentially protective social responses.’
(Simon and Gagnon 1977: 372)
It seems reasonable to infer from the above that numerous corporate executives, having already responded to the situational demands necessary for career mobility within an organization by displaying sufficient degrees of competitive ambition, shrewdness, and moral flexibility will experience a further development of these characteristics when they have to respond to the relatively unaccountable and unconstrained power of being at or near the top of a large national, but especially transnational corporation.
They are then in a high state of preparedness to commit corporate crime should they perceive it as being necessary ‘for the good of the company’.
There is no intention in these arguments to give any sustenance to the view that corporate officials have been so successfully socialized into the ‘way of life’ that they cannot see what they are doing or that the organizational constraints upon them were so tight as to be ‘coercive’and therefore excusing.
A number of American studies, including Denzin (1977) on the liquor industry, Farberman (1975) and Leonard and Weber (1970) on car manufacturers and retailers, Geis (1967) on the heavy electrical equipment industry, and Blundell (1978) on an insurance company have all reported evidence supporting the view that higher officials create conditions under which their subordinates find it hard to refuse co-operation in illegal activities.
There exists according to these studies a ‘metaphysical pathos of ‘Godfatherism’ ' (Needleman and Needleman 1979: 518).
According to this view top corporate officials make their organizational inferiors ‘offers they can't refuse’.
It would be an easily acceptable explanation, if only it were entirely true.
But the fact is, the data in these studies cannot be turned into generalizations, for they relate only to industries with high levels of vertical integration and economic concentration, involving an oligopolistic control over product supply frequently accompanied by a franchise relationship between manufacturer and seller.
Consequently, there is no evidence that this ‘Godfatherism’, or as Needleman and Needleman (1979: 518) prefer to call it, ‘crime-coercive system’ exists in other industries operating under other forms of competition.
Furthermore, even within the narrow spectrum of industries covered by the above studies there was considerable evidence (Farberman 1975: 447) of persons being prepared to refuse the offer and accept the consequences, which were not always as severe as the Godfather analogy suggests.
Thus  rather than adopting the language of coercion and hence drawing parallels between corporate officials and, say, soldiers at the front in World War I compelled to go over the top at dawn to meet the German machine-gun bullets or be shot as ‘deserters’, it might be more realistic to argue that corporate officials are frequently placed in a position where they are required to choose between impairing their career chances or being a loyal organizational person.
That the latter seems to be chosen overwhelmingly testifies not to the existence of coercion, but to careful selection procedures for placing persons in corporate positions coupled with successful methods of persuading them that their interests and the corporation's interests happily coincide — or at least, that that is the most sensible, pragmatic way of looking at it.
As the corporate lawyer put it, when asked why he went along with producing completely bogus insurance policies as part of the Equity Funding Scandal: ‘I didn't think anything of it; it was something the company needed done, that's all’(Blundell 1978:171).
Or as a laboratory supervisor, who was asked to go along with the manufacture of ‘doctored’ data so as to secure a contract deadline put it (Vandivier 1972:22):
‘I've been an engineer for a long time, and I've always believed that ethics and integrity were every bit as important as theorems and formulas, and never once has anything happened to change my beliefs.
Now this…
Hell, I've got two sons I've got to put through school and I just…’
Another co-conspirator, reflecting on a similar dilemma, said (Vandivier 1973: 24):
‘At 42, with seven children, I had decided that the Goodrich Company would probably be my ‘home’ for the rest of my working life.
The job paid well, it was pleasant and challenging, and the future looked reasonably bright.
My wife and I had bought a home and we were ready to settle down into a comfortable middle-aged, middle-class rut.
If I refused to take part in the…fraud, I would have to either resign or be fired.’
A former sales manager looking back on the time he had to juggle with the moral and immoral balls of corporate demands said that:
‘One faces a decision, I guess at such times, about how far to go with company instructions, and since the spirit of such meetings only appeared to be correcting a horrible price level situation, that there was not an attempt to actually damage customers, charge excessive prices, there was no personal gain in it for me, the company did not  seem actually to be defrauding, corporate statements can evidence the fact that there have been poor profits during all these years…
So I guess morally it did not seem quite so bad as might be inferred by the definition of the activity itself.’
(Geis, in Geis and Meier 1977:123)
Finally, Judge J. Cullen Cancy, prior to imposing a sentence on the Heavy Electric Industry conspirators, caught nicely their contradiction:
‘They were torn between conscience and an approved corporate policy, with the rewarding objective of promotion, comfortable security, and large salaries.
They were the organization, or company man; the conformist who goes along with his superiors and finds balm for his conscience in additional comforts and security of his place in the corporate set-up.’
(Geis, in Geis and Meier 1977: 125)
Executives who commit corporate crime are not coerced into it, they do not necessarily have to go along with the advice or instructions of superiors.
They are men who rationally weigh up the advantage of conformity to criminal demands or staying on the path of righteousness; for the most part they choose the former simply because it does not weigh on their conscience and because it seems more likely to secure economic and career advancement within the corporation.
Their basic motive is no mystery, ‘they want nothing more than we all want — money, power, consideration — in a word success; but they are in a hurry and are not particular as to their means’(Ross 1907: 46).
FROM CORPORATE MOTIVES AND WILLING PERSONNEL TO CORPORATE CRIME: WHAT STANDS IN THE WAY?
‘The most blameworthy acts are so often absolved by success that the boundary between what is permitted and what is prohibited, what is just and what is unjust, has nothing fixed about it, but seems susceptible to almost arbitrary change by individuals.’
(Émile Durkheim)
So far, the explanation of corporate crime has concentrated on the specific long-term goal-orientated feature of corporations and the personnel who might become suited knights ambitiously pursuing the Holy Grail of profits, and who would, if necessary, be willing to initiate and execute crimes for the good of the corporation.
Given the power of large, particularly transnational corporations whose capital resources often outstrip the Gross National Product of some industrialized countries, there is every likelihood of success, both in business and in crime.
None the less there is a need to consider three countervailing social control  forces, which appear to have some effect on persons contemplating ‘conventional’ crimes, to see if they act as brakes on persons contemplating corporate crime.
These are:(i) does the criminal justice system or other state and societal forms of regulation deter corporate crime?(ii) are there sufficient moral or cultural impediments in the way of corporate crime? and (iii) are the structural opportunities for corporate crime sufficiently limited?
DETERRENCE
‘The thief who is in prison is not necessarily more dishonest than his fellows at large, but mostly one who, through ignorance or stupidity steals in a way that is not customary.
He snatches a loaf from the baker's counter and is promptly run into gaol.
Another man snatches bread from the table of hundreds of widows and orphans and similar credulous souls who do not know the ways of company promoters; and, as likely as not, he is run into Parliament.’
(George Bernard Shaw)
Given the environmental problems facing corporations and the preparedness of executives and officials unhindered by moral or ethical constraints to find ‘rational’ solutions, an operative criterion frequently forces itself into their consciousness —‘will it pay’(and in whispered voices)‘even though it is technically illegal?’
Since power has the capacity to sanctify crimes, almost in strict proportion to their enormity, corporate officials frequently discover themselves in the enviable situation of being able to conclude that ‘it will’.
To understand how this is possible, we need to consider how laws against corporate activities are enforced and the social meaning of sanctions imposed by typical violators.
In particular it is revealing to consider two principles in deterrence theory which are considered to inhibit ‘conventional’ crime — these are ‘the certainty of being caught’and ‘the severity of the punishment’.
For the irony is, in a society like ours apparently dedicated to ‘law and order’ and having a penal policy based largely on deterrent principles, it appears that corporate crime somehow gets left out of the arena of legal and social control.
The certainty of (not) being caught
For the most part corporate crimes are not/do not fall under the jurisdiction of the police, but under special regulatory bodies.
In America, there are the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the Food and Drug Administration, Fair Employment Practices Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, the Environmental Protection Agency.
In the UK, there are numerous inspectorates, commissions, and government departments, including inspectorates of factories, mines and quarries, explosives, railway, agriculture, alkali and clean air, and Scottish industrial, and commissions, such as monopolies and mergers, and such departments as energy, and trade and industry.
There are four important points to make about these special agencies.
(i)
Although they all have powers either to initiate or recommend criminal prosecution, they are primarily designed to be regulatory bodies whose main weapon against corporate misbehaviour is administrative, i.e. (occasional) inspection coupled with (polite) correspondence.
(ii)
The resources they command make them no match for national and transnational corporations.
This was made very clear by Her Majesty's Factory Inspectorate, which in the Manufacturing and Service Industry Report 1978 , wrote:
‘The Factory Inspectorate…works against a background of increasing commitments and slender resources.
There is a limit to what a force of some 900 inspectors in the field (700 general inspectors and 200 specialists) can do in practice.
The Inspectorate is responsible for some 18,000,000 people at work scattered through some 500,000 or 600,000 different workplaces…
It is obvious that an Inspectorate of its present size in relation to its responsibility cannot hope to achieve either all it would like or all the public would like it to do.’
(Health and Safety Executive 1980: vi-vii)
When these scarce resources are compared with those devoted to ‘conventional’ crime it is quite staggering.
There are at present in Britain something like 120,000 police and although some of these are in the Fraud Squad, they represent an exceedingly small per cent of the force, and in any case, the majority of their work consists of monitoring and prosecuting white collar rather than corporate criminals.
The British government in 1980 felt that the problem of social security fraud was large enough to justify introducing 1,000 new inspectors; yet it is hard to see how this problem exceeds that of the health, safety, and welfare of the workforce for whom there are only 900 inspectors.
What it does reflect is the willingness of the British government to increase the chances of criminalizing poor, oppressed, and sometimes inadequate individuals whilst leaving the rich corporate executive free to operate within and outside the law.
(iii)
The resources these agencies have available to pursue corporate crime through the courts are inadequate in comparison with those  available to large national and transnational corporations.
Braithwaite (1979b: 130) believes that, ‘government lawyers, who must in many ways be all-rounders, cannot compete with the corporation lawyer who spends his whole life finding out all there is to know about a narrowly delimited area of ‘legal loop-holes’ '.
This belief is firmly backed up by the experience of the West German government when in 1965 it attempted to bring criminal charges against nine Chemie Grunenthal executives who were indicted for causing bodily harm and involuntary manslaughter in connection with the drug thalidomide.
Corporate lawyers managed to delay the case coming to court for two years and then they prolonged the proceedings for a further two years.
When Grunenthal finally decided to make civil compensation to the satisfaction of suffering parents and children, the federal government's prosecution lost the bit between its teeth and permitted the hearing to be suspended indefinitely.
So none of the executives was ever convicted.
Another example comes from Britain.
The Bingham Report (1978) on oil sanctions-busting during the decade following Southern Rhodesia's unilateral declaration of independence contained a twelve-page (unpublished to the public) appendix, entitled Evidence of Criminal Offences .
This listed the names of oil company directors who may have committed offences.
It also contained the view that an oil company in Mozambique might be vulnerable to prosecution — this company, despite its name, is London-registered, with British directors, and was directly covered by sanctions legislation.
However, despite this evidence, prosecution would have been political suicide since the defendants might have argued that civil servants and certain government ministers knew of the oil sanctions-busting arrangements and therefore the company considered their actions, although technically illegal, were informally condoned by governmental officials.
That the Director of Public Prosecutions did not press for prosecution suggests that this line of defence might have been effective, or might have resulted in the prosecution net catching even larger, embarrassed fish.
The police were also involved in capturing the oil-sanctions busters but Martin Bailey (1978), writing in The Times , reported that ‘Scotland Yard's investigation into (this) major case of corporate law-breaking was surprisingly modest.
James Smith, a chief superintendent, had the assistance of only one other detective’.
(iv)
These regulatory agencies are increasingly faced with transnational adversaries who are capable of shifting their main base of operation — or if that is too drastic, their illegal activities at least— to other countries where laws against such behaviour do not exist, or if they do, where enforcement is even more lax.
The exportation of corporate crime is certainly big business (Braithwaite 1981a; Chetley 1979; Muller 1974) not only for the corporations concerned but also for local political and governmental leaders.
This simple manoeuvre puts these corporations beyond the regulatory influence of agencies whose powers are purely national.
Furthermore, one country's legal system often constitutes an impediment to another country's attempts to gather information necessary to pursue a domestic case against a transnational corporation.
Thus Switzerland's Privacy Laws provide a naturally safe haven for transnational corporations who want to keep their financial dealings closed (Klass 1975).
Establishing guilt in a corruption case, for example, particularly before the US Corrupt Practices Act, 1977, would be extremely difficult if not impossible.
As Jacoby, Nehemlis, and Ells convincingly argue:
‘In order to obtain judicially admissible evidence, US investigators would have to obtain proof that (i) a payment was intended for a foreign official,(ii) it was made with a corrupt intent, and (iii) it was made for a prohibited purpose.
Collecting such evidence would necessitate the co-operation of foreign governments.
Whether (they) would allow US investigators to implicate one of their own nationals under US law is doubtful…
Moreover, a US citizen accused of foreign bribery would be denied due process of law under the US constitution unless he could produce foreign witnesses and documents in his own defence.
These essential components of a fair defence would not be available to a defendant, as they are beyond the compulsory judicial process of US federal courts.’
(Jacoby, Nehemlis, and Ells 1977: 218)
Corporate executives contemplating the possibility of being required to commit corporate crimes know that they face a regulatory agency which for the most part will be unable to detect what is going on, and in the minority of cases when it does, it will have no heart and few resources to pursue the matter into the criminal courts.
This enforcement structure does little to deter corporate crime.
The (lack of) severe punishment
Deterrence theorists (Zimring and Hawkins 1973: 174) point out that formal sanctions, particularly if they are not severe, will only deter if there are negative social sanctions to reinforce them.
Assuming this to reflect common-sense rationality, it follows that there are three types of sanctions which prey on the minds of thoughtful officials contemplating the commission of corporate crime:(i) legal sanctions, and especially ‘will I be sent to prison?’;(ii) occupational sanctions and especially ‘will  my job be lost or my promotional chances endangered?’;(iii) social sanctions —‘will I be rejected by family, friends, and acquaintances and required to resign from the country club?’
For the most part, the evidence from corporate officials who have been sanctioned is that for this type of crime , criminalization and stigmatization are not fearful consequences likely to occur.
The corporate calculator has little to fear; and he is correct in not being deterred for the costs incurred by corporate crime are indeed small.
Studies on the enforcement of laws prohibiting certain corporate activities in America (McCormick 1977; Seymour 1973), Canada (Goff and Reasons 1978; Snider 1978), and England (Carson 1970) all suggest that even in that minority of cases where criminalization occurs, the legal sanctions imposed fail to act as a deterrent because they are trifling fines rather than imprisonment and normally are directed at smaller, relatively less victimizing, corporations.
McCormick (1977) analysed the nature of anti-trust enforcement in the US from 1890 through to 1969.
This eighty-year period reveals very clearly how laws against corporations are (not) enforced and consequently how executives are (not) deterred.
The US authorities instigated 1,551 cases, but of these only 45 per cent were prosecuted as criminal; the majority were dealt with as civil matters even though little difference could be found in the types of anti-trust behaviour these corporations committed.
Of those prosecuted criminally, about 80 per cent were convicted, the majority of these entering pleas of nolo contendere , which means they refused to defend themselves.
This in effect constitutes a plea bargain because the court is tacitly prepared to impose a modest sentence in return for its time, energy, and resources not being devoted to the expensive business of proving corporate guilt.
In fact, not one business person was imprisoned for violation of the Sherman Anti-Trust Act 1890 until the 1961 Heavy Electrical Conspiracy trial — other persons had been imprisoned under this act but they were trade union officials!
Furthermore, of the twenty-eight executives found guilty in 1961, only seven were sent to prison, and then the maximum length of sentence was thirty days which was, of course, substantially reduced by remission.
Since then, imprisoning corporate officials has become less novel but by no means universal.
During the fourteen years following the Electrical conspiracy verdict, a further thirty-eight corporate executives out of nearly 800 convicted have been imprisoned for violations of the anti-trust laws.
The next most famous conspiracy, the Folding-Carton case in 1976, resulted in 36 per cent of those convicted being jailed — the heaviest sentence being fifteen days (Clinard and Yeager 1980: 281).
Such sentences are hardly likely to deter other executives, particularly  when evidence (to be considered below) shows that few people think any the worse of them.
The most frequent legal sanction imposed against corporations and their executives are fines.
These can be in the form of a regulatory agency fine, which is comparable to a fixed-fine imposed on traffic offenders, and a criminal fine imposed by the court.
The former are trifling and would be too insignificant to have any impact on corporate crime (Clinard et al .
1979: 143).
The latter can be, and have been absolutely large.
Thus in the Electrical conspiracy, General Electric was fined $437,000.
But when this and fines imposed on others as well as those firms involved in the Folding-Carton industry conspiracy are calculated  against the gross revenues and then standardized as a fine imposed on a person earning $15,000 annually, it is clear that they are relatively minuscule.
Ermann and Lundman (1982:148) show that the heaviest fine in 1961 was the equivalent of $12.30 and in 1976 it was $1.80!
Just as a theatregoer is prepared to add the possible cost of illegal parking to the costs of his/her evening's entertainment, or a city businessperson is prepared to add to the costs of a tax-  deductible lunch, so a corporation regards fines as ‘reasonable licence fees’(Dershowitz 1961: 285) for engaging in illegal conduct.
Aptly summing up this situation, Green (1972: 96) said that ‘while some court imposed fines achieve compensation and others create deterrence, anti-trust fines have the distinction of doing neither’.
Carson (1970) analysed the Factory Inspectorate files on a randomly selected sample of two hundred firms in one district of south-east England covering the years 1961 to 1966.
During this period, the inspectorate recorded over 3,800 offences and every firm had at least one violation recorded against it .
The vast bulk of these acts involved insecure or improperly adjusted fencing of dangerous machinery, inadequate precautions against fire and explosion, as well as failure to inspect equipment and maintain healthy work conditions.
These offences cannot be regarded as trivial because sometimes they result in an employee's or innocent bystander's death, serious injury, or permanently impaired health.
Yet despite the potential and actual harmful consequences of the failure to comply with factory regulations, the pattern of enforcement does not deter.
The inspectorate had six major methods of responding to a prima facie case of violation.
These were: no formal action, notification of matters requiring attention, indirect threat of prosecution, direct threat of prosecution, and prosecution.
Only 1.5 per cent of the actual enforcement decisions constituted prosecution, and of these cases all pleaded guilty and were fined on average only £50.
The major response of the inspectorate was to write a letter stating what was wrong, and how  and when it might be improved.
Imagine the outcry if the police were to send this type of letter to an adolescent they had reason to believe had violated the law:
Dear G. E. Rald, We should like to take this opportunity to inform you that on 12th March this year you were seen entering empty handed into the private premises of Ms P. C. Edwards of Convent St., Folkestone and leaving shortly afterwards with your hands full.
In our opinion, this constitutes a violation of the Theft Act 1968 subsection 32 (c) and we would be grateful if you would consider the following advice: please stop going down Convent St. and entering houses without the owners' permission.
We should warn you that next March 12th another police constable will be on foot duty in Convent St., and should he notice a repetition of your behaviour, we shall have to consider the possibility of taking even more stringent action than we have on this occasion.
Not only is this mild rebuke the typical response made by the inspectorate, but it is even the usual response to firms detected three or more times; for these, the rate of prosecution was still only 3. 5 per cent!
Naturally this enforcement pattern could be justified by the inspectorate who see their primary function not as a kind of industrial police force, but more of a pastoral mission rounding up wayward factory owners and showing them the light and contentment to be gained from compliance with current standards of safety, health, and welfare required by law.
However, this pastoral mission is not only up against hardened heathens, but it also considers that some ought not even to be read the lesson.
For the inspectorate tended to initiate a prosecution only against firms who had ‘unsatisfactory attitudes’; others whose violations were seen to stem from adverse economic circumstances, or from some other extenuating condition were not prosecuted.
In other words, many executives in firms experiencing economic difficulties and who know from experience that the inspectorate mainly imposes administrative sanctions will calculate that their best interests lie in not conforming to factory health, safety, and welfare regulations; instead they will gather their excuses and get on with the violations.
These above studies and many others all support the view that there is no general deterrent in the typical sanctions imposed on corporations and their offending executives.
Polite advisory letters, relatively minuscule fines, and short prison sentences leave corporations licenced to continue and leave us, as Dylan advised, with heads buried deep in our rags.
But there is one final possible regulatory factor — civil damages.
Surely corporations will not deviate easily when they realize just how high civil damages can be?
The evidence here too is not particularly encouraging for those who consider corporations are regulated by deterrence.
In the 1976 Folding-Carton conspiracy,International Paper had to pay $27 millions in class-action treble damage settlements.
But against their gross revenues and then standardized for a person earning $15,000 per annum this represented only $96.
On the same calculation the highest settlement came to $675 paid by Federal Paper .
Such civil action settlements, whilst absolutely large are again relatively insignificant.
Indeed, in the trial of Ford Motor Company in Indiana, 1978, it became evident according to Swigert and Farrell, that:
‘the manufacturer had known that the fuel tank on its subcompact Pinto was defectively designed and had consciously decided to proceed with production in spite of the potential hazards.
The decision, the grand jury found, was predicted on a cost-benefit analysis.
Officials at Ford allegedly predicted the number of severe burn injuries and deaths that would result from the defect, and estimated that the cost of repairing the car would exceed anticipated court settlements.’
(Swigert and Farrell 1981:166)
Even if the typical criminal sanction holds out little hope as a general deterrent, does it act as a specific deterrent?
Are those who have to pay fines deterred in future?
It is difficult to see why they would be deterred any more than fined traffic-offenders are deterred; they can calculate rationally the cost of future fines and build that into any contemplation of irregular and illegal behaviour.
However, there is a study which tends to go against this common sense reasoning.
In an attempt to consider the specific deterrent function of sanctions imposed under consumer protection legislation in Australia, Hopkins (1980a) asks: ‘do sanctions applied to corporate offenders prevent or reduce the likelihood of recidivism?’
Reminding us that Sutherland's answer was definitely not, Hopkins points out with insight that this negative answer was only possible because Sutherland conflated individual and corporate crime, thus reducing large rambling enterprises with thousands of employees to a single entity.
If any one of these employees committed a corporate crime, then this was added to any previous crime committed by any other employee, no matter how distantly related to the organizational site of previous offences.
This, said Sutherland, constituted recidivism.
Clearly this was an unsatisfactory procedure severely reducing the acceptability of his answer.
Hopkins argued that much of this type of corporate crime (violation of consumer laws) could be viewed as a breakdown in  communication or organizational procedures, and he attempted to see if, as a result of being fined, these companies made any effort to locate the flawed chain of information and correct it.
In other words, did they, as a result of being fined, take steps to prevent the reoccurrence of this behaviour?
His conclusions were:
‘Of the 15 companies in which offences were attributable to organizational defects, nine made significant changes designed to reduce the likelihood of recidivism.
Two made minor changes which, while forestalling the possibility of an exact repetition of the offence in question, failed to rectify the general weakness which the offence had uncovered.
Two companies made no changes at all, and for two, no information was available.
Where organizational defects were involved therefore, the prosecution can be said to have led to significant organizational improvements in at least 60 per cent of cases.’
(Hopkins 1980a: 210)
From the available evidence, it seems fair to conclude that the typical legal sanction against corporate crime does not act as a general deterrent — others are not put off merely because some corporations and their executives have been fined, particularly when the fines are comparatively small and tax-deductable — and the evidence, such as it is, suggests that a specific deterrent function may operate, but only to deter corporations from recommitting the same offence.
The one study on which this latter conclusion is based cannot be generalized to demonstrate that there is a specific deterrent effect for all other corporate offences, and in any case, it should be treated very cautiously, not only because a single study can often be shown later to have missed the general condition, but also because it flies in the face of empirically grounded deterrence theory.
Thus as Andeneas argues:
‘A trusted cashier committing embezzlement, a minister who evades payment of his taxes, a teacher making sexual advances towards minors and a civil servant who accepts bribes have a fear of detection which is more closely linked with the dread of public scandal and subsequent social ruin than with apprehensions of legal punishment .’
(Andeneas 1966: 964)
There are no sharp judicial teeth or public claws to arouse a fear of detection in corporate executives.
An occasional court appearance can become enshrined as mere ritual ceremony totally encapsulating a particular moment of time which can be easily forgotten.
The evidence is, in the case of corporate crime, that nothing much happens by way of public scandal and social ruin.
The majority of executives found guilty of corporate crime not only retain their jobs or have others found for them, but also find that funds to cover their fines are somehow made available.
For some, the crime may even pay: thus in the Goodrich disc-brake scandal of the late 1960s, when the company attempted to foist a defective brake-disc system on to a customer who happened to be too clever to be deceived, two of the main executives involved were later promoted (Vandivier 1972: 33).
Many companies in the Heavy Electrical Equipment conspiracy did not dismiss ‘guilty executives’(for they had merely been doing their job) but even those who did, did not do so with the intention of ruining them.
Indeed, all the dismissed executives were soon re-employed, sometimes in positions with higher salaries than their previous position!
This is of course, in marked contrast to the typical experience of persons found guilty of ‘conventional’ crimes (Martin and Webster 1971).
Not only are there few adverse occupational consequences, but there is very little social scandal.
Those few cases which are prosecuted fail to arouse media-indignation, except when it expresses disapproval for the way executives are very occasionally over-sanctioned!
And amongst neighbours, an executive found guilty of corporate crime continues to be regarded as ‘upright and steadfast; indeed, they will probably see him as solid and substantial a citizen as they themselves are’(Geis 1978: 283).
In any case, amongst such a community there is a strong ethic directed towards making money but a great disapproval of it being stolen directly, as in the case of larceny, burglary, or robbery.
Thus, since the executive's way of making money for the corporation is not viewed as either immoral or criminal, his neighbours are hardly likely to discriminate against him; after all, there but for the grace of the enforcement agencies
Because corporate crimes are hardly likely to be described as heinous in the media, few consciences are outraged and scandalized; consequently, the ingredients which deterrent theorists argue are necessary to achieve a specific deterrent effect do not typically exist.
In these circumstances, executives feel free to commit corporate crimes.
It also means that other executives calculating the odds will most likely decide that their jobs, their friendship network, and their club affiliations will not be put at risk.
As any good control theorist (Box 1981a; Hirschi 1969; Johnson 1979) knows, even if people have a high stake in conformity, this will not act as a brake on their criminal behaviour if they perceive — quite rightly in the case of executives contemplating corporate crime — that this stake will not be put at risk by undertaking such a shady but profitable enterprise.
IDEOLOGICAL SUPPORTS: STRUCTURAL IMMORALITIES, NEUTRALIZATIONS, AND CORPORATE SELF-IMAGE
‘Criminaloids move in an atmosphere of friendly approval…and this can still smart any conscience with the balm of good fellowship and adulation.’
(Edward Ross,Sin and Society )
Corporate officials are able to transform motives which make corporate crime possible into actual behaviour because they operate in a subculture of ‘structural immoralities ’(Mills 1956: 138).
This is conceptually similar but not identical to the phenomena described by Matza (1964: 33–68) as the subculture of delinquency : both consist of ‘precepts and customs that are delicately balanced between convention and crime’; both ‘posit objectives that may be attained through (crime) but also other means’; both ‘allow (crime) but it is not demanded or necessarily considered the preferred path’; and both consist of ‘norms and sentiments’ which are ‘beliefs that function as the extenuating conditions under which (crime) is permissible’.
Thus, these subcultures respectively enable corporate officials and lower-class adolescent males to commit crimes without too many pangs of conscience; through their sanitizing prism, each sub-culture softens criminal acts so that they assume the appearance of ‘not really’ being against the law, or it transforms them into acts required by a morality higher than that enshrined in a parochial criminal law.
There are however, two main major crucial differences between these subcultures.
Whereas lower-class juvenile delinquents find themselves confronting a legal system which has  literally declared war against them, upper-class corporate officials find a legal system which is either at, or on their side; for the most part it is unwilling and if not, unable even to guarantee compensation for the victims of corporate crime let alone to contain and control the crime itself.
Second, corporate officials are comparatively more committed to conventional values and a respectable self-identity than typical lower-class male adolescents.
Consequently, they have an even greater need to neutralize the moral bind of the law and thus protect their respectability and self-identity from the signs of discreditability implicit in corporate crimes.
It is not difficult for corporate officials to cover themselves in ‘purity’ even when they are breaking the law because the ‘structural immorality’of their corporate environment provides a library of verbal technique for neutralizing the moral bind of laws against corporate behaviour.
First, officials can deny responsibility .
They do this, not by pleading momentary insanity, as Matza (1964: 69–100) says delinquents frequently do, but by pleading ‘ignorance’, ‘accident’, or ‘acting under  orders’.
Laws attempting to regulate corporate activity tend to be excessively vague, consist of ambiguous definitions, and subject to subtle but significant shifts in meanings; or at least, that is how they can be interpreted, particularly by those desiring to violate them.
As Merton (1957: 141) sees some corporate misbehaviour, ‘it is not easy to say whether it is an instance of praiseworthy salesmanship or a penitentiary offence’.
In these circumstances, it is convenient for corporate officials to pull the cloak of honest ignorance over their heads and proceed under its darkness to stumble blindly and unwittingly over the thin line between what is condoned and what is condemned.
Claiming that whatever happened was an ‘accident’ is another means of denying intent.
Of course, this is not entirely implausible.
None of the fatal accidents or occupational diseases mentioned earlier were the result of any corporate officials intending to kill or mutilate hundreds of employees, customers, or civilians.
Their primary motive was ‘for the good of the company’: that meant creating more efficiency in the productive process, cutting costs, not making unnecessary repairs, and so on, all with an eye on improving the corporate's profitable position.
They did not intend to harm anyone; the consequences might be unfortunate, but accidental and irrelevant for establishing whether or not the act was criminal.
Thus by prioritizing intention and relegating consequences as accidents — conveniently turning a blind eye to strict liability-corporate officials can proceed to commit corporate crimes because they do not perceive them as such in the first place.
A third means of avoiding responsibility consists of shifting the blame to even higher officials.
This may be achieved by engaging in what Matza (1969:93) refers to as ‘natural reduction’, that is, reducing oneself — the subject — into a thing-like object incapable of transcending circumstances, which in this particular mundane instance means viewing oneself as incapable of disobeying orders from high places.
Thus one conspirator in the 1961 Great Heavy Electrical Industry conspiracy said: ‘We understand this was what the company wanted us to do’, and another reported that, ‘It (the instruction) came to me from my superior…but my impression was that it came to him from higher up’.
And a lawyer involved in the Equity Funding Scandal of the mid-1970s said: ‘It was like someone asking you to help move a sofa from here to there.
I didn't think anything of it;it was something the company needed done, that's all ’(Blundell 1978:171).
A second technique of neutralization available to corporate officials is to deny the victim .
When the ‘victim’ is, say, a government agency such as the Inland Revenue (UK) or Medicare (US), or another vast transnational organization, or when it is millions of individuals deprived of  trivial amounts of property, or when whole countries or even continents are ‘victimized’as in the case of bribery and corruption of Third World governments or legal officials, or the exportation of products whose consumption is only really safe in a western cultural environment (Chetley 1979), then it is possible for the corporate official to convince himself that there is no real person suffering , and therefore there is no real criminal victim.
This is plausible because in our common-sense construction crimes involve real people as victims; many corporate crimes, because they fall on impersonal organizations or distant countries, fail to match this common-sense stereotype, and therefore can be viewed as non-criminal.
It is a very convenient stereotype!
A third technique is for corporate officials to condemn the condemners ; they can deny the legitimacy of the law which regulates their behaviour as well as the competence of those attempting to enforce ‘unnecessary’ law.
The law, they can argue to themselves, should have no business regulating the behaviour of corporations, particularly in a free-enterprise system; the state, to quote a fashionable political phrase, ‘should get off our backs’.
‘If’, argues Conklin (1977: 94), ‘businessmen feel ideologically deprived by government regulation because they think that the law is unfair and unduly restrictive of the economic forces to which they have a strong commitment, they may violate the law’.
The law can not only be condemned for being ‘unnecessary’ but also because those who formulate and publicly defend it are ‘hypocrites’.
Clearly those firms who engaged in oil-sanctions busting on the South African continent after Southern Rhodesia had illegally declared, unilateral independence were able to ‘neutralize’ their own and subsequent misbehaviour in this way.
They knew that the government which had passed the order prohibiting the supply of oil to Southern Rhodesia was sufficiently realistic to know it could not be enforced.
But what must the hypocritical collusion of government officials in this illegal activity have done to the way corporate officials regard laws against corporate behaviour more generally?
Clearly, it could not have enhanced it; why obey a legal system in which senior officials publicly pose as against one thing but privately collude in its occurrence — not only ought they to be condemned as hypocrites but their laws ought also to be disregarded as mere propaganda concealing the lack of will to control corporate behaviour.
Fourth, corporate officials may be able to appeal to higher loyalty and by that technique deny the moral bind of the law.
This can take at least three forms.
Officials could accept responsibility for their behaviour but argue that in being willingly loyal to the corporation they were obeying a superior moral imperative.
They could also argue that in general there is frequently a difference between morality and legalism and that the  former has a greater claim on their allegiance.
As one executive in the Great Electrical conspiracy stated:
‘One faces a decision, I guess, at such times, about how far to go with company instructions, and since the spirit of such meetings only appeared to be correcting a horrible price level situation, that there was not an attempt to damage customers, charge excessive prices, there was no personal gain in it for me, the company did not seem actually to be defrauding…morally it did not seem quite so bad as might be inferred by the definition of the activity itself.’
(Geis, in Geis and Meier 1977:123)
And another said:
‘Sure such collusion was illegal, but it wasn't unethical.
It wasn't any more unethical than if the companies had a summit conference the way Russia and the West meet.
Those competitors’ meetings were just attended by a group of distressed individuals who wanted to know where they were going.’
(Smith 1969: 888)
Finally, officials can claim that business ethics are morally superior to mere formal legalism.
Thus free enterprise — the pursuit of fair profit, the generator of wealth and employment, the backbone on which social welfare is possible — can be viewed, at least by corporate officials, as the primary ethic for and of an industrial society, and conformity to this neutralizes any obedience to the law merely because it happens to be the law.
This can be felt particularly strongly by corporate officials if the law attempts to interfere with free enterprise.
Thus by referring to such values as ‘our country's values’, business men appeal to a higher loyalty than obedience to the law and thereby free themselves from its moral constraint.
By the use of these techniques of neutralization, which are themselves embedded in the ‘structural immorality’ of corporations, executives are able to violate the law without feeling guilt or denting their respectable self-image.
Furthermore, this final piece of identity cosmetic can be enhanced by the official portrait of crime as being essentially a lower-class phenomenon.
Since murder, assault, and theft are committed by working-class men, corporate executives see their own virtue reflected in the guilt of those beneath them.
Thus corporate officials are both mystified as to their own crime, and misdirected as to the distribution of crime in general.
Both mystification and misdirection preserve the appearance of corporate respectability and help keep invisible, to themselves and others, the underlying ugly reality of corporate crime.
OPPORTUNITY
‘You got criminals in high places,
And law-breakers making the rules.’
(Bob Dylan)
The third major structural feature facilitating corporate crime is opportunity.
There are at least three dimensions to this: the relationship between corporate and enforcement agencies; the nature of laws against corporate activities; and, probably the greatest of them all , the power of corporations to intervene in the process by which corporate behaviour becomes incorporated in criminal law.
Obviously the lenient system of law enforcement constitutes a kind of opportunity structure denied to those subjected to higher rates of prosecution and the imposition of severe sanctions.
But the fact that corporate activities are not subject to high levels of surveillance compared to, say, lower-class adolescents whenever the ‘Special Patrol Group’(UK) swoop down on ethnically mixed neighbourhoods, and that they are not confronted by regulatory agencies with sufficient resources to maintain an adequate level of surveillance through frequent inspection, also constitutes a greater opportunity structure conducive to corporate crime.
Corporate officials can further reduce the surveillance on them by simply shifting resources, records, money, and personnel between national boundaries thus rendering their behaviour virtually disentangleable even to the most persistent regulatory agency.
Finally, the sweet exchange of personnel from, agency to corporation (and vice versa) and the extent to which some agency officials are amenable to getting their hands grubby with filthy lucre again make the executive suite a relatively safe place for planning illegal behaviour — there might even be some people present who are supposed to be enforcing the law!
A second dimension to the corporate illegal opportunity structure consists of the nature of criminal law itself and the legal requirement of intent which still dominates corporate crimes.
Criminal laws aimed at regulating corporate activities tend to refer to a specific rather than a general class of behaviour.
For example, as tax avoidance schemes are dreamt up by corporate accountants and lawyers or financial entrepreneurs, so the law attempts to encapsulate them by making that specific tax avoidance scheme illegal.
But of course, given the superior cunning of these corporate gentlemen, they are always able to discover another scheme, and still another scheme, and so on .
Until a tax avoidance clause is incorporated into law which would require corporate officials to establish the legality of any avoidance scheme, there will always be a wide-open prairie of opportunity for gouging  back profits from the exchequer, leaving ordinary tax-payers to ‘foot the bill’.
Criminal laws against corporate behaviour again facilitate crime because they focus purely on the regulation broken and not on the consequences of that broken regulation.
Thus the company responsible for the hoist accident at Littlebrook Dee power station were not prosecuted for the fact that five men died, but for the fact that the machinery was not properly maintained or inspected.
For this, they were fined £5,000.
In conventional crime there is no such similar fracture; a person is charged with the consequences of his/her action; if someone dies as a consequence of being stabbed, the assailant is more likely to be charged with a homicide offence rather than‘carrying an offensive weapon’.
The point of this fracture between regulation broken and its consequences is that it facilitates corporate crime; executives need only concern themselves with the likelihood of being leniently punished for breaking regulations, whilst ignoring its consequences for the law does not concern itself with the consequences either.
Most laws against corporate criminal behaviour require that intention be proved before guilt can be established.
Not only is this virtually impossible (and improbable) in cases of injury — fatal or otherwise — to employees or the public, but in cases of financial irregularities it is always open for the suspect(s) to plead that it was not his intention to defraud shareholders, indeed even though he engaged in what appears to be financially irregular practices, his intention all along had been to improve shareholders' financial interests, but unfortunately due to unforeseeable circumstances, matters went sour.
It was just this kind of argument that two company directors put forward when they were prosecuted in New South Wales in 1979 for apparently causing shareholders to lose more than A$22 millions (Hopkins 1980b).
Although some of these opportunity structures — provided ironically, by the legal system itself-could be blocked, it is unlikely that they would be.
Clearly, business interests would be against any general proscription and particularly against strict liability, since then it ‘would not be possible to know with any degree of certainty whether a proposed course of action was legal’(Hopkins 1980b: 427) and that would deprive corporate executives of an essential precondition for entering or staying in the market, namely predictability .
Important as these two above opportunity structures are for facilitating corporate crime,the greatest opportunity lies in their ability to prevent their actions from becoming subject to criminal sanctions in the first place .
Their ability persistently to cause avoidable harm, injury, and suffering is because they prevent much of this becoming incorporated into laws  against corporate behaviour.
Whether or not the avoidable harm, injury, and suffering should then be called ‘crime’ is a point legal theorists then dance on for ever; but a ‘crime’by any other name causes at least just as much pain and grief.
To understand why the criminal (and administrative) law is so narrow in its encroachment on corporate activity, we need to consider those moments in history when the state does create laws apparently against the interests of business and financial élites.
For these not only reveal something about the nature of criminal law and hence crime itself, but also how corporations are able to channel some of their resources into a concerted attempt to prevent their socially injurious behaviours from being criminalized.
Graham's (1972) analysis of the social processes leading to the US Comprehensive (sic ) Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act, 1970, considers how, through tough lobbying tactics and calling on good connections — especially in the House of Representatives — the pharmaceutical manufacturers were able to limit the discussion of amphetamine abuse so that it focused on that small minority of persons who inject it.
The vast bulk of users — housewives, businessmen, students, physicians, truck drivers, and athletes — many of whom obtain their pills through legitimate channels, represented a considerably profitable market provided it could be kept clear of federal control.
To this end, Hoffman-La Roche, who annually reaped profits during the late 1960s of about $40 million, was prepared to exert effective pressure on the legislature.
Senator Dodd, who had attempted to bring more amphetamine use under control, argued that Hoffman-La Roche ‘paid a Washington law firm three times the annual budget of the Senate subcommittee staff to assure that their drugs would remain uncontrolled’(Graham 1972: 22).
And Senator Eagleton, who had successfully brought in a reclassification amendment so that amphetamine would be more tightly controlled, stated, when he saw the amendment subsequently overturned: ‘when the chips are down, the power of the drug companies was simply more compelling than any appeal to the public welfare’(p. 53).
The outcome is that an industry which has skilfully managed to convert a chemical with meagre medical justification and considerable potential for harm (Grinspoon and Hedblom 1975) into a legitimate drug, remained free from federal control to go on manufacturing, distributing, and advertising it.
The industry's corporate leaders must have laughed demonically to themselves when they saw the full weight of the law coming down on people manufacturing and distributing comparatively harmless drugs, such as marijuana.
Legitimate drug rackets are after all not only lucrative — there's gold in them there pills (Klass 1975)— but they also provide the occasion for  seeing oneself — if you are involved in them — as sharper, shrewder, and more powerful than those ending up the wrong side of the law.
Shover (1980) examined the clash of interests in the run up to the US Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act, 1977.
He revealed that although this appeared to be an instance favouring a pluralist conception of law-making, i.e. law representing a compromise between the interests of numerous groups, it was in fact a law which basically reflected the interests of the coal industry and those dependent upon it — manufacturers of heavy equipment and the electric utilities, who consume nearly 80 per cent of domestically mined coal.
It appeared that when this alliance of powerful forces realized that some legalistic gloss over their environmental vandalism was necessary or desirable, not because they wanted it but because the public were increasingly becoming aware of pollution, they actively encouraged the legislature to formulate a bill which created the illusion of controlling corporations.
In fact it provided the industry with more control over its environment by making conflicts over environmental damage an administrative problem whose outcome could be predicted by corporate executives.
It thus gained for the coal industry what all organizations strive for, namely rational control of the environment through being better able to predict its fluctuations.
Similar processes, reflecting the ability of corporations to prevent their socially and economically injurious behaviour being criminalized operate also in Britain.
Thus Gunningham considered the clash of interests between ‘in the red corner’ the National Smoke abatement Society, the Conservation Society of Britain, Friends of the Earth, and other groups for the non-pollution of the environment and in, the ‘blue corner’:
‘capitalists with strong economic interests in maintaining the status quo.
These were involved because in a capitalist market economy, the organization of economic activity has historically been based on numerous fragmented units, each seeking to operate as profitably as possible, whilst paying only the costs which it is impossible to avoid.
Thus the dilemma of the polluting industry is that controlling pollution is expensive, but adds nothing to the value of the goods produced, and is bad business for any firm whose main concern is to maintain profitability in a competitive situation.’
(Gunningham 1974: 39)
The outcomes of these conflicting interests are enshrined in the Clean Air Acts of 1956 and 1968 and the Deposit of Poisonous Wastes Act 1972.
Under these acts, the Alkali and Clean Air Inspectorate was responsible for ensuring that the emission of some pollution from industry was no more than ‘practicably reasonable’, a level so ambiguous and vague and capable of numerous interpretations by corporate lawyers that the actual  amount of pollution was frequently allowed to rise above a level found tolerable by local residents.
Thus in 1971, United Carbon Black Ltd of Swansea was forced to spend money on improving its air emissions because local residents had formed a strong pressure group.
Similarly, the Imperial Smelting Corporation (a Rio Tinto Zinc subsidiary) at Avonmouth was discovered by scientists working at Bristol University to be ‘poisoning’ local agricultural land as well as inhabitants.
Again, after a period of closure, this company improved its pollution control.
The point is, in both these cases the Alkali Inspectorate had been satisfied that the pollution control by these corporations was ‘practicably reasonable’.
Furthermore, this should not be too surprising.
Under the acts, corporations are required to measure their own pollution level and report this to the inspectorate.
Clearly such a self-monitoring system is wide open to abuse, particularly amongst those who have a clear but maybe not clean motive for doing so.
Gunningham concluded that the acts only reflected the types of control which were economically convenient to industry, and that ‘since strict enforcement of more severe legislation would attack the very root of capitalism…then any compromise between alternative policies and views is always struck within an area which does not threaten these interests’(Gunningham 1974: 83).
A further example of how the interests of the powerful are enshrined in legislation which has the appearance of opposing them is provided by Carson's (1974,1980) analysis of the Factory Regulation Act, 1833.
He suggests that although manufacturers had an instrumental influence in supporting this act — it helped to rationalize and make predictable the conduct of competitors — they also saw it as having a symbolic dimension, which if anything, was predominant in their minds.
Carson suggested that:
‘The Act of 1833 publicly affirmed that the precepts of common humanity were not so alien to the logic of industrial capitalism that checks could only by imposed from without.
In this way it facilitated public representation of the relationship between the state, capital, and an emerging working class as one of pre-eminent moral stature.’
(Carson 1974:137)
However, the achievement of this symbolic significance could be attained with minimum constraint upon factory owners' autonomy and an ineffectual enforcement.
Thus in the process of passing the 1833 Act, ‘a tide which might have run much more strongly in the direction of the ‘criminalization’ of the offending employer was effectively stemmed' (p.138).
A final instance of the same process is given by McCormick (1979), who analysed the social forces behind the American Sherman Antitrust Act, 1890.
He argues that the act reflected the clash of interests between the dwindling power of agrarian groups and the rising power of manufacturing and big business groups.
The former power was not entirely diminished, and its lingering potential threat was at its greatest in the Populist movement of the 1880s.
To this threat, the political representatives of big business had to make a response.
It took the form of the apparently anti-monopoly anti-big-business Sherman Act.
In reality it was not like this at all.
The act was the least constraining of the various bills introduced into the legislature; it was a weak remedial measure, quite impotent as a regulatory instrument, and its sole purpose was to serve as a token declaration of anti-monopolism.
As a consequence of its scope, its vague wording, and its proposed method of enforcement, which was mainly civil, it applied to very little business conduct and was, as discussed earlier, more suitable for the prosecution of labour and small businessmen than large manufacturers.
In comparison with‘conventional’ offenders, corporate executives find themselves in an enviable position.
Not only do they have a greater opportunity to commit their favoured types of crimes, but they have the capacity to influence which of their behaviours will be regarded as corporate crimes in the first place.
Figure 1 attempts to summarize the above arguments and I hope that this will serve to  facilitate comprehension where it is needed.
Control, regulation, and justice
What can be done to reduce significantly the volume of killing, maiming, and economic deprivation caused by corporate crime?
One brief terse answer is'**** all!
' According to a more polite version of this argument, these crimes are embedded and endemic within the capitalist system.
The prioritization of profit under conditions of environmental uncertainties inevitably leads to persistent and chronic levels of corporation crime.
No piecemeal liberal reform will make one iota of difference.
Only when the means of production and distribution are socialized will the incidence of corporate crime diminish.
This may, or may not be true; and true or not, it might not be a bad thing if many leading corporations were socialized, just to see if our needs were better served.
But there is no hope of that occurring in the foreseeable future.
Short of the holocaust, when everything will be blown away on the wind of oblivion, there is no reason to believe that we will see the lights going down on capitalism in our lifetime.
Meanwhile, the    mountain of victimized employees, consumers, taxpayers, shareholders, and the public continues to grow.
Would it really be justifiable to turn away from such carnage and pillage?
Maybe liberal reformism is something to be contemplated today, even by those waiting patiently for the revolution tomorrow.
Figure 1 Understanding corporate crime
Although there are some grounds for not expecting too much from slight changes in the system, there are, none the less, other grounds for believing that something good can be achieved, at least in principle .
If hundreds of corporation-caused deaths can be prevented, if thousands of occupational diseases and injuries can be avoided, and if millions of pounds stolen by corporations can be saved, then these would be no bad achievements.
The question is, however, can these be realized in practice?
The history of attempts to control and regulate corporate crimes does not give much cause for optimism, and indeed the idea of it reduces radicals to knowing laughter.
For it is quite clear that despite innovative legislation, the proliferation of enforcement agencies, the relatively new use of imprisonment for corporate offenders, and absolutely (but not relatively) large fines for offending corporations, there has not been a substantial brake on corporate crime.
In many ways, it has been a huge, cynical black-comedy — although the victims are not laughing.
But there are some silver linings peering over the edges of this dark cloud of history.
First, in North America at least, there is a growing awareness of corporate crime, although not necessarily the extent of it.
Throughout the 1970s attitudes have shifted.
Undoubtedly the best illustration of this can be obtained by comparing the research of Rossi et al .
(1974) with that of Cullen, Golden, and Cullen (1982).
The latter study, which was conducted in Macomb, Illinois, discovered that during the period 1972 (when Rossi carried out his research in Baltimore) to 1979, ‘the seriousness rating of white-collar crime…increased both absolutely and to a greater extent than any other category’, and more important, increases in seriousness ratings were pronounced in two categories of corporate crime, particularly ‘violence’(resulting in death or injury) and ‘price-fixing’.
The authors suggest that these changes may reflect the publicity surrounding the Ford Pinto car scandal, and the various price-fixing conspiracy trials including the Folding-Carton industry trial in 1976.
This research is not isolated.
Further confirmation that public attitudes towards corporate crime are hardening and becoming more punitive have come from other American studies (McCleary et al .
1981; Sinden 1980; Wolfgang 1980; Yoder 1979).
The last author commented ‘increasing numbers of Americans have become aware that crime exists in  the suites of many corporations just as surely as it exists in the streets of their cities and suburbs’.
Where this awareness of corporate crime has been expressed elector-ally, corporate victims have benefited.
Thus in 1970 a new prosecuting attorney was elected in King County, Washington (Seattle and environs), partly on a platform of increasing consumer fraud and general white-collar prosecution.
Stotland and associates analysed the effects of subsequent increases in  prosecution and enforcement and concluded that ‘a tendency toward an upward rise of home repair fraud was reduced by convictions…however, the increased sanctions did not appear to have completely reversed the upward movement of home repair fraud’(1980: 262).
Clearly a major problem in controlling corporate crime is raising victim and public consciousness to a level where the community desires and supports a policy of more active and effective state control and regulation.
This could be (and has been) achieved not only by investigative journalism and television documentaries, which do appear to have influenced the general level of awareness amongst American citizens to such an extent that Spiro Agnew referred to it as the ‘post-Watergate’ morality.
However, more still is needed.
Raising victim consciousness could also be achieved by incorporating it as a function explicitly pursued by controlling and regulating agencies.
Intense and widespread publicization of corporate crime could produce a greater public sensitivity and this in turn, could become the catalyst out of which stronger and tougher enforcement programmes blossom.
The second hopeful sign is that the state and its criminal justice system (broadly conceived to include criminal, administrative, and civil law) has shown itself receptive to arguments that corporate crime victims deserve protection and that corporate criminals deserve sanctioning, particularly when those arguments have been well orchestrated, empirically supported, and contain implicit electoral threats.
The criminal justice system projects itself above social conflicts and expects to be recognized as fair and just because it is guided by universal principles that transcend sectional interests.
But there are contradictions between these principles and judicial practice, and these can be exploited advantageously for corporate victims.
A forceful demonstration that the law is failing to realize its own professed principles may have the beneficial effect of shaming it into action.
For example, it claims allegiance to equality before the law, yet it systematically flouts this by treating corporate offenders and offending corporations leniently.
It also claims our allegiance because it offers to protect our lives, limbs, and property, although it does little to protect us from predatory corporations.
Pushing the state and its legal institutions to act consistently with their own principles at least brings out the contradictions between what they say they are doing and what they are actually doing.
Publicizing this may undermine their legitimacy, an outcome they would want to avoid.
In response, they may close the gap, if only slightly, between principles and practices.
The final glimmer comes from recent attempts to develop novel strategies for controlling corporate crime.
These turn out to be old ideas — worn-out and discredited as solutions to conventional criminals — reinvigorated by appearing in new bottles.
If employees, consumers, and other corporate victims had their awareness sharpened and supported by trade unionism, consumerism, and environmentalism, and if the state and legal institutions could be shamed into closing the gap between lofty principles and tawdry practices, then some of these old ideas could be put into effective operation.
ENTERPRISING IDEAS FOR SANCTIONING DEVIANT ENTERPRISES
There seems to be agreement that corporate criminals can be deterred because their crimes are essentially instrumental , being outcomes of a fine balance between perceived costs and rewards, and they have no emotional commitment to them, whereas they do have a very high stake in conformity and respectability .
Similarly, corporations are very much in the business of projecting a favourable image of themselves and their products, so that business might flourish.
Consequently, it appears that in principle at least, both corporations and their officials could be deterred, unlike their conventional counterparts.
But how?
The history of penal practice is replete with particular sanctions falling into disuse.
Positive repentance is one such practice.
There was a period when deviants were publicly humiliated and self-confessions, accompanied with displays of repentance, were deemed necessary rungs in the ladder towards social reintegration.
This practice could be revived and applied to corporations (Fisse 1971).
When they behave illegally, they could be required to pay for publicizing their own failures, negligence, indifference, apathy, and greed, and also the names, photographs, and misdeeds of each corporate offender.
These adverts need not follow the insipid SMOKING CAN BE DANGEROUS FOR YOUR HEALTH recipe.
Instead, they could be imaginative products of creative advertising agencies, paid for by the offender(s), to persuade employees, consumers, and the general public to be cautious in the future of this corporation and its officials.
The idea of positive repentance for corporations has already been implemented in some American states, but the results have not been too impressive, largely because the logic of the sanction has not been followed through.
Thus the Federal Trade Commission instructed STP, a marketer of oil additives and other automotive products, to correct false, misleading, and fraudulent advertising claims, or face criminal prosecution.
The corporation chose the former; the agency fined it $500,000 and instructed it to spend a further $200,000 in corrective advertising.
However, STP placed these adverts in such outlets as Business Week ,Harvard Business Review ,National Geographic , and Time Business Edition , whereas the original misleading advertisements appeared in such consumer-orientated journals as Auto News ,Car and Driver ,Hot Rod ,Motor Age and Playboy (Ermann and Lundman 1982: 140).
So those less likely to buy the products knew what these could and could not achieve, whilst potential consumers remained misguided by the original advertisements.
However, although this example reflects the failure of the Federal Trade Commission to think the sanction of positive repentance through to its logical conclusion, it also demonstrates just how powerful this sanction could be, had it been accompanied by just one further instruction —‘publish the repenting adverts in the original outlets’.
That STP deliberately chose to place the correct information in obscure papers read by financial enthusiasts rather than motor enthusiasts (the two populations may overlap, but not by much) indicates just how much of a deterrent positive repentance could be if properly executed.
When Philip Schrag (1971) became director of the New York Department of Consumer Affairs, he soon realized that companies could easily delay criminal prosecution cases, so he moved from a ‘judicial model’ of control to a ‘direct action’model.
This included threats and use of adverse publicity, revocation of licences, writing directly to consumers to warn them of company practices, and exerting pressure on reputable financial institutions and suppliers to withdraw support of the targeted company.
In his view, this produced better results because the companies wished to avoid their respectability being tarnished.
There are, however, two major problems with a policy of imposing positive repentance directly, or in Schrag's case, indirectly.
First, the company may refuse or not be deterred.
Second, the regulatory agency may in response be able to impose a fine, but this would normally be small and ineffectual.
This leaves criminal prosecution as the only viable option.
But this would be a tiresome choice to make unless conviction were probable.
However, under the present arrangements for prosecuting corporations, convictions are very infrequent.
One of the major stumbling blocks in the criminal prosecution of corporations and their officials is that costs to the state become excessive as the case is stretched out for endless months and sometimes years.
According to Braithwaite (1981b) there are numerous reasons why smart lawyers are able to accomplish this form of economic deterrence.
For example:
the complexity of the law enables them to discover loopholes and multiple meanings in the vague and often ambiguous wording of corporate law(s) — the pursuit of each interpretation is a further delay in the case reaching a conclusion;
the complexity of company records , which are not only subject to mysterious,(but relief-bringing) disappearances down the corporation vortex, but when occasionally discovered are often so specialized and riddled with technical jargon that the average jurist finds them unintelligible — naturally corporate lawyers render them intelligible in ways which favour their clients;
the complexity of corporate structures , which often consist of so many subsidiaries and specialized divisions, within and beyond national boundaries, that unknotting the tangled thread of responsibility becomes difficult, if not impossible, thus making the view that ‘no one was to blame’ easy to accept;
the complexity of science , which renders forging a direct causal link between corporate practice and the death, injury, or economic loss of employees, consumers, and the general public, very difficult to prove ‘beyond a reasonable doubt’, particularly when those ‘experts’ called in to testify to the relationship add so many qualifications and possibilities that almost everything appears possible but nothing certain.
All the above suggests that serious consideration should be given to abandoning judicial practices which protect the accused from arbitrary or unjust conviction, or which ensure they receive the benefit of the doubt, and exploring alternative judicial principles more relevant to prosecuting (and convicting) corporations and their officials (Friedman 1979).
For example, regulatory agencies should be strengthened, particularly in their legal departments, so that it would be possible to nurture a pool of state lawyers sufficiently specialized and experienced to be a fair match for corporate lawyers.
The ‘right to trial by jury’ could also be abandoned.
Instead, trials could be heard by a panel of judges or juries especially selected for their ability to understand the complexities of cases against corporations.
The ‘limited’ intrusion of ‘strict liability’into criminal law could be expanded to cover more and more corporate  behaviour so that the issue of responsibility and intention becomes subsidiary to the more pressing need to compensate victims and make the offending corporation foot the bill.
Finally, maybe the ‘balance of probabilities’ should be substituted for ‘beyond reasonable doubt’.
Achieving the latter is so difficult that attempts to put corporations and their officials down the hole they belong in are often stymied.
Whilst each of these may be attractive, they do raise a vexing question: would their acceptance represent an indefensible system of dual justice, one providing fewer rights to the accused and thus increasing the chances of conviction?
It would be too easy to say ‘Yes, and not before time either.’
Clearly it would be difficult to justify a dual system of justice if it led to certain types of people being more easily convicted, for the whole concept of the rule of law was to tip the balance of power away from the accusing state to the accused individual because it was rightly felt a too one-sided contest without such protection.
But would the same objection have such weight if one judicial system applied to individuals and the other to corporations (and other organizations)?
This question is crucial, for the essence of corporate crime is not the behaviour of individuals, but the ‘behaviour’ of corporations.
It is, in other words, endemic within the corporation's standard operating procedure (Hopkins 1980a), or is inherent within the nature of relationships between corporations and their environment in a world capitalist economy (Barnett 1981), or within the asymmetric power relationship between transnational corporations and national state regulatory agencies (Braithwaite 1979b, 1981a).
Prosecuting individual corporate executives, particularly where some have the dubious ‘responsibility for going to jail’(Braithwaite 1981b: 35) in exchange for premature elevation to a high salaried but non-responsible position, is simply missing the point.
In order to be effective, the level of intervention to regulate corporate crime has to be organizational rather than individual .
But it was not with this intervention level in mind that the rule of law and various protective judicial principles were formulated.
To grant these rights and judicial privileges to corporations (and other organizations) is simply to give them additional resources for a judicial battle in which many, particularly the transnationals, are already more than a fair match for national state regulatory agencies.
Indeed, it would be unjustified (and plain silly) to strengthen corporate power further by granting them judicial privileges originally formulated to protect relatively powerless individuals.
If it is agreed that to regulate corporate crime the level of intervention should be organizational (although individual offenders should be prosecuted in tandem) and different judicial principles to increase the state's chances of securing conviction should be instituted, then what?
Ironically, it is just at the organizational level that ideas of deterrence, incapacitation, rehabilitation, and restitution to the community and the offended gain this season's attractive fashionable glow.
First, there is the issue of fines .
Their paltry and insignificant level has already been considered.
Clearly there is scope here for change.
Fines could at least be raised to a level comparable pro rata to a parking fine!
But there is a limit to achieving justice through this judicial sanction.
If fines were so high that corporations went bankrupt, innocent employees, consumers, and dependents would suffer.
It would be wrong to make them pay the price of justice — although this might nudge us into remembering that innocent wives and children and other dependents are made to suffer when the state imprisons thousands of working-class men for crimes which are often insignificant compared with corporate crimes.
Clearly a balance has to be located between a reasonable fine and one that cripples.
Given the rational nature of corporate crime, a higher level of fines than is imposed currently would probably deter some potential offenders.
But relying on this instrument is crude, lacks imagination, and does not achieve other goals desirable in the control and regulation of corporate crime (Stone 1975).
To prevent offenders repeating their misbehaviour, we no longer hang murderers, castrate rapists, or cut off thieves' hands.
Instead, we commit these and other offenders to varying terms of imprisonment.
This incapacitates them temporarily; whilst imprisoned they cannot victimize the public, although they do continue to victimize other prisoners, sometimes at a rate that exceeds community crime levels.
Indeed, according to Marvin Wolfgang (Braithwaite 1981b: 15) the chances of being a victim of homicide in the US are five times as high for white males inside prison than for those outside.
The chances of being raped are also high (Brownmiller 1975: 257–67; Davis 1970).
Corporate executives could be incapacitated by imprisonment; whilst inside they could not be victimizing employees, consumers, share-holders, or the general public.
In addition, the fear of imprisonment may instil the fear of rape into young, smooth, neat, corporate executives — as it did in the case of certain Watergate conspirators — and lead to a dramatic and welcome improvement in their behaviour.
There is therefore some hope that imprisoning executives might, through incapacitation and deterrence, bring down the incidence of corporate crime.
But this must be a cautious and overly optimistic conclusion.
If corporations merely promoted or recruited new personnel to replace the faint-hearted or imprisoned, then frightening and removing executives to prison may have only a minimal impact on corporate crime.
There is however, a way round this: ‘imprison’ all or part of the  offending corporation.
By nationalizing for a specific period — length depending upon the expected time needed for rehabilitation and the severity of the offence — and placing public-appointed directors to the board with a duty to inform the public and advise the remaining corporate directors, the chances of recidivating could be reduced considerably.
Since no more is claimed for the incapacitation effect on conventional criminals, it appears reasonable to recommend it for offending corporations.
However, within the political climate of industrialized capitalistic societies, such ‘socialist’ penal sanctions might well be viewed as draconian and ideologically repugnant.
There are though two other measures which would achieve the same limited objective and which appear more liberal in comparison with nationalizing (imprisoning) offending corporations.
The courts could impose a probation order .
This would not mean that an executive reports once a week to a local probation office to affirm that all is well back in the corporate suite.
It would mean that courts appoint teams of probation officers, drawn from a pool of accountants, lawyers, engineers, mechanics, chemists, physicists, management scientists, and so on, and selected to meet the requirements of each situation.
The purpose of the ‘new’ probation-order team would be to monitor standard operating procedures, research programme strategies, communications networks, command structures, and any other structural factors which might be linked to the corporation's previous misbehaviour and then make recommendations which the company could not refuse to implement without the risk of revoking the probation licence and returning to court for resentencing.
Of course this liberal reform would mean a dramatic increase in the cost of the probation service.
Not only would their number have to be increased but they would also need to undergo years of specialized training for which they would expect a commensurate reward.
The attractiveness of this reform though is that it need not add to public expenditure.
Whereas conventional criminals lack the wherewithal to pay for being placed on probation, no such inability is true for corporations.
Consequently, the costs of strengthening and extending the probation service could be defrayed by charging a fee to the offending corporation.
This would be sufficient to guarantee that the public were not indirectly paying for the corporation's rehabilitation.
Another possibility is that the court could impose a community service order .
Under this a corporation could be required to, say, build a new hospital, or pay for a motorway, school, nursery, or library.
In this way badly needed public resources, which cannot be easily paid for, could be met by those corporations whose financial reserves are sufficient for a  proportion to be ploughed back into the community from which they were originally largely reaped.
An alternative form might be for the corporation to sell a proportion of its products at strictly cost price to those sections of the community who are under-privileged and in need of these occasional subsidies.
Finally, the court could act directly in the interests of the victims and instruct the corporation to compensate them.
This would avoid civil actions, which are often defeated because individual victims, even when they decide to act co-operatively, are rarely a match for corporations who decide it is better to be prudent than just.
For example, in early 1983 MP Jack Ashley was attempting to secure the passage of a Private Member's Bill through parliament which would require pharmaceutical companies to establish a ‘no blame compensation fund’.
This would enable victims to claim damages without facing the difficult task of proving corporate negligence before receiving any compensation.
The immediate cause of this putative legislation is the possibility that nearly 70 arthritic sufferers have died and nearly 4,000 have been injured as a result of taking the drug Opren.
As yet, the manufacturer has not paid civil damages because negligence has not been proven in court.
The selective imposition of fines, probation orders, community service orders, and compensation orders, particularly when coupled with ‘positive repentance’ for the corporation and occasional imprisonment (not for merely thirty days) for executives would undoubtedly achieve the penal aims of deterrence, incapacitation, rehabilitation, and restitution better than the present system of token fines and infrequent short imprisonment sentences.
But for these to be achieved, a substantial proportion of offending corporations must first be caught.
To ensure a steady supply of corporations who could be prosecuted, other liberal reforms need to be considered.
An obvious major difference between corporate and conventional crime is that the former's victims often remain unaware.
This has considerable implications for regulating and controlling corporate crime.
Police work with conventional crime is primarily reactive ; it responds to victim-complaints.
If the regulatory agency relied on victim-complaints for corporate crime, then it might never find itself in business.
Relying, as they do, on irregular, inadequate, notified, and often superficial inspections, or on data provided by the corporations themselves renders state regulatory agencies and the police (where they are relevant, as in say the fraud squad) very defective in their ability to locate corporate crime.
Since a low rate of detection is a major encouragement to corporate crime, it might be necessary to pursue proactive policies such as deploying  state spies and informers, entrapping corporate offenders, and strongly encouraging ‘whistle-blowing’ or ‘grassing’.
It could be argued that since these are indefensible when applied, as they are currently, to conventional criminals, they ought not to be extended to corporate criminals.
But this argument needs considering.
It is easy to capture a large number of conventional criminals without needing to spy, entrap, or encourage ‘grassing’; this is not true of corporate criminals who are extremely difficult to detect.
In many of the conventional crimes for which offenders receive imprisonment, there are no real victims.
For example, nearly one-quarter of people in prison are there because they were unable to pay their fine, others are there because of ‘consenting’ sex below the age of consent, drug addiction, being drunk and disorderly, or begging abroad.
With corporate crime however, there are always victims and they are frequently numerous.
For their sakes, and the sakes of others who follow, more efficient means of apprehending offending corporations are desirable.
Finally, people who ‘grass’ on conventional criminals constantly risk physical and sometimes fatal retribution, whereas corporate ‘informers’are dismissed and risk prolonged unemployment and career fracture.
The state is better able to protect the corporate ‘grass’ because he (or she) could be guaranteed a job for life as a reward for information leading to conviction for a serious corporate crime.
BUT WOULD THESE IDEAS BE EFFECTIVE?
In the film Hospital George C. Scott plays the administrator attempting to impose some order on the chaos of misadventure, accidents, and disasters passing themselves off as medical care.
In a moment of weary despair, he turns to a colleague and says, ‘It's like pissing into the wind!’
There are reasons for believing that if the above liberal reforms were implemented, they might not significantly reduce the volume of corporate crime.
This is not, as Young (1981: 328) asserts, because they are ‘well calculated to be ineffective’, but rather because they have not been framed with a crucial issue in mind — how far can a national state regulatory agency effect the operations of a transnational corporation, particularly when its parental state is one of the two world imperialist powers?
The history of corporate legislation enforcement is a history of penalizing the small fish whilst letting the big ones escape.
For example, Snider examined the enforcement of the Canadian Combine Investigation Act, 1889, which makes it ‘illegal to conspire or arrange with another person to limit unduly the facilities to manufacture any article, or to  prevent or lessen unduly competition in the manufacture or production of any article and to thereby increase the price’(1978: 147).
This is an indictable offence which carries a two years' prison sentence.
During the period 1961–73, the Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs was more likely to take out an enforcement order against a company that did not dominate the market, and was therefore in no position to affect the market price than one that did have such power!
Snider argues that the presence of dominant companies ‘seems to make the government prosecutors more wary, probably because such companies always have the most skilled battery of lawyers who will pursue each case to the Supreme Court if possible’(1978: 154).
Goff and Reasons, after analysing the period 1952–72, came to the same conclusion: ‘the Combines Branch has centred its attentions upon the investigations, prosecutions, and conviction of small-medium-sized companies and corporations, leaving the very largest corporations free to engage in their monopolistic practices’(1978: 86).
An analysis of enforcement practices in the US during the mid 1970s reached a similar conclusion:
‘the amount of fine bears no systematic relation to the size of the firm.
In fact, of all fines imposed in 1975 and 1976, the medium fine…for large firms ($1,000) was smaller than that for medium-size corporations…
In addition, smaller fines were used in proportionately more cases involving the largest corporations: for these firms, 86 per cent of all fines were $5,000 or less, while only 6.5 per cent were over $45,000.
The corresponding percentages for medium-sized corporates were 68 per cent and 18 per cent respectively and for smaller firms 54 and 38.5 per cent respectively.’
(Clinard and Yeager 1980:126)
If the enforcement practices were strengthened and a more determined effort were now made to capture the big corporations, there would probably be a rude surprise.
Bigger fish might indeed be caught, but in the meantime they have grown into killer sharks with teeth big enough to bite through any net we might attempt to throw over them.
National corporations have become transnational corporations, and the concentration at the top of major world industries has become even more concentrated in the hands of transnationals.
The internationalization and concentration of capital would not be material to the control and regulation of corporate crime if transnationals were well behaved.
But the sad fact is,they are the worst offenders .
This emerged clearly from the recent, and as yet, most comprehensive survey of corporate crime in the US.
Clinard and Yeager's study involved:
‘a systematic analysis of federal administrative, civil and criminal actions either initiated or completed by 25 federal agencies…against the 477 largest publicly owned manufacturing corporations in the US during 1975 and 1976.
In addition, a more limited study was made of the 105 largest wholesale, retail, and service corporations.’
(Clinard and Yeager 1980: 110–11)
However, even this study was restricted in its ability to portray the extent and incidence of corporation crime.
It was not able to cover financial, banking, and commercial corporations.
Neither was it able to cover all complaints made by employees, consumers, and the public.
Instead, it confined itself to actions initiated against corporations (which is the equivalent to arrest/prosecution) and actions completed (which is the equivalent to conviction).
Consequently, the study probably covered ‘only the tip of the iceberg of total violations, but they do constitute an index of illegal behaviour by the large corporations’(Clinard and Yeager 1980: 111).
Clinard and Yeager discovered that violations were far more likely to be committed by large corporations.
Thus, if the corporations in their study were divided into three groups depending on the size of their annual sales, then they calculated that those with sales over $1 billion constituted 42 per cent of all corporations but committed nearly three-quarters of not only all violations but all serious violations, whereas those small firms with sales with less than half a billion dollars constituted nearly one-third of firms analysed but only committed less than 10 per cent of all violations.
Not only were the largest firms the most criminal, but those corporations that dominated’ the oil, pharmaceutical and motor vehicle industries were the most likely to violate the law.’
(Clinard and Yeager 1980: 119).
Relative to what their size warranted and depending on which type of offence was examined, the oil-refining industry committed crimes at a rate five to nine times higher than would be expected, the motor industry three to seven times, and the pharmaceutical industry was four to six times as criminal as would be predicted.
When it is realized that of the fifteen largest corporations in the world in 1978, three were car manufacturers, eight were oil companies, and one was in chemicals, it can be appreciated that the largest corporations within the most concentrated sections of international capital formation are committing more than their share of law violations.
Furthermore, these giant corporations possess such wealth and power that they not only affect our lives, limbs, health, and property from the forceps to the grave, but they also bend the political democratic process in such a way that their interests are often prioritized over those of the electorate, consumers, employees, and shareholders.
The outcome is that national states, which exist to prevent life being poor, nasty, short, brutal, and solitary, are a match for the unreasonable person who commits conventional crimes, but ‘are no match for the resources and size of…great corporations: General Motors could buy Delaware…if DuPont were willing to sell it’(Nader and Green 1973: 79).
In the final analysis, it may be that national states and their control agencies are relatively autonomous of a particular social class, and that in that sense could, under the right circumstances, become an instrument, at least for a specific and limited objective, of any particular class or alliance of classes or pressure groups.
Under their temporary influence, the state could introduce some or all of the liberal reforms outlined above.
These would undoubtedly deter smaller corporations and bring down the incidence of corporate crime, particularly amongst the relatively smaller national-bound corporations, and even those larger corporations whose capital equipment is relatively fixed and who need the local more specialized work force.
If capital transfer to other countries was also made illegal or tightly controlled, this would also help to prevent corporations evading the law by exporting those behaviours which would be illegal in one country to another where they are not.
However, even these barriers would hot prevent forever a corporation determined to maximize its interests.
Neither would a sovereign state's government necessarily want to oppose transnational corporations, for the former often find themselves in the unenviable position of needing the latter more than the latter need them.
A clear example of this is provided by Carson (1981) in his analysis of the other price of Britain's oil.
He argues that in order to extract Britain's oil reserves fast — a policy objective pursued dogmatically by all governments over the last fifteen years — it was necessary to depend upon the transnational oil companies.
They agreed to extract oil quickly, but argued they would not be able to do so if hindered by trifling safety regulations that applied to on-shore industries.
To disarm reluctant government ministers, the transnationals pointed out that there were other vast reserves in South America, Mexico, and Alaska, and that rather than find themselves restricted with petty regulations they would prefer to spend vast amounts on exploratory research elsewhere.
British governments had no strength to resist these arguments, and as a consequence the North Sea Oil installations, working literally at break-neck speed unfettered by safety regulations comparable to those operating on-shore, had a fatality rate eleven times greater than the construction industry, nine times higher than mining, and six times greater than quarrying.
Carson concludes, after carefully researching the individual  incidents which constituted this high rate of fatality (as well as those involving serious injuries) that the majority could have been avoided if the ‘political economy of speed’ had not been allowed to  supersede the ‘political economy of employees lives and limbs’.
With the internationalization of capital and the concentration of power in the hands of fewer and fewer transnational corporations, national law violation may well become old fashioned.
These giant corporations may simply opt for law evasion.
That is, they may choose to export, say, plants emitting too much (illegal) pollution, or manufacturing processes where the labour costs are legally maintained at a ‘high’ level, or products banned for safety reasons, to other countries where pollution laws, legal wage levels, and product safety regulations are all less stringent.
The exportation of ‘corporate crime’ will normally be to Third World countries which, because they are more dependent upon capital, have fewer resources to check manufacturer's claims or police corporate activities, and because their officials are more susceptible to corruption are less likely to circumvent corporate behaviour.
This is a depressing conclusion for liberal reformers.
National states simply may not possess the will or power to ‘knock the stuffing’ out of the worst corporate offenders.
Maybe persuasion, based upon appeals to ethical considerations and the flickering embers of nationalism are the only tools left to crack corporate crime.
But they will not succeed where the law has failed.
If there is no preparedness to see extensive nationalization of the worst offending corporations and if there is no political or national will to place public officials on the boards of directors to guarantee that ‘our’ interests are given as much consideration as those of the corporation, then clearly the will to control corporations has atrophied in the withering light of pragmatism.
Maybe smaller corporations can be deterred, but any attempt to constrain seriously the large transnational corporations will ultimately affect us adversely where it hurts most — in our economic performance.
So better to become subservient than to waste our energies attempting to bring the worst criminal organizations to justice.
But if that is the depressing conclusion, then it has implications for our treatment of conventional criminals.
In 1981, there were nearly 85,000 males and 4,000 females received into prison under sentence in England and Wales.
Of these 20,000 males and 1,100 females (nearly 25 per cent and about 30 per cent respectively) were imprisoned for defaulting on fine payments.
Can it be justified to send to prison people too poor to pay fines — and there are more such persons during times of economic crisis — not only when the original crime of which they were convicted did not warrant a prison sentence, but when their crime is trivial in the extreme in comparison with corporate crimes which we lack the political will to  tackle directly by socialist remedies?
By the same logic, can it be right to send people to prison because they have been found guilty of drunkenness, vagrancy, offences related to prostitution, and drug offences (of whom there were nearly 900 men and 100 women in 1981)?
Maybe such considerations will also mellow our attitude towards the imprisonment of nearly 9,000 men and 500 women (representing nearly 25 and 45 per cent respectively of all those sentenced to immediate imprisonment) for theft, handling stolen goods, fraud, and forgery, when the amounts of value involved are nothing in comparison with the millions stolen by offending corporations on whom our criminal justice system has given up.
If there is no way of implementing justice for the largest and worst offending corporations then it is surely unjust to pursue with such ruthless and cruel tenacity the majority of those eventually condemned to prison.
By all means punish those committing violence against us, but when we fail to punish those practising minor acts of genocide, let us be merciful on those committing comparatively minor acts of violence.
If that is too hard to stomach, then the political will should be discovered or constructed so that our government will pursue vigorously and ruthlessly all those, including transnational corporations, who violate laws, particularly those designed to protect our lives and limbs.
If the price of achieving justice for offending corporations is a more socialized mode of production, that may be a price worth paying if our lives, limbs, and property are protected from predatory transnational corporations.