

Employee Attitudes to Relocation
A lack of knowledge about employees' willingness to move can disrupt the most carefully laid relocation plans.
This chapter analyses the problems associated with the relocation of organisations and with individuals moving within Britain and overseas.
How to predict employees' mobility is examined together with how to improve attitudes towards company relocation and individual relocation at home and abroad.
COMPANY RELOCATION
One of the main problems in relocating an organisation to another part of the country lies in trying to predict how many employees will move with it.
Relocation is bound to cause a certain amount of disruption in the running of the business.
If most of the employees based in the old location refuse to move with their firm, the organisation must recruit and train replacement staff.
New employees will need to start work as soon as the move has taken place and training plans must be initiated straight away if staff are to be effective quickly.
However, the time lags involved in a relocation exercise — perhaps resulting from delays in obtaining and refurbishing new premises or from departments/sections moving at different times — can seriously affect recruitment and training plans.
Although manual and clerical staff may be replaced relatively easily, staff with special skills are hard to find.
If they refuse to move with the firm, the company will have a difficult task on its hands in trying to find suitable replacements.
The loss of key staff can be expensive in other ways too — their contracts may well provide for more costly redundancy provisions than for junior employees.
MOBILITY
In trying to assess reactions to company relocation in terms of which staff will move, the following factors need to be taken into account:
Age;
Sex;
Marital status;
Education level;
Housing;
Socio-economic group;
Geographic region.
By analysing these factors and by determining a profile of the work-force, it is possible to gain a better idea of how many staff will move and who these staff are likely to be.
This in turn will influence decisions on the contents of the relocation/redundancy packages.
Age
In general, mobility falls with age; the most mobile being the 16 to 24-year-old age group.
However, the mobility of young workers may reflect that of their parents.
An independent survey on willingness of workers to move with their job was carried out in January 1983 by communications specialists, Milne and Stewart Consultancy.
A representative sample of the adult British population was asked: ‘If the company you work for had to move its premises, do you think you would or would not move with it and find a new home if it moved more than 50 miles away and gave you financial help to move?’
(A similar survey was also conducted in 1977.)
The results of this survey (see Table 1.1) demonstrate clearly the fact that younger people are the most mobile.
Sex
In general, women are less likely to move than men.
This is usually a result of family and marriage ties and so an employer might expect young unattached female staff to be more willing to relocate than married women.
Table 1.2 provides a breakdown of willingness to move by sex as drawn from the Milne and Stewart Consultancy's survey.
The survey shows that more people were prepared to move in 1983 than in 1977.
This may reflect a greater fear of unemployment in recent years.
Marital Status
Married women are less likely to move than unmarried women.
What is interesting, however, is that a Government Social Survey entitled Labour Mobility in Great Britain 1955–1963 , published in 1966, found that married men were more likely to move than single men.
Although in recent years, as second incomes have become more important, it is debatable as to whether this finding would still hold true.
The Guardian 's ‘People At Work Survey’(published in January 1982) which covered 11 389 Guardian readers, was conducted in June 1981.
It provides data on mobility as related to job change primarily for people in management, professional and technical occupations.
Surprisingly, this survey found that couples with large families were as likely to move as those without children.
Education level
The higher the level of education attained, the more likely the person will move.
The Government Social Survey mentioned above found that people with academic, technical or commercial qualifications were most likely to be willing to move.
Those with no skills or qualifications were least likely to do so.
These trends are also confirmed in the Guardian 's ‘People At Work Survey’ which found that some 49 per cent of those with a GCE/CSE qualification would consider moving to take up their next job, 59 per cent of those with a first degree and 74 per cent of those with a doctorate would do so.
Housing
The Government Social Survey also found that local authority tenants were least willing to move.
Owner occupiers were more likely to relocate but the most likely were those in rented accommodation from private landlords or those living rent free.
Socio-economic group
Mobility can be seen to vary according to people's type of occupation and seniority.
In general, the higher the employee's seniority, the greater the willingness to move.
The Milne and Stewart Consultancy's survey provides data by socio-economic groups for 1977 and 1983.
The survey used standard socio-economic groups: AB which covers management, professional, technical and administrative occupations; C1 which covers other non-manual staff; C2 which covers skilled manual workers; and DE which covers the semi-skilled and unskilled.
As expected, the survey found that, in 1977, willingness to move was highest amongst staff in the AB and C1 groups and lowest in the DE group.
But by 1983, the picture had changed.
Semi-skilled and unskilled workers were more willing to relocate than management and professional staff.
This may well reflect the effect of the recession on manual workers' perceptions of work — the importance of being in employment even if this means changing home.
Indeed, Table 1.3 shows that willingness to move amongst all socio-economic groups has increased in 1983 over the figures given for 1977.
It is interesting to note that management and professional staff are the least certain as to whether they will move with their jobs.
Geographic region
Willingness to relocate within the UK also varies by region.
The Milne and Stewart Consultancy's survey indicated that the further away from London that people live, the more willing they are to move, with the least mobile staff living in London and the South East (see Table 1.4).
This causes problems for employers as most company relocations are from this area to other parts of the country.
The Guardian 's ‘People At Work Survey’ also indicated that mobility in the London and South East region is below that in other areas of the country (see Table 1.5).
Some regions are more popular to move to than others.
The Government Social Survey found that people preferred non-industrial areas to industrial regions.
The South West emerged as the most popular area to go to; London and the non-industrial areas of the Midlands were also popular.
Reactions to relocation
The quickest way to find out people's attitudes towards relocation is to ask them.
Once a company knows who is moving it can form its relocation plans.
Why take the trouble of trying to assess from mobility predictions who will move and who won't?
The answer is quite simple.
There is little point in telling the staff that relocation is in the air if there are no precise facts available to answer employees' questions.
Employees are unlikely to decide whether or not to move with their firm if they do not know when the  move is taking place; where the company is moving to; who is affected; what are the financial inducements to relocate (if any); what are the redundancy terms for those eligible for them who stay behind; what are the medium and long-term prospects of the job in the new location; and many other points of concern.
Once the word ‘relocation’ is out, employees are bound to react negatively.
They feel threatened by the two alternative prospects — move or take redundancy.
Rumour and gossip will spread and the employer may well find key staff and others so unsettled that they look for and find other jobs.
The number of staff who choose to relocate with their firm depends, to a great extent, on how they are informed of the move and provided with information on the new location.
It is important not to respond to rumour before company policies or procedures are drawn up.
A problem arises here: the company policies and procedures need to be based on some knowledge of employees' willingness to move but asking the employees whether they are willing to relocate will not provide constructive answers unless those concerned can have answers to their questions based on hard facts — which are usually given in written policy statements.
The art, therefore, is in determining which staff need to be relocated and in drawing up a compensation package which will encourage most, if not all, of the key people to move.
If the relocation package is too generous, the company may find a higher percentage of non-essential staff moving with the firm and some employees, who would have moved for less, reaping substantial benefits.
Alternatively, if the relocation package is poor but the redundancy package generous, few staff will opt to move, leading to many redundancy claims and a recruitment and training problem when the company moves to the new area.
It is therefore necessary to strike a balance between the two sets of compensation packages.
Some firms do this by giving non-essential workers less generous relocation allowances than those given to key staff.
Senior staff may be offered the services of an independent relocation company.
Improving attitudes
To improve employees' attitudes to relocation, employers need to consider the following:
Preparation;
Communication;
Advice and assistance.
Preparation
Before implementing a relocation, ensure that whoever is organising the move is fully prepared to deal with employees' questions and anxieties.
Most relocation policies are developed around the issue of the finances involved in buying and selling property.
Employees' attitudes to relocation may well improve once they have learned what expenses they are entitled to under such policies.
Be prepared to inform employees of their entitlements.
However, not ‘being out-of-pocket’ is only one factor.
Employees are bound to be concerned about their future prospects should they decide to relocate.
Continuity of employment and the company's commitment to the new area are of great importance.
Attitudes may well be negative if employees have cause to believe that after moving to a strange area, they may face redundancy.
Concern may also arise about the employment opportunities for a relocated spouse and school and future work opportunities in the area for children.
Employees may also be worried about the social life in the new area and leaving their friends behind.
Another major problem can arise in house price differentials.
Moving from a low cost to a high price housing area will be of concern: employees will wish to know how they can be helped to meet increased payments.
Even moving from high to low cost areas can raise difficulties — employees may doubt that they will ever be able to move back to their home areas or other more expensive regions once they have committed themselves to living in a lower cost housing area.
Communication
How the move is announced can also affect attitudes.
If employees are provided with detailed information packs on the proposed new area at the time of the announcement this can go a long way to answering some of their questions and thus reducing anxiety.
Reassurances may need to be given on continuity of employment.
Involvement with trade union representatives within the organisation  concerned may prove valuable in respect of getting this particular message across.
To convey more information about the new location, companies might consider running tape/slide presentations on the area or taking employees to the new site so that they can see what it is like.
The latter measures may be carried out by a company representative or the organisation may choose to bring in an outside specialist to run this part of the communications exercise.
Advice and assistance
Advice on opportunities in the new area can be given through counselling.
This could take the form of group briefings or individual counselling sessions with the employee (and possibly the employee's spouse).
As with communications, counselling sessions can be carried out by an officer of the company or by an outside independent specialist.
Employees should understand the various forms of relocation assistance which may be given and what terms are available under the redundancy clause should moving remain an unattractive prospect.
INDIVIDUAL EMPLOYEE TRANSFERS
Individuals asked to transfer to another location are, in general, key staff.
They have been chosen for the posts in other parts of the country because their employers consider them to be the best people for these particular jobs.
By and large it is, therefore, in their best interests, with regard to career prospects, to accept these postings.
However, a number of companies report that employee attitudes towards relocation under such circumstances are becoming increasingly less favourable.
Some employees believe that the trauma of uprooting their families and homes outweighs any benefits that may be gained by taking up a new position (possibly a promotion) somewhere else in the country.
If the key person identified for the transfer does not want to move there will probably be a number of career-hungry individuals on the payroll who will willingly step into the vacant position.
Rather than try to change the reluctant-to-move employees' attitudes or even find out why they reject the transfer, companies may accept the easy option and transfer other willing individuals.
However, before taking  this step, the organisation should consider whether these people are right for the job.
After all, if the executives fail in the new location, the employer will have made a costly mistake.
Another problem to consider is that if the people identified for transfer do not go, what happens to their career prospects?
If the refusal of a transfer effectively stops an individual's career-route to the top, the chances are that he or she will look for another job.
As a result the employer loses a valuable employee.
Alternatively, if the employee receives promotion after refusing a transfer, this may be seen as a precedent by other staff when their turn comes to be asked to move.
Although a company cannot expect all staff offered transfers to other parts of the country to accept them, it can take steps to improve employees' attitudes towards relocation.
One of the specialist relocation companies, Merrill Lynch Relocation Management International, sponsored a ‘Study Of Employee Relocation Policies Among Major UK Companies’ in 1984 which was conducted by the Harris Research Centre by a poll among ‘The Times Top 1000 companies’.
Of the 243 companies interviewed, 56 per cent considered the disruption of children's schooling to be a very or fairly serious problem for transferred staff.
Other problems listed in the study were: having to live in a more expensive environment (41 per cent); inability of spouse to find work after relocation (35 per cent ); and families having to make new friends (14 per cent ).
Improving attitudes
The first step which should be taken by employers wishing to improve individual employees' attitudes towards relocation is to provide counselling.
This can be undertaken by a member of the company's staff — such as the personnel manager or employee welfare manager — or the company could employ an outside specialist to help.
The specialist relocation companies can provide a counselling service or there are a number of independent consultants who can carry out this task.
Counselling should explore the employee's concerns about the move and try to allay fears.
However, although the employee needs to be ‘sold’ the attractions of the new job/new area, it is important that questions are answered truthfully and realistically.
If an employee decides to accept the transfer as a result of a counselling  session which gave a misleading impression, it can only spell trouble for his or her future happiness in the job.
The employee's spouse and even the children as well may be invited to the counselling sessions.
If anxieties are ironed out before a transfer takes place, the employee is less likely to be under the pressure of family concerns when taking up the new appointment.
To convey exactly what the new area is like, some counsellors run audio-visual presentations.
Many firms pay for an employee (and spouse) to visit the new area to assess its suitability.
Employee attitudes towards a move may be made more favourable if the employer allows the relocation to take place during school holidays.
If the employer offers assistance towards housing costs, worries about living in a more expensive environment may be allayed.
If the employer offers help with finding new employment for the spouse — for instance by talking to company contacts in the area — this, too, can help the employee and family to feel more positive about moving.
A suitable relocation compensation and benefits package also needs to be provided.
And, possibly even more important for the employee's long-term security, the employer should provide assurances on the employee's future with the company as far as this is known.
INDIVIDUAL EMPLOYEE TRANSFERS ABROAD
Employees offered a transfer which involves relocation overseas will consider the pros and cons very carefully, as accepting such a transfer is a major step to take.
Employee attitudes are likely to range from excitement at the prospect of living and working in a foreign country to dread of having to adapt to a different climate, culture and life style.
Employers pay a hefty price if the executive relocated overseas fails in the post — for whatever reason — and is forced to return home.
So, it is therefore important to find out exactly what attitudes the employee and family have towards working abroad before posting them out.
Areas of concern
Employees' attitudes towards the country concerned may be based on false pre-conceptions.
Employees may take an instant like or  dislike to a particular place according to what they believe it to be like.
Papua New Guinea, for example, may conjure up ideas of tropical jungles which could well appeal to would-be explorer executives but not to the home-loving family types.
The executive may therefore accept or reject the whole idea of a transfer abroad on this basis alone.
And problems are bound to arise when the attitudes of the spouse towards a particular country are completely different from that of the employee.
Another area of concern revolves around job prospects.
Take, for example, an executive who is sent abroad on a two or three year contract.
When arriving at the foreign post, will he or she be in a less senior capacity than in the home country because of unfamiliarity with local customs and methods of working?
Similarly will the employee lose out when coming back to Britain ending up two or three years behind the progress of peers who stayed at home?
A period of working on contract abroad could leave the employee worse off than not going at all.
Other problems can arise with how the employee's spouse will cope with living abroad and what the spouse's employment prospects will be.
This applies not only while out on contract but also on returning to the home country.
The transferred executive will automatically return to a job in the home country; the spouse will not.
Concern over children and their education is another major problem area.
Families can be torn in trying to decide whether children should accompany their parents abroad and receive their schooling there or whether they should remain in the home country at a boarding school.
People posted abroad are also unhappy about losing touch with family and friends or they may even worry about what will happen to pets.
One problem area for transferred executives is what to do with their homes and personal effects.
Renting out the family home while working abroad on contract may not be particularly appealing; but selling it and having no stake in the home housing market on returning at the end of the contract is by no means an ideal solution.
Whether to take personal effects abroad or not — and anxiety about their safe transport or storage — is another area of worry for relocated executives and their families.
Trying to find somewhere to live in a strange country may also be a concern.
Add all these problems together and it would not be surprising if some employees refuse foreign postings.
Improving attitudes
It costs companies considerable sums of money to send employees abroad to work.
It is therefore sensible to ensure that those going are adequately briefed on exactly what their new country is like to live and work in.
So that employees can truly assess the new country, some firms pay for short ‘look-see’ visits so that the executive and spouse can judge for themselves, first-hand, as to whether they should accept the transfer.
Such visits may confirm or dispel anxieties about living conditions, climate and culture.
Either way, the executive and family will have gained more facts on which to base their decision.
Employee counselling sessions run in addition to briefing courses and ‘look-see’ trips allow employees to raise further questions.
It is advisable for a company to employ specialist counsellors who have a detailed knowledge of the new country to run such sessions.
It is also wise to invite the employee's spouse (and even the children) as they too, will have anxieties about the transfer which will need to be resolved.
These steps are likely to result in many employees' worries being reduced and their attitudes towards relocation abroad becoming more favourable.
To improve attitudes further, employers need to explain the provisions of the compensation and benefits package fully.
Drawing attention to paid visits back to the home country may help to reassure the family that they will not be completely cut off from relatives and friends.
The employer may wish to engage specialist relocation and international removal firms to deal with the employee's property (rent it out or sell it) and to transport household effects to the new location.
These firms can usually advise on procedures for taking pets abroad and the relocation firms can help with finding property in the new country.
Not all employees are going to react negatively to a relocation abroad.
Some may leap at the chance.
It is important to understand why people are favourably disposed towards a move, just as much as it is important to know why they are unhappy about going.
Some employees may look forward to the opportunity of experiencing life in a foreign country; others may be keen on the compensation package — the lure of tax-free earnings in some countries is strong.
But positive attitudes can turn into negative ones on arrival in an  unfamiliar land especially if it is customary for expatriates not to mix socially with local people but for locals and expatriates to live in separate communities.
If this is the case, it is better for employees to know and understand this before going abroad rather than to go out with high hopes only to return to Britain dispirited.
The Relocation of Companies
This chapter discusses the issues facing organisations contemplating a group relocation and presents five case studies of firms which have undergone such a move recently.
WHY RELOCATE?
Organisations may choose to relocate to a new area for a variety of reasons.
One may be cost.
Rent, rates or the cost of services may prove to be too expensive in the organisation's present site.
Or if a firm's lease is due for renewal or the rent is due for review, this may prompt a firm to relocate.
Moving to a new area may not only result in lower rent and rates but also lead to reduced transport and travelling costs and perhaps lower labour costs.
And financial assistance available in the new area may reduce the cost of rent, capital equipment, etc. further.
Another reason why firms choose to move is because of changing needs for space.
Existing operations may have outgrown space available in the old location and it may be impossible, owing to planning restrictions or the space actually available, to expand.
To overcome this problem in the short-term, firms may well find themselves taking on a number of small sites in the general area.
However, this usually leads to a proliferation of costs as well as inefficient working, as time and money are spent in linking the activities of the various sites.
Relocation to a new area could, therefore, provide the opportunity to consolidate on one site and to provide sufficient area for future expansion.
Firms may also decide to relocate because their existing locations are no longer convenient for clients, customers, suppliers and sales outlets.
Or they may move because their old location is not well placed for transport facilities.
Another factor which may influence a firm's decision is that of competition from other firms in the same line of business.
If the local market is saturated, it may be wise to move elsewhere to develop a new market.
However, firms must consider that moving to  a new area can break ties with existing customers and suppliers and could lead to a loss of business if new links are not forged straight away.
On the other hand, rather than move away from an area where similar firms operate, some firms may consider that it is in their own particular interest to move into such a location.
One of a firm's greatest resources is its people.
The current area may not appear attractive to staff, possibly because of high house prices, and so firms may want to move to help their recruitment or perhaps reduce their staff turnover levels.
Before taking any decision to relocate, organisations should consider carefully whether relocation is the answer to their problems.
For instance, if a reorganisation or modernisation of the current site is carried out this may result in the space savings required.
Perhaps some functions could be centralised, others eliminated and some sub-contracted.
This might dispose of the need to relocate.
And, with recruitment and turnover of staff, the company should examine its procedures thoroughly to find out whether its inability to recruit skilled people or reduce its high turnover rates could be the result of bad management practice rather than the location.
Also, before deciding to embark on a relocation exercise, it is important to ensure that the proposed timing is appropriate.
The effect that the move will have on peak periods of demand from customers should be considered.
Also, to benefit, for example, from financial assistance in the new area, the relocation may have to happen when grants are available.
And, if the organisation plans to relocate to areas in anticipation of new services being built, such as road links or new housing, timing is important.
If the business relocates too early or if the proposed developments are delayed, the organisation will need to have contingency plans on how the business will operate and where relocated employees will live until these new services are completed.
PLANNING
In order for a relocation exercise to be carried out effectively, planning is crucial.
Those responsible for planning the move must be experienced enough and have the time to spend on dealing with all the issues that arise.
For the process to proceed smoothly it is necessary to ensure that responsibility for overall policy decisions is assigned to an appropriate  individual or group (for instance the managing director or the board of directors).
If the organisation appoints committees to deal with aspects of planning, policy forming and co-ordination there needs to be clear lines of communication so that everyone involved knows the person to whom the committee reports.
Day-to-day decision making should be assigned to a particular person if this is not carried out by the board member(s) who have overall responsibility for the policy.
Those in charge of planning the relocation will need to establish exactly what key tasks need to be carried out, when, and in what order these should be done.
All plans should then be assessed to determine whether they are realistic and the effect they will have on employees, suppliers, customers, and so on.
As part of the planning process, it is necessary to establish the organisation's basic requirements and also any special demands which will need to be fulfilled.
For instance, the planners should work out if it is in the organisation's best interest to move into an existing building and whether such a building needs any refurbishment or, whether premises should be custom built.
Should the relocation take place in one complete stage or should the process be phased?
If everyone is to move at the same time, the new premises need to be ready in their entirety to house all the people and equipment being moved.
Alternatively, if the move is phased, some parts of the new building will need to be completed ahead of others.
There are advantages and disadvantages to either.
A single one-off move may be disruptive to overall business activities but at least the process is carried out over a short time.
A phased move may prove ideal if the original location of the company is spread over several sites as one site can move at a time and so not cause total disruption to the business.
On the other hand, in administration terms, suppliers, customers and employees will need to know which part of the operation is in which place and when it will be there, otherwise communication between the different sites may become confused.
It is also important to determine which activities and functions should be housed in the new and old locations especially if the organisation plans to carry out either a phased move or to keep a small presence in the old site after the main move has taken place.
Besides working out space requirements in the new location, the planners have to decide whether the organisation needs any special  facilities both for its own operations and for its employees.
Examples might include the need for strengthened floors for heavy equipment or high ceilings to house special machinery.
Loading bays and car parking facilities may also be necessary.
The planners also have to investigate what local services are available including transport, housing, schooling for employees' children, sports facilities, shopping, and so on.
Planning the move itself is also necessary.
Quotations for the removal need to be obtained and a contractor chosen.
The planners must work out in which order departments, functions or sites move and who will be responsible in each for overseeing the removal process.
If there are any special needs, such as the transport of dangerous substances or classified documents, these too must be planned.
The delivery date for new furniture and equipment needs to be arranged so that the new site is fully operational once all the equipment and goods have been transferred.
The company can expect to draw on the advice of many different specialists and institutions during and after the initial planning stage.
These include: architects, builders, surveyors, lawyers, bankers, local authorities and Government agencies, management consultants and relocation specialists.
It may also prove helpful to talk to other firms which have relocated to find out how they went about planning and executing the relocation, the problems they faced and how they overcame them.
New location
Before choosing a new location it is necessary to draw up a list of all the company's requirements and objectives.
In this way, many possible locations can be eliminated immediately leaving more time for the planning group to concentrate on the details which will determine exactly which site is the best one.
For instance, distance from motorways, railways or airports must be considered when choosing a new location.
Added to this, a company may wish to cut its costs or to benefit from Government or local authority financial assistance.
It may also want to move to an area which appears attractive to staff and where housing costs are reduced.
The new location could be only a few miles from the present site — especially if one of the company's priorities is to retain existing staff.
When all the various factors are added together, the choice of new locations may prove to be very limited.
Cost
Relocation to another area is not cheap.
Professional advice on funding the move is likely to be required.
Costs include: buying or leasing the new property; building and refurbishment; staff costs (including redundancy/severance payments, retention payments if staff are to be encouraged to stay until the move goes ahead, recruitment and training costs for new staff and relocation and removal allowances for those moving); communication costs (including the installation of telephone and telex facilities and changes to stationery); occupancy costs (including rent, rates, lighting, heating and security) and other costs (such as new machinery and the cost of removal of goods from the old to the new site).
Some cost savings may be offset against this total, such as money received from grants and savings made on rent and rates.
Firms need to include a contingency fund within the budget.
Although the costs of relocating can usually be easily quantified, the benefits associated with the relocation often cannot, in the short term, be transferred into cash values.
Any relocation depends on a detailed cost/benefit analysis being carried out to ensure that the exercise is truly worthwhile.
EMPLOYEES AND RELOCATION
What information should be given to the work-force?
If employees hear rumours of an impending move, they are likely to be very apprehensive about their future with the firm and worry about having to uproot themselves and their families to move to an unfamiliar area or take redundancy.
Neither option will appear attractive.
Staff may, therefore, begin looking for alternative employment in the local area so that they will not be forced to make the choice of a job with their employer or no job at all.
Rumours of a relocation can spread quickly.
This puts management in a difficult position.
It can either refuse to comment on the possibility of a move until some concrete decisions have been taken as to where the company will relocate to and when the move will occur or it can adopt a more open style and keep the staff or union representatives in the picture about developments taking place within the relocation programme.
Either way, some employees may  look for other jobs to avoid being made redundant or having to relocate.
When informing employees of a likely relocation, employers need to present as full a picture as possible of the reasons why the move is necessary and the effect that it will have on existing jobs.
Union representatives are particularly concerned to find out as many facts as possible to keep their members fully informed and to negotiate the best deal they can, both for those moving with the firm and those accepting redundancy.
Likely subjects to be included on the list for discussion with staff or union representatives include: reasons for moving and details of the new company location and its facilities; the effects of the move on existing jobs and organisational structure; union bargaining rights at the new site; the relocation and redundancy policies; job opportunities at the new location — for employees, their spouses and also for children nearing working age; how to avoid disruption to employees' children's schooling and the relocation timetable.
Before embarking on briefing exercises with staff or negotiating discussions with unions, management needs to consider the sorts of questions that are likely to be raised and to have answers available.
Staff's anxieties will grow if their questions remain unanswered.
COMMUNICATION
There are many ways in which the work-force can be told about the relocation.
Briefing groups and negotiations with union or employee representatives have already been mentioned.
Other methods include sending letters to all employees and holding meetings for groups of employees or for all employees.
Communication to staff may come straight from the top, with the highest levels of management informing all employees of the move or top management may inform senior management who, in turn, hold meetings with supervisors to explain how and why the relocation exercise will take place.
It is likely that many follow-up meetings will need to be held after the initial announcement is made to communicate progress and to deal with employee problems as they occur.
The communication exercise may involve bringing in relocation consultants to answer employees' questions and provide advice.
Audio-visual presentations  indicating the facilities available in the new area may be shown and a company newsletter may be launched to explain the move.
News of a proposed relocation should not only be communicated to employees but should also be given to suppliers and customers.
Publicity
A group move is likely to attract attention from the media.
The relocation of large companies is likely to attract national television, radio and newspaper coverage.
Even smaller firms moving away from an area may get press coverage in local newspapers.
Management will therefore need to be able to have sufficient information to present an accurate account to the media.
Any such media coverage should, in no way, present different factual information from that supplied to employees who should also hear about it first.
ALLOWANCES
The allowances given to staff moving as a result of a company relocation may be the same as for individual staff transferring at company request.
(Details of relocation allowances are given in the next chapter.)
Alternatively, the relocation package may be more or less generous.
Individuals transferring as a result of a promotion have more incentive to move to the new location than those being asked to move as a result of a group move.
Some companies therefore give employees in the latter situation an additional incentive payment to encourage them to move.
On the other hand, employers who value the services of key individual employees and are dependent on them accepting a transfer may give them more generous relocation packages.
Much depends on company policy and philosophy.
This raises the question of eligibility for relocation allowances.
Relocating an employee can prove very costly.
To reduce costs some firms lay down eligibility criteria for relocation assistance.
For instance, if support staff can be recruited locally in the new site, firms may restrict eligibility for relocation assistance to senior employees or to those with specialist skills who could not easily be replaced.
Alternatively, assistance can be based on a sliding scale, with greater financial help given to key employees and the more junior workers given only some elements of the package.
One problem which an employer may face is that of an employee accepting the relocation package, moving to the new area and then leaving the company to go to another local firm.
To prevent such financial losses being made on the payment of relocation allowances, some employers make relocation payments in the form of a loan, which employees have to repay if they leave the organisation within a fixed number of years (often one or two years) of the date of the move.
Organisations may also not wish to pay relocation allowances to staff approaching retirement.
This may involve suggesting such employees take early retirement or making them redundant.
REDUNDANCY PAYMENTS
Redundancy faces those staff who choose not to relocate or who are ineligible for relocation assistance and will not move without it.
Once employees are certain they are not going to move with the company, they are going to look for alternative work.
If they leave before the relocation takes place, this could put the employer in severe difficulties with regard to staff shortages.
Many firms, therefore, pay retention bonuses or give redundancy payments above the statutory minima to those staff who stay until an agreed date.
This generally enables business to continue as usual until the move takes place.
In drawing up the relocation and redundancy packages careful consideration needs to be given to the financial implications for employees of one vis-à-vis the other.
If the redundancy package is too generous many staff will opt for that and not even consider relocating.
If the relocation package appears very favourable, the company may find itself paying out relocation costs for more staff than it had budgeted for.
It is important to strike a balance so that the employees required by the company in the new area actually do choose to relocate and those which can be replaced easily stay behind.
PROBLEMS
Employees from the old location may be reluctant to move immediately, preferring to wait until their children finish important examinations.
Some firms are very flexible on this issue and where possible, allow them to relocate at a later date.
Employees' spouses may also have difficulty in finding work in the new area.
Generally, companies cannot do much to help, although some try to employ relocated employees' spouses or inform them of job vacancies in other firms in the area.
Some companies help employees' spouses to find work by contacting Jobcentres or the local Chamber of Commerce.
New staff recruited locally who are not trained in the company's methods cannot make a full and effective contribution to the running of the business straight away.
This may lead to problems with regard to business efficiency.
Where possible, some overlap of working between the staff employed in the old and new locations can help to ease this difficulty although such arrangements do present their own problems in terms of transporting staff to and from the old or new buildings.
The following five case studies, two of which are treated in depth and three in brief, outline how the organisations concerned carried out their group moves.
They indicate typical problems facing firms undertaking a group relocation exercise, how and why particular decisions were made and how particular points of difficulty were overcome.
R.S. COMPONENTS Ltd
Background
R. S. Components distributes electrical and electronic components in the UK and currently employs 1400 people.
Between June 1982 and September 1984, it relocated from premises in the City of London to Weldon, near Corby.
The company was formed in 1937 as Radiospares Ltd and grew quickly.
It moved premises five times in five decades to keep abreast of space requirements.
In the late 1960s the company took over premises in the City of London and grew by adding overflow locations.
By the late 1970s it was operating out of two headquarters buildings in the City, warehouses in north London and Milton  Keynes and a packaging factory in Hertford.
There was an obvious need to bring operations together to maintain high levels of customer service and cut the proliferation of unnecessary costs which arose from being in five separate sites.
R. S.'s historical roots were in London and so careful consideration was given to remaining there.
However, staying was ruled out by the realisation that it was impossible to find a suitable single site to accommodate all the various departments.
R.S. decided that, like many other companies, its business really needed custom-built premises with potential for expansion.
It was therefore necessary to find a large, greenfield site of the kind unobtainable in London.
A number of factors influenced the company's choice.
A large site (at least 30 acres) was required.
It was also important that planning restrictions would not prevent R.S. creating an ideal environment for the company's expanding business.
It was crucial that the postal and telephone services, access roads, car parks, electricity, gas, drainage, etc. should be available or could easily be provided.
The site needed excellent communications with the rest of the country; R.S. would not survive in a distribution business if this was not available.
The area also had to offer attractive living conditions for staff.
The company considered many sites which fulfilled some but not all the criteria.
For a long time Milton Keynes was the favoured location.
However, the costs of building and of providing the necessary infrastructure together with planning restrictions meant that it was less than ideal.
By the end of 1981 Corby was chosen from a very short list of places.
But even in Corby only one site, that of Weldon, suited all the company's requirements.
(Several alternatives were subject to possible subsidence due to previous iron-ore mining.)
The company chose Weldon as being the best site because:
Weldon was in an Enterprise Zone created by the Government to help the nearby town of Corby.
The corporate tax relief and lack of planning restrictions within an Enterprise Zone created very favourable conditions for a service company like R.S. Components to expand and grow;
It was a greenfield site which allowed R.S. to construct buildings which suited its commercial needs exactly and which would provide excellent facilities for staff;
There was plenty of land around the site which would allow easy expansion when that became necessary;,
Weldon was known to have excellent transport and communications links with the rest of the country;
Weldon is within easy reach of major towns like Leicester, Peterborough and Northampton.
Housing was cheap and easily available;
The area possessed a large labour pool.
The site was chosen in December 1981.
By April 1982, R.S. had received the freehold title for its site from the Commission for the New Towns.
Building began that year and by February 1984 the warehouses were occupied and by April the offices were ready too.
Relocation or redundancy
At the outset R.S. had no idea of how many staff would relocate or how many would choose redundancy.
R.S. designed its relocation package to take the financial considerations out of moving so that the staff could make their work/career decisions without worrying about the costs of relocation.
Similarly the redundancy package was geared to match the relocation package so that staff would not base their decision on financial matters.
The terms of the redundancy package for those who stayed until the relocation took place were far more generous than normal redundancy provisions.
This was to encourage people to work through until their department moved and also so that R.S. left the impression of being a caring employer with those who chose redundancy.
Tables 2.1 and 2.2 give details of the relocation and redundancy provisions.
How many moved
A very high percentage of R.S.'s professional, supervisory, skilled and semi-skilled staff moved with the company.
R.S. also reports that the numbers of staff leaving the company before the relocation took place were insignificant.
This enabled continuity to be maintained right up until the move occurred.
Out of the 850 people employed in London and Hertford, 150 moved to Corby.
The relocators included 31 out of 33 departmental managers, 18 out of 21 marketing staff, 17 out of 21 engineering staff and 14 out of 16 purchasing staff.
And in other administrative areas, such as personnel and accounts, most of the supervisory and long-term experienced people opted for relocation.
Within the company's warehousing and distribution operation, which accounts for 75 per cent of the company's employees, the majority opted to stay in London.
Many of these employees were women and the company was not surprised that they decided to remain in London where their husbands were working.
However, the two dozen or so people in these departments who did relocate had sufficient skills and experience to provide training for newcomers as the business gradually transferred.
Communication
In April 1982, with the assistance of Hill and Knowlton (a public relations company), the company began publishing a series of brochures entitled R.S. Moves to Weldon .
produced every two or three months, these brochures explained why the move was necessary, the amenities available in nearby towns and the R.S. relocation package.
R.S. ran seminars in London hotels bringing in speakers from the relocation area to discuss issues such as health, education and housing.
The company also organised coach parties to Weldon for all of the management staff but, due to the numbers involved, R.S. was unable to provide adequate trips for all staff and their families.
(The relocation package included an element for expenditure on house hunting and fact finding trips so that staff could explore the area themselves.)
As well as the company brochure, employees were given documentation on the five counties surrounding the relocation area so that they had the opportunity to get to know the areas before  visiting them.
for each county, employees received detailed documentation on:
Health (every doctor, clinic and hospital);,
Education (every establishment from crèche to university);
Housing (every agent plus property sheets); and
Local amenities (from sports to concert halls).
R.S. used Hill and Knowlton to research the five counties and to help it produce the relocation documentation.
Housing
At the outset of the move to Weldon, house prices in the area were very depressed and people from the South East could trade up favourably.
Typically, a young couple with a small two-bedroomed semi in the Essex commuter belt could buy a larger three-bedroomed semi with a reasonable garden or, with a nominal increase in their mortgage, they could buy a three-bedroomed detached house.
However, over the period of the relocation programme, house prices rose considerably.
This was because so many other companies were moving into the area and the demand for property grew.
But, in 1984, by the end of the relocation programme, house prices in the Corby area were still 15 per cent less than in the South East.
Many of R.S.'s employees were able to become first-time house buyers in the new location, whereas in London they could not have afforded property.
Help and advice
In order to help employees sell their homes and move from London, R.S. engaged the specialist relocation company, Homequity Relocation, to run a guaranteed home sale programme.
Under such a scheme, the relocated employees sell their property for a guaranteed price to the relocation company and so become ‘end of the housing chain' buyers in the new location.
This takes much of the uncertainty of house buying and selling off the relocated employee's shoulders.
Worries that the relocated employees faced were finding employment for relocated spouses and ensuring that the relocation did not affect children's schooling.
R.S. engaged the spouses of  relocating employees in the new location when this was appropriate and publicised employment opportunities in the surrounding area.
The relocation process covered three summers.
This meant that school-children taking ‘O’ and ‘A’levels were not moved during this crucial time and so disruption to schooling did not present a major problem for parents.
Costs
The costs of the relocation were as follows: land and building costs £13.5 million; equipment and fitting out costs £1.7 million; and the revenue cost of redundancy, relocation and other associated expenses £2.3 million.
These were partly offset by grants and capital allowances totalling £9.2 million.
The company believes its investment in Weldon to be very worthwhile although the benefits cannot be so precisely quantified.
R.S. notes
The company is once more contained within one location…
The new complex lends itself to mechanised materials handling…whilst the cost of construction has been high, rental costs have been eliminated.
…Staff enjoy easier journeys from the surrounding country….
Further space for expansion is on the door-step….
Suppliers find delivery to R.S. easier.
The company adds that it is already benefiting from increased efficiency and expects a large return on its financial investment in Weldon.
STC plc
Background
During 1982 and 1983, STC plc carried out a consolidation and relocation exercise for its systems and software centre, IDEC.
As a result, six separate operations based in north London (two in Cockfosters, three in Potters Bar and one in Whetstone) and one in Orpington in Kent were relocated to Stevenage in north Hertfordshire.
The company, which is non-unionised, employed 298 people in the north London sites and 75 in Kent.
The move took place in two stages with the north London sites  relocating first in 1982 and the Kent-based operation transferring to Stevenage in the summer of 1983.
Because of the nature of its business, a high proportion of IDEC's work-force are professional and technical staff possessing scarce skills in software and systems design and hardware engineering.
In its north London sites, for example: 15 per cent of staff were professional/technical management; 50 per cent professional/technical, e.g. programmers, engineers and systems analysts; 17 per cent professional support staff such as accountants and administrators; and 18 per cent non-professional support staff, including technical assistants, secretaries and clerks.
During the mid-1970s, the company decided that the consolidation of its activities on one site would produce considerable advantages.
Some of the most obvious included the benefits of face-to-face, and hence faster, communication between staff, together with the building of a team spirit amongst professionals of different disciplines.
There were, however, no suitable premises available in north London which could house the company and there were other problems associated with its existing locations.
The high cost of housing in the north London area was proving a barrier to the recruitment of people with the rare technical skills it required.
Relocation to an area which presented the right company image together with good facilities for employees could ease the problem.
Relocation was therefore an option.
But to maintain its market position as a leading systems and software house, it would need to persuade about 70 per cent of its key employees in the north London locations to relocate with the company.
With this in mind, in 1977 the company formed the following objectives on the relocation and consolidation of its activities:
‘To provide a modern, high technology environment in which to consolidate company activities engaged in the development of software and systems using state-of-the-art techniques;
‘To eliminate, as far as possible, the high cost of housing as a barrier to recruitment in the north London locations occupied by IDEC; and
‘To retain as many as possible of the existing work-force during and following the move.’
During the period 1977 to 1980 two professional management consultancy organisations were appointed to carry out studies of  suitable areas where the company might relocate.
North Merseyside, the West Country, the South Coast and Hertfordshire emerged as potential areas.
North Merseyside was dismissed immediately as existing staff would be unlikely to wish to relocate to the area and it was felt such a location would not serve to enhance the company's recruitment image.
The possibility of a move to the West Country or the South Coast was considered but the company was uncertain of retaining sufficient numbers of the existing work-force and these options were also dropped.
In contrast a site within the county of Hertfordshire was considered an ideal area for relocation since this appeared to offer the company the best opportunity to fulfil most of its objectives.
Hertfordshire planning authority suggested that the company direct its attentions elsewhere, possibly Bedfordshire or Milton Keynes, arguing that there was almost full employment in the county and the council was under extreme pressure from environmental groups not to permit any further industrial or commercial development.
However, Stevenage — within Hertfordshire — still had ‘new town’ status at this time and development in the town was under the control of the Stevenage Development Corporation (now transferred to the Commission for the New Towns).
The Corporation offered IDEC a greenfield site on the edge of the town centre which was zoned for office development.
IDEC felt confident that it would be able to attract a high percentage of its staff to this location as the area not only offered a pleasant environment but was only about 20 miles from north London.
A suitable developer was found to construct the new building.
As soon as the contractors moved on site in August 1980, the company began to brief its employees on its plans.
Employee briefing
STC IDEC LIMITED has an open management style and, as a result, most employees were aware that a consolidation of activities was going to take place but that there were no suitable local premises which the company could take over.
Many, therefore, were expecting to be relocated.
When the location of the site was announced in the summer of 1980, staff were given a provisional timetable to show when various employees might be moving.
The company's philosophy was to keep staff informed, on a regular basis, of progress on relocation and a monthly meeting, known as the IDEC Staff Forum, was held in which elected staff representatives met members of management to discuss areas of interest.
Subjects ranged from site matters to overall company strategy.
These forums had been held before the move was considered to provide lines of communication between management and staff but, the company notes, these meetings took on a new usefulness when the relocation was announced.
IDEC also employed a relocation co-ordinator between September 1980 and March 1981 to talk to each employee individually about problems they faced or might face as a result of the move.
The company also asked its advertising agents, Moxon, Dolphin & Kerby, to produce a briefing file which was issued to all employees.
The file contained details on: Stevenage as a place to work; IDEC's relocation package; the types of housing available and its cost; education; health; transport; leisure facilities; details on the surrounding towns and villages as well as useful addresses covering Citizens' Advice Bureaux, estate agents and local newspapers.
The report was presented to staff at a series of meetings and an audio-visual (tape/slide) presentation was made covering its key aspects.
The company also arranged a series of ‘partner’ evenings so that spouses could see the presentation.
The company recognised that it faced a greater problem in attracting the Kent-based (Orpington) staff to Stevenage than it had in persuading the north London staff to move — distance alone was an important consideration.
So, as part of the briefing process, Orpington employees and their families were taken on day trip coach tours to Stevenage so that they could visit the site where the new offices were being built and look at the types of houses and facilities available in the area.
Indeed, the company's relocation package recognised the fact that the Thames acted as a barrier to relocation for the Kent-based employees and made provision for them to make four paid visits to view accommodation.
Employee allowances
The company's policy was to offer home relocation at basically zero cost to eligible individuals.
Technical and professional employees, senior staff and certain other employees with key skills (such as data control staff with operating languages, job controllers and printed circuit board layout draftsmen) were eligible for this relocation assistance, although the allowances package was dependent on the  condition that the distance between the employee's old home and Stevenage represented an increase of at least 15 miles compared with their old home to work journey.
North London-based staff who were not in a category entitled to home relocation allowances, or who had an additional mileage of less than 15 miles were entitled to receive additional commuting costs.
(These were paid at a rate of 12p per mile with 100 per cent of the extra cost paid in the first year; 75 per cent in the second; 50 per cent in the third; 25 per cent in the fourth and nothing thereafter.)
All commuting costs were grossed up for tax and National Insurance deductions and paid through the payroll.
The company's policy with regard to the Orpington staff was to relocate the homes of entitled categories and discourage people from commuting.
Non-entitled categories were declared redundant unless they wished to relocate their homes to the Stevenage area at their own expense.
The company did make efforts to redeploy such people to jobs at other STC south London locations and IDEC reports this has been moderately successful.
Many of the elements which made up the relocation package applied equally to eligible staff moving from Kent and north London, for example, the payment of removal expenses, disturbance allowance and house expenses.
However, some of the provisions did vary according to whether the individuals were moving from one or other of the areas.
For instance, north London staff requiring temporary accommodation while arranging for permanent housing were given a temporary accommodation allowance for up to 13 weeks whereas those moving from Kent were able to receive this allowance for up to 26 weeks.
And the Kent employees were able to make four paid visits to the new area compared with the north London employees' two.
Further details of the relocation package are given in Table 2.3.
Who moved
In terms of outcome the relocation of the north London operations proved to be successful with 95 per cent of the ex-north London eligible categories continuing to work in Stevenage and some 90 per cent of this group still there one year later.
Of the categories ineligible for home relocation assistance, 75 per cent continued to work at Stevenage after their jobs moved although many of these   have now left the company.
IDEC has not had any particular difficulty in replacing these leavers.
However, the relocation of Orpington-based staff was not so successful.
The company managed to retain 50 per cent of the key managers and technical specialists.
The remaining 50 per cent were made redundant.
The company notes that the relocation exercise was carried out without the help of an independent specialist relocation company which may have been able to ease staffs' fears about moving to a new area and so possibly improve on the 50 per cent retention rate.
Costs
Like many others, the company found that relocation of staff is a costly procedure.
The budget for STC's relocation exercise was as follows: staff rehousing £520 000; redundancy, recruitment and training £358 000; temporary relocation expenses and travel allowances £110 000; and incentives for temporary retention of staff £55 000.
The total cost of the operation was therefore in the region of £1 043 000.
Source : This case study is based on Industrial Relations Review and Report , No. 348, July 1985.
AMERICAN CAN (UK) Ltd
Background
In April 1982, American Can relocated its head office to Congleton in Cheshire.
Before the move, the head office function was split into three locations; two of the head office buildings were in Liverpool and the company's sales function was based in Watford.
One of the head office buildings was originally on the company's Liverpool manufacturing site but, in April 1982, American Can moved this office to the Congleton complex because the Liverpool head office site was, by this time, no longer in the centre of the company's operations.
In addition the head office buildings in Liverpool had not been purpose built to suit the needs of the company and they had become too small.
As a result, American Can decided that relocation could provide the answer to consolidating its head office activities and could also meet the company's need to be more centrally based in larger, more suitable accommodation.
The company decided that any new location had to be within reasonable travelling distance from motorway and railway networks as well as be close to an international airport.
American Can also looked for areas with reasonably priced rates and rent and with pleasant housing areas for staff relocating with the company.
Congleton was chosen because of its close proximity to Manchester airport and motorway links.
The site was about three hours' drive  away from London and also had good communications with the north of the country.
Being further from Manchester than other areas often favoured by businesses, such as Wilmslow and Altrincham, Congleton offered cheaper rent and rates to the company and cheaper housing for relocating employees.
American Can chose to move into an existing modern building rather than build afresh.
The new premises were completely refurbished inside, however, in order to meet company requirements.
Communication
Before the move, the company organised visits by coach to the new area for employees and their spouses to view available housing.
American Can also paid travelling and accommodation expenses for employees and their families considering relocation so that they could view houses and schools by themselves.
Evening sessions were arranged for employees and their spouses in which the relocation package offered by the company was explained.
A representative from the specialist relocation company, Homequity Relocation, gave details of how the home sale programme would operate and a local builder from Congleton was invited to speak on housing opportunities in the area.
Relocation allowances
The relocation allowances package covered such items as: legal expenses; the cost of a structural survey; stamp duty; estate agents' fees; removal expenses; the cost of two visits by the family to view accommodation (this covered travelling and accommodation costs); and a disturbance allowance of up to two months' salary.
(This applied to existing employees — new recruits asked to relocate received only one month's salary as a disturbance allowance.)
Employees qualified for travel expenses while they were commuting between the old and new locations, before moving into accommodation in the new area.
Travel expenses were paid for a maximum of three months.
Employees benefited from Homequity's guaranteed home sale programme which speeded up the sale and purchase of properties in the old and new locations.
Who moved
Of the 80 to 90 staff employed in Liverpool and Watford all the 55 directors and senior managers eligible for the relocation package continued to work in the new location and of these 55, all but three moved to Congleton.
These three decided to commute to and from Liverpool each day.
(Liverpool is about 40 to 50 miles away from Congleton.)
About half a dozen employees decided not to relocate their homes immediately at the time of the company's move south, but to relocate in the following year.
Two sales staff employed in the Watford office remained in that area as their clients were based in the south of the country.
The support staff (approximately 30 people) were not offered the relocation package and were made redundant.
The company employed new support staff in Congleton.
They were engaged before the relocation and given their induction training in a nearby hotel.
This new group was taken by coach to Liverpool before the move so that they could get to know their new managers and the methods of working before the relocation exercise.
BLUE CIRCLE INDUSTRIES plc
Background
Blue Circle's group headquarters began its relocation from central London to Aldermaston in Berkshire in 1983.
During the late 1970s, the company found that it was becoming increasingly expensive to maintain its head office in London and therefore looked for alternative accommodation elsewhere.
Rather than rent a building, the company decided to build its own offices and then spent 18 months to two years looking for a suitable area.
The company needed access to both London's major airports (Heathrow and Gatwick) and to motorways.
Aldermaston was chosen as it met these requirements.
Communication
Staff were advised that the company was looking for a new property when the search for a new suitable area began and when Aldermaston  had been identified as the place where the new offices were to be built.
The company then arranged coach trips for employees and their spouses to view the area.
Open days were held at Aldermaston to provide information on the town and the facilities available there.
Blue Circle engaged Black Horse Relocation, a specialist relocation company, to carry out ‘staff clinics’ during which staff could discuss their questions and problems with members of Black Horse and Blue Circle staff.
Relocation allowances
The relocation out of London led Blue Circle to revise, improve and formalise its existing relocation policy.
The resulting package included the reimbursement of such items as: estate agents', legal and survey fees; removal expenses; and the cost of new school uniforms.
The company also paid 50 per cent of the cost towards new curtains and carpets up to a maximum of £1500 free of tax.
When employees are asked, as in this case, to relocate as part of an office move they also receive £1500 paid through the payroll (and hence subject to tax) as a compensatory disturbance payment.
The company also paid travelling expenses for all employees following the move of their department for a six-month period.
Employees were able to take advantage of Black Horse Relocation's guaranteed home sale programme to sell their old properties quickly and purchase houses in the new area.
Blue Circle offered interest-free loans to a maximum of £10 000 over 15 years to those suffering as a result of a disparity in house prices.
Any assistance given was based on a survey of house prices carried out by Black Horse Relocation.
Who moved
The central London head office originally employed 400 people.
When the relocation was announced in 1983, Blue Circle expected that around 30 per cent of the work-force would not move with the company.
By the middle of 1984, however, the company's prediction had changed and it anticipated losing 50 per cent of its staff.
Many of the support staff, especially clerical workers, found other jobs in London and many of the company's married women employees  opted to take redundancy rather than relocate as their husband's employment was in the London area.
Those choosing to take redundancy received the company's standard redundancy provisions as agreed with the British Cement Staff Association.
The relocation itself was phased with departments relocating separately to the new location.
Employees with school-age children were allowed to buy property in the new area but not move until the end of that school year.
Apart from a few small departments which relocated to Aldermaston into temporary accommodation shortly after the site was purchased, the main move was made in two parts starting with the move of the headquarters of Blue Circle Cement, the main UK operating group, into temporary accommodation in the third quarter of 1984.
With the completion of the new office block the whole of the operation relocated there in September/October 1985.
SUN LIFE ASSURANCE
Background
Sun Life Assurance employs 2500 employees and in 1976 the head office was relocated from London to Bristol.
The main reason why the company decided to undertake a relocation exercise was because of cost: rent, rates and overheads were a lot less in Bristol than in London.
Sun Life decided that Bristol was ideal for a number of reasons.
First, it had excellent road and rail communication with London and the rest of the country.
It also provided a large catchment area for high quality recruitment.
Its housing, shopping, school and medical facilities were considered to be excellent and so very attractive to the London-based staff.
It also offered many social and cultural activities as well as easy access to Wales and the South Western holiday resorts.
Property was also cheaper in Bristol than in London and so staff did not have to pay increased housing costs.
Sun Life did not know before the move how many employees would choose to relocate from London to Bristol although, at the end of the exercise (which was phased to ease potential business problems), 500 staff moved with the company.
Communication
Sun Life appointed a relocation officer at executive level who reported directly to the company's general manager.
The relocation officer held departmental meetings during which every aspect of the move was discussed and employees' questions were answered.
After these meetings, every employee was interviewed by a member of the team dealing with the relocation so they could raise any questions that they had.
Staff were asked at this time to complete a form indicating whether or not they wished to relocate.
As part of the employee briefing on the move, the company arranged week-end coach trips to Bristol for employees and their families to view housing and facilities in the area.
The company provided accommodation for those taking advantage of the week-end visits.
Second relocation exercise
At the time that Sun Life moved its head office to Bristol, it also had nine regional offices based in major cities.
The head office was responsible for company administration and the regional offices dealt with administration for the firm's 40 sales outlets.
However, by the early 1980s, the sales outlets had become linked to the head office via computer networks.
The types of contracts being marketed had changed too and required faster administration.
These two factors led Sun Life to review the role of its regional offices.
The company made an announcement in April 1983 that it would be closing eight of the nine regional offices (leaving one in London).
All staff in these offices were offered the opportunity to go to Bristol to work at the head office.
Some staff were offered employment in the sales offices which were geographically closest to their regional office.
The closure of the regional offices was phased over an 18-month period and affected 435 staff.
Of these, 185 remained in employment in pensions offices and sales branches, 120 were lost through natural wastage and 90 opted for redundancy.
Forty staff chose to relocate to the Bristol area and continued their employment with Sun Life in the head office.
Relocation allowances
Staff relocating with Sun Life received the cost of: legal and estate agents' fees for the sale of the old property plus the legal fees, stamp duty and surveyors' fees paid in respect of the new property.
The company also paid for one week's hotel accommodation for the employee and spouse to house hunt in the new location.
On moving house, Sun Life paid for employees and their families, travel expenses, removal expenses plus any storage charges for up to 13 weeks.
Employees also received a grant towards incidental expenses like buying carpets and curtains and paying for telephone installation.
The grant varied according to the employee's grade.
Sun Life also paid an allowance towards the cost of new school uniforms.
A taxable disturbance allowance was given to existing home owners.
The amount paid depended on each employee's grade.
Sun Life helped employees with bridging finance when this was necessary.
Loans were generally for six months and were interest-free.
If employees had to move into temporary accommodation while trying to find new housing, they received a tax-free allowance towards the cost of this accommodation for a maximum period of 13 weeks.
The allowance varied according to their grade.
Relocation Allowances
Organisations' relocation policies vary widely in their content.
Reimbursement of the costs incurred by employees moving at company request is common to the majority of relocation policies — be they drawn up by small or large employers.
These include the payment of fees incurred in buying and selling houses and removal charges.
If a transfer to a new job does not justify moving house employees generally receive help with increased travelling costs.
At the other end of the scale are major organisations which regularly move staff around the country.
They have well-defined written policies providing relocation assistance covering: house expenses incurred (legal and estate agents' fees, surveys, land registry fees, stamp duty, etc.); house-hunting expenses (travel and accommodation costs); house-moving expenses (removal, storage and insurance charges, travel expenses and hotel accommodation costs during the move); and financial assistance with the cost of temporary accommodation.
Employers also usually give a disturbance allowance, pay for bridging loans or use the services of a specialist relocation company to dispose of the employees' old homes.
And they may provide financial help towards the cost of an increased mortgage resulting from a move from an area of low cost housing to one where prices are considerably higher.
Some major organisations give staff additional compensation for moving.
In the banking and insurance sector, for instance, some employers give taxable transfer grants on top of the non-taxable disturbance allowances.
Firms can help in other ways too, such as by providing company housing for employees who are unable to find property in the new area before the date of their transfer.
Firms do not have to have a written relocation policy; although there are obvious advantages if they do.
For example, employees know where they stand with regard to compensation for moving at company request; a clear policy aids employee relations.
The levels of relocation allowances paid will change over time with employers usually reviewing their cash values each year.
(The data given in this chapter was collected during the first six months of 1985 and employers should, therefore, bear this in mind when determining their relocation policies.)
Relocation allowances and benefits may be determined through  negotiation between the employing organisation and the recognised trade unions or staff association.
However, the contents of a relocation package are not, in the main, considered to be a negotiable item by most employers.
They tend to review their arrangements — perhaps in consultation with their unions — so that allowances remain within Inland Revenue limits (to ensure employees do not pay tax on them) and so they provide adequate compensation for any costs incurred and the domestic upheaval involved in moving.
Relocation allowances for existing staff should not be reviewed as bonuses but as compensatory payments which enable employees to make decisions about their futures within their companies without worrying about financial pressures.
To illustrate the wide variety of allowances and benefits contained within relocation policies, this chapter gives some examples from named firms.
The full texts of eight relocation policies from named companies are given as examples of good practice in Appendix 1.
The first part of this chapter covers relocation provisions for existing individual staff transferred at company request.
A section at the end looks at relocation allowances offered to new recruits who have to move to take up an appointment.
ALLOWANCES FOR EXISTING INDIVIDUALS TRANSFERRED AT COMPANY REQUEST
Costs associated with buying and selling property
The direct costs incurred by employees who are buying and selling property are usually reimbursed in full by employers.
These costs include:
Estate agents' fees;
Solicitors' fees;
Stamp duty;
Land registry fees;
Local searches;
Survey charges (usually building society survey fees or, sometimes, private surveys);
Advertising or auctioneer's charges (if estate agents are not used);
Architects' fees;
Accommodation bureau fees;
Mortgage cancellation fees;
Insurance cover, rates and utility charges on property not yet sold (if the employee has already moved to the new location).
Some companies also reimburse costs incurred through premature termination of contracts for leased or rented housing as a result of the relocation.
Firms may also make provision for bridging loans or provide temporary mortgage facilities.
Merrill Lynch Relocation Management International's Second Annual Study Of Employee Relocation Policies Among Major UK Companies covers the relocation provisions of 303 of ‘The Times Top 1000 companies ’.
The study found that 89 per cent of all companies interviewed provide assistance for an employee buying a home in the new location.
Of those 271 firms which do provide assistance, Merrill Lynch found that 83 per cent pay for legal expenses and land charges/stamp duty.
Other forms of assistance included reimbursement of: survey costs (30 per cent), house hunting expenses (30 per cent ) and removals (28 per cent ).
Table 3.1 gives full details of the survey's findings.
Limits on reimbursement
Although employers generally reimburse the direct costs of buying and selling property, there are some firms which place limits on this.
For example, Brown & Root pays for estate agents' fees and legal charges up to a maximum of three months' gross salary.Company policy may also specify a limit as to the number of surveys that may be carried out at company expense.
The Rank Organisation, for example, pays for two and Nabisco pays for up to three building society surveys.
Abortive purchases
Some firms make special provision for abortive house purchases.
In Nabisco's policy legal fees resulting from up to two unsuccessful attempts to purchase a house are refunded.
And at VAG, if a house purchase falls through, further survey fees (in addition to the one building society and one private survey already carried out) may be reimbursed with the prior approval of the personnel manager.
Provision for people living in rented accommodation
Employees moving from rented accommodation to buying their homes may also receive some of or all the direct costs of buying property.
For instance, at Hambro Life Assurance, employees receive the costs of legal and any other fees incurred in buying property for the first time.
At VAG, employees leaving rented property and buying their own house receive 50 per cent of the costs of all normal legal fees, stamp duty, mortgage guarantee premium and building society legal fees.
Those VAG employees who decide to continue living in rented private accommodation receive reimbursement of legal fees incurred in drawing up the lease.
HOUSE HUNTING
Provision for house hunting varies widely between organisations.
Organisations may pay for just the employee and spouse to view accommodation or may make provision for children to go too.
Employees may be given time off for house hunting or may be expected to do this at weekends.
There may be fixed allowances payable for accommodation and meals or firms may reimburse reasonable expenses.
In general, two or three house hunting visits are allowed by most firms and around three to six days are usually considered to be adequate time to find housing.
House hunting allowances can vary according to employees' marital circumstances (for example at Guardian Royal Exchange Assurance) or according to the distance involved in the relocation (for instance at Pilkingtons).
Table 3.2 gives details of house hunting  
TEMPORARY ACCOMMODATION ALLOWANCES
If an employee has not found a permanent home in the new location at the time of the transfer, it is usual for the employer to pay the costs of a hotel stay and travel expenses home at week-ends.
If the old property has been sold but the employee has yet to complete buying the new, hotel and meal expenses may be payable for the employee and family in the new location.
Employers generally fix a time limit on the payment of these allowances.
Table 3.3 gives seven examples of company practice.
Merrill Lynch's 1985 survey of relocation policies found that 96 per cent of the ‘303 Times Top 1000 companies’ interviewed compensated their employees for the costs of living in temporary accommodation, with 78 per cent compensating for hotel and/or rented accommodation for a fixed period, generally for up to three months.
Company housing
Some organisations have company housing which may be used by employees who are transferred to the new area but have yet to complete their house purchases there.
For instance, Pilkingtons has company-owned licensed residential premises in St Helens, and employees yet to find permanent housing in the area may, whenever practicable, use these.
The company pays for board and accommodation.
When employees are accompanied by their families, they may be able to use company housing at Pilkingtons' expense but employees are entirely responsible for lighting, heating and the maintenance of their families.
REMOVALS
Company relocation policies generally cover the cost of the removal of household goods to the new location.
They may also cover the costs of insurance of personal effects in transit, storage charges and travel and hotel accommodation costs for employees and their  families during the move.
Some firms grant special leave at the time of the move.
Removal costs
Although practically all firms pay removal costs, a number require employees to submit quotes, and usually reimbursement is based on the cost of the lowest quote.
(Employees may opt for the higher quote but can expect to pay the difference themselves.)
In general, organisations ask for two quotes although some ask for three.
Some organisations specify particular items which are not covered by the reimbursement of removal costs policy.
For instance, the BBC's policy states: ‘the reasonable cost of the removal of household goods, excluding domestic animals and such items as motor vehicles, outbuildings, boats, etc. will be reimbursed’.
Policies may cater for the do-it-yourself enthusiast.
VAG's policy states that ‘if you wish to do the [removal]job yourself then the company will meet the costs of van hire and petrol expenses’.
Gratuities may be refunded.
The BBC reimburses tips up to 50p per man and Cadbury Schweppes pays gratuities up to 10 per cent of the removal charge.
STORAGE AND INSURANCE
Relocation policies may make provision for the payment of storage charges, for instance at Cadbury Schweppes and VAG.
Typically organisations require employees to obtain two or three estimates and base their payment on the lowest one.
Time limits may be set on how long employees can leave their goods in storage and receive reimbursement from their employers.
Storage costs are paid for a maximum period of 12 months in local authorities, six months at Nabisco and three months at Pilkingtons.
The insurance cost of household goods in transit or in storage, as appropriate, is also included in most policies.
TRAVEL AND HOTEL COSTS
It is usual for companies to reimburse travel costs incurred by the employee and immediate family during the move.
for instance, the  costs of travelling by rail or by car are refunded by Pilkingtons, Billiton and local authorities.
Guardian Royal Exchange Assurance pays the cost of second class rail fares.
If the relocation means that the employee and family have to stay in a hotel, accommodation costs for one or two nights are generally reimbursed.
SPECIAL LEAVE
At VAG and Associated British Ports, employees are given two days' special leave at the time of the move.
Employees at Henry Sykes and Guardian Royal Exchange Assurance have three days' special leave.
At Pilkingtons, the amount of leave given depends on the distance over which employees are relocating.
Those moving under 100 miles may take one day off work; those moving over 100 miles receive two days.
In addition, employees may be granted up to a maximum of three days' special leave.
SCHOOL FEES/SCHOOL UNIFORMS
It is usual for relocation policies to pay a grant towards the costs associated with the education of employees' children.
Prudential Assurance, for example, pays a tax-free allowance of £77 per child towards the cost of replacing school uniforms.
Sun Life Assurance pays £110 per child for those of primary school age and £150 per child for those in secondary education to help cover new uniform costs.
Pilkingtons pays a grant of £50 for any child attending school full-time.
Any non-refundable school fees which have been paid by the employee are reimbursed (less any Family Education Scheme entitlements) on production of receipts.
Brown & Root's policy takes into account relocation during term-time.
It says:
if relocation takes place during a school term, the company will reimburse day school fees for the remainder of that term or for such periods as required by the school for pupil removal.
If the relocation takes place at a time when it is important for a child to complete a course of education, e.g. GCE examinations, the company will pay reasonable board and lodging costs for the child  up to a maximum of £200 per month for the remainder of that school term or until all examinations are complete within that academic year.
Board and lodging costs are not paid during the school holidays.
DISTURBANCE ALLOWANCES
Company relocation policies usually provide for the payment of a disturbance allowance.
Such allowances are paid to employees to partly offset the expense of moving home.
They aim to cover the cost, for example, of cleaning and refitting or replacing carpets and other soft furnishings, transferring the telephone, disconnecting/reconnecting gas and electricity supplies, re-plumbing washing machines and the cost of re-decorating and/or buying decorating materials.
They also cover the cost of obtaining new appliances such as cookers if the move necessitates a change from electricity to gas or vice versa.
Although organisations recognise that employees may not always be able to refit old carpets or curtains in the new property, policies do often include a statement to the effect that staff should make every effort to adapt their existing possessions rather than buy afresh.
Some organisations provide detailed lists of items which are allowable under the disturbance allowance; others merely state that it is intended to meet all other ‘out-of-pocket’ expenses incurred during relocation which are not specified elsewhere in the company's policy.
Level of payment
The levels of disturbance allowance given vary widely from organisation to organisation.
Table 3.4 gives examples of disturbance allowances paid in 14 organisations.
In the main, disturbance allowances range from 10 to 12½ per cent of salary with maximum payments usually between £1000 and £1700.
However, as Table 3.4 shows, there is a great deal of variety in not only the amount of money given but also in the factors which are taken into account in its calculation.
Employees may, for example, receive flat-rate payments, allowances based on a percentage of   their salary, or a payment based on a number of weeks' salary.
Maximum and/or minimum levels of payment may be fixed or employees may receive an allowance according to the higher of two different figures: a percentage of salary or a flat-rate payment.
Around three-quarters (78 per cent) of the ‘303 Times Top 1000 companies interviewed in Merrill Lynch's 1985 relocation survey paid disturbance allowances.
In over half the companies, the amount was related to the transferee's salary.
In only 11 per cent of companies was a fixed amount paid.
Definition of salary
When a disturbance allowance is paid as a percentage of salary, an organisation's relocation policy generally spells out exactly what constitutes the salary.
For example, at Cadbury Schweppes the disturbance allowance is 12½ per cent of annual remuneration.
Company policy states: ‘Annual remuneration is defined as the employee's basic salary as a result of the move.
London weighting and/or any other allowance will not be included’.
At Nabisco, the disturbance allowance paid is 12 per cent of annual remuneration which is defined as ‘the employee's basic salary (including any shift allowance) as a result of the move (any bonus/commission payable will not be included)’.
When an employee's relocation is the result of a promotion or when an employee receives an increase in salary at the new location, any disturbance allowance payable on the basis of a percentage of salary is usually calculated on the new salary.
FACTORS AFFECTING THE LEVEL OF PAYMENTS
The level of disturbance allowances may vary according to employees' marital and domestic circumstances, their grade and/or whether their relocation results in a salary increase.
Marital status
A number of relocation policies take account of marital status in respect of disturbance allowances.
Married employees may not, under the Sex Discrimination Act 1975, receive less favourable treatment than single employees and thus may not receive lower allowances than those given to single staff.
But they may, however, receive higher payments.
Recognising that relocation may have a worse effect on married staff than on single workers, it is not unusual to find that they receive higher allowances.
This is the case, for example, at Henry Sykes.
Disturbance allowances may also be higher for those with dependants, for example at the Yorkshire Bank (see Table 3.4).
Type of accommodation
The level of disturbance payment given can also vary according to employees' domestic circumstances taking into account, for example, moves from unfurnished or furnished rented property to new rented accommodation or moves from rented property to purchased housing.
For instance, BBC staff who sell their own house at the old location and buy another property at the new location receive a grant of £1094 to cover the cost of miscellaneous expenses.
Similarly a grant is paid to staff who move from a rented unfurnished house or flat to a similar property at the new base or who buy a house of their own at the new location.
Employees moving from an unfurnished flatlet or room to similar accommodation at the new base or who rent or buy a house at the new location receive a grant of £438.
The same payment is given to staff who lived in furnished accommodation at the previous base who move to rented unfurnished property at the new base or who buy their own houses in the new area.
Staff moving from furnished accommodation to similar accommodation in the new location receive a grant of £66.
VAG's settling-in allowance for employees moving to or from furnished accommodation is 5 per cent of salary subject to a maximum of £830.
This compares with a disturbance allowance of 12½ per cent of salary subject to a maximum of £1660 for home-owners.
Nabisco's employees who move from rented accommodation receive a disturbance allowance which is limited to a refund of specific items of expenditure against receipts rather than the 12 per cent of salary paid as a disturbance allowance to home-owners.
Employees moving from rented homes have to discuss their list of intended purchases and prices with the personnel manager before buying them.
Grade
Disturbance allowances may vary with employees' grades.
Sun Life Assurance has 10 different levels of disturbance allowance which range from £660 for those in the lowest grade to £1715 for those at the top.
Salary rise
At Cadbury Schweppes employees who do not receive an increase in their salaries as a result of relocation, receive an allowance of 10 per cent of their annual remuneration in addition to their disturbance allowance.
Proceeds of house sale
At the Guardian Royal Exchange Assurance employees receive 10 per cent of their gross basic salary as a disturbance allowance (subject to minimum and maximum payments as agreed with its Inspector at the Inland Revenue).
In addition, employees with company mortgages may keep up to £1300 of the proceeds of the sale of their property when they move at the company's request.
Disturbance payments covering children
Payments given to employees who have to replace children's school uniforms or pay subsistence costs so that children can continue their education in the old location are usually listed separately from disturbance allowances in company relocation policies.
However, some organisations specify that the disturbance allowance covers such items.
For example, at Nabisco the allowance is intended to cover the costs of new school uniforms.
Employees also receive a payment of £150 for each dependent child under 18 (although children aged 16–18 must be in full-time education for employees to qualify for this payment).
REMOVAL GRANTS
Some organisations not only pay disturbance allowances but provide removal grants as well.
This is a way of giving employees more cash as an incentive to move and is particularly common in the banking sector.
At Lloyds Bank married staff receive a taxable disturbance allowance of 15 per cent of salary (subject to a minimum payment of £1125 and a maximum of £1980).
Single staff receive 10 per cent of salary (subject to a £565 minimum and a £990 maximum payment).
Managers also receive a removal grant of £1290 and other staff receive £1135.
These payments are tax-free provided that they cover  such ‘essential purchases’ as: new carpets and curtains when essential; light fittings, new cooking or heating appliances where there has been a change of power; and redecoration costs.
In essence, such removal grants cover similar items to those usually included under the heading disturbance allowance.
Removal grants or disturbance allowances may be paid tax-free under ‘Extra Statutory Concession A5’(see Chapter 6).
Additional grants
Companies such as Brown & Root and Cornhill Insurance pay relocated employees other grants on top of the disturbance allowance.
Brown & Root gives an additional housing assistance grant and Cornhill Insurance gives an extra transfer allowance.
Additional payments
Under some company policies, all domestic expenses which result from relocation are covered by the payment of a disturbance allowance.
This is the case, for example, at SKF and Nabisco.
However, others pay the costs of certain domestic expenses on top.
Pilkingtons pays a ‘resettlement allowance’ at a rate of 12½ per cent of salary at the date of transfer.
It also pays for telephone installation in the new house (provided the employee was already a telephone subscriber) and 50 per cent of expenses incurred in changing carpets and curtains, against bills, up to a maximum of £500.
Prudential Assurance's policy treats items such as the installation of a telephone and television aerials where they existed in the old house but not in the new and the reconnection of electrical/gas appliances as separate items.
Employees receive reimbursement of such costs on the production of full details and receipted bills.
Prudential Assurance pays £1406 as a non-taxable allowance towards incidental expenses.
(Single staff who are first-time buyers or who are renting accommodation receive £703.)
VAT RETURNS
A number of organisations require employees to submit receipts and VAT invoices so that they may reclaim the VAT paid as a business  expense.
Not all companies are registered for VAT purposes and VAT may not be reclaimed on all relocation expenses.
However, HM Customs and Excise has ruled that VAT may, for example, be reclaimed on: removal expenses including storage charges, estate agents' fees, legal and surveyors' fees and hotel and restaurant bills.
Some firms, such as Prudential Assurance, insist that employees indicate that payment is made on behalf of the company.
Prudential's relocation policy states that:
To recover this tax (VAT) it is essential that any invoices or bills which exceed £50 indicate that payment is made on behalf of‘The Prudential Assurance Company Limited’ and show separately the amount of VAT included in the gross total.
The name and address and VAT registration number of the payee must of course appear on all invoices/receipts.
TAXATION
The taxation of disturbance allowances is a particularly thorny issue.
To be given tax free, such allowances must be seen by the Inland Revenue as being reasonable in amount and properly controlled.
Company relocation policies generally provide tax-free disturbance allowances and employees are therefore usually asked to keep appropriate receipts to give to the Inland Revenue or their employers.
However, in other companies, disturbance allowances given to relocated employees are taxable.
(See Chapter 6 for further details.)
The disturbance grant paid to employees at Norwich Union Insurance Group is made up of two elements; one part taxable, the other non-taxable.
Those employees buying and selling houses receive the following payments: branch managers, £1690 non-taxable plus £1105 taxable; assistant managers, £1650 non-taxable plus £560 taxable; and other field staff, £1450 non-taxable and £195 taxable.
Those staff not buying or selling houses but who are changing their place of residence receive one payment of £335 which is not taxed.
The non-taxable allowance payments, as approved by the Inland Revenue, are paid by cheque, the taxable payments are given with salaries.
When transfer payments are given in addition to a disturbance  allowance, these are usually taxed.
Brown & Root's disturbance allowance is normally treated as tax-free, but the payment of the additional housing assistance grant is subject to the deduction of income tax through PAYE.
Similarly, at Cornhill Insurance, the transfer allowance is taxable.
And at Cadbury Schweppes, the additional allowance, paid to employees who do not receive salary increases as a result of their transfer, is taxable.
Removal grants and disturbance allowances both refund employees for out-of-pocket expenses incurred as a result of moving home.
Whatever terminology is used, the Inland Revenue does not allow tax-free treatment twice over: the disturbance allowance and any additional grants or allowances are taxable above a certain maximum payment.
WHEN PAYMENT IS MADE
Practice varies as to when employees receive payment of their disturbance allowances.
For instance, at Prudential Assurance, the taxable disturbance allowance of £1724 is paid in two equal instalments; employees receive one payment of £862 at the time of their transfer and the balance one year later.
Payment of the disturbance allowance at the Yorkshire Bank is also made in two equal instalments; one is given on the first available salary pay day after the move to the new house, the other is paid when the bank receives the proceeds of the sale of the employee's old house.
At SKF, the disturbance allowance is paid one month after the transfer has been agreed by the employee, while at Brown & Root, employees receive their disturbance allowance and housing assistance grant on completion of their move.
Employees at VAG receive their ‘settling-in allowance’ four weeks before the completion of the purchase of the new accommodation.
Cornhill Insurance's relocation policy states that the disturbance allowance ‘is payable upon removal but in no circumstances prior to removal actually taking place’.
The taxable transfer allowance, paid in addition to the disturbance allowance, is made in two stages; half is paid to the employee with the first month's salary in the new position and the remainder paid with the twelfth month's salary in the new position.
BRIDGING LOANS
Bridging finance is a major concern for both employers and employees.
If employees are unable to sell their old properties at the same time as they commit themselves to buying a new one, they may need finance in the form of a bridging loan.
However, at current high interest rates, many employees cannot afford to pay the interest on expensive bridging loans.
As a result, a number of employers are prepared to pay for interest-free loans.
For example, bridging loans are given, free of interest, for three months at Henry Sykes, Billiton, Cadbury Schweppes and Pilkingtons and for six months at Brown & Root, Boots (retail division) and Cornhill Insurance.
The employer may have a problem if the employee has not managed to sell the old property at the end of this time.
The employer may have to extend the period of the loan, thus incurring further interest charges or start charging the employee interest.
If companies do decide to charge the employee interest, the rate is usually bankers' base rate plus a percentage such as 1 per cent(at Cadbury Schweppes) or 1½ per cent (at Pilkingtons).
At Boots (retail division), however, if employees' bridging loans extend beyond six months, they may be charged the current building society interest rate — usually a higher rate.
Rather than run the risk of financing lengthy bridging loans, employers are turning increasingly to specialist relocation companies which, through  guaranteed home sale schemes, reduce the length of time necessary to sell an employee's old property.
Merrill Lynch's 1985 relocation study found that 44 per cent of the ‘303 Times Top 1000 companies’ interviewed provided bridging finance directly.
One in four gave no assistance with bridging finance and the remainder reimbursed employees for bank loan interest.
Merrill Lynch found that ‘one in five companies who provide assistance with bridging finance do not set a time limit, 28 per cent provide assistance for up to three months and 41 per cent for four to six months’.
The survey also contains information on the action employers take on the expiry of the time limit.
It found that 28 per cent would extend the time limit indefinitely, 8 per cent would extend it for another six months and 5 per cent for a further year.
About one-third would take no action at all: 21 per cent said they would be flexible according to individual's circumstances, 5 per cent would  continue to review the situation and 5 per cent would take no action if the employee acted reasonably.
Merrill Lynch found only a minority of companies would take a tough line — only one in seven firms would start to charge the current rate of interest and one in six would apply pressure on the employee to reduce the price of the old house in order to sell it.
HOUSE PURCHASE SCHEMES
Employees working in the banking, finance and insurance sector often benefit, subject to eligibility criteria, from subsidised mortgages.
Under house purchase schemes employees can buy property at concessionary rates of interest, often around 5 per cent.
In the main, staff have to complete a qualifying period of service (often two or three years) before they qualify for this.
However, in some organisations, particularly senior staff can benefit from staff mortgages soon after their appointment.
At Sun Life Assurance Society professionally qualified staff such as chartered accountants and investment analysts become eligible for a staff mortgage at a preferential interest rate on completing a six-month probationary period.
Mortgages at preferential interest rates may be offered to employees asked to move at company request with eligibility criteria (such as age, service and marital status) waived or reduced.
MOVES FROM LOW-COST TO HIGH-COST AREAS
The need to move employees from areas of low-cost housing to higher priced areas presents a special problem to an organisation.
Employees may wish to accept a transfer to another area but cannot afford to do so.
To help them, firms usually offer some form of financial assistance.
This is termed ‘excess mortgage allowance’, ‘excess housing allowance’, ‘excess rent allowance’ or ‘excess cost allowance,.
Determining housing differentials
Employers may employ their own valuers to determine house prices in different areas to assess payments under an excess mortgage  allowance scheme.
Alternatively, they may employ an independent third party, such as a relocation company, to undertake this task.
EXCESS MORTGAGE ALLOWANCE SCHEMES.
The United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority's excess rent allowance operates over a nine-year period.
Employees relocating to London receive a maximum allowance of £871 a year and those moving to areas of higher priced housing elsewhere in the country receive the current maximum payment of £638 per year.
Employees who are householders receive this allowance, paid over nine years, on a reducing basis of one-fifth of the original amount over the last four years.
Single employees who do not own property receive an allowance at a lower rate, paid for just one year.
However, many excess mortgage allowance schemes run for a shorter time, for instance, for five or seven years.
Under one company scheme — which works on the basis that the employee moves into an area of higher cost housing but into a similar property — the company pays half the additional mortgage cost for the first two years from the date of the move.
After the second year, the allowance is reduced by one-sixth and that figure is deducted from the allowance each year, so that it reaches zero after seven years.
The allowance is paid monthly, free of tax.
The individual has to put all proceeds from the sale of the old house into buying the new one.
If the transferred employee insists on moving into bigger or more ‘up market’ accommodation, the excess mortgage allowance is based on the price of housing comparable with that owned in the old area.
Cadbury Schweppes' mortgage assistance scheme provides for an allowance, tax free, based on the Building Societies' Association recommended basic mortgage interest rate on the agreed difference in price between the properties in the old and new areas.
(The size and amenities of the new property compared with the old is taken into consideration.)
The allowance fluctuates with changes in the basic mortgage interest rate.
The allowance is paid in full for three years and is then reduced progressively by 12½ per cent per annum of the original difference over the subsequent seven years.
It is paid free of tax up to a maximum of £8000 over the full period of the allowance (see Appendix 1).
Boots (retail division) may consider giving employees moving from low-cost to high-cost areas a loan of up to a maximum of one  and a half times the employee's expected first year's gross salary.
The first £2000 of this loan is subject to interest charged at the Abbey National Building Society's current rate, changing as the rate varies.
Interest is not charged during the employee's first two years of ownership.
Pilkingtons has two ‘special loan’ schemes, one covering moves to London, the other moves elsewhere in the country.
The company's policy is given in full in Appendix 1.
Merrill Lynch's 1985 survey on relocation policies found that 98 of the ‘303 Times Top 1000 companies’ interviewed (41 per cent) had a policy which gives mortgage compensation when employees move from low-cost to high-cost areas and 18 per cent provided subsidised loans or cheap mortgages.
Table 3.5 gives details.
Mortgage allowance scheme at Nabisco
Employees required by the company to move house to a part of the country where housing is more expensive will qualify for the mortgage allowance scheme.
If employees move to a part of the country where house prices are comparable or lower then the mortgage allowance scheme will not apply.
The mortgage allowance will be based on the difference between the selling price of the existing house and the lower of the purchase price of the new house or the estimated price of an equivalent new house.
An independent valuation of the estimated purchase price of the existing house in the new location will be carried out.
If both the company and employee are happy with this valuation the mortgage allowance will be based on it.
If one party does not wish to accept this valuation a second will be obtained.
If the first and second valuation are within 15 per cent of each other an average will be taken of the two.
If they are not within 15 per cent of each other a third valuation will be obtained and the average taken of the two closest valuations from all three.
A list of companies who carry out these disparity valuations is held by the personnel manager.
The company will pay the valuation fee in all cases.
This calculation will be made on the basis of a broadly equivalent comparable house, that is, one which would broadly provide the same accommodation, due allowance being made for the location, for example , urban versus rural and which is in a location of broadly equivalent quality.
Employees who are not at present house-owners may be entitled to a mortgage allowance in certain exceptional  circumstances.
If payable it will be assessed on the difference between the purchase price of the new house if this is of an appropriate category and the estimated (lower) price they would have paid in their existing location for a broadly equivalent house.
Any mortgage increase undertaken for personal reasons (for example, to obtain capital, maximise tax allowances) or purely as a result of purchasing a larger or more desirable property will not qualify for assistance.
In addition all the free proceeds of sale must be committed towards the purchase price.
The allowance will be based on a payment of £100 for each £1000 of agreed house price difference.
It will be paid in full for a period of three years and will then be reduced by one-third each year over the subsequent three years.
It will be extinguished therefore at the end of the fifth year.
An application for the allowance should be made on the mortgage allowance claim form.
Payment, when approved, is effective from the date of the new mortgage.
Details of the allowance will not normally be included in a letter confirming salary to a building society.
Payment of the mortgage allowance will be through the normal salaries system on a monthly/four-weekly basis and will be non-taxable, provided that the Inland Revenue is satisfied that the payments made are reasonable in amount.
Any payments above a reasonable level will be taxed.
Full details of the payments made must be supplied to the Inland Revenue to meet its requirements.
If an employee leaves the company for any reason whatsoever, the mortgage allowance will cease immediately.
If an employee should retransfer to an area of lower housing costs, payment of the allowance will be reviewed.
Taxation
Excess mortgage allowance schemes which have the approval of the Inspector of Taxes may provide tax-free payments to employees under the Inland Revenue's Statement of Practice (see Chapter 6).
PROTECTION AGAINST FINANCIAL LOSS
Relocation policies may include provision to protect or cushion employees against financial loss when they sell their old properties  and buy elsewhere.
for instance, the BBC gives a fixed mortgage interest allowance.
Under this scheme, when a member of staff has to surrender a mortgage at a low fixed rate of interest for a new mortgage at a higher rate of interest, a compensatory allowance may be payable.
This is paid over the outstanding period of the original loan or any shorter period that the new loan might involve.
And at Pilkingtons, if employees are paying a fixed rate of interest on their old mortgage and cannot obtain such favourable terms on a new mortgage, the company makes annual lump sum payments in arrears amounting to the difference paid in interest on the capital sum outstanding on the original mortgage at the time of transfer.
At Billiton and the Rank Organisation, employees receive some compensation should they lose money on the sale of their properties in the old location.
These policies are given in Appendix 1.
Boots (retail division) also has a scheme under which employees are guaranteed that if they move a second time, after their relocation, they will not lose financially if there is a fall in the property market.
The guarantee is based on the lower of the initial purchase price or a building society's valuation.
Boots (retail division) also gives a guarantee to employees moving a second time if property prices are rising.
It arranges for the house to be valued to determine its minimum selling price and the employee receives a figure up to this amount from the company so that the purchase of the next property can go ahead.
(Employees must maintain their houses in good condition, make every effort to sell at the best price and receive company authority before accepting an offer.)
HIGH-COST TO LOW-COST MOVES
Company relocation policies seldom make any special provision for employees moving out of high-cost housing areas to areas where house prices are low, except to review any special allowances which had been paid to ease hardship resulting from living in an expensive area.
But one problem which employers may face is employees' reluctance to move to a cheaper area as they can foresee the difficulty of moving back into a high-priced housing area later on.
Employees may regard their property in a high-priced area as a ‘nest egg’ for their retirement (as they may plan to retire to a cheaper area of housing and fund their retirement with the sale proceeds) or they may not wish to reduce their stake in the housing market.
RIGHT OF APPEAL
It is rare to find clauses in relocation policies which give employees the right to appeal against relocation decisions or the level of allowances payable.
However, local authorities have a local appeals procedure under which officers may appeal if they are dissatisfied with the authority's decision as to whether it is necessary to move home or if they are dissatisfied with any of the authority's decisions in relation to the application of the relocation provisions.
CLAWBACK OF RELOCATION COSTS
Relocating staff costs employers considerable sums of money.
If employees leave their organisations within a few months of relocation, the heavy financial investment in them will be wasted.
So it is not surprising to seek clawback clauses within employers' relocation policies.
Some firms insist that leavers repay their disturbance allowances if they leave their company within a specified period after the move.
Others, however, have clawback arrangements which aim to recover these and other costs paid out in the relocation exercise.
At Nabisco, employees receive their disturbance allowance as an interest-free loan, which is ‘extinguished after one year, provided that the employee is then still in the company's employ’.
If employees leave the company within one year of moving, the policy states that ‘the company reserves the right to request reimbursement of relocation expenses and disturbance allowance on a pro rata basis’.
At Cornhill Insurance, employees must also repay their disturbance allowance if they leave the company within a year of the move.
Employees at Brown & Root must repay all their disturbance allowance and housing assistance grant if they leave the company within 12 months of moving and 50 per cent of this total assistance if they leave between 12 months and two years of the relocation.
The Rank Organisation's policy requires employees who leave within 12 months of moving to repay their disturbance allowance, all fees for which they have received reimbursement, removal costs, travel costs and any out-of-pocket expenses paid by the company.
SKF requires employees to repay basic expenses such as fees and removal costs, the disturbance allowance and the costs of temporary  accommodation if employees leave within two years of receiving relocation payments.
Its repayment clause is quoted below:
SKF (U.K.) Limited Relocation expense repayment ‘This payment is made upon condition that if within two years of the date upon which it is made, you give notice to terminate your employment with this company, or we summarily terminate it because of misconduct, you will make repayment to us as follows:— a) If such notice is given or the employment is so terminated within nine months, the repayment will be the full amount.
b) If such notice is given or the employment is so terminated after nine months and within 15 months, the repayment will be half the amount.
c) If such notice is given or the employment is so terminated after 15 months and within 2 years, the repayment will be one quarter of the amount.
In addition to other remedies, we shall be entitled to deduct any amount due to us as above from any remuneration or other monies which may be due to you.'
Henry Sykes and VAG also have clawback clauses in their relocation policies.
For details see Appendix 1.
Organisations may also reclaim any monies given but not spent by relocated employees.
For instance, at Cadbury Schweppes, employees agree to return any part of their disturbance allowance which has not been spent on items specified in the relocation policy by the end of 12 months from the date of receiving the allowance.
TRANSFER OF JOB BUT NOT HOME
Travelling costs
If an employee is required to work at a new location and the distance between the old and new places of work is short enough to make commuting possible, organisations may not require employees to move their homes.
Employees may, however, face problems of  increased travelling time or higher fares.
As a result, employees may be offered an allowance towards their extra travelling expenses.
It is unusual for the cost of extra fares to be given as a lump sum consolidated into salary, although there are a few firms in which this has been agreed.
One publishing company which relocated out of central London to the suburbs negotiated a small consolidated payment, with its recognised union, the National Union of Journalists.
However, in the main, fares allowances covering the difference in travel costs are paid in full for a short period — generally up to one or two years and are then reduced over time.
At Prudential Assurance, the following terms apply to members of staff who travel daily and do not move home:
For the first year after transfer full excess fares less any increase in office allowance will be paid by the company, costs to be based on season ticket rates where appropriate.
In the second year following transfer the excess fare payment will be reduced by one third and in the third year by a further third.
After this time, no additional payment will be made.
However, should the excess fares and/or office allowance increase at any time during the three year period adjustments will be made.
Besides this, employees receive an additional taxable transfer allowance of £526 paid in three instalments over 16 months.
Also, if the distance (based on rail mileage where possible) travelled daily to and from the new office is greater than that travelled to and from the old office, the basic taxable amount is increased as follows: over 20 miles and up to 40 miles extra per day £132; over 40 miles extra per day £263.
Should employees’ location allowances decrease as a result of a transfer, any such decrease is phased over a three-year period.
Temporary transfer
If employees are asked to work in a different location on a temporary basis it is unlikely that they will need to move home.
Employers therefore generally pay accommodation and subsistence expenses during the period of the transfer plus the costs of a reasonable number of visits home.
COSTS OF RELOCATION
Pickfords Removals' publication Executive Relocation in the Eighties estimates that the potential cost of moving an employee from a £70 000 property to a £90 000 property can reach a total of almost £12 000.
It calculates this as follows:
the legal costs of sale and purchase of property including solicitor's fees and stamp duty, £3,750; estate agent's commission, £750; bridging finance (one month at 13%), £758; cost associated with mortgages, in particular the additional cost of a bigger mortgage to cover the greater cost of housing (company loan over 3 years), £1,500; cost of removal and, if necessary, storage, including insurance, £500; hotel and travel expenses including visits by wife to area to see houses,(15 weeks away from home plus two visits by wife), £2,420; cost of alterations to carpets and curtains, re-installing appliances, connecting telephone etc, alterations to property, redecoration and refurbishment, school uniforms and other educational expenses, maintenance, etc. of vacant, unsold property and miscellaneous incidental costs including vet's fees, kennels, etc., £2,000.
Many firms do not know how much it costs to relocate staff.
Merrill Lynch's Second Annual Study of Employee Relocation Policies Among Major UK Companies found a wide range of estimates of the cost of relocating employees.
One in five of the ‘303 Times Top 1000 companies’ interviewed believed that it costs less than £4000 per person, one in three estimated costs in the range of £4000 to £6000 and a further one in three thought it costs over £6000 per employee.
The study found that 17 per cent of organisations surveyed had no idea of the costs of relocation.
RELOCATION ALLOWANCES FOR NEW RECRUITS
To find the best individual for a particular job, an organisation may have to direct its recruitment programme throughout Britain.
This is especially true if the company is looking for key managerial expertise or rare technical skills.
The range of benefits given to new employees relocating as a result of accepting a job offer varies widely according to company policy and individuals' circumstances.
However, in general, new  employees receive some elements of the expenses package given to existing staff.
However, new recruits very seldom receive the disturbance allowance which is a common feature of relocation policies covering existing staff transferred at company request.
New recruits also rarely benefit from bridging loans or mortgage assistance payments.
Organisations do not usually employ the services of a specialist relocation company to aid new recruits moving house.
(However, this does happen occasionally and the relocation companies report that their services have been used for senior new appointments and for technical specialists.)
PA (a management consultancy) asked 145 companies taking part in its 1985 ‘Annual Fringe Benefits Report’ to say whether or not they provided assistance when senior executives had to move house to take up a new post.
PA found that 90 per cent of the participants transferring existing senior members of staff now bear all the costs associated with travelling expenses, preliminary visits, removal, temporary accommodation, estate agents' commission, legal fees and stamp duty together with a disturbance allowance…similar costs are borne by 70 per cent of companies in respect of the relocation of a newly recruited manager although a disturbance allowance is not as common in this instance.
(Table 3.6 summarises the survey's findings.)
Reward Regional Survey's ‘Spring 1985 Local Salaries and Wages’ salary survey covering central London contains a section on allowances paid on relocation and recruitment.
It cites 33 examples of un-named organisations' policies by industry group and size of company.
Seven organisations did not pay relocation allowances to new recruits while of the remainder, eight gave similar allowances under both the relocation and recruitment headings and 18 provided different sets of allowances under the two categories.
In the main these 18 firms did not give mortgage assistance or disturbance payments to those recruited.
One organisation quoted in the survey did provide disturbance payments for recruits but at a reduced level to that given under its relocation policy.
In Merrill Lynch's 1984 Study, 88 per cent of the 243 of ‘The Times Top 1000 companies’ interviewed did take some steps to aid new staff who were moving to take up an appointment.
The study found that companies in the food and drink sector were particularly active in helping new recruits relocate with the banks and financial institutions somewhat less likely to assist their new employees.
This reflects philosophies of buying in experience or ‘growing your own’ talent in-company.
Company practice
In Appendix 1 a number of organisations' relocation policies are reproduced and some cover eligibility and levels of relocation assistance given to recruits.
On eligibility, for example, Cadbury Schweppes's relocation policy covering new recruits states that ‘only management new employees will be considered’.
At the Norwich Union Insurance Group, if recruitment involves relocation on the part of the employee, the company considers extending its relocation package for existing staff to new recruits.
However, these facilities usually apply to specialist categories such as data processing personnel.
Billiton (UK) Ltd's and the Rank Organisation's relocation policies note that relocation expenses are only reimbursed to new employees in ‘exceptional cases’.
The Rank Organisation's policy defines exceptional cases as those where ‘the recruit's seniority, special skills, experience or qualifications make it particularly desirable to offer him employment and it appears improbable that he will accept unless a contribution is made towards his relocation expenses’.
And on benefits, for example, in VAG's policy, new employees are specifically excluded from receiving bridging finance.
In the Rank Organisation policy payments to new recruits may cover the items given to existing employees but the disturbance allowance is not available to new staff.
The Rank Organisation's policy also states: ‘New employees will in no circumstances be eligible for the home sales scheme or the excess cost allowance scheme.’
(These two schemes cover the sale of an employee's old property and financial assistance towards increased housing costs in the new area.)
Cornhill Insurance Group's relocation policy also excludes new staff from receiving a disturbance allowance.
Some relocation policies exclude new recruits from receiving other allowances, such as travel and accommodation expenses.
Cadbury Schweppes's policy reimburses eligible recruits' furniture removal charges, legal expenses and estate agent's fees but states that: ‘New employees do not qualify for — bridging loans, disturbance allowance, travelling expenses, hotel expenses.’
In contrast, a few firms do help new recruits with bridging finance and/or pay a disturbance allowance.
At Hambro Life Assurance new staff moving from rented property to rented property receive: the cost of moving to the new area and a disturbance allowance at the company's expense to look for accommodation.
Those moving from rented property who choose to buy property in the new location, receive: the cost of moving to the new area; a disturbance allowance of one month's salary plus £150; legal and any other fees and the company may provide financial assistance in the form of temporary mortgage facilities.
For new recruits who are selling their old property and are buying a new home, Hambro Life pays: the cost of moving to the new area; a disturbance allowance of one month's salary (half paid when the employee joins the firm, the balance when the sale and purchase are completed); two weekends at the company's expense to look for accommodation; estate agents', surveyors', building society and legal fees, including stamp duty and an allowance of £150 per month towards the cost of accommodation and/or fares for a maximum period of three months.
The company may also provide financial assistance in the form of bridging finance and/or temporary mortgage facilities.
All the above allowances apply to existing employees relocating at company request too but existing staff also receive a payment of 10 per cent of salary (instead of one month's salary) together with an  additional three-monthly allowance of £150 per month towards accommodation and/or fares (that is, making a maximum period of six months).
Henry Sykes's policy provides a disturbance allowance for existing and new employees but new staff are ineligible to receive the bridging loan interest available to existing employees.
Both groups are eligible for travelling and subsistence payments, housing visits and special leave at the time of the move but there are differences between other allowances paid to new and existing workers.
For instance, existing employees receive reimbursement for estate agents' fees whereas new employees do not.
Legal fees and stamp duty for sale and purchase are reimbursed to existing employees; new staff receive reimbursement of these costs only for buying the new house.
Existing employees are refunded for two private survey fees; new employees are allowed only one.
Relocation and the Law
This chapter examines whether employers have the right to require employees to move when the company relocates and whether employees are entitled to receive redundancy payments if they refuse to agree to the transfer and are dismissed.
It also outlines sex discrimination law and its effect on mobility clauses.
CONTRACT OF EMPLOYMENT
The first thing that must be determined when considering the rights of employees when a relocation is planned is what the contract of employment says in relation to employees' place of work.
If the contract specifically provides for employees to work in different locations, employers are entitled to insist that the employees honour the terms of their agreement.
Thus, employers are acting within their contractual rights if they require the employees to move.
Employees who refuse to move are in breach of contract and so, subject to the statutory test of reasonableness, a dismissal is likely to be fair.
Employers are also entitled to require employees to move if such a contractual right is implied, although there may be a greater danger of the dismissal being held unfair in such circumstances.
On the other hand, if there is no express or implied contractual right (see below) to relocate employees, employers cannot simply go ahead and relocate their work-force unless they obtain each employee's consent to the change in his or her place of work.
Thus, the contractual provisions which deal with employees' place of work are of critical importance.
Express or implied terms
Express terms in a contract of employment are those which are spelled out — either written or spoken.
Implied terms fill in the gaps between them.
A term is not implied, however, merely because it appears reasonable to do so nor if it is contrary to an express term.
Employers are entitled to require their employees to move to different premises if there is an express term in the contract which  specifies where they may be required to work.
Employers may also be entitled to do this under an implied term.
Express terms
Some contracts of employment contain an express term giving employers the right to transfer employees from one site to another.
In United kingdom Atomic Energy Authority v.
Claydon , Mr Claydon — a draughtsman — was employed at Orfordness in Suffolk and was transferred to Aldermaston.
He refused to accept the transfer, was dismissed and claimed redundancy pay.
On appeal, the Authority stated that the dismissal was not one of redundancy as their requirements for draughtsmen had not ceased, they had only ceased at Orfordness.
But, said the Authority, Orfordness was not the place where Mr Claydon was employed under his contract.
The National Industrial Relations Court held that Mr Claydon was not, in fact, redundant as, under the terms of his contract, he could be required to work at any of the Authority's establishments.
The conditions of employment which accompanied Mr. Claydon's letter of engagement made clear that the Authority reserved the right of transfer.
The NIRC gave employers the following warning:
Many men and women are employed under contracts of employment which provide for transfers over a wide area.
If work is short in one place but available elsewhere within the area, there will be no redundancy situation and the employer can dismiss without being liable to make any redundancy payment.
If, however, he does so without offering to transfer the employee to a place where work is available, he will risk being liable to pay compensation for unfair dismissal.
Implied terms
Contracts of employment may contain an implied term which gives the employer the right to transfer employees to other locations.
For example, in Jones v.
Associated Tunnelling Co Ltd the Employment Appeals Tribunal (EAT) held that the tribunal had correctly concluded that there was an implied term in Mr Jones's contract of employment to the effect that his employer had the right  to transfer him to any site within reasonable daily commuting reach of his home.
EAT pointed out that ‘a contract of employment cannot simply be silent on the place of work’ and that ‘the employers were in business as contractors working at different sites; so the parties must have envisaged a degree of mobility’.
Indeed Mr Jones had, in the past, accepted a transfer from Chatterley Whitfield Colliery (a couple of miles from his home) to Hem Heath Colliery (around 12 to 13 miles from his home).
The transfer to Florence Colliery was very close to Hem Heath and equally accessible to Mr Jones's home but he did not accept this transfer, left and claimed redundancy.
Also Associated Tunnelling had issued Mr Jones with the statement: ‘You may be required to transfer from one site to another on the instruction of the employer’ some four years before the end of the employer's contract with the National Coal Board at Hem Heath.
In Stevenson v.
Tees-side Bridge and Engineering Ltd the Court also found an implied term in the employee's contract to the effect that he could be required to work where directed.
Mr Stevenson was a steel erector.
In the constructional steel industry sites where work is available are scattered throughout the UK and, as a result, employees in the industry know that travelling around the country is a feature of employment in it.
Mr Stevenson had also worked away from his home in Leyland, Lancashire before.
When work ceased at an industrial estate near Liverpool (within daily travelling distance of Leyland), Mr Stevenson was offered work at a number of other sites: Northumberland, Anglesey and Manchester.
He refused all these, ‘not on the ground that he was not employed to go there, but on the basis that he thought the opportunity of earning overtime was not good’.
The Court held that under his contract of employment the employer was entitled to send Mr Stevenson to any of its sites as required.
It followed that the employer was entitled to dismiss him when he refused to go to a new site and was justified in refusing him redundancy pay.
In both these cases the nature of the business and the nature of the employees' jobs enabled the courts to imply a substantial degree of mobility into the contract of employment.
But, in O'Brien, Pritchard and Browning v.
Associated Fire Alarms Ltd , the Court of Appeal held that although there was an implied term in the employees' contracts entitling the employer to move them within reasonable daily commuting distance of their  homes in Liverpool, the site which the company wished them to go to — Barrow-in-Furness — was beyond this reasonable distance.
They were therefore entitled to redundancy payments.
It is therefore fair to say that, as a general rule, the courts are prepared to imply some degree of mobility into every contract of employment but this is likely to be limited unless the nature of the job or work performed by the employee is one where mobility would be recognised by both sides as being essential to the job.
Changing the contract
If the employer is worried about breaking the contract, the ideal solution is to try to negotiate a variation.
If the work-force is unionised, this may be done with the union representatives on behalf of their members.
Unfortunately this is often impracticable — particularly in cases of substantial relocation, where employees will have to move their homes.
The best that employers can usually hope for is to reach agreement with some of those affected.
Financial inducements and, if appropriate, assistance with moving house or travelling, may increase the chances of success.
Even if such an agreement is reached, employers may still face difficulties.
Employees who initially agree to move may change their minds later, for example because they find other employment in the area which they consider more suitable for them.
Although employees who decide not to move may be in breach of contract, there is little that employers can do.
The courts would not grant an injunction to force people to work somewhere they do not wish to work.
One solution is to state that any financial benefits are only paid when the move has taken place.
But even then employers are not necessarily home and dry.
Employees may try working at the new location for a short time and then decide not to continue.
The redundancy payments legislation allows employees a four-week trial period in which to make up their minds.
This starts with the date that employment under the new contract begins.
If they leave during this period they will be entitled to redundancy pay provided that the industrial tribunal considers their leaving was reasonable or the job at the new location was unsuitable.
It seems this is a risk employers must take, although it is reduced when the employer consults and investigates the wishes of those affected before the move.
If people refuse to move (despite inducements) the employer may  have no option but to dismiss them.
Such dismissals may lead to claims for unfair dismissal and/or redundancy payments.
Again the terms of the contract will be important in determining these rights.
Unfair dismissal
Dismissals are likely to be fair provided that the employer can show a good business reason for the move and that adequate consultation took place.
There is usually little difficulty in establishing a good business reason, since without it it is highly unlikely that a company would wish to relocate.
Consultation may involve determining precisely why an employee objects to the move and exploring possible ways of overcoming these problems, for example providing travelling facilities or expenses, altering hours of work and so on.
(Under s. 99 of the Employment Protection Act 1975 employers are required to consult with recognised, independent trade unions over proposed redundancies.)
Redundancy payments
Employees dismissed under these circumstances will almost certainly be entitled to redundancy payments.
This is because s. 81(2) of the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978 states that a dismissal is by reason of redundancy if it is ‘wholly or mainly attributable to…the fact that his (i.e. the employee's) employer…has ceased or intends to cease, to carry on that business in the place where the employee was so employed…’.
The place where a person is employed has been held to mean the place the employee may be required, under the contract of employment, to work.
However, s. 82(5) states that an employee loses the right to a redundancy payment if he or she unreasonably refuses an offer of suitable alternative employment.
So, if the job at the new location is, in the eyes of the tribunal, a suitable one for that employee, and the refusal of that job is considered unreasonable, the right to a redundancy payment will be lost.
In determining whether the offer of alternative work is suitable, the tribunal takes into account factors such as status, skills required, pay, hours of work and whether it involves additional travelling time and/or expense or perhaps a need to move house.
Employees' personal circumstances are also considered.
Should the offer be  thought to be suitable, the tribunal examines the reasons why the employee has rejected it.
Travelling time/expense
The degree of disruption caused by the need to travel further to work is taken into account in determining whether an employee's refusal of alternative employment is reasonable.
For example, in Gay v.
The Commander, US Naval Activities, UK , it was held that refusal was reasonable due to increased travelling time, travel costs and loss of status.
But refusal was considered unreasonable in Sheddon v.
James Williamson and Partners as the employer was prepared to meet part of the extra travel costs.
(Also it was common practice in the construction industry for employees to be moved.)
Mr Gay was employed as a foreman mechanic in Hendon.
He was given notice that when his employment at Hendon terminated, he could be re-employed at Ruislip as a tester.
Mr Gay refused the offer of re-employment.
The salary offered for the Ruislip post was marginally higher than that given in Hendon but the tribunal found that the offer of alternative employment at the new location was less advantageous to him.
At Ruislip, he would have been nominally in a grade one lower than in his Hendon post and would have not been able to exercise his abilities as a mechanic.
Also his journeys to and from work would have been considerably longer and more expensive.
The round trip from his home in central London to Hendon and back was about 16 miles; that to Ruislip was estimated at 26 to 34 miles.
The tribunal therefore considered that the employee was reasonable in refusing the offer of alternative employment and recommended a redundancy payment.
In Sheddon v.
James Williamson and Partners , Sheddon was employed as an inspector of works.
Two weeks before his employment was due to be terminated, he was offered alternative employment some 34 miles from his home.
His employers offered him additional wages and a partial refund of the extra travelling expenses.
Sheddon, however, refused this offer on the grounds that the travelling time to the new place of employment would be over an hour each way, compared with the 25-minute journey to the old site and because the travelling allowance only partly met his increased travel costs.
The tribunal found Sheddon's refusal to accept the offer of alternative employment to be unreasonable.
It considered the offer  of an increased wage together with the practice in the construction industry of employees moving from site to site were important factors in the case.
A further example concerns Little v.
Beare .
In this case, the move of premises meant that the employee had to travel an extra 40 miles each day.
Little refused the offer of the alternative employment.
It was held that the refusal was unreasonable because the employers had agreed to pay the extra travelling costs.
Personal circumstances
Employees' personal circumstances, such as their domestic commitments, health and age are often taken into account.
Cahuac, Johnson and Crouch were employed by Allen Amery Ltd in Hackney, London E2 and all three women lived very close to their place of work.
The employers decided to move to new premises in Goswell Road, EC1.
The applicants were formally offered work in the new premises but they refused to move and were dismissed.
They each claimed redundancy pay.
The tribunal ruled that all three women were entitled to redundancy pay.
Mrs Cahuac lived with her mother and was responsible for looking after her.
The longest period for which her mother was left alone was for three hours and Mrs Cahuac worked close by so that should anything happen to her mother during this period she could get home quickly.
Acceptance of the offer of employment in the new location would have meant her mother being left alone for periods of seven or more hours as Mrs Cahuac would not be able to check on her at lunchtimes as she was able to do while working in Hackney.
Travelling to the new premises also reduced Mrs Cahuac's net pay by 7 per cent and increased her travelling time by about 40 minutes each way.
Mrs Cahuac therefore felt that the offer of alternative employment was unsuitable and the tribunal agreed.
Mrs Johnson also suffered a reduction in net pay and increased travelling time and was therefore deemed entitled to redundancy pay by the tribunal.
Mrs Crouch would not have suffered a reduction in pay as she was offered an increased wage at the new plant.
However, after paying travel expenses her take-home pay would have been the same.
However, she was aged 59 and the tribunal felt that the inconvenience of long bus journeys to and from work was reasonable grounds in her circumstances for refusing the offer of  employment at the new premises (Cahuac, Johnson and Crouch v.
Allen Amery Ltd ).
Mr Charlwood worked in Sunbury and when his employers, KPK (Sheet Metal) Ltd moved to Hayes in Middlesex he was offered an equivalent job.
However, acceptance of this offer would have increased his travelling time from 10 minutes each way to 45 minutes.
Mr Charlwood was a widower with two teenage daughters and did not want to leave them for longer than necessary.
It was held that his refusal to accept the offer of alternative employment was reasonable (Charlwood v.
KPK (Sheet Metal) Ltd ).
In Cahill v.
Keith Prowse , Ms Cahill suffered from claustrophobia and was unable to use public transport.
When her company offered her employment at new premises she could no longer walk to work but would have had to undergo a half-hour bus journey.
She refused the offer of alternative employment and presented a doctor's certificate.
It was held that her refusal was reasonable.
Moving house
In the main, employees who refuse to accept alternative employment which requires them to move house are unlikely to be deemed as refusing it unreasonably. for instance in Rose v.
Shelley and Partners Ltd , Mr Rose's refusal to accept employment some 60 miles away from his home was held to be a reasonable refusal.
Mr Rose had worked for his employers, Shelley and Partners Ltd in North London for several years.
The company relocated its premises to Huntingdon and asked Mr Rose to move to the new premises.
But he refused the offer, left the company and claimed a redundancy payment.
Mr Rose himself wanted to move but his wife did not and threatened to leave him if he did accept the offer of employment in Huntingdon.
It also transpired that the couple owned their own house and if they did move to Huntingdon, they would have to live in a council house.
They had two children — one at work and one at school.
The tribunal ruled that the employee had not acted unreasonably in refusing the offer.
However, in Brennan v.
Mott, Hay & Anderson , the tribunal ruled that Mr Brennan's refusal to move from London to Newcastle to be unreasonable.
Mr. Brennan, who was three years from retirement, lived in a council flat in London.
He worked as a tunnel inspector and when  there was no work available for him in London, he was offered work in Newcastle.
He refused the offer and claimed redundancy pay.
The tribunal ruled that Mr Brennan had no family responsibilities and so could live away from home for two or three years and could return home every eight weeks or more often if he chose to pay his own fare.
He would also have received a subsistence allowance from his employers.
The tribunal therefore ruled him unreasonable in refusing the offer of suitable alternative employment.
Mobility
In some industries such as construction, mobility is an accepted practice.
(See Jones v.
Associated Tunnelling Co, Stevenson v.
Tees-side Bridge and Engineering Ltd and Sheddon v.
James Williamson and Partners above.)
Organisations with national networks of branches may require managers and/or management trainees (or even other workers) to move throughout the country as part of their career development.
However, employers' mobility clauses can be discriminatory (see below).
IMPOSING NEW TERMS
If a relocation outside the terms of the contract is imposed without the agreement of an employee, the employer is in breach of contract.
The employee may then resign and treat this as dismissal.
This is because s. 55(2) and s. 83(2) of the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978 includes resignation by the employee in circumstances when the employer's conduct entitles the employee to resign.
It has been held by the Court of Appeal in one instance, that the ‘employer's conduct’ which entitles an employee to resign is conduct which ‘fundamentally breaches’the employment contract.
A fundamental breach is one which the courts would consider more serious than an ordinary breach.
It has been described as a breach ‘going to the root of the contract’.
The employee may thus bring an unfair dismissal complaint or claim a redundancy payment.
The same sort of considerations apply in determining whether this ‘constructive’ dismissal is unfair as in the case of ordinary dismissals.
Equally, the right to a redundancy payment is subject to the rules about offers of alternative employment mentioned above.
Moving premises does not always create a breach of the contract.
For instance, if an employer moves to premises only a short distance from the old ones, the contract may not be breached.
For example, the EAT held that there was no breach in either Times Newspapers v.
Bartlett or in Managers (Holborn) Ltd v.
Hohne .
In Times Newspapers v.
Bartlett , the employer moved to new premises about a mile away from the old ones.
This was a comparatively short distance and in the circumstances of the case, the EAT concluded that the employer had not committed a fundamental breach of the contract.
And in Managers (Holborn) Ltd v.
Hohne , the EAT reached a similar conclusion in that when the employer moved from premises in High Holborn to Regent Street, the move itself did not constitute a fundamental breach because the new premises were just as easily accessible to Mrs Hohne as she travelled by underground.
(However, in this particular case, Mrs Hohne's transfer to the new premises resulted in both her status and pay being reduced as she could no longer hold the post of manageress because there already was a person in this position in the new premises.
The employer was therefore held to have breached the contract by reducing Mrs Hohne's pay and status.)
In some industries, like the construction industry, a fair degree of mobility may be implied into the contract.
In Express Lift Co Ltd v.
F.L. Bowles the employer, relying on an implied mobility clause, ordered the employee to transfer to Scotland from his home in Nottingham.
Mr Bowles refused to go as his wife was ill and asked that someone else be sent to Scotland.
The employer refused to do this so Mr Bowles resigned and claimed that he had been constructively dismissed and that his dismissal was unfair.
The tribunal found that Mr Bowles had been unfairly dismissed but the EAT held that the tribunal had erred in law in making its decision.
The tribunal interpreted the implied mobility clause in Mr Bowles's contract that he could be sent to work anywhere in the UK to mean that he could ‘ordinarily’ be sent to work anywhere in the UK.
There was, however, no evidence to suggest that the employee's obligation was subject to exceptions in certain circumstances.
The EAT said that the tribunal was not entitled to introduce a further implied term into the mobility clause to this effect.
In other words, implied terms cannot be introduced merely because it appears reasonable or equitable to do so.
The EAT had a great deal of sympathy with Mr Bowles and  considered the employers rather harsh, but nevertheless, the employee's resignation as a result of his refusal to go to Scotland was neither a termination of contract by the employer nor constructive dismissal.
The employee was therefore not dismissed and was not entitled to anything.
However, in Air Canada v.
Lee a move across London was held by the EAT to be a breach of contract.
Mrs Lee, a switchboard operator was asked to move from the company's Dover Street premises to new ones in Regent Street.
She tried out the new offices, did not find them satisfactory and left claiming unfair dismissal.
The EAT set aside the tribunal's finding of unfair dismissal and found that the employee was entitled to a redundancy payment.
Under her contract of employment Mrs Lee was ‘not mobile’(i.e. she could not be required to move) and the employer had committed a fundamental breach of the contract.
And in Shields Furniture v.
Goff and another , the National Industrial Relations Court ruled there had been a constructive dismissal.
In this case an executive director made an announcement to the company's employees that the firm would be moving from Chelsea to Fulham.
No moving date was given.
About two weeks later, this executive told two employees named Goff — father and son — who were employed in the company's Chelsea workshop to go to work in Fulham the next day.
This added two and a half miles to their journey to work and involved another 15 minutes' travelling time each way.
The employees worked at Fulham for three weeks but were dissatisfied with the conditions there.
They then took two weeks' holiday and, on their return, gave one week's notice and left when this notice period expired.
They applied for redundancy payments.
The National Industrial Relations Court found that at no stage were the employees asked if they were prepared to move to Fulham and at no stage did they indicate that they were prepared to move.
There was no term in their contracts entitling the employer to require that the employees move.
The NIRC's decision was to award redundancy pay.
DIRECT, INDIRECT AND MARRIAGE DISCRIMINATION
Under the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 , direct sex discrimination occurs when 
a person of one sex is treated less favourably, on the ground of sex, than a person of the other sex would be in the same or not materially different circumstances.
Indirect sex discrimination occurs when an unjustifiable requirement or condition is applied equally to both sexes, but has a disproportionately adverse effect on one sex because the proportion of one sex which can comply with it is much smaller than the proportion of the other sex which can comply with it.
Direct discrimination against a married person occurs where a married person is treated less favourably on the grounds of marital status, than an unmarried person of the same sex would be in the same or not materially different circumstances.
Indirect discrimination against a married person is similar in concept to indirect sex discrimination and may arise when a condition or requirement is applied equally to married and unmarried persons of the same sex but which is in fact discriminatory in its effect on married persons.
The Equal Opportunities Commission's Code of Practice (London: HMSO, 1985) gives the following example of indirect discrimination.
It says:
A requirement to be mobile might bar more women than men.
A complainant would have to show that fewer women than men could comply with such a requirement and that it is to her detriment that she cannot comply.
Where the employer can justify such a requirement without regard to sex there will be no unlawful act.
A finding of unlawful discrimination may be made even though the employer has no intention to discriminate.
And on marriage discrimination it says ‘a requirement to be mobile might bar more married than single women’.
In 1979 the Equal Opportunities Commission (EOC) began a formal investigation into the practices and policies of the Leeds Permanent Building Society and produced its report in June 1985 (Report of the Formal Investigation into the Leeds Permanent Building Society ,(Manchester: EOC, 1985)).
The EOC reports that it was apparent that the Society's mobility requirement and a candidate's ability to comply with it gave rise to both direct and indirect discrimination.
The clause stated: ‘All appointments are made on the condition that a staff member may be transferred to another office or department’.
The investigation arose after a complaint was made to the EOC for a woman applying for a post as a management trainee.
She said that her interview had laid stress on personal circumstances rather than experience and qualifications.
The EOC found that direct discrimination occurred when managers described the mobility requirement differently to men and women and made it more onerous for women to comply with it.
The EOC also found direct discrimination when managers treated women less favourably than men by making unfounded assumptions about their ability to be mobile.
With regard to indirect discrimination, the EOC conducted a postal survey of all the applicants to the Society in one year to establish whether or not each candidate could have complied with the mobility requirement at the time that they applied for the job.
Replies were received from 60 per cent of the people contacted: 830 of the 1384 male applicants and 260 of the 412 female applicants.
The EOC was advised that the response was statistically representative.
Analysis indicated that only 50 per cent of the women could comply with the mobility requirement compared with 65 per cent of the men.
Taking into account the Society's view on the operation of the mobility clause and its own survey, the EOC found that the mobility requirement had a disproportionate impact on women applicants and found it indirectly discriminatory contrary to the Sex Discrimination Act.
The results of this formal investigation are very significant for those employers who insert mobility clauses into employees' contracts of employment.
Indeed, many employers are now reviewing their clauses in the light of it.
Recommendations
After consultation with the Leeds Permanent Building Society, the EOC drew up the following recommendations in respect of mobility:
A review should be held to examine the extent to which mobility is actually required in the jobs held by staff.
The mobility requirement should be removed from contracts of employment of all grades of staff that are recruited where mobility is not required.
There should be a statement concerning the degree to which mobility is required in practice, and the way in which the mobility  requirement is to be operated in relation to the needs of the staff and the needs of the business.
This statement should be issued with an application form to all applicants of both sexes in order that the same information is available to all potential candidates for jobs where mobility is required, or may be required on completion of training.
Candidates of both sexes that are interviewed may be asked whether they can comply with the requirement to be mobile in order to progress, however, women are to be treated equally with men and not less favourably.
Specific advice should be included in the Branch handbook and training should be provided in order that managers understand what constitutes less favourable treatment, particularly in respect of the asking of questions at appraisal, at interview or before interview because negative assumptions are made about their ability to be mobile.
Consideration should be given to whether the internal advertising of management posts would identify those staff who were willing to be considered for a move to a particular branch at a particular time.
Only if no suitable candidate emerged would there be a need to consider asking a member of staff to move who had not indicated a willingness to do so.
Consideration should be given to whether the requirement to be mobile could be restricted to particular regions while indicating that faster progression might be achieved by staff who were prepared to be widely mobile.
After a reasonable period of time (for example, two years) there should be a review of the position to determine whether the mobility clause needs to be retained in the contract of employment if it was found that the need for mobility was being met by a sufficiently large group of staff willing to be mobile.
LIST OF CASES
International Relocation
When sending employees abroad to work, employers must consider: the selection of employees for the job; the importance of briefing them before going; and the contents of the compensation and benefits package.
This chapter aims to provide a broad overview of some of the main concerns facing employers and employees involved in overseas postings. first of all, it concentrates on the relocation assistance given to employees posted abroad to a subsidiary company for a two-to five-year period and who return to a position within their employing organisation in Britain.
Next, compensation given to employees specifically recruited to undertake fixed-term contracts overseas is covered and lastly, the chapter examines assistance given to foreign expatriates relocated to Britain.
It should be noted that the majority of employees posted abroad are men although the number of women executive expatriates is increasing.
This chapter assumes that the expatriate employee is male and references to spouses are directed to wives.
However, it will prove interesting to see differences that may emerge in the future with regard to problems facing female executives and their spouses when posted overseas.
WHY RELOCATE STAFF ABROAD?
Expatriates may be sent overseas because there is a specific demand for their skills, because they are needed to train local employees in particular procedures or because the expatriates themselves are to receive training so that they can return to their home countries to pass on their newly acquired skills.
Other reasons may include an organisation's need to have some of its top employees heading up the management team of foreign subsidiaries, that is, to maintain an international presence, or employees on their way up the career ladder may be posted overseas as part of the management development process.
Relocating individual staff abroad is an extremely costly procedure.
If an expatriate, rather than a local employee is really needed, the organisation has to consider whether to relocate an existing employee or recruit specifically to fill the post.
It must also determine the  length of time for which the post is required.
Company policies on employee selection and briefing and on compensation and benefits packages will depend on the length of the posting and the type of contract under which expatriates work.
EMPLOYEE SELECTION
Selecting staff to work abroad on two-to five-year postings is not as straightforward as it may appear.
If the selection decision is wrong or the selection process badly handled, the employee, or his spouse or family, may be unable to cope with living abroad and have to return to the UK.
This not only wastes time and money in sending the executive abroad but also business contacts in the foreign country can lose confidence in the company and valuable business ventures may be lost.
Besides this, other potential expatriates within the company and senior managers at home and abroad may become sceptical of their employer's competence in dealing with international moves and this could jeopardise the company's future success in posting employees overseas.
Employers may even run the risk of key employees leaving the company.
Before the selection process begins, candidates need to be clear about what the job abroad entails.
Job titles can be meaningless by themselves.
Candidates therefore need to understand the scope of the job and be given a clear job description.
They need to be told what freedom they have to use their initiative and perhaps be given information on the appropriate managerial style.
They should also have details of the objectives set for them plus a specification of what the company sees as an ideal candidate.
Any specification drawn up should not deal with technical/academic qualifications and/or experience alone.
It needs to give details of the type of person seen by the organisation as most able to succeed in the foreign environment.
Such detail may, in some instances, be best supplied by management in the overseas subsidiary.
They probably have a clearer idea of the type of person needed in the post.
Alternatively, details about the job and the person needed to fill it may be agreed jointly by the UK company and its foreign subsidiary.
Before putting themselves forward for selection, potential candidates and their families need to be aware of the foreign country's environment — for instance its language(s), climate and culture, its housing and education facilities, what security is like, and where they will be living and working.
Information on how business is conducted will be required and candidates also need to know details of the compensation and benefits package attached to the posting.
The employee's career prospects on returning to the UK at the end of the tour of duty should also be made clear.
Determining suitability
In some organisations, staff given an overseas posting are chosen or recommended by senior management.
There may appear to be only one suitable candidate for the job.
Alternatively, in organisations where such postings are advertised internally, there may be only one candidate who comes forward for selection.
In both instances, it is important that the candidate is assessed thoroughly to ensure suitability.
There is little point in sending an employee abroad because he is the only candidate to apply regardless of his ability to complete the posting.
It may be prudent to discuss the possibility of a candidate's overseas posting with as many managers whom he has dealings with as possible or send the employee to an assessment centre.
In this way, the organisation does its best to ensure that the employee is likely to be able to meet the requirements expected of him in the job abroad.
In organisations where employees sent on overseas postings are recommended by their managers, care needs to be taken to ensure that senior managers are not withholding recommendations for good candidates.
Domestic circumstances
In determining an employee's suitability, it is necessary to gain an assessment of his domestic circumstances.
The employee may appear eminently suitable for a particular post but if his wife is unwilling to relocate abroad and only agrees to do so grudgingly, this is bound to mar the employee's likelihood of completing the assignment.
Employees with wives who are actively pursuing their own careers are also likely to encounter problems overseas, especially if the wife is forced to give up her job because of her husband's transfer and her role abroad does not enable her to work or to develop other satisfactory activities.
Some organisations employ relocation counsellors, others use their  own staff resources, to provide wives with background information on the new location and to answer questions and deal with problems.
Although it is not common practice, some firms place wives in employment within the company overseas, where this is appropriate, or take steps to provide them with details of employment opportunities abroad.
Alternatively, or in addition to this, wives may be given help in re-entering employment when the couple return to Britain on completing their assignment.
Some organisations interview all candidates' wives early in the selection process; others invite only the wives of short-listed candidates into interview; a few feel it unreasonable to call into question the intentions of potential expatriates' wives.
However, as many overseas assignments fail because the wife or family are unable to cope with the new way of life and culture (around 50 per cent is often quoted), many organisations choose to invite the wives of short-listed candidates into the company to discuss the assignment and any problems that may be worrying them.
In this way, it is often possible for organisations to get a clearer idea as to which potential expatriate couples are likely to make a success of their assignments overseas.
Interview
Candidates for an overseas assignment should have had the opportunity to digest all information given to them on the new job, country, life style, compensation package and effects on their careers and families before being interviewed for the post.
In this way those candidates who recognise that they are unsuitable are able to drop out of the process early on.
At the interview stage it is important to ensure that candidates will be able to make a real contribution to the business of the overseas subsidiary and be accepted by the employees there.
The interviewer also needs to ensure that the potential expatriates have a clear idea of their careers and how an overseas posting followed by a return to work in the UK will aid their career paths.
Employees are likely to be concerned about how they will fit back into the system on returning from an overseas contract.
Some may fear that during their absence, colleagues remaining in the home country will forge ahead on the career ladder so that when they return to Britain they will find themselves behind and unable to  catch up.
Such problems can arise if no jobs equivalent to those held overseas are available for expatriates returning to Britain.
Once the most suitable candidate has been identified, it is ideal if he can be interviewed by the person who will be his immediate superior in the overseas post.
This may be carried out in the candidate's home country or in the overseas location.
An interview overseas could be linked with a visit by the employee and spouse who thus have the opportunity to assess first-hand whether they wish to accept the posting.
Overseas visit
Many organisations pay for employees and their spouses (sometimes even for the whole family) to visit the new location before agreeing to the international move.
This enables those concerned to gain a firmer idea of what the new country holds in store for them and decide whether they are likely to be happy living there.
It also helps the couple find accommodation and schools for children.
These trips may be run after the employee has agreed to undertake the assignment and so form an integral part of the briefing process given before the employee takes up his posting.
It should be stressed that not all organisations pay for such ‘look-see’ trips and a number rely on providing a thorough briefing in the home country.
However, the cost of these trips is minimal compared with the cost of an executive's failure in an overseas assignment.
Although briefing is crucially important in preparing people for living and working abroad, it does not provide the realism of a visit.
Using briefing only may be a false economy.
BRIEFING
The employee needs to be given training in products, technologies and business methods used in the overseas company in which he will be working.
Briefing on business matters should include basic details such as normal hours of work as well as information on the structure of the work-force, including the nationalities of which it is comprised and where, if any, skill shortages exist.
Any effects that the government of the country may have on business dealings should be explained and information on labour legislation be given.
It is also  very helpful for the expatriate to be given an outline of the local labour force's attitudes towards the company and its managers together with the strength of unionisation.
Advice on methods of conducting negotiations with clients or workers is useful.
To ensure an employee becomes effective in his work as soon as possible, briefing on the areas mentioned above is most important but no matter how much business information is provided in advance, the expatriate cannot give full attention to his work if he or members of his family suffer culture shock as a result of living in a strange environment.
Culture shock
Some organisations do not see culture shock as a threat to the completion of a term of work abroad.
‘It's different from England but they'll soon get used to it’ often sums up the attitudes of those who play a part in posting staff overseas but who have not lived abroad themselves.
The executive and his family are being asked to live in an unfamiliar place where the climate, language, laws, religion, etc. are alien to their normal life style.
The potential problems can be aggravated by separation from relatives and friends.
Again, thorough briefing before departure helps prepare the employee and family for their future life abroad and paves the way for successful completion of the overseas posting.
Courses
Briefing courses may be aimed at the employee only or organisations may encourage the employee's spouse to attend the briefing sessions.
The latter is recommended as the spouse is likely to be equally, if not more, concerned about a new life abroad.
It is likely that she will have to give up her employment to accompany her husband.
Also, in some countries, a woman's role is significantly different from that in the UK.
Some organisations employ specialist counsellors to run in-company briefing/counselling sessions for the employee(s) concerned and their spouses.
This has the advantage that the courses can be tailored specifically to meet company requirements and individual employee's needs.
Firms which are well experienced in overseas employee transfers often have international personnel departments  with the necessary resources to organise and run such training sessions.
Firms less experienced in international postings should ensure that employees, and where possible their spouses, attend externally run briefings.
The Centre for International Briefing runs residential courses for those due to be posted abroad.
Spouses are encouraged to attend.
The courses focus on specific areas where expatriates are to live, with course tutors usually drawn from the areas in question.
The courses provide a detailed insight into the culture of the country as well as local amenities and business practices.
They are tailored to company needs whenever practicable.
The use of externally run courses can prove to be very cost-effective if an employer sends relatively few expatriates abroad.
However, organisations may decide that internally-run briefing sessions may provide the best method of getting the cultural and business message across.
Course content
Any briefing given must provide sufficient detail on the new location.
However, it should not just act as a check-list but should relate facts about a country to the expatriate's new life style.
Briefing courses should provide the following general background information on the country: climate; language; local inhabitants; communications; politics; cultural differences; religion; and laws.
Climate
Facts about climate — such as rainfall, temperature, humidity and seasonal variations — should be given.
Information should relate not only to the country as a whole but should apply to the locality where the expatriate is to live and work.
Information given must relate to the individual's home and business life.
For instance, if there are seasonal variations in climate, these should be explained in the context of their effect on business operations, transport, home environment, etc.
For instance, monsoons may disrupt transport and power supplies and may affect the conduct of normal day-to-day business.
Language
The course should inform participants which languages are spoken in the country concerned, if English is generally used and whether a local language needs to be learned for business and/or social communication.
If it is necessary for the expatriate couple to learn a new language, the course should provide them with details on where they might go or the steps they should take to achieve this.
Local inhabitants
Background information on local inhabitants is important for both business and social life.
The course should give details on the various ethnic groups and, if any particular groups are disadvantaged with respect to others, this should be covered and the implications explained.
Local inhabitants' attitudes towards business and social affairs also require treatment.
Communications
Expatriates need to know how reliable services such as railways, air and sea travel, bus services and telephone, telex and postal services are.
Politics
The type of government in power and its stability are bound to be of concern to expatriates.
Relationships between the government and the employing organisation require explanation too.
Foreign policy may also affect the expatriate's business or social activities.
Historical information on the country's development and politics can be usefully included.
Cultural differences
Cultural differences are often the hardest facts for expatriates to accept.
Styles of dress which are perfectly acceptable at home may be offensive to local inhabitants or may be banned altogether.
Women may not be free to walk by themselves along the streets.
Behaviour considered normal in Europe may be unacceptable in  certain countries.
Alcohol consumption may be banned.
Certain unwritten rules may apply with regard to hospitality.
It is important that expatriates be fully aware of local customs and their effects on life style.
Religion
An understanding of the local religions and when religious holidays are taken is necessary.
Religion may affect employees' attitudes to their jobs and their relationships with expatriates and fellow countrymen.
Certain religions may prohibit particular types of food, alcoholic drink or restrict dress.
Law
Local laws may ban particular activities.
It could not only prove dangerous to expatriates inadvertently breaking local laws but could damage a company's reputation and its business dealings.
Living conditions
Briefing courses must contain specific information on living conditions including housing, and the provision of utilities, education, health, security, cost of living, taxation, travel and transport, the moving process and other assorted factors.
Housing and utilities
If expatriates are to live in company housing, details of this, including rent and the items of furniture supplied should be explained.
If the expatriate and family are expected to find their own accommodation, information should be given on the types of properties available for rent, how much these are likely to cost together with information on whether they are furnished or unfurnished.
The utilities available and charges for them plus details on their reliability should be provided as well.
Details of housing allowances should also be supplied as well as advice on whether it is usual to employ domestic staff and, if so, how much to pay them and where they should live.
The expatriates need facts on how to look for property in the new country, the hotel and transport allowances payable while they carry  out their search and any time constraints attached to their property hunting.
In general, British managers are unfamiliar with property rental and are unsure as to how to search for and conduct the necessary transactions.
As a result, it is becoming increasingly common for employers to engage the services of relocation companies which help expatriates and their families to find suitable accommodation.
The level of service offered varies according to the expatriates' needs and may consist simply of handouts — printed property sheets with information of what is available.
At the other end of the scale, the relocation company assigns a counsellor to the family who assesses their requirements and provides a hand-held viewing schedule.
Although it is usual for expatriates to rent housing abroad, some company compensation packages allow for property to be purchased.
A loan may be given to the employee, who pays interest on it, so that he can buy property.
At the end of his term abroad he sells the house and repays any outstanding debt.
Companies may arrange such loans through a third party — for instance, through the relocation company.
Housing at home
Briefing should also cover what the expatriate needs to do about property in the home country.
The British employee posted abroad normally wishes to keep, and hopes to rent out, his home in the UK.
There is usually no great profit on these transactions, despite the high rents achievable on the right kind of homes in the right areas for incoming expatriate employees of firms like his own.
The rent charged should be enough to cover mortgage, rates, repairs and agents' fees as well as tax but even this modest target may not be reached in many places without risk of taking in the wrong kind of tenant.
Despite the lack of available rental accommodation in the UK, some homes simply are not lettable at rents high enough to cover costs.
Employers may well advise their employees to sell their existing homes and buy a more lettable proposition, with a view to re-purchasing when the expatriate returns to the UK.
Employers should never advise employees to sell their properties and leave no stake in the UK housing market.
House prices in Greater London have been rising at a rate of around 15 to 18  per cent over the past couple of years.
House prices up by one-third over two years could spell disaster for those leaving Britain who sold but did not reinvest in the housing market before returning home.
Employees may find it difficult to gain information on rent levels which could apply to their own homes.
Briefing should advise employees to discuss their situations with managing agents/estate agents who can provide information on current rents and vet prospective tenants.
However, dealing with local agents is another worry for the expatriate and so some employers manage the expatriate's affairs in the UK during an absence overseas by paying the mortgage and rates when the home is empty or when the rent achievable does not cover the outgoings.
Alternatively, the employer may engage a relocation company to act as the managing agent for the property.
Education
The education of children is of major concern to expatriates and briefing courses should outline alternatives and warn about potential problems.
Compensation packages generally cover education fees.
The decision that needs to be made is whether children should continue their education in Britain or accompany their parents overseas.
There are a large number of independent boarding schools covering all abilities in the UK and many expatriates welcome the opportunity to board children especially over 0 and A level periods.
However, problems can arise in that long periods of notice may have to be given in order to arrange entry into such schools.
Leaving children behind may put an emotional strain on the family.
Another problem is that when the expatriates return to Britain, the payment of school fees by the employer generally ends and the couple may not be able to afford to keep their children in private education.
The alternative is for the children to be educated abroad in English-speaking international schools.
But usually there are waiting lists.
Further problems may arise again on return to Britain as the pressure for places in the more popular independent or state schools makes it increasingly difficult for the expatriate to find suitable educational facilities for children.
Finding schools abroad may be a daunting prospect for employees.
Briefing sessions should provide advice as to how to go about this.
Specialist relocation companies offering home search programmes  can identify local schools abroad and place children and, as a result, are engaged by a number of employers.
Health
Briefing sessions should inform expatriates of any inoculations required before departure; some countries demand up-to-date vaccination certificates against particular diseases before admission is allowed.
In many parts of the world, inoculations are advisable even if they are not required for entry.
Information should be provided on local medical facilities including availability and standard of hospitals, doctors, dentists, opticians, nurses and ambulance services.
Expatriates need details of the cost of treatment and whether medical insurance is required.
If the compensation package covers medical insurance/private health care, details of the scheme and level of cover should be explained.
Briefing sessions should provide advice on the precautions that expatriates may take to reduce health risks.
Security
Some countries have a bad reputation for crime and expatriates are naturally concerned about their chances of being mugged or having their home burgled.
Briefing on this topic should cover the incidence of crime, whether it is usual for expatriates to employ security staff and, if so, when such staff should be on duty, and procedures for dealing with the police.
Advice on insurance is also necessary.
Cost of living
Expatriates need to be briefed on how much it will cost to keep their families in the overseas location.
Details on prices for food, transport, entertaining, utilities, staff wages, etc. are required.
They also need to know what the local currency is, the exchange rate and the rate of inflation.
Taxation
The briefing session should provide an explanation of the taxation/social security system in the overseas location and the degree to which the expatriates remain affected by the British  system.
Personal taxation can be a minefield.
No briefing session can deal with individual problems but it should advise the executive moving abroad to ensure that his tax position is handled properly to avoid making costly mistakes.
Travel and transport
The arrangements for the expatriate and his family's passage to and from the UK and for periods of leave during the assignment should be given together with information on the location of airports/ports.
Details should also be supplied on the cost of running a car overseas, licences/documentation required, and the costs and reliability of the various forms of public transport.
Employees should be informed if a company car is included in the compensation package and if it is usual practice to employ a driver.
Expatriates also require information on general driving standards and how to proceed if there is an accident.
Information on road and rail access to both the workplace and schools should be given.
Employers need to bear in mind that the employee's spouse may not have a car.
Removals
An employee moving abroad is obviously concerned about the safe handling of personal possessions.
Briefing sessions should provide advice on: who is responsible for overseeing the removal — the employer or the employee; choosing a contractor; packing goods; storage facilities on arrival; and the time-scale of the removal process.
It may be the case that household goods have to be shipped several weeks in advance of the family's relocation.
Advice on living arrangements in the few weeks before departure may be necessary.
Women
A crucial part of the briefing session concerns women's roles in the new country.
Such sessions may be addressed only to the wife or to the couple.
It is better for both partners to attend so that they can discuss the issue and fully appreciate its implications.
The session should provide information on any restrictions placed on women including whether they are free to travel as they please and allowed to work.
Employment opportunities — both in paid jobs and in voluntary activities — should be explored.
The wife may be unable to get a job and may have little opportunity to work in the house especially if it is customary for servants to do all cooking and housework.
Social life in the country may revolve around entertainment of business associates and other expatriates in the home.
This life style may be unsuitable for some women and boredom can lead to a couple's failure to complete an assignment, even to breakdown of their marriage.
Briefing sessions should ensure that expatriate couples are fully aware of these potential problems.
Discussion with other members of the group can prove most helpful in identifying areas where conflict may arise and thus provide guidance in handling such situations.
The Women's Corona Society (see Appendix 4) has members throughout the world who both welcome and provide useful information to incoming expatriates' wives and children.
Other items
Other items which may be included in a briefing session on living conditions include: membership of local clubs; recreation facilities; standard of dress; social life; and whether pets may be imported and the documentation necessary for this.
Briefing the personnel department
Others also need to be kept in the picture so that they can answer employees' questions as and when they arise.
So it is important that those in the personnel department responsible for ensuring that the relocation exercise proceeds smoothly are able either to answer employees' questions themselves or direct the expatriates to sources of advice.
It is particularly important that those members of staff who participate in interviews with the potential expatriate and spouse are well-briefed to ask the right questions and in turn provide detailed, helpful responses to any anxieties raised.
REASONS FOR FAILURE
Good selection procedures and thorough briefing sessions go a long way towards making an overseas assignment a success.
But failures do still occur.
Expatriates may not adapt to the culture and so live in their own  world entirely separate from that of the local inhabitants.
The expatriate social circle may prove difficult to break into, with established expatriates clinging to their existing friends and unwilling to allow new members into the group.
There may be few opportunities for entertainment other than within the home.
This may prove tedious to those used to alternative leisure pursuits.
Inability to cope with cultural differences may not show itself immediately.
Many expatriates experience a ‘honeymoon’ period abroad where everything appears new, interesting and exciting.
But as time wears on, the novelty wears off and dissatisfaction results.
Boredom, isolation and loneliness can lead to alcoholism, marriage breakdowns and a failure to complete the assignment.
Briefing sessions, in which failures and why they occur are discussed, are probably best held with outside counsellors rather than company staff.
Potential expatriates may feel inhibited discussing such personal issues with course tutors drawn from the company payroll in case their anxieties are interpreted as being an expression of inability to cope.
Briefing for return
An important area to bear in mind when drawing up a briefing programme is the need to supply briefing at the end of the employee's period overseas.
Life in Britain may be glorified by the expatriate and family who come to believe that everything back home is perfect compared with their life style abroad.
It can come as a considerable shock when reality is forced upon them and their life on return is not as wonderful as they had anticipated.
The converse may also apply.
Expatriates may feel that Britain has gone ‘downhill’ while they have been away and homecoming does not match up to the good life abroad.
For instance, one major problem concerns the social life of the returning expatriates.
They may have lost touch with their friends and have to start again to build up a new social circle.
Timing
Employee selection should not be rushed merely because the overseas subsidiary demands a person in the vacant job straight away.
Hurried selection may result in costly failure.
Similarly, some organisations do not brief employees properly  because they claim they do not have the time to do so.
Employees need to be given adequate warning of the date of an impending move so that they can learn about their destination's culture, make decisions on and carry out such matters as renting out their properties in the home country, make arrangements for children's education and ship goods overseas.
It is advisable to set target dates for each stage in the international relocation process, working backwards from the date on which the expatriate is expected to begin work in the new location.
Allowances for delays should be built into the schedule.
Some flexibility may be necessary too.
For example, expatriates may wish to link their departure dates with school summer holidays to cause minimum disruption to their children's education.
A typical estimate of the amount of time necessary to complete all the stages — from the preparation of job descriptions and person specifications through to installing the expatriate in his new office abroad — is around four to six months.
COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS
This section outlines the principal methods of remunerating expatriates and methods of determining pay.
It also lists the items usually included in an expatriate's benefits package.
Expatriates' salaries are generally built up from a number of separate elements starting with basic salary.
Other payments on top can include premiums for foreign service (often termed inducement payments), hardship allowances, cost of living allowances, housing allowances, tax equalisation payments and bonuses.
Basic salary
Basic salary may be calculated in one of three different ways.
‘Balance sheet system’
This system is based on the home salary and aims to ensure that the expatriate's standard of living in the home country is maintained while he is working abroad.
It also aims to compensate employees working overseas, especially when hardship is endured.
Basic salary is based on the expatriate's home salary with a number of allowances added to adjust it to local living conditions.
In this way the executive  receives reimbursement for any additional costs incurred in working abroad.
Basic salary based on company in the host country
Under this option the expatriate is treated in a similar manner to local employees — his basic salary is the same as theirs.
However, he may receive some additional benefits which recognise the fact that he is working in a foreign land.
His benefit package may include the payment of school fees for his children and the continuation of pension arrangements.
Basic salary based on home/host country requirements
Using this method, the employee's basic salary is determined from an assessment of his needs in the host country which are costed by both home and host country prices.
These are combined to give an overall requirement which is grossed up for tax and converted into the local currency.
The amount of basic salary which exceeds that which the employee would have received at home as a pensionable salary is termed an overseas allowance.
Determining basic salaries
The basic salaries paid to executives relocated abroad depend to a certain degree on which countries are involved.
For instance, it is more common for a British manager working in Europe or in the United States to be paid the local market rate.
In contrast, executives working in developing nations (usually less desirable locations) tend to be paid their British salaries plus generous allowances for hardship and working in unpleasant conditions.
Which system is used also depends on company philosophy and policy with regard to ensuring that expatriates do not lose or gain with respect to their colleagues at home, local employees abroad and other expatriates in other parts of the world.
Foreign service premia
Foreign service premia — the international relocation equivalent of disturbance allowances — are paid to reward employees for leaving their home countries and agreeing to work in a foreign land.
They amount to an inducement to encourage employees to accept overseas postings although it can be argued that they do offset the additional costs which may be incurred through unfamiliarity with customs, language and general way of life.
They may also be seen as payments to compensate for culture shock.
In general, foreign service premia are based on a percentage of salary, usually around 10 to 15 per cent , and are paid throughout the period of the assignment.
Some organisations reduce the level of the foreign service premium over the period that the employee spends abroad on the basis that he becomes increasingly accustomed to the life style as time progresses.
Some pay an additional disturbance payment to compensate the expatriate when he has to readjust to life in Britain on his return.
Hardship allowance
Hardship allowances are paid as compensation to those expatriates relocated to countries where they have to face greater discomforts or difficulties than they would normally experience at home: climate, unstable political environments, isolation, separation from children, poor sanitation, and so on.
As with foreign service premia, hardship allowances are normally calculated as a percentage of salary — with higher percentages, sometimes 30 per cent or more, applying in areas where it is particularly difficult or unpleasant to live and work.
Remuneration packages may combine foreign service premia and hardship allowances or treat the payment of foreign service premia on a similar basis to that of hardship allowances, that is, the former are increased according to the environment in which the expatriate is asked to work.
Cost of living allowances
The determination of cost of living allowances causes more problems than any of the others.
Sharp increases in local prices which cannot be predicted and rises and falls in exchange rates lead to much confusion when trying to determine an expatriate's disposable income.
Also expatriates' shopping habits are bound to vary from individual to individual.
Many organisations including salary clubs, salary survey producers and even the specialist relocation companies produce their own statistics on cost of living.
But, it is difficult to know which statistics are the most realistic and which formulae to use to calculate cost of living let alone how often to update cost-of-living allowances.
Most firms believe that consistency is the best policy and stick to a reputable source of data and tried and tested formulae.
Housing allowances
Housing allowances invariably form a separate part of the remuneration policy (although it is surprising how many employers do not take them into account when determining cost of living allowances).
They are paid to compensate for any additional costs incurred in paying for accommodation in the overseas location over and above that which would be incurred at home.
In general, housing allowances amount to around 15 per cent of salary although company policy may allow for lower-paid employees to receive greater percentages than those given to the more highly paid.
The employee should be clearly informed as to whether the housing allowance covers the cost of the utilities, insurance and other expenses related to the property.
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, company policy may vary with regard to whether the expatriate is expected to rent or buy property in the new location or whether he can benefit from living in company housing.
(Generally, the latter is only provided in isolated areas, where there are no local properties for rent or purchase.)
Payments may also be made by companies in respect of expatriates' properties in the home country.
Organisations may take on the letting of the employee's property together with its insurance and maintenance or engage a managing agent or specialist relocation firm to do it.
Tax equalisation payments and bonuses
Payments may be added to the expatriate's salary to compensate for losses through taxation.
However, such payments are themselves liable to tax and it therefore becomes very difficult to determine the level of such compensation.
Further additions to expatriates' pay may take the form of bonus payments.
For example, employees may receive bonus payments on the successful conclusion of their overseas assignments.
Problems with pay
Working out a salary structure for expatriates is riddled with problems.
Friction between various groups of workers can arise if  the expatriates earn more or less than local staff or if expatriates in one country receive more favourable salaries or tax treatment than those in other countries.
Employees may be unwilling to take an assignment if it involves what appears to be a pay cut, even if local wages and prices in the country concerned are considerably lower than those at home.
Organisations may find themselves having to standardise expatriate benefit packages to prevent those employees moving from one country to another refusing certain postings.
Determining an executive's salary is not a straightforward task.
Sources of information may well be: hearsay (which can be inaccurate); articles in journals (which are not usually followed up, making analyses of pay over time impossible); and surveys by international management remuneration consultancies (which can be expensive and often only contain data from their own members).
Pay determination is also hampered by such factors as inflation rates and currency fluctuations against the pound.
In some countries, notably in Latin America, inflation rates are so high that salaries need to double or more each year to maintain their spending power.
And with currency fluctuations, salaries with appear attractive initially can become decreasingly so over time.
The payment of an inflation proof and/or sterling-related salary may be made to get round these problems.
OTHER BENEFITS
Annual leave
Expatriates expect to receive no less annual leave than they are entitled to in their home countries.
This includes any extra days given as a reward for long service.
However, if the local workers receive higher leave entitlements, the expatriate may feel resentful.
If the company's policy is to remunerate expatriates similarly to those in the home country, it is important that this is explained.
The amount of leave given may vary considerably from country to country.
Employees posted to areas with a harsh climate generally receive greater amounts of leave than those in less severe climates.
Holidays may be spent in the overseas location or employees may be encouraged to spend their leave at home.
This enables them to conduct their business affairs in person, maintain links with the home-based company and remain in touch with family and friends.
Practice with regard to the payment of home leave fares varies widely.
Some organisations pay the whole cost (especially where long distances are involved); others expect the employee to pay and some state that the employee pays the first £ x and the company pays the rest.
Allowances and benefits
The salary paid to the relocated executive is only the tip of the iceberg.
An executive earning, say £15 000 a year in salary may cost the employer as much as £80 000 or more a year to maintain in the overseas location.
Items generally included in an expatriate's allowances/benefits package may be listed under the following heads: pre-departure; abroad; fares; accommodation; fringe benefits; on return.
Pre-departure
Allowances and benefits arranged and paid for by the employer prior to departure include: medical examinations; inoculations; passports; visas; work permits; travel to point of departure; hotel accommodation; housing costs (agents' fees, etc.); car compensation (as in the case of an enforced sale); outfit allowance and language tuition.
Abroad
In addition to basic salary, bonus, expatriation allowance, location/hardship allowances, cost of living allowances and other allowances and bonuses (see above) employers maintain expatriates' continuity of pension; pay for insurance and social security contributions in the home/host countries; and provide medical insurance (expenses), accident insurance (24-hour) and supplementary insurances (travel).
Allowances may be paid for house-hunting and hotel accommodation.
Fares
Fares paid cover those incurred at the beginning and end of the contract for the employee and his dependants; host country arrival and departure expenses and the employer may pay home-leave fares and disturbance allowances.
Provision for emergency home leave is also included.
Accommodation
Employers, in the main, pay for the removal of personal effects and any storage charges incurred.The expatriate's home in the UK may  be rented out/managed or bought by the employer.
(Merrill Lynch's 1984 Study, based on a sample of 149 major UK organisations, found that 90 per cent of these firms transferred employees' personal and household effects, 21 per cent covered the cost of the sale of the UK home, 14 per cent managed and/or let the UK home on behalf of the employee and 6 per cent bought the employee's UK home.)
A housing allowance/accommodation subsidy or company housing in the overseas location is provided as appropriate.
Employers may pay for the provision of furniture/household equipment and pay for or subsidise the costs of supplying gas, electricity, water and telephones.
Fringe benefits
Not all expatriates receive company cars and so employers may provide car loans or make payment towards the cost of shipping an employee's car from home.
Children's education, either at home or abroad, is paid for.
Allowances may be given, as appropriate, for children to visit their parents overseas.
The cost of school uniforms is generally covered.
The company may also pay for club entrance fees or subscriptions, servants, home/host country expenses and other expenses.
On return
Expatriates returning home at the end of their tour of duty can expect payment of travel expenses to their homes and hotel accommodation if necessary.
They may also receive a disturbance/ settling-in allowance and a terminal gratuity.
Employers also arrange medical examinations and may, in some instances, continue to pay children's education fees.
EXPATRIATES EMPLOYED ON FIXED-TERM CONTRACTS
When a particular task requires expatriates to work overseas for a short period of time, it is common for employers to hire people with the necessary skills on short, fixed-term contracts.
Such expatriates do not work abroad to further their careers within their employing organisations but, in general, accept overseas postings because of the generous remuneration packages which are attached to them.
Unlike expatriates relocating overseas as part of a career move, those employed on fixed-term contracts often leave their families  behind while they complete their contract.
This is especially the case when the expatriate is employed in desert, mining or oil drilling areas.
(However there are some instances where, in pleasanter climates, employees working on fixed-term contracts are accompanied by spouses/families.)
Compensation
Many expatriates working on contract do so on one or two occasions in order to save large sums of money.
As a result, firms employing them need to recruit frequently to replace those who choose not to renew their contracts.
The compensation package offered is usually based on a local salary, which, when converted into sterling, is considerably higher than the workers could earn in the UK.
The salary may also be enhanced by favourable local tax conditions.
Much effort may need to be spent in determining the level of salary paid to expatriates working overseas on fixed-term contracts.
The salary should match that given to expatriates in the company's full-time employ and, in some cases, those working on contract may receive higher rates of pay.
This may reflect the fact that they are not in pensionable service with their employing organisation.
A bonus, payable on completion of the fixed-term contract, is also commonly included in the compensation package.
This bonus may be given because the employee concerned has no pension rights and does not have an enhanced salary already reflecting this or it may just be a reward for satisfactory completion of the contract.
Problems may arise in respect of expatriates working in the same location on longer-term postings or even local company employees who are dissatisfied with their rates of pay in comparison with salaries and/or bonuses earned by fixed-term contract workers.
It is important that all concerned understand the company's remuneration policies to prevent friction between different groups of workers.
Such jealousies may lead to valued career-move expatriates and/or fixed-term contract workers failing in their postings or result in local industrial unrest.
Another important element of the compensation package concerns holidays.
Fixed-term contracts vary widely in terms of the number of days' leave given.
The amount of leave is likely to be considerably greater when the employees' postings involve leaving spouses/families at home.
It is also likely to vary according to country — employees working in severe climates generally receive a greater amount of  leave than those working in more equable climes.
Fixed-term contracts may make provision for employees on leave to have their passage(s) to and from home paid for by the employer.
As well as salaries, bonuses and leave, other areas which are usually included in the remuneration package include: housing or the payment of an accommodation allowance; sick pay and medical insurance; local transport allowance and travel allowances to and from the UK; and specialist clothing, tools or kit allowance.
Other items which employees require include entry/exit visas, work permits and details of local laws and working conditions.
The employees' contracts should clearly state the length of the assignment for which they have been engaged together with details of procedures for termination of employment — both on behalf of the employer and the employee.
RELOCATING INDIVIDUAL STAFF TO BRITAIN
Posting an employee to London is a very different matter from posting someone elsewhere in Britain.
London is highly geared to respond to the needs of expatriates from many countries.
There are a number of international schools in the London area as well as support groups which cater for different nationalities.
The various relocation companies are also able to provide fully accompanied home finding services in and around London.
Property available for rent, especially furnished property, is relatively easy to find, whereas in most other parts of Britain only rented property at the bottom end of the market is readily available.
The expatriates may, therefore, have to advertise in local papers to find suitable accommodation — a time-consuming worry if the expatriate and family have already arrived here with no accommodation ready for them.
Schooling is also a problem for expatriates based away from London as there are few international schools outside the capital.
However, the presence of the oil and microtechnology industries has resulted in the picture being less bleak in Scotland.
Edinburgh and Aberdeen both have American schools and reasonable quality rented housing is more readily available than in other parts of the UK.
There are also a number of expatriate support groups in both cities.
Language and culture
Although the expatriate employee working on contract in Britain is likely to speak English, companies should give some thought to the employee's spouse and family.
For instance, if the spouse does not speak much, if any, English, limitations on finding work or becoming involved in the local community are bound to arise.
Even if the employee is successful in the job, if the spouse cannot adapt to live in the English culture and speak the language, the assignment may well fail.
Although the relocation firms use bilingual counsellors when helping foreign transferees to find property, this is not considered enough help by some companies.
Spouses may be encouraged to attend language courses at colleges of further education.
To help expatriates overcome differences in culture, their employers should issue them with briefing documents covering various points of concern.
Finding schools
Finding suitable schools is another problem facing expatriates coming to Britain.
The majority of expatriates choose to send their children to an international school or to a school following their home country's educational curriculum.
Fortunately there are a number of such schools in London including American, Canadian, French, German, Dutch, Swedish, Spanish, Norwegian and Greek schools.
The majority of these operate ‘bussing routes’ so that the expatriate families do not necessarily need to live close to the school itself but may choose to live along the school bus route, over a wider area of the capital.
One problem that can arise is that of a particular school being full and so unable to accommodate the newly arrived expatriate's children.
It is therefore advisable for the expatriate to give advance notice to the school of when places are required.
When viewing schools to decide which is most suitable, it is again necessary to give adequate notice.
International Relocation Company, which specialises in home finding for expatriates, recommends giving at least two weeks' notice for an appointment with a British day school although it says international schools may be viewed at short notice.
Opportunities for the spouse
It is rare for companies to have formal arrangements for finding work for the spouse of a relocated employee especially as a typical posting to the UK is only for two or three years.
However, some firms issue the spouse with details of opportunities available to do voluntary work or attend further education classes.
Relocation company counsellors assigned to families moving to Britain also provide information on activities that may be taken up by the spouse.
Finding property
It is not advisable for an expatriate and family to arrive in Britain without some steps having been taken in advance to arrange accommodation.
The employee arrives here unsettled and is unlikely to be able to devote full attention and energies to the assignment.
It is becoming increasingly common for companies to pay the costs of a house-hunting ‘look-see’ trip around six to eight weeks before the transfer takes place.
These visits are generally about one week long which gives the employee and spouse a reasonable length of time to find accommodation and get a feel for the country.
Generally speaking, around 80 per cent of companies sending employees to work in Britain base their relocation compensation packages on rented accommodation; the remaining 20 per cent allow employees to buy property in Britain.
(Employees relocated to parts of Britain other than London are more likely to have to buy property as there is little suitable rented accommodation available.)
By arranging housing visits six to eight weeks before the transfer, the employee can find property for rent, sign the necessary agreements and return home knowing that the property will be ready on the date of transfer.
If the housing visit is carried out too early, say six months before the transfer date, landlords are unlikely to be able to say with any certainty whether property is likely to be available for rent.
Setting the housing visit date too close to the actual transfer date will result in problems for the employee with regard to renting out property at home, arranging storage for goods left behind and transport for those items that the family intends to bring to Britain.
By viewing properties before bringing household goods to Britain, the expatriate and family can assess accurately which items should  be shipped over and which should be left behind.
The story of the American expatriate who shipped over his water-bed and then had to spend months trying to find a landlord who would allow him to bring it into his property is a good example.
Similarly expatriates are advised to check whether the furnished property includes crockery, cutlery, etc.
Unfurnished rented accommodation is no cheaper than furnished accommodation in London.
It is therefore easier for an expatriate to leave items of furniture in storage at home than ship them here.
However, if the expatriate rents a furnished property and wishes to ship over certain items of furniture, such as a favourite dining table, arrangements may generally be made with the landlord so that any unwanted items of furniture are stored during the expatriate's residence.
Another area which may cause problems is that of insurance of household goods.
Although the property and the landlord's contents may be insured, it is likely that the expatriate's own personal belongings will not be covered in the landlord's policy.
Companies should therefore advise their expatriate employees to take out adequate insurance cover.
Some employers pay for this.
When looking for property, expatriates will find more accommodation to choose from if they are to rent under a company let rather than in their own names.
Many landlords, usually those who own property as an investment, only let to a company rather than to an individual to avoid the tenant's security of tenure offered by the Rent Acts.
Landlords generally accept a business release clause.
This usually requires the tenant to give sixty or ninety days' notice, sometimes after an agreed minimum period of four to six months.
There are, however, expatriates who buy property to use during their two to three year stay in Britain.
It can take at least two to three months if not longer to buy a house and any deal initiated during a housing trip may not be complete by the time the expatriate and family arrives in Britain.
Some companies pay employees' hotel bills while the transaction is going through.
However, hotels may be an expensive option.
An alternative is to consider the use of a service flat.
These offer accommodation (complete with cleaners and porters) on a short-term basis.
By contrast, most privately rented accommodation is not available for short periods (say for a few weeks while a house purchase is carried out).
Rented property is usually taken for a period of a year with  an option to renew for the second and third years of the contract; even six-month lets are rare.
The service flat, however, may be rented for a short period of time and fill the gap between the employee's arrival in Britain and the completion of the house purchase.
Once again, service flats need to be booked in advance.
Six to eight weeks' notice is advisable.
It is possible for employees on housing visits to begin the process of buying property here and also arrange for service flats to be ready for their arrival in Britain.
Employers should note, however, that service flats do not always work out cheaper than hotels.
Employees buying property in Britain need to furnish it themselves.
It is difficult to hire many household items for instance, furniture, dishwashers, washing machines and tumble-dryers although some items such as televisions and videos can be hired easily.
It is therefore usual for the company to provide a compensation package which either covers the shipment of the employees' personal belongings to Britain or enables them to buy afresh here.
The latter option is less common.
Compensation packages for expatriates coming to Britain usually cover schooling costs, private medical care and housing costs.
With regard to housing, employers' policies vary.
Some provide a flat-rate sum per week to be spent on accommodation.
If the full amount is not spent, then the employee pays back the difference.
(Utility charges, but usually excluding telephone costs, are generally paid.)
Alternatively, the company provides a compensation package which amounts to an addition to the employee's salary — of which any not spent on housing may be kept.
Allowances
Merrill Lynch's 1984 Study covering 148 British companies relocating staff into the UK found that:
Compensation for expenses incurred in house buying was the most common form of assistance given to employees coming into the country; 53 per cent of those companies bringing in employees will compensate house buying expenses and 37 per cent will provide assistance with the house purchase.
About four in 10 companies provide rented accommodation but only a fifth provide a housing allowance.
The survey also notes that: ‘Compensation for temporary travel and living costs, transportation of personal and household effects and disturbance allowances were given by only a minority of companies’.
And, it says, ‘only a fifth of companies provide orientation advice on the localities, schooling, commuting and general amenities’.
Merrill Lynch's statistics are interesting in that they indicate that companies prefer to give expatriates coming to Britain financial assistance towards buying property rather than towards renting it.
This conflicts with the general view held by other organisations which have considerable dealings with expatriates and their employers.
However, the Merrill Lynch survey is based on only a small sample of UK companies (148 organisations).
It is also not clear from the survey whether the companies in question base their expatriates in London or elsewhere in Britain.