

WHAT SHOE FOR '92?
Chang Takes The Sting Out Of The Power Debate LLOYD'S SLATER GOALS FOR BRITISH TENNIS
MAIN POINT
by ALASTAIR McIVER
LET IT BE
Depending on how you interpret the above headline, you may either be in favour — or against, the International Tennis Federation's (ITF) recommendation that the ‘Let’ Service Rule be abolished as from 1st January 1993.
If it came to pass, it would affect every player in the world, be you Ivan Lendl or a park player.
RECOMMENDATION
The recommendation will be put by the ITF's Rules of Tennis Committee to the Committee of Management in Paris in June and if accepted, it will travel to the Dominican Republic in September for presentation to the ITF Annual General Meeting, where, if it receives a ⅔ majority from delegates in attendance, it will become the first time that a new rule has been introduced since 1989, when the tie break was standardised.
The proposed rule change comes against a background of concern about the speed of the game, which was the subject of an ATP Players Forum held during the Lipton International Players Championships in Key Biscayne in March (see Parsons' Perspective).
Although a separate issue which was not on the Forum's agenda, the ‘Let’ proposal nevertheless drew much adverse comment from many of those present, including Stefan Edberg and Steffi Graf, the latter player who thought it ‘silly’.
On the other hand, Ivan Lendl supports such a change, stating ‘It's the most controversial call in the game.
You can't  overrule it.
I'd be all for the change because there's logic in it.
It speeds up the game and takes controversy away’.
In the long term, should the change be approved, it may well reduce controversy on the court, but there will probably be any amount of controversy in the run up to any such potential change, not least because it affects all of us, you, me…and them, the professionals.
Tennis World would like you to have your say on the issue.
All you have to do to register your vote either ‘for’, or ‘against’ the proposed change is to complete the form at the foot of the page and we will publish the findings in an upcoming issue.
IMPORTANT
This is an important issue.
We believe that it's important enough to ask the general tennis playing public for its views.
If you feel strongly about this issue, then please vote on the form below and send it to the editorial offices to arrive by 18th May.
Speaking My Mind
David Wynne-Morgan
For the past two years, I have been questioning whether the Lawn Tennis Association was the right organisation to continue to be responsible for the development of a new generation of men and women tennis players who would be able to take on and compete on level terms with the rest of the world.
In order not to bore my readers, I have left the subject alone for the past six months, but with the start of a new summer season approaching in Britain, it is perhaps time to take up some of the issues again; for I see few signs that there is any change of heart and certainly no sign of a change of direction.
APPEAL
The Lawn Tennis Association in Great Britain is the wealthiest organisation of its kind in the world.
That's almost entirely due to the continuing worldwide appeal of The Championships at Wimbledon, which last year provided an income for the Association of more than £9m.
Despite this, less money is spent in direct support of our national squads, both men and women, than in many other less wealthy tennis nations, and far too much money is frittered away in areas that I do not believe are the LTA's responsibility and, in some cases, this actually damages the cause of tennis in Britain.
I do not want to make too big an issue of the large sums of money that are spent on taking LTA committee members and officials around the world, travelling in premium class and always staying in the best hotels, although it would seem that it is considerably more than the amount of money actually spent on transporting the competitors themselves.
UNCOMMERCIAL
However, I do want to query why the LTA produces a high gloss tennis magazine at a cost that is totally uncommercial and it does so in direct competition to other magazines which have to operate within the framework of normal commercial practice.
The LTA magazine sells less than 10,000 copies in newsagents, and is subsidised through LTA membership fees to the tune of what is believed to be nearly £250,000.
It absorbs the overwhelming majority of the total fees paid up by LTA members, few of whom are aware that this is how their contributions are squandered.
It represents totally unfair competition, not only to Tennis World but also to Tennis Magazine.
The LTA are not in existence to be magazine publishers.
They certainly do not have the right to use their members' contributions without their expressed permission, to subsidise the publication of a magazine which would otherwise be quite incapable of competing on a purely commercial basis.
I have no doubt whatever, that if they commissioned an outside and objective research organisation to ascertain from their members whether this was how they wanted their contributions spent, they would get a resounding ‘no’.
It is nothing more nor less than a determined effort by an immensely powerful bureaucracy to silence independent opinion, and to replace it with a censored, frequently biased, and increasingly bland official view of the state of British tennis today.
They will not, of course, succeed.
Tennis World, the biggest, best selling independent tennis monthly, will certainly continue to publish despite all their efforts.
What is important is that they should not be trying to enter publishing on an uncommercial basis, especially when there are such clear and obvious shortcomings in their performance in almost all the areas that are quite clearly their responsibility, and on which the future of British tennis depends.
Tennis World believes passionately in the future of British tennis, but success will be achieved despite the failure of the LTA to appreciate what is needed to make the grade in world tennis today, not as a result of its efforts.
NO COINCIDENCE
It is not, I believe, a matter of coincidence, that the only current British World Champion is Jamie Delgado, who won the 14-and-under title in Florida last year and owes nothing whatever to the LTA or its training and development programme.
He has achieved his success through his own talent, the support of his parents, and the skill and guidance of David Lloyd, the fiercely independent former British Davis Cup player whose mushrooming tennis centres have been one of the few success stories in British tennis in the last decade.
Clearly, the £250,000 reputably spent each year on shoring up the LTA's publishing ego trip could be much better spend elsewhere.
Ask Tony Pickard what he could do with an additional £250,000 for the development and training of the Davis Cup squad.
Ask Ann Jones what a contribution half this size could do to providing coaching and travelling support to her hard-pressed British girls, or even consult with Ian Barclay or Olga Morozova on the dramatic help this could give to the junior squads which, although cosseted, are far too small and elitist.
A much broader base with much greater competition to get into the squad is essential, together with continuing intense competition to stay in, which should be based solely on performance.
The LTA is operating in what is today a very professional tennis world, yet on all the LTA's innumerable committees, there is hardly a single person who has had personal experience of playing top class international tennis at the highest level since the game went ‘Open’ in 1968.
SERVICES
Why is it that the Association does not enlist the services of former Wimbledon Champion, Virginia Wade, or Wimbledon singles semi-finalist, Roger Taylor not as paid employees, but as committee members helping to set out strategic plans for the future?
Could it be that it might shake up the cosy, old fashioned world of the LTA?
There are many of us who believe that such a shake up is long overdue.
Chang Tames The Big Servers
by JOHN PARSONS, DAILY TELEGRAPH
Somehow it seemed delightfully ironic that on the very day that the Association of Tennis Professionals  organised its fascinating and skilfully presented seminar on ‘The Speed of the Game’, two renowned baseliners reached the final of the Lipton Players International Championships in Key Biscayne.
Indeed, Michael Chang's defeat of Jim Courier, which ended the French and Australian Open champion's reign as world number one after exactly 40 days, followed successes also against three of the biggest servers in the game, Marc Rosset, Markus Zoecke and Pete Sampras.
Alberto Mancini, for his part, had knocked out Boris Becker and Richard Krajicek.
DEBATE
Even so, the broad-ranging debate as to whether — and if so how much — the increase of power play through modern technology in recent years is damaging tennis as a spectacle, following hard on the controversial recommendation from the Rules Committee of the International Tennis Federation that the ‘let’ in serving should be abolished,(see Editor's Main Point), certainly helped focus minds on what is clearly an important issue.
REVOLUTION
I think most people now agree that, with hindsight, the ITF should have introduced a wood only racket rule, with limited dimensions, the moment hints of a racket revolution appeared in the mid 1970's.
To be fair, however, few at that time sensed the full implication of what was starting and the ITF in those days had neither the structure nor the financing to have become embroiled in any major commercial legal battles which may have started.
As Cliff Drysdale, former top player turned television commentator, in chairing the seminar, put it, the two questions needing to be addressed are ‘Is there a problem and if so, what can or should we do about it?’
CONSENSUS
The general consensus seemed to be that ‘Yes, there is a problem but probably not so bad as some people have suggested.
And that amending the foot fault rule to stop players jumping before they hit the ball, introducing possible changes to ball pressures for specific surfaces and taking steps to inhibit any further extensions in the dimension or strength of rackets, would be better than ‘tinkering about with how the game is actually played.’
Fortunately, that was in harmony with the thoughts of the ITF Rules Committee which had also met at Key Biscayne a few days earlier and had thrown out the idea of one serve instead of two…or changing the dimensions of the court, such as a smaller service box or a serving line a yard behind the baseline, but agreed to make further research into rackets, balls and court surfaces.
STATISTICS
Clearly, if some of the statistics presented are reliable, racket technology has changed the character of the game more on grass than on any other surface.
For instance, the playing time per hour at Wimbledon has dropped from 7.18 minutes in the 1970's to 3.55 minutes, whereas at the US Open, which used to be played on grass, it has actually gone up slightly from 8.14 minutes to 8.18 minutes.
Of course there are other factors.
In the early 1970's., there were no 25 seconds between points (which the ITF wants to reduce to 20 seconds) or 90 seconds at each changeover, so that will have also reduced playing times per hour.
And players do not only have more powerful rackets these days, but many of them, thanks to improvements in health, training and diets, are also stronger and bigger.
In 1973, for instance, only four of the top ten were more than 6ft.
Now there can be as many as nine of the top ten in that category and as both Brian Gottfried and David Wheaton astutely pointed out, you cannot legislate for that.
Wheaton, who not surprisingly opposed any moves to ‘discriminate’ against big serves, said with a grin, ‘No-one would suggest cutting off Michael Chang's legs!’
INJURIES
On the other hand, although one expert scientific engineer said he felt we had almost reached the point of diminishing returns in terms of extra racket frame power, can we risk that?
And Dr Ben Kibler and ATP trainer Bill Norris both acknowledged the increased incidence of elbow and shoulder injuries since modern rackets began replacing wood.
‘In particular’ said Dr Kibler ‘we're seeing more problems with younger players who have not fully matured physically’, and he warned that introducing heavier balls could make the problem even worse.
Like The Mousetrap, I suspect this debate will run and run, unless of course we find enough Michael Changs who can ace opponents with serves of no more than 62mph and then no doubt, as in the Vilas, Solomon, Dibbs era, we will start complaining that the game has become too slow again.
Incidentally, on the question of the ‘let’, despite the swift, unequivocal opposition voiced by Stefan Edberg, John McEnroe, Jim Courier, Steffi Graf and many more, the move has its influential supporters, including Ivan Lendl, Arthur Ashe, every umpire and Wimbledon referee Alan Mills when I spoke to them in Florida.
The ‘Let’ rule has stood since 1880 without too much fuss and I think I might get annoyed if I saw the fifth set in a Wimbledon final decided by a serve which simply hit the net and ‘died’on the receiver's side.
Perhaps, as ATP's Weller Evans suggests, trying out a ‘no let’ rule in a few special matches or even among juniors might be worthwhile — a simple, sensible case of don't knock it until you've tried it.
FRANC DISCLOSURE
Following my disclosure in the last issue that escalating costs and reduced financial expectations had forced the United States Tennis Association to contemplate a major re-think of plans for the rebuilding of Flushing Meadow, I hear that the French Federation has also run into problems over the upgrading and expansion of Roland Garros.
Everything was set for £25m extension on grounds adjoining the current courts, including a new 10,000 seat Number One Court, eight clay practice courts, five floodlit all-weather courts and other facilities  including offices, one of the world's most modern sports gymnasiums and parking for at least 500 vehicles.
Then, suddenly, a Paris administrative court, in response to action by just seven residents, over-ruled the go-ahead which French tennis officials had received from the City Hall, including the Mayor, Jacques Chirac, who is an avid tennis fan.
Engineers were already on the site when work had to stop and Patrice Clerc, Director of the French Open, in confirming the Federation's decision to appeal, said, ‘We had hoped to have things ready for next year.
Now we can only hope that things are resolved quickly enough for the developments to be finished in time for the 1994 Open.’
French players, former players and tennis fans all over the world are being invited to sign a petition in support of the expanded facilities and there is certainly a familiar name at the top of the list — France's recently resigned Davis Cup captain, Yannick Noah.
Mancini — tamed Becker
‘It's desperately important that we have these new facilities’ he says.
‘Without Roland Garros, French tennis could never have developed in the way it has over recent years and we would never have won the Davis Cup, which has given us all such a tremendous boost.’
Even with the extra land involved, which I seem to remember used to be a near derelict gravel soccer pitch and a few barely used tennis courts, the Roland Garros site would still only cover 21.5 acres, compared with 44 at Wimbledon.
On the brighter side, one new stadium development which is going ahead — at last— is for The International Players Championships, simply known as ‘The Lipton’ at Key Biscayne.
No sooner had this year's tournament finished, than work began on the £10m octagonal shaped 14,000 seater stadium, which will have giant palm trees growing through the stairways to help maintain the distinctive flavour of South Florida.
Since the tournament began, first in Delray Beach in 1985 and then for a couple of years in Boca Raton, the temporary, scaffolding-supported stands have gone with them.
It is only after three years of political persuasion and in-fighting that tournament officials have overcome enough local opposition from environmentalists — conveniently forgetting that the site used to be a rubbish tip — for a permanent stadium to be built.
Some idea as to the value of the tournament, not only to Key Biscayne but also to the City of Miami, can be  gauged from the fact that the tournament alone books 8,000 bed nights in local hotels for players etc, officials and media.
SPONSORS
Perhaps the best part of the 10 day tournament for brothers Cliff and Butch Buchholz, who run the Key Biscayne event, was the decision by Lipton to remain as title sponsors after all, having originally said they would only be a secondary supporter in future years.
Four years ago, you may remember, Lipton signed what was heralded as the longest sponsorship deal in world sport, for the next 31 years, but there were ‘get out’ clauses.
One opt out related to if there was a major change in the structure of world tennis and a prize money increase of more than 5 per cent in any one year.
The ATP coup 12 months later triggered both opportunities for their change of mind, although record crowds again this time and the realisation that, apart from the Stella Artois tournament at Queen's Club, they have one of the prime non Grand Slam events of the year, persuaded them to stay after all.
One commercial problem which had faced Lipton was that although theirs is a worldwide trading name, outside America the brand is marketed by rival companies.
Benson and Hedges used to have similar problems with Wembley, in that reports of the tournament in America and Australia, for instance, inadvertently gave credit to their rivals.
Life can be complicated sometimes when you least expect it to be.
RECESSION
Even so, with at least two American tournaments lacking name sponsors at the time of writing and the LTA's anxious search for a company willing to take over the men's autumn indoor event in Birmingham, are we, I wonder, starting to see the icy blow of reality infiltrating a sport which, for so long, has seemed immune from the impact of any recession?This year's Lipton International coincided with the launching of an astonishing new book entitled, ‘You Can Play Tennis In Two Hours’, written by Argentinian, Oscar Wegner who now coaches at the Colony Club Tennis Resort in Sarasota.
Bud Collins, one of America's leading tennis commentators and writers, who wrote the  foreword , assures me that he has seen Wegner prove the point by teaching newcomers from seven to seventy keep a reasonable rally going within two hours of them first picking up a racket.
As someone who made little enough progress beyond Youll Cup school tennis and county junior teams in 20 years, I remain to be convinced but I enjoyed the three hours I spent reading the book.
Unfortunately, though comprehensive on training, it said nothing about eye strain!
Lipton boost for  Buchholz 
MAC'S AGENDA
John McEnroe has never made a secret of his desire, one day, to become the United States Davis Cup captain.
At Key  Biscayne, a week before he expected to be competing in the doubles against Czechoslovakia in their Davis Cup quarter finals, he even started outlining some of the changes he would make should he be given the job.
After losing to Richard Krajicek in the fourth round in Key Biscayne, McEnroe outlined how he would try to do for American tennis what he has seen Yannick Noah achieve for France.
‘The next step (in strengthening the United States team) is obvious to me.
That's to have (Jim) Courier play.
It looks so bad when the number one player in the world is not playing Davis Cup.
There's no explanation for that.
So hopefully that will change,’ said McEnroe.
SENTIMENTS
After 12 years as a Davis Cup player, McEnroe's sentiments on that issue are understandable.
And between 1981–83, when he was number one in the world rankings, he played in every United States match, helping them to win the trophy the first two years and even competing in their historic relegation match against Ireland in Dublin after they had lost to Argentina in the first round in 1983.
In fairness to Courier, however, who made his Davis Cup debut long before he became world number one and when others, such as Andre Agassi, were ‘not available’, there is no shortage of patriotism on his part.
Although the first two rounds of this year's Davis Cup, one week after the Australian Open and then a week after Lipton, made it possible for him to fit them into his tournament programme for the first three months of the year when his number one ranking was under such threat, he says, ‘The Davis Cup is certainly one of my priorities now.’
ANDRE'S NEW TOY
Andre Agassi's stay in Key Biscayne was depressingly short as he lost in his first match to one of what seemed countless unheralded other Americans, Bryan Shelton.
No doubt it gave him more time to enjoy his new pride and joy, a Harley Davidson, classic Hells Angels style motorcycle.
Agassi, who already has a rich choice of cars, including a Ferrari and a  Lamborghini , acquired his new machine in Hawaii, while waiting to play the first round David Cup match in January.
He was shooting a commercial for Canon, who photographed him posing against the Harley Davidson which, quite by chance, they spotted parked outside a Diner.
When the bike's owner, replete in heavy leather jacket appeared, Agassi chatted with him for a while before offering to buy the bike for £9,000.
The offer was accepted.
Still on the subject of motorbikes, Gabriela Sabatini is another convert.
She arrived most days for her Lipton matches astride a Honda 600.
‘It's great because I can ride it to the beach and people don't recognise me beneath the helmet.
It's not difficult to ride because I already have one at home in Argentina.’
PILLION
Several fellow players asked her to take them for a ride as pillion passengers but that treat seemed to be reserved for members of her regular entourage, though I suppose it could be argued she took Steffi Graf for a ride in the semi-finals.
Of their 31 meetings, this was their eighth in Florida and Sabatini, invariably revved up hard for the latest occasion, has won seven.
Elsewhere round the world she has won only three.
Sabatini — enjoying the Florida sun
VAUXHALL INDOOR TROPHY
Hallamshire and Queen's Celebrate Dual Success in Vauxhall Finale
The line-up for the fourth Grand Slam Finals of the Vauxhall Indoor Tennis Trophy reflects a mixture of old and new, as former champions Queen's Club make the grade for the fourth time, whilst Royal Berkshire earn a place in the last four for the first time in their debut Trophy season.
The finals venture up to the north of the country for 1992, with the city of Sheffield host to the two-day inter-club national finale for the first time at the Graves Tennis Centre in Norton.
The men's semi-final features three teams who may hold a key advantage, in that they have experienced the tension and excitement of the Vauxhall finals in previous years.
The exception is Royal Berkshire, who were responsible for the dramatic removal of last season's champions David Lloyd Slazenger Heston in the regional rounds.
Top seeds for the men's title, however, are Yorkshire's Ilkley — fronted by Gary Henderson, with support from Simon Ickringill — who meet Berkshire in the semis, whilst No. 2 seeds and ‘local boys’ IFG Hallamshire Sheffield tackle event stalwarts Queen's.
COMPETITION
Both Hallamshire and Queen's are also represented in the final four of the women's competition, but it is Long Road Cambridge who go into the semis as top seeds, with players of the calibre of Amanda Brown, a former Wightman Club player, and ex-Queen's No. 2 Judy Rich — who appeared in last season's inaugural women's Grand finals for the London club — setting the pace.
Defending champions Puma Welwyn will be obviously doing all in their power to retain the coveted Vauxhall Trophy when they begin their defence in earnest against Hallamshire.
The climax to the six month tournament takes place on Sunday 12th April, ultimately revealing the best two club teams in the country (full report in the next issue of Tennis World ).
The two champions will each collect £2,900 in prize money, whilst a year's use of a Vauxhall car awaits the best singles performance at the finals.
LLOYD'S LINES
Their lives in my hands
by David Lloyd
The Slater Foundation started five years ago with three members.
Of the original three, only Tim Henman remains linked with the squad.
Since then, at one time or another, we have had 13 boys involved with the scheme.
The boys were hand picked by me,(with the assistance of my most experienced coaches), and I am proud of them.
I can still see in each of them the special qualities which made me select them.
They are, or will be, excellent tennis players, but just four out of thirteen remain connected with the scheme, with their original aspirations still  intact .
In business, this level of wastage would be unacceptable.
Systems would be revolutionised, or the project abandoned.
However, business terms and concepts cannot apply when the raw material for your product is a human being, especially a child who, contemporaneously with your manufacturing process, is maturing to adulthood.
GOALS
The goals of the scheme are straightforward.
It aims to provide the boys with a good education, in a caring environment, while giving them the opportunity to train towards the specific goal of reaching the top 50 in the world, as professional tennis players.
This is no easy target.
Great Britain has only produced four players of that calibre in the last 25 years.
They are Mark Cox, Roger Taylor, Buster Mottram and John Lloyd.
(I must apologise for ignoring our ladies here, because their record is much better, but at present, the Slater scheme is only open to boys).
As everyone is aware, world standards are very high.
Numbers 50 to 100 are very, very good tennis players but please realise, that is not our sole aim, nor that of the boys.
It is interesting to note the following information from the current top 50 on the world ranking list.
These figures make our record of approximately two per decade, embarrassingly poor.
But how can we, with the Slater scheme, explain our dwindling numbers?
There are many facets to being a player of that quality and the years have brought changes in different ways.
Adrian Blackman is a worker and a trier, of whom no one could ask more, but there has always been a question mark over his speed and flexibility.
Meanwhile, he is Head Boy at Reeds, very accomplished academically, with a good chance of a place at University.
A good player?
Yes.
A great player?
Maybe not, and who can then advise him to abandon his education?
Not me.
Mark Moreso, one of the most talented boys the scheme will ever see, had a different problem.
Everything seems so easy to Mark.
He can flick a football over his head with perfect control, pick up a guitar and find a tune.
Effort and application were not needed in the first instance and did not come easily when the need arose.
As he grew up, he lost his appetite for the game and, natural enough in a teenager, he questioned his motives and direction, and was lost to the scheme.
I hope he will not be permanently lost to tennis.
James Baily and Tom Hand are two boys with something very special.
In both cases their parents took decisions for them which, in my view, were not in the boys' best interests.
An honest assessment of attainment, progress and potential is fundamental to the ethics of the scheme but it is not always what parents want to hear.
The most difficult task of all is to pass judgement on a child who has given his all, but whom I can no longer see reaching the goal I have set.
How I would love to be proved wrong by any one of them but parents and boys deserve my honest opinion, however much they may hate me for it.
Children naturally go through so many changes during these critical years and we have no history of solid British tennis achievement from which to draw patterns, norms and conclusions.
It is hard for parents to keep faith through lean years, and harder still for the boys, particularly if doubts and pressures filter through to them.
Often parents and boys are wooed by LTA representatives to favour their own ‘official’ scheme.
The knowledge that they control and select teams, and valuable ‘wild card’ slots, whether explicit or implied, is hard for parents to ignore.
However, more than anything else, we need the faith and commitment of the parents.
Consistency in coaching and training is vital.
I am also becoming increasingly convinced of the importance of a non-interventionist approach to technique.
If a player has developed an effective and exciting shot, it should be left alone, no matter how unorthodox.
I am not talking about weaknesses, or shots with a fatal flaw, but idiosyncratic strengths.
Too many coaches want to impose a technical straightjacket on their pupils, which can destroy them more than it improves and helps them.
How then, do we retain our numbers and improve our success rate?
We must now accept that Britain needs all of our combined efforts and co-operation to overcome the head start that other countries have.
We all know that tennis must attract increasing numbers and so enlarge the base of the pyramid.
More than anything else, we need a winner.
We are on target with Tim Henman, Jamie Delgado and Ben Haran and we won't give up.
Watch this space.
TENNIS WORLD CLUB
UPWARDLY MOBILE CHANG
Michael Chang has fought his way back into the top ten.
At the time of going to press, he had won three tournaments, in San Francisco in February, followed by back to back victories in Indian Wells and Key Biscayne in March, scoring wins over Courier (twice), Krajicek, Gilbert and Sampras along the way.
He started the year ranked 16.
Before his back to back wins, he was ranked 15.
After Liptons, he was nine.
His win/loss playing record for the year up to 23/3/92 was 20/3, bettered only by one player, Perez Roldan, who had only played in one tournament, in  Casablanca .
Such a performance deserves recognition and that is exactly what the Tennis World fan club service offers to Michael's fans…detailed, statistical information and quotes from the tournaments.
In last month's newsletter, we even had an item about Michael Chang's favourite  pastime — fish.
And don't forget, every new member to the Tennis World fan club service will automatically receive an adidas headband or hat.
Because of the demand for adidas ‘T’ Shirts, we have decided that only joint applications for fan club service and subscriptions will be eligible to receive the ‘T’Shirts.
So if you want to know more about Michael Chang, or indeed any of the players who have fan club services and who are listed on the opposite page, then don't delay.
Join up now and claim your free adidas accessory.
Tennis World and adidas — a great team.
COACHING COMMENTARY
MORE, MORE, MORE!
Olga Morozova calls for change in junior structure
All the best junior girls were at Nottingham for the national junior championships last August, but it was not enough.
There are not enough young girls playing, not enough of them competing for places.
I feel that there should be four or five other tournaments around the country to play in order for them just to get to the national championships.
There aren't enough players.
It's not their problem, it's a problem of facilities.
There should be pre-qualifying tournaments around the country before they come to the nationals.
In Russia, it was so easy to do this.
First of all we would play club and then we would play the Moscow Championships, then we would play the Russian Championships and then the Soviet Union Championships.
It was very easy and the standard just became higher and higher.
It's how it's supposed to be.
It should be club, then city, then region then national.
TIMING — THE KEY TO GOOD SHOTMAKING
To create power and control you have to have very good timing.
Again to have good timing you have to have good footwork, strong legs, a perfect point of contact; the body, the racket and the ball are supposed to be in harmony.
Today the situation is very quick on the court and the ball comes much quicker to you, so too you have to get to the ball much quicker.
Without good  anticipation and without power you cannot do it anymore.
It's just impossible.
You have to take the ball early, on the rise, in order to give less time to the opponent to prepare.
So you have to hit the ball on the rise.
To get power, you are using your power against the power that the opponent gives to you.
In many ways, I feel, such a policy is against proper footwork, so then, of course, bodywork becomes so important.
If you are not putting the proper bodywork on the ball which is coming towards you and which you are taking on the rise, then you won't have the control.
1991 — and other stories
TAKE THREE BOOKS…
by Alastair McIver
I'm sure that Rex Bellamy won't mind me saying that in tennis terms at least, he's been around for quite a while.
Hence the title of his book, Love Thirty , first published in hardback in 1990 but as from this month (18th), available in paperback.
‘Love Thirty in tennis parlance’, writes Bellamy in his Introduction, ‘fits in neatly with 30 years of airports, hotel rooms and press boxes, and suggests a manageable number of essays.’
CHARACTER STUDIES
The transformation from hard to soft back in no way dilutes the presentation of the writings in order to attract a different type of reader, rather it makes available to a wider audience, a collection of historical character studies at a more attractive price, something that, in this day and age, we should all be grateful for.
Created out of personal knowledge and friendship with most of the players he writes about, Bellamy makes full use of his uncanny anecdotal memory which enlivens an already creative rhetoric about no fewer than 30 great champions of yesterday, today and — dare I say it — tomorrow.
FAVOURITES
All the favourites are in there, although there are one or two surprising omissions which is understandable when one considers that he chose 30 from an original list of 79.
For fans of Evert, Borg, Nastase and Navratilova, however, there is no need to fret.
They're all in there while from the generation before, we come face to face with a champion whose greatness spanned almost three decades, ‘Pancho Gonzales’.
‘To write merely about his tennis would be to ignore the force of Gonzales’ intimidating personality’, writes Bellamy.
‘No man to upset and it did not take a great deal to upset him.’
In a fine example of the above, Bellamy recalls an incident at Queens Club in 1972 when Gonzalez, then 42, was disqualified after getting upset with a linesman.
The referee, Bea Seal got upset with him and he was gone.
‘The old lion had raged and roared in vain’ concluded Bellamy.
The live of one of the more contemporary ‘baddies’, James Scott Connors, receives its full complement of creative vocabulary from Bellamy's bountiful reservoir of words, the writer concluding that ‘…
It may be that we could not have had the best of Connors without the worst of him.’
While not condoning his more offensive behaviour over a career that spanned some 20 of the writer's 30 years, Bellamy nevertheless offers an often ignored view of Connors' early years.
His ‘slums to success’ story, the underlying motivation being the ‘chip on the shoulder’mentality which continued throughout his career, offers the fan a reason and the critic a thought as to the career of the man.
As Bellamy says, ‘East St. Louis, Belleville, the chip on the shoulder, the bond with mother and grandmother that carried over into his career, the move to the West Coast…what emerged was a great player and one of the toughest, roughest competitors the game has ever known’.
Of similar champion qualities but without the rough and tumble approach of the male Connors, is the feminine German, Steffi Graf, who was born around the time that Connors was striding into the competitive world of senior international tennis.
‘She is simply a normal balanced youngster who knows her own mind and goes her own way’ Bellamy writes.
He compares her with Lendl.
‘They think big.’
And so it goes on.
Champion after champion, each with a different story to be told.
Bellamy tells thirty of them…well.
Love Thirty will sit comfortably on any coffee table, any bookstall.
Ultimately, however, it is a book to be picked up and read.
The ATP Tour ,Year Two :1991 invites the tennis fan to ‘take a ride and see the world’, in the form of a colourful account of the Men's Pro Tour.
Edited by Richard Evans, who oversees some of the world's greatest tennis tournaments, the book offers a bird's eye view of the Tour, not least because of some of the superb colour photography contained within it.
BRITISH JOURNALISTS
That is not, in any way, to take away from the fine documentation of every tournament played in 1991, many of which were penned by British tennis journalists, who continue to be the most travelled in the world.
Imaginative use of the photographs, which include pictures of players, their wives — even their babies, on tour, blend in nicely with the unobtrusive design, a factor which makes the book both readable and viewable.
PHOTOGRAPHS
Many, indeed most of the photographs will be new to most of the readers, not least the picture,(for example), of Emilio Sanchez shaving in a Paris bathroom!
And of course, the journalism is tip top, as you would expect from the choice of names chosen by Evans.
The ATP Tour, Year Two: 1991, is a book for the enthusiast although it is also a book that you would have no hesitation in showing off to your friends, even those with only a passing interest in the game.
The Official Wimbledon Annual —1991 .
Finally, another must for the tennis home, is the recently published Official 1991 Annual of the Wimbledon Championships .
Written by John Parsons, the tennis correspondent of the Daily Telegraph and photographed by Allsport, the book offers a memorable insight into the fortnight, from the disastrously wet first week, to the emergence of a new, ‘outsider’ men's champion and the return of an ‘old’favourite in the women's event.
Germany took the honours last year with Messrs. Stich and Graf overcoming not only difficult opponents but also horrendous conditions.
The rain, however, failed to silence the pen of Parsons (never one to be at a loss for a line or two of copy!).
He recalls in the book, that ‘On Court 1, one intrepid spectator…persuaded fellow spectators to play charades, while in the various Press rooms, another entirely different game was being played, as journalists from all over the world pondered how to fill acres of space available to record the most important events of the day’.
DELIGHT
The Official Wimbledon Annual will delight those who braved the rain, and those who enjoyed the second week's sunshine.
Similarly, for those many thousands who enjoyed The Championships from their armchairs, this book will surely be their way to re-live them.
JUNIOR TENNIS WORLD
OPPORTUNITY KNOCKS — MACE OPENS ITS DOORS TO ALL
by ALASTAIR McIVER
For the sixth successive year, Mace Foodstores will be giving a mouthwatering opportunity to young tennis hopefuls — regardless of their means or previous playing achievements — by awarding Sports Scholarships to 12 boys and girls who reside in the United Kingdom.
The Scholarships, which cover 7 sports, of which tennis is one, have helped no fewer than 420 youngsters in the first five years of their existence.
Such a long term commitment reflects a genuine desire on the part of the company to encourage youngsters to achieve to their potential, irrespective of any financial restrictions.
FORTUNATE
This year, once again, Mace is fortunate to be able to call on the services of Richard Lewis, National Director of Training at the Lawn Tennis Association, who will oversee the 12 selected tennis enthusiasts on the courts of Eton school, where the youngsters will reside during the week of 19th–25th July.
In the past, Mace have been ably and generously assisted by top sports personalities — men and women such as Linford Christie, Sebastian Coe, Kriss  Akabusi , Dickie Davies and the former Minister for Sport, Colin Moynihan.
In addition, an equally generous set of individual sport sponsors has enabled Mace to continue its programme.
Jacob's Bakery, for example, have supported the tennis since the start of the scheme, while other sponsors this year, include Heinz (Equestrian), McVities (Athletics), Coca Cola (Swimming), Golden Wonder,(Golf), Birds Eye (Football) and CPC,(Gymnastics).
BOOST
A special boost for youngsters this year will be the appearance of decathlete Daley Thompson, himself a big tennis fan, who will be on hand to offer advice and training to youngsters in all of the 7 disciplines.
If you want to apply for a Mace Scholarship — and remember, Mace would be particularly delighted to consider applications from children, aged between 12 and 15, who feel that they may have talent, determination and ambition in a particular sport but who may not, for one reason or another, have received coaching of any kind — then either collect an application from a Mace Foodstore during the month of May or write,(with enclosed SAE), to:
Withdrawals Provide  Opportunities 
Steven Clark, the leading points winner in the boys' event over the LTA's 114 and Under Indoor Winter Series of  tournaments , went down with appendicitis two days before the latest tournament, played at the Gosling Sports Park during March.
This event had already lost James Trotman, Sarah Kirby and Jasmine Choudbhury through injury — all players who could have been potential title winners.
Despite this, the weekend was packed with tennis of a promising all round standard.
It was also apparent just how well the Rover Tennis Initiative is working.
The vital combination of technique, fitness and mental strength had all noticeably progressed.
Both boy finalists are members of this scheme and they exemplified the improvements made.
Martin Lee had fought his way back into the event (organised on the double elimination format), having lost to Steven Amey in the second round and played very aggressive tennis in his victories over Justin Layne and Ben Haran.
Dario Galasso, in turn, fought back well in the final, having lost the first set on a tie breaker.
He played very cool tennis after his tough first round encounter with twelve year old Adrian Barnes, dropping only eleven games in the three further matches he needed to reach the final.
Ultimately, his change of pace and flight of the ball broke up the rhythm of Lee, who perhaps rather over pressed in the first set and found himself 0–5 down before he adjusted his momentum to claw four games back before Galasso's touch and confidence returned, in what was for him a perfect final game and a match point won with a brilliant lob.
Sally Gie, also a member of the Rover Tennis Initiative and the top seed, was surprised by the powerful hitting of Susie Durham in the second round, but took full advantage of her second chance with gutsy performances against Rebecca Foster, Jheni Osman and Claire Lyte in a ruthless performance in the final.
Claire herself had been beaten by Rebecca Foster but neatly and shrewdly worked her way back into the tournament with a strategic win over Rebecca Dunbar in the quarter final.
In the semi final Susie Durham demonstrated power in reaching this stage without losing a set.
Sadly, at set and a break up, she aggravated a groin injury and had to retire when leading 1–0 in the final set.
Once again Richard Lewis will be on hand to offer expert tuition to juniors
JUNIOR SET
DEWHURST BOOST for BELFAST BELLE
ALASTAIR McIVER REPORTS
As the 1991 Ulster champion at both 16 and 18 and under levels, she has made some small waves in the province.
She first represented her country when she was just 15 and only last month, Tennis Ireland selected her for her fourth international match, which was played in Italy at Easter.
Yet outside of her home in east Belfast, few people in tennis would have heard of 16 year old Zara Wolsley.
However, after June, and the conclusion of her 5 GCSE's, all that will probably change.
For last April, Zara accepted an invitation from Chris Bradnam to join the Dewhurst Tennis Academy.
She was the only player from almost 100 who were screened to be offered a place on the squad.
So how does the girl who began hitting on a Swingball set in her back garden, see this move?
‘This is a great opportunity,’ she says.
‘It's a chance in a lifetime.
I'm so grateful to Chris and to Mr Evans.’
(David Evans, who set up the Centre back in 1989).
Zara has been playing tennis since she was 9, which is rather surprising, as her family are not ‘tennis’ people.
‘I'd always watched it on television and I just loved the game, so I asked my mother and father if I could play.’
Mother Hilary, a legal secretary, and her golf playing husband Mike, who works at Stormont, encouraged her so that now, she admits, ‘I don't really have any hobbies.
I just play tennis all the time’
It was a local coach, Sammy Tuff, who first noticed Zara's potential.
Yet for the past two years, Zara has had almost inseparable on-court support from coach Michael Ferguson, who she warmly credits for bringing her to her current level.
‘Michael has really helped me.
If it hadn't been for him I'd not have reached the standards that I've achieved,’ said Zara.
At times, Michael coached her three times a day in an effort to get her to international standard.
It's certainly reaped its rewards.
Zara has also enjoyed similar, committed encouragement from Strathearn, the school which Zara has attended since she was four.
It has co-operated with her tennis progress, so much so that Zara has a special timetable to  accommodate her tennis.
Zara's family and tennis friends in Northern Ireland have undoubtedly given her much of the help that she needed, but the lack of adequate facilities, together with a dormant tennis structure in the province, has left Zara — and other tennis hopefuls — without the opportunity that perhaps her efforts deserve.
NO OPPORTUNITIES
I asked her what hope she might have had for her tennis if the Dewhurst opportunity hadn't come along.
‘None — there are no opportunities.
I have to go to Dublin for the nearest indoor courts.
I play in all types of weather and very few people play tennis anyway so you can't always get a game.
‘Chris,’ she says, ‘is helping me to play all the tournaments and providing me with clothes and rackets.
‘I just couldn't consider playing tennis professionally if I'd had to stay in Ireland.’
Nevertheless, it's a big move for a young girl and no doubt there will be a few family tears at the airport come June 21st.
‘My mum is a bit upset,’ says Zara, ‘but we had a lovely letter from Mr Evans saying that he would pay for me to return home at any time during the first three months in England, which we were very grateful for.’
Mother Hilary may well be the one to shed those tears, but she is also a realist who realises that for her daughter to achieve at the sport she loves, she needed to leave home.
SUPPORT
‘It's the chance of a lifetime,’ she says.
‘All of the support that has been offered is fantastic and Zara really likes Chris (Bradnam) and his methods’
For a girl who has school trophies for athletics and swimming in the family cabinet, who supports Liverpool and whose favourite player is Steffi Graf, Bradnam is getting an achiever who looks to the best in sport for her inspiration.
If he can help Zara to translate her enthusiasm, talent and desire into winning, then who knows, we may even have a champion on our hands.
SPECIAL REPORT
Satellite Success for British Boys
The LTA Men's Indoor Satellite Circuit held over four weeks from February 12th to March 6th was a British success story, with the Country's top player Jeremy Bates, the fast rising Chris Wilkinson and Chris Bailey all displaying outstanding performances.
The four singles titles on offer were contested by 15 nations and involved at least one British player in each final — with three of the four crowns going to the home players.
COMPETITIVE
The complete Davis Cup Squad was one show as team mates Neil Broad, Danny Sapsford and Mark Petchey joined the successful trio in a fiercely competitive main draw.
Jeremy Bates began his single minded quest for world computer points with ruthless discipline, and as the highest ranked player on the circuit, had to deal with the ensuing pressure to win every match.
After a month of continued competition, the pressure was understandably present in more than one camp during the latter stages of the tournament schedules.
An all British quartet won through to the semi-finals in Week 1 with Southampton's Chris Wilkinson (currently on the brink of threatening the British number 1 spot), facing the young Laing Squad member Andrew Richardson, and Jeremy Bates who prepared to meet his Davis Cup team mate Danny Sapsford.
Wilkinson and Bates, with equal determination to achieve as many computer points as possible, won through to face each other in the first of two finals encounters.
The first title was captured by the number 1 seed, accompanied by the doubles title also,(with fellow Brit Neil Broad).
SUCCESSFUL
In the first week, 13 British players qualified through virtue of their rankings for the main draw, six out of the eight quarter-finals placings were British, with all four semi-finals placings also occupied by home players — a very successful first week!
The number 1 seed played to form again in the second leg as it moved to Coventry.
Bates — overall winner
Brian Garrow from America, ranked in the world's top 90 before an injury six months ago, looks set to give Bates one of the  strongest challenges — yet was dismissed 6–4 6–0 leaving the coast clear for his second final.
Chris Wilkinson's remarkable progress was curtailed in the quarter-finals by Chris Bailey who proceeded to displace last year's circuit winner, the American Brian Joelson, in the semi-finals and ease himself into a confrontation with Bates the next day.
In only the second three set match so far for Bates, Norfolk's Bailey, fully recovered from a knee operation which almost severed his career when ranked at 124 back in 1990, produced the strongest challenge yet.
In an enthralling match in which Bailey served nine aces in the first set and with a tie-break in the final set, the match was poised for either player to win.
It was Bates, however, with two serves in hand, who held and took the tie-break 7–5 to claim his second singles title.
By the third week, the mental strain of playing 17 matches (including doubles), in so many days, was beginning to show.
AVENGED DEFEAT
However, as the third week began in Croydon, Bates dispatched a series of home players, including Mark Petchey, Sean Cole (avenging a previous defeat at the National Championships), Andrew Richardson (who gave a fine performance reflecting future potential) and Joelson.
In the bottom half of the draw Chris Wilkinson was again preparing for a second challenge to Jeremy Bates' domination as he overcame strong challenges from Italy, South Africa and Sweden to reach his second final.
Bates entered his third final in an uneasy mood, stating his opinions about a fine which he considered to be too high for a verbal abuse offence — this did affect his performance.
On the other hand Wilkinson, determined to beat the British number 1, played a much tougher match, taking every opportunity to place pressure on his agitated opponent who succumbed 6–4 7–5.
INTENSIFIED
The Masters event in Eastbourne brought together the top 24 from the circuit (determined by how many circuit points they had accumulated) as competition intensified and world computer points were not to be contested.
Ten British players qualified for the final leg with the top eight seeds — including five British — receiving byes into the second round.
Mark Petchey, Neil Broad and Sean Cole all won their first round matches to join their team mates with four of them moving into the quarter-finals.
Chris Wilkinson defeated fellow Davis Cup player Mark Petchey 6–2 6–3 in a disappointing match, to face Texan Brian Joelson in the semi-finals while Bates outclassed young Italian Massimo Ardinghi 6–1 6–0 to earn himself a meeting with a Swedish qualifier from the first week, Johan Donar.
Wilkinson dispatched Joelson 6–1 7–6.
Bates, on the other hand, relaxed after claiming the first set 6–1 to lose the second 6–0 and found difficulty in mentally recharging as the 25 year old Swede took his opportunity to achieve a career best performance to reach the final.
DETERMINATION
Donar began the final the under dog — Wilkinson had defeated him three weeks in a row with relative ease.
Perhaps over confident, his application to the first set seemed to lack the determination he had applied in their previous meetings and as the first set ebbed away 6–3, Wilkinson found difficulty getting his game together in a slipping match.
The young Southampton prospect did accumulate a 5–2 lead in the second set, but tentative returns enabled the 25 year old Swede to claim five consecutive games, robbing Wilkinson of the Masters singles title he had worked so diligently for.
The overall circuit winner remained Jeremy Bates who had achieved 38 ATP points out of a possible 40, with Chris Wilkinson placed second with 37.
The Satellite itself proved to be the most successful British circuit for some time and was the clearest indication yet of an ever strengthening base of players beginning to make international progress.
WHAT SHOE FOR '92?
ALASTAIR McIVER BRINGS YOU THE ULTIMATE GUIDE TO TENNIS FOOTWEAR FOR 1992
In much the same way that Kodak announced, in May of last year (ahead of the actual launch), its plans for its revolutionary Photo CD project,(a new technology which will revolutionise the way that pictures are viewed), so too Reebok, in March of this year, made a pre-emptive strike by announcing that it will be launching,(initially at the Olympics in July), its latest technology, which will be introduced to tennis at the US Open, in September.
Launched at the Savoy in London, in March, the technology is called the Insta Pump System, an innovation which sees the shoe being inflated around the foot, moulding the shoe around the contours of the foot and removing much of the previous detail that went into previous hose manufacture, most notably the laces.
DURABLE
They have been replaced with a durable elastic TPU (thermoplastic urethane) strap that supports the inflatable tongue when fully, or partially inflated.
Earlier Pump shoes relied upon internal air chambers encased in a traditional upper  design , which added extra weight to the shoe.
Reebok believes that it has taken a further innovative step by eliminating much of the superfluous components so that now, the tennis shoe will consist of an estimated 12 separate components.
In the Insta Pump technology, air is inserted at three points on the shoe by use of the CO2 inflation device.
Reebok have developed a cannister, similar to the ones carried by mountain bikers, which will deliver only enough pressurised gas to fill the shoe.
A safety valve releases any excess pressure once the air chamber has been filled to capacity.
A second part of the technology brings, what Reebok calls ‘Custom Cushioning’ to its shoes' midsoles.
When this innovation is introduced to its tennis shoes, probably in 1994, it will, claim Reebok, significantly enhance the performance of the wearer, by allowing him or her to adjust, by inflation of the mid sole, the cushioning in the forefront or heel to suit their weight and to adapt to different playing surfaces.
BREAKTHROUGH
Obviously, this represents a major breakthrough in the industry, the benefits of which will initially be seen on the running tracks, but which will eventually move into tennis.
There are no Suggested Retail Prices as yet, but I understand that tennis shoes with Insta Pump technology will go out for in excess of £100.
The same theme is taken up by Hi-Tec, who are living up to their name — and their reputation — with the introduction of their new Tennis Twist shoe.
The twist system allows for an adjustment of pressure within channelled air pillows in the upper of the shoe and around the arch and instep of the foot.
A twist of the dial at the back of the shoe enables the user to customise his or her footwear.
Indeed, adjustments can even be made during the course of the game, simply by twisting the dial until the desired snug fit is achieved.
The shoe is of two density polyurethane, tough court outsole and full grain leather upper.
The lacing is vari-width.
The Tennis Twist comes in sizes 4–13 and retails for £49.99.
Of similar principle but different technology,(ie not air technology) is the Puma Disc System.
This development allows the user to anatomically mould the system to best fit the sensitive instep, middle and rear of the foot.
A simple turn of the disc — which is located at the front of the shoe, where the laces would normally be — will tighten the system while a turn in the opposite direction will loosen it.
There are two Disc System shoes available in the tennis range, the Pro Court 5000 at £89.99 and the Advantage System 4000 at £74.99.
Back to basics go Head with their new Anatom tennis shoe, a shoe which, according to the company, provides the user with the perfect balance between fit, stability and shock  absorption .
The Anatom gives the foot more freedom to move more naturally, whilst reducing potentially dangerous side to side movements.
The Anatom has a removable orthopaedic footbed which locates the foot firmly in a central position.
The footbed sits on a spring plate made of Daplen, reinforced with graphite.
This, in turn, is supported by two Shockguard shock absorbers.
Such a construction allows the foot to move naturally and freely without slipping or rolling over.
In addition, the system, when compressed, allows for a greater circulation of air around the foot, keeping it cool and dry.
I understand that recent tests undertaken in Germany by PFI,(the German equivalent to SATRA, the Northamptonshire based Footwear Technology Centre), have shown that after over 600 miles of testing, the Head Anatom revealed a reduction in height of less than a  millimetre .
What is more, the shoe showed no loss in its shock  absorption properties.
An additional plus for the Anatom is its lining, which has in-built Antibac, an  antibacterial system which slows down the growth of bacteria on the skin, an unusual but welcome concept in shoe technology.
The shoe retails for £79.99.
From a long line of tradition in adidas shoe manufacture comes the Tennis Stabil and the Tennis Lite.
Both are based on the adidas heritage lines of the Lendl Comp and the Equipment Clay Court and include features which recently attracted British No. 1 Jo Durie, who recently signed a one year shoe contract with the company.
The Stabil, according to adidas, offers both stability and protection for the advanced player, while the ‘direct contact’ feel required by serious players can be found in the Tennis Lite.
The former shoe retails for £79.99 while the latter is £69.99.
Safety is a word which figures in the shoe range vocabulary of Ellesse.
Ellesse's ITC shoe, available in both men's and women's sizes, has a ‘Durelle’ Hi-Abrasion unit, which combines with an EVA midsole to offer stability to the foot.
adidas' Tennis Stabil offers both stability and protection for the advanced player
Garment leather makes the shoe comfortable and flexible, while contrasting colours and tri-coloured sole unit offers the fashion conscious player plenty of choice.
Both the men's and ladies shoes retail for £49.99.
Meanwhile, Pony Sports UK have launched a new tennis shoe this year, the T-42, a lightweight and high performance tennis shoe in the best traditions of the Pony brand.
The shoe has a full length EVA midsole which offers lightweight shock absorbing protection against stress related injuries.
The leather upper provides both comfort and flexibility of movement of the instep while the inside of the shoe, and especially the tongue, which is padded, is cushioned for maximum comfort.
The Pony T-42 is a lightweight and high performance tennis shoe in the best traditions of the brand
The T-42 is available in both men's (White/Navy and White Silver) and women's,(White/Violet/Lilac) sizes and retails for £29.99.
K-Swiss continue the theme of protection, support and stability with its Grancourt Gstaad tennis shoe, again a shoe for both men and women which is constructed by combining sock lasting in the fore part and board lasting at the heel to support and stabilise the foot.
Lateral and medial stabilisers are incorporated on to the outsole to prevent rollover while the design features a flex notch, which has been cut into the outsole to counter any restriction of movement.
The sole is made from durable and versatile Aosta rubber, while the shock absorber is the highly rated Silicone Formula 18, which is located in the midsole of the shoe.
The upper is of full grain leather and the shoes retail for £39.99 (ladies) and £42.99 (mens).
A mere £59.99 will buy you a pair of Mizuno Lendl Match TP shoes, a leather shoe with a mid cut upper and double padded topline.
The outersole, of shell rubber, is stitched to the heel and toe, while the EVA midsole has a fixed Transpower Energy Conversion system in the heel.
Lotto, meanwhile, is  targeting the serious competitor with its Syn Game Low tennis show, of full grain leather upper and featuring the so-called Syn Pulse system, which provides energy return, stability and shock absorption.
Kaepa is threatening to assault you with its 1025 Assault, a highly advanced, technical performance shoe.
Of full leather upper, the 1025 Assault has Permatec 2000 outsole for superior durability.
The midsole is of polyurethane and is moulded with a footframe cassette to create additional stability in the midfoot and heel areas.
The shoe has lace locks and a removable EVA sockliner and retails for £59.99.
Motion control is the award-winning feature of Dunlop's Axis 800
The Grancourt Gstaad features a flex notch to counter any restriction of movement
Insta Pump System, as demonstrated by Reebok CEO John Dearden
Motion control is the award winning feature of Dunlop's Axis 800 tennis shoe, a technology which checks excessive foot movement without restricting natural freedom.
The Axis system uses the principle of cross stressing which is nature's way of providing strength in flexible areas.
 Similarly , the Axis outsole ensures correct alignment between the rear and the front of the foot for maximum energy return.
In white leather with turquoise and grey trim, the Axis 800 comes in sizes 6–11 and retails for the very competitive price of £34.99.
For the same price, you can buy the top of the range Rucanor shoe, the Emperor, a full grain leather upper shoe, which features a new shock absorbing stabilizer system in the heel and an EVA midsole for extra stability and comfort.
The toe area is perforated, while the heel has a double collar for improved cushioning.
The toe and heel areas are double stitched for greater durability while lateral support straps give enhanced stability.
Rucanor's top of the range Emperor features a new shock absorbing stabilizer system in the heel
OFF COURT…
Lotto sign young British pair
Miles MacLagan and Andrew Richardson, both 17, will be wearing Lotto shoes and clothing for the next three years.
The players, both of whom are members of the LTA's Laing Squad, are pupils at the Rover School at Bisham Abbey.
Two new recruits join Dewhurst Academy
16 year old Zara Wolseley, from Belfast and Philip Cooper, now 19 but still the current 18 and under National Junior Champion, are the latest recruits to the Dewhurst Tennis Academy.
Zara is relatively unknown outside Ulster so we have featured her in our Second Set series elsewhere in this issue.
Philip, who is to take his A Levels this summer, has been studying at Repton for the last few months and will join the Academy in August, two months after Zara arrives at the Academy's Hemel Hempstead base.
They will join the existing squad members, Amanda Evans, Caroline Herbert and 11 year old Laura Cartwright.
Lotto's British boys
The first screening of 1992 is to take place during the third week of May.
It's not too late to apply for details of this and other  screenings, so if you would like to be considered for a place at the Academy, then please write to   
Last call for tennis playing families
A quick telephone call to Abbot Media Services  for an entry form will ensure your last minute entry into the 1992 Remington/Daily Express Family Tennis Championships, the finals of which will take place in January of next year at Quietwaters, Essex.
May 1st is the deadline for entries, so if you are a Father/Son or Mother/Daughter partnership and fancy meeting and playing against other tennis playing families firstly in your region, and then, if successful, nationally, then don't delay.
Call the number above and enter — while there's still time.
Eight and above
Gemstone Marketing Ltd., a British Company based in London, is producing 100% woven cotton towels in quantities as small as 8.
Measuring 18×10 inches, the towels can be used by individuals, clubs, prizes or  gifts.
The towels retail for £25.35 for a set of eight, a price which includes VAT and delivery.
Order forms can be  obtained by calling 
Stella's high five
Stella Artois have committed to supporting the men's pre-Wimbledon grass court tournament at Queen's Club for another 5 years, making their commitment since 1979 a staggering £20 million.
The tournament, which will this year be held from 8th–14th June, has confirmed entries from Stefan Edberg, David Wheaton, Pete Sampras, Ivan Lendl and Guy Forget.
The continued Raincheck system will guarantee anyone a refund if there is less than two hours of play on Centre Court on any one day.
Rain check plan
A new rain check system will be introduced by the LTA at three of the country's leading grass court tournaments this year, the Dow Classic,(June 8–14), The Pilkington Glass Championships,(June 15–20), and The Direct Line Insurance Manchester Open,(June 15–20).
STRINGERS CORNER
Stefan Edberg uses Bow Brand's Championship Natural Gut.
Andre Agassi uses Kevlar for main strings and natural gut for crosses.
Monica Seles uses Tecnifibre 515.
There are many and various racket strings to choose from.
So how do you find out which one is best for you?
Racket strings are divided into two groups — natural gut and synthetics.
Natural gut is made from the intestines of cows and sheep.
Synthetics are man made fibres ranging from simple nylons to very complex micro fibre materials intricately woven together.
Natural gut strings are favoured by the professional players because of their ‘playability’— their sensitivity and feel for the ball.
Natural gut absorbs moisture and does not last as long as synthetic string.
But professionals do not, in general, have to worry about the cost of the string or the amount of time it lasts.
Recreational players often play in less than ideal conditions and do not always have the time or money available to spend on their rackets.
Synthetic strings are cheaper than gut strings and last longer.
The range of synthetics is huge and there is a string being sold which will suit every type of player — from top spin baseliners to serve and volley experts.
The challenge is to find the right string for your game.
All of the world's top string brands are on sale in Britain.
Babolat, a French company, provide strings — mainly natural gut — for 33 of the top 100  men and 24 of the top women players.
Prince dominate string sales in the USA with 49% of the market and their Prince Synthetic Gut is a good match of the feel of gut strings with the durability of synthetics.
It is all largely a matter of trial and error to find the string that will suit you best.
That's where you need to find, or become, an informed stringer who can answer questions about strings with knowledge and enthusiasm.
Members of the public will be entitled to claim their money back if no play takes  place on one day, because of rain.
Claims must be submitted within 30 days of the date printed on the ticket and will normally be dealt with within one month of receipt.
John Feaver, LTA Director of Events and Tournaments, said, ‘Our experiences last year convinced us that something had to be done and we hope that this system will really help the enthusiastic spectator.’
Prosport reader offer
If you don't suffer from tennis elbow, then there is no need for you to read on.
If you do — or you know someone who does, then this is for you.
Seton Healthcare are offering Tennis World readers 50 Pro Sport arm supports absolutely free in this once only offer.
Worth £3 each, the ProSport supports, which are worn just below the elbow, have been specially designed by Seton Healthcare specifically for tennis elbow sufferers.
The Supports are comfortable, they do not ride up or slip down and are suitable for all racket sports.
Indeed, Seton Healthcare offer a range of sporting supports for knees, ankles, wrists and thighs as well as specially designed supports for cricket and athletics.
To claim your free giveaway support from Seton Healthcare, just write your name and address on a postcard, and sent it to:
The first 50  received at the above address will each receive a free tennis elbow support.
Competition winner
Mr D. Ling from Colchester in Essex has won a trip to Club St. Lucia as a result of entering the exclusive competition in the Feb/March issue of Tennis World.
He and his partner will enjoy some typical  Caribbean hospitality later in the year.
Queen's hospitality packages
The Stella Artois Grass Court Championships, the principal Grass Court Championship for men, immediately prior to Wimbledon, will include at least six of the top players who will hope to go on to capture the Wimbledon title.
Confirmation has already been received from four of the world's top 10 players, Stefan Edberg, Ivan Lendl, Pete Sampras and Guy Forget.
Pat Cash and Dave Wheaton have also agreed to play and efforts are continuing to attract other leading players.
Keith Prowse are officially appointed agents for the Stella Artois Grass Court Championships.
Keith Prowse are able to guarantee top price east stand seats together with first class hospitality facilities, situated within the Club.
Hospitality comprises a champagne reception, carefully chosen four-course lunch with selected fine wines, traditional English afternoon tea and not forgetting  strawberries and cream.
All drinks will be supplied with our compliments.
For further information call   
READERS LETTERS
Pat on the back
I would like to congratulate Tennis World on its magnificent fan club service.
I am a 13 years old Andre Agassi fanatic who is very satisfied with the newsletters, and great photos.
I was very pleased to see your interview with Nick Bollettieri about Andre in your  December/January issue, and I would also like to say that I agree totally with what the other people who wrote to you said about Andre.
He does deserve to be given more of a chance!
I would like to take this opportunity to wish Andre luck for Wimbledon this year, as I would really love to see him winning this great event.
Thank you very much.
Keep up the good work!
Capriati — the future Seles
I am writing to you regarding a letter in your February/March issue from David Sedgwick.
I would like to say that I agree completely with him about the lack of tennis action on our TV screens.
Like David, I have not got access to Satellite TV so I am also stuck with teletext and very poor coverage from the BBC.
I hope that the BBC will make more effort in the future to bring more coverage of major tennis events, for example Grand Slams like the French Open, on the scale of coverage they had for Wimbledon because I am sure that there are many people who are in the same situation as me and would like more tennis on TV.
I am also a big Jennifer Capriati fan, because of her attractiveness as well as her skill which she displayed at Wimbledon in '91 against Navratilova.
I think that by the end of '92 she will be the World No. 2 if not No. 1.
She has the capability and most importantly, a very long career ahead of her, where she can become the Seles of 1993–94.
I started buying every issue of Tennis World after Capriati's looks and sheer dedication in every match she has played, brought me into tennis and she has made me become an addict.
On behalf of all her fans, I would like to wish her the best of luck in 1992 and hope that she will carry on in the dedicated way she has in the past year or so.
P.S. Would you please, please, put Jennifer Capriati in your Sweetspot in the next issue for all of us Capriati fans out her.
Editor's note: Pleased to oblige, Omar.
Juniors discouraged
I am writing to ask a question about my local tennis club.
Readers of your magazine will be well aware of the state of British tennis.
Having read many articles in Tennis World about other countries starting their players off at much younger ages, British players are therefore encouraged to start earlier.
During the winter, our club has ten courts in use.
During the summer we have fourteen, but in that case, on the four best and most reliable courts, why do adults get priority over juniors?
So often I have been forced to submit to playing on the worst courts or not at all.
Adults have the right to throw juniors off those courts, whatever their age or standard!
Good luck Andre
Capriati — World No. 1?
Once, my partner and I were not allowed to play on  a vacant court, just because my friend had a brown sweatshirt on, and there was a veterans doubles match on the next court — we might put them off by playing on the vacant court!
We were then forced to go home until a week later.
I was a much a member of the club as they were.
I'm sure other clubs have the same problem.
Is this really the best way to encourage keen young players?
Editor's Note: I would welcome letters from any other juniors who may have experienced similar problems to Tom.
Don't write Castle off
I was disappointed that one of your readers described Andrew Castle as a ‘no hoper’ in a recent issue.
I think these kind of comments are most unfair, as Andrew has a very exciting fast court game, and he is still more than capable of producing some good results.
It seems to me that quite a few of our senior British players have had to put up with more than their fair share of  criticism in recent years, when perhaps a bit of encouragement might have been more appropriate.
As for Castle, don't write him off just yet.
With a little bit of luck he could still make an impact in an important event.
Wimbledon 1992 would seem to be the ideal venue to prove a few people wrong.
Turning point
An upturn in British tennis will have to start sometime so could 1992 be the turning point?
The last few months of '91 brought about a great number of changes, which does give hope.
The LTA has increased its training staff and with the arrival of Tony Pickard and others it does appear that we are on the right road to success or at least start travelling in the right direction.
Some of our juniors had success towards the end of the year, and our men getting back into the top group of the Davis Cup was a great boost.
What a pity that, for once, our girls seemed to make no headway at all , ending with another disastrous defeat in the Maureen Connolly Trophy,(the final result of which the LTA, in its own magazine, managed to get wrong).
How many years is it since we even came close to winning it?
Jo Durie, who has again carried the ladies game, made her own thoughts very clear and at this rate it could be some years until she is beaten regularly by a British girl.
But at last things are falling into place; there are a greater number of tournaments now available in Britain for our players to compete in; there are more and more indoor facilities and our coaches are trying their hardest to breathe life back into the game.
However, two problems still hang over the game.
The first of these is the lack of interest shown by the general public for the game, which only appears a week or so before Wimbledon and disappears a week or so afterwards.
There should have been a full house at Manchester for the Davis Cup, there wasn't.
Birmingham had very poor crowds.
Brighton was better but then Graf was playing.
The attendances for the British Championships were better but were they good enough?
The second problem, unfortunately, is the players themselves.
They seem to have difficulty in transferring from the junior to the senior game and get  disheartened and take up coaching although it can be seen that British players do not start getting their best results until their mid-twenties and beyond.
This applies both to the boys and the girls, the latter up until recently giving us the best prospects for success.
We only had to watch the ladies final at Telford at the end of last year to see how bad our tennis has become.
Hardly a rally was over two strokes and what was more disappointing was that it followed the brilliant final at Brighton.
Whilst we did not expect the same standard of play we should have expected something better.
Could it be that they do not have the stomach for the hard grind which seems to be necessary to pick up those all important computer points?
Castle — can still make an impact
Manifesto That Is Keeping Its Promises
Royal Berkshire Club wins public endorsement
— by Alastair McIver
The General Election may have come and gone in the Royal County of Berkshire, as it has everywhere else, yet for months prior to the political electioneering of recent weeks, one of Gt.
Britain's premier clubs has been doings its own campaigning on a very different manifesto — and very successful it has been, too.
Over 4000 members have already given their verdict in favour of the club's ‘fabulous facilities manifesto’ and its dual function,(tennis' double whammy, if you like!), that of meeting all member needs while maintaining a warm and welcoming atmosphere within the club's spacious acres.
18 months on from its official opening by The Duchess of York, the Club has achieved both of those initial objectives and is currently trying to build upon them, in communication with its members.
In the 1990's, we may well be heading towards the classless society so sought after and well documented of politicians, yet the Royal Berkshire Club, built within the existing framework of a society which demands ever higher standards in its leisure facilities, remains a class act in its own right.
Arguably, the Club has set the standards for other to follow — and very healthy it looks on them too.
COMMUNICATION
One of the keys to the club's success is the communication between members and the Club management.
A monthly Members Forum, suggestion cards and a New Members cocktail party ensure a steady crossflow of ideas and views.
The members, for their part, are true to their wishes, offering support to the various social and fundraising activities — some of which are initiated by them — that take place on a regular basis.
For example, since the club opened, the members have raised almost £14,400 for charities such as Commit to Get Fit, Comic Relief and Children in Need.
A recent fashion show, in aid of the Malcolm Sargent Cancer Relief Fund and local Heatherwood Hospital raised no less than £5,500.
Such is the enthusiastic commitment of the members.
Given all of the above, you might be forgiven for thinking that tennis and fitness are somewhat secondary to the social aspects of the club.
Not true.
These two predominant activities are merely complemented by the club's social side and it is the former which, in fact, brings together friends and acquaintances in pursuit of the latter.
FACILITIES
The Club can boast excellent tennis facilities (12 indoor and 8 outdoor courts), with extensive programmes for all ages and abilities.
They are overseen by Tennis Director, former Davis and Kings Cup player, Robin Drysdale, who has a compliment of 10 coaches under his wing.
Morning and afternoon, seven days a week, Muscle Hustle or Kid's Chaos…if you're into aerobics, then there's a class for you but don't delay your booking.
The classes are extremely popular.
It is this popularity which has prompted the management to look at the possibility of introducing these fit bodies to the joys of tennis, by offering complimentary tennis tuition, a worthy initiative and one which can only enhance the game in the club and its surrounding area.
If mum takes up the game again, then why not her children in future years?
Why not indeed?
If all this seems like too much hard work, then despair not.
There are four physiotherapists on call in the sports injury clinic, seven days a week, to advise on those pulled muscles,(a service offered to non-members), plus massage facilities, saunas and sun beds.
The club can also boast a swimming pool, indoor golf lessons from a visiting professional, fencing lessons, scuba diving instruction, squash courts, badminton courts, bridge evenings, parties, summer floodlit barbecues on the patio…and while we're on the subject of food, its restaurant offers extremely reasonable Table d'Hote and Executive Lunch  menus , all waiter and waitress served.
Perhaps it's no wonder the Club recently won the prestigious Operating Initiative Award, run by Leisure Week magazine.
For membership details and a brochure, call  
The swimming pool (above) and restaurant (opposite) are just two of the attractions at the Royal Berkshire Club