

PROLOGUE
The first dawn on the Pacific Ocean is the first dawn on the world.
This happy coincidence — happy, that is, for all those visionaries and seers who speak in sonorous phrases about the ‘New Pacific Century’ and the ‘Grand Pacific Age’, and find such a discovery a perfect symbol of what they're talking about — has been the case ever since 22 October 1884, when a group of scientists and politicians met in a hotel in Washington DC and set down the rules by which the planet was henceforth to organize the keeping of its time.
They adopted the invention of a man named Charles Dowd, who was then employed as principal of the Temple Grove Ladies' Seminary in Saratoga Springs, New York.
Professor Dowd, as he liked to be called — and who cut his hair and trimmed his beard to look just like President Lincoln — probably never travelled to the Pacific, nor to very many other places outside America; but he had an abiding interest in his country's enormous and burgeoning railway system, and from that fascination grew a scheme which changed the world — and particularly the Pacific — for ever.
Professor Dowd found it particularly irritating and inconvenient, as did the railway companies and their customers, that in the mid-1860s the continental United States had no fewer than eighty different standards of time.
In the state of Pennsylvania, for instance, the Penn Central line ran on Altoona time, which was ten minutes fast on Pittsburgh, while the Pittsburgh, Fort Wayne and Chicago railroad ran on Columbus time, which was thirteen minutes slow.
What happened when trains from the two lines converged on Pittsburgh, which of course they did, utterly confused and bewildered the poor steel-workers and their families and all the other benighted souls whose  destination this was.
It was left to Professor Dowd to come to their aid in 1870 by publishing a 107-page monograph entitled A System of National Time for Railroads .
This paper, regarded by students of horology as a classic of its kind, suggested that the United States be divided along longitude lines into a number of time zones, each one precisely one hour behind its eastern neighbour.
Crucially he arranged these zones every 15° longitude apart: with 360° around the globe, and 24 hours to deal with, simple arithmetic indicated that each zone should be roughly 15° wide.
So America was pared into four — the Eastern time zone, the Central, Mountain and Pacific.
When it was noon in New York, Miami and Pittsburgh, so it was 11 in the morning — one hour back — in Chicago, Dallas and New Orleans; at the same moment the clocks in Denver, Butte and Albuquerque would read 10 am, while it would be 9 in Seattle, San Francisco and San Diego.
Within ten years his plan, simple and eminently sensible, was agreed by all the railway companies and — shortly afterwards, and to all intents and purposes — by all the states.
At noon on Sunday 18 November 1883, all the public clocks in North America were changed to what the New York Herald called ‘the new standard of time agreed upon…as an obvious convenience in all social and business matters’.
And Professor Dowd's reach swiftly became global: fourteen years after the publication of his monograph and a year after America adopted his system, so the International Meridian Conference in Washington agreed as well: the entire world, not just the American portion of it, should be divided into time zones with Greenwich as the prime meridian.
Moreover, it should be divided along the very lines suggested by the modest principal from a small spa town otherwise hitherto and subsequently better known as the site where Ulysses S. Grant died, and where America keeps its Horse-racing Hall of Fame.
There may well be a modest marble tombstone for Mr Dowd somewhere in Saratoga Springs; but each time the television continuity announcer advertises a forthcoming programme as showing at ‘9 pm Eastern, 8 Central and Mountain’ then one might say of the late Professor,si monumentum requiris, circumspice .
There might well also be a memorial to Dowd on the tiny island of Tafahi, in the northern part of the Pacific Ocean's only remaining monarchy, the kingdom of Tonga.
For Tafahi is the closest populated  island in the world to the western side of the International Date Line, which is the obvious corollary to, or the logical antithesis of, the Greenwich prime meridian.
Since it is to the west, and the world turns to the east, Tafahi is thus the place which greets the world's new day first; it is the island where the day begins.
And where the week, the month, the year, the decade, the century, the next millennium begins.
Tafahi is, indeed, ‘The Island Where Time Starts’.
In plain symbolic terms, I thought, no place on earth could be more suitable for opening an account of the newness of the new Pacific Ocean.
I had read all manner of learned papers and cover stories in American news magazines talking of the ‘Dawn of the Pacific Age’ and suchlike: so why not go where that dawn actually happens?
Perhaps I might see in the rising of that sun some icon quintessentially Pacific, or think some thought which in a flash would sum up the essential message of the great Ocean.
It was a costly venture, of course, since Tonga is a very great distance from almost everywhere; but a glossy journal owned by an extremely wealthy New Yorker thought that a visit to ‘The Island Where Time Starts’ could make an agreeable tale, therefore handed me a sheaf of air tickets and a small sum in hard currency and told me to be on my way.
And so, on a blustery February evening in the very middle of the South Pacific summer and, I was warned, of the hurricane season — I flew to within striking distance of Tafahi from an airfield in the Republic of Fiji.
I was determined to see the world's first dawn, and to greet the first people on the planet — true Pacific people at that — who were planning to take a stab at their day.
Rupert Murdoch owns a newspaper in Fiji which claims to be ‘the first with the world's news’.
In that his is a daily paper, and that Fiji is quite close to the Date Line, probably he is technically correct.
But in all other respects Tonga is more rightfully regarded as the closest place and has an International Date Line Hotel in the main town, Nuku'alofa, to prove it.
On the floor of the lobby, a place invariably filled with idle Tongan men of great girth, is a brass bas-relief of the  Line, set in a marble sea.
Charles Dowd's invention gleams dully in the half-gloom, trodden upon by the sandals and the bare feet of a people who, despite the name of their hotel, take little obvious pleasure or pride in knowing their unique status.
But one man knew, and derived considerable pleasure from being where he was.
Paul Fabian, the lone British diplomat who gloried in the title of Her Britannic Majesty's High Commissioner in Tonga and Consul for the United States Island Possessions in the South Pacific, had sent me a telex advising me that yes, Tafahi was the first place in the world to receive the day's new time and that, moreover, he had only very recently been there.
I telephoned, down a long and scratchy line.
‘We're really looking forward to your coming,’ I could hear him shouting.
‘Would you like me to fix up an audience with the King here?
Perfectly easy if you'd like to see him.’
I met Paul Fabian a few days later — a small, bird-like man, quite bald, dressed in a white safari suit and a Panama, and in a perpetual state of fuss about ‘sending telegrams to London’.
‘First British diplomatic post in the world to open up each day, you know,’ he said proudly.
‘That's why you're quite right to come down here to start your travels.
Perfect place.
Complete Pacific symbol.
Admirable choice.
Why not pop in for lunch?
Not frightfully busy here, must admit.
Quite a bit of spare time on the old hands.
Better check the wire machine and see if there's anything from London.’
But there rarely was.
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office had rather greater concerns than Paul Fabian and his tiny High Commission and Residency on the seafront of Nuku'alofa.
His was not a mission at the cutting edge of British diplomatic activity.
Governments would not be swayed, nor would ministers tremble, on receipt of elegantly crafted and crisply sarcastic Notes written by him on the antique encryption machine which could be seen in a corner of the office, slowly rusting away in the hot, salt air.
Precisely why he had been sent to Tonga — what special knowledge or circumstance — was never explained and, sitting as I did for many an evening on the veranda of the magnificent old Residency, watching the fireflies and listening to the surf booming on the reef, I was not too sorely tempted to enquire.
The Fabians had indeed been up to Tafahi, about a month before.
His Excellency showed me a film he had taken of the three northern islands of the Tonga group which — being some 300 miles north of  the main island — are invariably overlooked by such few visitors as Tonga receives.
They were in fact the first of the so-called Friendly Islands to be seen by Europeans: the Dutch navigators Willem Corneliszoon Schouten and Jacob LeMaire spotted them in April 1616.
The Niuas, as the trio are called, are closer to both Samoa and Fiji than to the main Tongan group, and it remains one of the odder quirks of Polynesian history that the islands belong to Tonga at all.
(It also renders Tongan maps a most inconvenient shape: to accommodate all the Friendly Islands and all the Tongan seas, a scale map has to be about five times as long as it is wide, though nearly all the population and commerce is bunched in the islands in the far south.)
The most geologically interesting and romantically appealing of the three islands is Niuafo'ou, a sunken volcanic caldera set off to the west.
Almost perfectly circular, it contains a virtually circular lake with another almost perfectly circular island in its centre — the whole confection looking like a vast floating doughnut.
There is a big bundle of feathers called the incubator bird which lays its eggs six feet down in the hot black sand, and whose offspring emerge huge and fully feathered against the heat.
And there is a reputation among world stamp-collectors: since the cliffs of Niuafo'ou are almost wholly steep-to and landings are fatally difficult, mail is — or was until very recently — transferred to and from passing ships by swimmers, who carried the outbound post in oilcloth bags and used bamboo poles to retrieve the inbound letters sealed in tin cans.
‘Tin Can Island’ proclaim the postage stamps, and old ones are said to be almost as sought after as British Guiana Triangulars or Penny Blacks.
The second island is Niuatoputapu, small and triangular, fringed by beaches of the purest white, with palm trees and pandanus pines leaning into the ever-beating trade winds.
This island seems overrun with small black pigs (animals so much a part of Tongan life that when Captain Cook presented a pair of hitherto unknown Guernsey cows to the King they were classified as ‘Cook's pigs’, and the name has stuck for cows ever since), and with Australian cruising ‘yachties’ who use the Niuas (as Schouten and LeMaire once did) as the formal port of entry to the kingdom.
And then, at latitude 15° 51'S, longitude 173° 43'W, is the immense, half-mile-high volcanic cone of Tafahi itself — the island where time begins.
It loomed in almost every frame of the Fabians' film — a sugar-loaf, bottle-green and black, its cliffs forbidding behind their skirt of angry white water.
The guide-books say little: Samuel Wallis visited it and named it Boscawen Island, perhaps after the great admiral of Finisterre; the best vanilla in the Pacific is grown there; and it is rumoured that the finest kavo — that faintly narcotic drink prepared from the powdered root of a local pepper plant, and an important part of rituals and celebrations in the South Pacific — is Tafahi kava , and that it renders all Tafahians perpetually slightly dopey.
So there it lay, 300 miles to the north, utterly cut off from us by the hurricanes which — according to the local weather men — were raging back and forth nearby.
It certainly rained a great deal in Nuku'alofa, the gales whipping up the surf into clouds of spume and sending broken branches spinning through the air.
The High Commissioner's Residency was flooded, his collection of pandanus mats sodden, his power lines brought down by falling trees.
There was a momentary crisis when the telex failed, and he was cut off from London, but two Tongan soldiers arrived on his doorstep in the middle of the storm, saluted smartly, acknowledged they realized his predicament and promised that his links with the outside world would be restored ‘as a matter of the utmost priority’.
It turned out to be a matter of enlightened self-interest for Tonga too, since the first thing Mr Fabian did when his line was restored was to pen a telegram to London demanding immediate aid for the islands.
And he got it, by return — a promise of a few hundred pounds'-worth of schoolbooks, for which the government of Tonga gave due thanks.
(The Tonga Chronicle gave due prominence to the storm the  following week, though they might have wished for more careful sub-editing. ‘$10 damage as islands hit by hurricane’ read the headline.
But readers were also given a piece of gummed paper to stick after the figure ten, written on which was the missing word ‘million’.)
Friendly Islands Airways, the somewhat informally organized internal airline, lost one of its three planes in the storm, spoiling my chances of making an early start for the airstrip on Niuatoputapu.
And the inter-island ship, the Nanasipau'u , which might have given me a lift up north, chose to ride out the wind in the lee of the island, unwisely put down both anchors, promptly snapped both chains and then drifted helplessly out to sea.
When the weather calmed her master spent several days trawling for the missing anchors with grapnels in what the charts said was 30 fathoms of water.
He never found anything; when I left he was waiting for a new pair to be brought up from Auckland, and wondering if the insurance company would cough up.
So I waited and waited.
And I put in a request to see His Majesty the King.
I had first spied King Taufa'ahau Tupou IV, GCVO, GCMG, KBE, sitting in the royal box in church at Sunday service the week before.
Like most Tongan men he was a mighty figure, reputedly weighing nearly a quarter of a ton.
The King had his eccentric side.
In particular, he was given to unusual enthusiasms.
His personal fondness for the sayings of the Reverend Swaggart marked him as a man somewhat out of step with much of the rest of the world; a view reinforced by his apparent keenness on the suggestion of a freebooting American marine that the kingdom become a dumping-ground for spent atomic waste and noxious chemicals.
Knowing his passion for cycling (on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays) and rowing (on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays), I had mentioned in my letter that I had stroked my boat, somewhat ingloriously, for two Torpids and two Summer Eights.
It seemed as good a way of ingratiating myself as any other: the palace was a protective place, and there was no automatic guarantee that a visiting journalist would be granted an audience.
Tales of Tongan royal oarsmanship had recently spread as far afield as Hawaii and Tahiti and I reasoned that it could do no harm to mention my interest, albeit one or two decades old.
It worked: next morning there was a note for me in the Date Line: Audience with HM the King, 2 pm in the royal palace.
Please wear a tie.
Our meeting was delayed for ten minutes.
I had been ushered into the throne room (the throne itself, 8 feet high and needing six men to move it, was carved from a solid slab of oak and had been presented to Queen Salote by the British Government in 1951), and could hear from next door the awful warble of Mr Swaggart's daily broadcast to which the King was apparently listening.
The room was crammed with the bric-à-brac of kingship, the usual gifts from brother heads of state around the world: dolls in glass cases, a vivarium, two portraits of George Bush, seals of visiting warships, a porcelain plate from the Republic of China (which keeps a one-man embassy in Nuku'alofa), a map of the moon presented by Mr Reagan, statuettes, umbrellas, a humidor and any number of sets of engraved Waterford glass.
There was an elephantine stirring from beyond the arras, the heavy footfall of leather sandals on worn carpets, and the King appeared.
He puffed asthmatically.
‘Welcome, welcome.
You have something to drink?
I think the passion-fruit juice is very good this season.
You have come from very far.
From England, I think.
Now tell me, is the Manchester Guardian still printed in Manchester?
I had heard it may have moved.’
Indeed it had, some twenty years before.
‘Ah well,’ he chortled.
‘In Tonga we hear things a little late.
But you have come, I am told, became we are the first place on earth to get the dawn.
Last with everything else, first with the dawn — a fine irony, isn't it?’ and chortling again, he poured more passion-fruit juice into the Waterford glass.
We talked of toxic wastes; the possibility of there ever being true democracy in Tonga (‘on paper the place is ripe for revolution, it is true, and our friends in the other islands are experiencing troubled times, so we must be wary’); the complaints about corruption among the Tongan nobility, the curious business arrangements engineered between members of the royal family and the dubious Americans who were forever fetching up at the palace doorstep wishing to bend a royal ear to this scheme or that, with wealth and fame for all; and the most surprising news: his decision to demolish the royal palace.
The King wanted to take me round the garden.
He showed me the grass on which Tu'i Mala was wont to graze — Tu'i Mala being a blind Galapagos tortoise which Captain Cook presented to the Tongans in 1777, and which died in 1966 at well over two hundred years old.
He showed me the stands of Norfolk pines which shaded  the palace, and the view of the seafront, with a new sea-wall being put up by a Japanese firm.
A white Range Rover passed, the Union flag snapping from a small mast on the bonnet.
The King waved in a desultory way.
‘Your Mr Fabian, off to collect his letters from home, I daresay.
Such a nice fellow, don't you think?’
He walked me slowly out to the garden gate — a kindly old man, more interested in his trees and his plans for the palace, his rowing and his cycling than in the ruder demands of his people for democracy and good government.
I wondered as we strolled across the lawn whether he might not in fact turn out to be the last King of Tonga, the final member of a brief and moderately distinguished dynasty.
True, there was Crown prince Tupouto'a waiting in the wings, but he spent little time in Tonga and had a reputation as a playboy — a Farouk-like figure given to white suits and expensive lady friends.
He might not be quite the regal material the Tongan people were looking for, and as his wheezing old father — born in 1918, still fit, but neither infallible nor immortal — tottered around the herbaceous borders, I fancied, or perhaps dreaded, that soon we might see the kingdom fall and a republic rise in its place, and the monarchy he represented fall victim to the spirit of the age, as ancient and outworn as Captain Cook's old tortoise.
We reached the low white picket-fence, the only insulation from his subjects that he cared to have.
The only protection, too.
‘Flimsy, eh?
Wouldn't stop anyone who really wanted to get me.’
He grasped my hand and shook it warmly.
‘So glad you came to see us.
Have fun watching the dawn.
I shall still be in my bed.
But I enjoy knowing that the first sun in the world will warm you here in these islands.
It makes me rather proud.
That — and you having been an oarsman, too.
Really rather proud.’
It was another day before the winds died, the seas settled and the Friendly Islands Airways craft was hammered into serviceable shape.
And then, at 4 am one pitch-dark morning, I found myself where all along I had planned to be: standing on a steep hillside on a clifftop, waiting for the sun to rise on the world's first dawn of the day.
It was a Saturday, the middle of February.
The night had been unusually cool, and a slight drizzle was falling.
Down below me the surf thrashed and thundered: the Tonga Trench, a precipitous crack in the ocean floor where two of the planet's great tectonic plates crunched together and were folded downwards to melt again, lay a score of miles away.
The water was 22,000-ft deep off these islands, though down further south, near Kermadec, it was seven miles to the bottom.
But even here I was on the very lip of the world, peering over one of the suture lines of the globe and into the darkness of yesterday.
I had entertained many hopes for this morning.
I had imagined, for instance, that I would be able to catch a glimpse of Mount Silisili, a mile-high peak in the centre of Samoa, just a few miles away across the water: I had hoped to do so for no better reason than that Mount Silisili would be enjoying precisely the same clock time as here in Tonga, but exactly one day before.
So if I saw the mountain, outlined by the rising sun at dawn, I could say to myself that though it was Saturday morning here what I was witnessing at the same moment was dawn on Friday, the day before.
The simultaneous sighting of two periods of time separated by an entire 24 hours seemed a paradox well worth experiencing.
Then again, I had this vague vision — a pure fantasy — that schoolchildren would rise from their beds in this tiny village, and would file down to school carrying Japanese-made microcomputers to help them with their sums and their essays.
That, it seemed, would be the kind of icon I needed, a truly Pacific emblem — that of South Sea island children beginning the first learning of the world's new day, and doing so by using California-invented high-technology packaged, sold and marketed by the Japanese.
Everything about this little scene related to the Ocean with which I had become so enraptured: if ever the peoples of the Pacific were to take over the running of the world, I fancied, it would start with people such as these, using such things in a place like this.
And so I waited for the darkness of the Tongan night to lift, my fingers tightly crossed.
In the event, the reality was as different and as perversely non-emblematic as it could be.
For a start, it continued to drizzle.
The dawn — when finally it came up — did so neither like thunder, nor rosy-fingered.
Instead the horizon became vaguely apparent — an uneven charcoal line separating the inky sea below from a deep grey stain of sky above.
The stain lightened slowly to reveal lowering clouds moving in from the north; the sea became less ink-like too, and showed itself as a mess of enormous and ever-moving swells picked out here and there by off-white skeins of spray.
The fringing reef came into view as well: a ragged line of breakers, huge walls of spume and the ocean hurling itself relentlessly against the coral.
If Samoa, Mount Silisili and yesterday were indeed somewhere out  there, I would have to take their presence on trust: I doubt if the visibility was more than five miles, and less as the squalls rolled in and drenched me in my eyrie.
As the day began, so the village started to pull itself together.
The gloom rolled back until I could see six or seven huts: they were grass-roofed, mean little constructions of board and lath, surrounded by muddy pools by which dozens of small black pigs were wagging their corkscrew tails and chasing each other over the cliffs.
Two or three wet and rather forlorn-looking dogs lounged in the mud.
At about 6 o'clock, a light snapped on in one of the huts.
I could hear curses and grunts, clothes being pulled on, and the familiar twang as cheap bedsprings were relieved of their customary pressure.
I readied my notebook.
After all, this was an important moment, a time to savour.
Whoever was about to emerge from beneath the dripping straw roof of this tiny hut on this minute hamlet on the eastern edge of this unknown volcanic islet was the first person in the world to rise on this February Saturday morning:Homo Pacificus , the symbol of all I had travelled half a world to see.
He would, I knew, be an immense and magnificent man, his shirt half open, his ta'ovala mat secured with its waistband of coconut fibre.
He would spy me and bellow ‘malo e lelei !’
I could wish for nothing more (unless, of course, his daughter followed, bearing a Toshiba lap-top computer, and skipped down the hill to school).
The door creaked open.
The figure framed in the light was shorter than I had expected, thin and stooped; he looked up at the sky and cursed a guttural curse, then started buttoning his fly.
He wore no ta'ovala , no coconut-fibre belt.
I coughed, and he looked up; a grey little man with spectacles, standing there in the mud surrounded by the squabbling pigs, he looked the very antithesis of magnificent immensity.
Rubbing his glasses clean, he peered intently over at me through the thin rain.
‘Gröss Gott !’ he exclaimed.
He came a little closer and his face broke into a lopsided grin, half amazed, half delighted.
‘Guten Morgen, mein Herren !’ he said.
‘Wilkommen in Tonga .’
It turned out that my Homo Pacificus came from Dusseldorf.
There was, I realized, an easy explanation.
Tonga had signed a treaty with Germany in 1876, and there had been a German coaling station on Vava'u.
Then at the end of the century Britain, fearing for her own security in the trans-Pacific sea-lanes, swapped rights to Tongan waters with those she had in Samoa, giving Samoan trading rights to  Germany and the United States, and keeping Tonga's for the Empire.
The corollary is that British influence in Tonga is still immense; but Germany still has relict links from before 1899, and this dampish little Dusseldorfer was a case in point.
His sister, he explained, had married a Tongan, and the couple now lived in Mainz: not perhaps the most attractive of men, he had been invited out to stay among the substantial ladies of the islands to see if he, too, could forge any links.
Thus far, he had not enjoyed any success.
A moment later and the girls of the house tumbled out — Sophia, Anna and Salome.
All large, cheerful girls in their late teens, to my great relief they wore long skirts and mats around their waists, tied as tradition dictates with a braided kiekei band.
They asked me in for tea, and we all listened to the morning news on Radio Tonga, crackling over the miles from the aerials down in Tongatapu.
The King, the announcer said, was leaving that night to attend the funeral of the Emperor of Japan.
Salome, the most talkative and pretty of the trio, took me aside.
Training to be a teacher and with a wisdom that belied her years, she explained that it was her half-brother who was now living in Mainz and had suggested that Erich (the Dusseldorfer) travel down to Tonga to look for a wife.
‘But he is rather lacking in grace,’ Salome said.
‘It is unlikely he will go back successful.
There is very little connection now between our people and you Europeans.
We prefer to take our husbands from among each other.
Not like the old days when we looked up to you.
Now we have our own pride, and people like him have no place here.’
I was enormously glad she had made that little speech for the mere sight of Erich — the knowledge that a man who worked as a painter in a Ford Taunus factory and was, in his own way, a type-specimen of Atlantic man, with no known connections with the new Ocean, had somehow fetched up on a remote Pacific island — was disturbing the entire thesis I wished to construct.
There was no use pretending it hadn't happened: I had wished for a pure Pacific experience, a truly new world experience at the dawning of this day, yet it had become hopelessly muddied with a relic of the old world and the Ocean whose time, we are now supposed to believe, has passed.
But Salome had placed it all perfectly in context, and by doing so had made Erich an unwitting ally to the theme.
For of course the Pacific is still influenced by the Atlantic that once dominated the world: the ties that bound the world together yesterday — personified  by the men and women who came out from the West to trade or to peddle religion, to colonize, annex, smuggle or fight — these ties still exist today, though more weakly, with less influence and fewer and fewer people enrolled in the process.
The crucial difference now is as Salome had declared, and is as true on a small and insubstantial island group like Tonga as in the capitals of Japan, Chile, Queensland or Korea: the difference is that the peoples of the Pacific no longer have a reason to look up to those adventurers from the old Atlantic.
They have their pride, their new confidence and assertiveness.
‘We are a Pacific people,’ I heard said on many occasions, ‘and we are proud.’
I said my farewells to Salome and her sisters and shook hands with Erich, who gave me a sheaf of letters to airmail when I got back to Hong Kong.
A boat returned me to the little coral landing-strip; Friendly Islands Airways took me down to Tongatapu; and within half a day I was settled in a small hotel in Auckland, waiting for the weekly Cathay Pacific jet home.
I had seen the island where time begins, and had come to the sorry realization that the Pacific, the vastest of all oceans, is a far more complicated entity — if indeed it could ever be regarded as such — than it was possible to imagine.
For if nothing else, by the time I had flown another twelve hours north from Auckland, and my jet had settled me on to the runway at Kai Tak airport in Hong Kong, I was still on the periphery of the Pacific Ocean.
I was still in a place washed by the waters which had thundered off Tonga, where there was a king with a nation of Brobdingnagian subjects, a million pigs and a tradition of wearing clothes made of pandanus leaves and coconut string.
I was still on the shores of the same great sea and yet had been transported into quite another world, a place on the edge of a China which seemed to have nothing in common with those islanders so forgotten and so far away.
Except, of course, the Ocean itself.
Trite though it may sound, the Pacific, unlike its sister seas, is an ocean of many worlds indeed — and at the same time by being so has become the world ocean , as dominant and all-encompassing as its immensity suggests it has to be.
To fathom its many mysteries, to grasp its vastness and try to understand its wholeness, I then realized would be a very considerable task.
The event that set the modern Pacific on its unrelenting climb towards world dominion happened, by an entirely appropriate  coincidence, to be the first ever shown clear across America, on coast-to-coast television.
The inauguration of the 3,000-mile link of co-axial cables and microwaves took place on an unusually hot Saturday morning, 8 September 1951, for the reporting of the momentous happenings then reaching their climax in the gaudy and Italianate opera house in San Francisco.
The ceremonial that unrolled before the cameras was displayed, just as it happened, on television sets (black and white only) in living rooms, offices and bedrooms from Presque Isle in Maine to Key West in Florida, and in all salient points between such as New York, Pittsburgh and Washington DC.
The event that prompted this sudden electronic integration of the nation — with all the then unrecognized implications, good and bad, for those who lived there — was the formal signing of the Japanese peace Treaty.
This treaty, written on a mammoth parchment document that was said to hold more signatures than any other treaty in world history, was signed by 49 of the participants in the Second World War.
It formally returned to Japan the sovereignty she had lost in her atomic-bombed defeat, and enabled her to recommence her ambitious ascent towards economic supremacy — a climb which, though frustrated and corrupted before, was this time and at last to culminate in her present astonishing success.
And with Japan's success came the beginnings of the Ocean's success: a new economic axis had been created.
However the era of the Pacific probably had its true beginnings nearly a century before, and at the behest of that most unremembered of all American presidents, Millard Fillmore.
No other act of his dismal presidency deserves mention; but in an irony perhaps lost on his many detractors, his single decision in March 1852 to despatch a naval expedition to Japan, under the command of Commodore Matthew Perry, has had an ineradicable effect on world history.
Perry's foray to the Orient marked the true beginning of America's  global role; it marked the emergence on the world stage of Japan, after two centuries of a xenophobia that almost bordered on paranoia; and it allowed the creation — nervous at first, but gradually becoming more and more pronounced — of a trans-Pacific axis between, put at its most basic, California and Honshu — an axis around which the fortunes of today's Ocean, and much of today's world, revolves.
America's interest in the Pacific, dating from the end of the eighteenth century, was almost certainly fired by the telling in dockside bars and merchants' cafés of gaudily embroidered tales of the explorations of Captain Cook: why, the mariners of Boston and New York wondered out loud, should the Ocean that washed their continent's western shores be traversed and charted by a navigator all the way from North Yorkshire, and by Frenchmen and Portuguese too?
And so, in the early years of the nineteenth century American sailors set out in contest, the seaward extension of those landlubbers who, to use John L. O'Sullivan's famous phrase of 1845, sought their ‘manifest destiny’ on land by expanding ever westward, to the very edge of the continental United States.
Those mariners set about whaling, settling, plundering; they established a presence in Hawaii; they shared with Britain the spoils of the Chinese treaty ports; they took Samoa; they befriended Korea; they seized and settled Midway, Wake, Guam and (a spoil of an Imperial war) the Philippines — thus creating a series of stepping-stones, a lifeline of tropical islands that led all the way to that greatest and most elusive prize, the Middle Kingdom, China.
But the most notable act of all this trans-Pacific ambition — when seen from today's vantage point, if not necessarily so at the time — was President Fillmore's decision to send out Commodore Perry and his ‘black ships’, to bring sense to the isolationist shoguns who in almost Carthusian seclusion, ran the state of Nihon.
Matthew Calbraith Perry, with his minuscule armada of two frigates and two sailing vessels, arrived at the heavily fortified pod of Uraga — at the very mouth of Tokyo Bay — on 8 July 1853.
Japanese warships, puny in the extreme, surrounded him.
The Commodore  refused pointblank to leave.
He would, he insisted, complete his mission to deliver a pouch of documents from President Fillmore — by force, if no one was deputed to receive the papers personally.
Despite their stubborn pride and the risk of loss of face, the Japanese soon realized that Perry's ships were far superior to their own.
They withdrew their blockade, and sent their prince Toda to collect the package.
In what was regarded then as some perverse flourish of American protocol, ‘Admiral’ Perry then gave the papers to two of his black mariners —‘the best-looking fellows of their colour that the squadron could furnish’— and instructed them to hand them over.
They were to deliver, with the greatest of courtesy, the inaugural diplomatic traffic between the newly-emerging America and the soon-to-emerge Japan.
The initial shock felt by the Japanese wore off quickly enough, once they had read the letters and considered their implications.
The Commodore was back in Tokyo Bay seven months later, in the depths of the following winter.
This time he came with nine ships, and a determination to win agreement from the Japanese — and he did precisely that, concluding a treaty of peace and friendship that — unknown to all its signatories — was to have consequences of shattering proportions.
The collapse of the shogunate and the restoration of the Meiji throne was but one effect, from which a myriad of others flowed: the revival of Japanese nationalism and her imperial designs, the invasion of China, the florid plans for a Greater East Asia Co-prosperity Sphere, the bombast and cruelty of the Pacific War, the creation in America of the atomic bomb, its eventual use over the two great cities of Kyushu, and Japan's consequent defeat, post-war disgrace, ruin and decay.
All of this, it can surely be argued, flowed seamlessly from that fateful meeting between two black American sailors and a princely envoy from the Kyoto court in the harbour at Uraga, and by the handover of a letter written by a president who, less than a year later, would be languishing in Bukalo in the beginnings of what should be — by this reckoning alone — quite undeserved historical obscurity.
It took the San Francisco peace Treaty of 1951 to place the official seal of international forgiveness on Japan's decade of distemper; after  which, and ever since, Japan has raced ahead without once looking back, achieving all she had sought by war and conquest without the firing of a single shot or shell.
Few commentators at the time saw in the conference the beginnings of the Pacific age.
Most were far too taken with the spectacle of Andrei Gromyko, then the Soviet Union's deputy Foreign Minister, trying — and failing — to break the conference apart.
The newspaper-reading public — and the television audience of some 40 million who had never before been treated to live pictures from the Californian coast — revelled in the pictures of Gromyko and his polish and Czech ‘wrecking crew’(as John Foster Dulles put it) who complained, harangued, sulked and finally walked out as amendment after amendment was defeated by the other conferees.
All praise was given to Dean Acheson, the conference chairman, for his handling of the ‘Reds’; and there were lurid tales told by a reporter who smuggled himself into the Soviets' rented mansion disguised as a plumber (‘socks and panties dangled…orange peels littered the floors…five to seven beds had been squeezed into every bedroom…’).
There was even supposed to be a plot to assassinate Gromyko by ramming a beer truck into his motorcade (and a meat truck did overturn on the road shortly before the cars were due).
America was fascinated by the Russians' presence in their prettiest city, and duly ignored the real significance of what was going on.
It took well over an hour for the first 48 delegates — who included no Soviet bloc nation, nor India, nor Burma, nor either of the Chinas, nor a scattering of other countries who could not bring themselves to accept Japan's word — to file up to the podium to sign.
And then, with a solemnity and dignity appropriate to the moment, the Japanese prime Minister Shigeru Yoshida stepped up to sign.
He had flown in via Honolulu, but reportedly had not deigned to glance over at the still-visible wreckage of Pearl Harbor, just off the runway.
He and his five brother delegates (though there were 74 in the full Japanese team, and 70 correspondents) were dressed in morning coats and striped trousers, ‘to show Japan's modesty and sincerity’, as Yoshida said.
They signed — and the war was officially over, the peace had begun.
Very few of the seers got it right.
Freda Kirchwey, writing in The Nation , came close:
…already the British are worrying about cheap Japanese goods flooding markets absolutely essential to the export trade…
Norway is worried about fishing rights….
Many nations are apprehensive because the treaty establishes no controls to prevent the ruthless industrial and trading practices that built Japan's pre-war commercial empire.
And all the powers…. fear the rapid rise of Japan's war-making capacity, industrial and political as well as military.
They know that a new balance of power in Asia has been created by the Treaty….
By ‘new balance of power’ Freda Kirchwey (and most other writers who made this same point) meant a balance between Japan, Korea, Formosa, China and the Soviet Union.
There was little thought that the ‘balance’ would ultimately rest between the two old enemies, Japan and the United States; nor that the entire Pacific Ocean and all the countries around it were to become, to a greater or lesser extent, dependent upon and in thrall to these two protagonists in the conference.
As everyone left, clutching the fountain pens and the sugar-pastry city crests handed out by an exuberant San Francisco mayor, so the world's thoughts were principally, and thankfully, concentrated on the reality that one war was now definitely over while another — that raging across the Ocean in Korea — was beginning to look as though it might end soon.
(It did not.)
The idea of the emergent Pacific was not in anyone's mind, and in any case the reality of it was not to appear for many years.
But it did steal up on us, in the way eras have a habit of doing, some time in the late Sixties and early Seventies.
The West, the Atlantic world, may have been firing rockets to the moon and fighting a war in Indochina, but the benefit of hindsight indicates now that in other ways it was gripped by a blinkered and introspective mood, absorbed by its own internal problems.
Understandably so, for these problems were grave indeed: the Kennedys had been killed, likewise Dr King; the streets of Paris and London were furious with the sounds of protest; the cities and university towns of America were in turmoil: race relations, the draft, mind-expanding drugs, the Weather Underground, Dylan, Daley, psychedelia, the National Guard; a cause for a riot, bomb or occupation was to be  found everywhere, every day.
It was not a time for students of the world to ponder the great matters of global history, to care about the great beyond, to notice the unleashing of distant energies.
Yet being unleashed they most certainly were.
The turning point, the moment when the era rightly began, came during those years between America's Sixties triumph — Neil Armstrong's first footsteps on the Sea of Tranquillity in 1969 — and that most doleful moment of the Seventies, when the last US Marines were evacuated from the roof of the embassy in Saigon in 1975.
And the indicator of the moment, regrettably, has to be a statistic: the simple fact that from the late Sixties and the early Seventies onward, more than half the world's goods and services, more than half the world's trade, had its origins within the domain of the Pacific Ocean.
If in no other sense than economic, the world's focus had switched from East to West, from Greenwich to the Date Line, from Atlantic to Pacific.
This part of the planet meant business.
Statistics — unpalatable, indigestible and ephemeral though they may be — tell much of the story of the world's sudden recognition of the Pacific.
Some — such as those asserting that most of the world's people now live around the Ocean — are questionable (as will be explored shortly).
Others, which display the higher growth rates of the Pacific countries, the greater per capita incomes of their peoples, and the steadily increasing volumes of iron ore, oil and containerized trade crossing the Pacific, are powerful indicators of an undeniable trend.
But, though statistics are objective icons for the disinterested observer — or powerfully distorting tools for the polemicist — once in a while a particular set of figures will leap from the page of some dust-dry tome to offer up an image more illuminating than all of a dozen reports like those in the bibliography relating to this chapter.
Others interested in this Ocean may have already found their choicest figures: the one that brought the Pacific's surge so very much alive for me — when hitherto it had been no more than the muffled beatings of a warm, blue and very distant sea — related to an event seven miles above the surface of the earth, some time during a night in 1984.
Probably, though this can never be wholly proven, the night of Friday, 4 May 1984.
Like any wide expanse of sea, the Pacific Ocean is criss-crossed with commercial air-routes.
These are flying lanes, arranged more or less like the lanes of a superhighway, each given a name and a number, all clearly designated on maps, and designed by the  International Civil Aviation Organization's Air Navigation Commission to allow civil aircraft to fly in relative safety when far from land.
To say the Pacific is criss-crossed is, perhaps, too strong — the Atlantic has a number of routes that cross each other, and its Jepperson high-altitude charts are so filled with intersecting lines that to an untutored eye, they resemble the early stages of weaving.
In contrast the Pacific, being so huge, and travelled across by aircraft that tend (at least for now) to fly principally between East and West and back again, manages to contain its major routes within a few distinct bands.
The five ‘main roads’ that run between Anchorage and Tokyo are the main tracks across the Pacific for aircraft running between any of the American or Canadian west coast airports on the one hand, and any of the Asian traffic centres, Tokyo, Seoul, Taipei or Hong Kong on the other.
These routes, known as ATSs, or Air Traffic Separation routes, are designated Red 220, Red 580, Amber 590, Red 591 and Green 344, and they carry the bulk of traffic across the Ocean.
Pilots using them plot their journeys across the uninterrupted emptiness of the Pacific by plotting a course between a series of way-points, random but fixed points above the Ocean that are each given five-letter nonsense names — Neeva, Nytim, Nokka, Nabie, among a host of others — from above which the planes report their positions to the Pacific's oceanic control centres at Tokyo, Anchorage and Oakland, California.
These heavily-travelled, perpetually busy airways are supplemented by others currently less hectic but growing fast both in use and consequence.
There is, for instance, a route between Tokyo and Honolulu — known, because it is not fixed in cement, as it were , as the TYO-HNL Flexible Track System — which carries millions upon millions of Japanese to and from honeymoons and shopping expeditions; there are routes now between Honolulu and San Francisco, between Honolulu and Nadi (in Fiji, and pronounced Nandi), Nadi and Tokyo, and Nadi and Sydney, between Los Angeles and points south-west.
(Fiji, despite its relative economic unimportance, has become a major centre for air traffic controlling, refuelling, stopovers and crew changes.)
Oceanic controllers there, as well as in Honolulu and Auckland, watch the blips on their radars, or plot positions of unseen aircraft on immense plastic charts, as do French-speaking specialists hunched over their radar screens outside Papeete, in Tahiti.
To the north and  west of these last the skies are cluttered; only to the east of Tahiti is the Ocean left to its own devices.
This, then, was the situation on what I shall call that Friday, early in the northern summer of 1984.
It was late on Friday evening in London; in the cities of the western Pacific — Tokyo, Hong Kong, Seoul, Vladivostok, Sydney — it was early Saturday morning.
In those of the eastern Pacific — San Francisco, Hawaii, Easter Island, Anchorage, Pitcairn — it was mid-afternoon, on Friday.
Professor Dowd's line dividing Friday from Saturday rendered it late Saturday morning in Tonga, and slightly later on Friday morning in Samoa, just a couple of hundred miles away.
So the exact time — and day — of this statistically important happening depends very much on where it was recorded.
Since planes tend to fly by Greenwich Mean Time, it is convenient to say it took place on the evening of the Friday.
What happened is recorded as a statistic.
There are about 700 Boeing 747s in operation around the world, and rather fewer Douglas DCI0s and Lockheed Lloll Tri-Stars: the so-called jumbo jets, the wide-bodies, those given the suffix ‘heavy’— as in ‘Cathay Pacific 200-Heavy’— by the air traffic controllers.
Until that Friday night slightly more than half the planes actually up in the sky, flying between the cities with runways that can handle wide-bodied jets, were doing so — across the Atlantic Ocean.
They were flying between London and New York, Philadelphia and Frankfurt, New Orleans and Madrid, Montréal and Paris, Chicago and Lagos, Rio and Cape Town, Buenos Aires and the Canary Islands and a score of other places besides.
But from late that Friday night the scene suddenly shifted.
Most of the world's big planes known to be in the air at that time were recorded by the traffic controllers as being not above the Atlantic Ocean at all, but above the Pacific.
It was a development that had been long foreseen, and it was inevitable.
But somehow, of all the facts and figures that had and have been adduced to bolster the arguments in favour of the dawning of a new Pacific age, this one seemed the most appropriate.
The jumbo jet is after all one of the most potent symbols of this century.
The simple statistical confirmation that the majority of them  were from 1984 onwards — and probably from that particular Friday, though one cannot be certain — in the skies above the Pacific Ocean was (for me and I suspect for most who came to know) the first and final affirmation that from now on this part of the world was the centre of things.
Official recognition of the change came thick and fast during the presidency of Ronald Reagan.
In June 1984, a scant four weeks after the jumbo jet statistic became known in the world's aviation lobbies, the president made a particularly memorable speech.
He was in Dublin — an improbable place for a display of Pacific oratory — when he declared:
This century has brought the Pacific nations many hardships, and many difficulties and differences remain.
But what I found everywhere [on a recent tour]was energy, optimism and excitement.
More and more there is a sense of common destiny and possibility for all the peoples of this great region.
The vast Pacific has become smaller, but the future of those who live around it is larger than ever before.
Then again, in a later speech, the president warmed to his theme: ‘You cannot help but feel that the great Pacific basin — with all its nations and all its potential for growth and development —that is the future.’
Or: ‘The Pacific is leading mankind into a new age of enterprise and progress.
The Pacific Basin is being transformed into one of the most dynamic and productive regions in the world.
The pattern of growth, stability and co-operation found in this region offers a unique and promising vision for the future.’
And finally, in the same year, all trace of the tentative vanished: ‘The Pacific is where the future of the world lies.’
After such endorsements from a man who, despite being a migrant from the Mid-West has been transformed instinctively into a prime example of Homo Pacificus , it would have been a foolish and almost unpatriotic American who professed otherwise.
And so, come the mid- and late 1980s, the rhetoric flooded forth.
At Georgetown soirées and Bel Air fund-raisers, in the think-tanks and the magazine offices, in the halls of academe and (dare one say it) in the offices of publishers, the Pacific suddenly became fashionable .
A phenomenon —Pacific chic — began to arrest the attentions of those on the dinner-party circuit, and it became desirable, nay essential, for the United States to  think Pacific, be Pacific (though with a capital ‘P’) and, above all, to develop a Pacific policy.
‘There is a shift in the centre of gravity of US foreign policy,’ said a State Department seer, Mr Lawrence Eagleburger, ‘from the trans-Atlantic relationship toward the Pacific basin and particularly Japan.,
‘There is now a new reality in the world,’ said George Shultz, the Secretary of State, ‘though the world may not comprehend it.
In economic development, in the growth of free institutions, and in growing global influence, the Pacific region has rapidly emerged as a leading force on the world stage…a sense of Pacific community is emerging.’
Sometimes the rhetoric became positively and absurdly hyperbolic.
Senator Gary Hart, who in 1985 was busily courting public attention for his attempt on the American presidency, declared that ‘we are all members of the community of nations surrounding the Pacific.
The Pacific has become the twentieth century's fountain of youth.’
And further: ‘Economically,’ a governor of California declared, ‘the sun is now rising in the West.’
The Russians were not backward in coming forward, either.
In July 1986 Mikhail Gorbachev, speaking in the great Pacific port of Vladivostok — the name means ‘Rule the East’— made what turned out to be a seminal address displaying the Soviets' keen interest in the region.
He spoke of the ‘renaissance in world history’ that was taking place along the rim of the Pacific, and declared that his country — the greater part of which, he told his audience, lay ‘East of the Urals’— was about to develop a coherent attitude towards it and its people.
‘The situation in the Far East, in Asia and the Ocean expanses adjoining it, where we are permanent inhabitants and seafarers of long standing, is to us of national, state interest.’
Mr Gorbachev's words — and the wave of shrewd and generally conciliatory diplomatic actions that followed — sent a tremor through the American diplomatic establishment.
The Pacific, it had long been supposed, was America's private playground — no super-power had bothered about the Ocean before, and the assumption of American naval supremacy in its blue waters was unchallenged.
There were  the inevitable demands that the new Soviet ‘threat’ be repulsed: the United States, some thought, should forget about the Europeans and concentrate its diplomatic and military skills entirely on the Pacific.
Wiser counsel suggested a more cautious approach.
Mr Paul Wolfowitz, President Reagan's State Department specialist on the subject, did indeed talk of the United States ‘reasserting our appropriate role in the Pacific region — a very strong and involved role — and even many foreign observers give President Reagan a large share of the credit for that.’
But the whole process of reassertion and realignment must be performed with care.
‘We must pay great attention to the Pacific, as it is one of the most important regions of the world.
But if we do that at the expense of other vital interests…we will have made a mistake.’
But the underlying theme was that expressed by a Japanese, Zenko Suzuki, in 1982 — a theme that has since proved an undeniable stimulus to politicians and rhetoricians in need of a new and very positive cause.
‘We are today standing at a historic crossroads,’ Mr Suzuki told a conference in (most appositely) Hawaii, ‘a crossroads where the many civilizations encounter each other in this Pacific region.
We are witnessing the birth of a civilization which nurtures ideas and creativity precisely because it is so rich in diversity.
This is the beginning of the Pacific Age, an age which will open the doors into the 21st century.’
Mr Suzuki's flourishes merely echoed and embellished words that had been uttered with signal prescience almost exactly eighty years before, by John Hay.
‘Western history,’ Theodore Roosevelt's Secretary of State declared in 1902, ‘began with a Mediterranean era, passed through an Atlantic era, and is now moving into a Pacific era.’
And Hay himself was an echo of an even earlier huzza for the region.
William Seward, President Lincoln's Secretary of State, the man who had committed the legendary ‘folly’ of buying Alaska for rather more than $7 million, made an even more provocative forecast in the mid-nineteenth century:.
‘The Pacific Ocean, its shores, its islands,’ he said, ‘will become the great theatre of events in the world's hereafter…henceforth European commerce, European thought and European connections, although becoming more intimate, will nevertheless sink in importance.,
Setting such contentions assertions aside, it is evident that in terms of all the human and material resources it contains, the Pacific is  indeed a remarkable prize.
But it is what the more energetic and motivated of these human resources — her people — have managed to do with the material resources that — to quote from just three current claims, which some might think exaggerated — has triggered an economic revolution, caught the rest of the world unprepared and given birth to a whole new era and a brand-new geography.
Many metaphors are used.
On one rather bloodless level, the phenomenon of the New Pacific is the consequence of what happens when all the curves by which we define a region's resources suddenly reach their peaks simultaneously, and produce a wave of dramatic geometric harmony — the whole wave being far greater and more impressive than the sum of its component curves.
In a more romantic mode, it is as though a thousand lone voices have suddenly and unexpectedly found common cause in one majestic chorus, which is now drowning out the discordant notes heard from beyond the main stage.
Or again, it is as though the disorganized and random bursts of photons present in a beam of white light were suddenly all being accelerated and agitated to precisely the same frequency and directed at the same spot — to produce the awesome source of energy that we have come to know as the laser.
But whether a wave, a chorus or a laser is used as a metaphor, the common feature to be found in all comparisons is, quite simply,power .
The Pacific, once merely big, is now endowed with very considerable power which seems likely to grow and grow, to a pitch that mathematicians will say is amenable to extrapolation, but which is actually, in terms of its effects, quite unimaginable.
It will presumably then decline, and some presently unconsidered part of the world — perhaps Africa, or Arabia — will rise to prominence; but for the moment there is little doubt that the Pacific era is beginning, it will reach its full flower in perhaps two or three decades, and will then enjoy or suffer the supremacy known to other oceans and regions in the decades and centuries past.
How long it endures — how long the Pacific wave will stand before it breaks, how full the chorus sings until it wavers, how long before the brilliance of the light begins to dim — cannot even be guessed.
A Library of Congress report on the region, commissioned in 1986, began thus:
The Asian Pacific Rim has been transformed in the past 25 years into a major world centre of commerce, industry and economic activity.
The region today rivals North America and Europe in many of the key indicators of economic power.
The unprecedented economic achievements of the region have forced governments and firms in North America and Europe to re-examine their polities and practices to remain internationally competitive, and have led to predictions that the countries of the Asian Pacific Rim will eclipse North America and Europe as the centre of world, economic power and dynamism in the 21st century.
They are growing…at breathtaking rates….
The figures are breathtaking, too, as a random sampling will illustrate.
In 1965 the Pacific countries — leaving out the US and Canada-produced goods and services worth S183,000,000,000, sixty per cent less than that of Western Europe; by 1985 this figure had increased eight-fold, to $1,700,000,000,000 — a mere thirty per cent less than Europe.
The Pacific countries are now America's largest trading partner — they first outstripped the Europeans in 1985, when they sold goods worth $121 billions to the United States, compared to the $116 billions'-worth that came from Southampton, Marseilles, Rotterdam and Hamburg.
Thirteen of the Pacific nations — the US, Canada, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Thailand, Brunei and the Philippines — now account for half of the world's growth.
The four ‘little tigers’— Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan and Korea — have growth rates which, at between eight and eleven per cent, are more than double those for most of the rest of the world.
(Germany grew at 2 per cent during the period 1973–84; Hong Kong grew nearly five times as rapidly.)
The western American states are in on the act, too — Oregon, California and Alaska are growing at seven per cent— twice the rate of the remainder of the country.
In 1950 the gross personal incomes of those living in the five Pacific states amounted to just over a quarter of those living in the 18 Atlantic states; by 1982 it had risen to very nearly half.
The population had gone up too — from 30 per cent of the Atlantic states' population in 1960 to 37 per cent in 1982.
The sum of the gross national products of Japan and China  and the ‘little tigers’ will, by the year 2000, equal that of the United States.
In 1995 Japan will own a tenth of all American assets, a figure brought about in part because of the weakness of the dollar against the yen, but also because the Japanese manage to save three times as much as do the Americans, and have that much more spare money to invest.
Los Angeles is set to take over from New York as the busiest port in the world.
Hong Kong shot past Rotterdam in 1987 to become the world's busiest container port.
Forty per cent of American trade with the Pacific is carried on ships that arrive in the pod of San Francisco.
The figures are almost endless.
And what they all display, rather too baldly though highly effectively, is the simple economic importance of the Ocean.
What they do not tell, however, is the human dimension of the Pacific story — the human reasons behind the staggering growth of the region, the ways in which this virtuoso performance actually affects the lives of the men, women and children of the Pacific, and the ways in which the Pacific people are different in outlook, aspirations, fears and needs from those who live beyond the Ocean.
The figures report on what and where and when; the pages that follow will, I hope, give some answers to the how and, most important, to the why.
Why, if the Pacific era is upon us, has it all happened here?
Ever since the Portuguese annexed Goa in 1510, the Europeans have had their eyes on or have in some ways dominated Asia and the Pacific; Western ideas have triumphed here as everywhere else in the world.
But now, at long last, it seems as though this might be ending: the much vaunted triumph of the West may be faltering in this, its first confrontation with a region and a group of peoples who are as confident and as proud — and as rich and powerful — as the Westerners have long been.
Yet is this really so — could European dominion, and the subsequent dominion of America, really be at the beginning of a decline?
And further, is it really possible — given the varieties of people, the gigantic distances and the vastly differing ideological systems to be found in the Pacific — that this part of the world could assume the mantle of leadership?
Could it triumph, with its Galileos, Einsteins, Picassos, Beethovens and Aristotles — thinkers and seers of Pacific  origin, who will one day come to imprint their views and creations as firmly as did their Mediterranean and Atlantic forebears?
Or is it all an illusion, a phantasm derived from mere figures, a figment of journalistic imagination, an evanescent creature of dream and the wishful thinking of those for whom history is proceeding too slowly, and who would prefer to see an era change during their lifetimes rather than to live within the dulling envelope of merely one?
I hope that the succeeding chapters will go at least some way towards building flesh and sinew, face and character — even if it happens to be, as on Tafahi island, a North German face and character — on to the dry, lifeless bones of economists' figures.
On the face of the planet there lies, assembled into one immense and complicated but always inter-connected body, a quantity of some 329 million cubic miles of water — the sea.
This body, because it contains fifty thousand million million tons of sodium chloride and similarly massive quantities of other dissolved salts, is undrinkable by most living creatures, but in scores of other ways is central — vital, indeed — to the existence of all life.
What might at first seem an enormous volume of fluid accounts in fact for a mere one million million millionth of the total volume of the planet.
(A trifling proportion, perhaps — though students of the trivial are usually intrigued to learn that all the dissolved salts in the sea, were they to be dried out, would be enough to cover the entire land surface of the planet to a depth of 150 feet.)
To better appreciate the size of the sea, one can perhaps imagine it heaped up into a cube.
Each side would be 690 miles long — about the distance from London to Inverness, or Washington to Atlanta.
But of course the water is not heaped up into a cube and so it is perhaps more appropriate, though less convenient, to think of this mass of salt water in its actual context — as a veneer-thin skin which lurks in those troughs and valleys which fall below the mean circumference of the earth's planetary spheroid.
If the earth is thought of as a billiard ball, then the water upon its face is like hammered gold leaf, adhering to some imperfections in the ball more tightly than to others, and in yet others not adhering at all.
It is held there and is permitted (or forced) to move only very slightly to and fro— though in very complicated ways — by the influences, sometimes combined, sometimes separate, of that  variety of proximate gravities exerted by the sun, the moon and the nearer planets.
Thanks to the condition of the atmosphere above it this body of water may appear, at closer quarters, either tranquil or chaotic, storm-swept or calm.
Depending on its latitude and the season, it may be a deep warm blue or an ugly, tepid green — or its surface may be frozen hard and white into ice, on which creatures may walk.
Depending on the geology, the tectonics and thus the topography of the earth's surface beneath it, it may be many miles deep or some few fathoms shallow.
It invariably supports an unimaginably vast quantity of living creatures, from submicroscopic unicellular beings via countless varieties of fish and plants and crustaceans to the mightiest whales — and thus the mightiest living creatures — that are known to exist.
The sea is statistically a very much more impressive body than the land it surrounds.
For a start it is far larger — 71 per cent of the earth's surface is sea, only 29 per cent dry land.
Only in a very few latitudinal bands is there more land than sea: thanks to Europe and Asia, that stretching from 45°N to 70°N is dominated by land, as is that (because of Antarctica) between 70°S and the South pole.
Elsewhere, and particularly south of the equator, the sea rules: north of 84° there is no land at all, and between 45°S and the Antarctic Circle there is to all intents and purposes none either (just The Bluffs in New Zealand, a sliver of Patagonia and a few islands, unshakable relics of the British empire).
The average depth of the sea is 12,430 feet — much deeper than the average height of the land, a mere 2,760 feet.
And the sea's greatest known depth of 36,200 feet exceeds by more than a mile the height of Mount Everest.
From mankind's point of view the varying configurations of these 329 million cubic miles present a variety of conveniences and opportunities.
It is a body that simultaneously defines the continents and divides them from each other; at the same time it knits together some of their distant and improbably linked civilizations, as well as their anthropologies and histories.
The water can be both a barrier to our travel and a pathway for our commerce.
It displays an endless variety of moods: lonely, majestic, dangerous, fickle and serene.
It is always powerful.
Perhaps not always as immediately dramatic as an exploding volcano, devastating earthquake nor a hurricane-force wind — but in terms of a sustained exertion of strength, it is probably the most powerful earth-borne entity known.
The sea is the primal source of all living things on earth.
It is an immense graveyard, thought of by some as a sacred and unspoiled resource.
It is used by others — by far too many — as a dumping-ground for the unwanted, the unsung, the unspeakable.
For many it is the way home; for others the way from home, a medium that encourages escape, change, exchange and exile.
Accordingly, and because of its vast size, the sea inspires the greatest emotional responses of loving and loathing among those who occupy their business upon its surface.
It can be the focus of inconsolable grief; it inspires poetry and literature, symphonies and songs.
To any visitors from another planet, it would be the most obvious and most dominant feature of this one.
But only lately have we come to think of it as one body, however large and interconnected it may be.
Not long ago geographers were wont to divide it into its most impressive component bodies, and to call them the Seven Seas.
(These were the Arctic and Antarctic, the North and South Atlantic, the North and South Pacific, and the Indian Oceans.
Other impressive bodies of water — the Mediterranean, the Caspian, the Black, the Baltic — were not included in the list.)
Slowly, as geography became a more refined and philosophical diversion, so this way of subdividing the sea evolved into the simpler concept of just Five Oceans: the northerly and southerly subdivisions of the Atlantic and Pacific dropped, we were left with the uncomplicated vastnesses of the Oceans Arctic, Antarctic, Atlantic, Pacific and Indian.
Then again, at the turn of this century, a geographer named Otto Krümmell decided that both Seven and Five were too many, and that there should be only the Three.
The Arctic and Antarctic Oceans, Krümmell decreed, were simply polar integrands of those oceans which had equatorial legitimacy: only these latter — the Atlantic, the Pacific and the Indian — were, in his scheme of things, true oceans.
The progressive simplification continues.
Today even more reduction has taken place: now the more pedantically-minded geographers dispense with talk of any subdivisions, perhaps hesitating to diminish so mighty a feature of the globe by paring it apart and apportioning its sections hither and yon.
They now call it what an extraplanetary visitor — a being unmoved by tales of historical discovery, disinterested in the results of political argument and unaffected by the predicted consequences of commercial trends — would probably call it himself.
They remind themselves that it is all linked, one body of water, one mass of 329 million cubic  miles of brine, and with unaffected simplicity they call it the World Ocean.
For the purposes of this book, however, I plan to use Herr Krümmell's definition of 1897 from his Handbuch der Ozeanographie .
It is worth bearing in mind, though, that his three oceans are in fact all part of one, and that their individual behaviours are all part of the overall behaviour of the planet's hydrosphere, where all winds and currents, ambient temperatures and barometric pressures — and, just possibly, all human behaviour too — are part of one hugely complicated, ever-mobile, mathematically-insufferable and only marginally predictable global machine.
The workings of the Atlantic Ocean are affected by what happens in the Indian Ocean.
The Indian Ocean pays close heed to what occurs in the Pacific Ocean.
The Pacific is affected by everything and in turn it, too, affects everything else.
Taken alone the Pacific Ocean can be, like any other, defined in a variety of ways, depending on whether the observer is a geographer, geologist, cartographer, military strategist or fashionably up-to-date economist.
Sometimes the definitions can border on the eccentric: the American admiral who commands all his country's ships, airmen, soldiers and marines in what the pentagon regards as ‘the Pacific’— as in the admiral's official title CINCPAC, Commander-in-Chief, Pacific — holds sway over an ocean which has its westerly shores oft Mombasa, and is arbitrarily cut off along a line running due south from the border between Mexico and Guatemala.
Thus ‘the Pacific’, as seen from the pentagon's decidedly Atlantic eyrie in Arlington, Virginia, includes all the Indian Ocean, yet excludes that lo per cent of the true Pacific which abuts the coast of South America (and, even more surreal, is actually administered from the office of the Commander-in-Chief, Atlantic, in Norfolk, Virginia).
The genesis of this particular definition, which we might call ‘the military Pacific’, has more to do with American imperial history than with logic.
But in recent years a more rigorously scientific approach has unwittingly given some credibility to it — at least to the pentagon's arbitrary gift of an eastern frontier for the Ocean.
It is all to do with satellites.
The geostationary communications satellites placed high above the Pacific to link the banking and trading centres of South-East Asia, Japan and Australasia with those of North America preside over a  ‘window’ of the planetary territory of geometrically fixed size — rather as if a cone, a dunce's cap, the height of which is equivalent to the altitude necessary for a satellite's geostationary orbit, had been set down over the ocean.
The maximum diameter of this window, at the equator, is about 150° of longitude — so for the satellite to be able, say, to ‘see’ Singapore on the very western periphery of what one might call ‘the economists’Pacific' — a definition we will consider m- a moment — its window must end in the east somewhere near the longitude of Mexico City.
As indeed do the windows of most Pacific communications satellites.
This is simple enough to test by observation.
Any international satellite dish one might see in Vancouver or Los Angeles will point toward its ‘bird’, low on the western horizon — the Pacific satellite.
A dish in any Pacific city east of the longitude of Mexico City — Lima, say, or Quito, or Santiago — will be cranked down in the direction of an equally low point on the eastern horizon — for just as American naval vessels involved in exercises off the Pacific coasts of Peru, Ecuador or Chile are regarded as being part of the US Atlantic Fleet, so communicators, for reasons of pure geometry, think of these countries' capital cities as part of the Atlantic communications network.
Balboa and Magellan might have found the classification very droll, but the fact remains that for purposes of cartographic, organizational and now administrative convenience, the Pacific Ocean is simply-far too big.
There are, however, more conventional definitions of the Ocean's limits.
To a geologist, for instance, the Pacific Ocean is a very sharply defined depression of the earth's surface which has been formed as a result of the complicated processes of plate tectonics.
Put another way, the area which can properly be called the ‘tectonic Pacific’ is one of relatively low altitude that is bounded by a ring of islands and mountains which have been — and are still being — formed by the geological processes that occur when one tectonic plate bumps into and grinds against another.
The main and more or less stable plate that dominates the area is known, hardly surprisingly, as the Pacific Plate; surrounding it are a number of equally large, or smaller plates such as the Australian, the Nazca, the North American and the Cocos Plate.
Were one to define the Pacific in terms of its tectonics alone, then it would be a sea considerably shrunk from that to which we are accustomed.
Its boundary — the boundary of the Pacific plate — would follow the west coast of North America, but it would then turn sharply south and pass to the seaward, as it were, of both the Galapagos archipelago and Easter Island, before curving to the south of New Zealand, along the spine of South Island and emerging back into the sea near the hot mud springs of Rotorua.
The Pacific boundary-line would then pass to the seaward of Tonga and Fiji, curve back westwards to New Guinea, head north and east through Guam and Iwo Jima; pass off the eastern shores of the Japanese chain, head up to Kamchatka and rejoin the North American continent off the Aleutians.
This supposed boundary of the Pacific plate almost exactly parallels what was once called the Andesite Line: a zone surrounding the Pacific, on the outer edge of which are found rocks of an andesitic — acid — variety, and within which nearly all the rocks are of a more basic kind, using the word in its chemical sense.
In excessively crude shorthand: there are light-coloured rocks that form themselves into sharp peaks and very explosive volcanoes (Mount St Helens, Krakatoa) on the outside of the Line; while there are dark-coloured rocks that give rise to rounded hills from which flow copious amounts of benign lavas (Mauna Loa) within it.
When the Line was adduced, the science of plate tectonics was unknown; the mechanics are better understood today, and I shall return to them later.
For now the geologists' definition is sufficient: the tectonic Pacific is a body that is only about 70 per cent of the area of the conventionally accepted Ocean, and omits the coasts of all the South American and most of the South-East-Asian countries.
This is a definition which, while perhaps satisfying the intellectual appetites of a few myopic geophysicists, and considerably more satisfying than that of the Pentagon, still bears little relation to reality.
Yet neither does what we might call ‘the economists’ Pacific'.
This, though, is probably the most popular modern vision of the Pacific — a vision of a place of unbridled growth, vigour and wealth, one that has helped to spawn modish concepts like the Pacific Rim, the Pacific Basin and the Pacific Community (each of which will be considered in detail later).
But the ‘Pacific’ which has led to such thinking is a  very different place from that dreamed up by soldiers or geologists, and once again is some way removed from the real, warts-and-all Pacific to which later chapters will be devoted.
It is a collection of those countries which generally have two things in common: they abut on to the ocean, and they are in some positive — always positive — way economically or politically vibrant.
Japan is a good example, invariably on every list, as is the other side of that particular economic equation, the United States; South Korea is always there too; Taiwan invariably; Hong Kong and Singapore usually; the Philippines on occasion.
Some countries — Australia, Fiji, New Guinea, Mexico — are included in some definitions, omitted from others.
And a whole host of other countries — North Korea, Chile, the Solomon Islands, Colombia — hardly ever get counted by the practitioners of the dismal science, despite their admirably Pacific qualities.
So a Pacific as defined by such minds might fall within the appropriate longitudes and latitudes, but it would be riddled with holes, a discontinuous mess, a collection of unconnected pieces of sea and land established principally to prove an argument about an entity of which they make up only a fraction.
The geographers and the oceanographers, politically disinterested a corps d'elite as they are, offer us two uncomplicated versions of the Pacific.
The first is what we might call the ‘technical Pacific’— that immense body of water lying to the seaward of all the island arcs and groups within the Ocean's obvious continental margins.
It is in places almost congruent with the tectonic Pacific; its outline follows the Andesite Line along the western margin of the Pacific plate, from Kamchatka to Christchurch.
But on the eastern margin it keeps its own counsel: instead of heading out to sea to follow the line of the Easter Island Ridge, this Pacific Ocean boundary stretches (with only three minor hiccups) directly down the American coasts, from Attu Island in the Aleutians to Diego Ramirez Island off Cape Horn.
This is thus the most nearly recognizable of all the Pacifics we have considered so far.
However, it is the next and last version which can most reasonably be regarded as the true Pacific.
This uses the technically-defined Ocean as above, except that all the hiccups that interrupt the passage of  its boundary have been removed by the relatively simple process of granting to it all of the so-called ‘marginal seas’ to which logic (and political reality) suggest it can lay claim.
The three hiccups on the American coast are the Gulf of Alaska, the vast and confusing mess of nameless bays and inlets and fiords between Skagway and Vancouver, and the Gulf of California.
Excluded from the technical Pacific, these are now part of the real Pacific.
Would that the other coasts were so simple!
To perform the same task on the other side of the world, the following eleven major seas — all on the continental side of the Andesite Line, all secure on their own tectonic plates — need to be included (we are proceeding northwards and clockwise, from a point somewhere south of New Zealand): the Tasman, Solomon, Coral, Bismarck, Philippine, South China, East China and Yellow Seas, the Seas of Japan and of Okhotsk and the Bering Sea.
There are lesser seas which must also be included, in particular the fifteen around the islands of the East Indian archipelago: the Sulu, Celebes and Molucca Seas, the Gulf of Tomini, the Halmahera, Ceram, Banda, Arafura (which may or may not contain the Gulf of Carpentaria, depending on which atlas is used), Timor and Flores Seas, the Gulf of Boni, the Bali Sea, the Makassar Strait, the Java and Savu Seas; and there is the Gulf of Thailand, the Strait of Malacca, the Singapore Strait and the Inland Sea of Japan.
Add to this the Great Australian Bight and the Bass Strait — for if we did not, it would be difficult to regard Australia as a Pacific nation, which would indeed be a foolish error — and we have arrived at what seems the most appropriate and comprehensive definition of our goal: one oceanic bloc, twenty-four marginal Seas (of which one is designated Inland), five Gulfs, four Straits, one Canadian Confusion and one Australian Bight.
All told that is some 69,370,000 square miles (and 173,700,000 cubic miles) of sea (though the Scottish mapmakers Bartholomew omit all the waters south of Australia, as well as the Timor and the Savu Seas, and come up with a total of 67 million square miles).
Whatever the precise total, it is through these waters — found north and south of the 13,235 uninterrupted miles separating Malaysia from Colombia, and east and west of the 9,600 miles lying between Big Diomede Island in the Bering Strait and the Cape Adare in Antarctica — that the axis of the world, some would have us believe, is now turning.
The Ocean thus defined is almost immeasurably vast, its size only imaginable in terms of other immensities.
Its area takes up fully one third of the entire earth's surface; it makes up half of the World Ocean.
Twice as large as the Atlantic and getting on for three times the size of the Indian Ocean, it is bigger than all the land surface of the earth, including Antarctica, and with Africa counted twice.
It has the deepest sea known — 36,200 feet, nearly seven miles.
Not unexpectedly, perhaps, it contains that spot on the world's surface that is most distant from land — where the longitude 118° 30'W intersects 47° 30'S is an equal 1,560 miles from the nearest coasts of Chile, peter Island in Antarctica and an uninhabited British colonial possession, a member of the Pitcairn group called Ducie Island.
Moreover it is, as so vastly important a body of water perhaps should be, the original ocean of the world, the so-called Panthalassa.
If one accepts (and not everyone does: there are some vocal Soviet opponents of the idea) the theory of continental drift propounded by Alfred Wegener, then the present configuration of the planet derives from the break-up of a single super-continent which he called Pangea, which comprised two lesser continents called Gondwanaland and Laurasia, and a shallow marginal sea named the Tethys.
Some then inexplicable process forced the supercontinents to break into immense component pads which became (in the case of Gondwanaland) Africa, South America, India, Antarctica and Australia and (in the case of Laurasia), North America, Europe and continental Asia.
The slow fission of Gondwanaland produced two oceans — the Indian, where Africa, India and Antarctica were hauled away from each other; and the southern portion of the Atlantic, where South America and its clearly closely-fitting neighbour Africa (which possessed an uncanny coastal match first noted by Francis Bacon) sprang apart.
Laurasia's similar explosion gave rise to the North Atlantic, and the Tethys was widened to produce the Mediterranean and all the other shallow seas that decorate the central parts of Asia and southern Russia.
But Panthalassa, as Wegener called it, had already been born.
The events that he suggested (his theory fell out of favour in the Twenties, and has only been revived since the study of palaeomagnetism indicated the strong likelihood that the continents had drifted, and in continuous directions at regular velocities) were supposed to have started to take place 600 million years ago.
The Panthalassic sea that supposedly surrounded the proto-continents is thus at least that old.
Australia drifted up and into it (and is still drifting northwards, at an infinitesimal rate); but very little else.
The immense, landless mass of Pacific water is more or less as it always has been.
Its size and its stability have come about largely because, unlike the other oceans, the Pacific is made essentially of one tectonic plate — one of the eight plates that cover the surface of the earth.
Plate tectonics appears to be the device, unexplained in Wegener's day, that permits the continents to drift: it is a process whereby the rigid, relatively cool plates that cover the earth's hot and partially plastic asthenosphere, forty miles down, shift slowly about, colliding and separating from the other plates by turn.
The processes that occur when these plates meet is now thought to form the basis of all the planet's tectonic processes — from the formation of continents and mountain chains to the making of ocean deeps, island arcs, volcanoes and earthquakes.
The structure of the Pacific — its enormous, landless centre, its contorted and congested peripheries — is due entirely to the plates of which it is constructed and the manner in which they have moved in relation to each other.
I have mentioned that the Ocean's enormity and stability derives from the dominant presence of one plate — the Pacific Plate.
Probably the largest on the earth's surface, to me it bears a passing resemblance to a somewhat distorted version of a face that was popular in Eighties amusement arcades — that belonging to a creature called Pac-Man.
If it is possible to conjure up such an image, then imagine the ‘head’ facing to the left, the west.
The top of the ‘head’— the northern boundary of the plate — runs from the Alaskan coast near Seward, along the line of the Aleutian Islands to the Komandorsklye Islands off Kamchatka.
The top of the ‘face’ then runs along the Kuril Islands to Japan, staying always on the ocean side of these chains — down through the Marianas  — Saipan, Guam, Palau — to a point just east of the Spice Islands, which played so large a part in the saga of Magellan and his attempted circumnavigation.
Then Pac-Man's ‘mouth’ begins — a jaw that turns inward, eastward, along the northern coast of New Guinea, through New Britain, the Solomons, the Torres Islands, the New Hebrides and New Caledonia.
Next the upper jaw ends, the lower begins, the outline turning back south-westwards through Samoa, Tonga and the Kermadec Islands to the Bay of Plenty in New Zealand (where, in a typical display of tectonic activity, there was a major earthquake with considerable damage and injury in 1987).
The lower jawbone continues through both the North and South Islands of New Zealand until it reaches the ‘chin’, then begins a slow doubling back along an unseen series of mid-oceanic ridges that curve through the roaming forties, become the back of Pac-Man's skull and turn back up towards warmer water, surfacing briefly as Easter Island and the pinnacles of Sala y Gomez, and joining the scalp and the hairline at the Mexican coast, Baja California and the west coasts of America, Canada and, finally, Alaska once more.
This great plate — adorned with a few ‘hot spots’, where plumes of magma have spurted to the surface randomly to form such agglomerations of islands as the Hawaiian chain, the Marquesas, the Tuamotos, the Tubuais and that tiny British possession the Pitcairn group — is almost universally deep, has a floor covered with siliceous oozes and red clays and is dotted with millions of volcanic abyssal hills discovered by the trailing of arrays of echo-sounders.
Most important, though, is the fact that the Pacific Plate is moving.
It is floating, propelled by convection currents deep in the mantle, at between six and sixteen centimetres a year, towards the north-west.
This movement, which though tiny in real time is immense in the aeons of geological time, is wholly responsible for the other dramatic features of the Pacific.
For there are other plates surrounding the Pacific Plate and they jostle and crash against each other, like ice floes at break-up time; and as they jostle so they tide up against each other , pushing each other deeper, cracking and bending as they do so — only on a global scale, and with extraordinary consequences.
There are essentially two processes at work, one to be seen at the western edge of the Pacific and the other towards the east.
In the west, the Pacific Plate meets two other major plates, the Eurasian and the Indo-Australian.
The collision is slow, mighty and spectacular.
What is believed to happen (and plate tectonics is still only a matter of intelligent conjecture, not amenable to the kind of proof most sciences demand) is that the Pacific Plate, being composed of heavier, oceanic rocks hits the Continental Plate and is forced down beneath it —‘subducted’, and propelled hundreds of kilometres downwards, towards the region of the mantle where it melts and becomes the stuff of volcanoes once again.
It takes a little of the Continental Plate with it, producing a rare and exotic melt of rock; and as it goes down and melts, and as its volume changes and its physical chemistry alters, so this deep-diving mess of ocean rock contorts and winces, and deep-seated earthquakes and violent eruptions occur.
The subduction takes place at an angle — the Pacific Plate is being forced down, but forced onwards too, so the line of its descent is a gentle plane inclined at perhaps 30°.
The eruptions, however, occur directly above the point of strain in the asthenosphere where they happen — meaning that a line of volcanoes and volcanic islands occurs to the landward side of the colliding plates.
Between the islands and the edge of the two plates is one further feature — a series of ultra-deep trenches in the sea-bed, where the Pacific Plate is being forced down to meet its original maker.
The order, then, is always the same: Pacific Plate, trench, volcanic island, earthquake zone, Continental Plate.
And it is repeated time and again around the Ocean's western margin.
Take, for instance, the North Pacific.
As one progresses outward from the sea, there is the classic order: the Japan trench; the Japanese Islands; Fuji-san; the great Kansei earthquake zone; the Sea of Japan; the Asian continent; Siberia.
Or again, further south, in the true West Pacific, the order once more: the New Guinea trench; New Guinea; the volcanoes of Manam, Kaul and Long Islands; deep-seated earthquakes; the stable continental mountain ranges of Central New Guinea; the continent of Australia.
The line of trenches indicates precisely where the Pacific subduction zone begins, exactly where the Pacific Plate collides with its neighbours.
The Aleutian trench is thus where it hits the North American Plate; the trenches of Kurlin, Japan, Bonin, Mariana (the deepest in the world, with a hole of 36,201 feet), Yap, Palau and Manus indicate its collision with the Eurasian Plate; the Mussau, Solomon, Vitiaz, Torres and New Hebrides trenches show where the Pacific Plate overrides the subducted Indo-Australian Plate; and the Tonga, Kermadec, Hikurangi, Hjort, Iselin and Balleny trenches demonstrate the effect of bumping into the same Indo — Australian Plate and passing beneath it.
And on the landward side of all the trenches (except those between the Solomons and the New Hebrides, where they are on the seaward side) are the island chains — Japan to New Zealand — whose birth is in whole or in part a consequence of all that colliding and jostling beneath the blue horizons.
The reverse is happening in the eastern part of the Ocean.
Here the Pacific Plate, bowed, stretched and strained by its westward movement, is moving away from its neighbour — in this case a relatively small fragment of lithosphere known as the Nazca plate.
And the very opposite processes obtain: instead of cold rock being forced down, hot rock springs up to fill the void between the two separating plates.
A line of oozing volcanic vents — a sharp, steep ridge below the sea surface — runs from San Diego, via Easter Island south-westwards.
Along this line new ocean floor is being generated: the material lost by being subducted into the mantle is being replaced by black coils of basalt easing their way out of cracks and fissures on the sea-bottom.
This sea-floor spreading, as the phenomenon is known, is happening at an impressive rate: near the Galapagos Islands the sea-floor is expanding at eight inches a year; down by Easter Island, by nine inches.
It is a process of oceanic generation and destruction — generation in the middle, destruction at the outer edges — that is peculiar to the Pacific Ocean.
(The Atlantic, though dominated by an enormous mid-ocean ridge where new sea-floor is being created at a modest rate of about an inch a year, is home to only two very small subduction zones, with volcanoes and trenches, in the Caribbean and the South Sandwich Islands, and therefore is not being destroyed at its edges as rapidly as it is being created in the middle; the Indian Ocean is similarly undramatic — a mid-ocean ridge once again, but a single subduction zone where its eastern plate collides with the  Eurasian Plate and produces the volcanoes that — like Krakatoa — line the southern side of the islands of Java, Sumatra and Timor.)
There is, finally, one other possible relationship that mobile plates can enjoy: those which neither collide nor diverge may simply slip past each other, rotating in relation to one another around some imagined pole.
This is happening right now in the eastern Pacific — the Pacific Plate is sliding north-westwards, while the North American Plate is sliding south-eastwards, and the two strain and rub as they do so.
Enormous tension can build up along the margin of the two plates and occasionally explodes into immense earthquakes which can, if they strike inhabited portions of the land suffice, wreak terrible damage.
One such place where the two plates are edging past each other is at the San Andreas fault in Northern California: the consequences of a major release of tension along that line are too well-known, and too horrific, to bear repeating here.
The earthquake of October 1989 reminded San Franciscans of the awesome power of the thing.
In summary, the Pacific is not simply the biggest and the deepest quarter of the world ocean.
It is the most active and most geologically interesting — a test-bed, an ever-mobile demonstration of all the major forces and processes that shape the great structures of the planet.
Vulcanologists and headline-writers talk about the ‘Ring of Fire’, the ‘Halo of Energy’ that surrounds and encloses the Pacific; there are 336 active volcanoes surrounding the Pacific, as against a mere 94 in all the Atlantic and Indian Oceans.
The phrases have become metaphors, some writers suggest, for all the zest and excitement that drives the Pacific's inhabitants ever onward.
And they are indeed appropriate metaphors — for this, geophysically-speaking, is where the planet's action really is, the axis of the earth's creativity, the centre of its growth.
The eponymous notion of Ferdinand Magellan's men that the Mar del Sur was a Pacific sea, blessed by fine weather and pleasant breezes, was more or less coded — at least, for that region of the Ocean through which they first sailed and where their optimism was at its height.
But elsewhere — particularly to the west of the Date Line, and north of the 40th parallel — the Pacific can be anything but Pacific, and may be as savagely destructive as any stretch of water known.
The general weather system of the Pacific is determined by the  emptiness and uninterrupted smoothness of the Ocean — of the area above which, as all over the planet, air pressures build and wind patterns develop.
No vast islands with walls of rock or ice stand to disrupt the progress of the wind.
There are no sand deserts or snowfields or rain forests to lift or deflect the breezes, or raise or lower the temperature.
So the climate conforms almost totally — to the east of the Date Line — to what is called the planetary weather system, the theoretical system of winds and pressures that would exist if the earth was a near-perfect spheroid unencumbered with continents, mountain chains and other complicating nuisances.
Winds blow as they should, in the directions that physics tells us they should, at the right speed and in the proper season.
The steadiness of the breezes is quite remarkable: nowhere else on earth is the weather so stable.
Nor so perfect.
In the region of the trades — the south-easterlies (between the equator and Capricorn) and the north-easterlies (to the north of the equator, up to the Tropic of Cancer)— one can count on endless days and weeks of steady, 13-knot winds, a delightful lack of high humidity and temperature, and skies that are either cloudless or decorated with small white patches of flat-bottomed cumulus cloud, always poised a third of a mile above the sea.
It is perfect sailing weather: a yacht can cast off from San Diego in January, coast southwards before a good southerly blow and then catch the trades which will take her almost clear across to the Philippine Islands without the need for a single sail change.
There will never be more than a stray shower; the waves will never be more than three feet high, with a scattering of white horses when the breeze runs into double figures.
No sailor who has ever crossed the tropical Pacific at the right season will forget the idyll of the passage.
However, the weather is very different to the west of a sinuous line that curves down from a point off the east coast of Japan and then very roughly parallels, a thousand miles out, the outline of Asia — curving in towards Borneo, out over New Guinea, down around the Solomons.
The simplicity and pleasing symmetry of the trades is suddenly quite destroyed by the influence of the Asian land mass and its monsoonal — seasonal — climate.
The immense summer heat of the Asian deserts, the low pressures they generate above them, the consequently varying winds — all these features dominate the weather of the western Pacific (and much more so in the northern hemisphere, where the ocean is overshadowed by two immense land  masses, compared with the relatively landless margins south of the equator).
So in winter the trade winds are strengthened and diverted, and are almost reversed in summer.
Good south-westerly blows are dominant during the Asian summer; cold north-easterlies during the winter.
The change from one monsoon to another can be sudden, and dramatic.
One February evening I was in a ship, northbound through the South China Sea.
It was bitterly cold, the chill wind roaring down from Siberia raising immense grey seas, through which the ship plunged head-to in clouds of spume.
The crew all looked liverish and unhappy.
But by next morning the gales had dropped — though it was still very cold — and the sea was glassy, doldrum-like.
Then by lunchtime a line of waxy, yellow-white clouds was spotted abaft by the starboard lookout, and before long a breath of hot and humid air was wafting over a ship which, in a matter of moments — since its metal was still so cold — was dripping with condensation.
By nightfall the air was tropical, the humidity was unbearable and every fan was on, every punkah louvre open and every air conditioner roaring away.
In no more than twenty hours and with 400 sea-miles beneath our keel, the miserable Asian winter had given way to the equally miserable Asian summer, and all newcomers on the ship knew full well what the monsoon was all about.
But however unpleasant monsoonal conditions can on occasion be, they are as nothing compared with the fearsome storms that hurl themselves on the Pacific with terrible regularity.
The Atlantic and the Indian Ocean receive their due share of tropical cyclonic storms too, but in the Pacific, because of its vastness, they are visitations of destruction and tragedy like nowhere else in the world.
The storms have different names, depending on where they are generated and where they hit.
In the north-east Pacific, they are known as hurricanes ; in the south-west, as cyclones .
In a long stretch of vulnerable Asian land between Vietnam and Japan they are typhoons — the Chinese words for ‘big wind’; in the Philippines, which suffer each summer from the most dreadful storms, they are baguios ; on the west costs of Mexico and Central America,cordonazos ; and in north-western Australia,willy-willies .
Officially, in the neutral world of the meteorologists, they are known as tropical revolving storms — the most energetic and destructive of all the planet's natural surface phenomena.
The storms seem to be formed in the strangely disturbed band of atmosphere that lies athwart the equator between the two trade wind regions, and is known as the intertropical convergence zone.
How and why they form is still not known; all that can be said with certainty is that winds begin to twirl anti-clockwise around a fixed point of steadily diminishing atmospheric pressure, and this circulating system then begins to move, invariably in a westerly direction, its internal pressure steadily falling and the gales inside it picking up speed as it does so.
By the time the storm is fully formed it may be as much as 400 miles wide, moving at perhaps 20 miles an hour, and with winds near its core raging at well over 100 miles an hour.
If this beast then hits land, there can be destruction on a titanic scale — floods, ruined houses, uprooted trees, broken bridges, the ruin of crops and the death of livestock, and loss of human life.
In the less well-developed countries, where warnings of impending storms are poor and precautions minimal, whole tracts of countryside can be inundated, entire villages swept away, vast communities decimated.
India suffers terribly; the Philippines too; and the low-lying Parts of eastern China.
In Hong Kong, where there is a well-oiled storm warning machine piloted by the staff of the ancient Royal Observatory, the entire community becomes rather gaily caught up in the summertime ritual of typhoon watch.
Idle — or perhaps not so idle — mention may be made on the radio news of a distant tropical depression known to be forming somewhere close to an exotic and encouragingly far away island — Yap, maybe, or Truk, or the northern Matianas.
The colony pricks up its ears.
The circulating system wanders a little closer, deepens, is classified under a new title — a moderate tropical storm — and is given a name, Agnes perhaps, or Bob, an innocent, unassuming, rather cosy, old-fashioned sort of name that makes no connection in anybody's mind with a swirling mass of warm air and piled clouds that is bearing down on the coast, thunder and lightning flickering from its belly, the waves beneath it being whipped up into a fury.
Across in Hong Kong the marine department raises a single beacon on a flagpole on Green Island, the No. 1 signal: all Hong Kong is now formally aware that a typhoon may be forming within 500 miles.
Next day Agnes (if that is what the storm is called) keeps to a westerly track, hurrying a little more, deepening a little more.
Now it has been upgraded still further to a severe tropical storm: winds at the centre, measured by radar and by American air force planes despatched from the big bases in Japan and the Philippines, are gusting to eighty miles an hour.
Shipping is advised to keep well clear, and masters begin to make the complicated storm-avoidance manoeuvres well known to those familiar with these waters in this summer season.
In Hong Kong the No. 3 warning is hoisted: a little coloured blip appears at the bottom left of the colony's television screens, a constant reminder that a typhoon alert may soon be declared and the emergency drills so well practised in the territory brought into force.
And already the thin strands of cloud, the outer rings of the immense, whirling storm, begin to drift over the southern islands — Po Toi, Sung Kong, Waglan Island, the Ninepins — and the wind and the waves begin to bustle about in the harbours.
The junks start to roll heavily in the swell.
Fishermen on the distant banks beat for home.
The old sampan-ladies begin to tie up their wares, wrapping everything in layers of black plastic and hessian sacking.
The typhoon shelters at Aberdeen and Mong Kok start to fill with craft, their prudent masters and owners looking uneasily at the eastern sky as it blackens and darkens, and as the wind begins to sing in the telephone wires, the unsecured edges of roofs begin to flap and creak, and the streets are busy with flying litter, and dust.
And then, shortly before noon next day the Observatory announces that Typhoon Agnes will strike Hong Kong, head on, imminently.
The No. 8 signal is raised and the colony goes into its well-known emergency rituals.
Schools empty.
Shops shut down.
All businesses, factories, financial markets, the airports — everything — are declared closed.
The entire colony scurries home.
The Star Ferry keeps on going, its little green ships bucking across the harbour in the growing swell until the last stragglers from Kowloon have made it to Hong Kong, and those bound north from the island have reached their goal.
And then, for ten, twenty, forty hours or so the millions sit back to watch the show as the huge tropical storm lashes and  bursts and howls its way around the islands, shaking, shuddering and drenching the place as if it held all the concentrated fury of nature and had decided to unleash it upon this one unfortunate spot.
To go out in a Hong Kong typhoon is to experience an almost pleasurable madness.
The banshee-like wail of the wind is majestic.
It is almost impossible to stand up, and you haul yourself from building to building, from stanchion to stanchion as if on board a ship rounding the Horn in a nor'wester.
The air is dangerously alive with the objects — pieces of tin, small stones, branches, tiles — being hurled along by the wind.
The horizontal rain stings like grazing bullets.
You only venture outside once.
Most people who have been seasoned by these violent irruptions stay indoors, where they hold typhoon parties, or watch the progress of the storm on the television.
On every channel earnest-looking men with maps and pointers, looking like war-gamers in some fiendish Pentagon basement, demonstrate — predict, even — the inch-by-inch path that the storm is taking, noting that it usually passes off to the north, but may perhaps curve back upon itself and go in for a second strike.
But then, with a final burst of rain and a final howl of the gale, it is all over — the only cyclonic visitation of the year, perhaps.
The storm signals are reduced in urgency, from No. 8 to 3, to 1, and then the last is taken away.
The dead and injured — and often there are casualties, particularly in the poorer areas, or the more remote parts of the New Territories countryside — are taken away; the power lines and landslips are repaired; the beached ships are tugged off the reefs; the cost is counted; and the colonials take to watching, with a curious mixture of pride and nostalgia, as the storm —‘our Agnes’ they'll call it — wanders away, does some more smashing and battering in Taiwan or the Yangtze valley before petering out, quite spent, and becomes just another statistic for the record books.
The truly mighty storms are remembered for years, though the frequency of destructive typhoons is depressingly high in some corners of the Pacific — the Philippines, for instance, and Japan.
In 1979 alone, for instance, devastating storms named Cecil, Irving, Mac, Sarah and Vera struck the Philippines: three in Luzon, one in Leyte, one off Samar.
In one storm, 46 inches of rain fell in 24 hours.
And unlike Hong Kong, the Philippines is ill prepared for  floods, high winds and landslips, and there is invariably much loss of life, generally ignored by the rest of the uninterested world.
There is one final and decidedly non-Pacific phenomenon that occurs only in this ocean — the tsunami.
This tidal wave is a product of the combined efforts of the jostling of the crustal plates and the behaviour of the deep Ocean through which the resulting shock waves are transmitted: a small nudge in southern Chile can set up a wave that streaks across the entire Pacific in a matter of hours, with unimaginably enormous force.
In deep water the travelling wave may be only a few feet high: but on those rare occasions when such waves reach shallow water, or coastlines, they can rear up and explode with fearful consequences.
The infamous Chilean case, in May 1960, began with an earthquake deep in the subduction zone between the Nazca and the South American Plates: scores of people died near the town of Puerto Montt.
But it was the resulting tsunami that did the greater damage: it lumbered away to the north-west, speeding up and gathering energy as it did so.
It hit Hawaii fifteen hours later, wrecking boats and beaches, ruining the Waikiki tourist trade; and twenty-four hours after being triggered in southern Chile, it hit Japan, 10,000 miles north.
When it hit it was travelling at more than 400 miles an hour: no one expected it, and hundreds of Japanese living along the coasts of Hokkaido and Honshu were drowned.
Warning stations were then established all over the Ocean, and a big ‘tsunami early warning system’ was set up in Hawaii, an island chain through which all major long-haul waves, it is reckoned, were bound to pass.
The almost ceaseless trade winds of the central Pacific propel the Ocean's surface waters westward on both sides of the equator, forming the basis of the two enormous — but essentially very simple — circulatory systems of currents that dominate the Ocean.
The two equatorial currents, interleaved by the equatorial counter-current, take waters from the American coast across to New Guinea and Mindanao: then one heads north, taking warm water to the Japanese coast as the Kuro Shio.
This warm water collides, at around 36°N, with the southbound cold Oya Shio — part of the small, anti-clockwise current system in the Bering Sea — causing huge and navigationally hazardous fog banks to form, four days out of ten.
The main north Pacific current system continues in a clockwise direction — the mixed, cooling waters of the Bering Sea and the Kuro current turning east and then, when they reach the coast in the region  of Seattle, turning south to form the cold California current, source of all the San Francisco fogs and a challenge for the more courageous of Oregon sea-swimmers.
Much the same takes place, though in mirror-image, in the south Pacific.
The southern equatorial current is diverted south, past the Solomon Islands, and goes on to bathe the Great Barrier Reef — and, indeed, much of the Australian coastline down past Sydney — in the tropical water of the east Australian current.
It then turns east, joining the endless eastern drift of the southern Ocean current, before heading back up north once again along the coast of Chile and Peru, as the Peru current.
Although there is no South Pacific equivalent of the foggy collision of the Kuro Shio and the Oya Shio, there is one crucially important peculiarity about the currents off the South American coast which has a bearing on the economic livelihood of tens of thousands of people.
It is associated with a phenomenon known, somewhat inelegantly, as upwelling .
Upwelling occurs when offshore winds — like, in this case, the south-easterly trades — persistently drive water away from the land, and the sea replaces that water by allowing cold bottom water to well up from below.
The effect off the coast of Ecuador is twofold: first, the waters off the Ecuadorian coast (a few degrees north and south of the equator) are unusually cold — indeed, so powerful is the upwelling that a belt of this oddly cold water extends west from Ecuador for nearly 3,000 miles.
The second, and economically important, consequence is that the ‘new’ water from the ocean bottom is dense with phosphate, nitrates and many other nutrients liked by planktonic life — with the result that this belt of water is stiff with plankton.
The food chain being what it is, these same waters are alive with fish, and the skies and islands are dense with birds.
Fishermen scurry all over the seas catching anchovies; quarrymen have long made a living scraping guano from the bird-rich islands.
All told, the upwelling of the cold waters of the south-eastern Pacific has long been a source of considerable economic importance.
But occasionally, and for reason not quite understood, the upwelling suddenly stops.
The trade winds weaken, the waters off the Ecuadorian coast are not pushed relentlessly out to sea, there is no consequent need for any replenishment.
In addition the lack of upwelling allows a tongue of the equatorial counter-current  (which normally passes into and flails pointlessly about in the Gulf of Panama) to head further south, into the region of the northbound Peru current.
In the years when this inexplicable phenomenon occurs — and it usually happens around Christmas, and so is known by the local fishermen as El Niño — the plankton suddenly vanish, the fish die and the birds fly away or are left to starve and rot.
The fishermen come back with their holds empty; the islands have neither birds nor guano; it is said that the strength of the smell of the gases from the millions of tons of decaying fish is such that it can blacken the hull of a passing ship — a phenomenon known as the Callao Painter.
The gallows humour disguises the very real misery that El Niño causes; not only are there no fish to harvest, but the arrival of the rogue current, reaching down all those unfamiliar and unwelcome degrees of latitude, invariably causes heavy rains, soil erosion, landslips and added misery to the towns along the Peruvian and Ecuadorian coast.
During the last ninety years El Niño, one of the Pacific Ocean's more enigmatic problems, has occurred nine times — in 1891, 1925, 1941, 1953, 1958, 1965, 1973, 1976 and 1983.
The mechanisms of the upper atmosphere and the deep sea that cause it to spoil so many Larin Christmas times are still unknown; but there is beguiling evidence that whenever El Nin-o appears in the Pacific, so the monsoon rains in India are perilously sparse, the winters in the continental USA are unusually harsh, and there is a further episode of drought in that wretched quarter of Africa known as the Sahel.
Further study is necessarily being completed; but the evidence of linkage between the simultaneous appearance of climatic phenomena in Kansas, Chad, Bihar and in the south — eastern Pacific Ocean suggests what all geographers have known for many years — that the globe works as one complete system, one vast interactive machine, and that the divisions man has forced upon it are no more than crudely artificial devices for our own intellectual convenience.
The resources presently known to exist on or beneath the land surface of the Pacific are stupendous in their extent and importance.
There are few diamonds to be found, nor is there much cocoa; and considering the amount of space the Pacific commands it might seem a little odd (unless one remembers the geology) that only a fifth of the world's proven oil reserves are there.
(Most of those lie off the  minute sheikdom of Brunei and are the personal property of the Sultan, who is in consequence the world's richest man.
Brunei is also the world's wealthiest country, with a GNP per inhabitant of $21,000, half as much again as that of the United States.)
But just about everything else exists, and in spades.
There is more than half the world's coal — much of it in Manchuria; half the world's uranium — much of it in Australia; half the world's natural gas; nine-tenths of the silk, 67 per cent of the cotton, 63 per cent of the wool; huge iron mines, great deposits of silver and, it has lately been found, a girdle of epithermal gold lodged in the volcanic rocks from the Solomon Islands to northern Japan.
Lihir Island, off the west coast of New Ireland (itself sitting off the north coast of Papua New Guinea) is said to have the world's largest gold deposit — though as it sits inside a volcano the deeper the miners dig, the hotter they get.
In terms of similarly world-beating deposits, there is nickel in New Caledonia (the mining establishment once ruled the island in the name of France); aluminium at Weipa on the Cape York peninsula of Queensland; iron in the Hamersley Range of Western Australia; lead, zinc and silver at Broken Hill; uranium near Darwin and in the tiny Queensland town called Mary Kathleen; copper and lead at Mount Isa, whose smokestack is the tallest structure in northern Australia.
Malaysia has the world's biggest tin deposits, while the South Jianxi and Guangdong provinces of China are rumoured to have the most tungsten.
The Ok Tedi mine in Papua New Guinea seeks to reduce to ground zero a massive mountain of copper capped with a summit of gold.
There is yet more ‘tungsten in the Yukon, vast deposits of copper and molybdenum in Arizona, still more copper and molybdenum in both northern and central Chile.
And dotted in mines and quarries from New Zealand clockwise around to Easter Island, the ocean is littered with cobalt, zirconium, titanium, antimony and almost everything else under the sun.
And with almost every mineral, so also every kind of food and crop.
There is rice in abundance, of course: China, Japan, Indonesia, Thailand, Burma, Vietnam and Korea produce (and then consume) most of the world's annual crop of 400 million tons of the grain of Oryza sativa .
(Of the centres of the world's rice culture, only India and Bangladesh lie outside the region we have defined as the Pacific.)
Most of the world's beef, mutton, pork, fish, eggs, wheat, wool, cotton, sugar, groundnuts, palm oil, soyabeans, bananas, tea, oranges and pineapples come from Pacific countries: only wine, potatoes, apples, cocoa and milk come predominantly from countries beyond the Pacific pale.
However, the distribution of all this food is patchy.
There is still real malnutrition to be found in islands of the Philippine archipelago.
I have seen children with the classic symptoms of kwashiorkor — distended bellies and rheumy eyes — sitting aimlessly in dingy hospitals outside silent sugar mills on Negros Island, and wondered how such tropic abundance could possibly spawn such misfortune.
Nutritionists and cartographers still draw the so-called ‘hunger line’ through Asia and the Americas; the poorer people who live in those countries that are sandwiched between Mexico and Chile, and between North Korea and New Guinea, exist on diets of fewer than 2,250 calories a day, and thus go to bed each night hungry.
And herein, of course, lies one of the ruder ironies of the Pacific: that among all this economic vibrancy and dynamism there are still the familiar evils we currently associate only with Africa, or with countries that are at war: illiteracy, hunger, a vertiginous growth of population, disease, overcrowding, slums.
Beside the glitter of all the Pacific wealth there are still pockets — becoming ever smaller, the governments and their statisticians insist — where the unhappiness and squalor of the inhabitants remain an insult, a disfiguring blot on the Ocean's otherwise gleaming escutcheon.
As their national borders are currently defined, and as this book has decided to define the Pacific, thirty-three countries lie around the margins of the Ocean.
Twenty-three more lie within it.
They can be grouped, more or less efficiently, according' to the usual geographical rules.
The peripheral Pacific, for instance, can be divided into six.
Australia and New Zealand, originally settled by white Europeans and still following a generally Protestant tradition, are usually regarded together — though it is worth noting that if their native aborigines and Maoris still dominated their populations, both countries would be regarded as South-East Asian, joined ethnically and culturally across the Arafura Sea.
But in fact the Sea does divide this new Antipodean culture from the ancient traditions of South-East Asia, and so renders the countries separate and distinct from their neighbours.
The South-East Asian Pacific nations comprise, among others, the world's largest Islamic country, Indonesia; the only Asian Christian country, the Philippines; the world's richest country, Brunei; what is probably the world's poorest country, Kampuchea; the busiest  port-city, Singapore; as well as Thailand, Malaysia, Laos, Vietnam and Papua New Guinea.
The Gulf of Tonkin and the Vietnamese frontier is the arbitrary point at which South-East gives way to North-East Asia — the industrial powerhouse of the Pacific, the region that most economists and businessmen mean when they idly refer these days to ‘Asia’.
In terms of its population, China dominates, of course; but there is also the old Portuguese colony of Macau; the thoroughly modern British colony — though soon to be ‘retroceded’— of Hong Kong; the Republic of China on Formosa, now known as Taiwan; Japan; the two implacably hostile Koreas, North and South; and the Soviet Union.
The range of ideologies, climates, ethnic varieties, economic standing and futures apparent in this spread, between the islands of Hainan and Sakhalin, invariably defies imagination.
And then the Date Line is passed, and we are into a segment of the Pacific best known for its unrivalled prosperity and good fortune: here is the United States, sharing with Japan the suzerain's role; and, sandwiched between its two continental divisions, the Dominion of Canada.
Next, pushing further south, we enter what seems to be a perpetually troubled and impoverished region, between Tijuana and the Darién Gap — Mexico, distinguished in global terms these days solely by being the site of the planet's largest city — and a succession of Isthmian countries.
We tend to think of most Central American countries as somehow linked by the Caribbean Sea to the Caribbean islands and cultures; but all the republics have Pacific coastlines — and so Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras (with a scant 45 miles of Pacific shoreline along the Gulf of Fonseca), Nicaragua, Costa Rica and of course Panama can rightly (if pedantically) be thought of as Pacific nations.
Finally, the sixth Pacific segment contains those countries that, until lately, have been utterly excluded from consideration — those of South America.
Colombia, it is true, still seems to regard herself as an Atlantic nation — her trade goes principally through the Caribbean port of Cartagena rather than through the dire and crime-ridden  wharves of the Pacific port of Buenaventura; but Ecuador (which has island possessions in the Ocean) and Peru seem to be becoming further and further entwined in Pacific matters; and Chile — ah, Chile!
She, the ‘bootlace’ of Latin America, has the longest coastline of any country on the Pacific — 3,317 miles, longer by far than the entire Pacific coastline of Australia, which is a mere 2,450 miles from Cape York to Tasmania.
Although she is very much a latecomer, Chile is now furiously building her Pacific interests and ambitions.
The links she is forming — trade with China and Korea, New Zealand and Australia — are deliberately aimed at ensuring that Chile in particular, and South America in general , is becoming very much a legitimate partner in the Pacific of the future, no matter that the local cultures and traditions, -combined with the sheer distance from the Pacific's economic heartland, have always hitherto militated against the continent's inclusion.
Within this great encircling babel of tongues and cultures, aspirations and rivalries, lie the Pacific islands, regarded from afar as idyllic and palm-fringed and all more or less the same.
But they are not at all the same, being invariably grouped into three — Polynesia, Melanesia and Micronesia — on the basis of complicated formulae relating to the race of the islanders, their languages and their geography.
But in contrast to the sturdy independence of the encircling nations, many of the island-groups within have still to shake off the mastery of foreign powers, and remain in subjugation.
European colonizers have left their marks all over the central Pacific — in the name of protecting sea-lanes, submarine cable routes, or the native peoples themselves.
These marks have proved almost indelible.
For although the tide of imperialism has ebbed considerably in most of the remainder of the world, some of the Pacific islands are still too small and their governments too feeble to stand alone as independent states.
The consequence — and most would regard it as regrettable — is that old empires, or their sub-imperial nominees, look after them even now.
Not one of the three island groups escapes.
In Polynesia, the largest of the groups — an immense, tilted isosceles triangle of islands with its apex in New Zealand and its other angles in Hawaii and Easter Island respectively — only Western Samoa, Tuvalu and Tonga are now nominally independent.
France  has huge possessions — the Tahiti group, the Marquesas, the Tubuais and the Tuamotus, as well as those of Wallis and Futuna well to the west.
The New Zealand  government looks after the Cook Islands, Niue and Tokelau; the Americans have Samoa, and the British look after the four islands of the Pitcairn group, selling stamps for the islanders to help them keep up their revenues.
The Melanesian group, stretching in a broken line to the east of the immense and mountainous island of Papua New Guinea, includes the Solomons, Vanuatu and Fiji, each an independent, free-standing state; but the Australians look after Norfolk Island, and there are French possessions too, in New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands, with gendarmes, soldiers from Lyons and Marseilles, and offices of that wondrously-named bureaucracy, the DOM-TOM, which concerns itself with the Déartements Outres-Mer et Territoires Outres-Mer .
And finally the Micronesians, up in the northwest of the ocean — here Kiribati and Nauru are independent, Guam is a self-governing American territory, and the others — Yap, Ponape, Truk, Kosrae, the Marshall Islands and Palau — are part of the old post-war US Trust Territory, now doing their best to keep afloat.
It would be idle to pretend that any of the Pacific islands have the kind of economic importance possessed by, say, Korea, or Malaysia, but in addition to potentially immense political importance and no small amount of charm, they have a symbolic significance — for they are what the world still thinks of when confronted with the single word,Pacific .
The countries of the Pacific are now inhabited by half the world's people — 2,400 million of them.
The figure is slightly spurious, though.
Some countries — New Zealand, say, and Japan — are obviously wholly Pacific; but Australia, the United States and Canada are shared by the two oceans that lap their eastern and western shores; and Russia, at least in the years prior to the Gorbachev speech at Vladivostok, was a country whose traditions and ethnic roots were quite obviously Atlantic and Baltic.
To count the Soviet Union's  275 millions as ‘Pacific’ people is stretching the point a little, and it might be more appropriate to count only those living east of the Urals.
Similarly it might be proper to consider as ‘Pacific’ only those Americans who live west of De Soto, Missouri (the median point of the population, moving slowly ever-westward as the people do the same), or, in Australia, those east of Alice Springs.
But the complication of such an operation would be considerable; and it is reasonable to say that the entire population of the Pacific nations, even if they inhabit the Atlantic seaboard, can make use of the goods that are carried across the Pacific Ocean.
So, while noting that single caveat, the figure of 2,400 million can be allowed to stand.
Half the world's people, like one third of her surface area, is by this reckoning Pacific.
These Pacific peoples speak I, 200 of the world's languages.
Most of them, in number if not necessarily in influence, speak Mandarin Chinese.
A sizeable proportion — the Americans, Canadians, Australians, New Zealanders — have as their first language the most supranational of all tongues, English.
(And an even more sizeable fraction — nearly all Filipinos, for instance— have English as a back-up.)
Those living between Tijuana and Puerto Williams speak Spanish.
Some languages are peculiar to one region, yet intimately related to others beyond — like the 500 or so Austronesian tongues which not only link speakers in Vietnam and Cambodia with those in Fiji, Malaysia, the Philippines, Sulawesi and Borneo, but also reach out to the inland mountains of Taiwan, the North Island of New Zealand, and to the speakers of Dobu in the d'Entrecasteaux islands and of Trukese on Truk.
There are important languages only spoken in their countries of origin — Japanese, for instance, and Korean; some Pacific languages unrelated to each other or to any other linguistic group on earth: Ainu, for example , which is not spoken outside Hokkaido Island in Japan and has no relationship at all to Japanese; and Gilyak, which is used only by a very few people on Sakhalin Island — a place known only as being the birthplace of the actor Yul Brynner, and near where the Korean airliner KE 007 was shot down in 1983.
Superimposed upon this immense bewilderment is an equally confused gallimaufry of religions.
The Marind of New Guinea believe  that fire has its origins in sex, and so indulge in a rite whereby a girl has to be raped in order to keep that fire alight.
Some Melanesians worship the memory of President Lyndon Johnson.
Trobriand islanders use the tug-of-war, cricket, the collection of yams and great and freely expressed sexual enthusiasm as the planks of their complicated beliefs.
Anyone in Hong Kong with a problem — be it so trivial as to know which horse to place a bet on, or so crucial as to know whom to marry — can ask the god Won Tai Sin, whose temple is to be found in the middle of a vast housing estate in north Kowloon, and who came to fame by turning boulders into sheep.
Queensland aborigines believe they can sing a man to death, and indeed recently managed to sing the state's premier — a white man, a New Zealand migrant who cared little for ‘black fellows’— out of office.
Every Easter, a number of brave Filipino men allow themselves to be crucified — with real nails driven through their palms — in an attestation of their faith.
Basically, though, the line of 150°W longitude divides the Pacific into the religious groups that really matter, in terms of the Ocean's success.
To the east of that line the dominant religions belong to the Christian-Hebraic schools; to its west the societies have their roots in Confucian-Buddhist beliefs.
To the east are Roman Catholicism and Protestantism, Mormonism and Judaism, Jimmy Swaggart, Billy Graham and Oral Roberts.
To the west are Mahayana Buddhism, Shinto, Taoism and, in a strangely aberrant appearance, the Islam of Indonesia (and even more odd, Hinduism on the island of Bali).
Above all — though only formally practised by large numbers of zealots in South Korea — is Confucianism, a philosophical system now 2,500 years old, but which underpins the entire belief system of almost everyone who (whether under communist rule or not) lives between the Yalu River and Cape York.
And, as the Canadian writer Eric Downton put it in 1986, ‘societies with Confucian-Buddhist roots are proving more effective in coping with the industrial and technological challenges on the eve of the twenty-first century than [are those countries with a]predominantly Christian-Hebraic heritage.’
Confucianism, in other words, is central to the coming triumph of the region: we shall examine it in more detail later, and perhaps will come to recognize its new strength, its new status on the world's political and economic stage.
For the teachings of the Sage, suddenly, have established themselves as an almost indestructible Oriental adhesive, helping to bind so many of the region's member-societies together.
The Pacific, as is surely now evident, is an Ocean which, while long trying to assume some kind of unity, is plagued by a grossly inconvenient diversity.
It is after all, an entity which gives house room to people as different as Chilean gaucho and Japanese silk farmer, Californian software writer and Australian brewer, Tongan noble and Panamanian politician; it encompasses men and ideas more disparate and discordant than any to be found within the borders of any other physical entity on the planet.
But now — listeners insist — some distant harmonies are being heard.
Some trans-Pacific resonances are being detected, some symmetries noticed; there is some recognition of a sense of common purpose and design.
A few Atlanticists, as one might term the doubters, decline to recognize or admit that such things exist.
But to those for whom such patterns are becoming real, and for whom some rational explanation of the shift is required, then it can fairly be argued that the spreading ethic of Confucianism — exported in the last hundred years or so to every nation on and within the Pacific coastline by the tens of millions of overseas Chinese who have acted as its accidental evangelists — is crucial.
It can be argued that it has played a significant — one might even say the most significant — role in producing all those patterns and distant harmonies that are being recognized as signalling the onset of the Pacific Age.
APPROACHES
From a Peak in Darién
Towards the eastern end of the Republic of Panama, a few hundred yards away from a tiny Darién settlement known as Santa Fé, is a small somewhat dilapidated hut, roofed against the rains with sheets of rusting corrugated iron.
It is currently home to a family of Choco Indians, their head a middle-aged farmer known by the local people as William.
Not Guillermo, as might be expected in a Spanish-speaking community, but William,pur et simple .
William's life — like that of nearly everyone else in Santa Fe — appears to be both blameless and obscure, and is occupied principally with the farming of bananas and taro plants on the shallow hillsides that slope down to a sluggish tributary of the Rio Sabanas.
He has lived in his rickety hut for most of his fifty years.
His parents lived there once — and generations before them — on this patch of land, if not in this particular accommodation.
But now the earlier generations have all passed on, and today William's home is crowded with his wife, several small children, an assortment of chickens and a gaggle of small, excitable black pigs.
In short, it is very much the kind of hut in very much the kind of village with which Darién is amply overstocked.
Neither the village, nor the house, nor William is at all remarkable in any obvious way.
Except that in one rather less than obvious way, William is very special indeed.
There was one aspect of his life which had made him so — of which I had heard talk long before on some obscure wanderers' grapevine.
Via the half-reliable morsels of intelligence that pass from continent to continent along this jungle-drummed, smoke-signalled messageway, it appeared that William the Choco  of Santa Fé in Darién was possessed of an unusual link with a great historical moment.
He had insisted, so the story went, that he knew — and his knowledge was said to be based on information handed down from Choco ancestors long dead but unforgotten — what no one else in Panama knew (or apparently wanted to), and no one in the world of historical scholarship knew either.
This small shard of antiquarian knowledge which he claimed was the precise location of the hill, the peak in Darién, from which Vasco Núñez de Balboa was reputed to have first glimpsed the Pacific Ocean on the morning of Tuesday, 27 September 1513.
William, it was rumoured, could lead a man to the very spot where the Pacific Ocean was first seen by the first European explorer — a place in space and time that changed the historical progress of the world.
The story might or might not have been apocryphal.
William may or may not have been a rogue and charlatan; there are said to be many such in Panama, which as a crossroads for the modern world radiates a special magnetism for crews of ne'er-do-wells.
But I had been sufficiently intrigued by the stories I had heard of William to want to find out.
Accordingly, one winter's day when I was at a suitable jumping-off place in America, I decided to see if I could find him.
I had the somewhat faint hope that he might lead me to the place and permit me to stand where Balboa had stood — on the very peak which John Keats, with the kind of monumental mistakenness permitted under the principle of poetic licence — declared was occupied by:
…stout Cortez, when with eagle eyes He stared at the Pacific — and all his men Looked at each other with wild surmise — Silent, upon a peak in Darién.
I went to Miami and booked myself aboard a late-night Pan American jumbo jet to Panama City, arriving shortly before dawn in the pullulating and insufferably hot shanty-capital sprawling beside that most famous of all entrances to the world's greatest of seas.
When Panama City awakened, and after I had taken a small breakfast of pineapple,café con leche and a hard roll or two, I rented a small white Japanese car, acquired a map from the official cartographers who conduct their business under the curious name of the Instituto  Geografico Nacional Tommy Guardia, and set out to look for Santa Fé, for William — and for the Pacific.
I was thus occupied by precisely the same ambition which had driven Vasco Núñez four and a half centuries before.
Like him, I knew that this great and peaceful ocean was out there somewhere.
I just wanted to lay my eyes upon it.
I too wanted to stand, silent or otherwise, upon that peak in Darién.
It was in December 1511 that the King of Spain had given Balboa the job of Captain-General of the fledgling colony of Darién.
The post was offered as somewhat grudging recognition that he had been a signal success as leader of the first European colony in South America, a village called Santa Maria de la Antigua, on the Atlantic coast of the Isthmus.
His success led to some intimacy with the Indians, who told him that a vast sea lay off to the west — a sea, and a land, infinitely rich in gold.
Peter Martyr d'Anghiera, the Italian court historian (though to the Spanish court) who was the inventor of the phrase ‘the New World’, the man who first announced the existence of a substance called India-rubber, and the principal contemporary chronicler of Columbus and all those others who explored and travelled to the ‘Orbe Novo’ in the fifteenth century, wrote an extraordinary account of how Balboa first heard the definite news.
It seems that during a period of good relations between the Spaniards and the native Indians, the cacique of one local tribe had become blood-brother to Balboa, and had actually persuaded the Spaniard to help him prosecute a local war.
(Quite conceivably the conquistadores , like most colonial conquerors, believed in policies of divide-and-rule, of which this small conflict was but one example.)
Whatever, once the battles were over and the cacique's tribe had won, the man made Balboa a gift — a quantity of gold ornaments so gaudy and so valuable that squabbling broke out among the Spaniards as to who should have which piece, how much the minor colonial leaders should get, how much Balboa himself should receive.
Suddenly the cacique's son, who had watched the scene in dismayed silence, lost his temper.
Richard Eden, who translated Peter  Martyr's works, quotes the young Indian as shouting to the Spaniards:
‘What is the matter, you Christian men, that you so greatly esteeme so little portion of golde more than your own quietnesse…
If your hunger of gold bee so insatiable that onely for the desire you have thereto, you disquiet so many nations,…
I will shew you a region flowing with golde, where you may satisfy your ravening appetites.
When you are passing over these mountains (poynting with his finger towarde the south mountaines)…you shall see another sea, where they sayle with ships as bigge as yours, using both sayles and ores as you doe, although they men be naked as wee are…’
Balboa — as avaricious, arrogant and adventurous as any of his brother conquistadores — decided in an instant that he must go and see for himself.
He sent news home to Spain, demanding reinforcements of 1,000 men — the number the cacique had warned him would be required to defeat such forces of hostile Indians along the way.
Official Spain was immediately excited.
A force was raised, an expedition was organized — but Balboa, it was ordered, should not be its commander; that task should go to a bitter rival, Pedro Arias Dávila.
The Pedrarias expedition, as it is generally called today, left Spain with 2,000 men in April 1514
But Balboa had beaten them to it; he had decided not to wait.
Seven months before, while Castile was — in his intemperate view — still dithering, he had set sail from Santa Maria for the coastal town of Acla, at what Indians told him was the narrowest and least topographically inconvenient part of the Panamanian isthmus.
With Leoncico snapping genially at his heels, with a force of 190 Spaniards and with several hundred more local guides and porters embarked on a fleet of nine canoes and a small ship named the Chapinera , Balboa set out for Acla on the morning of Thursday, 1 September 1513.
He was bound, as his biographer puts it, ‘for Careta, the Pacific, and immortality’.
Only 92 men at arms and 2 priests began the route-march, for Balboa was a prudent organizer, keenly interested in security, and he insisted that the others from Santa Maria remained at the base camp, denying them their expected encounter with immortality.
Enlarged by an escort of servants and porters and the sixteenth-century versions of groupies and hookers, the marchers made an impressive  column half a mile long.
Day by day, under the hot September sun, it wound its way steadily southwestwards, stopping for a few hours here, for half a week there, while Balboa attempted — in most cases, successfully — to make and consolidate friendships with the leaders of the tribes on whose lands he trod.
The men crossed the low hills of the Serrania del Darién, then proceeded to cut their way through the jungles in the valley of that great central Panamanian river variously called (depending on whose map you buy) the Chucanaque and the Abanumaque.
On the far side they came to the Sierra de Quareca, hills which, though not particularly high, did give the party — many of them clad in heavy metal cuirasses and leg-armour — some relief from the steamy, insect-ridden heat of the lowlands.
But here Balboa's persuasive charm did him no good: a Chief Torecha, leader of a tribe of mountain Caribs, set about defending his lands, and there was a brief and bloody battle which the Spaniards (hardly surprisingly) won.
Yet they were anything but magnanimous in their triumph — at least not once they discovered, to their corporate Castilian horror, that some of the patricians of the region were ‘soiled by the infamous vice’, the ‘abominable sin’, of homosexuality.
Nothing so riled a sixteenth-century conquistadore as the knowledge that some men indulged in sodomy, and Balboa felt no compunction in setting the dreadful war-dogs on the culprits and having them tom to pieces in full public view.
It was a grisly episode indeed, one which inevitably detracted from history's judgement of the epochal events that were to follow.
One can perhaps understand why John Keats,’ writing his first mature work of poetry, managed to confuse Balboa with Cortez; a young and sensitive man, Keats may well have balked at including a figure capable of such wanton cruelty in a sonnet devoted to such tender sentiments.
Balboa left Quareca the next day, 25 September.
There now follows — among yesterday's narrators and today's historians — one of those minor disputes of chronology from which whole doctoral theses are constructed and careers built, or destroyed.
We need not bother with the details, save to say that it is quite certain that all the contemporary accounts of Balboa's triumph — which mention that he first saw the Pacific at 10 am on Tuesday, 25 September — are wrong.
25 September 1513 was a Sunday.
It is also a near-certainty that the discovery was not made on a  Sunday.
To these ardent Catholics,domingo was a day with peculiar significance.
One can be perfectly sure that had such a momentous event happened on the Lord's Day, that fact alone would have been reported over and over again, the comfortable synchronicity of it all being a matter for boundless pleasure.
That the particular day of the sighting was never regarded as special, and is almost brushed aside, suggests that it was a Tuesday — and the nearest Tuesday to the reported date is the 27th.
Choosing this date also allows Balboa and his company a little breathing space: they can spend two full days marching from the unpleasantness in Quareca to the summits of the coastal range — rather more reasonable a period than the few hours that elapse if we believe the earlier date.
This, then, is the historical moment: 10 am, Tuesday, 27 September 1513.
As for the historical place — technically, says Balboa's biographer, the peak was not in Darién, nor was it actually a peak.
Cartographic logic suggests it was in fact an isolated hill that stands above the headwaters of the Rio Congo — an unspectacular 1,800 ft-high hillock, somewhat denuded of trees, a short distance away from a rudimentary track (made by wild pigs, or cattle, or perhaps by people long ago) which can still be discerned in the jungle.
Antonio de Herrera's History , published in Madrid eighty-eight years later, records the moment thus.
Balboa:
…commanded his armie to halt, and himselfe went alone to the toppe where, having sighted the Mar del Sur, he knelt down and raising his hands to Heaven, pouring forth mighty praises to God for His great grace in having made him the first man to discover and sight it.
Having made this pious demonstration, he signalled to all his people to come up, and they in their turn fell on their knees, rendering thanks to God for this great favour, while the Indians stood amazed at the rejoicing and the ecstasy of the Castilians…
Two days later, on 29 September, the Feast of St Michael and All Angels, Balboa and his men arrived on the shores of the great sea, to take possession of it for God and for Castile.
The ceremony was supposed to start at 2 pm on the 29th: the Gulf on whose beach the men found themselves had been named San Miguel because of the happy coincidence of the feast day.
But it very nearly had to be postponed.
No oceanographer, when Balboa first strolled down to the gently lapping waters on the morning of that day, he had no reason to suppose that the ceremony — which would involve him standing ankle-deep in the water, the better to annex it — could not begin on schedule.
But he knew nothing of the Pacific's tides.
The tidal range in the Caribbean sea off the north coast of Panama is very modest — no more than a couple of feet.
The tidal variation of the Pacific on the south side, however, is most impressive — a good 18 feet under normal circumstances, more than 20 feet at springs.
And when the Captain-General and his men turned up in the afternoon — all in polished armour, and bearing a gaudy new flag adorned with the arms of Castile and Leon and a Madonna and Child — they were dismayed? embarrassed? horrified? amused?(history does not record) to find no sea in sight; just hundreds of yards of black and rank-smelling mud.
No claim to the new ocean could be made by standing in a nearby bog — Balboa knew his law.
And so the group waited, and waited, until not long before dusk the sea raged in ‘with great impetus’, and the process of annexation could begin.
To judge from the surviving accounts of the escribano detailed for the occasion, it was a ceremony that today would have been ideal grist for the television networks.
There stood Balboa, his shield on his arm, his cuirass gleaming on his chest, the brilliant new banner in one hand and his naked sword in the other, his plumed helmet giving him a stature far more considerable than offered by his height alone.
He waded into the sea until the waters lapped against his knees while Leoncico splashed happily along behind him — perhaps reflecting how far he and his master had come since both were smuggled in a flour barrel on a boat to Darién.
The great man paced back and forth, uttering as he did so a formula of annexation appropriate to the moment:
‘Long live the High and Mighty Sovereigns, Don Fernando and Doña Juana, Kings of Castile and of Leon and of Aragon, et cetera, in whose names and for the royal crown of Castile I take and assume royal possession corporal and present of these austral seas and lands and coasts and islands with everything annexed to them or which might pertain to them in whatever manner or by whatever reason or title  might or could exist, ancient or modem, in times past, present or to come, without gainsay whatsoever.
‘And should any other prince or captain, Christian or infidel, of whatever law or sect or condition he may be, pretend to any right to these lands and seas, I am ready and prepared to deny him and to defend them in the names of the Kings of Castile present and future, whose is this empire and the dominion of these Indies, islands and mainland, northern and southern, with their seas, in the arctic pole as in the antarctic, on both sides of the equinoctial line, within and without the Tropics of Cancer and Capricorn — so that each thing and part of it belong and appertain most completely to Their Highnesses and to their successors, as I declare more at length by writ setting forth all that may be said or can be said and alleged in behalf of their royal patrimony, now and for all time so long as the world shall last until the final universal judgement of all mortals.'
Few annexations come more comprehensive than that.
It is largely thanks to this one moment of history that there currently exists an unbroken line of Spanish-speaking nations through 90° of latitude from Tijuana in northern Mexico to Punta Arenas in southern Chile.
One can reasonably say that Balboa's triumph ultimately gave us San Diego and Los Angeles, Santa Barbara and Yerba Buena, San Ysidro and San Onofre, San Clemente and San Francisco.
At this distance, we may find Balboa's antics in the surf laughably pretentious; but at the time the sighting of the Mar del Sur , as he felt compelled to christen the new sea, was a formidable discovery indeed: the implications of its swift and secure passage into the hands of Spain were profound in the extreme.
The fact that Balboa caused the Ocean to become a Spanish lake, in effect, would come to be recognized as one of the most important stratagems in the development of the modern world.
There is a tragic postscript to the tale of Vasco Núñez — a man judged by today's historians to have been ‘as kindly, loyal and competent a conquistadore as ever brought the cross and the banner of Castile overseas…
’ By the time the news of his triumph had been transmitted home to the Court, the Pedrarias expedition was on its way.
It was a considerable party: 2,000 men in twenty ships, and headed by an intemperate ruffian whose only qualification for replacing Balboa as Governor of Darién was that his wife was the daughter of one of Isabella's ladies-in-waiting.
The contrast between the two men was as profound as their  rivalry was to become.
Balboa was constructive in his approach to the Isthmus, generally compassionate to the Indians, inventive in his plans for exploration and the furthering of Imperial aims.
(He achieved a great feat of maritime engineering by building ships on the Atlantic shore, transporting them bodily over the hills he had explored and sailing them off into the Pacific.)
Dávila, however, was a bully, a cruel and insecure man whose constant attacks on the Indians succeeded in turning them from ‘sheep’, as Balboa called them, into ‘fierce lyons’.
Eventually the contest between the new Governor and the man he had replaced became violent: Balboa and four of his colleagues, summoned from their Pacific base to discuss ‘matters of common concern’ with Pedrarias, were instead arrested.
They were accused of rebellion, murder, treason and — ironically, in view of the circumstances — the mistreatment of the Indians.
There was a show trial, the five were beheaded in public and their heads placed on poles.
‘And in a building that stood ten or twelve paces from the place where they were beheaded, one after the other like sheep’, wrote a Spanish historian, ‘was Pedrarias, watching them between the canes which formed the walls of his house…‘
A statue to Balboa stands near the Pacific exit of the Panama Canal, in the town named in his honour.
He is standing as he must have stood that afternoon on the shore of the Gulf of San Miguel, four-square and haughty, bucklered, helmeted, spurred, and looking out over the greatest ocean in the world.
I took a rather simpler route than Balboa — the Pan-American highway out of Panama City.
This is a road of great promise, as one might expect of a highway that is paved almost all the way from Barrow in Alaska to Ushuaia in Argentina, and is — at 16,000 miles — the longest continuous route in the world.
A formal concept since 1923, millions of American dollars have been spent on it and it has been virtually complete for years.
Complete, that is, except for one irritating — and one might have thought, locally embarrassing — gap, in Panama.
The Darién Gap.
No road has ever been built clear across Darién; nor, one imagines, will one ever be built.
Balboa might find it amusing: nearly five centuries later, the land he crossed in the sixteenth century on foot has still not been completely bridged for those crossing it by car.
I found this less amusing when, on the outskirts of a grimy little town called Chepo, the highway quite simply fell apart under my wheels.
One second I had been speeding at fifty miles an hour along a ribbon of uninterrupted concrete; the next, to the wide-eyed amusement of a group of policemen standing beside a checkpoint, there was a loud crunch, every shock absorber on the Nissan thudded home to its end-stops and I found myself dead in the water by a pothole large enough to accommodate half Balboa's army.
The dust began to clear after half a minute.
A donkey grazed morosely beside me.
The policemen guffawed.
The air was full of mosquitoes.
It was very hot and sticky and, as the dust cleared still further, so the hills ahead shimmered in a pale blue haze.
It took an hour to free the Nissan from what I assumed to be its grave, and persuade its bent and battered metal to press on southwards.
The road worsened as I edged gingerly down along the country's sunken spine, vanishing at times in coils of thick black mud.
Elsewhere tractors had scoured deep gullies separated by huge ridges that threatened to strand the little car with its wheels thrashing uselessly in space.
The bridges were awesome in their fragility and ill-repair: loose plates of iron rattled and slipped away to reveal brief visions of dark and menacing deeps, filled no doubt with crocodiles, man-eating fish and swimming snakes.
In several places the road simply ceased to exist at all— there were cliffs, a hole 50 feet wide and 10 feet deep.
A muddy cut through the jungle showed where the last car had passed around it.
A rusting hulk at the bottom of the pit showed where the last car hadn't.
Five hours later, after I had passed beneath a crudely-lettered blue notice board that welcomed travellers to the unpeopled jungle vastness of Darién, I came to a wooden sign that said simply ‘Sante Fé’.
I turned off to the right.
The car protested as it settled into muddy pools, heaved itself out, scraped through fields of boulders and crossed innumerable rickety bamboo bridges.
Finally I passed rows of sombre-looking huts, blackened by cooking smoke and infested by scores of small children and large dogs.
There was a small shop, stocked with boxes of soap powder, dried and blackish-red carcasses of goats, tins of condensed milk and posters of Madonna.
Outside a low, white cement building with a radio aerial stood a tall negro with distinctly West African features, wearing the neatly pressed uniform of an inspector in the Carabiñeros National .
He waved me to a halt, and then proceeded to ask why on earth I, a gringo , had driven all  this way, to what was evidently one of the least visited and least remarkable villages in all Panama.
My Spanish, at least when I attempted to speak it, was execrable.
So I wrote my request on a sheet of paper.
The brief dialogue I later found preserved along with the car rental papers:
‘Es posible, con los miniculares, a vuer el Mar Pacifico sur los montañas?’
I gestured to the low hills rising to the west of his police station.
‘Si ,’ the policeman wrote.
I was encouraged.
‘Donde Señor Balboa — el primero conquistadore — quando el vuer el Mar Pacifico?’
The policeman smiled broadly, then wrote quickly: ‘El Hindio William conose el te puede llebar.
Pero le reconose algo al cabo y ami …‘
So…the Indian named William did exist and, moreover, he lived close by.
The policeman, who was even now shutting up his office, was evidently going to guide me there.
Fifteen minutes later, having banged and bumped our way up another track heading directly for the low hills, the two of us came to the small tin-roofed hut which I had imagined and there, standing before it, was the single link required to bring Balboa's journey and mine into their final conjunction.
William, busily digging some unrecognizable vegetable out of the mud, was wearing gumboots and the jaunty remnants of a straw hat.
(Not, however, a Panama hat, since those are only worn in Ecuador.)
When the policeman told him what was wanted he removed his hat, wiped his brow and looked at the sky — it was mid-afternoon, and there would be only three hours of light remaining.
Then he gestured towards the’ rise ahead, and to a path snaking into the undergrowth.
‘Dos horas ,’ he said, and without a backward glance, began walking up the hill.
Panama City, like most Central and South American capitals, is littered with statues of, temples to and mausoleums occupied by the famous, the not-so-famous and the forgotten.
In nearly all the Spanish-speaking world it is almost axiomatic that any half-significant event, any battle, revolution or skirmish is memorialized in an extravagant confection of marble and gilt, with crosses, acanthus leaves, Castilian doggerel and an invocation of the deity.
One might reasonably have expected, therefore, that the one historical event for which Panama is known (and there is a clear distinction to be drawn here between an event  and an accomplishment , for obviously the Canal is Panama's best-known triumph and has become its own memorial) should be remembered in an impressive construction, no matter how far from anywhere or how difficult of access the site may be.
But Balboa's hill — if that really is the hill to which William takes his occasional visitors — is quite unmarked.
It is exactly as the explorer's biographer predicted it would be: 1,800 feet high, half-covered with jungle, a little way off the trans-Isthmian Indian tracks and somewhat detached from the rest of the Sierra — an outlier, distinct and somewhat aloof.
It is in Darién, however — at least so far as Panama's administrators are concerned.
And from its summit it is entirely possible to see a stretch of water which — whether to a sixteenth-century viewer innocent of the details of geography, or to a well-versed wanderer five centuries later — could only be an ocean.
It seemed remarkably near: a flat blue sheet, crawling as in Hong Kong with the skeins of hidden currents, stippled and rippled by breezes, and turning brassy gold where it met the horizon on to which the sun was now setting fast.
One or two small boats inched ahead of tiny trails of white water.
To the left — the south — were the indentations of a swampy, evil-looking coast, where the shores of Panama curved and recurved to form the immense and nearly landlocked Gulf of San Miguel.
But to the right the level sea stretched far away — an ocean on which a westbound mariner sticking to this latitude need not (once he had cleared the complicated coastline of Panama itself) strike any land whatsoever until he met the Philippine Islands of Mindanao, Palawan and the skerries of the Sulu Sea, 13,000 miles away.
No other ocean is as wide.
The distance from Panama to Palawan is more than half the way around the world.
And this was the ocean that Vasco Núñez de Balboa had found — an immensity quite unimaginable but a void which, he must have known, was now no longer unbridgeable.
It would be agreeable to report that on at last sighting the ocean I, like Vasco Núñez, promptly prayed a lot, rejoiced even more, cut down a fine tree and erected a cross, then had the expedition secretary carefully write down the names of all my companions for posterity.
But in fact it was rapidly beginning to get dark.
The negro policeman was quite keen that I should stay the night in Santa Fé.
William was more eager that he should show me some papers he had recently received by post from America.
And I was keen to return to Panama City to catch my plane.
So we hurried back down the hill, and to William's little house.
The papers to which he had referred, and which he kept in a tin box underneath his bed, contained an unexpected coda to this small adventure — an unfortunate little postscript which reminded me how Captain Scott must have felt when he reached the South Pole only to find that Amundsen had beaten him to it.
For I was not the first to have stood in Balboa's footprints.
The papers that William held related how, just two months before me, a man named William Dobelle (describing himself as being ‘on the artificial organs faculty at the University of Utah’ and the director of a ‘medical device company in New York and Zurich’) claimed to have visited Balboa's hill.
He reported that he had come in by helicopter, and had claimed the hill as Balboa's on the advice of William, and in a formal note to the Explorers' Club of New York, of which he was a member.
Dr Dobelle had found the whole experience so extraordinary that he had issued a press release (no less) recounting the adventure, and had sent copies to William from his office in Farmington, New York.
Such were the papers which the Choco kept under his bed: written on a Macintosh, sent from Manhattan, claiming a triumph with which William seemed notably unimpressed.
The modem world from which I had briefly stepped aside seemed to come crowding in again.
Once I had said my thanks and farewells to William and to the immense policeman who had silently accompanied us throughout the afternoon, I headed away down the rutted tracks, rather glad to be back on the road and off back to Panama City.
Like Captain Scott, I was in a hurry to get home.
It was not an easy journey.
I had two punctures and was forced to abandon the Nissan.
I had a long and wary walk through the pitch-dark jungles — my wariness stemming from having sighted a large tarantula strolling down the road for its evening constitutional.
After what seemed an interminable period of tiptoeing down the road  I managed to hitchhike a lift on the roof of a logging truck.
I then waited until midnight in a tiny village where the local people plied me with beer and chickens until I could barely move.
Finally, ten hours after I had started I arrived at Tocumen airfield, back in one of the least pleasant cities in the Western hemisphere.
But a mile or so away from Panama City, linked to it by a discreet network of roads and side-streets that become suddenly cleaner, neater, less tropic, less obviously corrupted, is a city that bears the great conquistadore's family name.
The city of Balboa looks for all the world like a suburban Texas town — it has green lawns of tough-leaved grass, cyclone fences, large split-level houses, young housewives in sunglasses and hair-curlers driving Camaros on their way to the Safeway, American flags — and American troops.
For Balboa stands at the Pacific terminus of the Panama Canal — one of the most remarkable examples of man's enduring engineering skills, one of the legacies of Balboa's discovery and march.
Before I left for San Francisco I spent a few days wandering the considerable length and the decidedly inconsiderable breadth of the Canal, newest of the major approaches to Balboa's ocean.
A ship's master passing through the Panama Canal need have no concerns about having to navigate his way successfully into the Pacific.
He doesn't have to steer at all; he doesn't look at his compass; he need not even run his engines: his vessel is quite literally pulled out of one ocean and into the other by a sextet of electrically-powered (and Japanese-made) trains called ‘mules’ which run on American cast-iron rails beside the lock-gates of the Canal: all the captain has to do is stand on the bridge and watch, listen to the genial Yankee twang of his assigned American pilot and experience a transport of delight.
For a passage through Panama is very much a delight.
While it must be admitted that the republic in which it is set down has its less attractive aspects, the Canal itself is a thing of unexpected spectacle and beauty.
Its sheer size is impressive, of course, and a first-time transit from Atlantic to Pacific will be something of a revelation — the ship does not head due westward to get to Balboa's ocean, but south-east.
Further: a quirk of the Coriolis Force means that the journey is slightly uphill, with the Pacific Ocean about six inches higher than the Atlantic.
But the beauty of George Washington Goethals' eighty-year-old construction becomes apparent within moments of arrival.
Lake Gatun, into which the ships pass on a due southerly track after leaving the Caribbean and easing through the first set of locks, is an immense inland lake — though an artificial one created by the damming of the Chagres River.
The Tiger Islands, the Brujas Islands and the Trinidad Islands are the summits of drowned hills, covered with tropical jungle and noisy with a hundred kinds of colourful birds.
(There are spiders too: an engineer, inspecting the Lake as it was filling, reported seeing a half-drowned tree covered with what appeared to be black foliage: he paddled alongside, then shot away as fast as his blades could carry him.
The ‘leaves’ were tens of thousands of tarantulas, clinging to the branches to delay their inevitable death.)
The route turns south-easterly after Gatun, through the deep chasm of the Gaillard Cut — eight miles of near-straight canal where the labours ant tribulations of all Goethals' thousands of men become dramatically evident.
Here, truly, one can see writ large the truth of the Canal Commission's simple motto —‘the Land divided, the World united’— or applaud the brief laureateship of the poet Stafford who wrote, to celebrate the Canal's opening day in 1914:
In freedom let the great ships go On freedom's errand, sea to sea — The oceans rise, the hills bend low, Servants of Liberty.
The Cut — 500 feet wide from shore to shore, 45 feet deep, illuminated at night by a blaze of red and white lights — is of a size to dwarf the vessels passing through it.
From down on deck, the cliffs rise up to the sky, quite blotting out the sun; from 400 feet up at the viewing platform on Contractors Hill the passing tramps, container vessels and car carriers look like toys.
Far below, on the winter's day when I stood and watched, the Aleksandr Ulyanov — a 30,000-ton general freighter — was grinding slowly northbound, back to the Atlantic, back to Mother Russia; a comfortable-looking, rust-stained Greek liner called the Corfu Reefer had passed heading south.
The Mar Mediterraneo was waiting in the Pedro Miguel locks.
The Hyundai No. 205, carrying cars from Pusan to Savannah, was coming through the Miraflores.
And there seemed an almost endless queue of freighters, tankers and oreships waiting in the roads at each end, some at anchor, some jostling politely for the lock entrances.
Thirty ships make the nine-hour transit through Panama each day: 11,000 a year, carrying more than 130 million tons of cargo to and from every country on earth.
Warships, pleasure boats, container ships — Britain's royal yacht Britannia was due some days later — all saving themselves 8,000 miles and three weeks of sailing round the Horn.
None seemed to begrudge handing over the thousands of dollars in tolls payable in cash by each ship to the Canal Commission, which brought in more than £150 million in 1988.
And few aboard, whether captain or crew, seemed anything less than awestruck during the entire nine hours that a transit usually takes.
I watched the crew of a grubby Polish reefer vessel: they were taking pictures of each other against the background of the Gatun Locks; three hours later, they were gazing with rapt attention at the passing majesty of Culebra; their cameras were out again for the Pedro Miguel, for the distant flags of the American bases, for the Miraflores Locks, and for the immense red-white-and-blue bandera of the Panama Republic that waved lazily from the summit of Mount Ancon, over the old wooden houses of Panama City.
And as the ship freed herself from the mule-lines and her screw began to chum up a wake of umber, sludgy water, and she picked up speed towards the marker buoys and the farewell beacon on Flamenco Island, I was sure I could see the seamen still, pointing their cameras back — now with long lenses all — towards the statue of Balboa which stands on the Panama City seafront, with the great man gazing out at the Ocean into which the Poles were now, at long last, sailing.
The Strait That Shall Forever Bear His Name
Once Balboa had found the Ocean, so in their droves the explorers emerged to circle, probe and colonize it, but first — in that most daring of all endeavours — to cross it.
No one could be sure how wide it was.
No one could be sure where lay the Terra Australis Incognita which Ptolemy had postulated, and which Mercator had argued was a necessary balance for a spherical world, without which the whole planet might simply topple over to be lost among the stars.
No one knew the weather, the currents or the winds.
There was only one certainty, one small piece of reasoned and deduced fact which spurred the would-be circumnavigators onwards.
This certainty was that the Spice Islands, the Moluccas, lay at the farthest side of the Mar del Sur , or of whatever might lie beyond the waters that Balboa saw.
The position of the Spice Islands was more or less well known.
Traders buying nutmegs and doves from Arabian merchants had been aware of their existence for centuries; Marco Polo knew roughly where they were, for he saw junk traffic in the ports of Cathay loaded down with spices and manned by suntanned crews who had clearly come there from the south.
Then, in 1511, a Portuguese expedition led by Antonio d'Abreu discovered them.
His party of three ships had travelled from Lisbon  out to Malacca with Albuquerque, thence down the Strait and past the immense island of Borneo to the confused archipelago where all spices known to man grew in wild profusion.
To reach their goal d'Abreu's men had gone halfway round the world from Europe to the Orient, and always in directions with an easterly component.
This single geographical fact, though dictated by circumstance, was of great political and imperial importance.
For since the Treaty of Tordesillas, signed in 1494, all the unknown world to the east of an imaginary line drawn 370 leagues west of the Cape Verde Islands would belong to Portugal; everything to the west of that line would belong to Spain.
So far as the Atlantic and the Indian Oceans were concerned, there was no problem; but what about the other side of the world?
Where, the scholars and the diplomats debated, was the antimeridian of the Tordesillas line?
No decision had been taken in those first decades of the sixteenth century.
Conquest, squatters' rights, annexation,force majeure — these cruder tools of geopolitics might well dictate its eventual position.
Thus the Moluccas discovered by going eastabout would, by the logic of some explorers, belong to Portugal.
The Moluccas claimed by a party going westwards might belong to Spain.
So while d'Abreu and his colleagues went off eastwards, even braver or more foolhardy men — following the banner of Castile — were determined to discover — heroically and, as it turned out for many of them, fatally — the way to reach this same Orient by travelling outwards to the West, across the vast unknown.
It meant the acquisition of knowledge, to be sure; but it also meant the envelopment and direction of the Orient by Spanish adelantados , for the greater glory and expansion of the vast empire of Spain.
There is thus a nice irony in the fact that the man who undertook the seminal voyage, and did so in the name of Spain, was in fact Portuguese.
He was born Femão de Magalhães, and the Portuguese —‘he is ours’, they insist — rarely care to acknowledge that he renounced his citizenship after a row, pledged his allegiance to King Charles I — later to become the Emperor Charles V — and was given a new name: Hernando de Magallanes.
The English-speaking world, which reveres him quite as much as does Iberia, knows him as Ferdinand Magellan.
There is a statue to Ferdinand Magellan in the main square of Punta Arenas, at the southernmost tip of Chile.
He sits by a globe with his back to the police station, looking south towards the Cabo de Hornos Hotel, towards the low hills of Tierra del Fuego and the unseen coast  of the distant Antarctic.
Another monument to him is in the main square of the city of Cebu in the central Philippines, a canopy with the kind of gaudy murals one expects in this flamboyant tropic city.
The paintings illustrate the notable moments of his forty years of life, including that most singular to the Filipinos, the bringing of Christianity to their islands.
Nearby, on a small, marshy, mosquito-ridden island called Mactan — the site of Cebu airport, and some of the region's hundreds of guitar factories — there is a simple memorial (looked after by a caretaker with the improbably contradictory name of Jesus Baring) of which more later.
Doubtless there are other statues to Magellan — near Sabrosa in Portugal's Trás-os-Montes, where he was born; in Sanlucar de Barrameda, from where he set sail.
But the life that will be always remembered stems from a journey which will never be forgotten — that commemorated by the space of sea between the statues in Chile and Cebu, a distance of some 12,000 miles.
Edward Gaylord Bourne, in his masterly series Spain in America , written at the beginning of this century, offers a view with which few would take issue:
The first navigation of the Straits of Magellan was a far more difficult problem of seamanship than crossing the Atlantic…
Columbus's voyage was over in thirty-five days; but Magellan's had been gone a year and weathered a subAntarctic winter before the real task began — the voyage over a trackless waste of waters exactly three times as long as the first crossing of the Atlantic…
Magellan is to be ranked as the first navigator of ancient or modern times, and his voyage is the greatest single human achievement on the sea .
Yet when he set off on 20 September 1519, with a royal mandate to search for a passage through to the Mar del Sur , and thus to determine for certain that the Spice Islands were within the Spanish domains, he had not the foggiest notion how far he might have to travel.
Not only was there great perplexity about the existence of a Strait — for all the men in their five little ships knew, Balboa's Panama and the Columbia that Columbus had sighted in 1499 might be the equatorial portions of a continent that extended without a break to the Antarctic pole, and the Southern Sea would be quite unreachable from the west.
And even if a break were to be found, the five naos and the 277 men would have to sail — how far?
Schoener's globe of the world then known shows Japan a few hundred miles off Mexico; the historian López de Gomara says that in his negotiations with the  Emperor Magellan always insisted that the Moluccas were ‘no great distance from Panama, and the Gulf of San Miguel which Vasco Núñez de Balboa discovered’.
He would rapidly discover precisely what ‘no great distance’ meant.
The five vessels that would soon make history — the Vittoria (now generally known as the Victoria ), the Trinidada (the Trinidad ), the San Antonio , the Concepción and the Santiago — were small and, until Magellan set to work on them, hopelessly unseaworthy.
(‘I would not care to sail to the Canaries in such crates,’ wrote the Portuguese consul in Seville, with obvious pleasure.
‘Their ribs are soft as butter.’)
They set sail from the Guadalquivir River under the proud corporate title of the Armada de Molucca , amply armed but hopelessly provisioned, with crews composed of men of nine different nationalities and of innumerable and in many cases mutually antagonistic temperaments.
There was one Moluccan slave, Enrique, who would act as an interpreter if the crossing was accomplished.
There was a journalist, too — or maybe Antonio Francesca Pigafetta was a Venetian spy, since he came from Venice, was an acquaintance of the Doge and could well have been told to keep a wary eye on Spanish imperial ambitions in the East.
Be that as it may, Pigafetta's diaries of the journey remain the classic source for all future accounts of the voyage: he had joined the ships, he said, because he was ‘desirous of sailing with the expedition so that he might see the wonders of the world’.
The sorry tales of sodomy and mutiny, of yard-arm justice and abrupt changes of command, and all the other trials that attended the Armada on its path south and west across the Atlantic, do not belong here.
The truly important phase of the journey was to begin on Candlemas Day, 2 February 1520, when the vessels left their anchorage in the River Plate, near today's Montevideo, and headed south.
No charts or sailing directions then existed for the coast beyond Cabo Santa Maria: no one had ventured this way before.
From this moment on the sailors were passing through virgin territory, with unknown coasts, increasingly terrifying seas and temperatures that went steadily downwards day by day.
They began to see penguins —‘ducks without wings’, they called  them,patos sin alas — and ‘sea-wolves’, or seals.
They explored every indentation in the coast off which they sailed — and with depressing regularity each indentation, even though some of them were very large and tempted the navigators to believe that they might be the longed-for straits, proved to be a cul-de-sac .
They spent much of the winter, from Palm Sunday until late August, in the centre of a chilly and miserable bay at what is now Puerto San Julián — a winter made doubly wretched by an appalling mutiny and the consequent executions and maroonings that Magellan ordered; by the stranding and wrecking of the Santiago , which the Captain-General had sent on a sounding expedition; and by the realization of the dreadful damage done to the remaining ships by the constant chomping and feasting of those plank-gourmets of the seas, the teredo worms.
But one important discovery was made at Puerto San Julián: these southern plains were inhabited by enormous nomadic shepherds (though they herded not sheep but the little wild llamas known as guanacos, and they dressed in their skins).
Magellan captured a number of these immense people — one pair by the crud trick of showing them leg-irons and insisting that the proper way to carry them was to allow them to be locked around their ankles.
Women were brought aboard the ships, too — but the crews, despite so many months away from female company, did not find much sexually attractive about them.
They were immensely hairy, had breasts that hung down at least a yard and were used by the males as beasts of burden.
But the men liked the giants' tricks: one used to swallow and then regurgitate long arrows, as in a circus; and another, who allowed himself to be called Juan and learned some biblical phrases, caught and ate all the rats and mice on board, to the entertainment of the men and the pleasure of the cook.
Magellan, who like everybody else was awed by their size, called these men ‘patagones ’—‘big feet’; the land in which he found them became — and has been, ever since — Patagonia.
Despite the amusement such indigenes provided, the months at anchor in so depressing a place wore on Magellan, and by late August he was off south again with the four ships that remained.
Two men had been left behind, marooned on his orders for mutiny: they had a supply of wine and hardtack, and guns and shot; but when other, later expeditions entered the Bay they found no trace of them.
They may have been killed by the giants; they may have starved to death; all the men of the Armada remembered were the pitiful wails of the  pair echoing over the still waters as the ships sailed back into the open sea, and south.
By the time the flotilla had reached a latitude of 50°S, and had stopped again for rest and replenishment, the men were becoming restive once more: their plea now was)— if the expedition wanted to reach the Spice Islands, why not turn east towards them and pass below the Cape of Good Hope, as usual ?
Magellan refused, of course— except that he was evidently frustrated enough at the lack of success in finding a way through to promise that if no strait was found by the time they had eaten up another 25° of latitude, he would turn east as they wished.
The murmurs stilled.
The weather became colder, the seas outside rougher and stormier.
One wonders if the Captain-General had any idea of the utter impossibility of navigating at 75°S, for on this longitudinal track his ships would be stuck fast in the thick ice-of the Weddell Sea, hemmed in by the unimagined continent and unendurable cold of the Antarctic.
The four ships got going once again on 17 October.
Four days later on 21 October 1520, a day celebrated throughout the Catholic world as the Feast of St Ursula and the Eleven Thousand Virgins, Magellan sighted a headland.
Cabo Virgenes, which is today surmounted by a lighthouse that flashes a powerful beam every five seconds, as well as with a foghorn and a radio direction beacon, is perhaps the most navigationally important point on the Atlantic coast of South America.
For this modest Cape, as Magellan and his men were soon to discover, marks the eastern end of ‘the Strait that shall forever bear his name’— the entrance, at long last, to the Mar del Sur .
At first they had no idea that the stretch of pale, shallow water beyond the Cape would present them with anything more than another disappointment.
Ranges of immense, snow-covered mountains crowded into view: there could, Magellan thought, be no possible exit.
Nonetheless he ordered the San Antonio and the Concepción into the headwaters of the bay — only to be horrified when he saw them being swept by unsuspected currents and winds into a huge maelstrom of surf and spindrift, and on to a wicked-looking spur of black rock.
He had already lost the Santiago — now it was  beginning to look as though two other ships were doomed.
The whole expedition was turning, it seemed, into a fatal shambles.
But he had no time to dwell on these particular miseries, for an immense storm broke and his own ship, the Trinidad , and the Victoria alongside, were themselves imperilled.
Men were hurled overboard, one vessel was dismasted, the other nearly turned turtle several times.
And the storm went on and on and on; when finally relief came to the exhausted crews, it seemed the only recourse was to turn tail and head for home.
The expedition was over, an abject failure.
Yet just at that moment — one occasionally suspects that the mythmakers have been at work on the story — the lookout sighted sails on the western horizon.
They were indeed what they could only have been-the two scouting vessels which had returned, safe and sound.
Yet the joy Magellan must have felt at realizing his men were still alive was as nothing when he saw, as the tiny naos drew closer, that their yardarms were hung with bunting, that music was playing and the crews were dancing, singing and shouting.
It became clear in an instant that they had found the paso .
Suddenly,[as an account of their voyage puts it]they saw a narrow passage, like the mouth of a river, ahead of them in the surf, and they managed to steer into it.
Driven on by wind and tide they raced through this passage and into a wide lake.
Still driven by the storm they were carried west for some hours into another narrow passage, though now the current had reversed, so what appeared to be a great ebb-tide came rushing towards them.
They debouched from this second strait into a broad body of water which stretched as far as the eye could see toward the setting sun…
By the application of good marine logic — tasting the water and finding it salty, then making sure the ebb — and flood-tides were of equal strength (both tests which argued against this body of water being a river) they realized that they had, indeed, discovered the way through.
Magellan, overjoyed and believing that his ultimate goal was within his grasp, brushed aside the doubters' view that he should, despite the discovery, turn back eastwards for the Moluccas.
‘Though we have nothing to eat but the leather wrapping from our masts,’ he declared, ‘we shall go on!’
The Estrecho de Magallanes, as Admiralty Chart No. 554 is content to  call it, is as darkly beautiful as it is useful.
Before I first visited I supposed wrongly that, since the latitudes are more or less the same, the coastline would be vaguely similar to that of Maine or New Brunswick.
But it is in fact much starker, more hostile, more grand.
From the east, the direction taken by Magellan, the land begins flat and windswept, mean grassland with tumbleweed rolling endlessly before the gales.
The wind reduces such trees as there are to stunted survivors.
There are virtually no deciduous trees, aside from a few beeches seen halfway along the Strait near the modern coaling-station of Punta Arenas.
In consequence there are no autumn colours to be viewed in surroundings that look as though there should be — no golds and flaming reds to set off the whites, blues and blacks of snow, water and rock.
In summer the box-leafed barberry, or calafate , blooms — bright yellow flowers, small blue berries.
There are sphagnum bogs and spiny bushes and, also in summer, thousands of tiny polar flowers of apparent delicacy but great toughness.
The wildlife is very different, too-penguins, guanacos, seals, Patagonian foxes, sea-lions.
There are birds both magnificent —Diomedea exulans , the wandering albatross, and five almost equally remarkable family members — and flightless, like the ostrich-like rhea and the ludicrous steamer duck.
Some birds are sinister: the Carnero , a mean-spirited grey monster, is said to delight in picking out the eyeballs of shipwrecked sailors.
The Strait is not an easy place for sailing vessels: ‘…both difficult and dangerous, because of incomplete surveys, the lack of aids to navigation, the great distance between anchorages, the strong current, and the narrow limits for the manoeuvring of vessels’, says the pilot manual.
(Had Magellan and his men read today's pilot they would, no doubt, have been reluctant to try to pass through.)
The coastline is now Chilean territory on both banks, save for a minute touch of Argentina at the very western entrance.
(Cabo Virgenes is part of the Argentine Republic, and there are two lighthouses at Cabo Espiritu Santo on Tierra del Fuego, one belonging to Argentina, the other to Chile, the frontier in between; their duplication causes much confusion to seamen.)
The shores are littered with the relics of stranded vessels: just on the seaward side of the first narrows — the Primera Angostura — are two magnificent old ships.
One is reduced to her ribs; the other still has her steel plating and her funnel.
Both are home to seabirds and seals and all manner of grasses and flowers.
They have  washed up on a shingle strand beside a lonely and barely habitable estancia.
Bored gauchos sit out of the wind, sucking yerba maté from gourds; their horses munch at the thin grass in a desultory fashion.
The place is apparently being slowly abraded by a fine, stinging dust blown across Patagonia by the unceasing gales.
The wrecks are less exposed to the weather than they might be, lying in the lee of a hill called, improbably, Mount Sutlej.
(Though perhaps not quite so improbable: a hulk I once saw stranded in Port Stanley in the nearby Falkland Islands was called the Jhelum — and both Sutlej and Jhelum are names of rivers in the Punjab.
Where, I have often wondered since, are South Atlantic ships or hills or plains named after the other three Punjab rivers — the Indus, the Chenab and the Ravi?)
The two narrows are narrow indeed — the first no more than half a mile wide and, before the opening of the Panama Canal in 1914, crowded with a mass of shipping.
Today only the occasional vessel passes by; when I was there, a couple of Polish trawlers bound for repairs in Punta Arenas, an oiler from the American Navy bound for an Antarctic research ship.
A shabby little ferry chuckles across every couple of hours, taking lorries and a few cars on the quickest route between Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego.
Once through the narrows, and having explored and discounted tempting-looking passages that turned out to go nowhere —Bahia Inútil : one can almost sense Magellan growling with irritation as he named this immense body of water useless — the Captain-General entered the narrow waterway that would eventually take him into the neighbour-ocean.
He had turned a comer.
Until now his ships had been on a southerly course, the weather becoming even colder, the unexpected winds known now as williwaws threatening to dash his vessels against the steep cliffs.
But now, having passed Cape Froward at nearly 54°S, he was heading north, and would not be so far south again ever in his life.
By now he had lost another ship.
Though he did not know it the  San Antonio had turned tail and was even now on her way back to Spain, ‘bearing a cargo of falsehood against Magellan’.
(She also took away supplies that were vital for all the fleet — a third of the Armada's biscuit supply, a third of its meat, and sixty per cent of its currants, chickpeas and figs.)
Her captain quite probably sighted the Falkland Islands on his way back — something about which Magellan was never to know nor care.
He had but three vessels left and despite urgent pleas from his men — now demoralized again, fretful once they realized another ship was gone — to abandon the voyage and sail back to the Guadalquivir, he pressed on north-westwards, passing through scenery of a wild grandeur and beauty he had never known before.
The trio of vessels (with a combined weight less than one of today's jumbo jets) passed the tip of a small island where it was dear the two oceans' waters met — the point is now named Crosstides — and through the Paso Tortuosa.
Then, deciding boldly not to enter another beguiling-looking passage which, had he done so, would have wasted very many miles and many days (it is now called Canal Jeronimo, and leads into an immense maze of lakes and passageways), he sailed directly north-west, up the Paso Largo and finally into the Paso del Mar.
Here huge surges of Pacific water — sensed as mere vibrations once they had rounded Cape Froward — now rocked their boats from stem to stern.
Stiff westerly winds made forward passage difficult, and the little boats had to tack this way and that within the narrow confines of the Strait's exit, before the funnel began to widen and the open sea to present itself Magellan, now perfectly confident of his discovery, named the waters Estrecho do Todos los Santos — All Saints' Strait.
It was a name that would swiftly give way to his, once his heroism and navigational skill were recognized back home.
There is some dispute about the date upon which Trinidad ,Victoria and Concepción passed into the Mar del Sur.
Antonio Pigafetta, the journalist (or Doge's spy) says 28 November; one distinguished eighteenth-century historian says the 27th; another of equal distinction puts it a day earlier.
Whichever is correct, we know that Magellan named the final cape Deseado, ‘for we had long been desiring it’.
We also know that ‘the iron-willed Admiral’ broke down and cried on hearing that Balboa's ocean had at last been sighted.
(Unhappily his chosen name Deseado barely survives today; the dramatic and unlit cliff on Isla Desolación that marks the western exit of the Strait is now called Cabo Pilar.
Deseado is a smaller  cape to its south, generally ignored except by sentimental mariners of whom there are, these days and in these waters, rather few.)
The day when the ships passed the tip of Desolation Island was rough and stormy — the typical robust westerly weather for which Cape Horn is notorious.
The mariners spent the night in such shelter as they could find from the 30-knot winds, drenching squalls and menacing waves.
At daybreak, though, they passed out into the ocean proper, still heating to the north-west to get out of the miserable cold.
They passed the Strait's tiny guardian islands, the Evangelistas — where there is now both a lighthouse ant a Chilean signal station — and sailed into an evening that suddenly became magically serene.
Ferdinand Magellan assembled his men on deck.
Father Pedro de Valderrama, the Trinidad's padre, stood on the poop deck and called down on the crew of all three remaining vessels the blessing of Our Lady of Victory.
The men sang hymns.
The gunners fired broadsides.
And Magellan — just as Balboa had done seven years before — proudly unfurled the flag of Castile.
But he had none of the grandiloquence of Vasco Núñez; he uttered none of the proud formulae Balboa had uttered in the Gulf of San Migud.
What he said — if contemporary accounts are to be believed — includes the first use of the word that, as a geographical descriptive and identifier, is central to this book and, if one accepts the dominant economic theses of today, central to the future development of the planet.
‘We are about to stand into an ocean where no ship has ever sailed before,’ Magellan is said to have cried (though it has to be reiterated that there is no hard evidence that he dit so).
‘May the ocean be always as calm and benevolent as it is today.
In this hope I name it the Mar Pacifico .’
And just in case it was not Magellan who & t uttered the word, then perhaps it was Pigafetta: ‘We debouched from that Strait,’ he later wrote, ‘engulfing ourselves in the Pacific Sea.’
Unknown to Magellan and his crew — for they lived fully three centuries before Alfred Wegener advanced his theory of continental drift — the spot where they chanced upon the new ocean is one of the great tectonic landmarks of the world.
A few miles from where the tiny ships first ‘debouched from the Strait’ is a spot which marks  one of the suture-lines of the planet, one of those rare sites where can be seen the brushstrokes of creation.
I went there once, to see a place that was thus twice blessed, by histories both recent and more ancient.
I had travelled down to Punta Arenas, which the biblical authority of the South American Handbook said was the best jumping-off point.
Within two days of leaving the warm winter of Hong Kong, I was standing shivering in the endless summer gales of the roaring forties on the shores of the Magellan Strait — if not obviously at the edge of any tectonic, plates, then certainly at the very edge of the world.
It was New Year's Eve and the midnight sky was still bright: Punta Arenas is at 53°S, and although on a similar longitude to Halifax has been shunted, by Professor Dowd's descendants, into the same time zone as New York — all of which means that it stays light for a great deal longer than in most cities, and we celebrated the coming of the New Year in almost broad daylight.
The few ships out in the harbour sent up fireworks and flares, and the low hills around town echoed with the wail of sirens and foghorns — at least until the dark did set in at about three in the morning.
By that time I had made drinking friends in the Hotel Cabo de Hornos with a couple of young American teachers down from Ecuador who had long wanted to visit the Towers of Paine, the very spot where — geologists had written — the two tectonic plates in which I was interested had come together.
They spoke good Spanish: if they promised to interpret for me, I said, I'd rent a car and give them a ride.
The next morning the wind still blew from the west.
Beyond town, beyond the extraordinary cemetery for the pioneers who had created the place and the Indians who had tried to frustrate them, and once the shanties had petered out, the Patagonian landscape was flat and treeless and the gale howled across it without ceasing.
For a few miles, as we hugged the shore of the Strait, the northbound road was paved; but once we had passed a junction and the track leading eastwards across to Argentina, it reverted to rutted gravel and the wind blew little spirals of dust across it, like ectoplasmic tumbleweed.
We saw a great many sheep, of course, grazing on the peat-grass and the bog-myrtle; and every once in a while, some miles back from the road, an estancia — a collection of farm buildings like white dolls' houses, tiny on the immense plain.
Some owners had tried to plant  pines as windbreaks, but they were stunted little trees now, huddling themselves for protection in the shadow of the buildings.
I stopped to take a photograph of one estancia that I knew belonged to a Scottish family who had lived there for five generations: even from two miles away I could hear the rhythmic clattering of the tin roof as it was lifted and dropped by the gales.
The womenfolk would no doubt be beside the wood stove, talking over the din of the roof as they did their needlework; the men would be in the wool-shed, cleansing and grading the fleeces in time for the next lorry down to port.
Scotland must have seemed a fair way away, and no chance this year of a real Hogmanay.
At a place called Morro Chico there was a tiny inn where we sat around the stove ourselves.
We were given mugs of coffee and slices of black bun, a dark Christmas-time cake that had come from Scotland too.
The innkeepers — I had enough Spanish to recognize their curious Patagonian accent, all rolling rs and glottal stops — took me outside to show off a baby rhea they kept in a pen.
It had been hit by a passing lorry, and they joked that it would never fly again.
It was a joke because rheas, which look like small ostriches (only with an extra toe on each foot) cannot fly anyway.
This one hobbled about gamely, seemingly eager to get back to the open plains.
Soon after Morro Chico the plains began to undulate and then, in the distance, we spied the mountains, the southern Andes.
The road was now backing west towards the sea, and towards the place where I fancied we might see evidence of major geophysics at work.
We first met Pacific waters at the windswept village of Puerto Natales, and suddenly there were mountains all around us: mountains and glaciers, and curious seabirds and dolphins and spume-whipped sea, the water a vivid blue under a cloudless sky.
It was breathtaking in its beauty.
The exiles from Ecuador — more accustomed to jungle and soggy heat — had gasped unashamedly as we rounded the bend above the cliffs, and they remained quite mute, awestruck, as we circled down into town and parked outside the Hotel Eberhardt for a dish of the king crab,centolla , and a mug of beer.
The ocean which appeared to stretch across all our visible horizon was in fact a loch, Ultima Esperanza, a sea-loch that reached 200 miles inland and from where Pacific shipping could, in theory (if the master was good and the compass correct) navigate its way deep inside the Andean chain.
There was a small cutter parked at the jetty, and a sign taped to the Eberhardt window said that for  $15 each she would take us right up to the foot of the Balmaceda and Serrano glaciers which spilled from the southern tip of that immense high-altitude sheet of white that was the Patagonian ice-cap.
But we were driving to the ice-cap anyway and needed to reach the peaks by nightfall.
So we contented ourselves instead by watching a troupe of steamer ducks — quite flightless, like the rhea — whizzing maniacally through the waves, chasing a fishing-boat.
They may not be able to fly and one doesn't like to enquire too deeply into how elegant they look below the waterline, but steamer ducks — their wings gyrating through the water like paddle-wheels — can make 12 knots, and more in a following wind.
There were another 100 miles of flatland, of dust, sheep, rheas and distant mountains before we were stopped at a police post.
A trio of grumpy officers, all Pinochet look-alikes, demanded our passports, eyeing us curiously lest we be Argentine spies.
We then passed beneath a ranch fence: Parque Nacional Torres del Paine, it announced, and in the distance over a range of low brown grasslands were the sharp spires of a dozen oddly-shaped mountains, twisted and contorted and coloured like no other mountains we had ever seen before.
This, at last, was the place where the engine work of the world was on view, just beyond the brow of the hills ahead.
It is worthwhile, perhaps, placing these Towers in the context of their geology.
As I mentioned previously, there are six major plates covering the surface of this planet, and ten or so that are classified as minor (though even minor plates can be as big as entire continents).
These plates float, relatively coldly and stiffly, on the warmer and more mobile outer surface of the earth's mantle.
They slip and slide against each other— somewhat ponderously, since they proceed at no more than a foot a year and sometimes a great deal less.
But they are for ever moving and, where they meet in head-on collision, in what is known as a subduction zone , they produce one of the great geological dramas of the planet.
Generally speaking, a subduction zone is the place where the major business of the earth's surface is done.
One of the colliding plates crumples upwards and then grinds down, sliding beneath the onrush of the other.
As it descends towards the mantle it melts; thousands of deep-focus earthquakes are triggered as gobbets of molten rock screech and burst against each other; the edge of the upper plate, meanwhile, contorts and rises tortured into the air, producing a range of soaring peaks.
There are volcanoes and fault lines and a ceaseless tremor of activity.
The ocean floor is scored and fissured, and a suture line miles deep plunges through it in sudden counterpoint to the nearby mountain-building.
From the deepest point of a new trench to the highest point of a newly created mountain range can be ten miles, maybe more — the greatest difference in the shape of the planetary spheroid anywhere.
The whole area, a band 50 miles wide and hundreds or maybe thousands of miles long, is alive — rearing and plunging, writhing and creaking — as the future shape of a portion of the world is determined for the next aeon of geologic time.
Geophysicists are perhaps not best known for their romantic souls, and when they invented the dire appellation subduction zone, they probably overlooked the fact that precisely because of all this subterranean frenzy, each one is an area of quite extraordinary beauty.
The contorted peaks of the Torres del Paine rise at the very site of collision of two of the world's largest plates — the South American and the Antarctican Plates.
Where they smash into each other, at fully one resounding inch a year, in one of the primal dramas of the earth's creation, they form the summits and the valleys that even now were beginning to fill our windscreen as we headed deep into the park.
A shepherd, a gaucho , rode past us, ahead of a sea of sheep.
There must have been 5,000 head corralled into convoy formation by a quartet of big black dogs.
The gaucho was a swarthy old man in a red woollen cap and a leather jacket; his saddle was a grubby sheepskin, and the horse's nose was bridled with a yellow wool cabeza .
He waved at us as we passed and then, noticing something, gesticulated wildly into the air.
‘Condor !’ he cried.
‘Condor !’
And sure enough, gliding effortlessly through the eddies and the down-draughts from the peaks ahead, were six mighty Andean condors, the biggest birds in the world.
Vultur gryphus , I had been told, was not in as grave danger of extinction as its California cousin.
It was a magnificent vision: the mighty, black-winged birds, their wings fully 10 feet from tasselled tip to tasselled tip, rose and fell in the cold wind against a background of the brown earth below them, the deep blue sky above them and, behind them and nearly circling  us all, the great grey fortresses of the Andes, sheer walls of ice, snow and rock nearly two miles high.
As the plains became higher and colder, so another memorable Andean beast appeared — the guanaco, country cousin to the llama, brother to the vicuña and the alpaca, and properly regarded as a small and humpless camel.
Herds — if that is the proper collective for guanacos — grazed peacefully on the alpine plants.
They stood their ground as we passed; few people travel this way, and none would ever think of harming one of these gentle creatures.
Moreover, as the guide-books say of the guanaco, ‘when annoyed, they spit.’
Now we were at 2,000 feet, the grasslands and such trees as there had been were below us.
The lakes huddled in the valleys — Lakes Grey, Nordensköld and Pehoé — were speckled with small icebergs, and at the end of Lake Grey we spied the white winding-sheet of a glacier edging its way down from the ice-cap.
The wind was biting.
The peaks — the Towers — had closed in above us, presenting a glowering, vaguely terrifying immensity.
They cast a shadow a mile wide, within which there was just the howl of the gale, clouds of dust and the occasional flurry of hail.
A primal place indeed.
As we glanced at each other, we shuddered with apprehension.
But we had another few hundred feet to manage before we saw our goal.
We scrambled up the hillside on the left bank of an enormous river which thundered down a precipitous cascade of rapids into a foaming cauldron, raging with wind-whipped mist.
We could barely hear ourselves think.
A few blades of grass clung to the otherwise barren slope, the gale tugging all the while at their roots.
Swirls of clouds billowed down from the Towers and the glaciers hung vertically, suspended like gigantic icicles, while flocks of birds scattered and spun before them, helpless in the wild turbulence.
Finally we breasted the saddle in the lower ridge, what in the Welsh mountains, and latterly in the Himalayas, we would call the cwm .
Darkness was falling.
Behind us we could just make out the glimmer of lamplight from the tiny hotel on Lake Pehoe, where we should be dining on river trout,bife chorizo and good Chilean pinot noir before the night was out.
If, that is, we survived the cold and managed to avoid being hurled by the wind into that bottomless pit at the base of the waterfall.
Already the night air was laying hoar-frost on the rocks, and a gleam of thin ice was sparkling on the surfaces of the flatter stones.
It was dark behind…but there was sunset ahead.
Sunset, and the  Pacific Ocean.
Now we were huddled against the wall of sheer, pale grey rock that soared seamlessly into the sky, up into the ice-white clouds above.
Ahead of us the land fell away, became green, then brown, then evolved into a crazed fretwork of islands and sea-lochs, lakes and strange peaks.
Could that be, perhaps, the Isla Esperanza and, beyond, the much larger Hanover Island, Isla Jorge Montt and the chunk of rock the Royal Navy (who found it) once called Cambridge Island, but which was now the Isla Diego de Almagro?
To the left, I fancied — though the light might be playing tricks — I could see the horns of Cape Pilar, the western end of the Magellan Strait, and to the right the prouder outlines of Imperial Fortune, Mornington Island and the pleasantly ambiguous Isla del Duque de York.
But ahead, beyond all this minor geology, stood the Pacific Ocean, painted blinding gold by the sun, but endless and vast, and terribly, terribly deep.
So here at last, this point at which I stood, was the very place, the geophysical start-line at which two of the world's great geologic plates met.
Ahead of me, in the glorious sunset, was the level and quite stable monolith of the Antarctican Plate.
Behind me, in the dark, was the similarly undisturbed sheet of crust known as the South American Plate.
They met, collided and contorted somewhere deep below, some miles ahead of me, beneath all that sea and ice and beyond that jumbled mess of islands.
Beneath my feet and beside me to my right, were the sheer pale grey rocks that were the andesitic relics of all the ancient turbulence and torture which had been and was still being caused by the plates' gentle, turgid but quite inevitable meeting.
This, then, was one of the great suture lines of the world, a place which marked a turning point in the history of the planet.
It was too cold to stand and stare, and the wind kept buffeting us dangerously each time we tried to gaze across at the Ocean.
So we turned back eastwards instead, and hurried down the hill.
Above, in the dark, there was a rumbling from the Towers of Paine, the crackling sound of old rock being broken by new ice and the skitter of smaller stones plunging down a crevasse.
We looked back and up, and for a moment the Towers' summits were flecked with gold, before the sun slid down behind the unseen horizon and all Chile was plunged into blackness.