

Eagle House
   

This is a small, listed, Georgian mansion built round an Elizabethan malt-house, which is still intact within the newer, larger building.
It is an elegant, comfortable house, with a most attractive landscaped garden which descends the hillside in steps, with very fine views over the Avon valley.
There are six bedrooms, all with their own private facilities and colour TV, furnished in period and antique furniture.
The public rooms are all very pleasant with open fires, antiques and the family's 17th- and 18th-century portrait collection.
The drawing room is a quite spectacular octagonal room, with a 17-foot ceiling.
John has a wealth of experience in the hotel business, having worked for some of the largest chains in the country including a stint at the Savoy in London.
He and his journalist wife, Rosamund, are very welcoming and helpful hosts; they take great trouble to ensure their guests enjoy their stay at Eagle House to the full, booking sports activities (including hot air ballooning), theatre seats, and dinner reservations.
As there is no dinner served at Eagle House, it is quite usual for John and Rosamund to find their guests dinner bookings, and they consider it their responsibility to find an eating establishment to suit the purse and palate of each guest.
Easily Accessible : Please see entry on The Orchard, Bathford, p.32.
Paradise House
   

The views of Bath and the surrounding hills from the rear of this beautiful Georgian house are quite wonderful.
Situated in a quiet residential cul-de-sac, it is only a seven-minute walk from the town centre.
David was a squadron leader in the Royal Air Force, and Janet was a fashion designer, so running a guest house was a radical change for them both — but as it turned out, a happy and successful one.
They have worked very hard over the last nine years to create a warm, comfortable and gracious environment from a building which was, on their arrival, fairly dilapidated.
Today there is a fresh, light breakfast room, a pretty sitting room, and nine bedrooms, each equipped with a colour TV.
The spacious walled garden is quite lovely, with neat lawns and rose-covered pergolas — and of course, those splendid views of the elegant Georgian town of Bath.
There is no evening meal, but Bath has restaurants to suit all tastes.
Easily Accessible : Please see entry on The Orchard, Bath, p.32.
The Orchard
   

This beautiful listed Georgian country house lies in the conservation village of Bathford, just 3 miles from Bath.
Guests have a wing with a lounge and dining room to themselves; the rooms are spacious and elegant, furnished with antiques, and have marvellous views of the grounds and surrounding hills.
Each bedroom has a private bathroom and colour television, and one has an orthopaedic queen-size bed which has proved very popular with guests.
The walled garden is quite lovely, with sloping lawns and a wide variety of mature trees.
A healthy breakfast is served, consisting of home-made muesli, live yogurt, wholemeal bread and free-range eggs.
Dinner is not offered, but the local pub is recommended by the Londons and there are many pubs and restaurants in Bath.
Easily Accessible : Bathford is an attractive stone-built village dating mainly from the 1700s.
There is a very pretty walk around Bathford, another to Bath along the canal towpath, and yet another in the nearby Limpley Stoke valley, recently designated an area of outstanding natural beauty.
Bath is a beautiful city well known for its spa, its Roman baths and the excellence of its Georgian architecture, an example of which is the supremely elegant Crescent.
The Huntingdon Centre in the Paragon has a fascinating display on Bath's history.
There is a wealth of interesting shops, and a wide variety of museums — for example, the museum of costumes in the Assembly Rooms.
In May and June the prestigious Music and Arts Festival is held.
There is a regular bus service from Bathford to Bath, with a stop conveniently situated just a minute's walk from The Orchard.
Corsham Court (5 miles) has some fine Georgian state rooms, and grounds with a 15th-century gazebo.
There are many beauty spots in the surrounding countryside, including the quite spectacular Cheddar Gorge (28 miles) with its signposted walks and underground caves to explore.
Local Activities : Walks, golf, tennis, horse-riding, hot-air ballooning, cycling.
Mount Hotel
   

This small, attractive Georgian house is situated near to the centre of the riverside town of Bideford; it has a delightful secluded garden dominated by a beautiful 100-year old copper beech, and also a protected patio.
Inside, the decor is elegant and traditional, the gentle colour scheme creating a relaxing ambience.
Guests tend to congregate in the lounge for a chat over a drink from the ‘snug’ bar, or to watch TV.
There are seven bedrooms, three of which are en suite.
The Taylors' main aim is to make their guests feel very welcome and as committed Christians they are happy to see the Mount Hotel used as a retreat.
The restaurant is open to residents and guests of residents.
The diet is a wholesome one; healthy foods such as salads, wholemeal  bread and semi-skimmed milk are used.
To counteract all this healthy eating, real Devonshire clotted cream is often available and there is a small bar serving a variety of drinks — draught beer is not available due to lack of space!
Vegetarian meals can be provided, and packed lunches are available on request.
Easily Accessible : Bideford itself is a charming place to amble through, with its narrow streets, picturesque quay and famous medieval bridge.
A two-hour boat trip will take you to Lundy Island, once famous for its pirates and now for its puffins.
There are numerous footpaths in the area, the most notable being the long-distance South West Coastal Path.
There are also some interesting local walks, including nature trails around the Tamar lakes.
Of the many pretty villages to see, Clovelly, ten miles away, with its narrow winding cobbled streets and its ban on cars, is a delight.
Barnstaple, the principal town of North Devon, is only a mile away.
There are several excellent beaches; the most famous must be that at Westward Ho!, just two miles away.
Incidentally, Westward Ho! was named after Charles Kingsley's book and not, as one would expect, the other way around.
Local Activities : Walks fishing, golf, horse-riding, bowls, tennis, swimming.
St Christopher's Country House
   

This cosy hotel is situated in the unspoilt harbour village of Boscastle on the North Cornwall coast.
Boscastle is a truly delightful place, which looks very much the same as it must have done 600 years ago with its narrow winding streets and pretty 14th-century cottages.
The house is full of character and Cornish charm, with a slate floor in the reception area and a large comfortable sitting room with an open fire.
Eight of the nine bedrooms have en suite facilities, and two have excellent views over the village towards the coast.
The décor throughout the house is simple but tasteful.
The food is fresh and home-cooked.
Specialities of the house are the crab soup, made from locally caught crabs, and homemade sweets.
Brian  and Brenda Thompson, who previously ran a restaurant, are cheery and friendly and will help you make the most of your stay.
Easily Accessible : There are 300 miles of unspoilt coastline and moors to explore.
The walk from Boscastle to Tintagel (3 miles away) takes you through spectacular coastal scenery.
Another, from the harbour to St Juliot's Church through the delightful Valency Valley (where Thomas Hardy courted his Emma), is particularly lovely in spring, when you tread upon a carpet of bluebells and primroses.
The whole area is steeped in legend and history.
Boscastle itself has long been associated with smuggling and witchcraft, and today has a witchcraft museum.
At Camelford (Tennyson's Camelot) you can visit the North Cornwall Museum and the ancient stone circles.
Tintagel with its ruined castle is closely associated with the legend of King Arthur.
Local Activities : Walks, surfing, golf, diving, fishing, bird-watching, pleasure boat trips, sandy beaches.
Roundham House Hotel
   

This Victorian stone house standing in an elevated position on the edge of Bridport has very fine views of both the sea and country.
There is a pretty secluded garden and a sunny terrace.
The décor is full of period charm and colour.
The spacious porch leads into an elegant hall, from which access is made to the lounge, bar and dining room.
The bedrooms are comfortable with co-ordinated furniture and fittings and all have private facilities and a colour TV.
David and Pat Moody are very professional hosts — it was Pat's grandmother who started the business in 1911 and Pat was born in the hotel.
Dinner is offered: a table d'hôte menu of six inventive courses.
This is served from the end of May to the end of October; otherwise a ‘meagre’ four courses are available!
The  proprietors describe the food as a mixture of traditional British (such as‘Rabbit with juniper berries’) and French.
Produce is, when possible, taken from the kitchen garden and  fruit trees and good use is made of local game, freshly caught shellfish and local cheeses — Dorset Blue Vinney is a favourite.
Lunch and packed lunches are available.
Easily Accessible : Bridport is an interesting Saxon town, historically famous for its rope-making — a hangman's noose used to be known as a Bridport dagger.
To the south is West Bay, a small port with a shingle beach.
The coastal road to Weymouth from Bridport has spectacular scenery and half way along it, you pass through the unspoilt village of Abbotsbury, lined with thatched cottages.
Fifteen miles away is Forde Abbey, a 900-year old Cistercian monastery with gardens.
Parnham House 6 miles away is the home of Viscount Linley's furniture business.
Dorchester, the ‘Casterbridge’ of Hardy's novels, is 15 miles away.
Take a day trip to Wells and Glastonbury, both within a 30-mile radius.
Local Activities : walks, golf, fishing, horse-riding, bowling.
Torr House
   

Torr House is an attractive granite building, dating from the early 18th century, and was home, originally, to a woollen merchant.
It is situated in the Dartmoor National Park, amidst gentle rolling hills and woods where buzzards nest.
Herons can be seen fishing in the tumbling stream.
Today it is the home of John and Hazel Cork who renovated it after years of neglect and a serious fire.
As they put it, they feel that they have ‘put back the life into a very contented house’.
They have managed to do this without losing the original character of the building; marble fireplaces, Victorian and Georgian chests, a collection of clocks and a grand piano which has been in the house since the turn of the century, all seem to be very much at home here.
The house faces south and has a delightful sheltered terrace and two acres of garden which is host to a splendid bank of rhododendrons and a copse of red cedar, beech, willow and  prunus.
There are four bedrooms, all with en suite or private facilities and fine views.
Breakfast is plentiful and Hazel's home-baked bread is delicious.
The four-course evening meal is served by candlelight and afterwards coffee is served in the drawing room by a log fire.
The cheeseboard offers a good selection of locally produced cheeses such as applewood smoked cheese and the wonderfully named Cornish Yarg.
Easily Accessible : The whole of Dartmoor spreads before you.
In addition to their wild natural beauty, the moors contain interesting ancient relics and sites that are well worth investigating.
Four miles away you can visit Castle Drogo, a splendid private house, designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens, now owned by the National Trust.
At Okehampton, you can visit the Dartmoor Centre with its museum of Dartmoor life, working craft studios and Victorian tea rooms.
Nearby, in the small village of Sticklepath, the Museum of Rural Industry gives one a clear understanding of the skills and hard work involved in living in such a remote area.
Local Activities : walks, golf, horse-riding, fishing, bird-watching.
Waddon House
   

After a long drive this charming house with its friendly and welcoming hostess is most refreshing.
It stands in gardens landscaped over a period of two years (which were designed to ensure an array of colours and scents throughout the year), and woodlands resplendent with over one hundred species of trees and shrubs, the home of owls, badgers, green woodpeckers, pheasants and foxes.
The house was built in the 1930s and faces south with glorious views of Dartmoor, shared by all the principal bedrooms.
The interior is airy, elegant and newly furnished in an Edwardian style.
There are six bedrooms, all en suite or with adjoining bathrooms, and provided with colour TV.
One has a four-poster bed and another, a half-tester, which reputedly once belonged to Lily Langtry.
Guests are invited to join Sylvia Frowd in the elegant drawing room for cocktails before the four-course evening meal.
Local and home produce is used.
Easily Accessible : Of course, the best walks are on Dartmoor, fifteen minutes away by car.
Just 2 miles away, you can visit Ugbrooke stately home and park, a Robert Adam mansion built circa 1778 with a fine collection of furniture and paintings.
Killerton House and gardens, 10 miles away, has fifteen acres of beautiful hillside gardens, and some splendid views.
The house, rebuilt in 1778, houses a splendid collection of costumes.
At Rockbeare, the English Lace School (the only one in the country) invites you to watch and even participate in the lacemaking.
Plymouth and Exeter and the coast at Torquay are easily reached for day trips.
Local Activities : sauna and tennis at Waddon House, walks, trout-fishing, horse-riding, golf.
Broadview
   

This colonial-style bungalow stands in an elevated position, set back from the main road, with fine views of the small Somerset town of Crewkerne and the surrounding hills.
It faces south, in over an acre of landscaped gardens with a feature water-garden.
Inside, the décor is inventive with an imaginative mix of old-fashioned elegance and a co-ordinated mish-mash of plants, caged finches and colourful rugs.
The sun lounge with its comfortable settees is ideal to relax in.
All the bedrooms have views over the garden and Crewkerne.
Each has been individually decorated and is equipped with a colour TV and en suite facilities.
Dinner is a home-cooked, traditionally English meal — for example, home-made chicken soup; roast beef and Yorkshire pudding; and fresh fruit flan.
Gillian relies on fresh produce and quality food.
Easily Accessible : Broadview is well situated for visits to Somerset, Devon and Dorset.
Crewkerne itself has many interesting historical buildings  and antique shops, and many local walks start here.
The Cricket St Thomas Wildlife Park, consisting of 1000 acres of land given over to (amongst other things) a working dairy farm, wildlife, a pets' corner and an aviary for tropical birds, is only ten minutes' drive away.
The coast which offers some splendid walks, can be reached in thirty-five minutes.
There is a multitude of stately homes and historic sites to visit, including Glastonbury Abbey and Tor, where Joseph of Arimathea is said to have buried the chalice used at the Last Supper; and Montacute House, a very fine Elizabethan mansion with formal gardens.
Compton House, another stately home, houses a fine collection of butterflies from all over the world.
In the ancient village of Mulchelney you will find the second oldest monastery in the county, with buildings surviving from the 16th century.
Just south of Mulchelney you can visit the John Leach pottery.
Local Activities : Walks, fishing (sea and river), golf, bird-watching, horse-riding.
Ford House
   

This is an attractive listed building within easy reach of the centre of Dartmouth.
It is elegantly furnished, light and spacious, and the atmosphere is very relaxed — breakfast, for instance, is served until midday, so there is never any pressure to hurry.
There is a small walled garden at the front.
The character of the original house is very much intact, with open fireplaces, shutters and servants' bells echoing a previous age.
Richard and Henrietta set up the business in 1987.
Richard, who hails from Australia, and his wife Henrietta have travelled extensively through Europe, China and India.
Meeting people from all over the world became a hobby for them and they were both very happy to tun it into a way of life.
Henrietta is a trained cook with a varied repertoire including French, Italian and Oriental food, and is happy to cater for special diets.
Evening meals include such delights as ‘fresh sea bass, wrapped in lettuce leaves and filled with sorrel and tarragon’, and desserts such as‘lime mousse  with passionfruit sauce’.
Vegetables are fresh from their allotment, and breakfast jams and marmalade are home-made.
If guests feel like a meal out, there are numerous pubs and  restaurants in Dartmouth.
Easily Accessible : Ford House is situated in an area of Devon known as the South Hams —‘Hamme’ is old English for a ‘sheltered place’— and the climate here is particularly kind as the coasts are washed by the Gulf Stream.
Walks abound, along the coastal and cliff paths and the river, and through local woods.
Dartmouth itself is a very pretty town, with wealth of historic buildings (including a 15th-century castle) and considerable ‘olde worlde’ charm.
On Tuesdays and Fridays, Dartmouth market, which has existed since 1828, still bustles.
Totnes, 8 miles away, can be reached by boat; amongst other attractions, it has a motor museum, Elizabethan museum and the country's only horse-drawn double-decker bus service.
All around there are numerous pretty villages and many miles of gentle rolling countryside to explore.
Local Activities : Walks, golf, sailing, fishing, river cruises, sandy beaches, open-air swimming pool, tennis , bird-watching.
The Cottage
   

This delightful 15th-century cottage (grade II listed) shelters in the tiny hamlet of Westbrook.
It was once the home of the Irish poet Thomas Moore.
Surrounded by beautiful countryside, it is an ideal rural retreat.
Its large landscaped garden (which includes an orchard with a nine-hole putting course) is lovingly tended by your hosts, gardening enthusiasts Gloria and Richard, who will gladly give cuttings.
The guest accommodation is an attractive converted barn attached to the main house.
The three double rooms, all with en suite shower, are ‘attic'-style with fresh flowers and wonderful views of the garden, surrounding fields and woodland, which is home to rabbits, pheasants and deer.
Breakfast (strawberries and raspberries in season) is served in a  pretty room with white stone walls and beams made of ships’ timber.
No dinner is provided but Gloria and Richard will recommend local restaurants and make reservations.
Easily Accessible : Walkers will be delighted to know that Wiltshire has over 4,000 miles of footpath.
Nearby is a Roman road and a little further afield is the Ridgeway, the Wansdyke Path and the Tan Hill Way.
Within a 15-mile radius you can visit: the National Trust village of Lacock with 13th-century abbey; the Fox Talbot Museum of Photography; Bowood House with gardens and adventure playground; Sheldon Manor, Wiltshire's oldest inhabited manor house; Castle Combe, a very pretty village; Devizes with a market on Thursdays; Bradford-on-Avon with a Saxon church; Avebury Stone Circle, the largest in Europe and owned by the National Trust.
Local Activities : walks, golf, horse-riding.
Prospect House
   

Prospect House is an attractive town house, with a pretty, secluded garden.
Situated close to the harbour its nautical connections (it was once owned by a local shipowner) are very evident — all the bedrooms are named after local sailing ships.
Built in 1830, it retains many of its original features: the elaborately painted plaster cornices, stained-glass ‘Cornish’ porch and panelled mahogany doors.
It has been very stylishly furnished by Cliff and Barry with great attention to detail.
The dining room, for instance, has William IV dining chairs in walnut, and a specially commissioned refectory table, a small Cornish stove and the original (restored) window shutters.
All four bedrooms have en suite facilities and are furnished individually with great care, the prettiest is perhaps the Waterwitch room, with its low bay window looking over the garden.
Cliff Paul and Barry Sheppard began taking in paying guests as an extension of their enthusiasm for entertaining friends.
They deliberately limit the number of guests to six at any one time as they aim to preserve  the home-from-home atmosphere.
Cliff is the cook, and loves the job, especially as he can use produce from the greenhouse and herb garden.
A long-established vine provides grapes in season.
Cliff is only too pleased to prepare a celebratory meal for any special occasion.
Easily Accessible : Within an hour's drive from Prospect House, there are many of Cornwall's favourite beauty spots: beaches, gardens, and National Trust and English Heritage properties.
Pendennis Castle, which withstood a Roundhead siege during the Civil War for five months, is only 3 miles away.
Penryn itself is unspoilt, and its old and narrow streets are under a preservation order.
As for walks — well, Barry and Clive will help you find your feet (so to speak): there are twelve which begin locally and are recommended by the Ramblers Association.
Local Activities : Walks, sailing, wind-surfing, deep-sea fishing, golf, sandy beaches.
Laverley House
   

Laverley House is a listed Georgian farmhouse built in 1820 with five acres of land with spectacular views towards the Mendip hills, and an attractive garden in which highly scented roses blossom in the summer.
On your arrival you may be greeted by the pretty Welsh  Palomino pony nodding to you from the field beside the car park, or by the friendly Great Dane, known as ‘Puppy’.
The house is spacious and homely.
There are three bedrooms, each with a private bathroom, a comfortable guest lounge, and a dining room.
The full English or Continental breakfast offered is freshly prepared using local produce.
Dinner can be provided at twenty-four hours' notice, and in addition, your hosts will recommend local pubs and restaurants.
English, Italian, Chinese and Indian food can be enjoyed in Glastonbury, four miles away.
Easily Accessible : This is an unique area of the West Country, where history  and legend blend.
The origins of English Christianity can be found in Glastonbury Abbey, where the first Christian sanctuary in the British Isles was established and where, according to legend, King Arthur was buried.
Glastonbury Tor, with the ruined tower of St Michael's church, can be seen for miles around.
At the foot of the Tor lies the Chalice Well, where, it is said, the Holy Grail was hidden by Joseph of Arimathea.
The surrounding countryside is very beautiful, with lime-stone hills, caves, moors and a rich diversity of wildlife.
The climate is particularly favourable and the area is known for its cider-making and vineyards.
There are numerous walks around the house, to the top of Pennard Hill, through local woods, and across the moor.
Local Activities : walks, bird-watching, fishing, clay-pigeon shooting, horse-riding.
Special arrangements for guests at Wells golf club.
Trebles Cottage Hotel
   

Trebles Cottage can be found in the picturesque village of Kingston in the South Hams, an area of fertile farming land in South Devon designated as being ‘of outstanding natural beauty’ and notable for its mild climate.
Trebles Cottage, built in 1801, lies in an acre of secluded grounds.
At its front is a walled garden with camellias and  fuchsias , and a palm tree.
At the back David and Georgiana have planted flower beds, a small orchard, a heather garden and a vegetable patch.
The latter is already yielding fresh produce and fresh fruit is expected from the orchard in the not too distant future.
Inside, the cottage is comfortable and tastefully furnished.
Each of the five pretty bedrooms is individually furnished with a particular theme in mind, such as the ‘apple room’, ‘rose room’ and ‘almond room’.
All are en suite and are equipped with colour TV; one with a double king-size bed is particularly luxurious and is often used as a bridal suite.
The food, cooked in Georgiana's beloved Aga, is excellent.
There is plenty of choice and whenever possible locally produced foods are used, such as Devon crabs and, of course, Devon clotted cream.
The wine list is comprehensive and if you feel like a pre-prandial treat, there is a small, well-stocked cocktail bar.
Easily Accessible : Kingston is a very pretty village with thatched cottages, just one mile from a sandy beach and some stunning coastal walks, and yet Dartmoor with its rugged tors and crags is only 10 miles away.
Five miles away you can visit the National Shire Horse Centre.
Plymouth is 12 miles away, and the sailing centres of Kingsbridge and Salcombe are 10 and 13 miles respectively.
Dartmouth, 25 miles away, has a famous naval college and a very attractive waterfront.
Here you can take a boat on the estuary or a river trip to Totnes, or take a steam train on the Dart Valley Railway.
Local Activities : walks, golf.
Bissick Old Mill
   

This 17th-century house was once a working mill, powered by two enormous water-wheels — one wheel alone was twenty-four feet high.
Today, after a careful conversion it is a very comfortable and elegant country home.
It has three pretty bedrooms, decorated in well-chosen fabrics, and furnished with antiques and pine.
Each room has a colour TV, mini-fridge with fresh fruit, soft and alcoholic drinks.
There are always fresh flowers on show.
The beamed sitting room has an open fire and the appropriately named ‘honesty bar’ where guests are invited to help themselves to drinks, and then record their indulgences on a slate — charges are then made at the end of the visit.
It may seem a little naive but Ray and Jean believe it works and it really helps to preserve the ‘home-from-home’ atmosphere.
A fresh, wholesome meal is served every evening in the attractive dining room.
Easily Accessible : Bissick is centrally situated and so most of Cornwall with its glorious countryside, picturesque villages, lush gardens and ancient sites, is accessible.
The north and south coasts are 14 miles  equidistant.
The village of Ladock itself is surrounded by woods through which a nature trail runs and there are many local  footpaths and, of course, the long coastal walks to enjoy.
Nearby Truro has a modern cathedral, river trips down the River Fal with its many creeks to Falmouth, a country museum and country park.
Four miles south of Truro are the National Trust's Trelissick Gardens with their abundant magnolias, camellias and rhododendrons.
There is also a very pleasant woodland walk here.
In Falmouth, you can visit St Mawes Castle, and the Maritime Museum, and enjoy the sandy beaches and safe bathing.
Local Activities : walks, golf, fishing.
Boscean Country Hotel
   

The walled gardens surrounding Boscean Country Hotel are a shelter for wildlife — badgers, foxes and a wide variety of birds make their home here in the shadow of two ancient Celtic crosses.
The house was built by an Edwardian doctor using only the best materials — oak cured for eight years for the lower rooms' panelling, fine teak for the window frames and mahogany for the fireplace.
The furniture is very much in keeping with the original character of the house.
All the bedrooms are en suite and have superb views of the sea or across the wild moorland.
The food is home-cooked.
Produce is fresh: soft fruits, salads and vegetables come from the garden.
The sweet trolley in particular is very tempting, with a choice of five or six home-made sweets.
Vegetarians and special diets are catered for on request.
Roy and Joyce Lee will arrange activities for you, including trips to the local theatre, and horse-riding.
They very much enjoy having guests to stay on a house-party basis and they will arrange daily activities and entertainments for most evenings.
Easily Accessible : St Just-in-Penwith, an old mining town, is 7 miles away from Penzance, one of the first Cornish resorts and the county's third largest town.
Penzance has fine views of St Michael's Mount, a  fairytale castle built on an island reached at high tide by boat and at low tide by a causeway, which is owned by the National Trust.
The moorland and seemingly endless miles of coastal path (accessible only a few yards from the hotel) beckon many walkers.
Wherever you are on it, the cliff scenery is always spectacular.
Within a 10-mile radius there are several archaeological sights, stone circles and museums to visit.
Local Activities : Walks, fishing, golf, swimming, horse-riding, pleasure flights (airfield at St Just).
The Old Rectory Hotel
   

This gracious and well-proportioned early 19th-century building has a varied past: it started out life as a rectory, became a farmhouse, and is now a comfortable country hotel.
It stands in three acres of garden, and overlooks the picturesque valley of Looe.
To say that it is peaceful is an understatement; it is so quiet as to be almost unsettling for anyone used to the never-ending noise of the city.
The rooms are spacious and furnished to suit the Victorian features of the house, such as the marble fireplaces in the lounge and drawing room and heavy panelled doors.
The lounge (with adjacent bar) is a particularly warm and welcoming room, with Persian rugs, comfortable sofas, and in winter a blazing log fire.
Two of the bedrooms have four-poster beds, and there are also facilities for the disabled.
A five-course dinner of traditional English cooking is offered.
Easily Accessible : The Old Rectory is ideally place for touring the area, and offers access to many splendid walks, including those encompassing the coastal path and Bodmin Moor.
The latter is smaller and less well-known than Exmoor or Dartmoor but is still very beautiful in a bleak windswept way, and, like the others, has its fair share of ancient sites and wildlife.
There are several historic houses nearby, including Cotehele House, a Tudor manor house with spectacular grounds; and Buckland Abbey, with its beautiful gardens and medieval tithe barn.
Other attractions are the slate caverns, Cheesewring stone circles and the Morwellham tin mine.
Local Activities : Walks, golf, boating, sailing, fishing, beaches.
Chetcombe House Hotel
   

The guest sitting room opens onto a terrace which in turn leads out into the garden and a romantic avenue of apple trees.
It is quite lovely; the views which are enjoyed by most of the main south-facing rooms take one's eyes across the beautiful countryside way out into the distance to Blackmore Vale.
One of the first things Colin and Sue Ross did when taking over Chetcombe was to refurbish the bedrooms in pretty Laura Ashley papers and fabrics, and to put them en suite.
The guests' lounge is comfortable, with a wood-burning stove used for cooking chestnuts in the winter.
There is a small a la carte menu, and a table d'hôte menu, which changes daily.
The cuisine is traditional English fare.
Lunch is available on request.
The food is freshly cooked using produce from the kitchen garden and local produce as much as possible.
Easily Accessible : Mere is an attractive town dating back to Saxon times with pretty stone cottages and fine views of Blackmore Vale from Castle Hill, where once stood a medieval fortification.
There are many unrestricted walks around Mere, onto White Sheet Hill, with its nature reserve, over the chalk downlands, and along the Roman road.
There are several pretty villages nearby including Maiden Bradley, with its 14th-century church and Bradley House and Park, the ancestral house of the Dukes of Somerset.
Three miles away, the National Trust's Stourhead House and Gardens have delightful landscaped gardens which are quite beautiful with follies and grottos and Greek temples creating an unusual atmosphere.
The house, a fine Georgian mansion, has a magnificent collection of paintings and Chippendale furniture.
Longleat House and safari park is only 9 miles away.
Local Activities : walks, horse-riding, tennis, golf, cycling.
Wigham
   

This is the house to a thirty-acre farm, with three-quarters of an acre of fruit, vegetable and herb garden and a pretty cottage garden.
The house is very picturesque, with honeysuckle, jasmine, clematis, passionflower and virginia creeper growing up its walls, a thatched roof, oak panelled walls, beams, original ovens, and inglenook fireplaces.
The interior is pretty with ‘cottagey’ wallpapers, interesting black and white prints, locally made furniture including a unique solid yew four-poster bed in the honeymoon suite.
All five bedrooms have colour TV, video, and full private bathrooms.
There are two cosy sitting rooms, a dining room and bar, and a fourth public room, given over to a snooker table.
The four-course evening meal is taken around a magnificent yew table and offers a set starter with garlic bread or home-baked wholemeal, with the farm's own butter.
The main course is set, with dishes such as coq au vin or boeuf en croute and vegetables fresh from the garden.
There is choice of desserts which may include home-made ice-cream, strudel or cheesecake.
Vegetarian diets are catered for.
Easily Accessible : Here, you are right in the depths of the Devon countryside, surrounded by woods, farmland and gentle hills.
The parish of Morchard Bishop, just 1½ miles away, has forty footpaths.
Dartmoor and Exmoor are easily reached for day trips.
Crediton, 8 miles away, is an ancient town, once known for its wool industry now for its cider making.
Thirteen miles away at Tiverton, there are several historically and architecturally interesting buildings including a medieval castle, now incorporated into a private house.
Exeter, 16 miles away, has a fine 13th-century cathedral, a modern university, and a attractive waterfront.
Local Activities : heated swimming pool and stabling at Wigham.
Sunnycliffe Hotel
   

Sunnycliffe is indeed an appropriate name for this small hotel perched on a cliff overlooking the pretty bay of Woolacombe.
To its rear are miles and miles of open moorland and on a clear day the views from all aspects are quite spectacular.
All eight bedrooms have sea views, colour TV, and en suite facilities.
There is a comfortable lounge bar, a reading lounge, and a spacious dining room.
The Bassetts have developed Sunnycliffe for over twenty years.
Betty is the front-of-house person with all the gregariousness needed to put her guests at ease and in the holiday spirit, whilst Victor is the (trained) chef.
He prepares the delicious four-course evening meal with home-made soups and traditional English dishes as his speciality.
Easily Accessible : Directly from Sunnycliffe you can explore sandy beaches, rocky coves, moors and the coastal path with spectacular cliff scenery.
Many of the small, pretty inland and coastal villages can be incorporated into walks.
A little further away you can enjoy the natural beauty of Exmoor National Park.
Barnstaple, the premier market town for most of North Devon, has a 14th-century bridge across the River Taw, and among the modern high street shops, several small traders with a craft market during the summer months.
Six miles north of Barnstaple the Braunton Burrows is thought to be the largest area (2000 acres) of sand dunes in the country.
Within this vast area is a National Nature Reserve with a wide variety (some rare) of wildlife.
Braunton itself has a 13th-century church and a medieval church house, now a museum; You can take a boat trip along the coast to Lundy Island, the famous bird sanctuary.
Local Activities : walks, swimming, sandy beaches, fishing, horse-riding, donkey rides, surfing.
Mount Prospect Hotel
   

This is a comfortable, warm and sunny place to stay with a prize-winning garden laden with tropical and sub-tropical plants and an outdoor heated swimming pool bordered by palm trees.
Its outlook is spectacular, with panoramic views across Mount's bay to St Michael's Mount.
The décor is simple but tasteful.
There are twenty-six individually decorated bedrooms, each with its own colour TV, video link-up, and daily supply of fresh fruit.
The atmosphere is relaxed and convivial and friendships are often forged after dinner in the lounge.
Alexander Blakeley (a keen yachtsman) has a wealth of experience, and he runs Mount Prospect Hotel very professionally with his wife and.daughter.
They are particularly proud of the food; the breakfast is enormous and includes foods such as local smoked haddock and lamb's kidneys.
Bar lunches, full lunches and a four-course evening meal are available.
Fish features strongly as nearby Newlyn has the third highest fish landings in England.
Easily Accessible : the south coast of Cornwall is most spectacular, with its cliffs and coves, magnificent gardens and sandy beaches.
Penzance, once a centre of smuggling, is now very much a holiday resort.
St Michael's Mount, 2 miles away, can be reached by foot when the tide is out or by motor launch at high tide.
Six miles away, at the open-air Minack Theatre, plays are performed with the sea as a backdrop.
To the North there are great expanses of beaches.
St Ives, 7 miles away, is an old fishing port, with an artists community, and good surfing.
A very popular day excursion is to the Isles of Scilly, either by helicopter or ferry.
These islands have a history of shipwrecks and smuggling; St Mary's has a busy harbour, and Tresco has a beautiful tropical garden.
Local Activities : free golf, squash, and offshore sailing at local venues, swimming pool at Mount Prospect, fishing, wind-surfing, water-skiing.
Glenside Hotel
   

Glenside Hotel is beautifully situated on the southern bank of the River Teign, 1/2 mile from the unspoilt village of Shaldon.
It is a white cottage-style residence, built as a private home in 1820.
There are well-kept gardens to the front and rear, and in the latter there grows a very fine example of a Judas tree.
Inside, Glenside is comfortable and attractive, and the homely lounge with separate bar provides a welcoming atmosphere for a relaxing evening drink.
Each bedroom has a colour TV; most have en suite facilities; some have lovely views of the river.
Dinner is home-cooked, and soups and sauces are home-made at Glenside.
Special diets are catered for, but please let the proprietors know in advance.
Easily Accessible : Shaldon is a pretty village well-known for its narrow streets of Regency and Georgian cottages.
There is plenty to do and see in the area and if you like long walks, Britain's longest footpath, the South West Way, is on your doorstep — in total it is 560 miles long.
The old town of Widecombe-in-the-Moor (famous for its fair) has several historic buildings, while Becky Falls, also on Dartmoor are quite spectacular.
Buckfast Abbey, built at the beginning of this century, is famous for its wine and honey.
Along the coast there are several interesting old mining, and fishing villages to visit.
Children will enjoy Paignton Zoo.
Plymouth, Exeter and Torquay are all easily reached for day trips.
Local Activities : Deep-sea and river fishing, sailing, bird-watching, wind-surfing, golf, bowling, tennis.
Coombe House
   

In the grounds of Coombe House, at the top of a valley, in an area  designated of outstanding natural beauty, wildlife flourishes: buzzards, herons, sparrow hawks and tawny owls, wild flowers and the occasional stoat playing with its young can all be seen.
The origins of Coombe House lie in the 14th century (the surrounding farms date back to the 10th and 11th); today it is a Georgian building with an attractive garden, the perimeter of which has been left to flourish without the interfering hand of man.
Two streams run through the four-acre grounds and a pond has been built which attracts local birdlife.
Bunny and Alan Jacques set up Coombe House as a semi-retirement project after a business career in Africa.
The house is spacious and comfortable, with four bedrooms all en suite, a lounge, dining room, and sun lounge/bar.
Bunny loves cooking (she is trained to cordon bleu standard) and after a lifetime's experience of entertaining, cooking for her guests presents no problem.
The cuisine is English and Continental and the four-course evening meal uses fresh local ingredients.
Easily Accessible : Dartmoor, with its woods, tors and ancient sites, and the long coastal path provide numerous walks.
Totnes, 7 miles away, is a pretty, busy town with an Elizabethan market and Norman castle.
The Dartmoor Wildlife Park and Falconry Centre, near Plymouth, 16 miles away, is set in thirty acres of beautiful countryside and has a good collection of big cats.
There are numerous picturesque villages to visit including Berry Pomeroy, a small village which forms part of the Duke of Somerset's estates, and which has a haunted castle.
Exeter, 30 miles away, is an attractive city with a splendid Gothic cathedral.
Local Activities : walks, horse-riding, pony trekking, golf, beaches, swimming, wind-surfing, sailing.
Downhayes
   

This fine example of a 16th-century longhouse, with thick cob walls and open fireplaces, is set in fifteen acres of rolling countryside and commands magnificent panoramic views.
Inside, the rooms are light  and spacious; some are beamed; all have character.
Guests have use of a dining room, a comfortable lounge with a colour television and open fire, a long clematis-clad verandah, a colourful garden, a barn converted into a games room and artist's studio.
Two of the three guest bedrooms are en suite.
Mr and Mrs Hines are welcoming and helpful.
They describe themselves as ‘emigres from the South East’ and truly delight in sharing their lovely home with visitors from all over the world.
Prue Hines is the cook, offering a four-course meal in the evening accompanied by fine china and candlelight.
Fresh vegetables and local produce such as quail and fish feature.
Vegetarian meals are provided by prior arrangement.
In summer and autumn embroidery courses under the tutelage of Jocelyn James are held.
Organised on house party lines, they have proved most popular.
Easily Accessible : Downhayes is set in an area of small working farms with few public footpaths in the immediate area.
However Dartmoor National Park with its wild rocky scenery and prehistoric remains is a short drive away.
Exeter with its 13th-century cathedral, maritime museum is only twenty miles away.
Within a 22-mile radius there are several National Trust properties including: Castle Drogo, a splendid private house; Knightshayes Court, a fine Victorian mansion; the old mining village of Lydford with its spectacular gorge; and Killerton House, an 18th-century residence with an outstanding garden.
Both the north and south coasts can be reached for day trips.
Local Amenities : golf, fishing, walking.
Whittles Farm
   

Whittles Farm is a 200-acre dairy and beef farm, situated in the rich vale of Taunton Deane, between the Quantock and Blackdown Hills, one mile from the pretty village of Beercrocombe.
The house is built of locally hewn blue lyas stone, and originated in 1580, with a new front added in 1850.
This is now almost completely covered by stunning 150  year old virginia creeper which sets the wall alight in autumn with its fiery russet colours.
Inside, the pretty cushions and curtains, exposed beams, inglenook fireplace, log burners and freshly cut flowers (beautifully arranged by a friend) contribute to Whittles' delightful ‘cottagey’ atmosphere.
The rooms are spacious and light with large windows.
All the bedrooms are en suite with colour TV.
There are two lounges, one with a TV.
Dinner is served in the attractive dining room at one shared table.
John and Claire are charming and welcoming hosts (although John is really too busy on the farm to help with the day-to-day running of the house).
Claire greatly enjoys the business, after a career as the Assistant Head of a laboratory.
She enjoys the cooking and it shows in her wholesome and hearty meals.
A four-course evening meal offers local and home-produced foods including beef, lamb, turkey, vegetables, milk and home-baked bread, and local cheddar cheese.
Easily Accessible : There are plenty of splendid walks in the area in the Quantocks and Blackdown Hills, but if you feel like a gentle stroll, you are welcome to explore the farm.
Taunton is an interesting place with a castle reputedly haunted.
Just outside the town you can visit the Sheppey Cider Works.
Two miles away, at Hatch Court, a fine Bath stone mansion built in the Palladian style with a fine collection of paintings and furniture.
Ten miles away you can visit Poundisford Park, a beautiful tudor house with a charming garden.
Brympton d'Evercy, 16 miles away, is a magnificent country home, vineyard, and distillery.
At the Wookey Hole caves and mill, 2 miles outside Wells, you can visit the spectacular caves and Victorian working paper mill.
Dartmoor and Exmoor are within easy driving distance.
Local Activities : Walks, Golf.
Fairmount House Hotel
   

The pretty south-facing conservatory-type bar (overlooking a terraced  garden), the sunny patio and the wire-haired  Dachshunds all contribute towards the homely holiday atmosphere that Maggie and Noel Tolkien have created in this small Victorian hotel.
The terraced Garden is dominated by an absolutely magnificent magnolia tree that blossoms every April — it is not surprising that people tend to return year after year.
The lounge is cosy, with an open fire, and all eight bedrooms are en suite.
Food is fresh, and everything from soups to sweets is home-made.
Herbs, vegetables and soft fruits come from the Garden.
Maggie describes the cuisine as basically British, with occasional pasta dishes and some French and Eastern favourites.
Noel keeps a small but interesting wine cellar.
Easily Accessible : Fairmount House is situated away from the hustle and bustle of the centre of the popular resort of Torquay and closer to the peace of the old and pretty village of Paignton.
Torquay itself is all that a seaside resort should be, with discos, restaurants, cabaret and museum.
It is part of the ‘English Riviera’— so called because of the mild climate and sandy beaches.
The surrounding countryside offers a bewildering number of activities.
There are numerous historical sights, museums, parks, gardens and picturesque villages.
There is an excellent zoo, some spectacular caves, a steam railway, and much more.
For walkers there is the excitement of exploring Dartmoor National Park and the miles of scenic coastal path.
Your hosts, incidentally are able to recommend over one hundred walks!
Local Activities : Walks, horse-riding, golf courses, river and sea fishing water-skiing, boating, swimming.
Ford Farm House
   

Fold Farm House is a picturesque 17th-century farmhouse with cob and stone walls painted white with black shutters, situated in a small village, close to Dartmoor.
It has a secluded garden bordered by a stream.
Nearby is a lovely 14th-century church with the equally old Church House Inn next door.
Inside, it is small but comfortable and  furnished with antiques.
The dining room has a beamed ceiling and a wood-burning stove within a stone fireplace.
The bedrooms are pretty; one, the Patchwork Room, has a king-sized bed with a colourful patchwork quilt and an en suite shower.
Sheila and Mike Edwards are charming and helpful hosts who enjoy looking after their guests.
They will, for instance, bring an early morning cup of tea to your bedroom.
Sheila is an excellent cook, cordon bleu trained.
She and her husband ran a restaurant for eleven years before opening up Ford Farm in 1973.
Dinner is offered most nights (twenty-four hours notice required).
Fresh local produce is used whenever possible, and herbs come from the garden, but weight-watchers beware, real Devon ice-cream is conspicuously present at meals.
If you prefer to eat out, there are several places locally including the Church House Inn which serves good fresh local produce, and a little further away, two riverside pubs, the Waterman's Arms and Maltster's Arms.
Easily Accessible : There are several local walks from the farm, on Dartmoor, 10 miles away, and the South Devon Coastal Path, 7 miles away.
There are some good beaches at Torbay and Start Bay, including Slapton Sands, where there is a nature reserve.
Nearby are several National Trust properties including Compton Castle, a medieval fortified manor house.
Three miles away, you can visit Dartington Hall, a medieval estate with gardens and theatre.
Local Activities : walks, golf, swimming pool.
Moorlands
   

Moorlands gives one the impression of a house that is well lived in — that is, in the best possible sense.
It is a large, friendly and comfortable Georgian building with a delightful landscaped garden which looks out to a paddock, and some thick wooded hills beyond.
The rooms are simply but prettily furnished.
Four out of a total of nine are en suite and two are attic rooms with marvellous views over the village and hills.
The spacious lounge has a TV and in suitable weather, an Open fire.
David and Margaret Holt run the Moorlands with both professionalism and warmth.
They are even willing to give parents a much needed rest in the evenings by listening out for the children (once settled), thereby allowing the parents time off.
When guests arrive they are welcomed with a cup of tea, and every evening a hot or cold drink is offered.
The food is freshly cooked and wholesome.
Margaret's Anita is a trained patisserie chef, who comes in for three days a week to delight people with her delicious home-baked brown bread and scrumptious deserts.
Special diets are catered for on request.
Easily Accessible : The village of Hutton is over a thousand years old, and has many buildings of historic interest, in particular Hutton Court, dating from the late 15th or early 16th century.
Only ten minutes away from the peace of Hutton, is the hustle and bustle of the resort of Weston-super-Mare with its beaches, donkey rides and piers. cider making (from early September) and Cheddar Cheese making are open to the public and well worth seeing.
Bath, Glastonbury, Bristol and Berkeley Castle (home of the Berkeley family for eight hundred years) all make excellent day trips.
There are numerous walks around Hutton, on the Somerset moors, the Mendips and, thirty miles away, the Quantocks and Exmoor.
Local Amenities : Pony rides for children (in the Holts' paddock) golf, angling (fly, course, sea), horse-riding.
Moorlands has a special arrangements for guests with a local country club.
Portreeves Acre
   

Pat and Charles came to Arundel in 1974 as the tenants of the Red Lion public house, and took over this distinctive modern house in 1985 from some very good friends.
By now they are well acquainted with the area and its people and have nothing but good to say about both.
The house itself was built by a local architect in 1974, and is set in an acre of garden, bordered on one side by the gently flowing River Arun, and on the other by green fields: The background is dominated by the castle.
Guest accommodation (which does not include a lounge) is in a linked annexe.
All five bedrooms are on ground-floor level with private bathrooms and colour TV and they all overlook the garden.
No dinner is served but there is a substantial choice of restaurants within five minutes walking distance.
Easily Accessible : Arundel itself is an interesting historical town with many attractions, including the Wildfowl Trust nature reserve, a Saturday antiques market, and a picturesque park.
The pride and joy of the town is the splendid castle, which originated in the 11th century and has been restored through the ages.
There are also enjoyable cruises along the River Arun and in August a lively arts festival takes place.
The surrounding countryside is quite lovely and you can take a pleasant amble along the river or a more challenging hike along the South Downs Way, which passes nearby.
Just outside Arundel you can visit the archaeological remains at Fishbourne Roman Palace and Bignor Roman Villa, the latter being the remains of the largest villa in the country.
Goodwood House and race course are only 10 miles away, and within a 15-mile radius there are numerous historic houses to see.
If you feel like taking a day trip to the coast, Portsmouth with its naval heritage is only 25 miles away and the pleasant seaside resort of Brighton only 20 miles away.
Local Activities : walks, boat cruises, swimming pool, golf, horse-riding.
White Barn
   

This is a modern, single-storied, open-plan house of considerable character.
It is situated in a private road in the pretty, ancient harbour village of Bosham.
Exposed rafters, wall-to-wall pine panelling and the extensive use of beech and oak endow it with a warmth that is too often absent from modern architecture.
The dining room has a thirty foot wall of glass which enables guests to view the attractive landscaped garden and which looks out to a small patio for guests to enjoy in the summer.
There are three bedrooms; the two doubles are en suite, and the single has an adjacent bathroom.
Breakfast and dinner are sociable affairs — both are served at one large table (although guests may use separate tables).
The food is original, tasty and well presented.
Susan particularly enjoys mixing luxury items with traditional English ingredients.
Special diets can be prepared.
No dinner is served in August but there are several good restaurants nearby including a well-recommended Indian restaurant.
Easily Accessible : Bosham is where, according to legend, King Cnut tried and failed to turn back the sea and the village is depicted on the Bayeux Tapestry.
Today one can enjoy a relaxing boat tour around the harbour.
The surrounding countryside is delightful and the South Downs are a very popular walking area.
Chichester, a charming town with a notable festival theatre and Norman cathedral, is 3 miles east.
The Weald and Downland open air museum, 6 miles north of Chichester, has a fascinating collection of houses of historical interest including a 15th-century farmhouse and working smithy which have been saved from dereliction, brought here and restored.
Historic Arundel with its medieval castle (much altered and restored) is 12 miles to the east.
Portsmouth is 15 miles to the west and here one can visit the Mary Rose , HMS Warrior and HMS Victory .
There are numerous stately homes nearby including Petworth House with its excellent fine-art collection.
Local Activities : walks, golf, tennis, sailing, swimming, horse-riding.
Topp's Hotel
   

Topp's Hotel is an engaging blend of the old and the new.
A beautiful grade II listed Regency building, it is furnished in both an antique and modern style.
It is superbly situated in Regency Square in the heart of Brighton, only one hundred yards from the sea-front.
The rooms are spacious and light with refreshing colour schemes.
Nothing is heavy or ponderous.
All the bedrooms have en suite bath-rooms and come complete with writing desk, mini-bar and colour TV.
Two rooms have four-poster beds and sun-catching balconies.
The Bottoms restaurant, in the hotel basement, is run by Topps' proprietors, Paul (who has been in the business for twenty-three years) and his wife, Pauline.
It is open to guests and non-guests.
The food is fresh, simple French and British cuisine accompanied by tasty home-baked rolls.
Pauline does all the cooking using only top quality produce.
(She also does all the lovely flower arrangements for which she has won an award.)
Easily Accessible : Brighton has much to offer the visitor.
Apart from the sea and its attendant attractions, there is a wealth of elegant Georgian and Victorian architecture, the Pavilion, the Dome, an Aquarium and Dolphinarium, the Theatre Royal, nine cinema screens, interesting shops and for the ‘foody’— over three hundred restaurants.
In spring there is a fascinating arts festival and in November the famous London to Brighton Car Run.
Just outside Brighton there are the lovely South Downs to walk on and numerous pretty village to visit.
The quaint village of Rottingdean is just 4 miles along the sea-front.
Local Activities : As above plus golf, swimming, horse-racing, sea-fishing.
Sutherland House
   

This attractive Victorian house, situated near the centre of Deal, is run by the Pitman family.
Both Mr Pitman Senior and Junior were reps who grew progressively despondent over the standard of rooms and services they encountered on their travels.
Their intention when they opened Sutherland House was to create a homely, clean and warm environment.
This is very evident here, and in addition the period furniture, pot plants, unusual porcelain animals, and delicately patterned and coloured fabrics give Sutherland House a very distinctive look and atmosphere.
All the bedrooms have en suite facilities and the pleasant lounge has a colour TV.
The food (up to cordon bleu standard) is home-cooked by Janet Pitman using fresh ingredients.
Dinner is open to non-residents.
Easily Accessible : Deal is an attractive resort, with an unspoilt promenade, a pier — ever popular with fishermen — and two outstanding Tudor castles.
Deal Castle was constructed by order of Henry VIII and is the largest in the network of Tudor coastal defences; Walmer Castle, shaped like a Tudor rose, is the official residence of the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, who, at the present time, is Her Majesty the Queen Mother.
The port of Dover, twenty minutes away, has a splendid castle, and a Roman painted house with well-preserved wall paintings and heating system.
There are numerous picturesque villages (inland and coastal) to visit.
There are stunning walks along the coast and inland over the North Downs Way.
The Pitmans are agents for P & O Ferries and can arrange bookings for day trips to France.
Local Activities : walks, golf, beaches.
Claremont House
   

This sunny Victorian house is situated in a wide tree-lined avenue just off the sedate Hove sea-front.
The rooms are high-ceilinged, with large windows and marble fireplaces (some with ‘coal effect’ fires), and are very prettily decorated in light, flowery wallpapers and fabrics.
All twelve bedrooms have en suite facilities, and are equipped with remote control colour TV; the larger suites have mini bars, large bathrooms (one with a corner bath, another with a jacuzzi), and one has a very pretty four-poster bed with lace trimmings.
The spacious lounge with its well-stocked bar is furnished in soft peachy colours and attractive cane-backed chairs.
Colin and Sue Humber took over Claremont House in early 1989, from myself and my partner Mary Behar.
It had been my first venture into the hotel business and probably my last — I take my hat off to anyone who makes it work.
It is hard work.
Mary and I upgraded the hotel considerably, but the strain of running two businesses at once proved too much.
Colin and Sue took it off our hands and have made further excellent improvements.
I may be a little biased about this one, but I now consider it to be of a very high standard.
Amongst the many things Sue and Colin have worked on, the walled garden is much improved with very pretty herbaceous borders and a lawn laid out with parasoled tables and chairs, where guests can relax with a drink on a warm summer's evening.
Bar snacks are served at lunchtime and in the evening, either in the bar or, weather permitting, in the garden.
The menu is varied and if you choose to do so, you could make a full meal of it — for instance you could choose calamari, followed by Scottish salmon, followed by delicious fudge brownies.
Easily Accessible : Hove is considered a rather more genteel town than Brighton.
As the centre of the latter is only a half hour's walk away, many of its attractions are the same (and for these please see entry for Topp's Hotel).
In Hove, the beaches are a little less crowded, the streets less bustling.
Hove has its own museum and art gallery, which holds some fascinating ‘off beat’ exhibitions (such as‘The Pioneer Movie-Makers of Hove’); the King Alfred Sports Centre, with a leisure pool and water slide; and for steam enthusiasts, the Hove Engineerium.
Chase Lodge
   

Chase Lodge is well-placed, lying near the banks of the Thames in a conservation area, bordered by the Royal Bushy Park.
It is very well served for public transport and is one of the few places in this book where a private car is not essential.
The Lodge has an interesting history; built in 1870, it was once owned by a wealthy coal merchant who provided Hampton Court Palace (just down the road) with fuel.
Later as the home of the local prison warder it became known as ‘the cage’.
Today, it is a comfortable period-style house — something achieved after much restoration work.
To its rear is a gate leading directly to the Palace through the Royal Park with its free-roaming wild deer.
There are three bedrooms, all with colour TV, and en suite facilities and a fridge.
One has a four-poster bed.
There is a small patio garden full of colour and pot plants.
There is a three-course dinner, home-cooked with fresh vegetables.
The menu is simple, with a choice for all courses — Carrot soup, followed by beef in beer, and for dessert a rich chocolate mousse would be typical.
Wine can be purchased at a local store.
There are many restaurants in the area — your hosts will advise.
Easily Accessible : The centre of London with myriad attractions is only twenty minutes away.
Hampton Court, Cardinal Wolsey's splendid palace, can be reached in  fifteen minutes by foot.
Boats will take you up and down the river, stopping off at Kew Gardens, Richmond and its beautiful park and Greenwich Observatory and park, and the National Maritime Museum.
Kingston  itself is a historic town, prosperous since Anglo-Saxon days, it has a famous coronation stone where reputedly seven Anglo-Saxon kings were crowned.
During the summer months, the Wimbledon Tennis Tournament, the Oxford and Cambridge Boat Race and the Twickenham, Kingston and Richmond boat regattas are all to hand.
Richmond Theatre, a popular touring theatre, frequently shows West End productions.
Millers
   

Situated in a conservation area in the historical town of Lewes, Millers derives its name from the millers who in the 19th century sold their produce from the front parlour (now the dining room).
In 1939 it was bought by two genteel but eccentric sisters, Caroline Lucas and Frances Byng-Stamper, who were closely associated with the Bloomsbury group.
They converted the stables into a gallery and here staged art exhibitions, concerts and lectures, and later set up a printing press.
The small timber-framed house dates from the 16th century.
There are three bedrooms for visitors all with private bathrooms and individual character — one has an iron-framed antique rose-painted four-poster bed with lace hangings and a Victorian screen, another has oak beams and a closet (now a shower) where priests are reputed to have hidden during times of persecution.
A good English breakfast or a vegetarian equivalent including home-made preserves and bread rolls made from locally ground flour is served in the beamed dining room.
There is no dinner but Lewes has a good range of restaurants.
The proprietors recommend the Sussex Kitchen at the Pelham Arms which provides good, reasonably priced food.
Also recommended at the other end of the spectrum is Kenwards — described by Tère and Tony as the ‘jewel in Lewes's gastronomic crown’.
Easily Accessible : Lewes is an interesting town dating back to the Norman Conquest with steep narrow streets and a mixture of Georgian and older buildings including antique shops, a ruined castle, museums and a house which once belonged to Anne of Cleves.
The surrounding countryside is very pretty, with the South Downs attracting many walkers.
Stroll along the disused railway line from Lewes to Uckfield and around the Seven Sisters Country Park where you can enjoy the coastal scene.
Opera buffs will enjoy the summer season at Glyndebourne, 3 miles away.
Bloomsbury enthusiasts can visit Charleston Farmhouse and Monks House, both homes to the Bloomsbury set.
Alfriston is a very pretty village with a children's zoo.
The popular seaside resort of Brighton with its flamboyant Royal Pavilion is 8 miles away.
Barn House
This very charming beamed house is in fact an 18th-century converted barn.
It has a pretty stone-walled mature garden with lovely views of the surrounding farmland, downs and the four acres of grounds and orchards.
There are seven guest bedrooms, all with private or en suite facilities, colour TV, and a comfortable guest lounge.
One of the bedrooms has a four-poster bed and a Victorian bathroom.
All the rooms are individually and very attractively designed (Bernadette herself has a keen interest in interior design).
An evening meal is not provided but there are numerous local pubs and restaurants in Lewes, just over 2 miles away.
Easily Accessible : Rodmell is situated on the South Downs Way, so the immediate area is excellent for downland walks, and the River Ouse provides a variety of scenery and wildlife.
For local attractions please see the entry on Millers.
Local Activities : walks, horse-riding, bird-watching.
Blacklands House
   

This is a fine listed Georgian building standing in half an acre of grounds with a stream — once famous for driving the greatest concentration of water mills in Great Britain.
A man-made millpond with a splashing waterfall can be seen and heard from the rear rooms.
Ann and Vernon have decorated and furnished Blacklands in a comfortable and homely style, and have  succeeded in retaining the original  ambience of the house.
Pictures and documents about Robert Tassell, the original owner of Blacklands, who was twice Mayor of Maidstone, hang on the walls of the comfortable TV lounge.
There are five bedrooms all tastefully furnished in a style reflecting the relaxed, ‘old world’ grace that permeates the house.
Dinner is not usually available but there are several pubs and restaurants within walking distance.
They vary considerably in price range from the ‘upmarket’ Wealden Hall which serves French and Italian food, to the locally renowned Indian restaurant, the Gandhi Tandoori.
Easily Accessible : Blacklands is surrounded by the fine countryside of the heart of Kent with its hopfields and oast houses.
Close by is the picturesque village of West Malling with its high street of protected buildings, scheduled as places of architectural interest.
There are numerous walks; directly from Blacklands you can follow the East Malling stream which runs through its garden, through the East Malling village conservation area, and leads right to the source of the stream in the pretty hamlet of West Stree; you can also join the Pilgrims Way, the medieval route from Winchester to Canterbury which can be reached 2 miles away.
There are a profusion of historic buildings to visit; within half an hour's drive you can visit Penshurst Place, a Tudor manor house; Chartwell, once the home of Sir Winston Churchill; Hever Castle, once the home of Anne Boleyn, and Leeds Castle.
Brands Hatch, the famous racing circuit, is a fifteen-minute drive away.
Local Activities : walks, golf, horse-riding, wind-surfing, gliding.
Huggetts Furnace Farm
   

This house dating back to medieval times stands in tranquillity at the end of a long drive.
It has a lovely garden with a heated swimming pool and very fine views of fields and the River Uck — its ‘new’ extension is Tudor.
Inside there are old beams, inglenook fireplaces, oriental carpets and a warm and friendly ambience.
Gillian Mulcare is often very busy  breeding Charolais sheep and growing vegetables, but despite this she is always on hand to assist her guests.
There are three bedrooms which are off their own landing and so are very private.
The prettiest bedroom has oak beams and original wide floor boards.
The sitting room has a colour TV, open fire, and lots of books and games.
Dinner makes excellent use of fresh locally grown and home produce; fresh eggs, fruit and meat all feature.
Packed lunches can be provided by arrangement.
Easily Accessible : There are many footpaths around the farm.
A short drive will take you to the Downs and Ashdown Forest.
A 20-minute drive will take you to Tunbridge Wells, a spa town (you can still sample the waters) with excellent modern shops and some beautiful Georgian architecture, seen particularly in the Pantiles.
Wakehurst Place is a beautiful Elizabethan mansion known primarily for its exotic gardens.
The old locomotives of the Bluebell railway will take you through woods and green fields on a round trip starting from Sheffield Park.
Hever Castle, an impressive Tudor mansion, once the home of the Boleyn family, has a maze, a walled Italian garden, a moat and drawbridge.
The popular sea-side resort of Brighton is 40 minutes away.
Local Activities : heated swimming pool (Huggetts — bring your own swimming towel), walks, bird-watching.
Weavers
   

Nestling on the southern slopes of the Downs, this 16th-century house (once two cottages) is reached by way of a long drive.
From the moment you step inside, the surroundings are impressive, a heavy oak door leads into a beamed hall, with a slate floor and two staircases at opposite ends of the room.
There is a comfortable sitting room, with beams and an inglenook fireplace with bricks worn down by centuries of knife sharpening.
The four guest bedrooms are later additions, and constitute a separate ‘wing’ with their own entrance.
The garden is very pretty, with foxgloves, daffodils and primroses, a lawn enclosed by conifers, willows and ornamental cherry trees, and a pond with water lilies.
Growing along the side of the house, is a vine producing a lesser known wine, ‘Chateau Weaver’!
There is an excellent three-course English breakfast.
No dinner is offered but there are several local pubs and restaurants, including the pub The Feathers situated just one mile from Weavers, which has its own restaurant.
Easily Accessible : Merstham is convenient for Gatwick airport and London is just over half an hour away by train.
There are several pretty and interesting villages to explore including Outwood, where you can see one of England's few remaining watermills.
There are numerous gardens to enjoy: Wilsey, Nymans, Leonards Lee, and Sheffield Park.
Of the many castles and stately homes to visit, Chiddingstone, Hever Castle, Penshurst Place, and Hatchlands are all fairly local.
The area surrounding Weavers is criss-crossed with many bridlepaths and footpaths, including the Old Pilgrims Way, a path running from Winchester to Canterbury, which starts just 200 yards from the house and runs along the top of the Downs.
Sandown Park, Worcester Park and Epsom racecourses and Brands Hatch motor racing circuit are all within half an hour's drive.
Local Activities : walks, horse-riding, golf, sailing, wind-surfing.
Mizzards Farm
   

Set in complete seclusion in thirteen and a half acres of landscaped gardens and fields and surrounded by woodland, Mizzards is an exceptionally attractive 16th-century farmhouse built of brick and stone.
In the delightful garden there is a small lake which is being turned into a watergarden with unusual waterside plants.
It is altogether a very charming, Idyllic setting.
Inside, Mizzards is very prettily decorated; antique furniture, water colours on the walls and Laura Ashley fabrics in the bedrooms.
A baby  grand piano stands in the drawing room and is often played by guests (not this one unfortunately).
The drawing room is an impressive room; a vaulted hall with exposed rafters and a large inglenook fireplace.
All three bedrooms are pretty, and have en suite  bathrooms and colour TV; the main one is particularly luxurious with its large four-poster bed, marble bathroom and fabulous views.
In summer, as one would expect, the large covered and heated swimming pool is very popular, with guests.
Breakfast is an English affair, with fresh grapefruit, kedgeree, kippers and bacon, eggs and tomatoes.
All very delicious and also very filling.
An evening meal is not offered but there are many pubs and restaurants of quality in the area.
Easily Accessible : The lovely South Downs Way (which stretches for eighty miles) starts at Petersfield, just 5 miles away.
There are numerous shorter walks in the area, which has been designated of outstanding natural beauty, with its landscape of weald hills and wooded, rolling farmland.
Petworth House, 10 miles away, is a magnificent 17th-century house with a famous deer park landscaped by Capability Brown.
Six miles away at Cowdray you can watch polo, and 8 miles away at Goodwood, you can visit the races.
Portsmouth with its historic ships (the Mary Rose ,Victory and Warrior ) is 15 miles away.
Local Activities : swimming at Mizzards, walks.
Chequers Hotel
   

This is a very attractive Queen Anne building, situated in a quiet private lane on the outskirts of the pretty village of Pulborough.
It has very fine views overlooking the Arun Valley towards the South Downs.
John and Ann Searancke have lived at Chequers for nearly twenty years and have continually improved the property — their care and love of the house shows.
Today there are eleven bedrooms, all with private bathrooms and colour TV, and individually furnished to a high standard; one has a four-poster bed.
The restaurant is open throughout the year, with a daily change of  menu and friendly and helpful staff.
The food is freshly cooked using local ingredients.
Easily Accessible : There are several walks beginning directly from the hotel, and the ever popular South Down Way starts within 4 miles.
Parham House, an Elizabethan mansion with fine grounds, is only 4 miles away.
The Chalk Pits Museum, 6 miles away, is a fascinating industrial heritage centre with demonstrations by craftsmen — blacksmiths, potters, boat builders, and an exhibition of tools, all within the beautiful setting of the Arun Valley.
Eight miles away you can visit the magnificent Arundel Castle, which originated in Norman times and was rebuilt by the Duke of Norfolk in the 1870s.
Nearby is the Heritage Museum of local history and the Wildfowl Trust bird sanctuary.
Twelve miles away at Goodwood, you can visit the racecourse, stately home, and country park.
Brighton and Chichester are easily reached for a day trip.
Local Activities : walks, golf, fishing.
Shearings
   

Shearings, a charming listed, timber-framed, thatched cottage, dates back to 1575 and is, as they say, ‘as pretty as a picture’.
It lies in a quarter of an acre of secluded garden in the delightful village of Rockbourne.
A winter stream runs past and to enter the house, one has to cross a small wooden bridge.
Inside, the oak beams (some of which are 1000 years old), wood panelling and inglenook fireplaces, give one the impression of stepping back in time — although today, with central heating and electric blankets, guests will not experience the full flavour of Tudor life!
The three bedrooms are simply but attractively furnished, each with its own bath or shower.
The sitting room has a TV, games, and maps to help guests plan their activities.
Although a car is really necessary to make the most of your stay, your hosts will meet you at the nearest railway stations and airports.
Before dinner, Colin and Rosemary join their guests for an aperitif, which is taken in the drawing room in winter, and, weather permitting, in the summer months, by the summer house.
Dinner is an occasion to be savoured with candlelight, cut glass and fine china.
All this, the home-cooking and a complimentary half bottle of wine (per guest) goes down very well with tired walkers.
Easily Accessible : The village of Rockbourne nestles in a hollow in the Downs on the edge of the New Forest and boasts a 13th-century church and a Roman villa.
The beautiful medieval cathedral of Salisbury with its famous four-hundred-foot spire (the tallest in England) is 9 miles away.
Within a 35-mile radius, you can visit numerous historic places, such as Broadlands, home of the Earl of Mountbatten; Stourhead House and landscaped gardens with fabulous mock Roman temples and eerie grottos; and Longleat House and Safari Park.
Local Activities : walks, golf, horse-riding, fishing.
The Old Vicarage
   

The Old Vicarage is a pretty, pink listed building which, despite being four hundred years old, is today mainly Georgian in character.
The windows have views over the medieval roofs of the historic and picturesque town of Rye.
Henry James was inspired to write The Spoils of Poynton whilst living here.
The house is as attractive inside as without.
The five bedrooms are charmingly furnished in Laura Ashley fabrics; all have colour TV and private or en suite facilities.
Two rooms have four-poster beds.
The guest lounge overlooks the pretty garden.
Breakfast is delicious and healthy.
Home-made preserves and free-range eggs are used.
No dinner is provided but there are numerous pubs, hotels and restaurants within walking distance.
Easily Accessible : The town of Rye is one of the original Cinque Ports.
Despite the annual influx of tourists, it has managed to keep its character with medieval, Tudor, Stuart and Georgian houses jostling  for space along the cobbled streets.
The famous 14th-century church has the oldest turret clock in England and magnificent views from the belfry of the surrounding countryside.
You can walk from Rye to the beautiful beach at Camber sands.
One and a half miles away at Rye harbour you can visit the Bird Sanctuary.
The vicinity is rich in places of historic and architectural interest.
Winchelsea, 3 miles away, was created by Edward I and is known as the smallest town in England.
At Bateman's, 14 miles away, you can visit Rudyard Kipling's home and see the working watermill.
Sissinghurst Castle, 15 miles away, has gardens created by Sir Harold Nicolson and Vita Sackville-West.
There are numerous country walks around Rye as well as the Saxon Shore Way, a long-distance path tracing the ancient coastline of Kent for 140 miles.
Local Activities : walks, golf, swimming, sailing, wind-surfing, fishing, bowls, putting, tennis, squash.
The Old Parsonage
   

In the heart of the Friston forest, in a delightful hamlet, this fabulous building, dating back to 1280, is reputed to be the oldest continually inhabited small medieval house in England.
It was built with local greenstone, flint and chalk, by the monks from Wilmington Priory.
It retains several distinctive features such as a mighty stone spiral staircase, heavy wooden shutters (which may have doubled as combat shields), a greenstone fireplace, and exposed roof timbers.
The old crypt, with its exposed beam ceiling, is now used as a library.
To the rear of the house, the lawn surrounded by herbaceous borders leads up to a meadow and copse which is bordered by the northern boundary of the forest.
The house, despite its grand old age, is welcoming and comfortable.
There are three bedrooms, each with private facilities; one, in the original hall, has an impressive high timber roof structure, arched latticed windows and a four-poster bed.
The drawing room has an open fire and heavy arched doors and on chilly afternoons your hosts will light the fire and offer you complimentary tea and crumpets.
Raymond and Angela bought the Old Parsonage in 1987 after fourteen years of teaching in Mombasa.
They are still excited by the house, and enjoy sharing it with their guests.
Sea fishing is a particular passion of Raymond's and he will loan tackle and arrange boat trips.
A hearty breakfast is served.
Dinner is not offered but there are several excellent local eating places — the most famous being the Hungry Monk at Jevington, where advance booking is essential.
Easily Accessible : The area is very good for walking, through forests, hills or along the coast.
The hamlet adjoins the Seven Sisters Country Park where there are some fine coastal and cliff walks, and a shingle beach in the delightful setting of Cuckmere Haven.
A ten minute drive will take you to the Seaford Head Nature Reserve with its badgers, foxes and diverse birdlife.
There are numerous signposted forest walks through Friston Forest.
The South Downs Way passes through the hamlet.
Four miles away you can visit the remains of the 13th-century Wilmington Priory and to its south, the extensive hill painting known as ‘The Long Man’.
The Opera House at Glyndebourne is 7 miles away.
Children will love the educational Drussilas Zoo, 4 miles away.
Local Activities : walks, golf, sea fishing, canoeing, rowing, horse-riding.
Culver Lodge Hotel
   

Culver Lodge Hotel is situated in a quiet part of Shanklin but within easy reach of the town centre and beach.
It has a distinguished history.
It was commissioned for General Gordon (of Khartoum fame) and is mentioned in his diaries as ‘this idyllic retirement oasis by the sea’.
Unfortunately General Gordon was killed before its completion but his two sisters lived there for forty years.
The house was then bought by the island's MP and has seen many worthy visitors in its time — Lord Louis Mountbatten and Douglas Bader, to name but two.
Built in 1884 the house has been modernised but still retains its original charm with a very pretty secluded south-facing garden.
Several  of the rooms have magnificent sea-views.
All are en suite and one, the honeymoon suite, is most attractive with a split level, the bathroom and dressing room on one level, and the bedroom with superb views immediately above.
The Wards are most helpful (they say that running Culver Lodge has restored their faith in human nature as their guests have always been such a pleasure) and are always ready to give advice on places to visit, walks, bus and rail timetables.
The five-course dinner is very good.
Vegetables are fresh from the island and herbs come from the kitchen garden.
The island's strawberries which are available all year round have a reputation for being particularly delicious.
Easily Accessible : The island is known for its largely unspoilt countryside which ranges from chalk downlands to green fields and from sandy beaches to ancient forest.
Much of this land is open to walkers who can use the numerous footpaths and bridleways.
The coastal path alone is sixty-five miles long.
There are many historic and archaeological sites to visit including Osborne House, owned by the English Heritage, where Queen Victoria spent much time after the death of her beloved Albert.
The town of Brading has a Roman villa with fine mosaic floors and a medieval church.
You will see many rare plants in the Botanic Gardens at Ventnor, which benefits from a near-Mediterranean climate.
Local Activities : walks, sea-fishing, golf, and of course, Cowes Week.
The Old Rectory
   

The views of the lovely Derbyshire countryside from this gracious house are wonderful and its location in the tranquil and pretty hamlet of Blore makes it an ideal retreat for the discerning traveller.
There is a double room en suite and two twin rooms with private facilities, all equipped with a television.
The spacious elegant drawing room is warmed in winter by a large log fire.
Well-travelled Stuart and Geraldine Worthington show considerable flair and sophistication as host and hostess and meals are veritable dinner parties, served by candlelight using the Worthingtons' fine glass and silver ware.
Fresh trout, pheasant and venison (when in season) are featured on the menu.
If guests prefer to eat out, two well-acclaimed local restaurants, ‘Old Beams’ and ‘Callow Hall’are only a short drive away.
Easily Accessible : The Peak District National Park has much to offer the visitor.
The famous and very beautiful areas of Dovedale and Manifold Valley provide many delightful walks, and a little further afield, high up on the moors, near to the source of the Rivers Dove and Manifold in the village of Flash (England's highest village) the only wild wallabies in England may be seen.
Only 4 miles from Blore is the old and very pretty market town of Ashbourne which boasts a cobbled square and magnificent 14th-century church.
Alton Towers, 10 miles away, is the largest leisure park in the country and combines a mini-Disneyland with beautiful gardens.
Also well worth a visit are the famous potteries of Royal Dalton and  Wedgwood .
In summer the arts festival at Buxton is a popular attraction.
Local Activities : walks, golf, horse-riding, fishing (day passes available), cycling (cycle hire locally), squash, swimming, pony-trekking.
Easington House
   

The estate of this house dates back to 650 AD when it belonged to the Bishop of Dorchester who was later canonised as Saint Birinius.
The house itself is, not surprisingly, a little younger and dates back to the 16th century when it was owned by the great-great-aunt of President George Washington.
Today it is the home of Malcom and Gwynneth Hearne who have carried out extensive restoration work.
There is a pleasant Victorian conservatory leading into a pretty garden, a fine mahogany furnished dining room and a comfortable guest lounge.
Each of the eleven bedrooms (all with colour TV) is decorated in a unique style, one has beams, another antique pine furniture, all have charm and character.
Breakfast is excellent (croissants and petit pain are imported directly from France) but no dinner is offered.
There are many pubs and restaurants nearby — The Easington, I/2 mile away, serves good pub food and the Duke of Cumberland's Head which specialises in French cuisine, to name but two.
Easily Accessible : Banbury lies on the edge of the Cotswolds and is therefore ideally situated for walking, but it is probably best known for both the nursery rhyme ‘Ride a cock horse to Banbury Cross, To see a fine lady, upon a white horse’ and for its special cakes made from a 300-year old recipe.
It is less well known, probably, that Banbury has been a trade centre since Viking times, and the design of the town still bears witness to this.
Banbury also had the oldest brewery in the country.
Among the historic houses are Broughton Castle, originally a 14th-century castle, later changed into a country house, Wroxham Abbey, a 17th-century gabled house; and Hidcote Manor, famous for its unusual garden.
Fulford House
   

This is a lovely 17th-century country home with beams, sloping walls, a priest hole and lots of character.
It has sixteen acres of pasture and an acre of most attractive and interesting gardens laid out on three levels — the top layer has very fine views across a valley over miles of rolling farmland, and amongst its beautiful trees it boasts a ‘Parrotia Persica Pendula’, twenty feet high and ninety feet round.
Stephen and Marypen bought Fulford House for their family of three, and in particular their daughter Antonia needed land and stabling for her riding career — the horses are always a centre of interest for visitors.
When their children moved away, the house seemed empty and so with some trepidation Stephen and Marypen began to take in guests, their intention being that every guest should be ‘entertained as a friend’.
They are both friendly and helpful and take an interest in their guests itineraries making sure that everyone makes the most of their stay.
The three bedrooms are of a high standard, furnished elegantly with antiques, each with its own sitting area, private bathroom and colour TV.
Evening meals are by prior arrangement only, and generally Marypen likes to cook for her guests three times a week.
She and her husband eat en famille with their guests at a circular Georgian, candlelit table.
On non-cooking nights there are a variety of local pubs and restaurants to choose from.
Easily Accessible : Culworth is an ancient settlement, standing on a prehistoric trade-route and mentioned in the Domesday Book.
It has a beautiful 13th-century church and a fine manor house, Sulgrave, also mentioned in the Domesday Book and once the home of George Washington's ancestors.
Within half an hour's drive from Fulford you can walk on the Cotswolds, or more immediately there are numerous footpaths and country lanes around the village.
Banbury, 7 miles away, was founded as a Saxon settlement and today is a busy market town.
Seventeen miles away in the Rollrights you can examine a mysterious circle of early Bronze Age stones.
Twenty-three miles away at Warwick, you can visit one of the most magnificent of English castles.
Oxford with its splendid college buildings, theatres and museums is 30 miles to the south.
Local Activities : walks, golf, horse-riding.
Shottle Hall Farm
   

Shottle Hall is an attractive mid-19th-century farmhouse set in acres and acres of farmland and a large colourful garden in the picturesque valley of Ecclesbourne.
The area is noted as much for its natural beauty as for its industrial history — it was here, in the lush valleys of Derbyshire that the first stirrings of the Industrial Revolution were felt and today working mills and factory shops testify to this heritage.
Inside, Shottle Hall is spacious and comfortable.
Each bedroom has distinctive features and outlook.
The lounge has an adjoining bar for guests to enjoy conversation in a relaxing atmosphere, and in a separate room a game of snooker can be enjoyed and TV viewed.
The four-course dinner is home-cooked.
Rolls and bread are home-baked and the delicious sweets are home-made.
Vegetarian meals are available but please order in advance.
Easily Accessible : The countryside is stunning.
The Sett Valley Trail will take you along paths created from disused railway lines, past unspoilt villages and through areas of fascinating wildlife.
This trail is open to walkers, cyclists and horse-riders.
More rugged landscape can be found in the Peak District National Park to the north-west.
Belper itself is an interesting town with echoes of its grand industrial past seen in the iron-framed North Mill, and the forbidding old Victorian poorhouse, now a modern hospital.
There are many historic houses in the area including Kedleston Hall, built in 1759 and regarded as Robert Adam's finest work; and Wingfield Manor, a romantic ruined manor where Mary Queen of Scots was once imprisoned.
Local Activities : walks, cycling (cycle hire locally), horse-riding, golf, course-fishing.
The Croft Hotel
   

This attractive four-hundred-year-old listed building situated in a conservation area in the old town of Bridgnorth was once a Temperance hostel.
Today after much restoration work by its proprietors, Gill and John Wilding, it is a warm, intimate and happily intemperate hotel with exposed beams and inglenook fireplaces adding considerable character.
All twelve bedrooms are carefully colour co-ordinated and have en suite facilities and a colour TV.
There is a pleasant rear garden.
In a converted stable and bath-house, self-catering accommodation is offered.
There are two dinner menus to choose from (a three-course or four-course meal) and food is fresh and well prepared.
Your genial hosts will recommend several excellent local restaurants.
Special diets are catered for with advance notice.
Easily Accessible : Bridgnorth is a pretty and ancient town, dating back to the 10th century, with a good level of conservation and with the unusual feature of being divided by a river — the Severn.
It offers a theatre, sports facilities (listed below), some fine churches and an open market on Saturdays.
The county of Shropshire in the Marches has some beautiful and varied scenery.
Walkers will enjoy the Brown and Clee hills, 11 miles away — where on a clear day one can see eleven counties; and 20 miles away, the Stretton Hills.
Take a trip on the Severn Valley Steam Railway which runs through 14 miles of the Wyre Forest.
The UNESCO World Heritage site of the Ironbridge Gorge marks the birth place of the Industrial Revolution.
The Lawns at Broseley, the home of John Wilkinson who built the first iron bridge, now houses a large impressive collection of English pottery and porcelain.
Local Activities : walks, bowls, tennis, leisure centre, golf.
Thorn Hayes
   

Thorn Hayes is a comfortable Victorian house situated in the Victorian spa town of Buxton, with a mature, well-kept garden which is much enjoyed by guests.
There are seven bedrooms, all en suite, a dining room with separate tables and a relaxing lounge bar.
There is a full choice of evening meal, including a vegetarian dish.
Pat makes all her own patés, sauces and desserts, as well as the breakfast marmalade.
Local produce is used.
Pat and David have known each other since they were eight years old and astonishingly they say they always knew they would marry!
Both are very well acquainted with the area, but David is particularly  knowledgeable , having lived in Buxton all his life.
Easily Accessible : Buxton was discovered by the Romans who named it rather poetically ‘the spa of the Blue Waters’.
It is an interesting town with several historical buildings including the Old Hall, where Mary Queen of Scots once stayed, and a wealth of fine Georgian architecture seen at its best in the famous Crescent.
Poole's Cavern in the Buxton Country Park is a very impressive natural cave and the source of the river Wye.
Buxton is host to an annual summer arts festival.
The surrounding countryside of the Peak District National Park is very beautiful and to the north of Buxton, the Goyt Valley affords some excellent walks.
Lyme Park has 1323 acres of land with red deer and superb views of the Peak District, Pennines and the Cheshire Plain.
The Hall is a very fine Elizabethan mansion with a fine collection of tapestries.
Local Activities : golf, swimming pool (containing spa water), country park.
Purlins
   

Purlins is the highly original dream house of Olga and David Hindley, located in a pretty, tranquil Cambridgeshire village.
With its galleried  dining hall lying off the octagonal entrance hall, one sees echoes (intentionally) of a medieval manor house.
It is elegantly furnished with antiques.
The guests' lounge in the conservatory is very comfortable, and is home to a variety of plants including a 10-foot Kentie.
It opens onto two acres of gardens and woodland.
Olga and David have planted over two hundred trees which supplement those existing before the house.
There are three attractive bedrooms, all with en suite facilities and colour TV.
David and Olga are both retired from Cambridge University where David was a principal lecturer and member of the music faculty and where Olga was a music librarian.
They stress that as Purlins is run on a bed and breakfast basis, it is normally closed from 10.30am to 5pm every day.
However, given prior notice, they will accommodate guests' needs.
No dinner is offered but there are many and varied eating establishments within a short drive.
A chauffeuring service is offered using a dashing S-type Jaguar.
Easily Accessible : Little Shelford is an ancient village with thatched-roof houses and a flint church mentioned in the Domesday Book.
You can take a 12-mile or 20-mile circular walk around the village.
Cambridge is only 4 miles away with a wealth of beautiful architecture; amongst other treasures, the excellent Fitzwilliam Museum and the University Botanic Garden.
The choirs of King's and St John's are renowned for the beauty of their singing.
In summer you can enjoy punting along the river Cam, and the Cambridge Festival of music, drama and film.
Fifteen miles north of Cambridge is the splendid Romanesque cathedral at Ely.
Nine miles away, Audley End House was once the Royal residence of Charles II and has a fine park landscaped by Capability Brown.
Three miles south the Imperial War Museum has an exciting collection of military and civil aircraft at Duxford airfield.
A 30-minute drive will take you to Newmarket, home of English horse-racing, where you can watch the horses being exercised on the heath.
Wimpole Hall, 8 miles south west of Cambridge is a spectacular 18th-century mansion with a 350-acre park and a farm dedicated to rare breeds of animals.
The Coach House
   

This gracious 18th-century converted coach house is situated in the small and peaceful village of Dry Drayton, five miles north-west of Cambridge.
It stands in two acres of landscaped garden which was once a paddock for horses, and has a delightful lily pond and a revolving Victorian summer house.
The Coach House originally provided stabling for a wealthy rector who lived next door.
Inside it retains an old forge, providing winter visitors with a truly warm welcome.
Catherine has considerable interest in interior design and the Coach House is attractively decorated throughout; each room (all face south) has its own mood and character and one has a four-poster bed.
Half-way up the handsome pine staircase that Catherine installed, a collection of locally bought antiques is displayed for guests to purchase.
There is an elegant conference room and a comfortable lounge with a TV.
Breakfast is taken in the large dining room with mahogany tables with home-made marmalades and preserves, and locally made honey is offered.
Packed lunches are provided on request.
No dinner is offered, but there are many well-recommended pubs and restaurants in the area including The Plough at Coton, 2 miles away, which gives excellent value for money, and is open seven days a week for lunch and evening meals.
Easily Accessible :(see Purlins, p. 125)
Dene House
   

Dene House is an elegant ivy-covered Victorian residence which rests in peace and tranquillity amidst lovely gardens.
The bedrooms are warm and comfortable and are equipped with colour TVs.
Fiona Hughes, a trained cordon bleu cook, makes good use of fresh produce from the  large kitchen garden.
If guests wish to eat out, there are several nearby pubs including the Caxton Gibbet Inn.
Easily Accessible : Dene House is a perfect base for touring East Anglia and visiting Cambridge.
Four miles away is Wimpole Hall, a 17th-century mansion which has a farm for rare breeds.
At Duxford airfield you can see the Imperial War Museum's collection of military and civil aircraft.
Anglesey Abbey, an Elizabethan manor house, has splendid gardens.
Stretton Lodge
   

Kathy and Eric Price run this small hotel as an ‘extended home’ which should give you a good idea as to its all pervading atmosphere of warmth and hospitality.
It is elegantly furnished in light, pleasant colours.
A crystal chandelier hangs in the lounge and the marble fireplace has a newly acquired ‘dancing horseshoe’ Victorian grate.
There are high ceilings, tall windows, moulded cornices and a splendid original staircase with a mahogany handrail sweeping down into a carved lion's head.
The pretty walled garden shelters a patio.
The nine bedrooms are decorated with charm and character, some with pretty flower fabrics and pine furnishings, others more grandly with extravagant drapes and period furniture.
All have en suite facilities, a mini-bar and colour TV.
One bedroom at garden level has direct access to the patio.
A set evening meal is offered (by arrangement) of traditional English cooking.
For guests wishing to sample some of Cheltenham's many restaurants, Kathy and Eric will recommend one to suit your tastes, be it vegetarian, Italian, a steak house, or gourmet cuisine.
Easily Accessible : Cheltenham is one of the most elegant and complete of all our Regency towns with excellent antique shops, theatres, and colourful gardens.
Its flower-decked balconies have won it the ‘Britain in Bloom’ award.
It is ideally placed for exploring the Cotswolds, which are dotted with beautiful old towns and villages famed for their warm golden limestone buildings — Bourton-on-the-Water, Stow-on-the-Wold, Chipping Campden and Broadway are all a delight to stroll through.
Berkeley Castle, built by the Normans in 1117, is still the home of the Berkeley family who gave their name to Berkeley Square in London.
Chedworth Roman villa, 8 miles south-east from Cheltenham, has some wonderfully preserved mosaics and a water shrine fed from an ancient spring.
Sudeley Castle, the palace of Henry VIII's sixth wife Katherine Parr, has some gruesome dungeons; a less macabre attraction are the displays given by the resident falconer.
Bath, Bristol, Stratford-upon-Avon, Oxford and the Forest of Dean are all easily reached for day trips.
Noel Arms Hotel
   

This was a 14th-century coaching inn (the oldest inn in Campden) where, apparently, King Charles II stayed during the battle of Worcester in 1651.
The whole house is laden with interesting antiques, such as a fabulous collection of armour, muskets and swords.
There are eighteen bedrooms; each is individually furnished, and has private facilities and a colour TV.
Two of the bedrooms have magnificent four-poster beds.
The bar is warm and cosy, with an open fire and oak beams.
The lovely oak-panelled dining room seats up to sixty guests, and offers a very traditional English menu, which includes a number of vegetarian dishes.
Obviously, as it is situated near to the famous Vale of Evesham, the market garden of England, the produce is excellent.
Easily Accessible : Chipping Campden was mentioned in the Domesday Book, and is lined with picturesque 13th-century houses, including the old market hall, almshouses and St John's parish church.
There are many walks in the vicinity, the most popular being the Cotswold Way, which starts here, and finishes in Bath.
If you climb Dovers Hill, you can see the wonderful views across the Vale of Evesham to the Malvern Hills.
Three miles from Chipping Campden are the National Trust gardens at Hidcote Manor.
The beautiful Cotswold town of Broadway is just 5 miles away.
Stratford-upon-Avon, home to the Royal Shakespeare Theatre, is just 12 miles away.
At Beckford, on the southern slopes of Bredon Hill, you can visit Beckford Silk Centre and view the processes involved in the dyeing and printing of their unusual silks, and make purchases at the adjacent store.
Local Activities : walks, horse-riding, golf.
The Grange
   

The oldest part of this spacious house dates back to 1720, with two wings added later.
The rooms are high-ceilinged but warm colours, myriad plants and dried flowers, patchwork and three purring ginger cats create a cosy atmosphere.
The two guest bedrooms have private bathrooms and colour TVs.
Mirco is Czech and Annette is half-French so you can expect some creative cuisine here.
Dinner is taken at a large pine table in the breakfast room or in the dining room at a rather grand table, polished and adorned with the best china, silver-ware and of course, candles.
Annette makes the bread, jams, jellies, marmalade, soups and desserts and Mirco enjoys experimenting with the likes of poppy seeds and curd cheese.
Herbs and vegetables come from the garden as do the pre-prandial hazelnuts.
Easily Accessible : The surrounding countryside is very pleasant.
From the Grange you can walk to Calke Park where deer and sheep wander in magnificent surroundings.
Twenty-five miles away lies the entrance to the Peak National Park where there are many waymarked walks.
Melbourne has a fine Norman church and at Melbourne Hall there are delightful formal gardens of terraced lawns, a lake and avenues of limes to amble through.
The small town of Ashby-de-la-Zouch was named after a Breton nobleman and has a castle where in 1569 Mary Queen of Scots was imprisoned.
In a different vein, a half-hour drive will take you to the gardens and leisure park at Alton Towers.
Eight miles north of Melbourne lies Derby where you can visit the interesting part-18th century and part-modern cathedral.
Bellows Mill Cottage
   

Hodges have lived here for eight generations but Rachel Hodge is relaxed about most things her guests do — even the Czechoslovakian guests who played tennis on her court in brown walking shoes and underwear!
The house, which was a working mill until 1955, has twenty-one acres of grounds which encompass a wood, three lakes and an all-weather tennis court.
Accommodation is provided in the pretty, converted stables that surround the courtyard.
The bedrooms are attractively decorated with chintzy materials and antiques and have mini-bars and TVs.
There is a small kitchenette available for use at any time by guests who wish to make tea or coffee, a small dining room, and a patio.
Dinner is offered, but if guests wish to eat out, there are several local pubs and restaurants recommended by Rachel.
These include The Bell at Aston Clinton and The Kings Head at Ivinghoe.
Easily Accessible : Bellows Mill is situated on the edge of the villages of Eaton Bray and Edlesborough.
The surrounding countryside is very pretty and there are numerous walks, many of which start a couple of miles from the house.
These include Ivinghoe Beacon, the Ridgeway long-distance footpath and Two Ridges Link.
Whipsnade Zoo is only 2 miles away.
Woburn Abbey, a beautiful 18th-century mansion with a fine art collection and 3000-acre deer park, is 10 miles away.
St Albans with its Verulamium, ruined abbey and rose gardens is 15 miles away.
Hatfield House, a very fine Jacobean House with gardens and park, is 20 miles away.
Local Activities : fly fishing —(£9 per day), all-weather tennis court, table tennis (at Bellows Mill), walks, horse-riding, clay pigeon shooting, hot-air ballooning, squash (locally).
Dalkeith
   

Overlooking the village green, in a pretty conservation village, this fine Victorian house has a half-acre garden, two greenhouses (one has a vine that produces heaps of succulent black grapes), a sunken-terraced garden with lily pond and an affectionate three-legged cat.
The panelled dining room and lounge (with TV) are sun-lit in the morning (in cooler weather the dining room glows with a log fire), and the four comfortable spacious bedrooms are light and airy and attractively furnished in period furniture and antiques.
On arrival guests are treated to a cup of tea or coffee by the charming Jan Slater.
Dinner is offered (with advance warning) and meals are produced from organically grown fresh and local produce — eggs come from your hosts' free-range hens.
The home-made bread, pies and puddings are a speciality.
Vegetarians are catered for.
Easily Accessible : East Runton is a pretty Norfolk fishing village with (apart from some basic stores) two good pubs (both serving food) and a Greek restaurant.
Just a few minutes will take you to a sandy beach.
Half an hour's car journey will take you to Norwich and the Broads.
There are several National Trust properties nearby including: Sheringham Park, a beautiful landscaped garden with exciting views; and Blickling Hall, a 17th-century mansion with a park open for riding and walking, and magnificent state rooms.
There are numerous walks directly from East Runton — footpaths and bridleways lead out into the lovely gentle countryside and unspoilt coast.
Local Activities : walks, bird-watching, golf, sailing, horse-riding, sandy beaches.
31 Egremont Street
   

This delightful 17th-century house has  wisteria and roses crawling up its south wall and a walled garden laden with beautiful trees and shrubs — a ginkgo, mulberry, tulip tree and several varieties of Magnolia to name but a few.
The ageing orchard is full of spring bulbs and old fruit trees.
The kitchen garden has a large conservatory with an old vine and cucumber frames straight out of Beatrix Potter.
There is also a grass tennis court which guests are welcome to use.
The south-facing house is situated in one of the oldest streets in Ely and boasts superb views of the medieval cathedral.
There are two spacious bedrooms furnished as bed-sitting-rooms with arm-chairs, table and colour TV.
Throughout the house there are interesting antiques, clocks, paintings, and lovely oak beams.
The house is run on a bed and breakfast basis by the Friend-Smiths — an encouraging name!
Breakfast, served in the dining room at a large Victorian mahogany table, is prepared to order with locally baked wholemeal bread, farm eggs and home-made marmalade.
Dinner is not provided but there are nearly thirty restaurants and pubs in Ely.
Jeremy is a maths teacher and Sheila, who now runs the business, was once a history teacher which accounts for her detailed knowledge of the area — a great help to any visitor.
Easily Accessible : Ely is an ancient market town famous for its magnificent medieval cathedral and stained glass museum.
It is full of narrow winding streets and beautiful Tudor buildings and has an attractive waterfront.
There are many pretty walks in the area, along the banks of the River Ouse, the Hereward Way, a 110-mile long-distance footpath which passes through Ely, and the medieval track known as Bishops Way which traces the 12-mile route used by the Bishops of Ely from their palace in Ely to their country residence in Little Downham.
Ten miles away the Welney Wildfowl Refuge is famous for its floodlit sessions at dusk when a multitude of birds return to feed.
Newmarket race course and the National Horseracing Museum are 12 miles away.
Cambridge is 16 miles away.
Local Activities : walks, boating, fishing, golf.
Yews Farm
   

This attractive country home dates back to the 16th century when it was once a farm labourer's cottage.
It is set in a garden and fields which look south towards a fresh stream and woodland beyond.
Across the courtyard lies an Elizabethan building, believed to be the original farmhouse.
Much has been added to the house over the years and today, with its elegant 18th-century front rooms, there is little to remind one of its humble beginnings.
There is a restful green drawing room with a log fire, piano and colour TV.
The dining room is rakishly decked out in Regency stripes with deep red walls.
There are two comfortable bedrooms with en suite bathrooms.
Dinner is offered by prior arrangement.
The food is home-cooked using fresh ingredients, and vegetables and herbs from the kitchen garden.
Easily Accessible : There are several local walks which start directly from the house, taking in the village (one mile from Yew Farm) and the surrounding woods and fields.
Sherwood Forest Country Park, once the haunt of Robin Hood, has numerous waymarked walks among its famous glades and great oaks.
Two and a half miles away, you can visit Roche Abbey, a Cistercian monastery.
Chatsworth, the splendid stately home of the Duke and Duchess of Devonshire, with its marvellous painted walls, woodcarvings, tapestry and paintings, and Capability Brown's landscaped park, is within an hour's drive.
Conisbrough Castle, 7 miles away, has an unusual keep and is the setting for Sir Walter Scott's Ivanhoe .
Three miles away at Doncaster, you can enjoy the famous race-meetings and horse sales.
The cathedral cities of York and Lincoln are both within an hour's drive.
Local Activities : walks, golf, horse-riding.
The Emplins
   

This delightful timber-framed listed building was once the medieval home of six priests, and then became a rectory, which it remained until 1840.
In all this time it has only ever had three owners.
When Rosalind and Philip first moved in, it was in a pretty parlous condition, with, amongst other nightmares, an elder tree with its roots in the great hall and its branches spreading in through the windows.
Today, renovated and furnished with family antiques and oriental rugs, it is on show, not only to guests, but to the general public.
Many fine original features remain, the oak beams, the 16th-century wall paintings, and in the great hall, a huge fireplace which can take thirty-inch logs.
The garden too has been saved from neglect.
It has pretty herbaceous borders and an attractive paved herb garden, where on fine mornings breakfast is served.
Rosalind bakes her own bread and croissants and will prepare an evening meal with advance notice.
Fresh herbs and vegetables come from the garden.
If guests wish to eat out, there are several local pubs in the village, and 16 miles away, in Cambridge, there are numerous excellent eating establishments.
Easily Accessible : Emplins is situated in a conservation area in the village of Gamlingay, which among its attractions boasts a vineyard producing white wine, Hayley Wood, a naturalists' paradise.
There are many local walks including the long-distance Greenlands walk which starts from the village and finishes at Dunstable.
A twenty-five minute drive will take you to the races at Newmarket.
Seven miles away, the National Trust property of Wimpole Hall is a fine house, with lovely grounds and a collection of ‘rare breed’ animals.
A very pleasant day trip can be spent journeying through the pretty Suffolk villages of Little Cavendish and Long Melford, and the medieval town of Lavenham where a delicious meal is to be had at the Swan.
Local Activities : golf, fishing, horse-riding.
The Old Rectory
   

The red-brick Victorian rectory, commissioned by the Bishop of Norwich, is reached by way of a sweeping gravel drive.
It stands in three acres of garden, woodland and paddock in the delightful village of Gissing.
Inside, high ceilings, plaster cornices, marble fireplaces and a pine staircase contribute to its air of grandeur.
The large sash windows open up to embrace the beautiful surrounding countryside.
There are three bedrooms, one with an en suite shower room, all decorated very prettily with floral prints.
The comfortable drawing room has a TV and a log fire.
A four-course dinner is available, by prior arrangement.
The cuisine is traditional English using good quality fresh and local ingredients.
Low fat and vegetarian diets and packed lunches can be provided if adequate notice is given.
A house wine is on offer, or you can bring your own.
Occasionally dinner is not offered, in which case there are several excellent local restaurants and pubs including the gourmet but expensive Fox and Goose at Fressingfield and the Ram, which serves good pub food.
Easily Accessible : There are many walks immediately around Diss and Harleston and along Marriotts Way, a path following an old railway line.
Diss itself is an interesting part-Tudor town, built around a 6 acre lake.
Eight miles away at the Bressingham gardens, you can see the famous perennials, steam engines and garden shop.
At the Otter Trust in Earsham, 15 miles away, you can revel at the sight of the world's largest gathering of otters.
The fine medieval city of Norwich, 17 miles away, has a cathedral, castle and market.
Thirty miles away, Wroxham Barns has a collection of traditional 18th-century working barns set in ten acres of parkland.
The unspoilt coastline with its pretty resorts such as the harbour town of Southwold, is only 25 miles away.
Bury St Edmunds Cambridge, Ely and the Broads are all easily reached for a day trip.
Local Activities : walks, golf, swimming pool, horse-riding.
The Bauble
   

Nowell, a solicitor, and his wife Penny have taken thirty years to develop the lovely garden at Baubles which now boasts ornamental and wildlife ponds and a wide variety of trees, shrubs, a tennis court and a swimming pool.
The house has been renovated and modernised but retains beams, an inglenook fireplace and a lot of character.
There is a charming drawing room and dining room furnished with antiques.
Five guests can be accommodated and each bedroom is furnished in a ‘country house’ style and equipped with, amongst other things, a sewing kit and a radio or TV.
Dinner is not available but a full English breakfast is offered.
Within a five mile radius there are several pubs and restaurants.
Nowell and Penny recommend the Angel in Stoke-by-Nayland which they say has become a favourite with visitors, and the Terrace Restaurant which provides a sophisticated atmosphere.
Easily Accessible : The rivers Brett and Stour, closely associated with the painter John Constable, lie within walking distance.
There are interesting walks in the countryside surrounding the medieval towns of Lavenham, Long Melford and Sudbury, once centres of the Suffolk wool trade.
Sudbury remains a bustling market town and is still rightly proud of its famous son, Thomas Gainsborough, whose house is open to the public.
Lavenham and Long Melford have many interesting buildings, the former in particular retains its medieval character.
The Suffolk Coastal Path passes through areas designated ‘of outstanding natural beauty’.
Eight miles from the Bauble lies the historic town of Colchester, an ancient town dating back to the 1st century BC with Roman remains, a ruined Norman castle, a 15th-century abbey, museums and excellent shopping facilities.
Local Activities : swimming and tennis at the Bauble, walks, Higham point-to-point with four meetings a year, golf, walks, squash, sailing, fishing.
Sutton House Hotel
   

This is a comfortable Edwardian house, whose rather ordinary exterior completely belies its unusual and attractive interior.
It is conveniently situated close to the town centre and the sea, which can be seen from several of the  rooms.
Its.
eight comfortable bedrooms are tastefully decorated and furnished, five have full.
en suite facilities, and all have colour TV.
There is an a la carte dinner menu of traditional English food home-cooked using fresh vegetables.
Bar meals are also on offer until late.
Easily Accessible : There are miles and miles of sandy beaches and dramatic cliff-top scenery to enjoy.
The coastal path, Peddars Way, and Thetford Forest provide many interesting walks.
Three miles away at Heacham you can visit the only lavender farm in England and 5 miles away, at Park Farm in Snettisham, children can enjoy special guided tours and nature trails around this working farm.
Sandringham House, the Queen's country residence, is 7 miles away.
Little Walsingham, 15 miles from Hunstanton, is a beautiful village with a collection of medieval buildings including the most complete remains of any Franciscan friary in Britain.
Fifteen miles away, you can visit Houghton Hall, home of the Marquess of Cholmondeley, where on summer weekends the British Army's regimental bands perform the ancient ceremony of ‘Beating the Retreat’.
There are RSPB reserves at Snettisham Beach and Titchwell, both 5 miles away.
The beautiful city of Norwich, and Peterborough with its cathedral and excellent shops, are both within 50 miles.
Local Activities : walks, golf, wind-surfing, water-skiing, sandy beach.
Conygree Gate
   

This solid-looking house is built of Cotswold stone and dates from around 1648.
It was once a farmhouse, and now the outbuildings are being converted into self-catering accommodation.
There are pretty front and back gardens, roses growing round the front entrance, and inside, lots of exposed beams.
Kathryn Sykes has run a pottery, and worked for many years as a window dresser and she has used her sense of style and colour to decorate each room individually.
Most of the eight bedrooms are en suite and have colour TV.
The lounge is comfortable and has an open fire in winter.
 Kathryn cooks a traditionally English meal every evening using fresh local produce and vegetables.
If guests wish to eat out two local pubs, The Kings Head in Bledington and the Chequers Inn at Churchill, are recommended.
Easily Accessible : There is a large number of footpaths and bridleways in the area, and two long-distance paths, the Oxford Way and the Cotswold Way, pass within a few miles of the hotel.
The Cotswold Wild Life Park is home to many exotic species of animals ranging from big cats to tarantulas.
Nearby is the very attractive town of Burford, built of rich golden Cotswold stone.
Bibury, 8 miles north-east of  Cirencester , is generally held to be the most attractive of all the Cotswold towns and has a trout farm you can visit.
Nearby at Arlingtoll Mill museum you can see a display of rural crafts many of which are no longer practised.
Cirencester has some excellent Roman remains and a museum.
A visit to the Westonbirt Arboretum with its 13,000 trees and shrubs is always a sight for sore eyes.
Oxford, Cheltenham and Bath are all within easy reach for day trips.
Local Activities : walks, golf.
Withenfield
   

In this impressive Georgian house guests can use the original internal bell system, once used by the ruling classes, to call room service!
The house is elegant, furnished with antiques, and has some fine features such as the marble fireplace in the drawing room, and a conservatory with Italian terrazzo flooring.
All the bedrooms are en suite, and are equipped with colour TV, one has a four-poster bed, and the spacious master bedroom has a luxurious bathroom with a corner bath.
There is a pretty half-acre garden where guests can enjoy afternoon tea or a pre-prandial drink.
Snacks, salads, and a four- or five-course dinner using fresh and local produce and home-grown herbs and vegetables are provided.
Wye salmon, local trout and lamb, and Hereford beef, are regular features.
If guests wish to eat out, your friendly and welcoming proprietors, Jim and Pam, will recommend local restaurants and pubs.
Easily Accessible : Leominster is an attractive market town with a weekly antiques sale, some fine timber buildings, and a Norman church which features a ducking stool (last used in 1809) and a beautiful 14th-century chalice.
The surrounding countryside is largely unspoilt and is dotted with picturesque villages (such as the thatched and timbered Brampton Bryan, and Eardisley, with its 30-ft wide oak) and cider orchards.
There are many local walks, including Offa's Dyke (with its 168 miles of rugged footpath), and in a gentler vein, the 170 acres of the wooded Queenswood Country Park.
A few miles north of Leominster, Berrington Hall is an 18th-century house with gardens designed by the father-in-law of Capability Brown.
Croft Castle, 5 miles north-east of Leominster, is a 14th-century fortified mansion with extensive grounds and magnificent views of the Welsh borders.
The attractive town of Hereford is only 12 miles away, and Worcester is 20 miles.
Local Activities : walks, golf, fishing, leisure centre.
Oakleigh House Hotel
   

This is an attractive Edwardian house with a delightful garden (which overlooks Stowe Pool with its water sports facilities), and a large Conservatory.
Its proprietor was a sea captain from 1953 to 1986, when he went into partnership with friends and bought Oakleigh House; he bought his partners out in April 1988.
There are ten bedrooms, each with colour TV, and a lounge with a bar.
The restaurant has a very imaginative a la carte menu which includes such culinary delights as ‘Halibut with Lobster Mousse’, ‘Smoked Goose Breast served with Orange and Pink Peppercorn Salad’.
Sounds delicious!
Easily Accessible : Lichfield is famous for being the home town of Samuel Johnson, and his birthplace, now a museum, is open to the public.
Incidentally, Dr Johnson believed that here (in Lichfield) was ‘genuine civilised life in an English provincial town’.
Its spectacular cathedral has three spires known as the ‘Ladies of the Vale’.
Altogether a most attractive and unspoilt city, it has some pretty medieval streets, some of which are pedestrianised.
The city is also host to annual arts, jazz and folk festivals.
Eight miles outside the city, the Drayton Manor Park is a 60-acre leisure park with a zoo and some breathtaking fun rides.
The Walsall Arboretum, also 8 miles away, has over two hundred varieties of trees and shrubs in 33 acres of land.
Ten miles away, you can visit the Castle Ring Iron Age hill fort at Cannock Chase.
Nearby is Tamworth Castle, one of the country's few remaining Norman shell-keeps, which is reputedly haunted.
Its grounds have picnic areas, river boats, swimming pools and playgrounds.
Local Activities : fishing, sailing, sports centre with swimming, sauna and fitness room, tennis, bowls, miniature golf course.
Upper Buckton Farm
   

Well off the main road, Upper Buckton, a gracious Georgian farmhouse, nestles in the remote and tranquil hamlet of Buckton and overlooks the river Teme.
The house is large, white and elegantly proportioned with a south-facing porch equipped with comfortable chairs for guests to relax on.
The garden slopes down to a peaceful mill stream.
It is a truly delightful place to stay.
Whilst the three hundred acre farm is run by Hayden Lloyd, his wife, Yvonne, takes great pleasure in looking after the guests.
The house is beautifully decorated with antique furniture, paintings and honey-coloured natural pine woodwork.
Children and adults can enjoy the recreation room with snooker, table tennis and darts facilities as well as the croquet lawn outside.
There is a guest dining room and drawing room with colour TV.
The food is delicious.
Dinner is a four-course meal and menus vary from traditional roasts to imaginative cordon bleu dishes.
Hayden and Yvonne enjoy meeting their guests and their tradition of taking after-dinner coffee en famille in the sitting room has led to many new friendships.
Easily Accessible : There are several gentle walks along the banks of the Teme.
Further away you can reach Offa's Dyke, Radnor Forest and the Stretton Hills.
Ten miles away at Ludlow you are bound to be impressed by its looming castle, the delightful mixture of Georgian and medieval architecture and the interesting museum of local history.
Here you can also see National Hunt horse racing.
At Church Stretton the Acton Scott working farm museum demonstrates 19th-century farming methods and here you can see butter being churned and traditional crafts being practised.
Burford House Gardens have extensive lawns and a large collection of rare plants.
The history and natural beauty of the Welsh borders is easily reached.
Local Activities : walks, golf, horse-riding, pony-trekking, bird-watching.
Haversham Grange
   

The oldest part of this charming listed house dates back to 1387.
Two later additions, one in 1528, and one in the 1750s, complete its distinctive ‘E’ shape.
It was originally the farm to a nearby monastery.
The garden is pretty and looks out onto six acres of fields and a copse, and contains a tennis court which guests are welcome to use.
There are three comfortable bedrooms filled with family ‘bit and pieces’.
Two have private facilities, all have colour TV.
A full English breakfast is served, and jams and marmalades are home-made.
No dinner is offered but there are numerous local pubs and restaurants to choose from.
Easily Accessible : Haversham Grange is situated in a small tranquil village with an attractive church, a post office and a pub.
The magnificent stately home of Woburn is only 12 miles away.
The two university towns of Cambridge and Oxford are within an hour's driving distance.
Walkers will enjoy the Swan's Way, which passes within l/– mile of the house.
It starts in the south of Buckinghamshire and ends 6 miles north of the Grange.
There is also some pleasant walking along the banks of the river Ouse, and around the lakes at the back of the house.
Local Activities : walks, golf.
Live and Let Live
   

This is an attractive 18th-century building which was originally a village inn.
It is conveniently situated in the high street of Stetchworth, just outside Newmarket, in Suffolk.
It has a large garden with fruit trees and a splendid mature walnut tree.
There are seven comfortable bedrooms, a beamed lounge with a TV and a dining room.
The proprietors are happy to provide dinner with prior notice or to direct you to any of the many pubs and restaurants within a three-mile radius.
Easily Accessible : The surrounding countryside is very gentle and peaceful.
There are numerous footpaths including Devil's Ditch, a  long defensive fortification dating from 500AD, which runs from the woodlands south of Stetchworth, northwards to the Fens, and the Icknield Way.
Newmarket, the famous horse-racing centre, home of the National Stud and the National Horseracing Museum, is just 3 miles away.
Anglesey Abbey, 6 miles away, was originally an Augustinian priory, and was later transformed into a fine Elizabethan manor house with gardens.
Cambridge is just 12 miles away.
There are many pretty villages nearby, one of the most picturesque is Lavenham, situated between Bury St Edmunds and Sudbury.
Lavenham is widely regarded as the most complete example of a medieval town with its superb timber-framed houses, medieval street pattern and market place.
Altogether it has three hundred buildings listed as being of architectural and historical interest.
There is also a very pretty walk here, along the old railway line to another picturesque village, Little Melford.
Local Activities : walks, golf.
Old Furnace Farm
   

This pretty Victorian farmhouse set in the hills of Staffordshire has beautiful views from all aspects overlooking a peaceful valley.
The farm itself consists of forty acres grazed by sheep and pedigree Charolais cattle.
The pretty garden has its own trout lake.
Maggie Wheeler makes her guests feel entirely at home and certainly it is very easy to relax in this ‘no rules’ atmosphere, where you can enjoy meeting the other guests around the kitchen table in an informal atmosphere with Maggie taking the time to help you plan your itinerary.
The house is furnished with antiques and memorabilia.
All bedrooms have full en suite bathrooms.
The charming honeymoon suite has its own gallery and a large double Victorian brass bed.
There is a television in the comfortable lounge.
Dinner is home-made English fare using, whenever possible, fresh local produce.
Maggie recommends several restaurants and pubs within a five-mile radius of the farm — the Admiral Jervis Inn, the Bulls Head Inn, Old Beams Restaurant, and the Jervis Arms.
There are self-catering holidays available in a cottage and a chalet.
Easily Accessible : The nearest bus stop is l mile away and the nearest train station is in Stoke-on-Trent, 12 miles away.
There are many walks (from 3 to 40 miles) starting directly from the farm which will take you through woods, valleys and hills.
The farm is actually situated on the Staffordshire Way (an old Roman route) and nearby is the Hawkesmoor Nature Reserve where wildlife is abundant.
The Peak National Park is only 8 miles away.
Alton Towers, the large leisure park with gardens, is only 2 miles away.
The pretty market town of Ashbourne with its antique centre is only 9 miles away.
Take a ride on the Foxfield Steam Railway which can be joined 4 miles away.
The  Wedgwood and Royal Dalton potteries are within a 12-mile radius.
Local Activities : walks, golf, leisure centre, cycling, horse-riding, pony-trekking.
Pen-y-Dyffryn Hall
   

Pen-y-Dyffryn Hall (the name is Welsh for ‘The Head of the Valley’), lies in a remote hamlet in a fairy-tale landscape of verdant valleys, gently rolling hills, and pastures dotted with white sheep.
Your hosts, Miles and Audrey Hunter, came to this spot to escape the rat-race — and they could not have chosen more perfectly.
The hall is a beautiful listed Georgian rectory, built of local stone.
It is elegantly and comfortably furnished.
The bedrooms are south-facing (including the honeymoon suite with four-poster bed) and have panoramic views of the neighbouring Welsh hills.
All are en suite and have colour TV.
The south-facing terrace is perfect for enjoying early morning coffee, evening cocktails or just admiring the scenery.
The food is imaginative British cuisine and  breakfast , lunch and dinner are all available.
Vegetarians are catered for.
Whenever possible, organic and free-range produce is served.
Puddings, however, are definitely ‘naughty (but nice)’, spotted dick and jam roly-poly being two of the naughtiest!
Easily Accessible : Many short walks from the hotel take in standing  stones, old wells and disused mines.
Offa's Dyke, one of the country's finest long-distance footpaths with views into both England and Wales, can be reached under 1 mile from the hotel and is dotted with ancient fortifications.
Snowdonia National Park is just a short drive away.
Wales' highest waterfall, Pistyll Rhaeder, is 10 miles away.
There are numerous castles, including Chirk Castle which dates back to the 14th century and has some lovely formal gardens, and a little further away, Powis Castle, built in the 15th century but altered through the years and now very much a stately home with a large deer park.
Local Activities : walks, fishing (access to private trout lake), golf, canoeing, mountain-biking, hill walking, pony-trekking.
Otley House
   

This is a beautiful elegant Georgian house with ivy-clad stone walls, fine proportions and a very pleasing aspect.
It looks onto a pretty ordered garden with a small lake, large terrace, and summer pavilion.
Inside there is parquet flooring, a splendid Queen Anne staircase and fine antique furniture.
The drawing room has French doors leading out into the garden, and the dining room replete with Regency furniture and crystal chandelier and grand piano is a treat.
The bedrooms are furnished to a very high standard, all are en suite, one has a four-poster bed, another a half-tester.
There is also a sumptuous leather-chaired billiard room.
Lise is not a trained cook, but has a wealth of valuable experience which began with helping her mother in a small hotel in Copenhagen.
Thus the delicious Scandinavian dishes that frequently crop up among the traditional English farmhouse cuisine are no surprise in the menu.
Guests eat together around an elegantly decorated table and the atmosphere is very much that of a dinner party between friends.
Easily Accessible : Otley is just 6 miles from the pretty Elizabethan market town of Woodbridge which overlooks the Sutton Hoo burial mounds and possesses the only surviving tide mill in the country.
Half an hour's drive away, Bury St Edmunds is a beautiful ancient town with  an abbey and clock museum.
Cambridge and Norwich can be reached within an hour's drive.
Between Norwich and the coast there are over thirty Broads — if you feel like a trip you can hire a boat at Oulton Broad.
There are many beautiful walks nearby, along the coast, the Deben River, and through forests.
Much of the look and feel of the scenery will be familiar, as it has been brilliantly captured by the artist John Constable in his many paintings of the area.
Ipswich, 7 miles south, has been a settlement since the Stone Age, with interesting historical buildings and good modern amenities including a large shopping centre and leisure complex.
Local Activities : walks, golf, horse-riding, bird-watching.
The Old Rectory
   

The foundations and frame of this gracious building have existed since the days of the Domesday Book but the interior was redesigned by Sir Christopher Wren's great grandson in 1812.
There is a pretty conservatory where meals are served, a large, colourful garden and several interesting outbuildings such as the 17th-century half-timbered stable block which has been converted to provide four bedrooms, and the cellar, bread oven and fishpond dug by the monks from Bordesley Abbey.
In the house the rooms range from a beamed attic style to the Chapel Room with its fine barrel ceiling.
All the bedrooms have en suite or private bathrooms.
Tony, Jill and their son, Martin, have lived at the Old Rectory for twenty years and it is very much their home — as your hosts they will bring early morning tea (if requested), and arrange numerous activities.
Good home cooking is served and fresh local and garden produce are used.
Specialities are the home-baked bread and delicious mulberry ice-cream made with fruit from the ancient  mulberry tree in the garden (when in season).
Easily Accessible : One hundred yards from the house lies the Arraw Valley  Park which follows the course of the River Arraw and is ideal for walkers, but also has bridleways and a lake for boating.
Eleven miles away lies the Lickey Hills Country Park which is linked to the North Worcestershire Way (20 miles long).
Walkers will also enjoy the Malvern Hills, the Wyre Forest and the Cotswold Way, all of which are within a 25-mile radius.
The ruined Cistercian Abbey of Bordesley is just 3 miles away.
Hanberry Hall, 15 miles away, is a splendid Palladian mansion.
Four miles away at Caughton Court the wives of the Gunpowder plotters awaited news of the plot.
Warwick Castle 16 miles away is one of the finest castles in England.
Stratford-upon-Avon is just 12 miles away.
Eighteen miles away at Worcester you can visit the beautiful cathedral with its Norman crypt.
Local Activities : walks, golf, fishing, cycling, horse-riding, boating, health centre with swimming, snooker, squash.
The Old Forge
   

The Old Forge is an attractive Victorian house situated in the peaceful town of Southwell in the Trent valley.
It was once a working forge and today brims with character and antiques.
The colour scheme is delicate and pleasing and most of the rooms have a view of the Minster.
The dining room adjoins a conservatory and in summer, weather permitting, with the French windows open, guests can enjoy breakfast in the fresh air.
No dinner is provided but there are numerous pubs and restaurants within walking distance.
Your hosts Derek and Hilary Marston take the ups and downs of running a guest house in their stride.
Only once Hilary admits to being seriously rattled.
A stem and rather humourless vicar's wife angrily rejected the offer of morning newspapers, admonishing the bemused Hilary with ‘I only read the psalms at breakfast’— there were angry looks all round.
Easily Accessible : Southwell is dominated by the impressive Norman Minster (incidentally the most rural minster in Great Britain) and is a quiet, pretty town, famous for the beautiful foliage carvings in the Chapter House.
Nearby Newark is a picturesque market town with a  cobbled square overlooked by buildings of architectural interest.
The surrounding countryside is lush and fertile and much is given over to agricultural use.
There are numerous country parks with nature trails, including the Sherwood Forest Country Park with its Robin Hood exhibition.
Newstead Abbey was once the home of Lord Byron and now contains a museum dedicated to the poet.
Nottingham is an ancient city with a Norman castle and an excellent variety of shops, theatre and other modern amenities.
Local Activities : walks, leisure centre, water sports, golf.
The Old Rectory
   

This airy square Georgian building with thirteen acres of garden, parkland and trees, stands on a hill overlooking the village of Wetherden in rural Suffolk.
The rooms are high-ceilinged and spacious and attractively furnished.
There is a dining room (with a beautiful Italian monks' table dating from the early 18th century which interestingly has been lowered a few inches — the monks ate standing up), three bedrooms individually decorated, a comfortable study-cum-television room with a log-burning stove — and for bookworms, over 3,000 books.
No dinner is provided but Pamela Bowden serves a hearty breakfast which includes a choice of a wide variety of cereals and traditional English cooked dishes.
For lunch and the evening meal there are several recommended local pubs and restaurants.
Easily Accessible : Situated a mile from the A45 and near to the M11 and A12, it is ideally placed for touring East Anglia.
The countryside is fairly flat but a day trip to the coast provides some interest for walkers.
Also the Stour Valley, on the border of Suffolk and Essex, made famous by the painter John Constable, is well-loved by walkers and bird-watchers.
Bury St Edmunds is a picturesque historical town with many interesting buildings including the remains of an abbey founded in 945 and Moyse's Hall, a 12th-century mansion now a museum of local history.
In May you can visit its arts festival, and in September, it plays host to a famous  antiques fair.
Nearby Ickworth House, built in the late 18th century, has fine state rooms and a deer park and formal gardens.
Newmarket, famous for its horse-racing, and Lavenham, a very pretty town lined with half-timbered buildings, are within a short drive.
Cambridge has a wealth of beautiful architecture, museums, and punting on the river.
Sequoia House Private Hotel
   

Just a few minutes from the Royal Shakespeare Theatre (the car park is just 500 yards away), this typically Victorian house takes its name from the sequoia tree that graces the pretty lawned gardens.
The spacious rooms have large bay windows and cast-iron fireplaces with marble surrounds, and are furnished in Laura Ashley fabrics and antiques.
The lounge has an open fire and bar.
Of the twenty-one bedrooms, seventeen are spacious with private facilities, and the remaining four are attic rooms with shared bathrooms.
Tasty snacks, traditional afternoon teas, lunches and suppers with wine are all offered.
For a full-blown meal Stratford has numerous pubs and restaurants to choose from — 600 yards from the hotel is the excellent Shepherds Restaurant and 100 yards from the garden gate lies The Water Rat, a highly acclaimed cafè-brasserie.
Easily Accessible : If you are not keen on Shakespeare, Stratford may not be the place for you — nearly everywhere you go you will be reminded that this was his birthplace.
Indeed you can visit the house where he was born, see one of his plays at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre, or a contemporary performance at the Swan Theatre, see an exhibition of his life and times at the Shakespeare Centre and visit the picturesque home of his wife, Anne Hathaway.
If you want to escape the Great Bard for a while, take a day trip to the beautiful Cotswolds to nose around its idyllic villages and walk in the beautiful scenery.
Blenheim Palace, the magnificently grand birthplace of Winston Churchill, with 2,000 acres of grounds landscaped by Capability Brown, is 35 miles away.
Warwick Castle, only 10 miles away, is a splendid 14th-century stronghold with  Madame Tussaud's waxworks inside.
Coventry and its controversial cathedral is 20 miles away.
Nearby Activities : boating, golf, swimming pool, squash, sauna, solarium.
The Hundred House Hotel
   

A wealth of fascinating history lies within the very name of the Hundred House Hotel which refers to the ancient subdivisions of the shires of England into areas known as ‘hundreds’.
In the courtyard, a 14th-century half-timbered and thatched roof building was for many centuries the local courthouse where justice was meted out.
The remains of stocks and the whipping post serve as uncomfortable reminders of the not so good old days.
The main building is Georgian with very attractive exposed brickwork, beamed ceilings and oak panelling.
The décor is very pretty; period furniture, lots of wood, patchwork and brass — everything one feels a country inn should be.
The cosy dining room has a lovely Jacobean fireplace, and a separate bar is decorated with an array of dried herbs grown in the herb garden.
The ten bedrooms are beautifully furnished, some have half-tester beds and all have en suite bathrooms and colour TVs.
The restaurant is open for breakfast, lunch and dinner.
The food is traditional English with some French cuisine.
Herbs come from the garden; game, meat and fish are locally produced.
Easily Accessible : The area affords many beautiful walks: a couple of miles from the hotel is the Severn Valley walk along the track of an old railway from Bridgnorth to Coalport and Ironbridge.
Further afield are the Malvern and Clee Hills, Wenlock Edge with numerous paths and trails and the Wrekin, a famous local landmark with panoramic views and an Iron Age Fort.
At Ironbridge, 7 miles away, you can see the World Heritage Site.
In the interesting town of Bridgnorth, also 7 miles away, you can take a ride on the Severn Valley Railway.
Twenty-five miles  away is Shrewsbury, an ancient town with many historical buildings, where you can visit the castle, Rowley's House Museum with Roman remains, and Clive House, an 18th-century residence which houses an interesting collection of local paintings and porcelain.
Local Activities : walks, golf, swimming, ice-skating, tennis, squash, fishing.
White Lion Hotel
   

The elegant Georgian facade of this small hotel hides its earlier origins as a Tudor coaching inn.
The building dates back to 1510 and, whilst it has been sympathetically modernised, it retains much of its original character.
It was the Inn of Fielding's Tom Jones , and the ‘Wild Goose Room’ and ‘Rose Room’referred to in the novel have been preserved.
The bedrooms are attractive and have been individually designed, with specific themes in mind, such as the Tudor Room, the Georgian Room and the Chinese Room, using fabrics, furnishings and paintings to create just the right style.
One bedroom has an original four-poster bed; all have private bathrooms and colour TV.
There is a comfortable beamed bar lounge where snacks are served.
The beamed Burgundy Restaurant offers a table d'hôte and à la carte menu using fresh local produce.
A house speciality is the Royal Double Gloucester omelette filled with smoked salmon.
Easily Accessible : Upton-upon-Severn is a very pretty town, nestling at the foot of the Malvern hills, beside the River Severn.
Its history goes back to Saxon times, and it contains several interesting historical buildings, and a peaceful marina, from which you can take a river cruise.
There are numerous walks on the ancient Malvern Hills (the oldest rock in england), and many are fairly easy and suitable for a family outing, yet yield superb panoramic views.
The historic town of Great Malvern, 7 miles away, came into prominence through its spa waters in the 18th and 19th centuries, although its origins as several disconnected villages are much earlier; indeed its beautiful priory church was completed by craftsmen in 1460.
There are further walks to be enjoyed in the Cotswolds, 20 miles  away, and the Forest of Dean, 25 miles away.
Cheltenham, Worcester and Hereford racecourses are all within easy reach.
Worcester, 10 miles away, has a splendid Norman cathedral, some attractive Tudor buildings, a carnival in July and an arts festival in August.
Local Activities : walks, coarse-fishing, golf, river cruises.
Soulton Hall
   

As one approaches this house one cannot fail to find it incredibly impressive — a large mansion, constructed of Tudor brick.
One half expects a ruffled, doubleted figure to emerge from its grand doorway.
It is not surprising to learn that the ‘Manor of Suleton’ is listed in the Domesday Book.
You can see the moated site of the castle from the present hall.
The interior has beams, panelled walls, and inglenook fireplaces.
All the rooms are carefully furnished in keeping with the rest of the house.
present hall.
The interior has beams, panelled walls, and inglenook fireplaces.
All the rooms are carefully furnished in keeping with the rest of the house.
The four bedrooms are equipped with colour TV.
There is an attractive walled garden, fifty acres of tranquil woods, farmland, and over a mile of brook and riverside for guests to enjoy at their leisure.
Dinner is provided as long as it is requested the morning of the day you dine.
A full five courses are served, and good use is made of fresh local and home-grown produce.
Easily Accessible : Wem is a small market town with a 14th-century church and a castle mound.
William Hazlitt, the essayist, grew up here.
The border with North Wales is only 5 miles away.
There are many local walks, including the Hawkestone Hills, just 2 miles away.
The  boundary of the estate itself constitutes an eight mile walk.
At the nearby village of Weston, you can see the old stocks.
Hodnet Hall has sixty acres of gardens.
Its village is most attractive, with mostly black and white buildings.
Shrewsbury, 12 miles away, is a medieval town once built on its wool trade, and peppered with Tudor, Georgian and Queen Anne architecture.
Local Activities : walks, golf, fishing, horse-riding, boating, swimming, bird-watching.
Postlip House
   

On the outskirts of the 1000-year-old village of Winchcombe, Postlip House, a 19th-century stone manor house, stands in eight acres of wooded grounds surrounded by the beautiful Cotswolds.
The views are outstanding.
The main house has two bedrooms with bathrooms en suite, a lounge with TV, a large mullioned windowed kitchen where breakfast is taken, and an elegant dining room with views of the garden.
The outbuildings, once stables and tack rooms, have been converted into superior self-catering cottages with a meal service from the main house If required.
Your hosts have a wealth of experience in catering and the evening meal is prepared to a very high standard making good use of fresh vegetables, fruit and herbs from the garden.
Jams, chutneys and marmalade are home-made.
Easily Accessible : Winchcombe is a charming town with many 16th-century buildings and a fine church containing an altar cloth embroidered by Catherine of Aragon.
Two miles away lies  Sudeley Castle where Henry VIII's widow, Catherine Parr, once lived; she was buried in the castle chapel.
Cheltenham Spa, a fine Regency town, lies 6 miles to the south and is enjoyable for its shops, architecture and nearby racecourse.
There are famous horse trials at Badminton, 38 miles away.
Take a day trip to Bath, Stratford, Oxford or Winchester.
Walkers will enjoy the Cotswold Way, which runs for 102 miles from Chipping Campden to Bath and which passes through Winchcombe.
There are many places of interest en route including the picturesque and much-visited village 
Blue Dolphins
   

This lovely Victorian house is quite blissfully situated amongst a cluster of houses, in the village of Alnmouth, right on the banks of the river estuary, with only a small garden and a ‘no through’ road between it and the beach — it is brilliant for tumbling out of bed and enjoying a long walk on almost deserted sands.
There are five comfortable bedrooms, each individually decorated, with en suite facilities and a colour TV.
Joan and Jack enjoy meeting their guests and many breakfasts stretch into the mid-morning as new friendships are made.
No evening meal is offered but there are several pubs in the village.
Within four miles there is an even greater choice — such as the Carribe Northumbria at Shilbottle, and Blackmore's at Alnwick which are run by chef/owners.
Easily Accessible : The village is small, unspoilt and well serviced.
It is one of the few places (in this book) where a car is not an absolute necessity: Alnmouth is on the main London-Edinburgh rail line and the village has an excellent local bus service.
The village has an ancient history dating back to Roman times (the remains of a Roman wall testify to this).
Once Alnmouth was a busy corn port but today the estuary is used solely for pleasure activities such as wind-surfing and sailing.
North of Alnmouth and accessible by boat lie the Farne Islands famous for their seal colonies.
Near to them is Lindisfarne or Holy Isle which can only be reached by way of a causeway at low tide.
Holy Isle was the site of one of the oldest Christian communities in Britain and is now a nature reserve.
If you take a small step inland from Alnmouth, you can enjoy the stunning countryside of north Northumberland and the National Park.
Local Activities : walks, golf, fishing, wind-surfing, sailing, bird-watching.
Elmfield Country House
   

The  proprietors of Elmfield House, Jim and Edith Lillie, were initially a little apprehensive about opening their much restored and much-cared for home to the public — but they soon came to appreciate the friendship and interest given to them by their visitors from all over the world.
Edith finds the cooking a cinch.
She is a local farmer's daughter and was quite used to cooking for her six brothers and one sister.
The house is set back from the main road and has wonderful views of the surrounding farmland.
Inside, it is very comfortable and spacious and has a well-kept garden with a large illuminated pond with waterfall.
l here are nine double bedrooms, all with private facilities and colour TV.
Two ground-floor bedrooms have been designed to accommodate disabled guests.
There is also a games room and a solarium, available for guests to use for a small charge.
Dinner is home-cooked traditional English fare, the favourite dish being roast beef and Yorkshire pudding.
There are plenty of fresh vegetables and sweets, and soups are home-made.
Easily Accessible : There are numerous walks around the moors and dales.
Public transport is pretty thin on the ground so it is advisable to have your own.
There are several fascinating castles and abbeys in the vicinity including: Richmond Castle, 6 miles away, which was built in 107– as protection against the Saxons, and Bolton Castle, 12 miles away, where Mary Queen of Scots was imprisoned, and the ruins of the once magnificent Abbeys of Easby, Jervaulx and Coverham.
York, 40 miles away, and Durham, 30 miles away, are both beautiful historical cities.
There is horse-racing 5 miles away at Catterick.
Local Activities : walks, fishing, gliding, hang-gliding, golf, swimming, indoor skiing, sailing, squash, tennis, bowls, horse-riding.
Sunray Hotel
   

In a town with over 200,000 holiday beds, this small unprepossessing semi-detached house lying in a quiet residential area has a reputation for being special — in fact for being one of the best small hotels in the resort.
What makes it so is the extraordinary care and attention given to every guest by its owner, Jean Dodgson.
No one escapes from her warm welcome.
The nine bedrooms have en suite facilities and colour TV.
There is a comfortable lounge.
Jean provides a very good five-course evening meal and will cater for special diets on request.
There is a small front garden with a swing chair, deck chairs and parasols.
Easily Accessible : Blackpool is the archetypal British seaside resort, probably most famous for its tower, three piers, spectacular illuminations which shine through September and October, and its tram cars — the last in the country.
Its pleasure beach is the largest in Europe and one of the country's top attractions.
During the summer season, Blackpool plays host to many events sports championships (bowls, water polo), vintage car run and, more improbably, ‘the best bus driver of the year’ competition.
Lesser known are its beautiful gardens in Stanley Park.
Lytham St Annes, a short distance to the south, has sandy beaches and several excellent golf courses.
Using the M55 and M6, the beautiful countryside, historic houses, ruined abbeys, and picturesque villages of the Yorkshire Dales and the Lake District can be easily visited for a day trip.
High Greenrigg House
   

This carefully restored farmhouse with original beams, a stone-flagged floor and open fire is located just three miles outside the small lakeland village of Caldbeck.
It is very simply furnished with pine used throughout.
There are three lounges to choose from; one has a colour TV, one an open fire, and the third, a bar with table-tennis and snooker tables and a darts board.
The eight bedrooms are very comfortable, many have en suite facilities.
Food is taken seriously — with all the walking done every day, Fran and Robin Jacobs believe a good breakfast and dinner to be of the utmost importance.
The four-course evening meal is home-cooked using fresh ingredients.
Bread, soups and ice-cream are all home-made.
The cuisine is a mix of American, traditional English, Cumbrian and vegetarian.
Packed lunches are available.
Easily Accessible : Greenrigg Hotel is situated at the foot of the Caldbeck Fells and only a mile from the Cumbrian Way in the more northern and in summer, less crowded area of the Lake District.
The Jacobs have produced their own booklet on walks from the house which encompass fells (including Scafell, the highest peak in the National Park), lakes, waterfalls, woods and farmland.
Caldbeck is a pretty village with several attractions, including a spinning workshop and John Peel's grave.
The neighbouring town of Hesket New Market has a delightful pub with its own brewed beer.
Within a radius of 15 miles, you can visit Keswick, a Victorian town, at the heart of the district; Carlisle with its castle and cathedral, museum and art gallery; Cockermouth, the birthplace of Wordsworth; and the Solway, a bird-watchers' delight.
Local Activities : walks, golf, wind-surfing, fishing.
Demesne House
   

Over 200 years old, this lovely farmhouse stands in a garden on the banks of the River Eden.
It was once a coaching house, standing on the main road between England and Scotland (all that remains today of  this road is a grass track).
Rumours abound; it is said that Bonnie Prince Charlie stayed here after his defeat in 1745, and it is also suggested that the house was a centre of smuggling as it stands a mere hundred yards from the head of the Solway Firth.
Peggy Rockcliffe has worked hard to achieve its present high degree of comfort, adding bathrooms, a dining room and turning a barn into a spacious sitting room.
All three bedrooms have private bathrooms.
An excellent home-cooked three-course dinner is served.
If Peggy cannot offer dinner she will direct you to local pubs and restaurants.
Easily Accessible : There are many fine local walks particularly in the upper reaches of the River Eden.
Dumfries is now a tourist centre.
It was once the home of Robert Burns and has a museum in his name.
At the wildlife sanctuary in Caerlaverock you can see natterjack toads, and in winter flocks of geese arrive.
The ruins of Caerlaverock Castle are prominent against the flat marshes of the Solway Firth.
You can take a day trip to the Esk Valley, famous for its tweed and knitwear mills (where you can purchase goods at mill prices) and where you can enjoy the stunning countryside.
Local Activities : walks, fishing, golf, pony-trekking.
Harrop Fold Country Farmhouse Hotel
   

This typical Pennine longhouse with thick stone walls, Viking timbers and mullioned windows was built in the 17th century in a style originated by the Norsemen.
Situated in the tranquil hamlet of Harrop Fold, it is smoothly run by the welcoming Wood family, consisting of Peter and Victoria, their son, Andrew, and his wife, Anna.
The house is comfortable and tastefully furnished with antiques and period pieces.
Peter runs a small well-stocked bar and encourages evening conversation in the cosy lounge.
All six bedrooms, carefully colour co-ordinated by Victoria, are en suite and stocked with lots of toiletries and a colour television——not to mention a complimentary bottle of wine on arrival.
For honeymooners a bottle of champagne, a basket of  flowers and a heart-shaped sachet are offered at a charge.
Throughout the house there are interesting knick-knacks — in particular a collection of maritime memorabilia put together by Victoria who is proud of her sea-faring ancestors.
The table d'hôte menu is prepared by Andrew (a trained chef) using fresh local produce with a vegetarian choice.
Andrew's home-made bread is excellent.
There is entertainment on your doorstep; Andrew has created a fairway on the farm for guests to practise their golf and they are also invited to take a planned walk around the 280-acre farm.
Easily Accessible : Walks on the local fells and in the Ribble Valley, and further afield in the Yorkshire Dales and the Lake District.
There are numerous historic sites to visit, including Skipton with its castle, its church with fascinating family tombs, and the local history museum, and Gawthorpe Hall, a mid-19th-century stately home with an interesting textile collection.
You can take the Settle to Carlisle Railway with an exciting trip over the Ribblehead Viaduct.
York, Manchester Liverpool, and Lancaster are all within easy reach for day trips.
Local Activities : walks, golf, horse-riding.
The Riverside Hotel
   

This pleasant hotel, built in 1760 from local stone, is situated in the pretty village of Corbridge.
With Victorian, Edwardian and later additions, it has a small bar, comfortable sitting room and very pretty Laura Ashley decorated bedrooms most of which are en suite.
All are equipped with a TV.
The three-course dinner is served daily from a table d'hôte menu and is cooked by Judy Fawcett.
Good use is made of fresh vegetables and herbs from the garden; fresh wholemeal bread from the village baker and salmon and trout from the river Tyne (which runs behind the house).
Vegetarian dishes and other special diets are no problem for Judy and snacks and light lunches will be provided on request.
Harry and Judy will collect guests from the station (there is also an excellent local taxi service) and will advise on places to visit and lend maps to walkers.
Easily Accessible : Several walks taking you through unspoilt countryside begin near the hotel.
The National Park is a short drive away.
Corbridge itself has a 17th-century bridge, and the excavated site of the Roman town of Corstopitum which is open all year.
It is surrounded by interesting market towns such as Hexham and Prudhoe which are a pleasure to browse through.
Along Hadrian's Wall (which from July to September can be reached by coach from Corbridge) there are a number of interesting historical sites — the Roman Army Museum; Vindolanda (large Roman fort); a Roman hospital and a Roman cavalry fort.
Newcastle is just 17 miles away.
Day trips within a 50 mile radius include: the Farne Islands (home to seventeen different species of sea-birds and a colony of grey seals), the 16th-century Lindisfarne Castle on Holy Isle (National Trust property), and the historical cathedral city of Durham.
Local Activities : walks, riding, fishing.
The Coach House
   

Surrounded by farmland just south of the Scottish border, this house, reputedly the oldest in North Northumberland, is run with panache by Jamie and Lynne — he was a restaurateur, she a singer and actress.
Together they saved it from dereliction and have imprinted it with their lively characters.
It has a lovely old orchard full of damson trees, a paddock with goats and rare sheep and a sunny terrace.
The bedrooms are furnished individually, one with a wall hung with hats, another with bells hung from beams.
Those with private bathrooms have fridges.
The large high-ceilinged lounge is beamed and in winter is made cosy by a roaring log fire.
The dining room is full of character; once a smithy, it has a forge at one end and a quarry-tiled floor.
There is a TV and games room.
The food is very wholesome with free-range eggs and lambs, salmon  from the River Tweed, local shell fish and pigs once seen roaming the orchard, featuring on the menu.
Even the wine is organic.
Special diets are catered for.
Easily Accessible : The Coach House lies on the edge of the Ford and Etal estates which consist of 20,000 acres of beautiful countryside, ruined castles, pretty villages and a network of footpaths ideal for walking.
Also within the estates is the famous battlefield of Flodden where James IV of Scotland was killed in 1513.
Nearby the Pennine Way and Cheviot Hills provide further variety of scenery.
The coast is only 15 miles away and has some lovely sandy beaches.
Holy Isle and the Farne Islands are ideal for nature lovers — here you may see seals and puffins.
Berwick-upon-Tweed is 13 miles away; an interesting town, it has a museum and Tudor fortifications considered the best in Europe.
Local Activities : walks, horse-riding, fishing, golf.
Crayke Castle
   

Crayke Castle was built for the Bishop of Durham in 1430.
It stands in the pretty hill village of Crayke with magnificent views over the Vale of York, and the Dales.
Wandering through the spacious grounds you will come upon what is believed to be the remains of an earlier 12th-century castle visited by five kings of England during the 12th and 13th centuries.
Not surprisingly it was the cost of the restoration that persuaded Peter and Belle to take guests in, to, as they put it, ‘let the Castle earn its keep’.
Warm, comfortable and elegantly furnished with antiques, there are three individually furnished en suite bedrooms (two are four-posters), each with a colour TV.
Dinner is an event; after a pre-prandial drink (included in the price of the meal) is taken in the library or drawing room or on the patio, you are led into the dining room for a candlelit dinner.
The menu, a mouth-watering mixture of French and English cuisine, offers a substantial choice for all courses.
Coffee and liqueurs are taken in the library.
On rare occasions dinner may not be provided but there  is a nearby pub recommended by your hosts offering restaurant meals or bar snacks.
Easily Accessible : Crayke's nearest town is Easingwold, a pretty market town set in the Forest of Galtres, a Norman hunting preserve.
Walks on the Howardian Hills include a 4-mile one around Byland Abbey, one around the White Horse at Kilburn and another through the forest of Yearsley.
Half an hour's drive north will take you to the moors and to the west the dales.
York with its famous Gothic Minster and very popular Yorvik Viking Centre, and Castle Howard, John Vanbrugh's 17th-century palatial mansion with a fine collection of paintings and a 1000-acre park, are both 12 miles away.
Newby Hall is a famous Adam House with a lovely garden with adventure park for children.
Eight miles away at Helmsley is Nunnington Hall, a 17th-century manor house with the Carlisle Collection of twenty-two miniature rooms — each room is one-eighth life size.
There are several racecourses nearby suitable for day trips.
Local Activities : walks, golf, gliding, swimming, squash, cycling (bike hire available).
Whitfield House Hotel
   

This 17th-century country house in the heart of the North York Moors National Park lies in complete tranquillity at the end of a no-through road where sheep wander.
It has been sympathetically modernised and restored whilst retaining beamed ceilings and open fires in the lounge bar and television lounge.
John and Pauline Lusher think of Whitfield House as an old-fashioned residence and are rightly proud of the fact that, with the exception of ice-cream, all food is prepared on the premises.
The four-course dinner is wholesome and fresh produce is used whenever possible.
Specialities of the house are the traditional roasts and delicious old-fashioned sweets.
Easily Accessible : The nearby village of Goathland (an ancient settlement dating from the 12th century) contains several waterfalls, countless footpaths, and is only a stone's throw from the open moors.
The North York Moors Railway (steam) passes through.
Three miles away at Wheeldale is a perfectly preserved stretch of Roman road.
The coast and Whitby with its harbour, ruined abbey and museum, where you can learn about one of its most famous inhabitants, Captain Cook, is only 9 miles away.
A little further along the coast, you can visit the charming fishing villages of Robin Hood's Bay, Runswick Bay and Skinningrove.
Fourteen miles away at Pickering is the Beck Island Museum, a castle and church with fascinating wall paintings.
The beautiful city of York is 40 miles away.
Local Activities : walks.
Oak Bank Hotel
   

The views from the ever-changing fells are superb and Wordsworth thought so too.
Grasmere was paradise to him and he settled here for several years at Dove cottage (which is open to the public).
Oak Bank itself is a beautiful 19th-century house, made of local green slate and furnished in a simple country style, much in keeping with its external character.
The dining room looks out onto a mature, secluded garden where the River Rother passes through on its way to Grasemere Lake.
There are two lounges, one has a wood-burning stove, the other a TV and videos on the surrounding area.
There are seventeen individually furnished bedrooms (making it one of the larger hotels in this guide), all with en suite facilities and colour TV.
There is also a very pretty honeymoon suite.
Sharon and Attilio Savasi met when she was a chef and he a waiter at the same hotel.
They provide a friendly relaxed service.
Sharon is a cordon bleu trained cook and provides an excellent five-course table d'hôte menu whilst Attilio, who is something of an amateur but enthusiastic wine expert, will advise you on a suitable choice of wine.
Vegetarian and special diets are catered for.
Easily Accessible : The surrounding area is one of the most beautiful in the whole country and of course attracts tourists in their multitudes.
Just step outside the hotel and look at the sheep-dotted hills, whilst above birds of prey hover and swoop.
The fields and woods contain squirrels, badgers and red deer.
The little village of Grasemere has inspired many of our great artists and poets including Wordsworth, Coleridge and Ruskin.
If you feel like a gentle lakeside stroll Grasmere Lake is to hand, or for the more energetic, Helvellyn, the most climbed peak in England, rises Up only a short distance from the village.
The local council organises walks with leaders who are very  knowledgeable about the area.
Within an hour's drive you can visit the seaside.
Northwards in a couple of hours you can visit Edinburgh, Gretna Green and Hadrian's Wall — but most people linger in Lakeland.
Local Activities : fell walking, rowing, power boating, canoeing , wind-surfing, water-skiing, pony-trekking, horse-riding, fishing, swimming.
Greenways
   

Surrounded by the glorious scenery of the Yorkshire Dales National Park, on the banks of the river Wharfe and with views to the ancient forest of Grass Wood, Greenways has a near perfect setting.
A secluded garden completes the tranquil atmosphere.
There are five bedrooms, a lounge with a television, and a dining room with spectacular views.
Food at Greenways is wholesome, fresh and plentiful (Jill and Mike count on their guests working up a good appetite from walking) with herbs and vegetables from the kitchen garden.
If you wish to eat out there are several pubs and restaurants nearby: the Angel Inn at Hetton is well recommended.
Packed lunches are available on request.
If an aspiring artist, you will enjoy the special painting and sketching week held three times a year at Greenways by local artist Ted Gower.
Ted, who has lived for over thirty years in Yorkshire, will guide you to a different beauty spot every day.
Easily Accessible : For walkers the Dales Way passes by and the Pennine Way (stretching for 185 miles from Derbyshire to the Scottish borders) can be reached near Malham.
In Grassington there are several popular special events during the year, including the Dickensian weekends held on three Saturdays prior to Christmas Day, the music festival in late June, and in August, the annual exhibition of Dales paintings and crafts.
Skipton, just twenty minutes away, has a castle and canal.
A forty-minute drive will take you to Haworth Lane, home of the Brontë sisters now open to the public.
Local Activities : walks, fishing (trout and grayling), bird-watching, horse-riding, caving, ballooning and crafts.
Grove House
   

Grove House shelters in the middle of a forest, surrounded by 5000 acres of woodland, moors and becks where deer, squirrels and many birds can be seen.
From Hamsterley village, it is approached through the forest and finally a spectacular tree-lined avenue.
It is not surprising to learn that the naturalist David Bellamy lives nearby.
The house itself is an elegant early 19th-century stone building which was originally an aristocratic shooting lodge.
It has been carefully restored and retains many original features, with a beamed ceiling in the lounge and an open fire and superbly ornate ceiling in the dining room.
There is a separate reading room.
The large garden is bordered by two rivers.
With its formal rose garden, large lawns and a wooded area with a pigeon house and herbaceous borders, it is altogether an ideal place for just sitting and listening to the birdsong.
Helene and Russell Close are friendly and outgoing.
Helen does all the cooking, discussing the menus beforehand with her guests.
Game — pheasant and venison from the forest — is a regular feature.
Helen considers her home-made soups the speciality of the house.
Lunch or packed lunches are provided on request.
Easily Accessible : There are numerous waymarked walks through the forest which has designated picnic areas.
A tree library next to the house will interest any amateur naturalists.
There are many beautiful walks over the surrounding dales.
Britain's highest waterfall, High Force, is quite spectacular.
The Bowes Museum at Barnard Castle houses an exquisite collection of objets d'art.
Nearby are the ruins of Egglestone Abbey.
Durham has an outstanding 11th-century cathedral with a Norman castle, now part of the university, next door.
It is an attractive town and one in which it is still pleasant just to wander around its streets and along the banks of the River Wear.
Local Activities : walks, golf, horse-riding, bicycle hire, bird-watching.
Holme Castle Country Hotel
   

Located in a conservation area within the Peak National Park, the charming village of Holme is home to a traditional Pennine community of hill farms and stone-built weavers' cottages.
In this tranquil setting stands the distinctive form of Holme Castle, an impressive Victorian stone house built in 1820.
The castle tower (added in 1870) gives the building its name.
The décor inside is classical and, at the same time, very comfortable.
Jill Hayfield was a design student and has used her considerable flair and artistic skill in decorating the house.The drawing room is particularly notable for its splendid oak panelling and parquet floor which was a wedding gift to the wealthy mill owner occupier in 1924.
All rooms have extensive views of the surrounding moorlands and hills.
The eight bedrooms are elegantly furnished and equipped with colour TV.
Outside there is an attractive walled garden with mature sycamore trees, herbaceous borders and a lawn which is home to a wide variety of birds, who are encouraged to visit the dining room window, where guests may observe them with the aid of the proprietor's binoculars and telescope!
Jill Hayfield and John Sandford are very gregarious hosts.
If you are  a sociable person, then you will delight in the all pervasive convivial atmosphere.
The three-course dinner is served at one table where Jill and John often join their guests.
The food is very good, with organic, wholefood and local produce (including locally made yogurt and goats cheese) regularly featured on the menu.
Easily Accessible : Walks spiral out in every direction, including the Pennine Way, which runs across Black Hill and can be joined one mile from the house.
In nearby Holmfirth you can visit the popular post-card museum, antiques and craft shops.
Seven miles to the northeast lies Huddersfield, with its famous choral society, art gallery, and a contemporary music festival in November.
Twenty-five miles away, in the small moorland village of Haworth, you can visit the Brontës' house, still full of their personal possessions.
Take a day trip to York, 45 miles away.
Local Activities : walks, golf, horse-riding, cycling, bird-watching, pony-trekking, fishing.
Wellfield House Hotel
   

Situated in the foothills of the Pennines and near to the centre of Huddersfield, Wellfield House is ideally located for enjoying both the history and beauty of Yorkshire.
Although it has been modernised, it remains an exceptional example of Victorian architecture with many of its original fixtures and fittings intact, including stained glass windows, ornate plaster ceilings, oak panelling and marble fireplaces.
The large, mature garden is always very much enjoyed by guests in  summer .
There are two comfortable lounges with open fires, one with a large collection of books for guests to read.
The five bedrooms are attractive, spacious, each with a marble fireplace and colour TV.
John and Polly take great pleasure in making Wellfield House seem like home to their guests and are more than willing to give advice on sight-seeing, walks etc.
The food is delicious: home-baked bread, cakes and pastries, the excellence of which can be explained by the fact that  John and Polly were both bakers in John's father's business.
Fruity jams and marmalades are also home-made and the vegetables and herbs are fresh from the kitchen garden.
Easily Accessible : Wellfield House is situated in the foothills of the Pennines, and local walks take in Calderdale and the Holme and Colne Valleys.
The Pennine Way is accessible 10 miles from the house.
Eight miles away you can visit the Oakwell Country Park with 87 acres of parkland, nature trails and bridleways.
The Colne Valley Museum exhibits restored weavers' cottages, and has a weaving workshop and clogger's shop.
The whole landscape is dotted with picturesque weaving villages such as Holey, Holme and Netherthong, and attractive mill towns such as Marsden and Slaithwaite.
Local Activities : walks, golf, swimming, squash, badminton, bowling, sauna and solarium at Huddersfield Sports Centre.
Manor House Farm
   

This secluded sandstone farmhouse of a 164-acre sheep and corn farm is reached by way of a large, wooded drive.
Situated in the North York Moors National Park it is surrounded by hills, primitive woodland and elegant parkland from the adjacent manor house.
Peacocks, ducks, geese, deer and rare sheep can be seen in the immediate environs.
Inside the farmhouse the décor is simple and attractive with white walls and dark beams.
There are three individually decorated guest bedrooms, a lounge with an extensive library and colour TV, and a dining room with a wood-burning fire and pleasant views of the garden.
Recipes for the delicious four-course home-cooked evening meal are often created by the Blooms themselves, and are influenced by Continental cuisine.
Easily Accessible : There are many beautiful signposted walks which start almost directly from the house and which take you through forests, and others which take you over the moors and dales.
A visit to Helmsley town and castle (where walkers can take up the Cleveland  Way long-distance footpath), with a stop-off at Rievaulx Abbey, makes for an enjoyable outing.
There are numerous pretty towns and villages which hold open-air markets.
Blakey Ridge and Hutton-le-Hole with the outdoor Ryedale Folk Museum are at the heart of the moor, and only thirty-five minutes' drive from the farm.
The beautiful city of York, forty-five minutes away, has a famous Minster and popular Yorvik (Viking) Centre.
Castle Howard, a splendid 17th-century mansion with an exquisite art collection and 1()00-acre park, and Flamingo Zoo, the largest private zoo in the country, are both easily reached for day trips.
Local Activities : walks, horse-riding, golf.
Stabling and grazing are offered for a fee at Manor Farm House for people wishing to bring their own horses.
The Courtyard
   

This elegant listed Georgian house stands near to the centre of a picturesque market town in a quiet yet central position.
It has very fine views over the rooftops of the town, and the large garden has beautiful views of the fells.
It is a large house, newly decorated, curtained and carpeted, and furnished elegantly with antiques, porcelain, and paintings.
There are three bedrooms, one with a four-poster bed, and a TV room.
There is no evening meal, but there are restaurants and pubs within a few minutes walk including the Royal Hotel, an old coaching house, with an elegant dining room equipped with pianist, and also the Snooty Fox, a charming pub with attractive beamed ceilings.
Easily Accessible : Kirkby Lonsdale is situated between the Lake District and the Yorkshire Dales, and is ideally placed for visiting both.
Local walks take in moorland, the banks of the river Lune and its valley.
There are many stately homes to visit including Levens Hall, a beautiful Elizabethan mansion with topiary gardens; and Sizergh Castle, built in 1340, with the later addition of a Tudor Great Hall and a fine portrait collection.
A trip on the Settle to Carlisle Railway takes you through some stunning countryside.
The coast and the resort of Morecambe with  its seaside attractions and four-mile promenade is easily reached for a day trip.
Arnside Knott, a piece of wooded land owned by the National Trust, has superb views of Morecambe Bay and the Lake District mountains and a wide variety of wildlife including red squirrels and deer.
Local Activities : walks, golf, fishing, tennis.
New Capernwray Farm
   

Situated deep in the Keer Valley, this charming white house, dating back to 1697, has thick stone walls and oak beams.
Originally a simple rectangular building, a wing was later added to the rear, and within the angle of the two wings a dairy was constructed — this is now the dining room.
The pretty garden has fine views (particularly towards the Pennine Way), a table and chairs for guests, and enough room for dogs to run around in.
The three bedrooms are attractive and decorated to a high standard, equipped with private bathrooms and colour TV.
The beamed lounge with its log fire is elegantly furnished in a country-house style.
Dinner is served at a candlelit table decked out in fine linen and porcelain.
The cuisine is a mixture of English and Continental and fresh ingredients are used.
Easily Accessible : There is lots of walking to be done as New Capernwray is only half an hour from both the Lake District and the Yorkshire Dales and the immediate area has much unspoilt countryside to explore.
Try the Lancaster canal towpath from Capernwray to Borwick with views of the Lakeland Fells and the nearby beauty spots of Arnside-Silverdale and the Trough of Silverdale.
The coastal resort of  Morecambe is twenty minutes away and has all the amenities of a seaside resort including an open-air leisure park and Oceanarium.
Popular places to visit are the historic town of Lancaster with its medieval castle and maritime museum, and, for railway enthusiasts Steamtown at Carnforth, where visitors can take a ride on a steam locomotive.
Blackpool is 34 miles away.
Local Activities : trout and salmon fishing, golf, horse-riding, clay pigeon shooting, walks, canal cruises, beaches, bird-watching.
Mains Hall
   

Set back from the road by a long drive and framed by a crescent of trees, Mains Hall is both an imposing and yet secluded 16th-century manor house with a romantic past — it was here that George IV courted his wife to be, Marie Fitzherbert.
Despite extensive modernisation, its inherent air of historical grandeur shines through with the fine wood panelling, oak beams, a splendid staircase, ruined moat and pretty walled garden.
The beamed lounge has a roaring log fire in winter.
All the bedrooms are en suite or with private facilities; one has a four-poster and another a half-tester bed.
Bob and Beryl Owen bought the Hall in 1978 and they both greatly enjoy the guest house business.
Bob is a lecturer at a local college, and so it is his wife Beryl who runs the hotel.
Her favourite hobby is of particular interest as she studies wine and treats her guests to informal wine tastings.
The three-course dinner is delicious.
As far as possible fresh and home-grown produce is used and old fashioned puddings (the ones that do not count the calories) are a speciality.
Dinner is served at 7pm but if you miss it, there is a range of tasty snacks available at the bar.
Easily Accessible : The Hall is situated on the banks of the River Wyre and so river walks (wellies almost always essential) are popular with guests.
Half an hour way, the stunning countryside of Beacon Fell offers some lovely walks over hills and through woods.
The Lake District is only an hour away.
A very pleasant day can be spent touring the Fylde villages with their market days and craft exhibitions.
Salisbury Hall is a magnificent black and white house, set in beautiful grounds and selling antiques.
Blackpool with its seven miles of sandy beaches, spectacular autumn illuminations and 518ft high tower is only 7 miles away.
Both Manchester and Liverpool are within easy reach.
Greystones
   

This attractive Georgian house stands in an elevated position above a cobbled market place.
In its lifetime it has been a grocer's shop and a bank.
Its present owners, Keith and Frances Greenwood, are Yorkshire ‘born and bred’ but spent most of their adult lives in Bedfordshire.
When they returned, one summer, to visit relatives, they saw and fell immediately in love with Greystones.
It is a happy, friendly house, with a relaxed atmosphere where one is pleasantly greeted with a refreshing cup of tea and home-made biscuits.
There are four bedrooms, each with en suite facilities, and a large comfortable lounge with a log fire and colour TV.
The evening meal consists of a set starter, a set main course, a choice of sweets and some delicious Wensleydale cheese and biscuits followed by after-dinner coffee in the lounge.
The food is fresh and herbs, vegetables and fruit come from their allotment.
Special diets can be catered for.
Easily Accessible : Middleham nestles in the heart of the Yorkshire Dales.
Much of the town is built from stones pillaged from its splendid castle, once the seat of Richard III.
It is also a racehorse training centre, and every morning around 7. 30, stable lads can be seen leading the horses through the town and up onto the moors for training.
Last but not least, much of the BBC series ‘All Creatures Great and Small’ is filmed here.
There are many interesting walks around the town and on the Dales and it is also possible to take a mini-bus tour from Middleham of the popular areas of Wensleydale and Swaledale, with a local resident acting as guide.
The eerie remains of Jervaulx Abbey (where, incidentally, Wensleydale cheese was first made) is just 4 miles away.
Seven miles away, the Aysgarth Falls make a spectacular sight.
Fifteen miles away, you can visit the Lightwater Valley with its amusement park for children.
Local Activities : walks, pony-trekking, fishing, swimming.
The Mill Hotel
   

Situated at the foot of a mountain and bordered by a trout stream, this is an easy place to feel completely relaxed in.
Inside it is comfortable and attractive and decorated in traditional English fabrics, with an open fire and oak beams contributing to the fresh country mood.
There are eleven cosy bedrooms, most with private bathrooms and colour TV.
The proprietors Richard and Eleanor Quinlan found this, their ideal property, in 1985.
Richard has a wealth of experience in catering as for twenty years he was manager of a large company hotel.
Running a small, intimate hotel was his dream.
He is the ‘front of house’ person at The Mill, and enjoys chatting to guests over drinks in the lounge before dinner.
Dinner is excellent; there are five courses described by the proprietors as a mixture of English and French cuisine.
The sweets in particular are quite spectacular, and are sometimes decorated with fresh flowers.
A popular speciality of the house are the freshly baked wholewheat and herb soda breads.
Easily Accessible : The small unspoilt village of Mungrisdale lies towards the north of the Lake District but is still well-placed for touring.
Of course walking is the chief activity.
Everywhere one goes, there are mountains, lakes and sheep-dotted valleys.
The nearest lakes are Derwentwater and the larger Ullswater where you can take a cruise.
Nearby places to visit include the Lingholm Gardens, Carlisle Castle built in 1092 to watch over England's border with Scotland, and Wordsworth's house in Cockermouth which was his birthplace and houses some of his personal effects.
At Ambleside you can take a steam train through the lake and river scenery of the Leven valley.
The gardens at Dalemain, developed over the centuries from a medieval herb garden, contain many unusual plants and shrubs and a wide variety of roses.
Local Activities : walks, fell-walking, rock-climbing, pony-trekking, bird-watching, sailing, fishing, hang-gliding, golf.
Old Farmhouse
   

This old farmhouse resting in the village of Raskelf (the name means ‘the shelf of the roe deer’), probably dates back to the 18th century.
When Bill and Jenny bought it in 1977, it was in need of a lot of tender loving care — today, much restored and refurbished it has a wealth of beams, stripped pine and attractive brick fireplaces.
There is a small but colourful garden with a large patio.
The ten bedrooms are very prettily decorated with fine furniture and some antiques, one has a four-poster bed, all have en suite facilities.
There are two lounges, one with a TV.
All the main rooms have open fires.
It is run as a collaborative effort by the Frost family, and this includes the friendly intervention of the family pets, two dogs, three cats, and two rabbits, all kept well under control.
The service is excellent and very personal too — morning and afternoon tea are brought to one on a tray.
The food is imaginative and delicious — so good in fact that unless you have pre-booked it is virtually impossible to get in for dinner at week-ends.
There is a choice of six starters, and six main courses with specialities such as Honey Roast Quail and Beef Sassay, which consists of braising steak stuffed with cheese and herb paté, wrapped in bacon and cooked in red wine.
The puddings, such as the notorious ‘Boozey Prunes’, are just as appetising.
Easily Accessible : The village of Raskelf is a rural community lying at the northern end of the Vale of York, a few miles from the Hambleton Hills which form the southern edge of the North York Moors.
There are many fine walks such as the Cleveland Way, which passes within 7 miles and the Lyke Wake walk, starting at Osmotherly, some 15 miles away.
A pleasant footpath to Sessey, 3 miles away, starts directly from the house.
York is just 15 miles away.
Castle Howard, a palatial 18th-century country house with 1000 acres of grounds, and Beningbrough Hall, with over one hundred portraits from the National Portrait Gallery, are just two of the historic houses in the area.
For horse-racing fans, Catterick, Ripon, York, Thirsk, and Wetherby racecourses are all within a short drive's distance.
Local Activities : walks, golf, horse-riding, fishing, swimming.
The Fat Lamb
   

At an outstanding elevation of 1000 feet, the Fat Lamb has had its fair share of battles with the elements, and its proprietors, Paul and Helen Bonsall, admit that the garden's survival has been something of a minor miracle.
Near hurricane force winds and free-roaming sheep put paid to early attempts at planting flowers and shrubs.
Instead, rockeries and crazy paving abound and, after much tender loving care, a lawn has emerged triumphant.
A strange assortment of livestock roam outside the garden's fenced perimeter and amongst the Nubian goats, geese, and miniature Shetland ponies, a strange creature, a Langrake (otherwise known as a Cumbrian Long-Necked Sheep), can be spotted.
The Langrake, named Carlos, is over six feet high and is believed (by Paul and Helen) to be the last survivor of its breed.
Looking more like a lumpy llama than a sheep, poor Carlos is all alone in the world — and quite understandably, a mate is being sought.
Any suggestions gratefully received!
Inside the Fat Lamb, the visitor will find comfort and warmth.
Although Helen and Paul have completed extensive renovations, they have intentionally retained the original character of what was a 17th-century inn.
All nine bedrooms have private bathrooms.
There are two lounges, one with a TV, the other with books and games.
The cosy bar has an open fire.
The restaurant is open to guests and non-guests for lunch and dinner and offers both a table d'hôte and à la carte menu.
Good home-cooking is prepared, using fresh and local produce.
Easily Accessible : The Fat Lamb is situated on the edge of the Howgill Fells at the foot of Wild Boar (2,324 feet).
Thus the hill walker has a challenge right on his or her doorstep.
Further afield, the Lake District and North Yorkshire Dales provide some breathtakingly beautiful and exciting walks.
There are many pretty villages and market towns to explore including Appleby, where in June each year the famous horse fair  sees the largest gathering of gypsies in Britain.
At the Acorn Bank Garden, owned by the National Trust, you can see a fascinating collection of medicinal and cooking herbs.
Local Activities : walks, fishing, golf.
Burgoyne Hotel
   

This attractive stone house dates from the 1750s, and has been a hotel since the 1930s.
It rests in the heart of the dramatic scenery of Swaledale, one of Yorkshire's most beautiful areas, in the village of Reeth.
The spacious, airy rooms have exhilarating views of the surrounding hills and dales.
There is a TV lounge, a lounge bar, a dining room and a small garden.
Many of the bedrooms are large and have en suite facilities with colour TV available on request.
Pat and Steve came rather unexpectedly to the hotel trade after sixteen years in the Royal Air Force-Steve as a pilot, and Pat as an education and administrative officer.
At Burgoyne, Steve is chef, describing himself as an  enthusiastic amateur.
This is overly modest as the food is very good, with the choice of starter always including a home-made soup, lots of fresh vegetables, and a choice of delicious sweets.
Easily Accessible : Reeth is a large village with good amenities, including shops and cafes and a local folk museum detailing the history of the region over the last two centuries.
Walks abound: the Pennine Way passes within ten miles of the village, and the coast to coast path passes right through.
The surrounding countryside is quite dramatic with the legacy of the vast lead mining industry still evident.
There are numerous picturesque villages, each with its own traditional arts and crafts, which include glass-making, spinning, embroidery, pottery and rope-making.
A short drive to Arkengarthdale and you can down a pint in the highest pub in England.
There are numerous historic houses of great interest including Bolton Castle, built in the 14th century.
Children will enjoy  Lightwater Valley which has, amongst other attractions, a miniature railway grand-prix track and fun rides.
Local Activities : walks, pony-trekking, fishing.
Whashton Springs Farm
   

Whashton Springs Farm is set high in the hills, with superb views of the Yorkshire Dales.
Guests are welcome to explore the 300-acre mixed farm (worked by Gordon Turnbull and his two sons) at their leisure.
The south-facing Georgian house is a most attractive listed building with unusual bow windows which overlook the gently sloping lawn.
The pretty stone bridge which crosses the stream at the end of the walled garden is also listed.
Three bedrooms overlook this charming scene.
Six further bedrooms (all with en suite facilities) are situated in a converted stone courtyard.
The conversion upset one member of the family.
Snoopy the donkey was left without quarters and paid several unsuspecting guests a visit in a attempt to re-occupy her old home.
All the bedrooms have a colour TV and one has a four-poster bed.
The Turnbulls are very friendly and welcoming.
Gordon enjoys running the small bar and serving in the dining room which his wife says he took to like a ‘duck to water’.
Dinner is excellent: locally produced meat, vegetables and cheeses, and after dinner coffee and mints are served very elegantly in the drawing room.
Easily Accessible : There are numerous pretty villages to visit in the area and all are surrounded by the lovely unspoilt countryside.
Walkers can enjoy both the dales and the moors and the Pennine Way, which can be reached 15 miles away.
Among the many historic places to visit are Richmond's Norman castle and Easby Abbey (reputedly linked by an underground passage which is haunted by a drummer boy) and Aldborough Roman town with houses, courts, a forum and a temple.
Richmond, 3 miles away, is a delightful town, full of history and housing  the only Georgian theatre in the country.
York, Durham and the Lake District are an hour's drive away.
Local Activities : walks, golf, fishing, pony-trekking, canoeing.
Stanhope Old Hall
   

Stanhope Hall must be one of the most extraordinary houses in this book.
It was built way back in 1135 as a fortified manor house.
In 1976 it was purchased by Phyllis and Keith who restored it, quite miraculously, from an almost derelict state to its present form in which it resembles its original appearance to an extraordinary degree.
The thick stone walls, solid oak beams, cantilever oak staircase and mullioned windows are all exceptional, and the décor and style of furnishing is so absolutely ‘right’ that it is not difficult to imagine that one has just ‘stepped back in time’.
Features are continually being rediscovered; just one week before my arrival yet another brick fireplace complete with original bread corner oven was discovered.
In 1989 Phyllis and Keith joined forces with Neville Spiers and purchased the adjoining Elizabethan extension and formed the banquet hall which can seat sixty.
There are ten attractive bedrooms, thoughtfully decorated in keeping with the rest of the house.
Eight are en suite.
All meals are available in the  Feathertonehaugh dining room.
The food is wholesome, plentiful and traditionally English.
Bread and cakes are home-baked daily.
Vegetarians and special diets are catered for.
Easily Accessible : Weardale was recently classified an ‘area of outstanding natural beauty’ and there is considerable scope in the immediate vicinity for fell walking, as well as more gentle ambles along the river Wear.
Stanhope itself is an old market town; its centre has many 18th and 19th-century buildings, and was designated a conservation area in 1972.
It also has a mock-medieval castle erected in 1798, and even more extraordinarily a 250-year-old fossilised tree.
All around its industrial heritage can be seen, in the lead mining centre at the Dale Killhope Wheel, Britain's finest lead mining site, which is dominated by a 30ft  water wheel.
The Weardale Museum at nearby Ireshopeburn is a small museum in the Minister's House adjacent to a Methodist chapel where John Wesley once preached.
It displays exhibitions of Weardale history and local life.
Local Activities : walks, mountain cycling, pony-trekking, fishing.
Shire Cottage
   

This is a comfortable modern bungalow set in a large garden in peaceful countryside, with magnificent views overlooking Etherow Country Park.
It is very conveniently situated for Manchester.
Monica Sidebottom says she took in guests as she was tired of talking to her animals!
She is a friendly and helpful hostess who will book horse-riding, golf and fishing for her guests.
She does not provide dinner, but there are thirteen eating places within two miles, ranging from pubs to classy restaurants.
The three bedrooms have private facilities and TV.
Easily Accessible : The pleasures of Etherow Country Park — excellent views, wild flowers and wildfowl — are almost on your doorstep.
Four miles away at Kinder Scout you can join the Pennine Way.
Lyme Park, 4 miles away, has several hundred acres of parkland dotted with deer, and fine views of expansive moorland.
It also has a very fine collection of clocks dating back to 1658.
At Paradise Mill, 10 miles away, silk was handwoven from the 1750s until 1981 — today an exhibition gives you an idea of the skills and working conditions involved.
There are many stately homes, including Adlington Hall, a stunning Elizabethan manor with an elegant Georgian portico; Arley Hall and Gardens, a Victorian residence set in twelve acres of gardens; and Bramwell Hall, a 15th-century black and white manor house.
Eighteen miles away in Manchester you can visit Castlefield, Britain's first urban heritage park, which includes the Air and Space Museum and the Greater Manchester Museum of Science and Industry.
Local Activities : walks, fishing, golf, horse-riding, cycle hire.
Braemount House
   

Situated in the heart of the Lake District, away from main roads and close to some of the most beautiful countryside in the British Isles, Braemount House has much to offer anyone who appreciates comfort, hospitality and the great outdoors.
When Tony Eley and his Irish wife Mary purchased Braemount House in 1986 they were newcomers to the hospitality business; Mary had retired from the nursing profession and Tony from the Royal Air Force.
Together they have created a warm and welcoming atmosphere, with Tony (when he is not trying to improve his golf handicap) working front of house, and Mary preparing the meals.
The house is Victorian, fairly small but with a marvellous homely feel to it.
The four bedrooms are prettily furnished, all are en suite and well-equipped and each has a colour television.
Dinner is a set menu meal served each evening at 7pm.
The cooking is described by the Eleys as a mixture of English and Continental cuisine with a touch of Irish here and there.
Easily Accessible : Braemount House is situated in the Lake District National Park within easy walking distance of Windermere and Bowness villages.
It is ideally located for exploring the beautiful scenery of Lakeland by car or, as most people prefer, by foot.
If you have a literary bent, there is a lot that will appeal to you here; Wordsworth, Ruskin and Beatrix Potter all made their homes in the vicinity and today these ‘shrines’ are open to the public.
In a very different vein, Sellafield nuclear plant has a visitors' centre, which is surprisingly popular with tourists.
Local Activities : walks, boat trips on the lakes, horse-riding, fishing, golf, fell-walking, bird-watching.
White Doves
   

White Doves is a Victorian terraced house situated only a few minutes from the famous Minster, in a quiet cul-de-sac.
Its proprietor, Espie is a former schoolteacher who taught in Australia for four years before retiring to York to establish this most pleasant and comfortable guest house.
Charming and friendly, she will help you make the most of your visit.
There are four tastefully furnished bedrooms, each with its own facilities, and colour TV.
Dinner is not provided but there are many eating establishments within easy walking distance.
Easily Accessible : White Doves is ideally situated for exploring the very best of the 1,900-year-old city of York, with its Minster (the largest Gothic church in England), the Yorvik Viking Centre, and the famous ‘shambles’, an area of winding medieval streets.
Among the many tours available, the Ghost Walk of York will take you on a quite literally ‘haunting’ tour, while a river tour along the Ouse takes you right through the city centre.
There are also excellent tours from York into the surrounding area, where you can walk a number of the dales and moors, and see ancient abbeys, castles and fine stately homes.
Local Activities : sports amenities in city.
Tefferson Arms
   

The Nutcracker suite in this charming 17th-century inn is so called because the low-ceilinged doorway has an exposed beam which has caught out the unwary and cracked a few heads in its time.
The whole house is low-ceilinged, and furnished with antiques and pretty fabrics, with lots of fresh cut flowers and old world charm and character.
It has very much the feel of a traditional (but rather special) coaching inn.
Robert Mason, who has many years experience in catering, has an excellent idea of how to welcome his guests: a small decanter of sherry, fresh fruit and chocolate, await you in your room.
There are six cosy bedrooms (two have four-poster beds); each has a colour TV and en suite shower.
The garden is colourful with an interesting original feature-a huge stone arch from an old church that resembles an ancient ruin and which spurts water into the garden pond.
The Poacher's Restaurant serves traditional English food, with a taste of France here and there.
Desserts and bread are home-made; herbs come from the garden.
A good English breakfast is served in the pleasant conservatory.
Easily Accessible : The tranquil village of Thorganby stands just fifteen minutes from York and near to the Wolds.
There are numerous picturesque villages, ruined abbeys, and historic houses within easy driving distance, including Sledmere House which was built in the 1750s and rebuilt after a devastating fire, using the original plans, in 1911.
Here, among the many magnificent rooms, you can see the splendid library, exotic Turkish room, modelled on an Istanbul mosque, a beautiful chapel and acres of Capability Brown's landscaped grounds dotted with follies.
Twelve miles south of here you can see Britain's oldest horse races, the Kiplingcotes Derby at South Dalton.
The first race was held here in 1519, and today it takes place once a year, on the third Tuesday of each March.
Local Activities : walks, golf.
Craiglynn Hotel
   

This spacious house was built at the turn of the century of Aberdeen granite and has a most unusual roof structure which incorporates a domed tower — the tower bedroom below is very popular with guests.
There is a large colourful garden.
Inside, several original features remain, including the stained glass windows, oak and rosewood panelling, and parquet flooring.
All nine bedrooms are comfortable, well-equipped and have remote-controlled TV.
Dinner is served between 7 and 7.30pm.
All meals are prepared to order, and local meat, fish and fresh vegetables are used.
Specialities of the house are home-made soups and delicious main-course sauces.
Easily Accessible : Craiglynn is situated in a quiet residential area but within a short bus ride of the centre of Aberdeen.
The city has a wealth of things to do and see; historic monuments, a harbour, and all the amenities expected of a modern city including extensive sports facilities, art galleries, theatres and museums.
It also has some lovely sandy beaches and is surrounded by the beautiful wild scenery of the Grampian Highlands.
You can take the Malt Whisky Trail and visit seven excellent distilleries and enjoy the stunning countryside at the same time.
Local events include sheepdog trials, cattle markets and Highland games, and in certain pubs you will be treated to Scottish evenings and folk music.
Local Activities : extensive sports facilities in Aberdeen, hill-walking, horse-riding, pony-trekking.
Moorside House
   

Moorside House lies on the banks of the River Dee in the burgh of Ballater.
Built in 1883 of locally hewn pink and grey granite, it has an attractive landscaped garden with fine views stretching to the distant mountains.
The wooded hills of Craigendarroch and Craig Coillach rise up around it.
It is run by Ian and Ann Hewitt who met in Trinidad, where Ann's relatives were established in the hotel business.
This gave Ian the idea of setting up a similar, small-scale, homely establishment in the Highlands.
They both love the business; Ian enjoys meeting new people and for Ann, cooking is a pleasure.
All nine bedrooms have private or en suite facilities and colour TV and are decorated in pleasant pastel colours.
There is a guest dining room and lounge.
The four-course dinner menu is a mixture of traditional and modern Scottish cooking.
Fresh and local produce is used.
For breakfast the full Scottish menu includes a particularly good bowl of porridge.
Ann is, she says, greatly rewarded, ‘by the return of empty plates’.
Easily Accessible : The lovely countryside is obviously the main attraction for visitors and walking is a real pleasure here, partly because the area is not over-crowded.
Try walking up Craigendarrock Hill (meaning Hill of Oaks); the views from the top are excellent.
Balmoral Castle grounds 8 miles away are open to the public; adjacent to Balmoral is the Royal Lochnager Distillery.
The 16th-century ruins of Knock Castle, 2 miles away, have a murky past — all the sons of the Laird were murdered by a neighbouring Forbes of Strath girnock; when the Laird was informed he was so overcome by grief that he fell down a staircase to his death.
Glen Muick is very lovely with roaming red deer, beautiful waterfalls, and a peaceful loch.
The Malt Whisky Trail, a one day car tour, will take you to world-famous distilleries.
Local Activities : walks, golf, fishing, hill-walking, tennis/bowls, horse-riding, pony-trekking.
Keeper's House Private Hotel
   

This was once a gamekeeper's cottage belonging to a large estate.
It is situated in the small highland village of Carrbridge and surrounded by beautiful countryside of sweet-smelling pine trees, dark  moorland and mountain peaks.
There is wildlife here in abundance; deer, wild cats, red squirrels, golden eagles, ospreys and reindeer.
The hotel is full of charm and character and Penny Rawson's beloved and rare plants.
The Rawsons (a brother and sister team) have worked hard on the property creating a games-room from a garage, an Alpine section in the garden and adding private facilities to three of the five rooms.
The spacious dining room is often sunny and is filled with antiques and heirlooms.
The cosy lounge is lit by log fires in the cold winter months and has a colour TV.
The food is traditional Scottish fare and ingredients are fresh.
Vegetables and fruit (raspberries, blackcurrants and gooseberries) come from the garden and eggs from the Rawsons' hens.
The delicious kippers and haddock come from Portsoy.
Vegetarians will be offered alternatives by arrangement.
Easily Accessible : Local walks are varied and numerous and will take you through lochside and forest, field and riverbank, moor and mountains.
Golfers will enjoy the nine-hole golf course opposite the hotel.
In September for one week Carrbridge hosts its own festival of Scottish music.
The Carrbridge Landmark Centre provides nature trails, an excellent shop and a good selection of books.
Six miles away at the RSPB reserve at Loch Garten, you can see the nesting ospreys and in the adjoining Abernethy Forest you can walk in 21,000 acres of mountain, moorland and native pine forest.
Seven miles away at Aviemore there is a visitor centre and entertainment complex with a full range of sports facilities.
The nearest large town is Inverness, 23 miles away.
Resting on the banks of the River Ness with a castle (now the county court) it has a variety of shops, a cinema and a theatre.
Twenty-five miles away, Cawdor Castle, home of the Thanes of Cawdor, has some beautiful gardens.
The Whisky Trail, visiting several famous distilleries, can be picked up nearby.
Local Activities : skiing, water sports on Loch Morlich and Loch Insh, pony-trekking, walking, bird-watching, golfing, fishing, mountaineering.
Allt-Chaorain House
   

Allt-Chaorain is a warm and attractive house lying spectacularly in an elevated position among forest-clad hills and rugged mountains.
Just five hundred yards from the A82, it makes an ideal base from which to tour the Central Highlands.
The house was built at the turn of the century as a country home and used for many years as a shooting lodge.
It has ten acres of land and a pretty garden of roses and rhododendrons.
There is a comfortable lounge with a log fire and bar and a south-facing sunroom with superb views of the wild rugged landscape dominated by the mountain, Ben More.
All nine bedrooms have private facilities.
All the food is prepared from fresh produce.
The menus are discussed with guests at breakfast time.
Heavily influenced by traditional Scottish recipes, they are cooked to perfection.
Packed lunches are available on request.
Easily Accessible : The surrounding countryside is a walker's paradise with hills mountains, lochs, and the West Highland Way to enjoy.
There is an enormous variety of birdlife and the natural flora of the area (which includes Alpine plants) is fascinating.
There are several castles to explore including Inverary, a sumptuous baronial-type castle, and Doune with an interesting motor museum.
The small, peaceful island of Iona has been a centre of Christianity since St Columba founded his monastery there.
Today the abbey church is a thriving Christian community.
Both Glasgow and Perth are under 60 miles away.
Local Activities : walks, salmon and trout fishing, bowls, golf, sailing, tennis, wind-surfing, water-skiing.
Beach House Hotel
   

Beach House hotel is a small, warm and wonderfully comfortable Victorian terraced house in the old fishing village of Broughty Ferry just outside Dundee.
It has a small patio garden overlooking a sandy beach and a very attentive and friendly proprietor, Lynne Glennie.
There are five bedrooms all en suite with colour TVs, and an attractive lounge.
Snacks are available all day and a full home-cooked dinner is served in a small dining room from 6pm to 9pm — Lynne's soups are a speciality.
Easily Accessible : Dundee is the heart and capital of the Tayside region which encompasses the counties of Angus, Fife and Perthshire.
It is a coastal city with a fine historical heritage and offers all the amenities one would expect, including a castle museum, a botanical garden and the frigate Unicorn (the oldest British-built warship afloat).
The picturesque village and castle of Glamis (a royal residence since 1374 and the family home of the Earl of Strathmore) are half an hour from Dundee.
700-year-old Blair Castle, and Earlshall Castle and gardens are 8 miles away.
Just outside Dundee there are several country parks ideal for gentle walks.
Dundee is well placed for visiting Aberdeen, Edinburgh, St Andrews and Perth (a town described by Sir Walter Scott as the ‘most varied and beautiful in Scotland’).
Local Activities swimming, golf, tennis, coarse and sea-fishing, flying, skiing and sailing.
Brough House
   

This lovely country house lies well secluded off the road between Forres and Elgin in the magnificent countryside of Morayshire (which has one of the highest sunshine levels in the UK).
The house is beautifully furnished with antiques and warm colours.
There are two twin-bedded rooms, one with a bathroom en suite and the other with a private bathroom.
A third twin room is available with a shared bathroom.
The cosy drawing room has a TV and open fire.
There is a pretty garden with a large kitchen garden providing fresh vegetables.
Dinner is taken by candlelight at a well-dressed table in the elegant dining room.
Rosemary and Mark often eat with their guests.
Game, local fish and fresh vegetables are frequently on the menu.
If guests wish to eat out Rosemary will recommend local restaurants.
Easily Accessible : The whole area is full of natural beauty ranging from wild untutored countryside to spotless sandy beaches, from ancient forests to rugged cliffs.
But man also has made his mark in the many ancient monuments, castles and churches that dot the countryside and small villages.
Walks vary from gentle lakeside ambles to the arduous long-distance footpath, known as the Speyside Way.
Morayshire is the heart of the whisky industry and you can take the famous Whisky Trail to seven distinctive malt whisky distilleries.
The capital of the region is Elgin with its ruined medieval cathedral.
Nearby is the 13th-century Pluscarden Abbey which is being restored by Benedictine monks.
On the coast the maritime museums of Buckie and Lossiemouth record the history of the Moray fishing industry.
The 17th-century Brodie Castle in Forres has a fine collection of furniture and paintings.
Local Activities : walks, sandy beaches, golf, fishing, horse-riding.
The Brae Hotel
   

The Brae Hotel is situated in the midst of the Great Glen just outside the village of Fort Augustus.
It stands in its own grounds of approximately one and a half acres and from its elevated position has spectacular views.
The house is warm and comfortable.
There are eight bedrooms, five of which have private facilities.
A couple of bedrooms overlook Loch Ness, and others the village and the Caledonian Canal.
The Reives are kind and solicitous hosts who obviously enjoy the challenge of making their guests' holidays as relaxing and pleasant as possible.
They came to Fort Augustus having (like many others) fallen in love with the stunning natural beauty of the highland scenery and atmosphere when Andrew was based here with the Royal Navy.
There is good, wholesome home-cooking on offer.
Dinner is taken in the elegant dining room accompanied by candlelight, fine linen, flowers and classical music.
After dinner coffee and mints are served on the verandah.
Specialities of the house include Stilton and grape pastry and marinaded roast venison.
Easily Accessible : You can step outside the door and embark on a walk which will take in the expansive, mountainous, forest-clad scenery.
Fort Augustus has a Benedictine Abbey and a nine-hole golf course.
Nineteen miles away at the Loch Ness Centre, you can see evidence and theories about the elusive monster, and take a ‘Jacobite Cruise’ from the Clansman Marina to Urquhart Castle.
Inverness, 34 miles away, is the administrative capital of the Highland region.
The Landmark Highland Heritage and Adventure Park has some excellent nature trails, exhibitions and an adventure playground for children.
Local Activities : walks, bird-watching (buzzards, kestrels) golf, pony-trekking, mountaineering, fishing.
Moorlands Hotel
   

Situated beside the Caledonian Canal, Moorlands Hotel has magnificent views of the Scottish Highlands and Ben Nevis, and is ideally positioned as a touring centre.
It is an attractive modern hotel, run pleasantly and professionally by the Sinclair family who originally came from Orkney.
Its Jacobean-style restaurant, cellar bistro, and lounge area are all new and a main lounge bar has been recently refitted to a split-level design with a nautical theme, with wood panelling and brass fittings, a ship's figurehead and pictures of canal scenes.
There is entertainment every night.
The rooms are modern and comfortable with functional and tasteful décor.
All the bedrooms have private facilities and colour television, one has a four-poster.
The menu is based around traditional Scottish fare and ingredients are fresh.
The chef makes tasty bread rolls and grows his own herbs.
There is both an à la carte and table d'hôte menu.
Easily Accessible : Walking in the wild unspoilt scenery is a favourite occupation of most guests.
Moorlands is conveniently situated at the end of the West Highland Way and near to Ben Nevis (Britain's highest peak) and so provides plenty of walks of varying levels which take in woods, hills, mountains, lochs and ruined castles.
The Caledonian Canal is right on the hotel's doorstep and nearby Loch Eil and Loch Linnhe provide opportunities for boat trips.
Moorlands is also well placed for visiting many of the Highland attractions including Loch Ness, famous for its elusive monster; the Sea Life Centre; and the Highland Wildlife Park.
Once a year, in September, the very fit (and maybe a little mad) take part in the Ben Nevis Hill Race.
Local Activities : walks, fishing, bird-watching, boat cruises.
Lomond Hills Hotel
   

This hotel, originally an 18th-century wayfarers inn, stands on the site of medieval parliament buildings.
Part of the buildings used to be an old cobbler's shop, hence the ‘Cobblers’ wine bar and restaurant.
The décor is functional and comfortable.
There are twenty-five bedrooms, all en suite and with colour TV, an attractive lounge, a sauna, and a function room which can accommodate up to two hundred people.
The honeymoon suite has a four-poster bed trimmed with lace.
Dinner is available all nights (this is one of the few places in this guide where no prior notice is necessary).
There is an à la carte and table d'hôte menu, flambé dishes, and home-baked bread and shortbread are house specialities.
Easily Accessible : Freuchie is a picturesque village with pretty 16th-century buildings against a backdrop of the Lomond Hills.
It is well situated for touring the centre of Scotland.
The countryside is beautiful with rivers, streams, and rolling farmlands.
Close to Freuchie there are some waymarked Forestry Commission walks.
Two miles away, you can visit Falkland Palace, the country residence of the Stuart kings and queens, with gardens containing the oldest tennis court in Great Britain.
Seven miles away at Cupar, you can visit the Scottish Deer Centre, and view the magnificent red deer at close quarters.
A circular tour of Fife will take in the  university town of St Andrews, 18 miles from Freuchie, the picturesque fishing villages of Anstruther and Crail, the Fishery Museum, the folk museum in Ceres and the Scottish Trust properties of the Hill of Tarvit and Kelly Castle.
Edinburgh, a centre of culture and history, is 32 miles away.
Local Activities : golf, walk, pony-trekking, fishing, gliding, cycling.
Dunstaffnage House
   

Dunstaffnage House is set in an acre of pretty garden with wonderful views across the open land to the Cairngorms, yet only a few minutes drive from the centre of Grantown.
The house is very charming in a typically Victorian style with many original features — high ceilings, cornices and two attractive stained glass windows intact.
The fireplace in the lounge came from Sir Thomas Lipton's yacht,The Endeavour .
Throughout the house the large windows give fine views of the surrounding countryside.
The lovely south-facing Victorian conservatory with its wisteria and fig tree is ideal for quiet relaxation.
All six bedrooms are en suite or have private bathrooms.
David and Martha came to Dunstaffnage House after eight years of teaching sports in the Alps.
They chose this area because it reminded them of the Alps and afforded them the chance to continue with their much loved skiing.
Being sports enthusiasts they will arrange activities for their guests including skiing holidays, guided walking tours, cycle trips, golf and fishing.
The evening meal is served at a set time and is cooked to cordon bleu standard by Martha and is served by candlelight.
Packed lunches are available on request.
Easily Accessible : The surrounding scenery is quite beautiful with a thick pine forest right on your doorstep.
There are numerous walks in  the Cairngorms and Speyside, and local walks around Grantown and the Cromdale Hills.
Apart from taking in the scenery and the many outdoor pursuits available, there are several places of historical interest well worth a visit including Cawdor Castle, 25 miles away, with its 14th-century keep and associations with Macbeth; and Elgin, 40 miles away, a fascinating medieval town with a ruined cathedral, and a museum notable for its fine fossil collection.
The Aviemore sports centre is 12 miles away.
Local Activities : walks, golf, trout and salmon fishing, tennis, bowling, wind-surfing, bird-watching (RSPB reserve, 5 miles), canoeing, pony-trekking, skiing.
Burnside Cottage
   

Elspeth Scott, the charming proprietor of this small, cosy and bright establishment, welcomes visitors as if they were, in her own words, her ‘personal guests’.
Her aim is to make you feel as welcome, comfortable and relaxed as possible, with the expectation, constantly  fulfilled , that you will return again and again.
Built in 1813, Burnside Cottage lies on a hill, in the beautiful wilderness of the Scottish Borders.
It is close to the town of Hawick, the centre of the Borders knitwear industry.
It has a small front and back garden where the occasional strutting pheasant can be seen, and a sunny patio much appreciated by guests.
There are two guest bedrooms each decorated in a country house style with dark wood furniture.
As access to the guest bathroom (once a stocking factory) is through the kitchen, Elspeth, concerned for one's modesty, provides bathrobes.
A wholesome breakfast is served and dinner and packed lunches are provided on request.
If guests wish to eat out there are several reasonably priced local restaurants.
At night, your favourite hot drinks — hot chocolate, Ovaltine and Bovril, plus Elspeth's home-made shortbread — are offered.
There are very few house rules but the ban on smoking is very definite.
Easily Accessible : The surrounding countryside is stunning with plenty of scope for gentle ambles and, for the more energetic, hill walking.
Elspeth is prepared (her schedule permitting) to drop guests at the start and collect them at the end of walks.
Among the many places to visit are: the 12th-century abbeys of Jedburgh and Melrose; Abbotsford House, the stately home of Sir Walter Scott which was financed by the Waverley novels; and the 16th-century Thirlestone Castle, home to a fine collection of china, furniture and paintings and the Borders Country Life Museum.
Edinburgh, Carlisle and Berwick-on-Tweed are well within reach for day trips.
Local Activities : walks, fishing, horse-riding, golf, swimming, mountain cycling.
Redlands
   

Here you can relax in a pine lodge overlooking a lovely garden, or sun yourself on the semi-circular sun terrace.
The landscape of woodland and fields is very beautiful and if you like golf, you may well feel you have died and gone to heaven — there are an astounding twenty-five golf courses within a 20-mile radius and the local Ladybank course is an Open qualifier.
The lodge, which was rebuilt by Ronald Keanie, has four bedrooms each with its own facilities and colour TV.
There is a comfortable and spacious sitting room.
The three-course dinner menu makes good use of Scottish produce namely game and seafood, and whilst some recipes are traditional, others are home-brewed.
Vegetables are from the garden or locally grown and bread and rolls are home-baked.
Packed lunches are available but please give prior notice.
Easily Accessible : Redlands is half a mile outside Ladybank village which is served by British Rail and buses.
There are walks to suit everyone.
The nearby Falkland hills are delightful and not too strenuous.
There  is a stunning 10-mile coastal walk from St Andrews to Crail.
If you feel like something a little on the wild side, the glens of North Angus and Perthshire will interest you.
Falkland, 4 miles away, is an ancient town with a 16th-century palace which was the country residence of Stuart kings and queens.
Twelve miles away at St Andrews is a fine cathedral and a ruined priory, and pristine beaches.
Ceres, only 6 miles from Redlands, is a very pretty village with a medieval hump-back bridge.
There are numerous National Trust properties, such as Kellie Castle and Balmerino, both 15 miles away.
Children will enjoy the adventure farm, museum and nature trail at Cambo, 15 miles away.
Take a day trip to Edinburgh, 45 miles away.
Local Activities : golf, loch and river fishing, pony-trekking, riding, tennis, swimming, flying, parachuting, flying, bowling.
Dunfermline House
   

With an aviary, a fish pond, a rabbit, a guinea pig, a watchful cat and a ‘prize leek’ patch, Dunfermline House is obviously very much a family home.
It is situated in the small town of Melrose, which nestles comfortably between the Eildon Hills and the silvery River Tweed in the beautiful rolling countryside of the Scottish Borders.
The house is tastefully decorated and each room has an individual character, each with its own colour TV.
There is a cosy guest lounge and a dining room where breakfast and dinner are served.
The three-course table d'hôte menu makes good use of local produce; Border lamb and fresh trout from the River Tweed are firm favourites.
Easily Accessible : Walks abound; the Southern Upland Way passes through Melrose.
210 miles long, it runs from the west to the east coast of southern Scotland.
A climb up the Eildon Hills will present the energetic with stunning panoramic views of the surrounding gentle rolling countryside.
Just fifty yards from the hotel, you can visit the ruins of Melrose's 12th-century Abbey where lies the heart of Robert the Bruce, King of Scots.
Adjacent to the ruins are the Priorwood gardens which  specialise in growing plants for drying and flower arranging.
Nearby is Galashiels, a centre for the 19th-century textile industry, where you can still visit the ‘mill shops’.
Within 15 miles you can visit numerous abbeys, castles, historic houses and craft centres.
The marvellous historic and cultural cities of Edinburgh, Berwick-on-Tweed, and Glasgow are under two hours' drive away.
Local Activities : walks, riding, golf, salmon and trout fishing, swimming.
Moffat House Hotel
   

Surrounded by the soft, rolling hills of Armadale, Moffat House is set in two acres of mature garden and has magnificent views of the Annan valley.
It is a mid-18th-century mansion built by the famous architect, John Adam, and typically consists of a main building with two connecting wings.
It is situated in the charming old spa town of Moffat, a recent winner of both the ‘Best Kept Village’ and the ‘Scotland in Bloom’awards.
Whilst the exterior of the house is largely unaltered since its earliest days, the interior has been completely refurbished, although the main architectural feature, a stunning central spiral staircase, remains.
There has been much modernisation and recently a new bar/lounge and conservatory have been added.
All fifteen bedrooms have private facilities and colour TV.
It is worth saying that, with fifteen bedrooms, Moffat House is one of the largest hotels in this book, but in common with the others, the service is warm and personal.
An à la carte menu and bar meals are served in the evening.
The food is of a high standard with fresh local produce such as Solway salmon, Galloway beef, venison and wild duck regularly featured.
Easily Accessible : There are many stunning local walks on the Annandale Hills along the river Annan, and through Greenhillstairs and Rivox Forests.
Fourteen miles away you can visit Grey Mare's Tail, a great waterfall, and here you may catch sight of a herd of wild goats which live in the area.
You can take a day trip to visit Wanlockhead, the highest  village in Scotland, with its Museum of Lead Mining, where you can visit an underground mine gallery, and not far away, Drumlanrig Castle, the magnificent 17th-century home of the Duke of Buccleuch and Queensbury.
Twenty-five miles away, at the Caerlaverock Nature Reserve, along the shore of the Nith Estuary and Solway Firth, you can see natterjack toads and great flocks of wildfowl.
Local Activities : walks, golf, tennis, bowls, fishing, pony-trekking.
Cairn Edward
   

Lying on the edge of the Galloway Forest Park, this building of solid granite remains pretty much unaltered since its origin in 1872 as the country home of the descendants of Viscount Kenmure (the ruins of Kenmure Castle stand half a mile away).
Around the house is an acre of garden and beyond this eight acres of rough ground with rocky outcrops and mature trees and squirrels and deer from the forest paying occasional shy visits.
The lovely Loch Ken is just across the way.
The house is spacious and comfortable with a large drawing room and a dining room with separate tables.
All bedrooms have en suite or private facilities and colour TV, their attractive wooden shutters are always appreciated as they block out the dawn chorus — traffic noise is not a problem!
Dinner is offered from Easter (when Cairn Edward opens) to the end of May and again from September to October (when it closes).
The food is home-cooked; local produce such as the delicious Solway salmon, free-range eggs and chickens and locally cured bacon are regular features.
If guests wish to eat out, there are several eating places in New Galloway, just one mile away.
Easily Accessible : The location is excellent both for touring south west Scotland by car and as a centre for walking.
Thirty miles away, you can visit Drumlanrig Castle, built in the 17th century and home to an  exquisite art collection.
Dumfries, 26 miles away, has several interesting museums and the house of Robert Burns.
Walkers will find a great deal of variety, from short forest walks to the long Southern Upland Way.
Much of the walking is fairly rugged and a climb to the top of Merrick (2,766 feet), 35 miles away, is a challenge for the adventurous.
Almost straight from the doorstep of Cairn Edward you can embark on a day's walking in the Galloway Forest.
Local Activities : walks, watersports on Loch Ken, coarse and game fishing, bird-watching (RSPB reserve), golf.
Cairngill House Hotel
   

This hotel is quite gloriously situated in an elevated position just fifty yards from a sandy beach.
It has one of the finest outlooks on the Solway coast; the views of the bay and beaches are panoramic and in the far distance Lake District peaks can be seen.
A grand Victorian building, it has three acres of garden with a pond and hard tennis court.
It was once owned by a cotton baron from Lancashire; today it belongs to Brian and Ann who left Australia (where they worked as wool buyers) to  fulfil their long-time ambition of opening their own hotel.
There are six comfortable and spacious bedrooms, tastefully furnished.
An evening meal of good home-cooking is served.
Easily Accessible : The countryside is waiting to be explored; the lochs, rolling heather-covered moors, peaceful woods and long, unspoilt coastline provide tremendous scenic variety.
There are many castles, churches, abbeys and ancient monuments and public gardens to visit.
Kirkcudbright, once an active port, is an attractive town, particularly along the waterfront.
It has a ruined castle, an interesting local history museum, and its own school of painters.
Nearby are the National Trust's Threave Gardens, and at the Threave Wildfowl Refuge on the River Dee you can see many bird varieties.
Local Activities : walks, fishing, golf, pony-trekking, bird-watching.
Menzion Farmhouse
   

Menzion farmhouse, in the Tweedsmuir Hills, lies in an area officially designated of ‘outstanding natural beauty’ and ‘special scientific interest.’
It is remote (but accessible) and sparsely populated, providing a perfect retreat for the beleaguered city dweller, or indeed anyone who feels like getting away from it all.
A farmhouse probably stood on this site at the time of the Great Plague.
The present house is old, with a west gable wall, 8 feet thick and built of solid stone.
There are five acres of grounds with a walled garden and croquet green.
Adjacent to these grounds lies 7,000 acres of forest accessible to walkers.
Inside Menzion is old-fashioned and comfortable with blazing log fires in cold weather.
A five-course dinner is served at a large refectory table seating twelve, so guests have a chance to get to know one another.
Fresh produce is used from the kitchen garden (except for the more exotic items from abroad), and cakes and bread rolls are home-baked.
Packed lunches can be provided.
If guests arrive too late for dinner, there is a local inn which provides very good fare.
Mary and David have travelled extensively and enjoy meeting their guests, who hail from all quarters of the world.
They will do whatever they can to make your stay as comfortable as possible — provide chauffeuring as required, offer advice on the area and book fishing and golf.
Tuition in trout fishing is provided at no charge, along with waders and tackle.
Easily Accessible : Walking is a delight here as the area is never crowded and the walker can truly be alone with nature.
To the rear of Menzion Broad Law rises some 2,750 feet and is the highest point in the Scottish Borders.
It is ideal for sighting rare arctic-alpine species of plant life.
Fifteen miles away from Menzion you can join the Southern Upland Way, which runs for 212 miles from the south-west coast of Scotland to the eastern seaboard.
Apart from the abundance of nature to keep you busy, there are several historic and archaeological sites, museums and botanic gardens to visit.
The beautiful historic city of Edinburgh is only forty minutes away by car, and Glasgow just a little further.
Local Activities : walks, bird-watching, fishing, golf, skiing in winter.
Llanwenarth House
   

Surrounded by the Black Mountains in the Brecon Beacons National Park, this is a house full of historical interest with connections ranging from Charles I to Captain Henry Morgan, the infamous Governor of Jamaica, and with rumours of buried treasure in the grounds.
Inside, antiques, family paintings and period furniture enhance the elegance and character inherent in this finely proportioned manor house.
There are five bedrooms, all individually furnished with en suite facilities and colour TV.
Both the drawing room and dining room are very attractive with large Georgian windows creating a spacious and light atmosphere.
The garden is mature and colourful with a walled orchard given over to sheep and vegetables.
Amanda Weatherill, a trained cordon bleu cook, and wine-shipping husband Bruce take considerable care in the planning of menus.
The food is freshly prepared and very high quality produce is used — free-range ducks, pork, chicken, vegetables and fruit from the kitchen garden, locally caught salmon and trout.
If guests wish to eat out, there are several local restaurants which are recommended.
Easily Accessible : The scenery varies from rugged mountains to gentle valleys and mixed farmland.
Within 15 miles of Llanwenarth there are some thirty waymarked walks and within 3 miles the mountains of Blorenge, Tyla and Sugarloaf can be approached.
In the Brecon Beacons, the Pen y Fan walk can be attempted, to the highest peak in the region.
Abergavenny is a bustling market town with a museum in the grounds of a ruined castle.
There are famous racecourses at Chepstow and Cheltenham.
Although a car is a necessity, the Brecon Mountain Railway will take you through some of the more inaccessible countryside.
Castles are numerous.
Wales’ oldest and deepest mine is at Blaenavon, known as Big Pit, closed as a colliery in 1980 after a hundred years of production.
Local Activities : walks, mountaineering, trout and salmon fishing, horse-riding, golf, hang-gliding, bird-watching, boating on Monmouthshire canal.
Llidiardau Mawr
   

You have to watch your step at Llidiardau Mawr — uneven floors, low doorways and steep stairways can catch out the unwary!
This 17th-century farmhouse and watermill is situated 1,100 feet up in the beautiful and rugged mountain countryside of the  Snowdonia National Park.
Its newly tamed garden has fine views and a fast-running mountain stream.
The building has been lovingly restored (rats evicted, rubble removed and original features unearthed) from a very sorry state.
Today it is modern and comfortable whilst it still retains an ‘old world’ character.
The rooms are painted white to complement the black beams.
The dining room has a beautiful Welsh stone fireplace with original pit, and in the lounge (which incorporates the old pantry) old meat hooks remain alongside the colour TV.
In the new pine kitchen, old beams are still very much at home.
Unusually, there is a choice of supper and dinner, served at 6pm and 6.30pm respectively.
(The supper menu is simpler and cheaper.)
The food, cooked by Shirley May herself, is fresh and wholesome and local produce such as Welsh lamb and free-range eggs are used whenever possible.
Easily Accessible : Bala lies beside a four-mile long lake (which you can take a steam-train ride around) and is surrounded by three mountain ranges.
There is a local bus running once a day from Bala to the cottage.
Walkers are spoilt for choice, with numerous delightful walks in the surrounding countryside.
In season there are guided walks around Bala.
(Your host will supply Ordinance Survey maps.
) Ten miles away is Lake Vyrnwy, a reservoir and the largest RSPB nature reserve covering 17,000 acres.
Pistyll Rhaedr, the highest waterfall in Wales, is again only 10 miles away.
Fifteen miles away you can visit the Llechwedd Slate Caverns.
There are numerous castles to visit for a day trip including the magnificent Harlech Castle built between 1283 and 1289 and perched proudly on a cliff.
Local Activities : walks, fishing, sailing, wind-surfing, canoeing, skin-diving, swimming, golf, horse-riding.
Ty'n Rhos Farm
   

This pretty slate house is situated in a tranquil hamlet on the edge of the Snowdonia National Park.
It was once a dairy farm but with the introduction of milk quotas only a few cows are kept now to provide milk, cheese, cream and yogurt.
Visitors are welcome to milk the cows and pat the other friendly animals — children love it.
The three-quarter acre garden has a pond with ducks and views across the 72 acres of farmland and lakes.
Inside the house all the bedrooms have magnificent views across the lovely countryside, over to the Snowdonia mountains and in the other direction to Anglesey.
The interior is furnished simply but very pleasantly in keeping with the old-world cottage ambience of the house.
The nine bedrooms are all individually decorated and locally crafted wood is a feature; all are equipped with a colour TV and are en suite.
The food is fresh, wholesome and imaginative and the menu provides an excellent choice of dishes.
Individual diets are catered for.
Easily Accessible : There are several gentle walks in the immediate vicinity, starting from Llanddeiniolen church (with reputedly the oldest yew trees in Europe), and at Pen Dinas, an Iron Age hill fort.
Llanddeiniolen is situated on the very edge of  Snowdonia National Park and here the more energetic will find numerous walks taking in the mountainous scenery.
The summit of Snowdon can be climbed on foot or by train.
The views when not shrouded in cloud are magnificent.
Of the many interesting places to visit, try Caernarfon Castle, 6 miles away; Llandudno, a Victorian seaside resort; Harlech Castle; and Portmeirion, the dream village of Clough Williams-Ellis and the setting for the TV series ‘The Prisoner’.
To the east lies Betws-y-coed with its craft and woollen shops.
Local Activities : walks, cliff walks, golf, sea and river fishing, skin-diving, sailing, pony-trekking.
Castle View Hotel
   

This charming ivy-clad building was built over three hundred years ago with stones from Chepstow castle.
It has massive walls six feet thick, a beautiful hand-turned oak staircase, 18th-century wall paintings, and a delightful secluded garden.
All eleven bedrooms are en suite and are equipped with a mini-bar and TV.
There is a lounge bar, residents lounge, and dining room.
Martin and Vicky Cardale came to Castle View with a wealth of valuable experience, having built up a chain of hotels in Australia.
They run Castle View with their family of four, including their eight-year-old daughter, Zara, whose speciality is making the hotel's home-made ice-cream, and Holly, the friendly much-loved golden retriever.
Food is freshly cooked, with all meals available and a choice of bar snacks or restaurant meals.
The cuisine is home-cooked British with local produce — salmon, Welsh lamb and fresh vegetables regularly featured.
A full vegetarian menu is available.
Easily Accessible : Chepstow is an interesting and historical town set in the outstanding natural beauty of the Wye Valley.
It was a port from Norman times to the 19th century, and has an 11th-century castle perched high on the cliffs above the River Wye and a pretty church with a Norman nave.
There are numerous places of historical interest to visit nearby including Tintern Abbey, a 12th-century Cistercian abbey, and Caldicot, Raglan, and Penow Castles.
Four miles away at Caerleon, the ruins of one of the three main military bases in Roman Britain, the Legionary Fortress of Isca can be explored.
The Forest of Dean and Clearwell Caves (a natural cave system mined for 2,500 years for iron ore) are a twenty-minute drive away.
Walkers can enjoy the Wye Valley walk covering 34 miles, and Offa's Dyke path which runs from the Severn Estuary to  Prestatyn — 168 miles north.
Local Activities : walks, golf, horse-riding.
The Hall
   

This charming house is prettily and conveniently set in a rural position, just a few miles outside Chester.
The main house is believed to date from 1690 and there are traces of an earlier farmhouse in the grounds.
One of the outbuildings, a listed dovecote, has been renovated and is now home to two splendid white doves.
There are thirteen acres of grounds, with extensive views over the estuary of the River Dee, a large vegetable plot and formal gardens.
Bantams, geese, ducks and hens roam the grounds.
Accommodation is provided in a neatly converted cottage with five bedrooms and two bathrooms, a sitting room with a wood-burning stove and colour TV, a dining room and kitchen.
It is very simply but tastefully furnished with white walls, pine furnishings and flowery fabrics.
The walls are adorned with locally painted watercolours.
Whilst no evening meal is provided there are plenty of local pubs and restaurants within a two-mile radius.
Easily Accessible : You can walk for miles and miles on the nearby Halkyn mountains and a little further afield, the Denbigh moors and Snowdonia provide many challenging walks.
Chester, 15 miles away, is an attractive historical city with some beautiful black and white buildings, an 11th-century cathedral, a famous zoo, and some Roman remains.
You can take a day trip to Bodelwyddan Castle with its walled garden, aviary, maze and adventure woodland.
The popular Victorian resort of Llandudno, 29 miles away, is fairly unspoilt, and has a sandy beach, an attractive park, and an open-air theatre.
Local Activities : walks, fishing, pony-trekking, golf, Holywell leisure centre with sauna, spa pool, sunbed, trimnasium, swimming pool, squash, tennis, bowls.
Broniwan
   

A stay at Broniwan in the heart of Wales can be an educational experience; guests staying at this small Victorian stone farmhouse are given the opportunity to feed the calves, milk the cows, make friends with the donkey and tend the hens.
The farmhouse rests on a rocky slope and is surrounded by beech trees.
The surrounding area is very beautiful with gentle hills, waterfalls and purple heather.
The house faces south towards the Frenni Fawr hills, famous in Welsh legend.
The pretty garden with rhododendrons, irises, ferns and Victorian ‘immortelles’ surrounds the house.
The interior is furnished in period style with a pleasing 19th-century watercolour collection completing the picture.
There are three double bedrooms, one with en suite facilities.
The drawing room and dining room are furnished prettily in Laura Ashley décor and have very fine views.
There is a playroom in the barn with paints, records and books.
The food is plentiful and very wholesome (I enjoyed an impromptu and delicious kedgeree); much of the produce served at dinner comes from the farm including the delicious beef.
Carole and her American, jazz-loving husband Allan enjoy meeting their guests and are keen to give advice on anything from milking a cow to pointing out the best walks available.
They will also meet you at the train stations.
Easily Accessible : You can step outside the door and walk around the farm and the village.
Five miles away the Ceredigion heritage coast stretches for miles and miles.
The Preselli hills present more of a challenge, especially if you attempt the Carn Ingli summit.
There are numerous pretty villages with markets.
The woollen mills at Dre-fach Felindre, 10 miles away, were once a centre of the Welsh woollen industry.
There are numerous historic and archaeological sites to visit including the fascinating ancient burial chambers at Pentre Ifan, 20 miles away.
Local Activities : walks, fishing (sea trout), sailing and golf, sandy beaches.
The Crown at Whitebrook
   

The Crown has been an Inn since the 18th century and its widely acclaimed restaurant now occupies the original part of the building.
It is set in the Whitebrook Valley, just a mile from the Tintern Forest where the peace and quiet is disturbed only by a gently babbling brook and birdsong.
There are twelve cosy bedrooms, all with en suite bathrooms and colour TVs.
There is also a small room available for executive meetings of two to twelve delegates.
Sandra Bates is a trained caterer who has run three restaurants.
Her experience is brought to bear in the Crown's superior restaurant where she is particularly proud of the French cuisine.
Ingredients are fresh and many, such as the fresh salmon from the Wye, are locally produced.
Specialities of the house are home-made rolls, chocolate truffles and home-made ice-creams and sorbets.
Easily Accessible : There is plenty to do and see in this beautiful area; within a 15-mile radius there are ten castles to explore and the Forest of Dean is only 5 miles away.
Take a day trip to the Brecon Beacons, Hereford, Gloucester, Bristol, Cardiff, Newport or the Black Mountains.
Walking is a main attraction; the countryside is varied and walkers can enjoy gentle lakeside ambles, rugged hill climbing, or strolls along easy paths.
The Tintern Forest, the Wye Valley Walk, and Offa's Dyke are all within 2 miles and there are over thirty waymarked walks within 5 miles of the Crown.
Local Activities : walks, trout and salmon fishing, caving, canoeing, boating, pony-trekking, horse-riding.