

Media programme focuses on Indian tribal culture and identity
The Chotanagpur Plateau, west of Calcutta, is the home of the largest concentration of tribal groups in India.
Over the years, however, the tribes have become increasingly marginalised and their rich cultures and traditions have barely survived.
Modernisation, socio-economic exploitation by money-lenders and landlords, and the loss of previously communally-owned property, such as forests, have led to a collective loss of identity.
Since 1978 an organisation called the Liberal Association for the Movement of People (LAMP) has been striving to address these problems.
LAMP works with the tribal groups to help them revive their culture, languages and art forms, and to be aware of their rights.
Their long-term aim is to establish a new territory in central India (Jharkhand State) to meet the needs of tribal groups.
LAMP's activities are expanding each year, reaching a growing network of people.
In 1992, with support from WACC, the association organised 74 seminars, workshops, cultural events and festivals involving at least one million people.
‘Our objective is to develop communication through a mutual learning process which would enable the tribal groups to be aware of their cultural heritage and to embrace their history,’ explained LAMP's General Secretary, M Dewanji.
‘Our aim is to help break their culture of silence, which would, in the long-term, contribute to the wellbeing of Indian society as a whole,’ he added.
A large number of seminars organised by LAMP are designed to raise awareness about concerns affecting the daily lives of the tribal groups.
Health and medicine, environment, labourers' rights, witchcraft, land rights and the caste system have been the subject of many seminars throughout the region.
Other seminars concentrated on media skills such as poster-making, writing, drama, audio cassette production and the use of newsletters.
LAMP also coordinated several cultural festivals, including drama and dance, as well as poster exhibitions on the history and current struggles of the different tribal groups.
In all its areas of involvement, LAMP helps to make oppressed and exploited communities aware of their rights, and encourages them to organise themselves to set up comprehensive development programmes.
These programmes respond to specific needs and have included: setting up adult education centres and community grain stores; providing agro-service centres and small machinery for farmers and vocational training centres for the unemployed; developing programmes for women and for community health.
Liberal Association for the Movement of People, 5/18 Viveknagar, Jadaavpur, Calcutta 700 075, India.
Tel (33) 724698.
Togo's churches call for aid as violence escalates
The churches in Togo are calling for international aid and support following increasingly violent attacks on civilians.
All Africa Press Service reported that at least 14 pro-democracy protestors in the capital, Lomé, had been killed by Togolese police on 25 January.
There were more deaths on 31 January as troops fired into a crowd of people calling for justice and democracy.
There is widespread panic and confusion, and thousands of Togolese citizens are fleeing into neighbouring Ghana and Benin.
The pro-democracy movement in Togo is essentially peaceful, with citizens calling for dialogue, justice and more open channels of communication.
The Protestant Church of Togo has played a considerable role in fostering democratic principles through its educational and social programmes.
It also runs Togo's most successful indigenous publishing house, Editions Haho, which brings current political, religious and social issues to public attention in local Togolese languages.
Editions Haho is supported by WACC.
Eglise Evangélique du Togo (Protestant Church of Togo), BP 378, Lomé, Togo.
Tel 214582.
Young Chileans demand more from TV
A research organisation in Chile has completed a unique study into young people's expectations of television, showing a demand for more educational programmes and more serious discussion of issues and problems affecting the daily lives of young people.
The research was supported by WACC and carried out by the Centre for Artistic and Cultural Research (ceneca) with the aim of encouraging TV networks to carry programmes that would improve the quality of young people's lives and thereby enhance their contribution to national life.
The project is timely, because the government is in the process of revising its policies regarding communication, and in particular, television, since at least 95% of all Chilean homes have one TV set.
Some 116 young men and women, between the ages of 17 and 22, took  part in the research between January and December 1992.
On average, people in their age group watch five hours of television daily, most of which consists of imported programmes.
‘The project has allowed us to make substantial progress in understanding young people's relationship with television, and their needs and demands regarding programme content,’ said CENECA's Director, Valerio Fuenzalida, who is also Secretary to the Executive Council of Chile's National Television.
‘We have established beyond doubt that current TV programmes do not satisfy their demands, apparently because the producers do not know what young people want,’ he added.
One of the most striking results of the research was that young people have identified a lack of educational programmes, as well as of programmes that examine the emotions, affections, sexuality and identity of people of their own age group.
They said they felt marginalised from almost all television programmes, pointing out that young people's concerns are rarely covered.
They wanted to see scientific and technical programmes dealing specifically with issues such as employment possibilities for youth, and they called for more cultural programmes reflecting young Chilean people's interests.
General entertainment, especially from videos, was a popular element for young people.
When they want music, however, they turn to radio rather than to TV.
The results of the research will be given to both national and independent television networks.
They will also be distributed to youth organisations and to youth workers in parishes to encourage them to press for more appropriate TV programming.
CENECA plans to carry out similar surveys for women and children.
CENECA (Centro de Indagación y Expresión Cultural y Artística), José Diego Benavente 327 Nuñoa, Santiago, Chile.
Tel (2) 2043772 and 2043370.
Fax (2) 2233355.
Courses and Conferences
WACC's Pacific Region holds media awareness workshop for youth trainers
WACC's Pacific Regional Association will host a Workshop on Media Awareness for Youth Trainers from throughout the Pacific in Suva, Fiji, from 26 April to 1 May 1993.
The workshop is aimed at youth leaders who can develop media awareness training schemes in parishes and communities in their respective countries.
The aims of the workshop are to help young people in the South Pacific to understand and respond to the mass media (TV, video, radio and print) and to enable them to recognise better quality media programmes.
Young people will also be encouraged to find effective ways of using different kinds of media in their school, church and community activities.
The sudden explosion of video and television throughout the Pacific in recent years has prompted the churches to give high priority to media awareness training programmes, as well as developing video production skills.
While most Pacific islanders grew up with radio and print media, television and video are new to almost everyone.
Television has quickly become the most powerful medium, yet almost all its programme content is imported and bears no relation to the culture and traditions of the Pacific islanders.
For further information, please contact Seru Verebalavu, Communication Coordinator, WACC-Pacific Regional Association,
c/o Lotu Pasifika Productions, P O Box 2401,
Government Buildings, Suva, Fiji.
Tel 301314.
Fax 301183.
East European religious broadcasters meet
The International Institute of Journalism will hold a Workshop on Religious Radio Broadcasting in East/Central Europe in Berlin, Germany, 5–19 September 1993.
The workshop, which will be supported by WACC, aims to help establish a network of Christian broadcasters in Eastern and Central Europe and to contribute to the renewal of Christian life and faith in the region.
The short-term objectives include: enabling religious broadcasters to meet and share insights and experiences; helping them to develop programmes which are relevant to their respective cultures; and examining the forms and models of religious broadcasting authorities in different countries.
Participants will also be encouraged to help develop local training schemes.
Staff of the Institute of Journalism, who have considerable experience in radio training, will provide about 60% of the teaching.
The remaining time will be covered by members of WACC's European Regional Association, who will share their experiences in developing various formats for religious broadcasts, identifying relevant programme themes, and working ecumenically.
The working languages will be English and German, with some Russian.
International Institute of Journalism,
Muehlstr 1–2, 1162 Berlin, Germany.
Tel (30) 6440113.
Fax (30) 6452887.
Asia women's network plans forum in Delhi
The Asian Network of Women in Communication (ANWIC), a follow-up to the WACC-Asia Region's women's desk, is holding a Forum on Networking and Advocacy in Delhi, India, in September 1993.
The forum will bring together the women who have organised women's workshops throughout the region, in Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Korea, Malaysia and Thailand.
The aim of the meeting is to coordinate the women and media activities of the Asia network and to discuss new strategies for their campaigning and lobbying initiatives.
The forum will also discuss the network's participation in the forthcoming global conference on ‘Women Empowering Communication’, to be held in Bangkok, Thailand, in February 1994.
The short-term objectives of the network are to raise women's awareness of their image in the mass media, to obtain relevant information from research and networking that would motivate women to lobby for change, and to equip women with specific skills that would help build and strengthen alternative communication for and by women.
In the long-term, ANWIC aims to help empower women to communicate more effectively and to obtain a better representation in the media hierarchy.
It seeks to help evolve a more equitable social order where women are treated with respect and dignity and given equal  opportunities with men in all walks of life.
ANWIC, 14 Jangpura B, Mathura Road, New Delhi 110014, India.
Tel (11) 619821.
Workshop motivates Asian students
A workshop on Student Media for Social Change has motivated students from Indonesia and other parts of Asia to play a more active role in pressing for human rights and democracy in their countries.
The workshop, which was supported by WACC, was organised by the Asian Students Association (ASA) in Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 11–23 November 1992.
A report from Lina P Cabaero of the ASA Secretariat in Hong Kong, said that the exposure helped participants to understand the role and situation of Indonesian students in the movement for social change.
‘The Indonesian students are currently the backbone of this process, since the people's movement has not yet materialised,’ she said.
‘The students are working very hard to spark this movement,’ Ms Cabaero added.
‘That is what makes them different from other student movements, since they work with the oppressed and underprivileged, making them more aware of their role and situation in society and helping them to realise the need to organise themselves and to start doing the work by themselves.’
Participants, who came from Malaysia, the Philippines, Australia, Bangladesh, Nepal and Indonesia, were keen to hear about ASA's plan to establish an ‘Alternative Communication and Information Network’ to link students throughout Asia.
Asian Students Association, 511 Nathan Road 1/F, Kowloon, Hong Kong.
Tel 3880515.
Fax 7825535.
Indonesian publisher celebrates 70 years
Kanisius Publishing and Printing House in Yogyakarta, Indonesia, is celebrating 70 years of community-oriented service to the Church and the public.
The organisation developed as a branch of the Kanisius Foundation which was set up in 1917 by the Society of Jesus to supervise a network of schools.
The publishing and printing house has since grown to become self-financing, with a staff of 214 employees and an output of over 850 titles a year.
These are distributed through libraries, schools and bookshops.
The titles cover a broad range of subjects, including: spirituality, theology, non-formal education, current social issues, philosophy, health care, science and agriculture.
Kanisius is a corporate member of WACC and is currently organising WACC-Indonesia's ecumenical programme on communication and theological education.
Yayasan Kanisius (Kanisius Publishing-Printing House), Jl Cempaka 9, Deresan, Yogyakarta, Indonesia.
Tel (274) 88783.
Fax (274) 63349.
Video raises public awareness of India's child ‘ragpickers’
The child ‘ragpickers’ of Bangalore, and other Indian cities, are among the most exploited and mistreated groups in society.
Despite helping to keep the cities' streets free of litter, and striving to earn their own keep, they are often treated as vermin by police, who harass and bribe them for ‘protection’ money.
In addition, they receive just a single rupee for collecting a kilogramme of papers and rags, while their efforts are turned into substantial profits by the recycling industries.
The injustice of the ragpickers' existence has been recorded on video by the ecumenical Media Centre of Bangalore, with the aim of raising public awareness of their plight.
It is one of a series of ten videos produced with the support of WACC.
They cover urgent social issues such as spastics, leprosy, pollution, mental illness and old age, and will be distributed to social organisations, schools and colleges.
‘They will not only raise awareness, but we hope they will also raise the quality of education on social concerns, as well as stimulating organisations and individuals to take action to address the problems,’ said Ashish Sen, Producer and Media Coordinator with the centre.
The ragpickers video is being used by Concern for the Working Child to help provide safe night shelters for the children, basic medical care, and centres where the children can go for guidance and support.
Videos are produced in both English and the local language, Kannada, and the Media Centre also has production and library facilities for radio, audio cassettes, slides, photographs and fine arts.
In addition to media production, the centre has developed a number of programmes in the areas of media research and training.
It holds media skills workshops for activists from all over India and organises a variety of seminars and workshops for teachers, journalists and development workers throughout the year.
The centre was formed in 1984 by the Jesuit order under the leadership of its current Director, Fr Joe Naidu, who has been involved in WACC activities in India for several years.
He has built up a strong, ecumenical team of Christians and Hindus which is unusual for a centre of this kind.
‘What is most important is that we all share the same vision,’ said Fr Naidu.
‘It is imperative that we accept the plurality of the society of which we are a part — this is absolutely essential for Asia,’ he added.
The centre responds to requests for productions from groups in and around Bangalore with the understanding that they are used for the purposes of education and social development and that they reflect the principles of Christian communication.
‘You cannot define Christian communication because it is only expressed in the practice,’ Fr Naidu said.
‘For example, our journalism training programme focuses on concerns that affect people's lives such as justice and peace issues.’
‘There is a conscious effort to make the role of media in society meaningful and effective,’ he added.
Groups seeking the services of the centre include the Karnataka state government, Christian schools, and Hindu and ecumenical social organisations.
Fr Joe Naidu, Director, Media Centre,,.
African women communicators challenge church leadership
In a hard-hitting statement at the end of a recent workshop on ‘Communication and Prophecy’, held in Harare, Zimbabwe, women from nine African countries called on the Church in Africa to ‘re-examine its leadership structures and strategies that have made it vulnerable to manipulation by government’.
The workshop, which was sponsored by WACC, was organised by the All Africa Conference of Churches to examine the role of Christian communication in prophecy and witnessing from a woman's perspective.
The women also called on church leaders to stand by the tenets of truth and justice, and be willing to accept criticism of their own policies.
The Church should make its message relevant to all its followers, they said, by recognising the differences in economic structures, gender and cultures within its congregation.
‘The Church should begin to project women in a positive light that would strengthen the dignity of women,’ they said, adding: ‘It is important to publicise positive stories that interpret women differently from the stereotype’.
As regards the media, the workshop participants urged the Church to use radio more effectively, and said that Christian newspapers and magazines need to pay more attention to socio-economic and gender issues.
They cautioned against an obsession with modern communication technology which has often led to the marginalisation of many in rural communities.
‘Traditional means of communication, such as oral methods, are still effective and need to be capitalised on in order to reach those who do not have access to print or electronic media,’ they said.
They also recommended drama as a powerful way of communicating appropriate messages.
The women proposed that a follow-up seminar be organised in 1993 to discuss a five-year plan of programmes and policies for women communicators.
They agreed to invite more men to the next meeting (two attended the Harare workshop) and to make a concerted effort to bring their concerns to the AACC leadership.
The theme of the AACC's last General Assembly, ‘Abundant Life in Jesus Christ’, was reflected in the workshop.
For further information, contact Mehret Gebreyesus, Acting Director of the AACC Communication Training Centre, P O Box 14206, Nairobi, Kenya.
Tel (2) 441483.
Fax (2) 443241.
Grassroots theatre strengthens community life and democracy in Paraguay
Community theatre was one of the few forms of communication which managed to flourish under President Stroessner's dictatorship in Paraguay.
Since the process of democratisation began in the late 1980s, theatre has played an important role in the strengthening the growth of democracy.
The Latin American Theatre Circuit (LATC) is one of the regional groups that have helped to promote grassroots theatre as part of a broad movement for social change.
It has members in Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Paraguay and Peru.
In Paraguay, it organised a theatre festival and a series of theatre workshops with the support of WACC.
The festival was hosted by Misión de Amistad (Friendship Mission), which is an ecumenical organisation formed in 1953 by the Disciples of Christ Church to carry out development projects among marginalised communities.
The long-term objectives of the festival and workshops are to develop alternative communication and education models, strengthen local cultures and traditions, and document the history of the various ethnic groups living in Latin America.
The project also aims to help integrate theatre within the regular alternative communication activities of the grassroot movements.
For further information, please contact Rudy Torga, Theatre Festival Coordinator, Casilla 2022, Asunción, Paraguay.
Tel (21) 204033.
A church group in Lima, Peru, study the notes for their correspondence course in media education.
Latin American media groups focus on distance education
Developing materials for distance media education is one of the current priorities for the Combined Media Service (Servicio Conjunto de Comunicación), which is based in Quito, Ecuador, but works throughout Latin America.
The Service is made up of the Latin American sections of the international Catholic organisations for radio and television (UNDA), press (UCLAP) and audio visuals (OCIC).
Working through the network of national associations of the three groups, the small team in Quito has developed a three-year media training course for use by church and community groups, schools and colleges.
The course is designed to help individuals and groups to be aware of the influence of mass media on their societies, and to learn how effective communication can bring about positive changes in their daily lives.
‘We look first to the grassroots for insight into what is needed in our course materials,’ said Claudio Urtubia, the Secretary of UNDA-Latin America.
‘We are not trying to force people to change, but to accompany them in their struggle for a better life,’ he added.
About 115 groups throughout the continent are using the Service's course, which begins with a survey to ascertain specific needs and conditions.
The course is adapted for each group, and the group itself has to take responsibility for completing the assigned tasks.
At present, the course is conducted by correspondence, with the aid of imaginatively illustrated exercise books.
The Service hopes, however, that it will soon be able to recruit local or regional facilitators who would visit and guide the students throughout the course.
The Service has been operating since 1987, and began distance radio training straight away, followed in 1989 by print journalism.
The new combined course was launched in 1991, and the Service is now developing a research and evaluation package to find out how effective it is.
In the area of publishing, the Service is planning a joint venture with WACC's Latin American/Caribbean Regional Association.
They aim to produce a series of monographs on communication issues under the general title (Colección Comunicación).
The series will be published in Quito.
Servicio Conjunto de Comunicación (UNDA-AL, OCIC-AL, UCLAP), Alpallana 581 y Wimper, Quito, Ecuador.
Tel (2) 548046.
Japanese to strive for public access to cable television
A group of Japanese communicators is determined to promote public access to cable television following an international seminar on ‘Cable TV as a Citizen's Forum’.
The seminar, which was supported by WACC, was organised in Tokyo, 21–23 January 1993, by the Forum for Citizens' Television (FCT) and the Japan Lutheran Hour.
Panelists included media practitioners and researchers from Hong Kong, Korea, the USA, the UK and Japan.
Midori Suzuki, spokesperson for FCT, reported that the Japanese public has so far been denied access to cable TV (CATV), but she outlined some possibilities for access in the future.
The other participants from Japan acknowledged that the country's CATV regulations make it difficult to obtain public access, but agreed that awakening public interest through seminars and publications is an important first step.
Seminar participants learnt that in Hong Kong, political inertia accounts for the limited public influence in cable TV (CATV), while in Korea, the government is keeping tight control on its own CATV networks.
The USA has highly developed CATV systems — much more popular than those operating in the UK and most European countries.
Deedee Halleck, founder of Paper Tiger Television in New York and Associate Professor at the University of California, San Diego, gave a vivid presentation on the various possibilities of public access channels in the USA, including the alternative production network, Deep Dish TV.
Michael Traber, representing WACC's General Secretariat, reported however, that Europe's many cultures and languages make regional cooperation difficult, and that CATV is likely to play an important role in the strengthening of individual societies.
Japan Lutheran Hour Director, Takashi Yuguchi, said such meetings are ‘very necessary for laying the groundwork for local citizens, including Christian congregations, to be able to utilise CATV for local programming.’
Both the Forum for Citizens' Television and the Japan Lutheran Hour are corporate members of WACC.
Forum for Citizens' Television, Nagae 1601–27, Hayama-Machi, Kanagawa-Ken, Japan.
Tel and fax (468) 758243.
The Japan Lutheran Hour, Belvedere Kudan 201, 15–5, Fujimi 2-Chome, Chiyoda-Ku, Tokyo 102, Japan.
Tel (3) 261228 and 2655970.
Fax (3) 2616033.
From a report by the Lutheran Hour Press Service (Japan).
Books & Resources
Book gives advice on starting a resource centre in South Africa
An unusual guide to starting a resource centre is available from the Media Resource Centre and Community Resource Centre Training Project based in Durban, South Africa.
ULWAZI (Information and Knowledge) for Power and Courage is written in the style of a diary, in the first person.
It draws on the ideas and experiences of people who have considerable knowledge of developing and running resource centres in South Africa.
Explaining why resource centres are an important part of community life, the preface to the book states: ‘Information allows people to play a constructive role in society.
Without information, we cannot develop our skills, overcome our problems or plan our lives.
Information and education empower people’.
The preface also notes that ‘the poor and disenfranchised communities (in South Africa) have had limited access to information and the resources which would enable them to make decisions that will direct their own future.’
Since the 1980s, community organisations began to set up resource centres to serve and empower marginalised societies.
Additional communication and media production services were offered in addition to the lending of publications and documents.
The volume of requests for advice and resource skills training addressed to existing resource centres in the late 1980s led to the formation of the Community Resource Centre Training Project.
An appendix to the book lists resource centres in different areas of South Africa and gives details of organisations that offer training to community organisations.
It also includes a list of media producers and publishers that provide alternative resources.
The lists include several WACC members and colleagues.
ULWAZI (Information and Knowledge) for Power and Courage by Libby Dreyer and Jenni Karlsson is published by Media Resource Centre and Community Resource Centre Training Project, Room 55, Ecumenical Centre, 20 St Andrews Street, Durban 4001, South Africa.
Tel (31) 3078642.
Fax (31) 3016611.
New Zealand church promotes racial harmony
The Presbyterian Church of Aotearoa New Zealand has published five books called A Gift Toward Partnership, as part of its nationwide campaign to promote positive understanding and relationships with Maori people in the church and in the community.
The church cites the bicultural education campaign as the fulfilment of a promise to the Maori people made by the 1990 General Assembly (the Treaty of Waitangi).
The General Assembly made the following commitment to the Treaty of Waitangi: ‘We renew the covenant to be keepers of one another, to honour the Treaty, its obligations and promises, that justice and peace may cover our land that our life together may grow in new forms of partnership.’
The books were prepared in collaboration with the Presbyterian Maori Synod.
They are the result of two years of research and writing mainly by Maori for non-Maori readers.
Every one of the 442 Presbyterian parishes representing 60,000 New Zealanders will now be equipped to become familiar with the Treaty of Waitangi, and with Maori traditions and spirituality.
The Presbyterian Church of Aotearoa New Zealand is a corporate member of WACC.
A Gift Toward Partnership (five volumes) is available from the Presbyterian Church of Aotearoa New Zealand, P O Box 9049, Wellington, New Zealand.
Tel (4) 8016000.
Fax (4) 8016001.
From a report by Diane Gilliam-Knight, Director of Communications with the Presbyterian Church of Aotearoa New Zealand.
Communicators in Pacific assess influence of mass media
The Pacific Conference of Churches (PCC), based in Suva, Fiji, recently hosted a consultation of 26 senior church-related communicators from 11 countries.
It was the first time that a high level meeting of that kind had taken place.
Taking part were the communication directors and coordinators of PCC member churches, and representatives of church-related organisations such as the Communications Institute of Papua New Guinea and the Christian Family Video Society of Fiji.
Both the PCC and the Communications Institute are corporate members of WACC, and the association supports the activities of the Christian Family Video Society of Fiji.
The aim of the consultation was to assess the impact of mass media on the Christian faith in the Pacific, and to identify the role played by churches and Christian communicators in the media.
In his opening address, Rev Dick Avi, General Secretary of the PCC and Chairperson of WACC's Pacific Regional Association, stressed the importance of communication in the mission of the Church today.
Seru Verebalavu, Coordinator for WACC-Pacific, spoke on ‘Communicating the Gospel in the Pacific Today’.
He noted that ‘communication tends to flow into and out of the Pacific islands, but there is very little dialogue between the islands’.
He added that the churches were not making the best use of the mass media — print, radio, video and television.
‘The Pacific's churches need the will to act, the coordination to move together, and the skills and techniques to use the mass media to communicate their message and mission in the most effective way,’ he said.
Pacific Conference of Churches, Communication Department,,.
Media literacy resource launched for teachers in USA
The Center for Media and Values in Los Angeles, USA, has co-produced a multi-media package introducing Catholic leaders and teachers to media literacy education.
The package, called Catholic Connections to Media Literacy, was prepared for The Catholic Communication Campaign of the United States Catholic Conference in collaboration with the National Catholic Educational Association.
It contains the tools to begin learning, practising and teaching critical reading of the media, and connects the principles of Catholic values to today's media culture.
The package, which is the first of its kind, includes: lesson plans for basic media literacy concepts; sample sessions for a variety of pastoral settings; 20-minute video overview; theological reflection; background preparation for leaders; hundreds of resource ideas, and group activities for all ages.
The main objective of the resource is to respond to the urgent need for a clear, values-based approach to the problems and possibilities of mass media today.
‘It represents a new way of thinking about the media world we live in and a new way of learning the skills of active engagement and critical reflection with all forms of modern media — television, video, film, radio, print, and the glue that binds them all together — advertising,’ says Sister Elizabeth Thoman, Executive Director of the Center for Media and Values.
WACC has long-standing connections with the Center, which is best known for its quarterly magazine Media&Values.
Media&Values celebrates its 15th anniversary this year.
Catholic Connections to Media Literacy costs US$49.95 and is available from the Center for Media and Values, 1962 S Shenandoah Street, Los Angeles, CA 90034.
Tel (310) 5592944.
Fax (310) 5592944.
Book series reflects courage and faith of Christians in Guatemala
The Latin American Institute for Communication Education (ILPEC), based in Costa Rica, has published a series of six books on Christian themes for use by churches, non-government organisations and community groups throughout Central America.
The books draw on the experiences of Christians in Guatemala, whose faith has strengthened and supported them through the hardships and challenges of recent years.
They also share their experiences of reconciliation and greater harmony within and between communities.
The publisher hopes that the books will give fresh hope, courage and insight to readers in other Central and South American countries.
The six titles (in Spanish only) are: The Way of Christ (volume 1), the Way of Christ (volume 2), Prophets of Central America, Rights of the Poor — Rights of God, Women in the Bible, From Oppression to Liberation.
The titles are part of a wider programme which aims to produce communication education materials for the training of leaders of church and community groups in Central America.
The programme is supported by WACC and will ultimately lead to the creation of a support centre for the ongoing production and distribution of educational resources.
The six books, Caminos de Cristo-1, Caminos de Cristo-2, Los Profetas Bíblicos en Centroamérica, Derechos de los Pobres — Derechos de Dios, La Mujer en la Biblia, De la Opresión a la Liberación, are available from ILPEC (Instituto Latinoamericano de Pedagogía de la Comunicación), Apartado 201, Heredia, Costa Rica.
Tel 380180.
African video encourages social action
A new video aimed at encouraging women in Africa to work more closely together within their communities has been released by the Christian media consultancy, Pentaline Services Ltd, based in Nairobi, Kenya.
‘A Healthy Step’ is a ten-minute video which deals with the need to keep rubbish cleared and burned, particularly in marginalised urban communities where poor facilities are always a health risk.
In dramatic format, it demonstrates the power of community action in improving living conditions and the quality of life for the whole neighbourhood.
‘A Healthy Step’ is the first of a series of short ‘fillers’for television and mobile cinema vans.
It has already been shown on Ugandan and Swaziland TV and is available on high band and VHS for use in anglophone areas.
Another release by Pentaline is ‘Sabina's Encounter’, a film that deals with barrenness in Africa.
It has been screened repeatedly on TV in Uganda, Zimbabwe, Swaziland and will soon be aired in Nigeria, Zambia and South Africa.
Pentaline is a corporate member of WACC.
Pentaline Services Ltd, Box 76697, Nairobi, Kenya.
Tel (2) 723512 and 567595.
Fax (2) 561382.
Churches promote development in central Philippine islands
The western portion of Negros island (Negros Occidental) in the central Philippines, also known as ‘sugarlandia’, is renowned for its abundant sugar production, which accounts for 65% of the country's total sugar harvest.
In recent years, however, the world sugar prices have slumped and it has become one of the poorest areas in the Philippines.
Worst hit are the hundreds of thousands of landless plantation workers, whose livelihood has disappeared.
Poverty is widespread and malnutrition is becoming increasingly evident among children and young people.
Church leaders are determined to find practical ways of helping the region to develop alternative sources of income and more just social structures.
To this end, they have come together under the umbrella of the Negros Ecumenical Endeavour for Development (NEED), an institution that was formed in 1979 to serve deprived and oppressed communities in the central islands of the Philippines, including Negros.
NEED grew out of the national organisation, Ecumenical Centre for Development, which encourages the participation of churches in Philippine development and democratic growth.
WACC is supporting the education and training component of a comprehensive programme developed by NEED entitled ‘Towards active church participation for development’.
Education is carried out at various levels.
An orientation course examines the national and local issues and problems from a Christian perspective.
A local study exposure programme arranges visits to deprived areas that so far do not have organised activities.
At a more advanced level, management and leadership development courses cover administration, planning, communication and facilitation skills.
Further training includes cooperative development, covering types of cooperatives, structures and procedures, and a course on analytical thinking, with principles of instruction and methods.
Church and lay workers are equipped to help communities throughout Negros Occidental to understand the economic and social reasons for their problems.
With this understanding, communities are in a position to work with NEED facilitators to develop their own education programmes.
One major objective of the programmes is to strengthen cultural identity and traditions, and they may also lead to small-scale income-earning projects and ultimately to self-sufficiency.
Negros Ecumenical Endeavour for Development, C-4 Esteban-Magdalena Building, Libertad Street, Bacolod City 6100, Region 06, Philippines.
People
Rev Daniel Ntoni-Nzinga of Angola has been appointed International Coordinator of the Ecumenical Monitoring Programme in South Africa.
This is a programme of the World Council of Churches and is based in Geneva, Switzerland.
Previously, Mr Ntoni-Nzinga had been studying for a doctorate in theology and anthropology in Manchester, UK.
He is currently a member of WACC's Central Committee, representing the African Regional Association.
Dr Keith Suter of Australia has been elected to the Club of Rome, the prestigious international group of some 100 leading scientists, educators, philosophers and activists from 35 countries.
The Club was founded in 1968 to foster understanding of the economic, political, religious and social factors that shape today's world, and to bring that new understanding to the attention of policy-makers and the public worldwide.
Dr Suter, who is a personal member of WACC, has recently published the book, Global Change: Armageddon and the New World Order.
Paul Chandler is the new General Secretary of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK), based in London, UK.
He succeeds Patrick Gilbert who retired early last year.
Mr Chandler, who was formerly a senior manager with Barclays Bank, aims to help SPCK ‘regain a renewed sense of mission and common sense of purpose’ across its three areas of activity — publishing, book-selling and grant-making.
SPCK is a corporate member of WACC and supports many WACC-related projects.