

NEITHER SEEN NOR HEARD The Rights Of Saudi Women
INSIDE…
PAGE 6 of this issue contains extracts from obituaries to Orton Chirwa, the Malawian politician who died in custody in October last year, aged 73.
Orton was the longest serving prisoner of conscience in Africa.
His wife Vera survives him; she is still in prison and was mercifully allowed to see her husband briefly before he died.
AMNESTY urges all members to write to the Malawian embassy in London to secure her release (see details, page 6).
You will see alongside the Obituaries to Orton Chirwa a small article about the massacre of 300 Sudanese in Juba.
We will probably never know the extent of individual suffering endured by many of those 300 Africans, we do know the tragic circumstances of Orton Chirwa's life.
The proximity of the two articles demonstrates the sad fact that for every case of human suffering Amnesty International seeks to alleviate, there are many other innocent people whose human rights are routinely abused.
Elsewhere in this issue, Isabel Wolff reports on the inspiring life of Rigoberta Menchu, a indefatigable defender of human rights of indigenous people in Central America; Ian Williams describes his experience in Somalia while working there as a nurse during the worst of the 1992 famine; and we publish an extract from The Princess , an anonymous account of the treatment of women in Saudi Arabia.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL MANDATE
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL is a worldwide human rights movement which is independent of any government, political faction, ideology, economic interest or religious creed.
In Britain the organisation has 90,000 members and 320 local groups.
Members can join a variety of specialised groups and networks: eg, women, youth, business, children, medical professionals, lawyers, journalists, teachers, police, ex-services and more.
Members work within a closely defined mandate: to seek the release of prisoners of conscience — people imprisoned solely for their beliefs, colour, ethnic origin, sex, language or religion, provided they have neither used nor advocated the use of violence; to oppose the death penalty, torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of all prisoners; and to end extrajudicial executions and ‘disappearances’.
Amnesty International opposes abuses by opposition groups — hostage taking, torture and killing of prisoners and other arbitrary killings.
AMNESTY LETTERS
HOMAGE TO AMNESTY
THE COMMISSION of Investigation wishes to pay homage to you, in particular for your support to the Chadian people oppressed during the eight years of dictatorship of Hissein Habre.
During our investigations we have had the chance to keep a continuous record of more than 4,000 cards and letters sent by your section.
This gesture of solidarity and brotherhood has moved us deeply.
During the dictatorship of Habre, you were the only support for the persecuted Chadians.
During that time no Chadian resident was allowed to seek information about the prisoners, as they risked becoming prisoners themselves.
We wish to congratulate and encourage you for this humanitarian act, so praiseworthy, and urge you to persevere in this work of salvation.
We wish this letter to be brought to the attention of ALL the members of your section and to be published in your journal.
Thank you sincerely.
PS As soon as our finances allow we will send you a copy of the Commission's report.
CATHOLIC SHAME
I WAS embarrassed and ashamed by the front-page article in AMNESTY (October/November 1992) headlined, ‘Vatican gives official approval of death penalty’.
I should just like to point out, as a practising Catholic and member of Amnesty, that the ‘Church’ to which we refer when speaking of the Catholic Church is the whole ‘people of God’and not just the Pope, Cardinal Ratzinger or other members of the hierarchy.
From my own knowledge there are many Catholic Christians, including myself, who will continue to oppose the use of the death penalty for any reason, considering it barbaric and in total opposition to basic human rights.
Can we do otherwise when our Lord suffered so cruel a death himself?
Should the final print of the Catechism include the text as leaked on the use of the death penalty you have my assurance that I shall write to the Pope and Cardinal Ratzinger to express my disapproval and condemnation.
Should the text be as described, I shall be unable to reconcile the Church's utter opposition to the killing of the unborn child and euthanasia which are in essence a defence of human rights for those weakest and least-able-to-speak members of humankind.
I hope other Catholic and other Christian members will voice their opposition to the Vatican.
AMNESTY has received many letters concerning the Vatican's position on the death penalty.
A selection will be published in the next issue.
Letters of protest against the Vatican's endorsement of capital punishment may be sent to:.
UPDATE MANDATE?
I HAVE noticed for some time now that the Amnesty International Mandate has not been changed to include ‘people imprisoned for their sexuality’.
This group of people was recognised by the meeting in Tokyo over a year ago, and this is an issue that many people — both my friends and strangers that I come across in collecting or canvassing for Amnesty — ask me about.
Is it planned to update the mandate?
Working guidelines concerning the imprisonment or harassment of people due to their sexuality were agreed at an IEC meeting in December and are being incorporated into the Mandate — Ed.
HELP FOR CARIBBEAN
SOME of you may remember me appealing for help to form a national organisation to write to prisoners on death row in the Caribbean.
That help was, happily, forthcoming, and we are now in business, having held our first, very enjoyable, national conference of Caribbean Lifelines on 12 September in London.
The day before the conference I received an appeal for help from the Jamaican Council of Human Rights whose offices have been torched, equipment damaged, over 3,000 files destroyed, and its courageous co-ordinator, Florez elle O'Connor subjected to death threats.
We have sent a donation out of our as yet meagre little store of funds.
I am therefore appealing for funds and people prepared to help us raise them.
We also have a pressing need for volunteers with experience of editing to share the editing of our newsletter, and we desperately need an affordable source of good quality printing.
Are there any printing firms out there who will help us?
We also need people prepared to write, as pen-friends, to warders and other officials in the prison service.
Their co-operation is essential for the well-being of our prisoner friends.
Incidentally, many of you have continued faithfully for several years to send me your used AMNESTY journals.
I am trying now to wind down that project in favour of others, and am asking those who have helped me to take upon themselves what I have been doing, and find homes for their old journals — in libraries, universities and elsewhere.
Could I also take this opportunity to make another appeal for all types of books and used magazines (not necessarily AMNESTY) to be sent to death row prisoners in the Caribbean.
The response to a previous appeal has, after more than two years, dwindled, and the prisoners are once again short of things to read.
Here are the addresses of prisoners to whom they can be sent:.
Thank you on their behalf.
INTERNATIONAL NEWS
IRAQ BOMBS SHI'A CIVILIANS
VILLAGERS REMAIN IN HIDING
IRAQ: Government troops last year stepped up ground and aerial attacks on the southern marshes of Iraq, where tens of thousands of government opponents and military deserters, mainly Shi'a  Muslims , remain in hiding.
Civilian targets in the area have been extensively bombarded, and the military authorities have ignored due process of law, choosing to kill suspects rather than detain them.
In July and August 1992, scores of villagers were reportedly killed in the al-'Amara marshes by government troops attempting to enforce an evacuation order.
A ‘no-fly zone’ forbidding Iraq to operate aircraft, including helicopters, south of the 32nd parallel was implemented by the United Nations (UN) on 27 August.
Although this has apparently halted the aerial bombardment, Iraqi ground forces have continued to attack the Shi'as.
Reports that reached Amnesty International in September and October indicated that more than 2,000 people, many of them civilians, have been rounded up in southern cities and towns and transferred to unknown destinations.
Amnesty International has repeatedly urged the UN to resume discussion of how to implement monitoring of the human rights situation throughout Iraq.
MUZZLING CUBAN DISSENT
UP TO 500 PEOPLE DETAINED
CUBA: The number of prisoners of conscience held in Cuba has increased dramatically in the past two years.
Between three and five hundred people are believed to be in detention solely for exercising their rights to freedom of expression, association or assembly or their right to leave the country.
Severe restrictions on human rights monitoring make it impossible to know precisely how many are being held.
‘Rapid Response Brigades’, set up by the government to deal with any sign of ‘counter-revolution’, have harassed people working for human rights organisations or unofficial political opposition groups.
The Brigades carry out ‘acts of repudiation’ which usually involve accosting known or suspected dissidents in their homes or in the street, chanting pro-government slogans and sometimes physically attacking them.
Many of the Brigades' victims have then been arrested by the security forces.
Detainees have often been held for weeks or months without access to defence lawyers before being brought to trial on charges such as rebellion, illegal association and ‘enemy propaganda’(a charge brought against those accused of producing, distributing or possessing any information regarded as subversive by the authorities).
Prisoner of conscience Yndamiro Restano, president of an unofficial opposition group known as the Harmony Movement, was convicted of rebellion and sentenced to ten years' imprisonment in May (see Worldwide Appeal, pages 20–21).
Sebastian Arcos Bergnes, vice-president of an unofficial human rights group, was brought to trial in early October for ‘enemy propaganda’; the prosecution has called for a six year sentence.
Others have been imprisoned solely for criticising government policy or officials or for writing or shouting anti-government slogans.
Amnesty International is calling on the Cuban Government to release all prisoners of conscience immediately and unconditionally; to permit political detainees to see their lawyers immediately after arrest and regularly thereafter; and to incorporate international fair trial standards into Cuban law and legal practice.
ASSAULT IN TASHKENT
UZBEKISTAN: At least six opposition leaders or independent journalists have been attacked by unknown assailants in the past year.
In June the chairman of the opposition Birlik organisation, Abdurakhim Pulatov, needed emergency hospital treatment for skull fractures after four men beat him and a companion with metal bars as they left an interview at a police station in the capital Tashkent.
Tashkent's deputy chief of police and the deputy city procurator allegedly watched the attack but did not intervene to stop it.
The authorities appear to have made little effort to identify the perpetrators of any of these attacks.
In July Amnesty International called on the Uzbek authorities to ensure that the incidents were fully investigated and that every effort was made to identify the persons responsible and bring them to justice.
AFGHANISTAN: Moments before the execution, a guard uncovers the face of one of the three men publicly hanged in Kabul on 7 September 1992.
At least 12 men have been publicly hanged in Afghanistan under the recently Islamic Law Code.
The Deputy Minister of Justice announced that adultery could be punished by death by stoning, theft, by amputation of the hand or foot, and drinking alcohol, by up to 80 lashes.
OBITUARY — ORTON CHIRWA
AFRICA'S LONGEST SERVING PoC DIES
Last year Amnesty heard that Orton Chirwa, who has died in prison in Malawi, aged 73, was being kept in a squatting position in handcuffs and leg-irons, which were chained to an iron-bar behind his knees.
He stayed like that for two days.
It was not the first time that Orton, the veteran Malawi politician, had suffered this sort of torture.
For 18 months in 1982 and 1983, he had been kept permanently handcuffed in solitary confinement.
He was arrested with his wife Vera in 1981 and, after a grossly unfair trial in a ‘traditional court’, where normal rules of evidence did not apply and without defence lawyers, both were sentenced to death two years later on charges of treason.
After an international outcry, the sentences were commuted to life imprisonment, and the couple were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International.
Neither had advocated violence, but were imprisoned simply for their non-violent expression of political beliefs.
Orton Chirwa qualified in London in 1958 to become the first African barrister in the country.
He became active in the independence struggle of his native Nyasaland (later Malawi) and subsequently formed the Nyasaland African Congress.
With other members of the NAC, he urged Dr Hastings Banda to return home to lead the country.
Orton was dismissed from his position as Minister of Justice by Banda within weeks of Malawian independence in 1964, and went into exile with Vera, also a lawyer, in Tanzania.
There he became leader of the opposition group Mafremo, which sought ‘to restore democracy, justice and liberty’ to Malawi.
In January 1982, Malawi Radio announced that the Chirwas had been arrested with their son on Christmas Eve, and claimed that they had slipped back into the country to incite opposition to Banda's Government.
Orton and Vera said they had been abducted by Malawian agents during a visit to a Zambian town close to the Malawian border.
Long years in the notorious Zomba prison followed, and in 1987 Banda apparently changed his mind about the commutations and declared that the Chirwas did not deserve clemency and should not be allowed to live.
Orton's torture left him permanently ill.
Like many other inmates at Zomba, a prison diet of often rotten vegetables affected him: he was almost blind from cataracts in both eyes and suffered from stomach ulcers.
Seven years younger than her husband, Vera is now 65 and also suffers from injuries caused by beatings.
Mary Benson recalls Orton Chirwa in Britain 40 years ago when he came to this country to protest against imposition of the Central African Federation: ‘How vividly one recalls Orton, the slight, bespectacled, amused young lawyer who proved to be an articulate, passionate speaker whose wit enlivened public meetings from London to Edinburgh, while Banda, then a GP in Willesden, embarrassed organisers with his tub-thumping rhetoric — Banda the medical doctor, who was to subject Orton and Vera Chirwa to such extremes of suffering, remaining impervious to every appeal and protest on their behalf.
The efforts to achieve Vera's release take on a more desperate urgency in the face of her excruciating loss.’
Orton Edgar Ching'oli Chirwa, lawyer and politician, born 30 January 1919, called to the Bar London 1958, Malawi Minister of Justice and Attorney General 1964, advocate and law lecturer Tanzania 1964–81, died Zomba, Malawi, 20 October 1992.
URGENT!
A VERY important part of the Urgent Action technique is the Worldwide Accelerated Response Network (WARN), which allows Amnesty International to initiate immediate appeals during the times when the Urgent Action network is not accessible — late at night, or at weekends.
On 9 October 1992, several thousand Indians staged an anti-Columbus demonstration on the Pan-American Highway in Cauca department, Columbia.
Troops violently dispersed the demonstrators and arrested three indigenous leaders.
Within hours, the International Secretariat's researcher responsible for work on Columbia was in contact with WARN coordinators in USA, Canada and UK, who immediately sent appeals to the Governor of Cauca urging that the indigenous leaders be released and that no further force be used against the demonstrators.
That same night the three indigenous leaders were released.
It was also reported that the Governor of Cauca read out the faxes/cables received from Amnesty International to the several thousand Indians who marched on the city of Popayan.
The indigenous leaders and organisations working with them later thanked Amnesty International for its intervention.
NEWS SUMMARY
JUBA MASSACRE
SUDAN: Sudanese government forces reportedly shot dead at least 300 unarmed civilians and prisoners and arrested hundreds of others in the southern city of Juba between June and August 1992.
At least 47 prisoners were killed in custody, and those who remain in detention are at grave risk of being tortured or secretly and extrajudicially executed.
Many detainees have simply ‘disappeared’.
JORDANIAN GROUPS
JORDAN: The Jordanian Government grant legal registration to 18 Amnesty International groups on 1 October during a visit by an Amnesty delegation led by the then secretary general Ian Martin.
The Jordanian membership comprises some 250 members.
1,000 DAYS
JAPAN: Abolitionists in Tokyo staged a public rally in August to mark 1,000 days without executions.
Hundreds of prominent politicians and lawyers support abolition of the death penalty, but the Japanese Government cites opinion polls in favour of maintaining the death penalty as the main obstacle to abolition.
About 55 people are currently on death rows in Japan.
HOME NEWS
INSPIRED BY THE MINERS' RALLY
INDONESIAN ACTIVIST VISITS AIBS
WORKERS in Indonesia are denied the right to organise independent unions and those who initiate strikes are often arrested, interrogated, beaten and dismissed, according to Teten Masduki, an Indonesian labour representative.
In Britain recently to meet unionists, mainly in Sheffield and Manchester, Mr Masduki visited AIBS to discuss the Indonesian Government's woeful record of human rights abuses of Indonesian workers.
Employers rely on the military to suppress labour discontent in a country where the ‘legal minimum wage’ is little more than US$1 a day and where the basic working week is more than 50 hours.
In practice, 70 per cent of employers pay their workers less than the legal minimum wage, according to Mr Masduki.
He told AMNESTY: ‘Employers who don't have a relationship with the military are finished.’
Despite Indonesia's ratification of ILO Convention 98 — affirming workers' rights to organise and wage bargain — virtually no unions exist in Indonesia independent of the Government controlled SPSI (All Indonesia Workers Association).
To gain legal recognition as a union, representation is required in at least 20 of Indonesia's 27 provinces, branch offices in at least 100 districts and 1,000 union units in factories or plants.
‘Consequently,’ said Mr Masduki, ‘only SPSI is able to be recognised.’
Indonesian workers who try to improve their conditions through collective action are blacklisted and severely intimidated.
Forty people, including Mr Masduki, were imprisoned at the beginning of September last year and interrogated by the military.
He said his membership of the Legal Aid Foundation helped to secure his early release.
Mr Masduki, after attending the miners' rallies in London last year, said that he dreamt of the day that ‘this could happen in Indonesia’.
AMNESTY LAWYER QUESTIONS ‘HUMAN RIGHTS INDUSTRY’
One of the greatest dangers to Amnesty International and other in the human rights movement is the increasing tendency of governments to control human rights through ‘verbal formula’ and resourcing, and to base it on multilateral diplomacy rather than international human rights law.
This was the main message given by Geoffrey Robertson QC, a key defence lawyer in the Matrix-Churchill trial which led to the ‘Iraq-gate’ controversy, in his speech to 80 lawyers at the Amnesty Lawyers' AGM for England and Wales on 17 November.
Mr Robertson QC cited examples from UN practice, such as the eight-hour visit to Indonesia by the Attorney General of Kenya following the Dili massacre, and from other intergovernmental agencies, such as the drafting of the recent Seychelles constitution, to illustrate his point.
He and others at the AGM also called for a change in the International Bar Association's Code of Practice which, unlike the medical profession's codes, fails to mention human rights.
Mr Robertson criticised the recent involvement by two senior UK lawyers in the prosecution of Malawi's leading oppositionist, Chakufwa Chihana.
END OF COLD WAR NO PANACEA, SAYS BENENSON
AMNESTY International has much to do in the '90s to maintain its role as the world's leading human rights movement, Peter Benenson, the organisation's founder, told the annual Amnesty International Youth Conference last year.
‘Do not leave this hall thinking that with the fall of the Berlin Wall the work of Amnesty has lightened’, he told the young delegates.
Mr Benenson pinpointed four main areas that Amnesty needs to continue to address: the growing abuse of human rights in Asia, and in China in particular, the right to travel freely, ethnic conflict in Eastern Europe and states of the former Soviet Union; and the need for successful multi-party elections in Africa.
He attacked the British Government for its stand on refugees from war torn areas of the former Yugoslavia and criticised the British public for offering solutions to the crisis in the former Yugoslavia when conflict in Northern Ireland continues.
‘We have got to start at home.
If we cannot envisage a way of ending the fighting in Ulster, we cannot apply our solutions to other countries’ he said.
Two hundred members of Youth Action attended the conference which was held in October at the University of London Student Union.
Speakers included Prins Gunasekara, a Sri Lankan politician and human rights lawyer, who thanked Amnesty International for its efforts in helping him to flee his country because of death threats.
‘I am living testimony that Urgent Action and letter writing works’, he told the conference.
Gunasekara: UAs work
FUND RAISING
WALK FOR LIFE
DIARY BY ANDY HACKMAN
SINCE the launch of the 1992 Walk For Life in September, T-shirt orders have been mounting up along with details of some inspired, some fascinating and some frankly madcap ideas for the project.
In the first of a regular series, the Walk For Life Diary here reports on two of the more interesting ‘Walks’.
HITCHED FOR LIFE: Hitch-hiking is not everyone's favourite mode of transport — feigning angelic smiles at indifferent drivers from the cold, wet, hard shoulder of Leicester Forest East service station.
It is perhaps even less appealing across one of the driest, hottest regions of the world.
Jonathan Karkut's Walk For Life is a sponsored hitch-hike to visit in Nigeria.
He set off on 15 November on the first leg of a two month expedition thumbing his way across France, Algeria and Niger.
Jonathan's walk will cover a distance of about 4,000 miles.
GETTING OUT OF BED A BIT EARLIER…
FOR LIFE: Jonathan Pugh's is perhaps the biggest challenge so far reported of all the sponsored Walks For Life.
Jonathan has committed himself to rising early enough to get in for work before 9.00am.
Rather him than me.
SPRING RAFFLE' 93
The official launch of the Spring Raffle is 1 February 1993.
Should you receive your AMNESTY Journal early, please contain your enthusiasm and do not sell tickets before the launch date.
AMNESTY REVIEWS
REVIEWS OF GEORGE BERGER
A SHIELD OF COOLEST AIR
‘I WANT you to…to sense your own strength’— EP Thompson.
Perhaps the greatest contribution that fictional novels can make to human rights and changing attitudes is in giving us a timely reminder that all the statistics we're constantly bombarded with actually constitute human lives, just as valuable as our own.
In this respect A Shield of Coolest Air will probably hit you harder than any academic book, paradoxically by hitting you more gently.
Set in contemporary London and obviously written before the Somalian famine hit the news, the book is essentially the story of Rachel, an expatriate South African liberal with three children; Hassan, a Somalian Brit working as a refugee adviser; and Anab and Haleemo, two refugees from the Somalian civil war.
Rachel meets Anab and Haleemo through the local school that their children attend, and learns of Haleemo's other children, still stranded in Somalia.
The main characters are brought together when Rachel breaks out of her inertia to start a campaign to get Haleemo's other children into the country.
She approaches Hassan, in his role as a local refugee adviser, for help.
Together, they come up against an extraordinarily barbaric state bureaucracy and not a few disappointments.
Their fight, however, also serves to bring them closer to each other, each filling a void in their lives which they had not previously acknowledged as such.
Rachel's is the obvious context finding a new strength and realisation of her capabilities.
Hassan meanwhile (between endless rushes to airports, trying to convince faceless, emotionless authorities that they're dealing with genuine political refugees) realises his life must find time for love as well as small ‘p’ politics.
It's a story of ordinary people fighting for survival and justice; that the immigration laws never take a crude, direct beating only increases this novel's emotive power.
If all this sounds over-bearingly ‘right on’, it's not: and that is the strength and beauty of it.
There is a sad paradox when true humanity is supplanted by self-righteousness, but Marion Molteno has neatly side-stepped a trap that many unwittingly fall into.
She breaths life, warmth and passion into her characters.
When you cut them, they bleed — unlike statistics.
Turn over the last page and the credits begin, ‘The people in this novel are fictitious, the background of public events is not’.
Turn back again and you'll find an ending all too real, which is fitting.
If Hollywood ever made a film of it (Ha!), it would doubtless finish with violins, smiles and tears of joy all round.
But Marion Molteno leaves things in the air, where they belong — perhaps as an indication of how much there still is to do that whispers ‘whatever you do, don't do nothing…’
I could go on for pages.
A beautiful, inspiring book.
THE FALL OF YUGOSLAVIA (THE THIRD BALKAN WAR)
It's a fair bet that 90 per cent of people would admit to a maelstrom of confusion over the facts behind the tragedy of the country which was once called Yugoslavia.
So an academic account that could shed some light on the situation is to be welcomed.
This book, however, seems firmly aimed at that omniscient 10 per cent.
Light reading, it is not.
Misha Glenny takes us through the historical background to the war, before giving us a more detailed account of the political manoeuvring and stirring from August 1990 to May 1992.
Interspersed with these are anecdotes from his own personal experience travelling around the remains of the country as a journalist, which makes harrowing reading, if only to note how indiscriminately trigger-happy so many people over there seem to be (joking, for instance, about ‘target practice’ on a car containing a TV-film crew).
Indeed, the whole book inevitably paints a gloomy picture over the future for ex-Yugoslavia, particularly for minority populations caught up in nationalist disputes.
Somehow though,The Fall of Yugoslavia comes across as a series of fragments that don't quite make a whole, and any attempts to go beyond the yawn-capacity of school history books are sadly flawed.
Perhaps there was no other way.
A scholar's book.
LAOGAI — THE CHINESE GULAG
This is a record of China's ‘labour reform camps’.
Wu himself spent 19 years incarcerated (for expressing ‘counter-revolutionary’ opinion), beaten, tortured and starved before going to the United States as a visiting professor.
It was then that he penned this erudite survey of the Chinese prison camps.
The ideology, social structure and living conditions of the Gulags are all explained thoroughly and Wu has no hesitation in comparing them to Hitler's concentration camps.
But it is the photographs that hit home the hardest: prisoners paraded round the streets in execution parades, broken men with cardboard signs hung around their necks on TV ( post-Tiananmen ) and kneeling before firing squads.
THE CRIME — IRAQ'S INVASION OF KUWAIT
Rather than a book, this is a day-by-day, point-by-point detail of events from the day Iraq invaded Kuwait.
It is intended as a reference book for studying the conflict, although potential students ought to note that the introduction expresses joy for the ‘blessing of freedom under the leadership of HRH the Emir of Kuwait’.
SOUTH AFRICA'S POLICE (FROM POLICE STATE TO DEMOCRATIC POLICING)
THE ROLE of the police in South Africa needs a careful eye trained on it in these changing and unstable times, and Gavin Cawthra's booklet does a fine job in relating the story so far.
The cover reads, ‘If South Africa is to achieve a non-violent transition to democracy, the police must play a crucial role in keeping the peace.
Yet evidence continues to mount of the force's direct involvement in fomenting political violence’.
Among the accusations presented are frightening tales of the use of vigilante forces, links with extreme right-wing paramilitaries, death squads and the like.
Particularly harrowing are the reports that De Klerk's political liberalisation (as far as it goes) has resulted in many police officers resigning and joining right wing commandos.
The AWB claimed in 1990 that it had already trained 12,000 men.
Unfortunately, there's plenty more as well.
Detailed enough to be authoritative, while remaining readable.
Recommended.
TIBET — THE FACTS
This is a weighty, passionate document mapping out China's occupation of Tibet and human rights abuses therein.
The horrific catalogue suffers slightly from a lack of named direct sources — hence its claim to represent al ‘the facts’ is a touch ambitious.
But it is a valuable addition to the growing volume of news from Tibet that is helping to undermine the brutal occupation of this tragic region.
GROUPS
STRONG RESPONSE FROM PUBLIC AND PRESS
PoC WEEK A GREAT SUCCESS
GROUPS all over Britain put a great deal of effort into last year's Prisoner of Conscience Week, held from 18–24 October with the theme ‘for children’.
The week was met with a generous response from the public and media.
Local groups organised write-a-thons, door-to-door collections and other fundraising initiatives to help alleviate the plight of children world-wide.
Most groups managed to raise a few hundred pounds in funds.
Many secured coverage in local press, drawing attention to Amnesty International's campaign on behalf of children who have suffered gross human rights abuses.
Saffron Walden raised more than £2,000 from door-to-door collections and £851 from booksales, at the time of writing.
They were ‘still counting’ when last contacted by AIBS.
Aylesbury Group collected more than £1,300 and raised £200 from a Three Peaks Challenge Event.
Central Birmingham Group held a barn dance which raised £200; door-to-door the group collected £1,300.
Scarborough Group enticed internationally renowned playwright Alan Ayckbourn into posing for a press photograph while signing appeal letters.
BBC Radio Orkney broadcast a half-hour interview with Chilean born chairman of the Orkney Group, Suzy Shearer.
Welwyn Hatfield Group solicited 800 signatures as part of its PoC Week campaign, and promoted the Children's Postcard Art Competition in 10 schools.
Morpeth raised more than £500 and were offered a slot on three local radio stations to publicise Amnesty International's concerns.
Mid-Devon Group received coverage of their letter writing campaign in the local press and radio, and tallied 100 names on petitions for Guatemala and Peru.
Truro Group secured local radio coverage and raised £475 from door-to-door collections.
Runnymede Group raised £498, from a sponsored walk and write-a-thon collection.
Colwyn Bay held a PoC Week exhibition in their local library.
Salisbury Group sent 280 appeal letters on behalf of child victims of human rights abuses.
Grantham Group held in tandem with participants in One World Week a church service celebrating human rights and sent off 119 appeal letters.
East Shropshire Group raised £110 in one and a half hours selling products through the town's local Amnesty shop.
Haslemere Group's chairman was interviewed on local radio; the Group sent 104 appeal letters.
Barnsley managed to raise £31, sent two petitions, and approached four schools about the Children's Postcard Art Competition.
Other groups may have bettered these results; they are gleaned from Special Action Feedbacks which had been received by AIBS at the time we went to press.
AIBS wishes to thank everyone involved in PoC Week.
ART RAFFLE
THE IPSWICH Group raised £3,000 — a record for a single event for the Group — from an Art Raffle held last September, in which local artists were asked to donate a work to Amnesty.
Each ticket cost £30, and only as many tickets were sold as there were items to be raffled, so that every ticketholder received a prize.
A total of 116 works of art were donated, including oils, water-colours, pottery, woodcarvings, silk embroidery and woodcarvings.
The Ipswich branch of The Body Shop sponsored the event; Talk Electric lent a set of display stands; local craftsmen and women gave framing and sign-writing services.
JOIN A GROUP!
IF YOU want to be involved in activities such as these — writing letters to help victims of human rights abuses and campaigning on their behalf — please contact your nearest local group.
Full details are available from Anne Rimmer or Susie Wright in the Groups Office,.
The Mayor of Merton, Councillor Slim Flegg, is shown here with the Mayoress (right) and Merton MEP Anita Pollack, planting an American Dogwood tree in Cannizaro Park, Wimbledon Common.
The planting was organised by the Merton Group in memory of those imprisoned, tortured or executed for their beliefs.
‘EMBASSY CRAWL’
NEARLY 50 Amnesty members from at least 15 local groups across London joined forces on Saturday 17 October to go on an ‘embassy crawl’ in support of the indigenous peoples campaign.
The five-mile sponsored walk was the fifth organised by the Battersea & Tooting and Lambeth Groups and the biggest so far, taking in visits to 11 embassies in central London.
It was launched outside the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields, Trafalgar Square, by Reynaldo Maraqueo, a Mapuche Indian community leader from southern Chile.
Reynaldo's own story echoes that of many indigenous people.
He was forced into exile in the mid-70s, after the military government started a wholesale repression of the Indians by attacking their leaders and seizing back the land that they had struggled hard to reclaim under the previous regime.
As a refuge in Britain.
Reynaldo has continued to campaign for the rights of the Mapuche Indians and indigenous people elsewhere.
The crawl went down the Strand, past St James's, Belgravia and Mayfair, calling at the embassies of Australia, Canada, India, Bolivia, Peru, Columbia, Ecuador , Mexico, Myanmar, the USA and Brazil.
At each embassy, a giant poster was left with a brief appeal on behalf of indigenous people in the country concerned.
PALMERS Green Group and the Working Group for Children would like to thank all of you who supported our benefit at the 100 Club, Oxford Street, on 22 September.
Thanks to all of you and your friends.
The evening was a great success.
We hope you enjoyed the music as much as we did.
The total raised after costs was £945.
Thank you.
HITCH HIKE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
Two East Midlands Amnesty International members completed a 2,000 mile hitch-hike to Ankara in September where they petitioned the Turkish government on human rights abuses.
Clare Stevens and Mark Mascal, both members of Nottingham Cathedral Group, thumbed across seven European countries collecting signatures as they went, and raising £1,000 for Amnesty International.
They reached Ankara 13 days later, where they arranged a meeting at the Turkish Parliament building with Assistant Director of External Affairs, Meltern Sahinkaya, and handed over a 1,000 name petition and a letter addressed to Parliament leader Husamettin Cindoruk.
HOW TO RUN AN AMNESTY BOOKSHOP
THE HAMMERSMITH & Fulham branch of Amnesty recently donated a cheque for £1,500 to AIBS, the proceeds of a one-day-a-week second-hand bookshop which the branch opened in April.
The premises were donated by Trinity Hospice, which runs a charity shop just off Hammersmith Broadway, in West London.
Branch members run the shop on Saturdays, two at a time in two shifts.
Takings for the day are usually between £50 and £100.
Most of the trade is passers-by, but people are attracted by the comprehensive display in what was an empty shop site, at the station entrance, which London Transport has allowed the branch to erect.
Prim McHamish, secretary of the branch, said that they received advice on running a bookshop from the Blackheath, South London, Amnesty branch which has run one successfully for years.
Trish Bissett, Dick Langton and Prim McHamish, who did most of the organising, acquired many new or nearly new books from publishers and bookshops, and review copies from the Times Educational Supplement .
A few local shops also donated bookshelves.
The shop also sells Amnesty materials, and encourages visitors to sign letters on behalf of Amnesty causes.
‘We usually get anywhere between five and 20 letters signed in a day’, says Trish Bissett, ‘and we've recruited new members through the shop’.
A more detailed, step-by-step guide to setting up a bookshop — written by the Hammersmith & Fulham Group — appears in the new Amnesty International Fundraising Guide.
Any group thinking of running a bookshop, please call Prim McHamish on  who will be glad to give advice and assistance.
CAMPAIGN ACTION
DESPITE PROMISES TO IMPROVE TURKEY'S WOEFUL HUMAN RIGHTS RECORD, THE GOVERNMENT OF SULEYMAN DEMIREL HAS FAILED TO PREVENT TORTURE AND DEATHS IN CUSTODY.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL RESEARCHERS REPORT…
WALLS OF GLASS
The new Turkish Government of Suleyman Demirel came to power in October 1991 on a platform which pledged to prevent torture in custody.
Demirel's True Path Party (DYP) gave lavish tokens of its commitment to stopping human rights abuses.
An election poster promised: ‘The walls of all police stations will be made of glass’.
A year later little has changed in Turkey.
Allegations of extrajudicial execution and torture, one death in custody under torture, continue unabated.
Despite efforts to improve the country's human rights record, including a reform package, Turkey has signally failed to prevent acts of torture in custody.
In the past year there have been at least eight deaths in custody which are believed to have resulted from torture.
Four occurred within the space of less than three weeks in April 1992.
The first occurred on 11 April when Tahir Seyhan, an official of the People's Labour Party in Dargecit in the province of Mardin, died after four days under interrogation.
The autopsy report registered death as the result of a brain tumour.
A member of staff at the hospital where he died reportedly stated: ‘It is an inhuman case.
He was brutally tortured.
His body was all in pieces.’
On 18 April, Miktat Kutlu, a bank employee, died of a brain haemorrhage after interrogation at Bismail Police Headquarters.
On the morning of 19 April, Kadir Kurt was detained in Birk village, district of Bismail near Diyarbakir, and taken for interrogation to the Gendarmerie Battalion Headquarters where he died the same night.
His brother Davut, who was also allegedly tortured, is reported to have stated: ‘They tortured my brother next to me.
They inserted a truncheon into his anus.
One of my hands and ribs were broken as a result of torture’.
Kadir Kurt dies to internal bleeding caused by pressure on his lungs from a broken sternum.
The fourth reported death was that of Agit Salman, a taxi driver who was detained on 27 April and died in Adana Police Headquarters on 29 April after two days' interrogation.
The autopsy report stated that Agit Salman died of a heart attack.
However, photographs of the body showed injuries indicating that he had been beaten.
There has been no discernable decline in the stream of allegations of torture and extra-judicial killing reaching Amnesty International since the formation of the new government.
The independent Turkish Human Rights Foundation reported 179 allegations made by criminal as well as political suspects in the first six months of 1992 alone.
In 53 of these cases, the official Forensic Medical Institute confirmed injuries consistent with allegations of torture.
The methods of torture described by victims, among whom were women and children, include beating,falaka (beating on soles of feet), electric shocks, being suspended by the arms, being hosed with ice-cold water, suspended by the wrists tied behind the back, rape and sexual assault, including squeezing and crushing of the testicles, insertion of a truncheon into the anus, and insertion of objects into the vagina.
Few victims succeed in bringing effective prosecutions against their torturers.
Prosecutors will not usually open a case unless they see a medical report exempting the alleged victim from work for at least five days.
This is often impossible to obtain, however, as many of the torture techniques leave few visible injuries, or only superficial injuries which disappear during the long period in police custody.
The practice of issuing misleading medical certificates is widespread (this problem is thoroughly detailed in Turkey — Torture, extrajudicial executions, ‘disappearances’, May 1992 AI Index: EUR 44/39/92).
Victims of torture or relatives are often subjected to threats when they attempt to take legal action against torturers.
The brother of Yucel Ozen, who died in custody on 24 November 1991 after interrogation at Beyoglu Police Station, claims that he had been telephoned frequently by police who made veiled threats and advised him no to press his complaint concerning his brother's death.
A still more disturbing example occurred when the family of Servet  Sayan, interrogated at the Second (Criminal) Branch of Istanbul Police Headquarters in March, made a formal complaint to the public prosecutor stating that Servet Sayan had been suspended by the arms, and beaten on the testicles with a stick, resulting in a punctured scrotum (a medical report described a 2.5 cm wound at the base of the penis).
A prosecution was brought, and one night in April, shortly after an indictment had been drawn up against two police officers, a police superintendent accompanied by the two accused police officers, visited the family business, a café, looking for Servet Sayan.
Finding that he was not there, they ordered two family members and three customers to enter a police minibus and to keep their heads down.
They were then driven around the darkened streets of Istanbul while the police officers threatened, ‘How dare you make complaints against us’, before they were released in another district of the city.
EXTRA-JUDICIAL EXECUTIONS (EJEs)
Since June 1991, an unprecedented volume of reports of extra-judicial executions in Turkey has reached Amnesty International.
A series of police operations in Istanbul, Ankara and Adana, mainly directed against safe houses of Turkey's principal urban  guerrilla organisation, Devrimci Sol, in which casualties were high with few prisoners taken, fuelled allegations that the police were shooting to kill with out giving a warning or an opportunity to surrender.
Kurdish journalists, local politicians and members of the Turkish Human Rights Association have been the principal victims of extra-judicial executions.
Nine Kurdish journalists have been killed since February of this year.
The latest was 74-year-old Musa Anter, a prominent Kurdish writer, who was shot in the heart and head on 20 September during a visit to Diyarbakir.
He was lured with his relative, Orhan Miroglu, by a Kurdish-speaking man to a quarter on the outskirts of the city.
The assassin shot the two men with a 9mm automatic pistol; Musa Anter was hit by four bullets, Orhan Miroglu by three.
The assassin then ran off.
Musa Anter died on the way to hospital.
Three journalists who went to investigate the shooting were abducted at gun point by people who said they were police officers.
The journalists were beaten and threatened and released several hours later.
Musa Anter is the fifth journalist working for the Kurdish newspaper Ozgur Gundem to be attacked since the newspaper started publication in May this year.
Of the previous four victims, three have been killed and one left paralysed.
None of the killers has been found.
The Turkish Prime Minister is reported to have commented on the deaths by saying: ‘Those killed were not real journalists.
They were militants in the guise of journalists.
They kill each other’.
Musa Anter has been imprisoned on a number of occasions for his writings.
He was a founding member of the people's Labour Party (HEP) which has 17 Kurdish deputies in Parliament, and he was the chairman of the newly founded Kurdish Institute in Istanbul.
His name is listed among 28 mostly Kurdish people threatened with death in a leaflet which was circulating earlier in the Kurdish provinces.
He is the first one on the list to be killed.
Also targeted are members of the PKK (Kurdish Workers' Party).
Security forces are believed to have been involved in numerous killings this year in Silvan, Diyarbakir province, thought previously to have been carried out by Hizbullah.
In one case, Rifat Akis, 16, was detained in Silvan, on suspicion of membership of the PKK.
He claimed that the commander of Silvan Gendarmerie Post proposed to him, with a combination of threats and bribes, that he should assassinate Mehmet Menge, Diyarbakir SHP (Social Democratic Populiats Party) Board Member, and that he was given a Kalashnikov rifle and hand grenades.
Amnesty International urges members to write immediately on behalf of the victims of human rights abuses in Turkey.
‘A New Turkey — the walls of all police stations will be made of glass’— Election pledge made in October 1991 by Suleyman Demirel, now Prime Minister of Turkey.
SOME VICTIMS OF HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN TURKEY
MUSA ANTER: A Kurdish journalist, he was shot to death in Diyarbakir, south east Turkey, on 20 September 1992;
HASAN GULUNAY: Married with four children, he was ‘disappeared’ in Istanbul on 20 July 1992;
KAYA UNSALAN: A veterinary surgeon, he was imprisoned for four months on 26 September 1992, for posting stickers protesting against the Gulf War,
MIKTAT KUTLU: A bank clerk and father of three, he died in custody after being interrogated at  Bismail Police Headquarters;
CENGIZ ALTUN: A journalist, he was shot dead on his way to work on 24 February 1992, shortly after publishing an article stating that security forces had threatened to kill him;
SONGUL KARABULUT and FIKRI KELES: Suspected members of Devrimci Sol (Revolutionary Left), both were killed when police surrounded and fired on a flat in the Dikmen district of Ankara on 4 May 1992.
YAVUZ BINBAY: a shopkeeper and president of the Turkish Human Rights Association, he was severely beaten by police on the morning of 21 March 1992 after he had attended celebrations of Nevruz, the Kurdish New Year;
NIHAT CILASUN: a 15-year-old boy, Nihat Cilasun was shot dead as he ran towards his home carrying bread, during a curfew announced after disturbances in the City of Cizre at the time of the Kurdish New Year;
SEVKI AKINCI: a 16-year old Kurdish boy, on 9 April 1992 he beaten and abused by soldiers, held down over an open fire, and then left for dead.
He crawled to a local hospital and was transferred to Ankara for treatment;
NAZLI TOP: A 23-year-old nurse and midwife, she was tortured for four days at the Anti-Terror Branch of Istanbul Police Headquarters while three months' pregnant.
During her interrogation she was given electric shocks, punched in the stomach and raped with a truncheon.
IZZET KEZER: a Turkish journalist, he was shot dead by police on 23 March while covering the disturbances in Cizre following the Kurdish New Year;
YAKUP KARA: The mayor of the village Hilal in the province of Hakkari, on 28 June 1992 he and four villager were shot dead and their bodies burned by three people in commando uniform and balaclavas, according to Mehmet Kara, the sole survivor.
It is believed the security forces were involved.
WRITE TO
IN CASES OF EJEs; Express your concern over the reported deaths of individuals in custody (refer to victims by name, as above); explain that the first step to prevent such killings would be to undertake thorough and impartial investigations; urge that a commission of inquiry be established in accordance with the United Nations Principles on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-Legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions (1989), and that those responsible be brought to justice.
IN CASES OF TORTURE: Referring to a particular case or all cases mentioned above, urge the Government to bring those responsible to justice; point out (in letters to the Interior Ministry) that extended police detention is one of the main reasons why torture persists, urging that detainees are brought promptly before a judge, as required by international law.
COVER STORY
IN SAUDI ARABIA, WOMEN ARE DEEMED UNFIT TO GIVE EVIDENCE IN COURT; THEIR BIRTHS AND DEATHS GO UNRECORDED; ADULTERY IS PUNISHED BY DEATH BY STONING.
NOW, AN ANONYMOUS FEMALE MEMBER OF THE SAUDI ROYAL FAMILY HAS DARED TO SPEAK OUT ABOUT THE REALITY OF LIFE FOR WOMEN IN SAUDI ARABIA.
IN THIS EXTRACT FROM THE PRINCESS BY AMERICAN WRITER JEAN SASSON, SHE RELATES, WITH TESTIMONY FROM A BRITISH NURSE, THE FATE OF ONE YOUNG WOMAN ACCUSED OF ‘FORNICATION’…
‘SURRENDER TO THE WILL OF GOD’
SHE TOLD me the story, but not before she had advised me that she was absolutely scandalized.
Then she proceeded to insult all the people on earth before she described the happenings in room 212.
She said that nothing of the sort would ever happen in her country, that the British are quite civilized, thank you, and that they make the rest of the world seem simply barbaric.
My imagination could not take me to such depths of anger, so I implored her to tell me what was happening before Kareem (my husband) paid his afternoon visit.
The day before, she told me, the hospital staff had been dismayed to see a young girl about to deliver, shackled in leg-irons and handcuffs, escorted to the maternity ward by armed guards.
A group of angry Mutawas, followed by the frightened administrator, had accompanied the guards; they, not the administrator, had appointed a physician to her case.
To the physician's consternation, he had been informed that the girl had been tried in the Shari'a (the law of God) courts and found guilty of fornication.
Since this was a crime of Hudud (a crime against God), the penalty was severe.
The Mutawas, clothed in self-righteousness, were there to bear witness to the appropriate punishment.
The physician, a Muslim from India, made no protest to the Mutawas, but he was incensed at the role he was forced to play.
He told the staff that the usual punishment for fornication was flogging, but in this instance the father had insisted upon death for his daughter.
The girl was to be guarded until she delivered, at which time she was to be stoned to death.
The nurse's chin quivered in indignation as she reported that the girl was no more than a child.
She guessed her age at 14 or 15.
She knew few other details and left my bedside to gossip with the other nurses in the hallway.
Kareem returned early in the evening with information about the condemned girl.
He said she was known to be wanton and had become pregnant after having sex with numerous teenage boys.
Kareem was disgusted with her behaviour.
He said that in her disdain for the laws of our land she had humiliated the honour of her family name; there was no other course possible for her family to take.
I asked my husband of the punishment for the young males who had participated, but he had no answer.
I suggested that they had more than likely received a stern lecture in lieu of a death sentence; in the world of Arabs, blame for unsanctioned sex is placed wholly on the shoulders of the female.
Kareem stunned me with calm acceptance of the planned execution of a child, no matter what the crime.
In spite of my appeals for him to make some effort to intervene with the King, who could often attain success with a father bent on violent punishment, Kareem dismissed my cries of alarm with unconcealed irritation and insisted the subject be dropped.
I was withdrawn and sullen when he bade me farewell.
He lavished our son with kisses and promises of a perfect life while I sat dull and unresponsive.
I was preparing to depart from the hospital when the British nurse entered my suite in a white glow of anger.
She brought heavy tidings of the condemned girl.
She possessed an uncanny memory and recalled painful detail, in perfect clarity, that she had been told by the physician from India.
The condemned girl had given birth to a baby daughter in the early hours of the morning.
Three Mutawas had been told of the indignation from the foreign community and they stood with the armed guards at the entry of the delivery theatre to ensure that no sympathetic foreigner assisted the girl to escape.
After delivery, the girl was wheeled back into her room.
The Mutawas informed the physician that the new mother would be removed that day and taken away to be stoned for her crime against God.
The fate of the new born baby had not been determined since the family had refused to raise the child as their own.
With horror in her eyes, the nurse stated that the young girl had tearfully told the physician the events that had led to her tragic situation.
Her name was Amal, and she was the daughter of a shopkeeper in Riyadh.
She had been only 13 years old when the event occurred that shattered her world.
She had just begun to veil.
It was a Thursday night (equivalent to Saturday nights in the Western world).
Amal's parents had travelled to the Emirates for the weekend and would not return until Saturday noon.
Three Filipino house-servants were sleeping, and the driver was in his small gatehouse far removed from the main dwelling.
Amal's older married siblings were living in other areas of the city.
Of the family only she and her 17-year-old brother were left at home.
Her brother and the three Filipinos had been instructed to take care of her.
Her brother had taken the opportunity to entertain a large group of teenage friends while his parents were out of the country.
Amal heard loud music and voices late into the evening; the games room was located directly below her bedroom.
She thought her brother and his friends were more than likely smoking marijuana, a substance with which her brother had lately become enamoured.
Finally, when the walls of Amal's room began to vibrate from the sounds of the bass from the stereo, she decided to go downstairs to ask her brother and his friends to  turn down their music.
Dressed only in her thin nightgown, she had no intention of entering the room, just of poking her head into the doorway to yell for peace and quiet.
The lights were dim, and the room was dark; her brother did not respond to her cries, so the girl went inside to look for him.
Amal's brother was not to be found.
The other teenage boys in the room were obviously heated with drugs and talk of women, for Amal was pounced upon by several boys at once and found herself pinned to the floor.
She screamed for her brother and tried to make the boys understand that she was the daughter of the house, but her pleas did not register in their drugged minds.
Her gown was ripped from her body.
She was brutally assaulted by her brother's friends, as they had turned into a frenzied mob.
The volume of the music muffled the sounds of the attack, and no-one heard her screams for help.
Amal lost consciousness after the third boy raped her.
Her brother had been in the bathroom, but he was so drugged that he had slumped against the wall and slept in a haze through the remainder of the night.
Later, when the dawn of light cleared the heads of the attackers and Amal's true identity was revealed, the boys fled the villa.
Amal was taken to a nearby hospital by the driver and the Filipinos.
The doctor in the emergency room notified the police.
The Mutawas became involved.
Owing to Amal's seclusion as a female, she could not identify her attackers by name, only that they were acquaintances of her brother.
Their names were taken from Amal's brother, but by the time they were collected and asked to appear before the police for statements they had taken great pains to prepare their story.
According to the boys' version of the evening, no drugs had been present.
They acknowledged only that they had been playing loud music and having innocent fun.
They said that the girl had entered the room in a sheer nightdress and enticed them to have sex.
She told the boys she had been upstairs reading a book on sex and had a great deal of curiosity.
They swore that they had turned her down at first, but that she had behaved in such a bold manner — sitting on their laps, kissing them and fingering her body — that they could not hold back any longer .
The girl had been left without a chaperon and was determined to have a good time with some boys.
They declared that she was insatiable and begged them all to participate.
The parents returned from the Emirates.
Amal's mother believed her daughter's story; although demented with grief, she was unable to convince her husband of the girl's innocence.
Amal's father, who had always been uncomfortable with daughters, was stricken by the event, but felt that the boys had done only what any male would do under the circumstances.
With a heavy heart, he concluded that his daughter must be punished for shaming his name.
Amal's brother, fearful of severe punishment for using drugs, did not step forward to clear his sister's name.
The Mutawas offered the father moral support in his strong stance and showered him with accolades for his religious conviction.
The girl would die today.
Consumed by emotions of sorrow and fear, I barely heard the continued exclamations of the British nurse.
I felt the miserable decline of my happiness as I imagined the girl's innocence and the futility of her mother's efforts to save her from a cruel death.
I myself had never witnessed a stoning, but Omar had done so on three occasions and had taken great delight in describing to us the fate that awaited weak women who did not carefully guard their honour which was so prized by their men.
I thought of the vivid description with which Omar had burdened my memory.
When I was 12 years of age, a woman in one of the small villages not far from Riyadh had been found guilty of adultery.
She was condemned to die by stoning.
Omar and our neighbours' driver decided to go and view the spectacle.
A large crowd had gathered since early morning.
They were restless and waiting to see the one so wicked.
Omar said that just as the crowd was becoming angry with impatience in the hot sun a young woman of about twenty-five years of age was roughly pulled out of a police car.
He said she was very beautiful, just the sort of woman who would defy the laws of God.
The woman's hands were bound.
Her head hung low.
With an official manner, a man loudly read out her crime for the crowd to hear.
A dirty rag was used to gag her mouth and a black hood was fastened around her head.
She was forced to kneel.
A large man, the executioner, flogged the woman upon her back fifty blows.
A truck appeared, and rocks and stones were emptied in a large pile.
The man who had read off the crime informed the crowd that the execution should begin.
Omar said the group of people, mostly men, rushed towards the stones and began to hurl the rocks at the woman.
The guilty one quickly slumped to the ground and her body jerked in all directions.
Omar said the rocks continued to thud against her body for what seemed to be an interminable time.
Every so often, the stones would quieten while a doctor would check the women's pulse.
After a period of nearly two hours, the doctor finally pronounced the woman dead and the stoning ceased.
The British nurse interrupted my sad ponderings when she returned to my room in great agitation.
The police and Mutawas were taking the girl away for punishment.
She said that if I stood in my doorway I could see her face, for the girl was not veiled.
I heard a great commotion in the hallway.
Quickly I fastened my veil around my face.
My feet moved my body forward without thought or intention.
The doomed one was fragile and childlike between the tall stoic guards who led her to her fate.
Her chin rested on her chest, so it was difficult to see the expression on her face.
But I discerned that she was a pretty child, one who would have grown into a beauty had she been allowed the opportunity to age.
She glanced up with dread and peered into the sea of faces that was watching her with curiosity.
I saw that her fear was great.
There were no relatives to travel with her to the grave, only strangers to see her off on the darkest of journeys.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL URGENT ACTION IN SAUDI ARABIA
WOMAN RECEIVES 200 LASHES
MAHA Sa'ad-ul-Din Banat, a 35-year-old Syrian national and mother of four who had been sentenced to 200 lashes by the Shari'a Court of Expedient Affairs in Riyadh on 10 March 1992, received the lashes in four instalments in a one month period between April and May.
Maha Banat was accused of adultery with Ahmed Hussein al-Zahrani, a Saudi citizen, whom she claims she does not know, and who was sentenced by the same court to three months' imprisonment and 100 lashes.
The application of the lashes had been postponed until after the holy month of Ramadan, which in Saudi Arabia ended on 2 April.
Maha Banat, her 15-year-old daughter, Ansaf Banat, and Ahmed al-Zahrani were arrested by members of the ‘Committee for the Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice’(CPVPV), commonly known as the mutawa'een or religious police.
The arrests took place outside the Central Telecommunications office in Riyadh on 12 February after an argument ensued between Ahmed al-Zahrani and Maha Banat, who accused him of propositioning her daughter.
The quarrel caught the attention of a member of the CPVPV.
Apparently in an attempt to deny the accusation, Ahmed al-Zahrani reportedly claimed that he had given Maha Banat 500 Riyals for sexual favours.
The three were taken to the CPVPV headquarters in al-Muraba’ in Riyadh.
During questioning, Ahmed al-Zahrani was allegedly beaten and made to sign a confession stating that he had a sexual relationship with Maha Banat.
Ansaf Banat was also reportedly threatened and made to sign a confession to the effect that her mother knew Ahmed al-Zahrani.
Ansaf was released after five hours while her mother remained in prison for four days, reportedly without food.
Amnesty International considers flogging to be cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment prohibited internationally by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
THE ISLAMIC LAW IN SAUDI ARABIA
THE SHARI'A: THE PATH ORDAINED BY GOD
THE criminal laws of Saudi Arabia adhere to the strict Islamic precepts set by Muhammad, the Prophet of God, born in AD570.
The most important concept of Islam is the Shari'a, or the ‘path’, which embraces the total way of life ordained by God.
The word Islam means ‘surrender to the will of God’.
A Saudi scholar described to Jean Sasson the main tenets of Islamic Law and the punishment given to offenders.
(1)
There are four main sources of the Shari'a: the Koran, which is compiled from thousands of religious verses revealed by God through his Prophet, Muhammad; the Sunna, which are the traditions the Prophet addressed that are not recorded in the Koran; the Ijma, which are the perceptions of the Ulema, or religious scholars; and the Quiyas, which is a method whereby known jurists agree upon new legal principles.
(2)
The King of Saudi Arabia is not exempt from the regulations set forth by the Shari'a.
(3)
The court system itself is complicated, but if a judgement is taken to appeal it is reviewed by the court of appeals.
This court, usually consisting of three members, increases to five members if the sentence imposes death or mutilation.
The king is the final arbitrator who serves as a final court of appeal and as a source of pardon.
(4)
Crimes are classified into three divisions: Hudud, Tazir and Qisas.
Crimes of Hudud are crimes that are denounced by God; the punishment is made known in the Koran.
Crimes of Tazir are given to the appropriate authority to determine punishment.
Crimes of Qisas give the victim the right to retaliate.
CRIMES OF HUDUD
CRIME
PUNISHMENT
Theft
Payment of fines; imprisonment; amputation of right hand (the left hand is only amputated if the right has already been amputated)
Drinking
Flogging, usually 80 lashes
Defamation of Islam
Depending on whether a person is a Muslim or not, the sentence varies according to circumstances.
Muslims are usually flogged
Fornication
Usually flogging
Adultery
If he or she is married the sentence is death by stoning, beheading or shooting.
Proof of this crime must be established by confession or by four witnesses.
CRIMES OF QISAS
IF a person is found guilty of crimes against an individual or his family, the aggrieved family has the right to retaliate.
The sentence and punishment is decided and carried out in private.
The  many crimes include murder as well as mutilation.
If the crime was accidental the family of the deceased may collect ‘blood money’.
There is a set scale of damages according to the circumstances.
If a women is killed, the payment is half that of a man.
WOMEN FORBIDDEN TO TESTIFY
THERE are four reasons given why women's testimony is not valid in a Saudi court:
(1)
Women are much more emotional than men and will, as a result of their emotions, distort their testimony;
(2)
Women do not participate in public life, so they will not be capable of understanding what they observe;
(3)
Women are dominated completely by men, who by the grace of God are deemed superior; therefore, women will give testimony according to what the last man told them;
(4)
Women are forgetful, and their testimony cannot be considered reliable.
PROFILE
ISABEL WOLFF BELIEVES THE NOBEL COMMITTEE GOT IT RIGHT THIS TIME…
RIGOBERTA MENCHU: HER ONLY WEAPONS ARE WORDS
OF ALL THE six Nobel prizes, the Peace Prize has always attracted the most controversy.
Perhaps that's hardly surprising.
After all, how do we measure the praise-worthiness of peacemakers?
Do we judge them by the depth of their humanity, or by the extent to which they have reduced international tension?
By the righteousness of a particular crusade?
Some of the committee's more disputed decisions have thrown up questions like these in recent years.
Past winners have included Sean MacBride (1974), a former IRA chief of staff and  Menachem Begin (1978), formerly of the Stern gang.
In 1973, Henry Kissinger got the prize at the time he was implicated in the blanket bombing of Cambodia.
One might also note that this year's short-list included Nelson Mandela, who for all his grey-haired, septuagenarian dignity, openly espoused political terrorism in his youth, and is still the figurehead of an organisation which has practised torture in camps.
Previous Nobel Peace Prize short lists have included Robert Mugabe, a former  guerrilla leader (1980), and, in 1939, Adolf Hitler —‘because he did not unleash war, as expected, in 1938’, as the Swedish politician who proposed him cited.
Consider then this year's winner, the Mayan Indian peace-worker, Rigoberta Menchu, who has campaigned for the rights of Guatemala's oppressed indigenous majority for over a decade.
She has never hurled a grenade or primed a bomb in her life.
Nor has she slit any throats, gouged out any eyes or cut off any fingers or genitals, which is what is routinely done,pour encourager les autres , to opponents of the huge Guatemalan army.
Rigoberta Menchu has lived in exile in Mexico for the past 11 years, yet the only weapons she has used in that time have been words.
She has spoken at the UN and given lectures abroad in which she has tried to draw attention to Central America's most beautiful and most tragic republic.
She has never advocated violence, and yet there has been a lettered campaign in some quarters to discredit her.
Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, writing in both the Daily Telegraph and the Sunday Telegraph , says that he was ‘stunned’ to learn of Rigoberta Menchu's success.
He accuses her of being a stooge of the EGP, the Guerrilla Army of the Poor; he say she is a front for this ‘hard-line rebel group’ which is ‘bent on achieving communist revolution by force of arms’.
But the  EGP are not communist, they are nationalist and define themselves, like Rigoberta Menchu, by their ethnicity.
Ambrose Evans-Pritchard insists that the EGP is ‘one of Latin America's most vicious communist organisations’.
But there are only a hundred of them, poorly armed, standing against any army of 42,000 troops.
There is simply no comparison with the terrorist Communist Party of Peru, the Sendero Luminoso, although that seems to be what Evans-Pritchard is hinting at.
The EGP do not, as he claims, murder civilians.
In fact, they do not do very much at all.
Occasionally, they kill soldiers, and blow up the odd bridge or a railway line, but essentially they are an impotent and marginal force currently engaged in peace talks with the military.
It is true that Rigoberta Menchu sympathises with the aims of the EGP, which are an end to the repression of the Mayan people — indeed it would be extraordinary if she didn't.
But that support, which the Nobel committee acknowledges, does not make her a guerrilla.
Ambrose Evans-Pritchard also says that Menchu ‘does not speak for the Mayan Indians of Guatemala’.
Why then did tens of thousands turn out to see her when she returned to Guatemala last week?
Rather more seriously, he accuses her of being a liar, and claims that large parts of her story (her autobiography is an international best-seller)‘are not actually true’ and that ‘a Nobel Prise for Literature might have been more suitable’.
He seems to me to be swimming in dangerous waters here, but then Mr Evans-Pritchard probably knows that Rigoberta Menchu has better things to do with her prize money than spend it on litigation.
Does Mr Evans-Pritchard think that torture is so rare in Guatemala that her story is an improbable concoction?
These are the facts which Mr Evans-Pritchard, who has lived in Guatemala, thinks are inventions: Rigoberta Menchu's father, Vincente, a respected peasant leader, and founder of the Peasants' Unity Committee (CUC), was killed during a peaceful protest at the Spanish embassy in 1980.
The Guatemalan security forces set fire to the building and he was incinerated, along with 30 of his campesino colleagues.
Her 16-year-old brother was arrested and tortured (they removed the skin from his face and the soles of his feet); then they burnt him alive in the village square.
A few months later, her mother was taken into custody where she was raped, mutilated and killed.
After they had finished with her, the soldiers stood over her corpse and urinated into her mouth; then they left her body for the dogs.
These experiences, which Rigoberta relates in her autobiography,I Rigoberta Menchu , make grim and compulsive reading, but the fact is that her story is by no means unusual.
For 38 years, a dirty, secret war has been going on in Guatemala, a war which has largely been ignored by the outside world.
Ever since a military coup overthrew the elected government of Jacobo Arbenz in 1954, the indigenous Mayan people, who make up two-thirds of the population of eight million, have suffered widespread, brutal and systematic oppression at the hands of a Spanish speaking minority.
Their crime is to protest against the day-to-day control which the Guatemalan army has exercised over their lives — an army which consumes about a third of the national budget.
Organisations such as the CUC and the EPG certainly are left-wing, but one has to question what left-wing really means in a country like Guatemala.
Left-wing means this: asking for a fair wage, joining a political organisation, refusing to go into the army or complaining if the security forces kill your husband and torture your sons.
I went back to the country earlier this year on a human-rights delegation, with no political affiliations.
While we were there we toured the highlands, where the repression has been most concentrated, and met relatives of massacre victims and the widows of the ‘disappeared’.
We also spent time in the capital, Guatemala City, where we talked to senior government officials like the defence minister, General Jose Garcia Samayoa.
We also met the labour minister, Mario Solorzano, one lunchtime.
‘There is one thing you must all understand’, he said, tucking into his soup.
‘In this country, Mrs Thatcher would be considered a communist.’
We all laughed, but he wasn't joking.
In strictly numerical terms, Guatemala has the worst human rights record on a continent specialising in such behaviour.
It has been a country where soldiers and policemen, untrammelled by legal restraints of any kind, have freely tortured and murdered in the name of anti-communism.
Over the last few decades, at least 150,000 Mayan Indians have been killed by the army, one million have been displaced and a further 40,000 have ‘disappeared’.
In fact, the technique of forced disappearances was invented in Guatemala, and was later imitated by Chile and Argentina.
The beautiful, mountainous countryside is littered with the shallow, unmarked graves of the assassinated.
Between 1981 and 1984 alone, 80,000 Mayans were killed during the army's scorched-earth campaign in which 440 villages were razed.
Most of those who died were not guerrillas, and certainly not Marxists, but illiterate, Catholic peasant farm-workers from Guatemala's high plateaux.
Many were killed — as they are still being killed today — for refusing to join the army's Civil Patrol Units by which the military strengthens its grip over the countryside.
Despite a return to civilian rule, first under Venecio Cerezo, then, since 1991, under Jorge Serrano, the army remains firmly in control, and enjoys almost complete immunity from prosecution.
Before he took office in 1985, Cerezo said, ‘We are not going to be able to investigate the past.
We would have to put the entire army in jail.’
In any case, the past couldn't be investigated because the military had granted themselves amnesty from prosecution before handing Cerezo the reins of power.
When Jorge Serrano took office in January 1991 he promised to punish those responsible for human-rights abuses, yet the repression is as fierce and remorseless today as it ever was.
Torture remains an instrument of policy, death squads still operate and many hundreds of people are shot or stabbed every year for refusing to accept the status quo.
They are victims of what are euphemistically known as ‘extra-judicial killings’.
Their bodies usually minus tongues, fingers and eyes, turn up on roadsides, at the bottom of ravines, and on municipal rubbish dumps.
Trouble-makers and ‘liberals’ are simply wiped out.
This, then is the state of affairs which Rigoberta Menchu has been trying for the past 11 years to bring to the world's attention — an almost impossible task, given the fact that for most of that time the international press found Nicaragua and El Salvador much more diverting.
Guatemala has been Central America's sideshow.
Revulsion at what has been happening there is not a prerogative of the politically correct.
In fact it has nothing to do with political affiliations at all, since admiration and support for Rigoberta Menchu has come from all sides.
Among the many British MP's who endorsed her Nobel nomination are members of the Conservative and Liberal Democrat parties, such as Peter Bottomley and David Alton.
We do not, as Ambrose Evans-Pritchard claims, ‘idolise’ Rigoberta Menchu.
But we do respect her bravery in standing up against a dreadful regime.
The award of the Nobel prize to Rigoberta Menchu means that Guatemala is exposed to international scrutiny in a way it has never been exposed before.
The spotlight is shining briefly on this beautiful, blood-soaked country, and we should not avert our eyes.
Rigoberta Menchu: We should not avert our eyes from her struggle
FEATURE
IAN WILLIAMS, A WELSH NURSE, WORKED FOR THE BRITISH RED CROSS IN KISMAYO, SOMALIA, IN THE SUMMER OF 1992, A TIME WHEN THE WORLD'S MEDIA CHOSE TO FOCUS ON THE CONTINUING CIVIL WAR IN THIS FAMINE-STRICKEN COUNTRY, HE SEES THE SUFFERING OF SOMALIA ROOTED IN CLAN DIVISIONS…
Why Somalia?
A Somalian woman and her son await relief supplies.
But clan warfare has severely depleted the amount of food getting through.
To find the roots of the tragedy you have to look at Somali history.
Somalia is the only country in Africa possessing a single language, culture, religion and ethnic group.
But it is torn by deeper internal divisions than those warring along ethnic or religious lines.
For centuries, the Somalis have walked their camels and cattle across the harsh, scrubby bush in search of water and grazing land.
Ancient laws governed who would have rights to watering holes, but the young herders were often caught in the breach, stealing camels and sometimes women, from neighbouring clans.
The group elders would normally mediate and settle disputes, but in the open bush conflicts often remained unsolved with feelings of revenge simmering over extended periods.
During the 1960s and the 1970s, President Siad Barré accepted huge arms caches from Moscow, then from Washington, until, with the end of the Cold War, his country became less strategically important and supplies and support dwindled.
For the first time since the British and Italian colonisation in the 1890s, Somalia was free of external influence, but the inter-clan tensions suppressed and manipulated by Barré erupted into an anarchic and bitter civil war.
On the 27 January 1991 Siad Barré fled the country, and the clans embarked on the intractable conflict which has come to look like a nation intent on destroying itself.
We saw the results of this fighting during the summer of 1992 as the media spotlight shone briefly on Somalia: young men with guns, starving children in feeding centres, and the looting of emergency food by clan warlords.
These images symbolised the chaos which continues to worsen.
In Kismayo, a port town in the south, the evidence of previous prosperity remains.
The architecture shows the influence of the Italian colonisation; the modern harbour harks back to the healthy export of livestock to the Gulf States; and the large scale agricultural activity in the adjacent fertile valley now lies dormant with equipment and crops stolen and even the electricity pylons stripped of their cables.
Since early 1992, the population of Kismayo has swollen by 50,000, mainly refugees fleeing the fighting and searching for food.
They have settled in sprawling camps around the town, building rickety wooden huts covered with brown paper from the defunct local paper mill.
A women sat outside her hut cooking some grass seeds for her two teenage children, both of whom were painfully thin and too weak to stand, and told me her story: Her husband had been shot months ago, and when the food ran out in her village her only choice was to come to Kismayo where aid agency food was arriving.
She had walked for four days, and lost one of her younger children on the way.
Now she was waiting for the food to reach her at the rapidly expanding camp.
On the crowded streets the fragility of the alliance of four clan groups, collectively known as the Somali Liberation Army, is expressed in sporadic gun battles which keep the hospital supplied with five to ten victims every day.
Boys as young as 13 sped through the town astride their ‘Mad-Max’ cars: usually Toyotas with the roofs sawn off and large Browning machine guns welded onto the back.
They let off frequent bursts of fire into the air to remind everyone that the only law in Somalia is administered down the barrel of a gun.
At the harbour, where the relief food is off-loaded from the Red Cross and United Nations ships, the atmosphere is extremely tense.
The gunmen chewing the stimulant leaf, khat, are very jumpy…an argument over a bag of rice often ends in a killing.
The SLA demand taxes for all ships and planes arriving in Kismayo, and promise in return co-operation and safety for the humanitarian operations.
One of the clan groups was given the responsibility for securing the delivery of the food to the warehouses, but the internal divisions and the lorry drivers' loyalties mean that some food is always stolen, or lost to corruption.
There is no law against theft or murder in Kismayo and no-one with the ability to enforce it, if it existed, anyway.
Out in the bush the nomadic  people still drive their camels and cattle over huge tracts of land, but the herds have been decimated, and along with the drought, some watering holes are now out-of-bounds as clan allegiances shift and change.
Some tracks are littered with hundreds of carcasses signifying an immense extension of the famine if the remaining livestock continues to die at this rate.
For now the nomads are surviving, but time most be short for them.
We met one nomad driving 40 head of cattle in the baking sun, hours from the nearest village.
He flagged my car down to beg some drinking water, and told me that many of his animals would die if he was unable to reach water before nightfall.
An indication that many fighters have all but lost any semblance of moral conscience are the frequent violations of the neutrality of medical and humanitarian workers.
One of the bravest people I worked with was Hawa, a nurse managing the town medical programme for the Somali Red Crescent.
Some times petty problems would erupt into threats of violence or death, and she would have to take plenty of time to negotiate patiently until she could continue her work.
In terms of sheer inhumanity, one incident in August will remain stamped on my mind for the rest of my life.
In May, Kismayo had been taken over by new forces, and most of the people from the original clans had fled.
Some of the local Red Cross employees had taken refuge in the office, unable even to step out into the street.
By August, we had managed to get approval from all concerned to help evacuate these men and their families to safety in their own clan areas.
We had guarantees, from the local military authorities, who provided heavily armed escorts, a Hercules plane, and even gave the green light to our closer local advisers.
Early on the morning of the evacuation the families were preparing to embark when, in full sight of the military escort, gunmen surrounded the plane, forced the 11 men into a truck at gunpoint, and drove them off into the bush.
In most conflicts around the world, the Red Cross Flag confers some degree of protection on those in care of the organisation, but clearly not now in Somalia.
During the next two days, as we tried to discover the fate of the 11 men, we met with the most powerful warlord in the country: General Aideed, who denied all knowledge of the incident and proved unable, or unwilling to do anything to find out.
Aideed's forces are held responsible for many of the gross abuses of human rights in Somalia, mostly against members of the Darod clan.
The women and children were back in our office, and a sister of one of the victims had gone into the bush, in her grief, searching for a sign of them.
When she eventually returned, utterly distraught, our fears were confirmed: she had discovered the men's bodies lying where they had been shot.
So what are the Somali people and the relief agencies to do for this country which seems past the point of no return?
The farmers' tenacity is extraordinary: they had been looted repeatedly of their tools and crops, but continue to work the fields every day, planting their meagre remaining seed reserve.
Among the looting and fighting a lot of the villagers had managed to maintain their traditional systems for support.
When food aid arrived in some of the outlying villages, the elders' authority was strong enough to ensure a fair distribution.
Koranic schools were functioning in a lot of the villages and even in the refuge camps, for the children to attend.
For every Western aid worker, there are at least five Somali aid workers who, like Hawa the nurse, put themselves at greater risk, work longer hours for little or no money, and provide a body of local people who may be able to continue their work in health care or administration after the fighting is over.
The massive aid operation (the Red Cross allocated 20 per cent of their world budget to Somalia) has had a visible effect, despite the odds stacked against it.
In May 1992, when I first arrived, the streets and camps in Kismayo were full of children and adults with severe malnutrition that their knees and elbows would stand out on their stick like limbs.
Many of them died, but as I left in September, there was a tangible improvement in the condition of those remaining.
In the more stable area people were returning to pick up the pieces of their lives.
In the areas where the fighting continues though, this fragile balance has been destroyed, and a more lasting solution is desperately needed.
The United Nations has been widely criticised for not reacting fast enough to the crisis in Somalia.
The situation has been publicised since last year by the relief agencies and others, but the UN was slow to get involved.
The former UN Special Representative for Somalia, Mohamed Sahnoun, who resigned last year, said in August ‘…if only we had intervened last November…now we are paying the price.’
The UN's slow reaction was highlighted in the journal, Africa Confidential, which reported in August that the newly appointed UN Development Programme Emergency Representative (who was responsible for leading emergency co-ordination) was delayed in Kenya for three months by bureaucratic problems.
A wider political initiative, with UN armed observers escorting food and convoys, and increased financial output, was not launched until as late as August, by which time looting of food supplies had been going on for some months.
History has played a cruel joke on the Somalis by giving them a culture of internal clan divisions in a world of centralised government and bureaucracy.
They are expected suddenly to adapt to the modern world after a century of colonial domination and outside interference.
The political solution will be complex and probably long in coming.
The UN will have to understand the complexities completely, and act firmly and sensitively to encourage re-unification and co-operation.
Many are calling this the worst humanitarian disaster in the world today.
Surely Somalia deserves more assistance from the international community than it has so far had?
Top: The atmosphere in Somalia's ports is extremely tense; Bottom: for every western aid worker, there are at least five Somalia aid workers
WORLDWIDE APPEAL
WHAT'S IN A LETTER?
‘During our investigations we have had the chance to keep a record of more than 4,000 cards and letters (sent by Amnesty International members in Britain).
During the dictatorship of Hissein Habre, you were the only support for the persecuted Chadians.’
MAHAMAT HASSAN ABAKAR, PRESIDENT OF THE COMMISSION OF INVESTIGATION, REPUBLIC OF CHAD (SEE LETTERS, PAGE 4)
SOME TIPS:
Identify yourself by profession and nationality to emphasize the fact that all kinds of people are concerned about human rights.
Writing appeals is not difficult.
Letters need not be beautifully composed or very long.
Their aim is to show concern and make a clear, polite request.
There is no common international practice for addressing authorities, but you may safely use ‘You Excellency’ for Heads of State such as Presidents, Prime Ministers, other Ministers and Ambassadors.
Identify clearly the person for whom you are writing.
State the person's name and details such as the date of arrest and place of detention, if known.
Follow the directions in the appeal, eg, AI asks for the unconditional release of prisoners of conscience only.
Stay within AI's Mandate and don't discuss ideology or politics.
AI is a non-partisan organisation: it opposes human rights violations, not governments or political systems.
KUWAIT
NURI ‘ABD AL-KARIM LAYEDH MUHAMMAD, a 62-year-old driver, and his two sons SABAH and ‘ABD AL-KARIM: Iraqi nationals resident in Kuwait, they were ‘disappeared’ in March 1991 shortly after Iraqi forces withdrew from Kuwait.
They have not been seen since.
Their family fears that they may have been tortured to death or extrajudicially executed, or that they are still being held in incommunicado detention.
Sabah, aged 28, and his brother, ‘Abd al-Karim, aged 21, were both taken away from their home in al-Fahahil on 7 March by seven or eight men in masks and civilian clothes and one in military uniform.
‘Abd al-Karim was still recovering from serious gunshot wounds sustained during the Iraqi occupation.
After the brothers had been taken away, their family filled out forms reporting the ‘disappearance’ at al-Bayan police station.
The Public Prosecutor's office said that neither brother was on the list of those who had been detained and were facing charges.
However, on several other occasions the Kuwaiti authorities have denied holding individuals who were subsequently found to have been in incommunicado detention.
Nuri ‘Abd al-Karim, a diabetic, has two wives and fifteen children.
He was taken away from his home on the night of 29 March by a man who reportedly came to give him information about his two ‘disappeared’ sons.
The family has since continued to search for Nuri ‘Abd al-Karim and his sons at various detention centres, police stations, prisons and hospitals but the three remain ‘disappeared’.
Numerous Iraqis, Palestinians and others became victims of human rights violations at the hands of Kuwaiti government forces and armed Kuwaiti civilians, particularly during the four months of martial law following the Iraqi withdrawal.
The Kuwaiti authorities have not fully investigated these abuses.
INDONESIA
FRANCISCO MIRANDA BRANCO: a 41-year-old civil servant in Dili, East Timor, he was sentenced on 23 June.
He had been convicted under Indonesia's sweeping Anti-Subversion Law.
At the trial state prosecutors argued that subversion charges were warranted because the defendant had sought ‘to give a wrong picture of the facts in East Timor to prove that the Indonesian Government did not respect human rights in the province’.
Francisco Miranda Branco denied charges of subversion and stated before the court ‘I uphold the principles of non-violence and peace, which is why, after the outbreak of the civil war in East Timor…
I decided that…
I would no longer take sides with any party…which is my position up to the present day’.
Francisco Miranda Branco is one of eight people imprisoned for organising or participating in a peaceful procession to Santa Cruz cemetery in Dili, the capital of East Timor.
During the 12 November 1991 procession Indonesian troops opened fire, killing an estimated 100 people and wounding many more.
Many of the victims were school students and young people.
The eight people arrested and put on trial were also accused of membership of the ‘Executive Committee’, which had been created to deliver a petition to Portuguese parliamentarians scheduled to visit East Timor in October 1991.
The petition repeatedly appealed for a dialogue to be established between the Indonesian and Portuguese Governments and representatives of the East Timorese people.
The terms of the reference for the visit, agreed under the auspices of the United Nations, specified that all those wishing to make contract with the parliamentarians should be free to do so.
All eight are prisoners of conscience, detained solely for peaceful political activity, including the defence of human rights.
MALAWI
SAIDI SAFARI: a prisoner of conscience, he died in custody in Mangochi police station in November 1991.
The police offered no explanation of his death and despite clear requirements of Malawian law, there has been no inquest.
In October 1991, five young women in this predominantly Muslim area of Southern Malawi were arrested for wearing trousers, which is prohibited by the Decency in Dress Act.
The women were fined by a magistrate and detained at Mangochi police station until the fine was paid.
Saidi Safari, a local Muslim trader, came forward to pay the fines but was himself arrested shortly afterwards — possibly for making critical remarks about the incident.
After he had been held incommunicado for a month his family were allowed to visit him and found him in good health.
Two days later he was dead.
When his body was taken to Mangochi Hospital, staff were only told by police that he died in the night.
The authorities have not responded to widespread allegations that he was beaten to death.
There has been a consistent pattern of uninvestigated deaths in custody in Malawi, usually resulting from torture, harsh conditions or denial of medical treatment.
The authorities have apparently never held an inquest into nay prisoners death — including that of Saidi Safari — despite the requirement of the Inquests Act that they do so.
CHAD
FAKY ALI AHMAT: a 52-year-old Koranic teacher, he was among six people, including a 14-year-old boy, who were killed instantly on 1 August when members of Chad's National Gendarmerie opened fire on a group of people attending Koranic lessons at a mosque in Diguel-Est, a suburb of the capital, N'Djamena.
A second teenage boy died in hospital, and at least 14 other people, including an eight-month-old baby, were reported to have been wounded.
All of the victims came from Chad's Ouadda community from the east of the country.
The police had been sent to arrest Faky Ali Ahmat and his followers because of a land dispute over ownership of the site of the mosque.
According to sources in N'Djamena, a senior Interior Ministry Official had instructed the police to open fire if Faky Ali Ahmat resisted arrest.
A government minister has said that the police fired in self-defence, but there is no evidence to suggest that the their lives were in jeopardy.
No action has been taken against those responsible for the shootings or to introduce any official regulations on the use of firearms by law enforcement personnel.
The government's Minister for Humanitarian Affairs, seconded from the Chadian Human Rights League, criticized Interior Ministry officials in connection with the shootings and resigned in protest at the killings.
CUBA
YNDAMIRO RESTANO DIAZ: President of the unofficial political group Movimiento de Armonia (MAR), the Harmony Movement, he was arrested on 20 December 1991 in Havana, together with Maria Elena Aparicio, said to be the coordinator of MAR for the Havana city area.
In May 1992 they were convicted of ‘rebellion’ in connection with their activities as members of MAR.
Amnesty International considers them to be prisoners of conscience.
MAR advocates a wide range of democratic reforms, including the establishment of a multi-party system and free elections, though peaceful means.
However, at the trial, which began on 20 May 1992, the prosecution alleged that MAR intended to change Cuba's political, economic and social structure through acts of civil disobedience and sabotage and attacks on police officers and leading political figures.
MAR has consistently rejected the use of violence and no evidence was produced to support allegations that its members were planning to engage in violent activities.
During the trial, several prosecution witnesses reportedly retracted incriminating statements they had earlier made against the defendants.
Yndamiro Restano criticised the proceedings, saying that his ‘guilt’ was assured before the hearing had taken place.
He was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment which he is currently serving in Guanajay Prison.
Maria Elena Aparicio was sentenced to seven years and is believed to be held in a women's prison in Havana.
In 1985 Yndamiro Restano was dismissed from his job as an agricultural correspondent for a state-run radio station after giving interview about his political views to a US journalist.
RUSSIA
DMITRY SOKOLOV: aged 21, he was sentenced to two years' compulsive labour by a court in Russia on 5 May 1991 for ‘evasion of regular call-up to active military service’ under Article 80 of the Criminal Code.
Dmitry Sokolov, a Jehovah's Witness, had been imprisoned between 1988 and 1990 for refusing his call-up papers.
He has consistently refused calls to military service because his religious beliefs forbid him to bear arms for a secular power or swear on oath of military allegiance.
He is serving his term in Tver.
Compulsory labour involves working at a site designated by the authorities, where prisoners are under surveillance and restricted in their movements.
Amnesty International believes that the restrictions placed on prisoners of conscience doing compulsory labour are analogous to imprisonment and therefore urges that they be immediately and unconditionally released.
Conscientious objection to military service is recognised by the United Nations as a legitimate exercise of the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion.
Although the right to conscientious objection has been increasingly recognised in Russia in recent years, no concrete legislative steps have been taken to address the situation of conscientious objectors.
A draft law providing a civilian alternative service is still awaiting parliamentary approval, as is a draft criminal code which states implicitly that those who have evaded military service as a consequence of their religious or pacifist convictions are not liable to prosecution.
But as yet, there is no alternative to military service in Russia, and conscription is obligatory for every able-bodied male aged between 18 and 27.