

10 October 1992 PWEI * DENIM * LEMONHEADS * NEW FADS * GO!
DISCS RADIOHEAD * JACOB'S MOUSE * AFGHAN WHIGS * PULP DAISY CHAINSAW * JOYRIDERS * and, ulp, THE SEVENTIES Huge, ever-growing, pulsating 72-page issue from the centre of the universe JOHN PEEL reviews ‘RUBY TRAX’ Plus: how to get it!
‘Any old ‘Iron’?’
The dreadful BOB MARLEY industry You dirty, filthy bastards EMF cry fowl!
NEW MUSICAL EXPRESS Constellation prizes FREE!
The final suit of our unique rock playing cards THE ORB Dance side of the moon
NEWS
News Editor: IESTYN GEORGE
REMain unseen
REM have pulled their scheduled low-key London appearance supporting Robyn Hitchcock And The Egyptians, due to overwhelming ticket demand from fans.
The Hitchcock show, which takes place at Islington Powerhaus on October 17 (billed as a benefit for Bosnian Refugee Relief), was to feature performances by The Soft Boys and Peter Buck.
NME was tipped off last week that REM were planning to play an unannounced set with Buck and subsequent reports led to a rush for tickets, described by one insider as ‘absolutely frantic.’
Official spokespeople claim the band had not planned to perform on the night, although NME 's source said: ‘They were definitely going to do the gig, but it was pulled at the first sign of the news breaking.’
Anyone wishing to obtain a ticket refund should call the Mean Fiddler Credit Card Hotline 
STOP PRESS: GLEN MATLOCK is threatening to sue the SEX PISTOLS over the new promo video for ‘Anarchy In The UK’, which he alleges ‘infringes his moral rights’.
The Pistols' label Virgin received a demand from Matlock for a substantial sum of money as NME went to press.
A spokesperson said: ‘Glen is furious that the new ‘Anarchy’ promo features footage of Sid Vicious as well as himself.
However, Matlock relinquished all control over Pistols material several years ago.’
Matlock's action will not affect the Pistols' reunion.
The Pistols' spokesperson told NME : ‘Glen was only ever an outside contender for bass player in the re-formed line up.’
John Lydon commented: ‘People and their egos!
I should have just pressed the erase button.’
UnHappy Mondays
HAPPY MONDAYS may be taking a two-year break after their forthcoming UK tour, according to singer Shaun Ryder (right).
Ryder has spoken to NME about the pressures of touring the last LP, ‘Pills 'N' Thrills And Bellyaches’, recording their new LP ‘…
Yes Please’ and problems within the Mondays taking their toll over the last year-and-a-half.
‘I'm really proud of how everybody in our band are friends and still get on.
To keep that, I'm quite willing to split the band after this tour for two years and let us all get out and try different things.
We've been together a long time and people in the band like Paul and Mark and Gaz have a few things to prove themselves.
To keep us all happy and friendly and wanting to work together, I'd split us up for a while.’
Rumours of a split surfaced during the new album sessions, produced by Chris Frantz and Tina Weymouth at Blue Wave Studios in Barbados earlier this year.
Ryder, whose long-standing drug problems worsened dramatically during their stay on the island, is rumoured to have sacked guitarist Mark Day at one point, claiming he would be replaced by Johnny Marr.
Day returned to the fold the following day.
Now, there are clear indications that the group's relationship with Ryder has deteriorated and insiders claim the singer feels the rest of the band have ‘ego problems’.
The group's tour with Stereo MC's kicks off in Leicester this Saturday.
Can't stop the Madness
MADNESS have finally confirmed their recent reformation is permanent, with the announcement of six Christmas shows.
The band play .
A number of special guests are expected to be announced in the coming weeks.
As exclusively reported in NME in August, the band announced their farewell weekend shows at London's Finsbury Park while making initial plans to tour in December.
They were also sighted at a London recording studio preparing new material scheduled for release early next year.
A spokesperson for the group told NME : ‘The amount of interest generated by their Madstock weekender was beyond the band's wildest dreams.
They've turned down several lucrative offers to reform in the past, but feel that now is the time for fans outside London to get a chance to see them in the flesh.’
He declined to be drawn on the group's specific release plans, despite word that an album of remixes is imminent.
THE SMITHS issue ‘There Is A Light That Never Goes Out’, never previously released as a single.
Seven-inch and cassette formats are backed with a live rendition of ‘Handsome Devil’.
Two CD formats are also available.
The first features ‘Money Changes Everything’ and ‘Some Girls Are Bigger Than Others’and ‘Hand In Glove’recorded live, while the second boasts two tracks recorded with Sandie Shaw —.
All out on WEA on Oct 12.
Mary Chain unplugged
JESUS AND MARY CHAIN look likely to follow their fifth LP, ‘Honey's Dead’, with a new, mainly acoustic album, featuring astonishing special guest cameos.
NME understands that Jim and William Reid have already approached '60s singer/songwriter and cult legend Lee Hazelwood, who has agreed to contribute guest vocals to the LP.
Hazelwood, cited as an influence by many Creation bands, topped the UK charts with ‘Did You Ever’, a duet recorded with Nancy Sinatra.
However, Hazelwood's most recent solo LP ‘Poet, Fool Or Bum’ received the verdict ‘Bum’in the NME .
Meanwhile, insider sources suggest that Hazelwood is meeting with long-time friend Bob Dylan, to discuss the possibility of Dylan also contributing to the new Mary Chain LP.
NME understands that the Reid brothers have contributed to Shane MacGowan's new acoustic solo material, recorded this spring.
Did you ever?…
Lee Hazelwood to join JAMC
SUEDE's past has come back to haunt them in the form of a former business associate with whom they had dealings before signing to the Nude label.
NME understands the fledgling Suede recorded a single for a Brighton-based acquaintance of bass player Mat Osman, who was keen to found a record label.
However, the ‘label boss’ allegedly refused to issue the single unless Suede signed a seven-album deal.
The band could not agree these terms, so the track was never released.
Insiders suggest the Brighton party is now demanding the sum of £60,000 from Suede, and plans to issue the single should the band refuse to pay up.
Spokesmen for Suede issued a terse ‘no comment’, when questioned about the issue last week.
Cope de-pressed over album hold up
JULIAN COPE's eagerly-awaited ‘Jehovakill’ LP has run into trouble, with pressing plants refusing to deal with the album because of its controversial title.
Cope's own sleevenotes have also caused outrage, containing vitriolic attacks on Axl Rose and U2, among others.
The 16-track LP is released by Island on October 19 on CD, cassette and three-sided vinyl.
Cope's insistence on pressing all formats in a specific shade of blue led to a nationwide hunt for an appropriate plant.
One was finally found in Wales, but the company refused to deal with a record which might cause offence to people on religious grounds.
Cope attacks Guns N' Roses in the sleevenotes, describing them as ‘homophobics in puff gear’.
A press advert for his current EP, ‘Fear Loves This Place’, made further allegations concerning Axl Rose's duet with Elton John at the Freddie Mercury tribute concert earlier this summer and questioned U2's commitment to the anti-nuclear lobby.
The ad has been subsequently withdrawn from a number of magazines because of the fear of possible legal action under libel laws.
Julian gives up the hunt for that elusive pressing plant
MADONNA is the latest high profile performer to have been cited by US presidential candidate Bill Clinton in his quest to court young voters.
Governor Clinton, who granted Bono a private audience, and has also been interviewed on MTV by Megadeth's Dave Mustaine, received the endorsement of the official Madonna Fan Club Of West Hollywood.
‘I just want to thank my lucky stars,’ Clinton said in a subsequent statement.
‘I think this endorsement sends a loud and clear message to the Bush-Quayle campaign: Poppy, don't preach.’
Meanwhile, former Pink Floyd member Roger Waters has attacked Madonna in the most recent issue of Details magazine: ‘What's extraordinary about Madonna is that she's made all these rotten records, and she's this awful, ugly, dull person who — by virtue of the fact that she's completely fearless and shameless and blatant and cheap and bad — has become successful,’ he says.
‘She develops this grandiose theory of herself as being important, and makes Truth Or Dare which I saw a couple of minutes of but had to stop watching because it was so unpleasant and embarrassing and awful.
It's like she had a multi-barrelled gun, and hasn't just shot herself in the foot, but shot herself everywhere and blown her own head off, and no-one seems to have noticed.
I find that quite incredible.’
Madonna's new ‘Erotica’ LP is issued through the Maverick/Warner label on October 19.
Strange Fredfellows
ST ETIENNE, THE ROCKINGBIRDS and FLOWERED UP have announced final details of their Right Said Fred covers EP.
The three Heavenly groups, all of whom are fans of the chart-topping group, were inspired to record ‘The Fred EP’ after Flowered Up covered ‘Don't Talk Just Kiss’for a Channel 4 music TV pilot show.
The EP contains The Rockingbirds' rendition of ‘Deeply Dippy’, Flowered Up's ‘Don't Talk Just Kiss’ and St Etienne's cover of ‘I'm Too Sexy’, which features Pete Wiggs' vocals and improvised lyrics such as‘I'm too Shakey for my Stevens’!
All proceeds from the EP, including Right Said Fred's publishing royalties, are to be donated to the Terrence Higgins Trust.
The EP is issued through the Heavenly label on October 26.
Fairbrassin' about: Flowered Up, St Etienne and The Rockingbirds keep their hand in
After Madstock, Sexstock?
THE SEX PISTOLS are to play their first reunion show in the UK on a major outdoor site next year.
The group were originally expected to tour in support of their ‘best of’ LP, ‘Kiss This’, which is issued through Virgin this week.
However, sources close to the band told NME , the Pistols are keen to play one show at an outdoor venue rather than a conventional tour, and are talking to UK promoters this week.
‘Preparations for a concert on the same scale as Madness in Finsbury Park, including securing a licence from the local council, will take several months,’ said the source.
‘And of course the Pistols will have to wait for the return of better weather.’
Meanwhile, the Sex Pistols' re-enactment of their legendary 1977 boat trip on the Thames, coinciding with the state opening of Parliament on October 17, will go ahead with or without Steve Jones.
The Pistols' guitarist, currently resident in America, has not returned to the UK for several years.
Jones fears his criminal record pre-dating Pistols days might be used by US Immigration to prevent him returning to the States.
Legal representatives for Virgin are, however, attempting to clarify Jones' status so the guitarist may join the reunion.
A spokesperson for the Pistols told NME this week: ‘The boat trip will go ahead, regardless of the fact that Steve may not, at this time, be in a position to join the band.
However, in an ideal world, the Sex Pistols would play on the boat.’
EMF have strenuously denied stories suggesting they are to split after their current UK tour.
Questions about the band's future were fuelled by a Derry Brownson quote featured in the Daily Mirror which originated in a European magazine: ‘We may not be around much longer.
We've never looked on EMF as a career.
If we carry on too long, there's a danger we'll end up like every other useless, boring band in the charts.’
However, a spokesman for the band assured NME this week: ‘EMF have no plans to split up.
They're closer now than they ever have been.
Derry's quote was taken out of context — the interview from which that quote was lifted was a very light-hearted affair.’
THE POGUES precede their sold-out show as part of the Mean Fiddler Tenth Anniversary Celebrations next month with dates at .
The band will appear as a seven-piece to preview material from their forthcoming album, not expected until next summer.
SUEDE, CARTER USM, BABES IN TOYLAND and TEENAGE FANCLUB appear on a new Beechwood compilation LP.
‘Best Of Independent Top 20’ features highlights from the five previous Beechwood compilations, including Lush's ‘For Love’, The Breeders' ‘Do You Love Me Now’, and Spiritualized's ‘Run’.
The album is issued on limited-edition double LP, CD and double cassette format through Beechwood on October 5.
THE FUTURE SOUND OF LONDON, the London-based dub house duo whose ‘Papua New Guinea’ single is a prime contender for dance single of the year, have signed to the Virgin label.
The group were snapped up following the release of their acclaimed ‘Accelerator’ LP on the Jumpin' And Pumpin' label.
The signing is the first step in the re-building of Virgin's roster, halved from 150 to 70 bands following the company's takeover by EMI earlier this year.
THE SUGARCUBES have a 13-track compilation of remixes issued through One Little Indian this week.
The band's final album, titled ‘It's It’ is available as a limited-edition double CD in addition to LP and cassette formats, and features a Tony Humphries mix of ‘Hit’and Graham Massey's re-working of ‘Planet’, in addition to Justin Robertson and Tommy D's ‘Birthday’.
Censors working overtime
THE INTELLIGENT HOODLUM's rapper Tragedy and FU2 are the latest acts to be pressurised into self-censorship, as the US music industry closes ranks in the wake of the recent Body Count controversy.
Tragedy has been instructed by his record company, A&M, to take his song ‘Bullet’ from the group's forthcoming album ‘Black Range’, fearing that its inclusion would prompt an outcry among prominent US censorship campaigners.
FU2, meanwhile, have locked horns with their record company over their track ‘No Head, No Backstage Pass’.
Employees at MCA are rumoured to have refused to work on promoting and marketing the track, forcing the group to change its lyrics and title to ‘I Said No Backstage Pass’.
Metallica's tour KO
METALLICA are likely to only just break even on their double-header US stadium tour with Guns N' Roses following guitarist James Hetfield's recent injury.
US sources suggest that the band are obliged to pay out a sum of $2.5 million in retainers to 150 crew members, due to a clause stating that any band responsible for delays must pay for them.
Therefore Metallica are allegedly liable for all production staff wages during a hiatus in the tour after singer James Hetfield sustained serious burns in an onstage accident.
Meanwhile, as previously announced, Metallica's UK tour begins next week at .
Hetfield: injured in the pocket?
HOL: Sorry is…a free single
THE HOUSE OF LOVE have rescheduled their one-off London date originally postponed from September and plan to give away a limited-edition single featuring a previously unreleased ten-minute track at the show.
The band play London's Royal Albert Hall on November 20 — their last UK appearance this year.
The show was originally scheduled for September 24, but was pulled due to European touring commitments.
The band are expected to perform two sets on the night and a number of special guests will be announced in the coming weeks.
Each fan attending the show will receive a free single featuring ‘Into The Tunnel’, a song originally recorded for a Peel session track last year.
Those holding tickets for the pulled September show are asked to exchange them at the point of purchase.
Meanwhile, Chadwick and co are expected to follow last summer's ‘Babe Rainbow’ LP with a single before the end of the year.
House Of Love prepare for their ‘Babe’ symphony at the Royal Albert
SEBADOH release a nine-track album titled ‘Sebadoh Vs Helmet’, featuring covers of Nick Drake's ‘Pink Moon’ and The Byrds' ‘Everybody's Been Burned’, in addition to a re-recorded version of their own ‘Brand New Love’, recently covered by Superchunk on their ‘Tossing Seeds’compilation.
The LP, intended as a companion to their recent indie hit ‘Rocking The Forest’, is issued through the 20/20 label on October 19.
The band are currently scheduling a series of autumn dates in the UK, details of which are expected to be announced within the next two weeks.
US NEWS
ICE-T and BODY COUNT, who replaced Faith No More as the opening act on the Metallica/GN'R US tour, have been bumped from the Los Angeles area dates.
Concert promoter Brian Murphy ‘vetoed’ the rapper's September 27 and October 3 appearances at the two LA venues claiming Body Count are ‘an inappropriate act, given the circumstances of where our show was taking place’.
The September 27 show took place at the Los Angeles Coliseum, situated in downtown LA, which was badly hit in the April riots.
Murphy told The Lost Angeles Times that he had no fear of violence, but was concerned that the controversy surrounding Body Count's ‘Cop Killer’ track earlier this summer could hurt ticket sales.
Guns N'Roses' Axl Rose attacked the bumping of Body Count from the dates as ‘shallow-minded’.
‘Both Ice and myself are tired of all the racial crap,’ he told the LA Times .
‘This was our chance to play together and show people that we're about artistic expression, not violence or prejudice.’
Ice-T has not yet commented on the situation, but Body Count's manager, Jorge Hinojosa, said ‘We're glad to be doing the dates we are on the tour’.
Body Count are playing at least five shows with the rock bands.
TIME WARNER, Ice-T and Body Count's label, is producing a public television special to discuss issues raised by the uproar over ‘Cop Killer’.
Popular Culture: Rage, Rights And Responsibility airs in the US in December.
It will take the format of a forum with a panel including Ice-T and moderated by Harvard University law professor Charles Ogletree.
The special will be distributed free of charge to US schools.
U2 were visited in Chicago by Democratic presidential nominee Bill Clinton.
Clinton had recently spoken with band members on a national radio phone-in show, but happened to be in Chicago at a campaign stop the same day U2 were playing in town.
REM's Mike Mills says the band won't tour in support of their upcoming album.
Mills doesn't expect REM to go on the road until after their 1993 record is released.
By that time, the band will have three albums' worth of material they'll have never played live.
MADONNA appears in the new US Vogue magazine in a variety of retro '60s fashions, including neo-Janis Joplin gear, hip-hugger bell-bottoms, and an almost see-through top costing $800.
In the accompanying story Madonna describes fans who hang around outside her New York apartment as ‘not very bright’.
She also advised women not to sleep with their boyfriends ‘for the first five dates’.
JOHN LENNON's Academy Award, won in 1971 for the song ‘Let It Be’, will be auctioned in New York on October 5.
The Oscar is being sold by an unidentified collector, and is expected to fetch $100,000.
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN pulled out of an MTV Unplugged acoustic concert in Los Angeles on September 22.
After a rehearsal, Springsteen decided he felt more comfortable with an electric format, so he and his band played a three-hour show for 500 guests.
The show, which may be retitled Plugged or Bruce With Juice , will air in the US on November 11.
FRANK ZAPPA, suffering from prostate cancer, has cancelled appearances in Berlin and Vienna to return to the US for treatment.
A spokesman said Zappa was ‘feeling very bad’ when he left Germany.
Zappa later told the Associated Press, ‘I was in bad shape, but I'm better now.
I'm not in a hospital, I'm in my kitchen…
I'm not dead…
I have no intention of checking out any time this week or within the foreseeable future.’
PEARL JAM played a free concert in Seattle's Magnusson Park to encourage people to register to vote in November's US presidential election.
The show, which cost the band $100,000, had been postponed from last May after objections from Seattle's city council.
29,000 people saw Chris Novoselic and Dave Grohl from Nirvana join Pearl Jam onstage, putting rumours of a feud between the bands firmly to rest.
MESSIAH signed a major US deal with Def American last week, in the middle of the desert outside Los Angeles.
The band, who've cultivated a massive underground following in California, look set to issue their debut album ‘Beyond Good And Evil’ next January.
Sampled Notes
MARC ALMOND will attend his fan club's sixth official convention at London Astoria on October 18 from 4pm to 10pm.
Tickets, priced £9 for the convention, are available from Tiger,.
Cheques should be made payable to ID Glasson, and an SAE enclosed with each order.
DEBBI PETERSON, former Bangles member, and ex-River City People vocalist Siobhan Maker have formed a new band, KINDRED SPIRIT, whose debut single, ‘Here In My Eyes’, is issued through EMI this week.
FAT RAIN PROMOTIONS are set to open a new music venue in Stoke-On-Trent at the 1,100 capacity Leisure Bowl.
Promoters Tim Everett and Richard Corfield, formerly of The Vapour Club in Telford, are planning to book live bands to appear on Thursdays.
Groups interested in playing should contact Tim on 
CATWALK have parted company with the Dedicated label after two singles.
The band, led by former music journalist Chris Roberts, are currently considering offers from several other labels.
TORI AMOS has a new video,Little Earthquakes , issued through Warner Music Vision on November 2.
The video features promo clips in addition to live, interview and behind-the-scenes footage.
BOBBY BROWN makes his first appearance in the UK for over three years in London at HMV, Oxford Circus, on Monday October 5 at 5.30pm.
Some 2,000 fans turned out at Brown's last HMV in-store in 1989, jamming traffic in surrounding streets for several hours.
As previously announced, the former New Edition member and husband of Whitney Houston issues a new single, ‘Good Enough’, through MCA this week.
FUDGE TUNNEL, HOLY JOY and BACK TO THE PLANET are among bands confirmed to appear at London's Smashed!
Indie club over the coming weeks.
Full line-up at the club, which takes place at Islington Powerhaus on Wednesday nights, is  Admission is £5 before 11pm, £4 after 11pm, and £3 after 11pm with a Smashed! flyer.
CORNERSHOP, the Anglo-Asian band from Leicester who've recently taken to burning Morrissey posters onstage and performing ironic covers of ‘Bengali In Platforms’ and ‘Asian Rut’, play their debut London show at the Camden Falcon on October 17.
The group's first single is scheduled for release the same day.
MEGA CITY FOUR, THE HINNIES and TABITHA ZU are among the bands featured on The Gig , a new ITV series starting on Saturday, October 17 at 12.30am.
The first of the eight programmes comes from Glasgow's Tunnel Club and features Marcha Fresca, Betterways and Smile.
ANTHONY H WILSON, JANET STREET PORTER and SIMON FRITH are among the speakers at a conference on The Future Of Music On Television, taking place at Birmingham International Film And Television Festival on October 9 and 10.
Covering the rumoured demise of Top Of The Pops , the relationship between programme makers and the music industry and several other topics, the event is part of the city's Sounds Like Birmingham (Year Of Music 1992) festivities.
HOLY JOY, VIC GODARD and JACOB'S MOUSE are among the bands contributing tracks to forthcoming Rough Trade Singles Club mail order releases.
Despite being four months behind schedule, Butterfly Child's ‘Juice’ /‘Man And Woman’45 (originally planned for release in May) will be followed by .
Other planned releases are expected from Medicine, Mazzy Star, Pavement, The Auteurs and Papa Sprain.
Johnny Brown meets the Holy Joy Fan Club (Lithuanian branch)
RECORD NEWS
45s
A HOUSE: ‘Sampler’
limited edition of 1,000 on seven-inch only featuring ‘Second Wind’ from the band's forthcoming LP, plus two tracks recorded live at Feile, ‘When I First Saw You’and ‘I Want To Kill You’, available by mail order only priced £1 from 
ARCWELDER: ‘Favor’
Minneapolis-based buzz-pop trio issue their recent NME SOTW
NEIL ARTHUR: ‘One Day, One Time’
former Blancmange frontman issues his debut solo single, backed with the neatly titled ‘Going Round In Triangles’
BANG BANG MACHINE: ‘Evil Circus EP’
sugary guitar pop four-track including a cover of Jane's Addiction's ‘Jayne Says’
THE BEATLES: ‘Love Me Do’
their debut single reissued on limited edition CD and seven-inch format, 30 years to the day after it was originally released
THE BELLTOWER: ‘Outshine The Sun’
chiming Terry Bickers-produced debut EP reissued in the wake of strenuous rumours suggesting the band are to split up
BIZARRE INC: ‘I'm Gonna Get You’
house unit issue their first new single since their Top Ten debut ‘Playing With Knives’ 12 months ago, featuring guest vocalist Angie Brown
CRACK HOUSE: ‘Crack Baby’
three-minute noise globule which sold out instantly when it was originally released, following extensive Peel play
DEEE-LITE: ‘Thank You Everyday’
sampladelic cut from the trio's second LP ‘Infinitely Within’, remixed in four different forms
FLAIR: ‘Stopping Train’
London-based Gary Crowley GLR ‘Demo Clash’ winners make their four-track debut on CD only
ERMA FRANKLIN: ‘(Take A Little) Piece of My Heart’
ripe and raw classic reissued in the wake of its use in the current Levi's jeans TV commercial
THE GOD MACHINE: ‘Ego’
three-track power-teaser from the band's forthcoming debut LP, to follow their recent 30-minute marathon 45 ‘The Desert Song’
HUGGY BEAR: ‘Rubbing The Impossible To Burst’
London based five-piece issue their rude, angry three-track debut EP
LEMONHEADS: ‘It's A Shame About Ray’
title track from the US laze-rock unit's most recent LP, issued to coincide with an October tour of the UK
MARXMAN: ‘Ship Ahoy’
political Celtic outfit blend traditional Irish melody and rap, in collaboration with Sinead O'Connor
MEDALARK 11: ‘I Call Your Name’
former Bodines leader Mick Ryan launches his new three piece outfit with a twee, Chris Nagle-produced debut
THE MISSION: ‘Shades Of Green’
Utah Saints and Mark Saunders remixes of a cut from Wayne Hussey and co's recent ‘Mask’ LP
PERSPEX WHITEOUT: ‘Hey Girl’
guitar-fascinated Glaswegian combo issue their third single, a re-working of a track featured on their deleted debut
SHAKESPEAR'S SISTER: ‘Hello (Turn Your Radio On)’
Alan Moulder and Dave Stewart remixes of a track from the ‘Hormonally Yours’ LP, backed with a new mix of ‘Stay’
STATUS QUO: ‘Roadhouse Medley (Anniversary Waltz Part 25’
recorded live in front of 125,000 people at the band's August Party In The Park show, and also featured on the band's forthcoming LP ‘Live Alive Quo’
STEREOLAB: ‘Low Fi’
Brixton-based tingling indie unit follow their recent debut LP ‘Peng!’ with a fresh four-track EP
ROD STEWART: ‘You Wear It Well’
'70s tartan army standard re-released in the wake of its use in the current Boots 17 TV commercial
SUNSCREEM: ‘Perfect Motion’
Balearic house unit follow their Top 30 debut, ‘Love U More’, with a second 45 featuring Leftfield, Farley/Heller, Carl Cox and Wizard Of Oz remixes
THE SWEETEST ACHE: ‘I Remember Caroline’
Swansea indie kids offer their most recent winsome work-out
TH' FAITH HEALERS: ‘Mr Litnanski’
four-track EP featuring a re-recorded version of ‘Reptile Smile’
VERVE: ‘Gravity Grave’
Wigan-based glamour unit's languorous third single, backed with three exclusive live tracks
LPs
THE BLUE AEROPLANES: ‘FriendLoverPlane (Up In A Down World)’
18-track compilation of fresh, archive and rare material unavailable since the band signed with Ensign two years ago
BOB GELDOF: ‘The Happy Club’
Breakfast Bob explores the male menopause in the company of the same core of musicians featured on ‘The Vegetarians Of Love’ LP
INSPIRAL CARPETS: ‘Revenge Of The Goldfish’
Manchester baggy survivors offer their third LP, featuring singles ‘Dragging Me Down’, ‘Two Worlds Collide’ and ‘Generations’among the ten tracks
THE JAYHAWKS: ‘Hollywood Town Hall’
Minneapolis country rock four-piece's debut for the label, produced by George Drakoulis, whose credits include both Black Crowes LPs
NINE INCH NAILS: ‘Broken’
dazzling neo-industrial six-track mini-LP ‘secretly recorded in a variety of locations without the permission of the record label to ensure it could fester without divine intervention’, according to vocalist Trent Reznor
THE POLICE: ‘The Police Greatest Hits’
16-track compilation featuring their five Number Ones, and two previously unreleased tracks, ‘Tea In The Sahara’ and ‘Bed's Too Big Without You’
PSYCHIC TV: ‘Dreams Less Sweet’
only reissue of Genesis P Orridge's 1983 LP, recorded using Hugo Zuccarelli's ‘holophonic 30 sound’ technique
REM: ‘Automatic For The People’
Michael Stipe and co follow their multi-million selling ‘Out Of Time’ LP with a largely acoustic-based ode to the Grim Reaper
THE SAW DOCTORS: ‘All The Way From Tuam’
designer bogmen, with an extraordinary track record in their native Ireland, issue their debut for the label
SCREAMING TREES: ‘Sweet Oblivion’
Pearl Jam-esque, Bad Company-fascinated US stodge rockers follow their major label debut, ‘Uncle Anesthesia’
STEREO MC'S: ‘Connected’
socially conscious Brit rap unit follow their groovy Top 30 ‘Connected’ 45 with a third 12-track LP
VARIOUS: ‘Gas Food Lodging’
soundtrack from Allison Anders' big screen debut, featuring contributions by J Mascis, Barry Adamson and Nick Cave among 25 tracks
VEGAS: ‘Vegas’
eponymous debut of ex-Eurythmic Dave Stewart and ex-Special, ex-Fun Boy Three and ex-Colourfieldman Terry Hall's collaborative project, featuring the current Top 40 single ‘Possessed’
DWIGHT YOAKAM: ‘La Crois D'Amour’
collection of the contemporary country star's old, rare, remixed material plus five new tracks
GALLON DRUNK: ‘Bedlam’ London swamp unit follow their two previous indie Number Ones, ‘Some Fool's Mess’and ‘Last Gasp’.
The track is backed with covers of Lee Hazelwood's ‘Look At That Woman’ and Andy Williams ‘Solitaire’, recorded in collaboration with local four-piece The Mark Isted Baroque Ensemble
THE FRANK & WALTERS: ‘Trains Boats And Planes Cork trio (below) offer their 11-track debut LP, featuring Top 50 singles ‘This Is Not A Song’ and ‘Happy Busman’, three tracks from ‘EP1’and ‘EP2’, plus six new songs
TOUR NEWS
ACTION SWINGERS, New York grungers signed to Wiiija, appear at 
ANNA PALM, stormy violin virtuoso whose ‘Love Me’ LP is out now on One Little Indian, supports Snap at 
TASMIN ARCHER, Bradford-born singer whose ‘Sleeping Satellite’ 45 is currently resident in the Top Ten, supports Curtis Stigers at 
BLAMMO!, whose Imaginary 45, ‘I Love Sharon’, is imminent, appear at 
CUD have added an extra date to their forthcoming UK tour at Peterborough Academy and move their York show from The Hideaway to York University.
THE CYGNET RING, earnest pop folk, embark on the second part of their Hopeful Monsters tour, which calls in at 
CHAPTER AND THE VERSE, whose second album, ‘Renewed Testament’ is released this week, play 
CHIMERA, thoughtful Irish guitar band, perform an acoustic set at Belfast's Rotterdam Bar on October 12.
D-INFLUENCE, rising London-based dance quartet, back the release of their ‘No Illusions’ 45 on east west with a date at London's Subterania and a support slot with The James Taylor Quartet at Bradford University.
THE DARLING BUDS, whose ‘Erotica’ LP is out now on Epic, follow their recent stint supporting Kitchens Of Distinction with dates at 
8 STOREY WINDOW, recent signings to the Ultimate label, play  with the Rockingbirds.
TH' FAITH HEALERS, Too Pure guitar outfit whose ‘Mr Litnanski’ EP is out now, play 
THE FRANK & WALTERS launch Cardiff Terminal 396, a new venue featuring live music, comedy and club nights, at the city's Cardiff University Union on October 16.
FREEFALLING, formed from the ashes of indie guitar folk Dean Dwyer, play 
GALLON DRUNK, who issue their ‘Bedlam’ 45 next Monday featuring trumpeting former Higson Terry Edwards, interrupt their US tour supporting Morrissey to play London ULU on October 9, supported by Th' Faith Healers and The Mambo Taxis.
THE GOD MACHINE, whose new three-track single, led by ‘Ego’, is released by Fiction this week, play 
HERBIE HANCOCK, TONY WILLIAMS and WAYNE SHORTER, three of the original 1963 Miles Davis Quintet, join forces with former Jazz Messenger WALLACE RONEY and DAVE HOLLAND for a tribute concert at London's Royal Albert Hall on October 29 and 30.
JOINT EFFORT, MARCEL ARSEOLE and CASEY JONES star in ‘Up North’, a night of northern comedy and entertainment taking place at London's Greenwich ‘Up The Creek’ Comedy Club tonight
K CREATIVE plug tracks from their current Talkin' Loud LP ‘QED’ at 
NEUROSIS, Californian grindcore specialists, plug their current Alternative Tentacles LP ‘Souls at Zero’ at 
ORBITAL, SHEEP ON DRUGS, Ozric Tentacles' dance offshoot EAT STATIC and MUTAGEN play Club Megadog at London's Holloway Road Rocket on November 9.
KEROSENE, West Didsbury outfit recently snapped up by the Dead Dead Good label, play 
M-PEOPLE, Hacienda DJ Mike Pickering's dance collective, precede next month's reissue of their debut album ‘Northern Soul’ on deConstruction with dates at 
PITCH SHIFTER, Nottingham-based thrash folk, perform tracks from their Earache mini-LP ‘Submit’ at 
POWER OF DREAMS, no longer signed, play London's Camden Palace Feet First on October 13.
STEREOLAB continue to promote their Too Pure single release ‘Low Fi’ with Irish dates at 
STRANGELOVE follow the recording of their debut single with their first London headline show at 
THROWING MUSES follow their sold-out show at the Town & Country Club last month with a couple of more intimate shows at London's Clapham Grand on October 8 and 9.
Support on the first night is provided by Dutch quartet Bettie Serveert, while Kristin Hersh plays an acoustic set the following evening.
THE ROCKINGBIRDS have announced further dates on their seemingly never-ending UK tour, playing 
SHARKBOY, new Brighton band currently causing a stir in A&R circles, play 
STARLINGS, serrated guitar outfit fronted by wayward Kiwi Chris Sheehan, promote their Anxious LP ‘Valid’ with dates at 
TRIBAL DRIFT, LUNARCI, BARK PSYCHOSIS and the SHAKRA SOUND and ZION TRAIN sound systems are among the attractions at Tribal Village III, an all-night benefit for Survival International at 
VERVE, whose latest slice of crazed psychedelia, ‘Gravity Grave’, is out this week, appear at 
JAH WOBBLE'S INVADERS OF THE HEART support legendary jazz-soul figure Gil Scott Heron at Brighton's Event on October 16.
PULP (singer Jarvis above), whose latest slice of warped pop, ‘Babies’, is released on Gift this week, have added a number of dates to their current tour, playing 
ADORABLE (singer Piotr above), Creation's great pop hope, whose ‘Homeboy’ 45 is released on October 26, play 
THRILLS
EDITED BY STUART MACONIE
THRILLS BELIEVE IT OR NOT
Gravel-voiced singer TOM WAITS has a collection of jars of mud taken from various rock festivals
The village of FUDGE TUNNEL, Cambridgeshire, are  suing the grunge-rockers of the same name for ‘appropriating their name without consent’.
Disgraced minister DAVID MELLOR can be seen on the cover of ED BANGER AND THE NOSEBLEEDS ‘Ain't Been To No Music School’ single.
RADIO ARSE is the name of Turkey's state radio network
THE SHAMEN's MR C's real name is Blair Carshalton-Humphreys
It takes an education of millions to hold them back at…
PROFESSOR ENO'S POP SCHOOL!
(SCENE: A classroom littered with paper darts, caricatures of the tonsorially-challenged and broken Game Boys.
THE FRANK & WALTERS are using MORRISSEY as a shinty stick and BETTY BOO is exchanging make-up tips with RICHEY MANIC.
PROFESSOR ENO comes in, looking stern.)
PROF ENO:
Good morning, class.
THE CLASS:
Yo!
Prof!
Radical!
Etc!
(ENO throws a copy of Music Week onto the desk)
ENO:
Grave news indeed, class.
The chart results have come in…
DERRY FROM EMF:
Who's charted?
Ha ha!
CLINT POPPIE:
It wasn't me!
Ha Ha.
PROF ENO:
No, and that's what I want to talk about, Clint.
Some members of this class haven't been pulling their weight.
CLINT:
We went in at 35, sir!
It's our best placing yet!
BRYAN ADAMS:
35!
That's pathetic!
Isn't it, sir?
MIKI FROM LUSH:
Creep!
Lumberjack!
PROF ENO:
That's enough, Miki.
We can't all be unsuccessful Curve soundalikes, can we?
CLINT:
Why not, sir?
Curve can!
(Much merriment.
PROF ENO silences CLINT with a well-aimed JESUS JONES CD)
PROF ENO:
Now, I've got some of your demos back and it's easy to see where the problem lies.
You're all crap.
SINEAD O'CONNOR:
We are the heck not!
Haven't I been after having a Number One record just the other, um, year?
PROF ENO:
Ah yes, Sinead.
Your otherwise excellent cover version album was sadly marred by a long speech detailing how annoying it is that the price of eggs has gone up in Narodny-Karabakh.
SINEAD:
Fascist!
Lesbian!
Woodworm!
PROF ENO:
Now I know times are hard — just being indie dance isn't enough.
I mean, if I get any more songs submitted to me with a manky old Soul II Soul drum beat on them, I'll be very angry indeed.
CLINT, POPPIE, I AM TALKING TO YOU!
CLINT:
Sorry, sir…
I was just thinking, though.
PROF ENO:
I doubt that, Clint.
I doubt that very much.
But pray…shock us all.
Share your thought with the class — if, ha ha, it will bear up to the glaring light of day.
CLINT:
Well, sir, I was thinking…it's not just us what are unburdened by chart success, is it?
PROF ENO:
Um…let's move on, shall we?
Open your books at page…
CLINT:
I mean, playing the piano on ‘Virginia Plain’ in 1972…
It's hardly a chart career of great note is it?
‘Music For Toilets’, that was a biggie — I don't think!
SHAUN RYDER:
Yeah!
Debag the Prof!
(The class rise as one and remove PROF ENO's clothing.
CARTER write a song about it called ‘Eno's Where His Trousers Of The Holy Cow And Gates Of The Westworld Of Twisting My Lemonhead Went’ and it goes to Number One.
Ironic, eh?)
Eno evil, see no evil
‘BIG MOUTH’
‘Axl Rose is the new Diana Ross.
He was wearing this sequinned top that looked like a dress I saw Diana wear about three years ago.’
Pearl Jam bassist Jeff Ament
‘After Dirty Harry I used to have guys pull up next to me and say: ‘Hey!
Call me asshole like you did in the picture.’’
Clint Eastwood
‘I'm into Prince, fast cards, my chest and reading Viz .
But what I really like is girls with small feet.’
Brian Harvey of East 17
‘Hitler was the first rock star — the first to use a light show.
I collected Nazi memorabilia because they were the baddest guys ever and I always liked bad guys.’
Lemmy
‘I told Philip Schofield that shagging a sheep on the edge of a cliff was better because they push back.
He was quite amused.’
Harley from The Darling Buds
‘With hip-hop, you're hard.
You sleep hard, you listen to hard music, watch hard telly programmes and don't visit the bathroom.’
Speech of Arrested Development 
Lemmy: bad guy, bad taste
MATERIAL WORLD
PULP
WHERE ARE YOU AND WHAT ARE THE VIBES LIKE?
We are in Norwich and the vibes are like shimmering shards of incandescent plywood
WHAT WAS THE LAST THING YOU ATE?
WHAT WAS THE LAST VIDEO YOU RENTED?
Girl On A Motorcycle and we still owe six pounds because we took it back late, so because of that we've had nothing since
WHAT WAS THE LAST GOOD BOOK YOU READ?
FAVE POLITICAL FIGURES
WHAT TV SHOWS DO YOU TRY NOT TO MISS?
WHAT SPORTS ARE YOU GOOD AT?
WHICH PUBLIC FIGURE DO YOU MOST DESPISE?
Sebastian Coe (he gives Sheffield a bad name — he stood for Parliament because he couldn't run for toffee)
FAVE TV SHOWS OF YESTERYEAR
MOST EMBARRASSING RECORDS IN YOUR COLLECTION
Ours, because our mothers insist on playing them when relatives and insurance salesmen come round
NAME THREE GREAT SONGWRITING PARTNERSHIPS
FAVE PUNK ROCK RECORDS
FAVE HISTORICAL CHARACTERS
Vlad The Impaler and The Whore Of Babylon
WORST LYRIC YOU'VE EVER HEARD
‘Kick yourself in the head/Pretty soon you will be dead…’
(‘Get A Life’— Julian Lennon)
WHO'S OVERRATED
WHO'S UNDERRATED?
WHO'S SEXY?
PUNCHLINE TO FAVE JOKE
‘Elvis Parsley’
WHERE WOULD YOU LIKE TO RETIRE TO?
NAME A RECORD THAT CAN MAKE YOU CRY
WHEN WERE YOU LAST DRUNK?
When we dressed up as a bottle
WHAT WAS THE LAST DREAM YOU CAN REMEMBER?
C:
Eating live cockroach sweets
R:
That Rotherham was a major international conference centre
J:
Sticking up toads at the top of my gran's cellar steps
S:
Being dressed in women's clothes at a disco
THREE RECORDS GUARANTEED TO MAKE YOU DANCE
WHAT WAS THE FIRST RECORD YOU HEARD?
FAVE FABRICS
MOTTO
‘That which does not destroy us makes us stronger’
HOMES OF THE RICH & FAMOUS
THIS WEEK: GUY CHADWICK'S ‘HOUSE OF LOVE’, MIDDLESEX
IT'S NOT too surprising to discover that House Of Love's mainman, Guy Chadwick lives in a house that is, literally, a house of love.
‘I'm incredibly romantic,’ said Guy when he greets me at his door holding a bunch of carnations in one hand and a book of poetry by John Keats in the other.
‘Look at my house.
It's literally a house of love!
Every room is painted in lovely pastel pinks and blues, and I don't have any toilets, because going to the toilet is horrible and unromantic.
Yeuch!
How much better it is to surround oneself with nice paintings of collie dogs and children, sunsets and young lovers holding hands…’
At the back of Guy's house, there is a purpose-built romantic landscape featuring two spectacular waterfalls and a permanent rainbow.
‘I bought the waterfalls off Lloyd Cole before he moved to America, and the rainbow was specially designed for me by a team of clever scientists.
If I wish, I can turn it off at night.
But I don't want to!
I simply must have it on all the time!’
Just in front of the house, there is a beautiful bed of roses.
‘It is beautiful, isn't it,’ says Guy.
‘But it's kind of sad, as well.
In winter, I dig all the roses up, and the bed is empty.
I suppose it's a metaphor for life, because life isn't always a bed of roses, either.’
On a final, poignant note, I notice a large arrow sticking through the front and rear of the house.
Pray explain, Mr Chadwick.
‘Oh, that!
There's a very interesting story behind that…but I can't remember what it is.’
‘Is it the actual arrow used by ABC in their hit song ‘Poison Arrow’?’
‘No, it's not that.
I think it just fell out of the sky, or something.’
ON ON ON
EDITED BY STEVE LAMACQ
•Enjoy nails up your nose, angle grinders and unbridled hate?
Then meet Nottingham grindcore nihilists PITCH SHIFTER.
Enjoy apple pie, Cheap Trick and soppy melancholy?
Try Boston sonic scrappers GIGOLO AUNTS
LIFE'S A PITCH
‘We made a T-shirt with a guy nailing a nail up his nose and I remember, in Czechoslovakia, I saw a guy do it.
He put five really thick swords down his mouth, then he nailed two six-inch nails up his nose.
And he sort of went, ‘da-da!’
And we said wow, that's exactly like our shirt!
That was really cool, really sick .’
John Clayden, vocalist for Nottingham grindcore industrial metallers PITCH SHIFTERS, makes me feel a tad queasy.
He's pretty ecstatic recalling his street encounter with a one-man horror circus on a recent European tour, but I just want to hold my stomach.
And nose.
Then again, to dabble with these monolithic gloom-riff nihilists — including bassist Mark Clayden and guitarists John Carter and Stuart Toolin — is to expect a penchant for extremes.
The driving force behind ‘Submit’, their bleak but darky wondrous mini-album, is hate.
Tons of it.
No end of woes get, erm, right up John's nose.
Apathy.
Social leeches.
Bigotry.
Vivisection.
Pornography.
Am I missing anything?
‘People who try to screw you for that extra ten pence,’ John offers.
‘You wanna go somewhere and you have to buy a ticket.
You've got £1.70, the ticket costs £1.72 and they won't give you the ticket.
You think — why?
Just let me have it.
‘General life is structured to  f— you off every day.
I think anger's a really positive energy if you use it in the right way.
Our first LP (1991's ‘Industrial’) was unbridled hate, ‘Submit’ is directed hate and the next LP is like, hate — with questions.’
Do you feel you fit into normal society?
‘Not particularly.
Obviously with this sort of music the ideas aren't going to be: ‘Yes, my girlfriend is a nurse and I would like a job in the pit’.
But we're not mad or anything.’
And what can we expect of the Pitch Shifter live extravaganzas?
‘We've experimented with angle grinders, jack hammers and breaking tellies before in Germany, but sometimes when you turn on 1,000-watt machinery of destruction all the lights go with it!’
‘It's a bit more evil live,’ growls John, ‘because if the sound is good, with the bass cutting in, the actual airwaves around you change.
There's a lot of frequencies you can't pick up on the record listening through small speakers.
It's a different experience.’
Just like Pitch Shifter.
The sting in the nail .
The Pitch are on the pitch, they think it's all over…
LOOKS FAMILIAL
Great singles are two-a-penny around NME towers nowadays.
Fantastic, popmungously great 45s, however, are rarer than a disco-dancing dodo.
Enter ‘Cope’ /‘Bloom’, a seven-inch double whammy A-side of such unnerving pop prowess it refuses to leave the turntable.
Say hello to GIGOLO AUNTS — and be very, very scared when you hear what singing guitarist David Gibbs has to say…
Over a crackling line from a studio in Boston, David is enthusing about Gigolo Aunts' album recording sessions: ‘It's a lot more rock than we expected,’ he chortles, with nary a hint of apology.
‘Some of the stuff is very '70s sounding, but then again, as we've been doing this thing for such a long time, I guess it's kinda cool that all that is back in vogue.
Like, I love Cheap Trick!’
Gigolo Aunts consist of Velvet Crush part-timer David, drummer Paul Brouwer, bassist Steve Hurley and his twanging brother Phil on guitar.
If the effervescent ‘Cope’— a splendid mixture of Crush melodic instinct (jeez, listen to those harmonies go!) and Buffalo Tom style sonic scrapping — suggests some kind of abnormally perfect lifestyle, then David's conversation fits the bill perfectly.
The impression I get is that Gigolo Aunts know more about good ol' apple pie than Mr Bloody Kipling.
‘We come from a tiny, tiny little town in Upstate New York,’ explains the singer.
‘We've known each other all our lives — our parents even went to college together.
We started playing music together through a love of The Beatles and Kiss, and it's a real fun thing to do.
If we didn't play music we'd probably get a baseball team together.
If other people like us that's great…they can be part of our fun…’
Now this is beginning to sound like Sesame Street !
‘…
Unless they get mean about it, in which case we'll have to scrap with them!’
‘Cope’ succeeds where so many suck because it's such a great blend of US and UK cultures.
Older hippy brothers started the ball rolling, since when it's bounced everywhere from the realms of rock ‘n’ roll to the spark plugs of ‘C86’.
Gigolo Aunts' casual tenacity has been rewarded with a deal with Fire Records over here, which gives everyone the opportunity to catch ‘Cope’ and its maudlin lyrical concerns.
Sad songs say so much?
Let's ask David.
‘I used to be sad and pathetic, but I'm not so miserable any more.
What changed me?
Uh, my new girlfriend, I think.
I hate to sound sappy, but anything can make me cry, and I still get melancholy during the fall or when the sun goes down.
And I get really bummed out when I see people living on the streets.’
Good Grief, Charlie Brown!
Rumour has it that ‘Cope’, brilliant as it is, might not end up on the Aunts' album, such is the ‘glut’ of material available.
Which brings us back to mumbling about rock and ‘getting a little heavier’ and Cheap Trick and (yikes!) messrs Bachman Turner Overdrive…
‘Oh, I love BTO!’ shouts David.
‘In fact, I bought their ‘Greatest Hits’ CD into the studio today!’
Let's rock!
WILD 'N' LAZY GUYS
•It's all sulking under iron skies in Switzerland for the LEMONHEADS — unusual for such a casual, flexible group, thinks JOHN MULVEY, until he hears King Slacker EVAN DANDO talking about drugs, weird nightmares, good bites and loving Tipper Gore.
Dorking heads: PETER WALSH
David has bronchitis.
Evan has flu and is exhausted.
Nic has flu, is exhausted and is sulking, pouting and staring blankly in the corner.
In the bleak brick corridor that, tonight, the three of them are obliged to call a dressing room, the atmosphere is as buoyant as a funeral.
Somewhere in central Europe, it seems as if Lemonheads lost their sense of fun.
In reality, though, the trouble only started here in Aarau, Switzerland, a few minutes ago.
An advance copy of their new single, ‘It's A Shame About Ray’, has arrived, with the label wrongly accrediting ‘Shaky Ground’, the B-side, to Evan Dando and his friend Tom Morgan, rather than Morgan and Nic Dalton, the bassist.
Evan's angry and embarrassed, Nic's sullen beyond belief, there's a rammed, expectant club waiting for them to play, and all they want to do is moan at their manager (who also works for Nirvana) back in the States.
Suddenly, those colds have got much,much worse.
Under the circumstances, with the band far keener to slope off and mope back at the hotel, the gig goes remarkably well.
Evan spends much of the time with his eyes clamped shut, rocking gently and scraping notes out of his sore, croaking throat.
The emotion-packed power pop of the sparkling ‘It's A Shame About Ray’ album is beefed up a little, but still buzzes with a naive, laid-back charm that's at odds with the black mood of the band.
And Evan even stirs himself to encore with a heart-breaking solo shimmy through The Shirelles' ‘Will You Still Love Me Tomorrow?’, the latest addition to Lemonheads' litany of unlikely, gorgeous cover versions.
A triumph, pretty much.
Afterwards, we're stood on the steps outside the club, built at the top of a charmless metal shopping centre on the outskirts of Aarau.
Evan points to a hoist that's slowly lowering the band's gear down to ground level: ‘When we played here last year, we were riding up and down in that thing.
It was great.’
Not tonight, though.
‘IT'S SO funny.
The weather is perfect for the way we're all feeling, it's all like iron sky .’
The next morning, as we wander through Aarau's chintzy old town, at least Evan can joke about the business mess that tainted the show.
The Lemonheads have been touring for about three months, first in America and now in Europe, and this has been the first real glitch they've encountered.
Otherwise, everything's been fine for this most casual and flexible of groups.
As David Ryan, the drummer with big, bright eyes that explode out of his skull, who's stuck with Evan longer than most, puts it: ‘If things weren't going well I wouldn't be here, I'd have flown home weeks ago.’
He's more interested in being a writer than playing the drums, and reckons ‘the situation is really…mercurial.’
Certainly, no-one's here for life, no-one needs 100 per cent dedication to the cause.
The easy-come, easy-go attitude most obviously applies to Nic Dalton, still introverted but a bit more cheerful this morning.
The latest addition to the Lemonheads, replacing Juliana Hatfield, who played bass on the album, he met the band in his native Sydney last year.
Since then, Australia's become something of an, ahem, spiritual home for David, and Nic has become a close confidant and inspiration.
‘Hopefully, I'll be doing the next Lemonheads album,’ he says, with exactly the right amount of carelessness, ‘but I really have to go and do my own thing as well.
I can't stay away forever.’
Nic's own things back home include a shop and record label, occasional work with The Hummingbirds and three more bands; Sneeze, the excellently-named Hippy Drivel and Godstar (who may well feature Evan on drums, if he can dump his own band for a month or so next year).
His world, it's safe to say, will not fall apart if the Lemonheads do.
Whether that could be said for Evan Dando is more difficult.
The ‘slacker’ tag, that's currently slung at anything American with long hair and a dopey demeanour, seems particularly applicable to him.
Sat in a plastic cafe near Aarau station, he's ungainly and absent-minded, his favourite word is ‘cooool ’, he talks a lot about his trouble motivating himself and has, much of the time, the dazed smile of the happily, hopelessly lost.
And yet, the history of the Lemonheads — in which, five albums down the line, he's the only constant — suggests he's something of a control freak, far more fastidious than he seems.
‘I do have a casual attitude to everything, yeah, that's true.
Eventually I might crack if the pressure gets too much, but it's pretty mellow so far.
I think maybe I don't belong in control because I'm not very good at making double-sure about things — I probably should've double-checked that credit.
I'm not careful enough about the details, and then I end up kicking myself for not, like, stressing what was supposed to happen.’
But surely you've built the band around you like that, so that you're the only one who makes the decisions?
Evan shrugs.
‘I guess so.
I think it just comes from…
I don't know what happened, but over the years it was me who came to the band's aid when it was needed.
I played the drums when I had to, I played the bass when I had to, and I felt after a while I could kinda have it as my own.
I wonder if it's just some sub-conscious thing that my casualness is really just wanting to be recognised…’
At least now he's surrounded by people who encourage and inspire him, who kick his arse, help him write songs and drag him out of the isolated, uncreative lethargy he easily slips into.
‘Whenever I go back to Boston I end up not doing anything, y'know?
What do you do?
You walk down the street and get breakfast, and then what do you do?
Last year I wasn't inspired to write anything.
‘But I was really transformed when I went to Australia.
I got optimistic about making music again through my friends down there, like Nic.
They have a whole scene that makes it seem possible to write songs all the time and really, really enjoy it.’
What would the album have been like if you hadn't gone there?
‘I dunno.
A bunch of Jackson 5 covers or something probably.’
INSTEAD, WE were blessed with ‘It's A Shame About Ray’, a dazzling improvement on the first four, only sporadically exciting, Lemonheads albums.
A bright, consistent record, it showcases Dando's newly-honed knack of tossing of unforgettable, brilliantly gauche two-minute perfect pop songs, along with a couple of awesomely beautiful country vignettes —‘My Drug Buddy’ and ‘Hannah And Gabi’— that stand as the best he's written.
‘I think more and more that I'm better at doing the quieter stuff,’ he agrees.
‘But there are still all these fans of our first record — especially on the continent, they're really frank here — who come right up and say funny things like (in a thick Scandinavian accent )‘T'was not superior, but was OK’ and ‘So much lovey pop —ridiculous ’.
It's not always easy being in a band.’
The recording of the album, in Los Angeles, also cemented a long-term friendship with Juliana Hatfield, who started The Blake Babies in Boston around the same time as Evan formed the Lemonheads.
The recent American tour, when Juliana's new band were the support act, may well have screwed up the relationship, however.
‘We don't get a chance to see each other that much now — I don't know when I'll see her again — but I miss her.
I think she's pretty mad at me right now, 'cos I'm a little bit of a flirt and she gets disappointed with me when I go off with girls.
I was a little out of control on the American tour, meeting a lot of girls and stuff.
Which was stupid — I mean, I had a really good girl right along with me the whole time.
I dunno what's wrong with me, why I would do that.
I dunno.
It's complicated.’
Were you a real rock pig on that tour?
‘Not really.
I really, really like girls, y'know?
And we took mushrooms a little bit too much.
And one time in Austin it was really bad 'cos we took some acid before we played and I felt really small, like I couldn't do anything, like wooahh !, like vertigo.
And then I got onstage wearing this stupid nightshirt and I said, ‘Oh, I'll have you know I'm tripping, so please don't try to freak me out’— so they all started chanting and looking mean.
I was saying, ‘If anyone wants a refund they can go right to the door and they'll give it to you.’
But I think it was actually an OK show.’
Then the reams of drug anecdotes stop, and a highly confused sense of responsibility ambles in, concentrated on the cosily strung-out ‘My Drug Buddy’.
Attention readers: the credibility of the Lemonheads ends here…
‘I don't want kids to get the wrong idea from that song.
Everyone talks about Tipper Gore and ‘Smash the PMRC’, but I don't know if it's really such a bad thing to put stickers on records for kids.
I think kids can get influenced in a bad way by music.
Maybe not.
I dunno…’
But what does it say on the back of your T-shirt, Evan?
He laughs self-consciously.
‘It says ‘KILL FOR SATAN’.’
You should have a parental guidance sticker across your forehead, then.
‘Yeah, maybe.
I should really think that through.
I just worry about that song because I don't wanna be any part of kids thinking drugs are cooler than they are, 'cos they're not for everybody.
I just know that I wouldn't sacrifice the experiences I've had on drugs for anything.’
EVAN DANDO is weird.
All the time, there's this strange morality playing off the requisite selfish sex, drugs and rock'n'roll excesses that he — at least pretends — to stumble into.
If he couldn't keep up the whacked — out, languid image, you feel he'd be ripping himself apart with guilt and recriminations.
As it is, the only problems that clearly disturb him — as opposed to confuse him — are the nightmares and habitual sleepwalking he's been tormented by since childhood, long before the recreational drug use kicked in.
‘It's really bad.
Every time I go to sleep I don't know what's gonna happen.
I have really bad nightmares of someone pursuing me, or a really big landslide coming down on me, and I race out of my bed and run, run far away and find something to defend myself with, like a candelabra or a bottle.
I run outside and hide behind a hedge then wake up laughing, 'cos I'm out there in my underwear on the street.
‘I need a really simple room to sleep in, 'cos if I sleep with things overhanging or weird, too complicated visual stuff, my eyes open and they make things out of it.
Maybe that's my un-laid-back side coming to haunt me at night.’
Maybe.
Even though he's calm and affable, he's chain-smoked throughout the interview, and hardly smoked in all the time we've spent together prior to it.
And, in spite of his apparent gawky straightforwardness, there's a nervous, complex,almost impenetrable side to Dando beyond all the cute songs, stupid-fresh cover versions and slacker platitudes.
He says one of the reasons he likes Australia is because the people there don't analyse the fun out of everything, they just go ahead and act.
But perhaps Evan still thinks too much, or perhaps he doesn't think enough or, then again, perhaps he doesn't really think at all…
God only knows.
At the end, I guess there's some kind of haphazard logic there, anyway.
‘I wanna go to Argentina.
I wanna go there 'cos…like, there's three As here, right — America, Argentina and Australia — and America is the A in decline, but Argentina…
Somehow I get a vibe off it that it's gonna be a really good place to be, 'cos maybe things aren't as  f—ed up down there.
I have no clues about it, but I have a good vibe.’
Yeah …
Band of mope and glory — Lemonheads (l to r): Evan, Nic and David, having Aarau (ouch)
Evan waves his set lists for the benefit of the PMRC
YOU WRANGLER, MY LORD…
LAWRENCE from Felt has now become DENIM and, having recruited two of The Glitter Band, is here to celebrate the very fabric of pop by saluting the '70s.
STUART MACONIE grabs his Bell collection and stomps along to Hello and The Osmonds.
Material world: KEVIN CUMMINS
The music was enough to attract casual attention; a clipped, thumping, feral streetbeat layered with bright, echoing drums; the production sheen of a distant era.
Out of the office stereo it churned and stomped, causing a ripple of bemused interest.
But it was that voice that really nailed it; that languid, partly-formed Brooklyn drawl moving somewhere in the area of the tune.
And those lyrics…
‘I hate the Stones and I hate blues/Eddie Cochran and blue suede shoes/I hate the King and I hate Chuck Berry/I hate Leadbelly…
Alright.’
Heads began to turn.
Some laughed, some said, ‘What the  f— is this?’
And some said ‘He's back, he's back in Denim…and Denim put the soul in your rock ‘n’ roll!’
WE SIT in an eyrie above London's Drury Lane, an eyrie with a lease that's about to run out.
Lawrence from Felt is back and with a new title.
Now he's Lawrence from Denim.
And he's still keen on changing the fabric of pop.
Keener than ever, in fact.
If Felt were characterised by a certain whey-faced lack of engagement, a muted and sometimes beautiful sense of the ridiculous, Denim, as you might imagine, are rougher, harder-wearing and more explicitly brash.
Denim is the sound of a man audibly divesting himself of the baggage of the '80s, the personal mishaps, the disillusionment, the bad indie pop, the cellphones, the red braces,Club X and Margaret Hilda Thatcher.
Denim is not a celebration of the '70s, but it is a celebration of times past, harder times, of working class life in the cities of provincial Britain, of teenage thrills, the thrill of school being out forever and the constant spectre of evil in the form of IRA bombs, skinheads, power cuts and Hughie Green.
‘The '80s were such a boring decade.
I know that's a sweeping generalisation but it's true.
It was so bland.
We're only two years away from it but already we've realised just how dull it was.
For me, it was total disillusionment.
All through the '70s I'd wanted to be in a rock band and I ended up doing it and it was nothing like as exciting as I'd imagined it from reading and listening to records.
It wasn't real and it was all too easy.’
Lawrence pauses and smiles faintly.
‘I'm going to turn into one of those old guys who are constantly harping on about the war, about ration books and bomb shelters.
I'll be like that about the '70s.
Going on about how it was the best decade…but it was .’
They're back!
Denim's Siobhan and Lawrence with star-spangled blammer Gerry out of The Glitter Band
Lawrence, a child of Water Orton, a suburban lacuna on the outskirts of Birmingham, spent the dreaded '80s as the leader of Felt, a semi-legendary indie pop outfit whose dearth of sales was inversely matched by the affection and wonky respect in which they were held by the choosier pop consumer.
Felt broke up in 1989, not because of the usual tired catalogue of ‘musical differences’ or drug problems, but because it was written in the stars that they would break up.
Lawrence is scathing about the Status Quos of this world and equally convinced that Felt's pre-planned demise was a good idea.
‘If you know anything about the history of art, you'll know that the real process of evaluation goes on after things have stopped.
In the case of artists, that's usually when they're dead.
In our case, we got evaluated and glorified after we finished.
We knew that would happen.
That's why we knew it would be good to bring it to a close.’
‘MIDDLE OF The Road’ is Denim's first single and will be followed shortly by the album ‘Back In Denim’.
These are the first recorded works by Lawrence since the final moments of Felt over two years ago.
Word of Denim, Lawrence's conceptual thrust into the 1990s, began to circulate immediately, but then the trail went cold apart from overheard rumours and the odd piece of rogue merchandising (Denim patches and plectrums) turning up at the NME .
It's taken Denim two years to finally ‘hit the scene’.
Why?
‘After Felt finished, I got the name and the idea of Denim straight away.
I went off to America to live in New York where I knew one person.
I had a studio there for two months and during that time I got all the ideas together for the record.
I came back and got a deal that summer and started the album immediately but there've been various setbacks along the way.
It's been two years in the studio but in that time we've probably only spent four months recording.’
Allegedly unhappy about the sanitation and the cockroaches but by his own admission surprising himself by pining for ‘Kensington, Belgravia, phone boxes and iron railings’, Lawrence returned to Blighty and spent an extended sojourn in Windsor, where he assembled Denim around him.
There's no doubt that essentially Denim is Lawrence but he's keen to assert that there is a band involved, a band of unknown musicians from Windsor augmented, in a philosophically appropriate touch, by two members of The Glitter Band.
‘We had a drummer and he just couldn't cut it.
We had to let him go.
My favourite drum sounds have always been The Glitter Band's so I thought it was silly not to try and track them down.
I found one of the drummers and let him have a tape and he loved it.
And then on top of that we got Gerry Sheppard who did the chanting and the ‘heys’ on all those Glitter Band records.
Production-wise, Lawrence considered the obvious step of recruiting one of the '70s luminaries to the studio seat but found his aspirations nixed by circumstance.
‘Mike Leander has basically left the music business, Jeff Wayne was busy with ‘Spartacus’ and Visconti wanted an astronomical fee.
In the end I got John Leckie who did a load of good stuff with Be Bop Deluxe.’
A certain spirit of the '70s, the spirit of Hello, The Glitter Band and, less obviously, Bread, Mink De Ville and David Essex, hangs heavy over ‘Back In Denim’.
There's a conscious rejection of the sonic values of the '80s but a bright-eyed optimism about the 1990s.
On the track ‘I'm Against The '80s’, Lawrence drawls, ‘I'm for the '70s/I'm for the '90s, too’.
He laughs.
‘Yeah, sounds a bit like an after-thought, doesn't it?
But it isn't.
The rejection of the '80s is also an embracing of the possibilities of the '90s.
Half the stuff on the album is about growing up in Birmingham in the '70s but half of it is about '90s subjects like ‘Livin' On The Streets’ and ‘Fish And Chips’, which is about going to clubs.
‘I do listen to contemporary music but it tends to be electronic stuff that I can't put names to.
I know it's a cliché to be into Derrick May, but I am.
Techno goes well with a diet of The Glitter Band.
That's the beat I like.
You can't really dance to it but you can stomp to it.
Glitter techno, that's what I'm into.
That doesn't really describe Denim but I think it does have a quality, something inhuman and plastic and mechanical.
I like music that's cold on the outside.
Music that's slightly detached.’
LAWRENCE'S LOVE for rootless music, music with no history, manifests itself in a dislike for the pantheon of rock gods and the reverence in which they are treated.
Hence the anti-credo of ‘Middle Of The Road’.
Lawrence apparently has no wish to be verified by rock's steering committee.
Mention to Lawrence that ‘Back In Denim’ could be construed as a novelty record and he's delighted.
‘I'd love to be considered a novelty act.
Novelty records are what I'm really into at the moment.
It is a novelty record in some respects, although I'd like to think it's a lot deeper than that too.
There is so much rubbish revered in rock, reams of terrible by these so-called geniuses like Chuck Berry and Jerry Lee Lewis.
I can't believe these people who say, ‘Oh, you've got to see the Stones once in your life.’
Why have you?
Music isn't like that.
‘I love novelty records because at least they don't purport to be anything.
I can get some brilliant ideas Lieutenant Pigeon and Telex.’
The conceptual bulwark of the album, the centrepiece around which the rest revolves, is the eight-and-a-half minute epic ‘The Osmonds’, an autobiographical litany of the good, the bad and the ugly from Lawrence's teenage past.
It's a truly brilliant song that invests the homespun reality of '70s Britain with mythic significance.
It's a black celebration, a grimy, twisted tribute to an era that gave us The Black Panthers, Jeremy Thorpe and Paper Lace.
For a song with a hook that goes: ‘And there were lots of little Osmonds everywhere,’ it's hugely melancholic.
‘The reason I wanted Jeff Wayne was to turn ‘The Osmonds’ into an epic.
I wanted a surface sugariness to draw you in before you got to the substance of the song.
It isn't glamourisation.
It's an angry autobiography.
I hated The Osmonds…but the idea is to use that image to talk about a lot of darker subjects.
Like the Birmingham pub bombings.
To anyone who didn't live in Birmingham at the time, it's impossible to convey how much they affected people.
To me it's a focal point of the '70s.
And, as I say in the song, we wanted justice and it never came.’
It's time to leave Lawrence in his spartan eyrie above Drury Lane.
But before I do, I wonder if Lawrence has any more of the excellent Denim merchandising.
We go into Lawrence's equally spartan kitchen where, in the cupboard where there should be pasts shells and demerara sugar and jars of Ragu sauce, there is a bag of Denim plectrums.
Lawrence passes me a handful of the standard ones (white plastic, old Bell records logo) and then gives me a couple of unusual ones; heart-shaped and bearing the words ‘I Love Lawrence’.
He looks sheepish.
‘Oh, those are for the girls.’
He's back.
ZIGGY STARDUST MEMORIES
A BLUFFER'S GUIDE TO THOSE TARTAN-TRIMMED ‘70S
‘Osmonds…there were Osmonds…lots of little Osmonds…’
Lawrence from Denim is right, of course, there were lots of Osmonds in the '70s.
But there was a lot of other stuff as well.
The Decade That Style Forgot, it should be remembered, actually only lasted five or so years, from 1971 — when the '60s finally floated to a halt — 'til 1975–6, the 12 months when Leeds lost the European Cup final and the Sex Pistols pulled back music's nostrils and rammed red hot pokers into its concept album-addled brains.
Ye Olde Englande was, of course, a very strange place then.
Firstly, it was very, very dark.
Everyone you knew was at school.
Susan Stranks competed with Reg Varney to get those hormones whizzing round your Brutus Oxford bag hot pants.
Mike Yarwood was Prime Minister.
Sounds like a nightmare?
It wasn't.
The '70s was the decade of stomping.
Stomping platform boots.
Stomping drums, whether they were on Led Zeppelin's ‘When The Levee Breaks’ or (rather less sampled) The Glitter Band's ‘Angel Face’.
Stomping sitcoms —Man About The House ,Please Sir ,Bless This House , all chocka with stomping sex.
And Sid James.
If you're a '90s teen, the '70s won't mean a lot to you.
But they were the Barmy Years of Pop Culture, when anything went.
And, as they're all around us, in everything from Carter's Glitter Band singalongs to The Orb's concept albums — and ‘Tubular Bells II’!— let DAVID QUANTICK, ANDREW COLLINS and DANNY KELLY take you by the hand and lead you through The Decade That Said ‘Nice One Cyril’— and got away with it!
The '70s — brilliant drugs!
Mike ‘Tubular Bells’ Oldfield shows off his plans for the world's first outdoor pizza
Masters Of The Universe — quake!
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles — grovel!
Chicory Tip — Godfathers of techno — bestrode creation in shiny underpants
'70s icons Rick ‘on ice’ Wakeman and Watney's Red Barrel were equally attractive
Kenny: somewhere, in Britain today, these people have kids at school and proper jobs.
Possibly
Man About The House with Sally Thomsett (left), Richard O'Sullivan and Paula Wilcox.
This is the '70s equivalent of Julia Roberts, Mel Gibson and Vanessa Paradis wrestling in a vat of KY
Kojak: see fantastic schoolboy joke (above)
The greatest ever rock format, the eight-track cartridge (from the personal collection of Danny ‘he'll have to go’ Kelly)
20 THINGS YOU NEED TO PRETEND TO KNOW ABOUT THE '70s
17) Party Sevens (these were massive cans of bitter — it Whitbread Big Head Trophy Bitter, The Pint That Thinks It's A Quawawwart!— that you had to open with a hammer)
20 ESSENTIAL ‘I WAS THERE’ RECORDS
‘(That's The Way) I Like It’— KC And The Sunshine Band (‘uh-huh, uh-huh’— the first ever disco record — official!)
‘Dark Side Of The Moon’— Pink Floyd (first ambient house record — official!)
‘Tubular Bells’— Mike Oldfield (beware live orchestral version)
‘Lord Of The Rings’— Bo Hanson (scary elf concept bollocks)
‘Son Of My Father’— Chicory Tip (first techno record — official)
GREAT '70S CATCHPHRASES
‘I'll get you, Butler’ Blakey in On The Buses 
‘Put a chunk in your cheek!’
Cilla Black Cadbury's ad 
‘Up and underrrr!’
The late, great Eddie Waring on any Rugby League match on Grandstand 
‘Give us a twirl, Anthea!’
Bruce Forsyth to his future wife on The Generation Game 
‘Watch out, there's a Humphrey about!’
Milk advert based on the premise that hostile drinking straws were out to steal your milk.
Question!
Why do they have to advertise milk?
‘Bernie, the bolt’ Bob Monkhouse in The Golden Shot 
‘Ruff!
Ruff!’
Arnold, Tony Blackburn's imaginary dog
‘Ruggish!’
Eric Morecambe
‘I'll have ‘alf’ Jack from Love Thy Neighbour 
‘TTFN’ Jimmy Young
‘Two slightly distorted guitars…’
Viv Stanshall on ‘Tubular Bells’
TEN PEOPLE WHO WERE SEXY IN THE '70s BUT WOULD NOW BE ARRESTED BY THE ATTRACTIVENESS POLICE
Theo Kojak — because he looked like a knob and sucked a lolly.
Or was it the other way round?
Dora out of Follyfoot 
Mike Holloway out of Flintlock and The Tomorrow People 
Jack out of On The Buses 
Woody out of Bay City Rollers
GONE FOREVER — LOST '70s THINGS
Cresta — ink-flavoured soft drink —‘It's frothy, man’
Bond bugs — three-wheeled fibreglass ‘cars’ ie tricycles with lawnmower engines
GO AWAY! 11 UNWELCOME '70s ICONS WHO ARE STILL WITH US IN 1992
Bruce Forsyth.
And the tired old game show he rode in on 
A GIANT BLEEP FOR MANKIND
They're here!
Deep space explorers, ambience chasers and unlikely pop stars, THE ORB are the soundtrack to this year's vision of the future.
STEPHEN DALTON listens to the music of the spheres as Alex and Thrash trawl the nightclubs and pyramids of Paris.
Rich men and the modern Louvre: KEVIN CUMMINS
Dolphins float across the night sky.
A giant pyramid looms overhead.
Panoramic vistas open on to galaxies more immense than human minds can contemplate.
Somewhere, the gods are madly spinning a cosmic radio dial across nine billion frequencies.
Obscured by clouds of herbal cigarette smoke, a lugubrious, tufty-bonced boffin nods wisely to his straggly-maned apprentice as the nightclub begins disintegrating around us.
The space-time continuum shudders to a standstill.
Temporal turbulence stretches the very fabric of reality and folds it back on itself.
Don't you just hate it when that happens?
Here sits Alex Paterson, deadpan Cockney patter slowed to snail speed, 32-year-old features frozen into Easter Island stone.
The good doctor, ex-Killing Joke roadie, former A&R man and ambient trail-blazer whose spaced-out symphonies oozed from the chill-out zone of London's Land Of Oz club to become The Orb.
Nearby, grinning like the cat who fell into a vast underground lake of cream, Paterson's gangly 20-year-old sidekick Thrash — aka Kristian Weston — attempts communication.
But he's fighting a slow-motion battle against zero gravity and deafening interference.
A few hours ago this all made some kind of sense.
Slipping through the nearest black hole, maybe we can retrace the giant steps for mankind which led us here.
Set the controls for the heart of Planet Orb…
‘The ancient astronaut theory does seem to represent to many people a solution to the uncertainties that now plague our world.
If the space-gods are bestowers of kindness, we need not solve our own problems; our benefactors will take care of us when they return.
Such a belief can only serve to divert our attention from human concerns and human responsibilities.’
Ronald Story,The Space-Gods Revisited 
WHERE DID it all go right for The Orb?
Was it recording the legendary and seemingly endless ‘A Huge Ever Growing Pulsating Brain That Rules From The Centre Of The Underworld’ for a paltry £20 in 1989?
Hitching their own WAAU!
Mr Modo label to maverick dance roster Big Life?
Shamelessly releasing double concept album ‘Adventures Beyond The Ultraworld’— a mind-boggling triple set if you include the limited edition ‘Aubrey Mixes’— in 1990 or rocketing to Number One with this year's far more straightforward sequel, ‘UF Orb’?
All clever stuff, but their real genius move was inverting a golden rule of the acid house culture which spawned them: anything goes as long as the backbeat keeps thumping.
But if birdsong, babbling streams and chopper blades could be slung between heavy-duty percussion — they reasoned — maybe these noises would stand up as tunes in their own right.
Unplug the drum machine and do us all a favour.
Voilà .
Ziggurat Stardust: Alex Paterson lies back and waits for lift-off
So where is beatless band?
In Paris for the French launch of ‘UF  Orb’.
More specifically, they are lying next to the Louvre gallery pyramid being snapped by Kevin Cummins.
Steeped in ancient pomp and splendour, but loaded with post-modern wit and allusion, this semi-mystical edifice could almost have been purpose-built for an Orb photo shoot.
Perhaps prehistoric visitors from distant planets erected it here —Space Odyssey style — purely for this purpose?
Are The Orb the smiling, blissed-out face of a sinister intergalactic plot stretching back before the dawn of mankind itself?
Was God a space cadet?
‘Good morning!’ chirps Alex.
‘Good morning!’ chimes in Thrash.
Perfectly normal earthling behaviour.
Except it is four in the afternoon.
Other-worldly events remain an enduring obsession for The Orb.
The loose storyline of ‘UF Orb’ draws on Timothy Good's books Alien Liaison and Above Top Secrets as prime inspiration.
Their revelations about USAF base Wright Patterson, the alleged high-security storage depot for crashed UFOs and their occupants, provided a backdrop for ‘The Blue Room’.
Meeting Good recently only confirmed Paterson's faith.
‘He was nothing like us.
He was very normal, you could see him walking down to the bank Monday to Friday, but he's got this completely eccentric side to him.’
Most supposed experts in paranormal phenomena emerges as self-promoting cranks, as easily discredited as Erich Von Däniken's ludicrous Chariots Of The Gods .
Alex, however, subscribes to the standard conspiracy theory that the authorities undermine anyone investigating these sensitive areas.
Is this not just a defensive circular argument?
‘Why not?
Everyone's got a defence mechanism.
Football teams don't go out and buy loads of players and then not buy a defence, do they?’
Surely believers in extra-terrestrial superbeings are simply seeking catch-all solutions to complex earthly problems?
For some, the UFO cult seems to fit an almost religious need.
‘It's more of a fantasy to a lot of people, not a religion as such.
It's about individual freedom of thought.
There's no given word that UFOs and aliens exist, but if you read between the lines, a hell of a lot of things have been taken away and readjusted.
Even The Bible!
The Old Testament's the most reliable book for ancient history we have, yet that was tampered with by Roman priests 400 years after the birth of Christ!
Both Alex and Thrash attended church schools and still nurse sour memories of indoctrination there.
Neither are religious.
But if they refuse to believe in God on flimsy, ambivalent evidence, why have blind faith in aliens?
Unless they desperately need to believe, like the self-styled ‘cerealogists’ who could not accept two jokers had been manufacturing corn circles.
‘But I really believed they were cranks anyway,’ protests Alex.
‘Obviously someone was out to make a bit of exposure from it.
The KLF were clever enough to do it when they did…’
Ah, The KLF.
Fellow pyramid freaks and arch manipulators of New Age symbolism, whose Jimmy Cauty preceded Thrash as chief Orb sidekick.
Who invited Paterson to work on their pioneering ambient LP, ‘Chill Out’.
Who savagely satirised the music business before self-destructing in grandiose anarchist style.
Does Alex see any parallels with The Orb?
‘No,’ he snaps testily.
‘They don't exist at the moment, we do.
They came out of the world writing pop songs, at the very end.
They knew what they were doing and they were getting hits from it, whereas we are an experimental albums band.’
An experimental albums band which nevertheless enjoys Top Ten hits like ‘The Blue Room’?
‘Yeah, but that's just like having fish and chips on a Friday to us sometimes.
We'll carry on what we're doing without having to write pop songs to get to Number One.’
Ouch!
Although he can envisage working with Cauty again, is Alex tired of The KLF's ultra-commercial instincts?
The good doctor phrases his reply with, ahem, surgical precision.
‘Ummmm…there was a split in the fact that one person had one record label and the other person had another, and he also had KLF as well.
No, I've always admired them for doing it their own way and getting away with it all the way to the end.
And they got out at the very top.’
Something Alex himself hopes to do when his six-album deal expires.
For now, however, we have ‘Assassin’, a storming all-new single which almost features Bobby Gillespie returning the favour for an awesome Orb production job on ‘Higher Than The Sun’.
Only almost , because Creation nixed the idea, but Bobby will probably surface on later mixes.
‘Research into communication between man and the dolphin may prove to be extremely useful if, and when, man makes contact with extra-terrestrial life — a possibility that many astronomers regard as almost inevitable.’
Alvin Toffler,Future Shock 
THE BLUE womb.
Dolphins weave between the stars above us.
So peaceful down her, so soothing.
Endlessly undulating soundwaves spiral upwards like bubbles from a deep ocean trench, desert island discs becalmed in a sea of  tranquillity .
Welcome,mesdames et messieurs , to the amazing undersea world of Dr Alex Paterson.
This mesmerising son et lumière actually takes place two floors up in a domed planetarium at the Cité De Science, a futuristic and eerily empty complex in the Parisian outskirts chosen by The Orb's French label Delabel as an ideal launch pad for ‘UF Orb’.
Ambient hipsters from all over France have flocked to this low-key affair, lured by invitations promising ‘Smarts Drinks’ and a chat with someone called ‘Trash’.
Alas, smarts drinks prove to be non-alcoholic cocktails of fruit juice, lemonade and lurid food colourings being brazenly mixed mere yards away by absurd waiters in blue radiation suits.
Alex and Thrash arrive late and stick close to their entourage.
Pop star hysteria is not their style, having learnt from the riotous assembly and frayed tempers of their recent midnight signing session at London's Tower Records.
Victims of their own success?
‘We were lucky in that, when the album went to Number One, we went to Japan that week,’ smirks Alex.
‘We missed out on a lot of that pressure of people around you getting excited for you.’
Alex first witnessed the perils of pop stardom a decade ago when, having done Killing Joke's laundry, he saw the band almost split over who owned which pair of newly washed socks.
Ego clashes aside, the Joke sometimes let their young roadie sing Iggy's ‘No Fun’ as an encore.
When Primal Scream learned this they invited Paterson — touring America with them earlier this year — to revive ‘No Fun’ onstage.
‘It put me right up in the mood again, I'd forgotten about that sort of intensity .
So we just went in and recorded it.’
This became one of the weirdest and most requested Peel session tracks ever.
The Orb recreating the Pistols covering Iggy, with Paterson simulating Rotten's every sneer, note perfect except for odd snatches of reggae backbeat.
The ultimate post-modern pop statement?
‘It just sounded really funny coming out of an ambient track.
It seemed like the right reaction as well, because everyone thought we were ambient intellectuals going around posing in mirrors and stuff.’
More people probably had The Orb down as hippies.
One reviewer slammed the 40-minute ‘Blue Room’ single as ‘hippy excrement’, while the finale of ‘UF Orb’finds the dolphins blasting off from Earth in a freshwater spaceship, leaving mankind to stew in his own toxic waste.
So long, and thanks for all the fish.
But Alex dismisses hippy tags as totally misguided, claiming he only ever enjoyed one Steve Hillage album —‘Rainbow Dome Music’— which he was spinning in a club when Hillage himself came over and made contact.
Consequently, the former Gong guitar wizard became a floating Orb member and founded his own ambient outfit, System 7.
Fair enough, but what of the duo's imminent remix taken from Mike Oldfield's ‘Tubular Bells II’, or their promised ‘raunchy’ cover of Hawkwind's proto-punk classic ‘Silver Machine’?
Never mind all that, what about Pink Floyd?
Alex might cheekily explain the pastiche ‘Animals’ sleeve of ‘Ultraworld’as a tribute to his native Battersea, but other parallels abound.
Both are experimental album bands born of nocturnal drug cultures, both have performed in planetariums and released albums sealed in plastic casing.
Orb track ‘Back Side Of The Moon’ speaks for itself, while current Floyd bassist Guy Pratt even guests on ‘UF Orb’alongside ex-Killing Joker Youth and dub maestro Jah Wobble.
‘There is one thing which nobody has picked up on yet,’ confides Alex late in the evening.
‘I was at school with Guy…myself, Guy and Youth went to the same school together in Oxfordshire.’
So are The Orb some grand cosmic joke hatched at Kingham, a minor public school near Banbury, when punk overtook hippy in the late '70s?
Are they secretly debunking today's short-sighted rave fashions by reviving the dinosaur antics of Tangerine Dream and Focus?
‘I've never thought about taking the piss out of fashion,’ frowns Alex earnestly, ‘but there is a certain irony that we have done, in retrospect.
Like using old '70s art covers and guitar legends, turning them around and putting them on Number One albums, ha ha!
I get your point, but we never actually meant it that way.
The day before we finished mixing ‘UF Orb’, Robert Fripp phoned and asked if we wanted any guitaring on the album…’
It becomes clear The Orb are a whole different kettle of dolphins to their popular image as aloof, KLF-style pranksters.
Despite playing chess on Top Of The Pops and beaming lasers on to buildings à la Jean Michel Jarre, they are far less analytical of their impact than might be expected.
Alex points to the ‘anti-image’ of their virtually anonymous stage shows and talks of releasing low-key dub albums in plain sleeves.
But how quickly would the emperor's old clothes fall from fashion when stripped of their conceptual trimmings?
‘We're not very fashionable,’ he protests.
‘If you put yourself in the position to be fashionable, then six months later everyone's going to take the piss out of you.
We're not putting ourselves in that position — all we're doing is selling music.’
There are no subliminal messages behind The Orb.
Just tune in, chill out, pull up a spliff…and thanks for all the fish.
‘Perhaps an astronaut who fell into a black hole would be able to make money at roulette by remembering where the ball went before he placed his bet.
Unfortunately, however, he would not have long to play before he was turned to spaghetti.’
Stephen Hawking,A Brief History Of Time 
NIGHTCLUB BOUND, we speed across small-hours Paris in The Orb's interplanetary transport podule, a French minibus whose name translates into English as ‘Space’(you mean a Renault Espace — Ed).
Alex monitors the airwaves, alighting on random spurts of African pop, Indian wailing, Euro-reggae vibrations and raging rivers of crackling distortion.
He seems in his element.
But wherever they stand — or think they stand — on this planet of sound, The Orb have an undeniable gravitational pull on modern music.
Witness the masterly atmospherics of The Future Sound Of London, Ultramarine's hypnotic travelogues or the Beyond Records ambient dub compilation.
Suddenly, for the first time since Eno, it's hip to be weightless.
How did they achieve this?
Divine accident?
Cynical goalpost-shifting?
No, more like expanding already open minds to infinite parameters, building their own Virtual Reality theme park where time has no meaning and the entire history of sound — acid house, prog rock, punk, reggae, classical, astronaut transmissions, Muslim prayer chants, Rickie Lee Jones eulogising the skies of her youth — is up for grabs.
Accidentally or not, The Orb could be the post-modern  Punk Floyd for a new millennium.
But does this make them the future of rock ‘n’ roll?
‘I don't think so,’ shrugs Alex.
‘We'll leave that to other bands who can wave their flags much bigger than ours.
But we might be experimental enough to spring people into other ideas, which is what it was all about in the first place.
that's why I was an A&R man for a while, trying to tell other people what to do without realising I should do it myself.’
Perhaps The Orb — earthbound anti-stars — have been over-analysed?
‘You might have a point there, people might have read too much into it.
Orb music sets the imagination going, and some people's imagination runs a lot further than others…’
Outside, a million splinters of light stream by in the Parisian murk.
Some are streetlamps, some are stars, but all shine like crazy diamonds.
Klaatu barada nikto!
Alex and Thrash in bizarre love triangle!
FM AND BLINDING
Neurotic, paranoid, alienated, personally inadequate (sound familiar?)— RADIOHEAD's THOM YORKE could well be the new British lyricist to claim the King Of Glum's songwriting crown, swears psychoanalyst.
Head shots: A J BARRATT
There are four things currently lying next to my stereo: PJ Harvey's ‘Dry’ album, Suede's ‘Metal Mickey’, an advance cassette of the soon-come Kingmaker single, and a copy of Radiohead's new EP.
Superficially, they have little in common, but they're all refreshing evidence of the welcome return of the neurotic, articulate lyricist.
The neurotic, articulate British lyricist, that is.
While the Americans have continued to export cathartic, confessional product from the likes of Black Francis, Kristin Hersh, Kurt Cobain and Buffalo Tom's Bill Janovitz, bands on this side of the Atlantic have seemed to delight in their complete lack of anything to say.
Maybe it was the fear of going anywhere near the angst-ridden territory so comprehensively covered by The Smiths, maybe it was the fact that being stoned out of your mind was suddenly fashionable again — but neither the baggy bunch nor the floppy-fringed waifs who enjoyed the post-Madchester plaudits came anywhere near the kind of emotional rush peddled by Morrissey's men.
The indie-rock of the late '80s and early '90s said nothing to you about your life.
Thankfully, we've now got Brett, Polly and Loz (and Nicky and Rickey too, I guess, though what the hell something like ‘we blur into images of state coercion’ means is anyone's guess).
The new breed of messed-up young things deal with the emotional extremities of everyday existence.
The sing about things that are more important than ‘slimy bog-eyed mong worms’(top one, Shaun), or ‘catching the breeze’(you know who you are, Tarquin).
And their personal therapy group can now be swelled by the addition of Thom Yorke, the wordsmith and frontman of Radiohead.
Thom is about five foot four.
He swears a lot.
He went to Exeter University and he lives in Oxford, a place whose strange, cliquey culture lies at the root of a lot of his songs.
He's sitting next to me in a late night eaterie in Manchester talking into a tape recorder because he and his band have just released a song called ‘Creep’ that's threatening to be one of the highlights of the year.
‘CREEP’ HAS been an NME office favourite for weeks.
Musically, it's somewhat redolent of the left-field rock of the Boston set (it was produced by Slade and Kolderie, the team behind records by Buffalo Tom and Throwing Muses).
As far as its lyrics are concerned, ‘Creep’ is a dark, desperate trawl through unrequited obsession, heavy on self-loathing and personal inadequacy; not an easy song to listen to, but one whose disquieting subject matter makes it nothing short of stunning.
It begins with Thom gazing at the object of his fixation, flattering her with couplets like, ‘You're just like an angel/Your skin makes me cry.’
Then, after a huge, spluttering ‘KERRUNCH’ has shattered the lovelorn calm (more of that later), the song lifts into a heart-breaking ‘I'm a creep/I'm a weirdo/I wish I was special/So  f—ing special…’
‘When I wrote it,’ he remembers, staring at the floor like a child admitting to shoplifting, ‘I was in the middle of a really, really serious obsession that got completely out of hand.
It lasted about eight months.
And it was unsuccessful, which made it even worse.
She knows who she is.’
Radiohead: Very very funny
The cause of much of Thom's misery, it transpires, was the feeling — familiar to many victims  of Fatal Attraction Syndrome — that he just wasn't good enough for the person concerned.
Hence the frenzied self-hatred that explodes every time he spits out ‘I'm a creep’.
‘It was all sad paranoia, completely in my own head,’ he continues, ‘but I really thought I had to be somebody different.
And I still want to be that person; I want to be happy; I want to look good; I want to command the situation I'm in.
But that'll never happen.’
At the heart of almost all of Thom's lyrics is a sense of  alienation from his surroundings, whether it's expressed in ‘Creep’ 's whispered final line, ‘I don't belong here’, or the first words of the last single ‘Prove Yourself’, ‘I can't afford to breathe in this town’.
They're sentiments that come from falling between the two factions that all but dominate life in Oxford's social centre: the yuppified, well-heeled types who hang around in the bars and bistros of the city's bohemian quarter, and the massive student population.
Thom hasn't a kind word for either of them.
‘The whole cultural situation in Oxford is such that you  have to have a certain degree of power or influence of money to be admitted to any social sphere,’ he fumes.
‘Prove Yourself’ was about the feeling of rejection I got from living in Oxford.
That's how I felt all the time; this constant feeling that no-one wanted me to be there, no-one gave a  f— about me.
‘In Oxford, if you haven't got much money, you're nothing.
It's like Florence in Italy — one of those  places where if you have money, it's a wonderful place to be, and if you don't, it's  f—ing terrible.
For along time I  f—ing hated the place.
And then I got some cash.’
He grins briefly, fiddling with his food, before he launches a verbal attack on Oxford's much-maligned university students.
‘What really winds me up is the fact that the student population doesn't involve itself with Oxford at all.
They just cut themselves off, living behind huge walls and barbed wire, whereas to my mind they should feel a certain responsibility to the place.
And then they wonder why they get beaten up while walking down the street at one in the morning.
‘It all gives me the feeling that I'm in completely the wrong place.
It's crawling with pretentious wankers.’
So are you going to move out?
‘No.
That's the weird thing.
Although I hate a lot of people there, that's where all my friends are.
And I really like a lot of aspects of the place.
Paradoxical, I know, but it's true.’
ANALYSIS OVER, we return to the subject of ‘Creep’.
If their press officer is to be believed, the whole majestic mess was recorded in one take.
‘That's true,’ enthuses drummer Phil Selway.
‘We didn't even know it was being taped — we were just warming up for another track by playing the song.
The reason it sounds so powerful is because it's completely unself-conscious.
We were overwhelmed by how good it sounded.’
Talk then centres on the aforementioned ‘KERRUNCH’ sound, which shockingly signals ‘Creep’'s transition from weary verse to furious chorus.
It sounds like a thunderclap being forced through a fuzz pedal.
Or something.
‘That,’ explains guitarist Ed O'Brien,’is the sound of Johnny (second ‘Head guitarist, in bed with flu) trying to  f— the song up.
He really didn't like it the first time we played it, so he tried spoiling it.
And it made the song.’
And what of the fact that the song's key line, ‘You're so  f—ing special,’ has been altered on every copy of the record destined for the radio?
‘The replacement word is ‘very’,’ Thom tells me.
I can't help laughing.
‘It's the best option, really,’ he explains, putting paid to my chortling with a very level-headed examination of the choices that were available.
‘The alternative was putting in a bleep, and that was never going to work.
At least‘very’ sounds sarcastic.
I can sing that without feeling a twat.’
But you've compromised the song!
‘Oh yeah, of course we have.
We know we have.
And it's pretty obvious that we have — so anybody with any brains will realise that, see through it, and go and buy the proper version.’
MARKETING MOVES aside, the fact that Radiohead have barred themselves from the 3,000-sales-and-you're-a-star indie party by signing to EMI means that, as stunning as ‘Creep’ sounds, it'll probably chart at about Number 74, hang around for a couple of weeks and fall back out again without so much as a whimper.
The band seem surprisingly unconcerned.
‘That'll probably happen,’ shrugs Ed, ‘but our day will come.
It may take time but it will.
For now, it's other people's loss.’
‘That song will always be there,’ Thom concludes.
‘And in five, six, ten years’ time, people will be saying that ‘Creep’is a  f—ing classic record.
We know that.’
Arrogant, articulate and extremely screwed up.
How can Radiohead fail?
Out come the creeps
Screwed-up moody boys come over all alienated in Oxford
McDONALD'S TO GO!
LITTLE CRED ROSTERS
Continuing our profile series of the best independent labels in Britain, we take an intelligent and sensitive look at GO!
DISCS, the label started by ANDY McDONALD with a loan from his mum.
IAN McCANN grins himself to death for a cosy tour round the home of BILLY BRAGG, THE HOUSEMARTINS, THE BEAUTIFUL SOUTH and recent recruits THE FRANK & WALTERS
In the annals of rock 'n' roll rebellion, Go!
Discs is nowhere to be found.
Indeed, rock rebels sneer at its inability to be nasty, its sheer lack of gropeability.
If Go!
Discs was a Viking on a rape and pillage tour, it would probably write a letter to apologise afterwards.
Even Go!
Discs Mansions is the epitome of new business gentility, tucked away in a sweet little Victorian cottage mews in Hammersmith, just around the corner from Island Records — which is probably no coincidence, as we'll find out later.
When you call at reception, you're not kept waiting for half an hour, and the receptionists don't even forget your name.
Christ!
I've even seen Bruce Springsteen having to explain who he was for the tenth time in one record company reception.
But at Go!
Discs, managing director Andy McDonald appears immediately I arrive and shows me to his office.
He has no slaves in mini-skirts.
His attitude seems to seep into all comers of the company.
He likes songs.
He signs intelligent, sensitive pop people like The Beautiful South, William Bragg Esq, and, sniff, the late Housemartins.
He borrowed money from his mother when the record company was in trouble right at the start.
He doesn't seem to be embarrassed by anything, except when you try to provoke him by telling him that surely he must thump his desk once in a while, or that although he says that a record company exists ‘to guide your artists’ most of them must hate him at some point.
Then you get this little wan smile.
We shall call it the Go!
Discs Look.
What it means is: you've got it all wrong.
And, indeed, I probably have.
LET'S GO back, right back to the dawn of time, 1982-ish.
Andy McDonald is working as a PR for Stiff Records, the world's most pop ! pop label.
One of the company's 2006 mottos, as Andy reminds me, is ‘a tired band is a happy band’.
This means, basically, that if an act isn't working their balls off, there's something rotten in the state of Denmark.
And so Stiff plough through the careers of Madness, Ian Dury et al , until there's no Madness or Ian Dury anymore.
And, although he doesn't say so, you can see that at the back of his mind, there's an idea brewing in Andy McDonald.
And what it says is, there must be a better way.
‘I just took a flyer when I was at Stiff,’ says the gently-spoken rock demon through a head cold.
‘I had about 700 quid and I had some mates who'd been in Clock DVA, the Sheffield band.
They'd split up and about a year later, they'd formed The Box and wanted to get a record out, and that's how it started in January ‘83.
It was just me at home on the blower, learning about all the various bits of it; I knew about press and radio, but you have to learn about manufacturing and distribution.
The whole idea behind it was to keep it really small and be really selective about who you work with.
Hopefully, that's what bands get when they're here now: more hours spent on each record because there's only 12 artists.’
Let's go back, right back to the beginning of the last paragraph.
If you had 700 quid in your pocket and you wanted to take a flyer, you wouldn't spend it on a band comprising ex-members of Clock DVA, would you?
You'd do something more likely to reap a financial return, such as throw it off the top of Blackpool Tower in a Force Nine gale and run down the 763 steps to see if you could catch any of it before it blew away.
But signing The Box is what Andy McDonald chose to do.
And predictably, McDonald and wife Juliet, who had also been present at the birth of the label, found themselves in financial trouble.
At one point, roughly the same point as when they had to borrow money from Andy's mum, their telephone was cut off, and all business was conducted from a call box in Chiswick High Road.
And then came a knight in tarnished armour, a veritable giant amongst singer-songwriters from Barking.
Andy McDonald:; The Look that launched a dozen acts
From the ashes of The Housemartins…the Beautiful South
The arrival of Billy Bragg suddenly put Go!
Discs on the map.
His first LP, ‘Life's A Riot With Spy Vs Spy’, the label's  debut LP, issued at the end of 1983, went into the charts.
It didn't rise about Number 30, but i t was there for 30 weeks.
McDonald is still proud of it.
‘Life's A Riot’ is a total classic for me.
It's a really honest record, there's no bullshit about it.
It's all to do with motivation.
There's some artists out there who do it because they have to get it off their chest and get their songs on to tape.
There's others who are probably more motivated by fame and hit records and money, which to me doesn't make good music.
Billy's been brilliant because we've had him on an album-by-album deal, and he could have jumped ship, but he's been really loyal.’
That idea pervades Go!
Discs.
They're really not interested in mad pop kids with big cocks and big noise who appear and disappear in the twinkling of an eye.
The nearest Go!
Discs have to that is The La's, who have been compared to The Beatles , for Chrissakes, and The Stairs, who are, let's face it, a doped-up R&B group.
It's hardly shag city, is it?
But their ‘good songwriting’ ethic is what makes Go!
Discs function as a company.
It's also why, when you suggest that it might not be the most credible thing for a label in their position to sign old bores like Paul Weller and Madness, McDonald looks bewildered and offers that Go!
Discs Look.
‘Paul's album has had great reviews, some of which have said it's his best-ever album.
I think it'll still sound great in ten years.’
I give Andy my best impression of a Go!
Discs Look, but I'm evidently not as good at it as he is.
IT WAS after ‘Life's A Riot’ that Go!
Discs realised maybe they could make a go of it.
Andy, Juliet and a couple of part-time workers were now on board, and a plan gradually evolved.
We shall call it the Go!
Discs Formula.
It's the principle upon which all record companies would work if they weren't run by total bastards.
McDonald outlines it thus: ‘A: find the best artists you can; B: keep them in a creative mood so that they make the best records they can, and C: maximise the sales of the records everywhere without turning it into a real form of drudgery for them.’
It's pretty basic stuff, but most companies forget it.
Making it work can't be easy either.
How, for instance, do you keep an artist in a ‘creative mood’?
‘Just by not being a dickhead about things.
If people are writing the songs, they've got the purest view of what it's all about.
The marketing is very much a secondary thing.
You've just not got to put people through too many hoops that they don't wanna go through.
Like, it would be nonsensical to get Paul Weller to go play live on a kids’ Saturday TV show, and it's the same for all our artists: there's a right environment for them and a wrong one, and it's important not to force them.
You have to be very patient, you wanna try and look at a situation where they might wanna do it for five, ten, 15, 20 years.
It should be a good experience, not the sort of situation where bands get burned out.’
A couple of offices away sits the living example of a burnt-out band member: A&R manager Carl Smyth, formerly Chas Smash of Madness.
He's a justification for the Go!
Discs Formula: Madness quit without ever reaching a proper peak.
The huge sell-out reformation shows earlier this year were something they never achieved in their chart heyday.
After Billy's arrival made Go!
Discs viable, a second halfway decent act was required.
It took six months for The Housemartins, the fourth best band in Hull, to turn up.
They put out the ‘Flag Day’ EP, which garnered good reviews, ‘Sheep’, a single that didn't quite make the Top 50, and then broke through with ‘Happy Hour’, which got to Number Three.
This created a conundrum for the label, resolved with the following decision: ‘You can suffer from Number One-itis,’ reckons Andy, ‘which is always trying to get to Number One or go one better than you managed last time.
We won't do that.
Charts are a really stupid way to value music.
Just because it's a Number One doesn't make it a better record than anything else that's out that week.
There was another track after ‘Happy Hour’ that we could have put out that probably would have done just as well, but instead we went for a ballad, ‘Think For A Minute’, to make people think, ‘Jesus, there's more to this group than I'd thought’.
It wasn't as big a hit, but we'd shown more about the scope of what they could do.’
But how do Go!
Discs make such decisions?
‘We do things by consensus as much as possible, and you learn by taking notice of your artists.
I think there's still too much ‘You do that, you do this’ in the big record companies, but that's bollocks too, because without the artists knowing what they're doing nobody in the record company would have a job.’
Go!
Discs must fall out with their artists as much as anyone else, I reason, but this idea produces the Go!
Discs Look.
‘We have frank and fearless discussions sometimes,’ smiles Andy ironically, ‘but you've got to try to communicate with your bands as much as possible.
I like to get out on the road when I can or go to the studio.
The closer you work with people, the more you can assess what they're capable of.’
THERE'S A certain understatement in the Go!
Discs image.
It began with Billy Bragg, who couldn't be sold as a mad animal even if he grew horns and arrived onstage in a cage.
There's also been The Beautiful South's New Lad reasonableness, Father Father's virginal soul, and the English eccentricity of the aged Robyn Hitchcock.
The clincher to this image was The Housemartins.
They were ordinary chaps who deliberately sold themselves short right down to their weedy name, an idea that still attaches itself to anything on the label.
But they weren't always like that.
Andy remembers Paul Heaton ringing him to pester him into listening to The Housemartins' demo, telling him, ‘You've gotta sign us, we're brilliant.’
But when ‘Happy Hour’ cracked the Top Five, they had to hold a meeting to see if this was what they really wanted to do — they did, temporarily.
‘I remember Paul had this nine-year plan; three years with The Housemartins, three years playing football, three on Hull council.’
I put it to Andy that it must have been a blow when they split in 1988, but he, ever the voice of reason, says, ‘There was no point in trying to keep them together, it had gone as far as they wanted it to go and they wanted to do something different.
It only would have been like The Housemartins watered down if they'd have kept doing it without believing in the band.
Anyway, we got two bands out of it, both of which have had Number Ones.’
That seems a strange statement for someone who doesn't measure success in chart placings, but his is an MD.
Go!
Discs formed Go!
Beat, their not-exactly-stunning dance division, for Norman Cook's Beats International, although Paul Heaton's Beautiful South seem to be making a more lasting contribution.
Cutely, the two band names sit together in the Guinness Book Of British Hit Singles .
It's part of Go!
Discs' ‘family atmosphere’.
No wonder Billy Bragg has never left home.
Dispelling the myth that Go!
Discs are incapable of nastiness, this ‘Welcome To The Beautiful South’ cover upset the censors and was later banned
Welcome to your new home Frank & Walters
TEN GO!
DISCS YOU SHOULD OWN
GO!
DISCS have no cult following.
There's a certain status attached to labels like Creation and 4AD that cause anally retentive males — and it is always males — to collect their product.
Some labels encourage this, but Go!
Discs' efforts in this direction have been decidedly half-hearted.
While there are some people in Australia desperate to obtain all the Beautiful South singles in envelope packs, these people are not really encouraged.
Once again, this is down to the importance of songs and the unimportance of ‘product’.
When Go!
Discs has gone for promotion of the label en bloc , it has not been in the most obvious way, but it does typify the house sense of humour.
The label sponsored Fulchester United in Viz for a year, only pulling out when Viz became so successful that Go!
Discs couldn't afford their rates anymore.
Andy is, incidentally, an Arsenal fan, but we all have our failings.
Perhaps because of the influence of Juliete De Valero Wills, now divorced from Andy but still a company director, Go!
Discs has also sponsored a women's football team by supplying them with a kit partly drawn from Billy Bragg's Red Star Belgrade promotional shirts.
The team, based in Camberwell, South London, are known as the Old Fallopians.
One thing that does put Andy slightly beyond the Go!
Discs Look is the allegation that the label is not quite the independent it is cracked up to be, thanks to a distribution deal with Phonogram.
‘I can't see that it makes any difference.
There's all these arguments about what constitutes indie and they're all subjective.
Phonogram have made no difference to what we sign and choose to put out.
We're as independent as ever.
It's partly down to trying to do the best you can for your artists.
If doing a deal with another company will help you to get their records out to people then I can't see why you shouldn't do it.
‘If there's anything we're trying to aspire to it's probably Island Records.
They've done so much brilliant stuff, from Marley to Traffic to U2.
They've proved it can be done with a bit of dignity, and we'd like to achieve that.
I've had meetings with Chris Blackwell and that man is the spirit of independence.’
It's a reasonable argument that only crumbles when you realise who owns Island these days — Phonogram.
AS FOR Go!
Discs' future, things look bright.
They missed out on potential Go!
Discs bands The Stuffies and Fine Young Cannibals, both of whom Andy loves, but they're trying not to let any more ‘must-signs’ slip by.
There's the cranky pop of The Frank & Walters, the slightly more stormy Anna, looking good in America, plus a new singer-songwriter, Jenny Jones.
There's also half a new Paul Weller LP in the can, and, of course, the ‘Madstock’ live album from the A&R department's old Skatonians.
The company is also spreading out to form DG!
TV and Go!
Film, as all sensible record companies do.
If only Andy McDonald would bash his desk a bit more, then maybe Go!
Discs would be a real record company.
Billy Bragg practises the Go!
Discs Look with Andy McDonald (right) and Moire of His Latest Flame
I'VE GOT YOU UNDER MY FORESKIN
Once they were young, pretty and sexy pop stars riding on the frenzied rock-shag monster with a diet of dangerous drugs and sex.
Now EMF are fed up and want to be serious, spiritual rock stars and mates with Bono — and still on a diet of dangerous drugs and sex.
STEVEN WELLS listens to the whining, and yet more tales about that foreskin.
Forest trannies: KEVIN CUMMINS
A carnivorous looking transvestite teeters past on  don't-f—with-me-heels and Ian from EMF, breathing deeply, his eyes closed, a long, sensitive index finger gently pressed against the bridge of his nose, says: ‘This album's about…about…it's about spirituality , it's about finding your identity …
But Mark from EMF, a shaven-headed little person, is still ruminating on Sharon Stone's role in the film Basic Instinct .
‘Arrrr!
Her gorrer waffe rout, din'eeee!?
Like seein' a bi’ o' the rabbit's tail it wor!’
Mark is the most spiritual member of EMF.
When left alone with the tape recorder for two minutes, he says into the microphone: ‘Is it on?…
Heh heh heh!
Hiyyyyyy!
My balland's (sic ) loverrrrrrleeeee!!
I've got a big hairy do- nut !
And, uh, what was it she said about yours?
Quick!
He's comin' back!’
WHEN I heard I was to interview the ‘Mef, I got terribly excited.
They were once my heroes and ‘Unbelievable’ is one of the greatest pop songs of all time — OFFICIAL!
They were young and pretty and sexy — just like proper pop stars — and they shagged lots and did dangerous drugs — just like proper rock stars.
They were the Bay City Rollers meets The Hammer Of The Gods — except they didn't dress crap and they had good hair.
And, despite the fact that shy little James the singer — with his Predator locks and cheeky little monkey face — is the only one that you'd recognise in Sainsbury's, I (along with every red-blooded mammal in the universe) wanted to shag them until they squealed.
(Speak for yourself —Red-Blooded Mammal Society ).
So when I saw James (true story this) in Sainsbury's, I walked up to him, leered, banged him on the elbow with a bottle of freshly squeezed orange juice and said, ‘Tom Jones!’ because the last time I meet him was on the Tom Jones TV programme.
And he says, ‘What?’ and I says, ‘Tom Jones!’
So he points to himself nervously and says, ‘No, I'm James…’
But the sexploits of EMF drew attention away from declining chart positions, each single slipping further and further away from the worldwide Number One slot attained by ‘Unbelievable’.
The tabloids turned on them for selling the idea of drugs to schoolchildren and having too much sex .
There were tales of tears, rumours of religious frenzy, accusations of sexism and dark, whispered hints of burn-out and nervous breakdown.
And it's all right here on their new album ‘Stigma’.
The tragic musical story of a group of viciously exploited young men who rode the back of the drug-frenzied rock-shag monster for two full years to emerge at the end bruised and bloody and battered but changed —changed from grubby little knobsessed small-town caterpillars into beautiful, brilliantly SPIRITUAL butterflies.
But first — as usual— we're going to hear about Zac's foreskin, Pop Will Eat Itself never flushing the toilet, drugs, ‘stompers’, why smart drugs turn your piss dayglo green and why female pop journalists all want a good shagging.
We are in Madame Jo Jo's — a chic transvestite bar in Soho.
It is only two o'clock in the afternoon and already me and the boys have had more beer, sex, drugs and Nintendo than you'll have all year, you sad  f— !
‘No, no, no!’ says Derry.
‘It were half a bottle of Evian, 12 grapes, a piece of cheese and a small tomato.
It was a Scooby snack.
But none of them were crushed, you could have eaten it if you'd have wanted to.’
He is, as usual,spiritually discussing how much food Zac from EMF can stuff under his foreskin at any one time.
‘The ‘ot dog on the plate was good when he put his dick on the paper plate with all the other ‘ot dogs and put salad cream and…
‘He'll have like a styrofoam burger-box and he'll cut a hole and put like his balls and his dick up there and then he goes —‘Oh!
Does anyone want a bite of my burger?’’
WELL, COME on!
They are only babies!
But babies capable of real spiritual depth.
A few minutes later, the lights imperceptibly dim as Derry, in a hushed, trembling voice, dredges the darkest pits of his soul for horrifying memories of the most disgusting and dehumanising torment ever suffered by a human being.
‘Arr!
Well, the thing is, Pop Will Eat Itself used to come down to my place when I first had it and absolutely  f— the place up.
We used to do speed and stuff and I could never get to sleep because they'd always be in my bed — it was like having kittens in the house.
 F—in' red wine on the carpet, that was bad, white wine on the walls so you get like a nice green tinge and they'd been sick and broken the toilet seat and they'd shit in the toilet and not flush it, fags in the coffee cups, I don't let them come round any more…’
Each member of EMF has read and understood Oscar Wilde's The Picture Of Dorian Grey —truly understood it.
They have seen Pop Will Eat Itself close up and seen in them the terrible cost of debauchery.
Fame, says Derry, has an awful price…
‘I got recognised by this real old stomper in the sit-down Chinese in Cinderford…’
And what, exactly, is a ‘stomper’.
‘A real old slapper!’ explains Mark.
‘Like a 32-year-old,’ adds Derry, ‘one of your mum's old mates who always used to come round your house when you were young and you always fancied her and she starts coming on to you later —‘Oh year!
What are you doing?
You're in that band, aren't ya?
Oh, I remember when you used to run around in your pants…’
‘My brother had that, din’ he?’remembers Mark.
‘My mum's mate is a stomper and she ended up staying round my house and jumping in the sack with him.
He was only 19 and she was, oh,an animal !’
But isn't that every young man's dream?
‘Not round our way it  in't !’ exclaims Derry.
‘They're well ironed!
They've flattened some grass!’
Are you fearful of older women?
Mark pauses and thinks.
‘Um, I'm a bit fearful of me nan…’
‘The thing is,’ explains Derry, ‘that women to us and women to you are two different things because women in the Forest are like something out of, uh, they've all got that sort of hillbilly vibe about them.
You'll never get them doin' doggy style or get any fruit out in the bedroom, it's like straight down and that's it!
It don't matter whether it's the bed or the bush…’
If you go down to the woods today, make sure it's not the Forest Of Dean.
Because every angel-dust dealer, acid head, mushroom freak, rugby player and total dickhead in the world lives there, apparently.
EMF make it sound a hell on Earth.
‘You'd ‘ave a riot on your hands if summat like a transvestite walked into one of them pubs, they can't handle stuff like that,’ says Mark.
‘Yeah,’ says Ian, ‘and that's just the Forest intelligentsia!’
‘Forest intelligentsia?’ says Derry.
‘Sounds like a  f—ing smart-drug.
Smart-drugs are all right if you can stand the colour and the stench of your piss while you're doing ‘em.
It's just like, y'know, when a cat pisses, it really stinks.
What the  f— have I been drinking?
It's like a real dayglo green colour, like fluorescent lime and if you sprinkle a little bit on the side of the toilet, when you go down to wipe it off you've got that green ring around it, like…alien's blood !’
THE REASON EMF are in such a subdued and reflective mood is that they are depressed.
A female journalist from Smash Hits — a magazine that used to love them, but it's all over now — has not only slagged their record off, she has claimed that they are — wait for it —sexist !
‘She's heard,’ claims Mark with confidence, ‘that we all wear crotchless knickers, that's what it all is.’
‘Yeah, but we're not sexist, are we?’ pleads Derry.
‘We're too young to be sexist.
Like if an older band started saying some of the things that we do then they'd be sexist because they're older and more respectable.
I think it's just because of our image that people think we're sexist because people are a bit intimidated really.
They're just intimidated because we're good looking…’
‘She's probably frigid.
She probably needs a good…’ starts Mark, but he stops himself just in time.
‘Um?
Yes?
A good what?’ scolds Derry.
‘Whoops, bit of Shaun Ryder there!’
Has, I wonder, the recent easy availability of all the sex they can handle done EMF's head in?
Does familiarity breed contempt?
‘I spend more time with me hand, it's a lot less  f—ing hassle,’ claims Mark.
‘Be frank, on the road you don't want all the bullshit, sitting up all night with them, chatting to them, they nick your  f—ing mini-bar, nick your clothes.
Knock one out and go to sleep, it's the easiest way, innit?
Really …’
Derry claims that the band much prefer English women to American women because most English women wouldn't touch them with a bargepole and therefore are ‘more of a challenge’.
‘It's a social thing,’ ruminates Ian.
‘If you just go and talk to a girl in a club in England, she'll think you're stupid.
You need some sort of connection…’
You mean you don't just go —‘Hello, I'm in EMF, fancy a shag?…’
‘Yeah, well, I've tried that when I've been really pissed up,’ admits Mark, ‘and it's never really worked.
I've ended up with a drink in the face, exit really quickly, her boyfriend didn't really like it much…’
‘I mean we're not really like EMF in real life , claims Derry.
‘In real life we're really pretty shite.’
‘We're really quite nice,’ says Ian, ‘I think the whole groupies thing is a myth…’
‘Arf!
Arf!
Arf!’ arfs Derry.
‘He ain't 'arf spinnin' one there!’
‘No, this is true, I've never met a girl I'd just shag and leave — I always fall in love!’
‘WHOOP!
WHOOP!
WHOOP!’ says Derry.
‘ F— me!’ says Mark shaking his head, ‘an’this is supposed to be the one with the  f—in' brains in the band!
 F—in' sad, innit?’
‘No!’ says Derry.
‘He's right!
It's not sexist!…
I mean we 'ave…
I mean, people ask us and we tell 'em!
We're young, we haven't got girlfriends, we might not be around in a year's time so, like, milk the cow while she's full of milk, really.
I don't want to deny anything — it was  f—ing great.
But it wasn't sexist …’
So why did (tabloid hack's name withheld for legal reasons ) write that article about you being horrible womanisers?
‘That's easy!’ says Derry.
‘It's because she wanted us to shag her.’
‘Gagging for it…’ adds Mark.
Ian silently rolls his eyes.
NOW, YES, at last— EMF's spirituality .
I'm sure you don't want to hear about Mark's cousin getting done for selling crack mixed with concrete, or the Forest Of Dean whizzkid who tried to get the band's mate to give them heroin so they'd all become addicted so he could make a profit out of them, or Zac sticking his finger up a chicken's arse, do you?
Good.
Mirror, mirror on the wall, who's the smartest of them all?
The wisely-silent James
Deep and meaningful Ian makes a new friend backstage at Madame Jo Jo's
‘There was a bit of shit past the one knuckle,’ says Mark, ‘I noticed that.
He tried it with a pig but the pig just pissed  everywhere, he wasn't having it.’
Yes, spirituality, Ian?
‘This record is about spirituality, it's about finding your identity.
There are a lot of internal things going on, there are a lot of lines about searching for that kind of thing , like they're here !
‘I think it does have something to do with drugs, because if you look at all those Spiral Tribe people who've just been on E for so long, y'know?
You need some sort of order and some sort of security, it makes your mind so sort of universal that you look for some sort of order…’
One of the marvellous things about your lyrics is that they're complete bollocks, they don't actually mean anything, do they?
‘Oh but they do!
One of the marvellous things about this record is that there's so many references to all sorts of things that have happened to us over the last couple of years.
There's stuff about infidelity and trying to keep it quiet, for instance.
And James has a line in there about ‘I've never had this much…’
I dunno, you never had this much but there's more .
It's like somebody is watching it all for you…’
Who is?
‘Well, in this case it's like aliens.
Do you know what I mean?
I don't know if you've ever felt that, it kind of comes in totally  f—ed up and there are people all around you guiding you and they're bringing all my friends to me, y'know…’
Yes the mysterious ‘people’ who ‘look after’EMF — otherwise known as your record company, you dozy drug-addled twat!
Oh, hush!
Ian is obviously a deeply spiritual person and I for one am NOT going to take the piss out of him as he recounts to us his close encounter with ‘them’.
‘OK, so it was a drug experience, it was mescaline, right?
It is amazing, you see why the American Indians took it, to get into their spiritual world, and they were there.
 F— knows who they were.’
‘And they were there and nobody was there at the same time !’ says Derry.
‘Schubert Dip’, Ian tells me, was written at a time of innocence, frivolity and irresponsibility.
On ‘Stigma’, EMF show their scars…
‘We write for ourselves, anything we did write that was, like, upbeat and jolly, got thrown out immediately…’
You daft bastards!
You probably threw out three Number Ones!
‘Yeah, so who wants three Number Ones?’
‘ME, YOU SOFT GETS!’ shouts everybody else on the planet.
‘Yeah, well,’ sighs a world-weary Mark, ‘when we got to Number One in America it was pretty great and pretty terrible and basically you have to be pretty shit to get to Number One in America, we kept on saying that to everybody…’
‘And the trapping of having to go on radio stations and saying, ‘Hi, how are ya doin'?’ and all that sort of press…’moans Ian.
‘Sounds absolutely  f—ing terrible!’ says an £80 per week toilet cleaner reading the NME in Scunthorpe.
I mean, do me a favour, it's better than working isn't it?
You're getting paid enough, aren't you, f—ing hell!
It's spiritually damaging, is that what you're saying?
‘Oh  f— off! snaps Ian.
‘It's serious to us, this is…’
‘For us,’ explains Derry, ‘success is something that we don't want, spiritually, if you like…’
You want to be The Family Cat, don't you?
You want to travel in a Transit van and sleep on people's floors.
Just give me all your money and you'll have no problems.
Come on!
Hand it over!
‘But,’ says Derry (I thought there'd be a ‘but’).
‘But when you sell enough records you can say  f— off, f— off!
But yer average Carter, The Wedding Present — they haven't made enough money to say  f— off, they're still Joe Blow…’
But I just don't understand why you want to stop being exciting pop stars and become boring rock musicians.
Pop stars are far nicer people than rock stars.
Wouldn't you far rather hang out with Kylie than Bono?
‘I think I'd rather hang out with U2!’
BORING BASTARD!
‘We're just trying to do it on our own terms.
I mean — where is pop?
And where is rock?
That's very Spinal Tap, isn't it?
Look, after coming off tour I've just got no  f—ing politics, religion, anything.
I just don't want to know about it, that's not through money, that's just through, y'know, f— , who cares.’
You bunch of whiners!
Ned's Atomic Dustbin, right?
Not an ounce of talent, nobody wants to shag them, been on the road every single night for 25 years and all for a once-a-week bag of chips and a saveloy between them if they're lucky.
You don't get them writing albums about how horrible it is being adored!
They get on and do the job!
Why don't you just pull your socks up and smarten yourselves up?
‘If you'd have said that to Led Zeppelin,’ postulates Derry, ‘they'd have had their manager  f—ing shoot you!’
‘We did get down and do the job!’ murmurs Ian.
‘We worked  f—ing hard, writing and recording, like, every day!’
Aren't you worried that you'll kill the goose that  laid the golden egg?
‘We are the goose,’ says Ian, ‘and our goose is  f—ing cooked.’
There is a stunned silence…punctured at last by shrill, almost hysterical laughter.
THE INTERVIEW is over.
Believe it or not, it's been a very pleasant experience for all of us.
Not once did EMF lose their tempers at my teasing or threaten me with physical violence.
It's all been a bit of fun, bit of a laugh really.
And then they emerge from the shadows, clutching clipboards and notepads and schedules and questions and microphones and make-up bags and fan mail…
Being a pop star means never being alone…
Oh-so spiritual Mark: if you live by the sword…
Derry finds another animal to play with
SINGLES
JOINT (YES PLEASE) SINGLE OF THE WEEK
EUPHORIA: Mercurial
From the controls of our very own Sherman and his partner Steve Dray, comes one of the few techno records I've heard that has a real big city passion and a cinematic panorama to it.
Largely instrumental, it's like warm soapy water, soothing and enveloping you in the last bath of the day.
Clint:
What's passion though?
It just depends on where you're at at the time.
You can't say that all music made by machines is robotic and unfeeling, just because you play guitars it doesn't mean you've got soul.
Graham:
This is great!
It's neck and neck with Madonna.
C:
I really like this, it reminds me of a John Carpenter soundtrack and I really like his stuff.
I suppose it's a bit like Orbital, that type of area, I dunno, I can't keep up with it all.
Basically this has got a good feel to it, a good tune and a good throb.
Oh God, I dunno which to choose as Single Of The Week .
Oh dear, I'm totally drawn, erm…(long and thoughtful pause )
G:
I'm gonna have to rush you Clint, you've got the fondue set — that's yours to keep — now do you want to gamble for the car?
C:
Oh blimey, the Euphoria one was the only one which grabbed me on the day, but I've a lot of attachment to The Orb…
Let's say you've only got £4, you can only buy one record.
Which one do you buy?
C:
Oh, err, ooo, err…
The Orb?
G:
Congratulations.
C:
It was the free window sticker that pushed it but…
I'm still not sure.
Well why don't you have one SOTW each and one joint?
C:
One joint?
Yes please.
EAT: Shame
Off-beat folk rock with an early XTC twitch.
Oh good.
Just what we need in these times of trouble and economic strife and Cud.
G:
No, I'm not really into that type of thing.
But you don't want to rubbish someone 'cos you're not into what they're into…
Ha!
Course you do.
C:
Can't wait, that's why we're here.
LET US AT ‘EM!
G:
I've never heard them before.
But the chorus is dead catchy.
C:
Just file it under ‘Doesn't Do It For Me’.
Singer Ange has got guts, he did get his willy out on stage once.
C:
Did he?
Oh well, I'm all for that.
GRAHAM'S SINGLE OF THE WEEK
MADONNA: Erotica
This record shouldn't be called ‘Erotica’, it should be called ‘SHAG’.
An extension of ‘Justify My Love’ with a sandpapered down rhythm, yet more breathless ‘Vogue’-style commentary and what appears to be the sound of squeaky bedsprings.
Madonna is saying, ‘Don't you wish you had as much sex as often and as uninhibitedly as me?’ to the poor old lights-out, pyjamas-on proletariat.
AGAIN.
Graham:
I think that's brilliant.
Real sex appeal.
Clint:
Yeah, it was very steamy, perhaps too blatant though, subtlety is always a good factor.
What's the line —‘Let me take you from behind’?
I mean what's wrong with a kiss for God's sake?
It's the same with Prince — it's great having a bit of rumpy pumpy on the TV with a few cheeky videos and lots of naughty bits, but it's becoming a little standard.
Personally, I think she could've been a little cleverer, lyrically.
But I'm sure she doesn't give a flying  f— what I think.
G:
I like the blatancy of it, it's just a fun pop single and for a sleaze record, I think it's the best.
Madonna always does it the best.
Good luck to her, she knows she can get away with being sexy and saucy.
I LOVE IT.
Maddy: ‘Who are Pop Will Eat Itself band?’
REVIEWED BY: POP WILL EAT ITSELF
YOUR HOST: GINA MORRIS
PRINCE: My Name Is Prince
Still on the subject of shag records, here's Prince — doing a rather bizarre Hammer impression.
Perhaps that's why he feels the need to remind us that His Name Is Prince.
Imagine Bivouac singing ‘Hey, hey, our name is Bivouac and we're pretty good at playing the guitar’— self-obsessed, self-important, self-self-self, and a bit more self.
G:
There's a place for crass music I think.
I like it, it's totally upfront and that appeals to me.
C:
Yeah, I guess it depends on what titillates you at the end of the day.
Prince has turned into David Icke!
Check the line, ‘And on the seventh day God created me’.
C:
Yeah, Earth to Prince.
Mind you he's probably taking the piss.
He can do what he likes now he's practically Mr Time Warner.
LEMONHEADS: It's A Shame About Ray
If I held the winning ticket this would definitely be my Single Of The Week.
‘It's A Shame…’ is the title track from the Lemonheads' enthralling album and it's beautiful.
Evan Dando and ‘special’ guest vocalist Juliana Hatfield are the college radio Sonny & Cher, the his'n'hers play-off sounding particularly sublime even when confined to just ‘that bit at the end of the last chorus’.
Warner Brothers have no idea what they're sitting on here.
C:
I have no concept of that, it's lame.
It doesn't light my candle.
Heathens.
Philistines.
PULP: Babies
Cud die!
Sheffield's Pulp are the kings of Lion Pop (whatever that is).
Not yet signed to a major, but reassuringly, still peeping out of the wardrobe of their best friend's older sister.
This jogging last-of-the-summer-wine single sees singer Jarvis apologising for an imagined (we hope) boyhood affair.
It's sad, it's seedy, it's splendid.
And I haven't even mentioned the B-side, ‘Sheffield Sex City’, which will ensure that your palms are damp until Christmas.
G:
I thought that was great.
I love the cheesiness of it, he's like a camp C&W singer.
It sounds really original doesn't it?
Yeah, but it's weird because they epitomise and revitalise the naff '70s.
Did you hate it, Clint?
C:
Didn't particularly hate it, I dunno, I mean I had no idea that they were camping anything up from that record.
There is a wacky feel but perhaps you have to see them live.
I can't say yay or nay to that really.
G:
A difference of opinion, Geoffrey, press your buttons and gamble away.
MY LIFE WITH THE THRILL KILL KULT: Sex On Wheelz
I thought we'd killed Zodiac Mindwarp.
Sadly no, his grimy, greasy, talentless ghost lives on.
If only they'd had as much sex as Pulp, this childish dry wank might have half a hint of the lascivious, mobile intercourse it so pathetically promises.
C:
Let's have a look at the sleeve, always an important factor and, oh, yes — it's got a chick on it.
The Glamour Dyke.
Mix sounds worth a listen…
Erm, that had a B-52's ‘Rock Lobster’ vibe to it.
G:
Well, I can say without question that was the most trebly record we've heard today.
If you're into high frequencies, buy this record, the treble's nearly off the scale.
C:
Madonna does crass with class, whereas this has noooo class.
It's quite Crampsy, I probably wouldn't be as swift to the bar when they started playing as I would be when the Lemonheads were on, though.
KRISS KROSS: I Missed The Bus
C:
We loved ‘Jump’— we tried to do a cover version of it.
We learnt the dance and everything, thank God we didn't let that one out of the rehearsal room.
I suppose to a 12-year-old kid, missing the bus is a pretty big deal.
C:
Should've been called ‘I Missed The Charts’.
G:
Or ‘I Missed The Point’.
Tch! kids, eh?
SLR: The Drunken EP
Do you want the Drunk Side or the Hangover Side?
Graham looks at his third can of beer thoughtfully.
G:
The Drunk Side I think.
SLR are an insistent London rap ‘posse’, not to be confused with SL2 of ‘On A Rubbish Tip’ fame.
Key track ‘Devil In Disguise’ sounds desperate to assert its macho bollocks.
Ultimately, it just gets on your wick.
C:
Nope, it doesn't light my candle!
The idea of having a rapper and using a James Brown melody line as your hook was done a long, long time ago — by us!
I'm not saying we were the first, bloody hell, it sounded dated when we did it.
Sorry lads, we can't help ya.
AMBASSADORS OF FUNK: Super Mario URBAN HYPE: The Feeling
Black Lace goes dance.
Hot on the heels of Andrew Lloyd Webber's ‘Tetris’ theme, ‘Super Mario’will be Number One for 16 weeks.
So daft and entirely empty-headed it's life-affirming.
G:
Well, there you go — if you've got Super Mario…
C:
And you're six…
G:
…it's probably quite amusing.
It's not exactly techno but techno is going through the ‘Two Pints Of Lager And A Packet Of Crisps, Please’ phase that punk went through.
This is taking off where ‘Sesame's Treet’ and ‘Pugh, Pugh, Barney, McGrew’left off.
If only Urban Hype had left off!
No catchy line, not even a stolen one, just the sound of some people muttering in an underpass and the giveaway line ‘There's no feeling’.
C:
Didn't they do the ‘Pugh, Pugh’ record? he says — with his finger on the pulse.
(Clint snatches the needle off the record after 50 seconds).
G:
Well, wasn't that shite?
GALLIANO: Jus' Reach
‘Recycled’ it says on the sleeve.
Clever wording.
Remixed, reissued, repackaged, re-available, if it's a hit this time, Galliano will be laughing all the way to the bottle bank.
More Sunday afternoon than Saturday night, this takes you all the way to Soho and leaves you there.
G:
I like bands that sound like they've got 87 punters in ‘em.
I'd like 87 punters in our band, but if we had that many, we wouldn't be able to carry on our caviar and cocaine lifestyle.
VERVE: Gravity Grave
The Levitation It's OK To Like are back with their third single.
‘Gravity Grave’ drifts in lovingly and then — whoops!— Mad Richard starts to taxi up the runway.
Graham leaps from his chair and almost tears the arm from the record.
G:
FOR  F—'S SAKE!
C:
(Laughing) I went to see this lot live once and like, it was all really moody and I honestly thought the singer was about to launch into some sort of mime routine, I mean, he's such a  f—ing pansy.
Dribbling shite.
THE CURE: Letter To Elise
G:
Arrrgh!
The Cure!
We've reviewed one of their singles before.
I fancy I slagged it off and then about a year later I loved the whole album.
This is like every other third track off a Cure album ever.
That's good.
C:
They do tracks like that, don't they?
I mean for every great Cure record you get an inferior follow-up with all the same ingredients but without the spark.
G:
I wonder why he's still miserable with all that cash?
C:
Well, probably because Elise has left him.
I dunno.
I don't know what he's on about.
CLINT'S SINGLE OF THE WEEK
THE ORB: Assassin
Are you sleeping comfortably?
The Steptoe & Son of ambient soup are back, following their Number One album ‘UFOrb’ with, well, a Number One single, Sensual, meandering and long, this is the equivalent of a BBC Sound Effects disc — you use it rather than sit back and enjoy it.
It's designer Radox.
Clint:
(Grabbing the sleeve) Oh that's gonna entice you into buying a record isn't it?— Free Orb window sticker with every purchase…
I'll have two!
One for every house in the window.
Very profound!
C:
Erm, yeah (he lies), but I really meant to say every window in the house.
Actually, I've already heard this, it's brilliant.
I love it.
Total ambience.
Don't you like The Orb?
Not really.
Atmospheric…uplifting…but ultimately, an awayday without a return.
I get travel sick, anyway.
C:
That's bollocks, The Orb are great live.
I just prefer a bit of real action.
At least you lot run around — that's much more interesting.
C:
(Adopting Alan Freeman voice) Well, it's the only way we can create the, er, new musical language that we knock together, roughshod, in the rehearsal room.
When we first started we didn't even like sequencers and samplers, we had cheap guitars and we could sound like The Buzzcocks.
We got bored of that, we moved on.
Anyway, I've made all the excuses — it just depends where your head's at.
Graham:
(Whispering to Clint) I think we bluffed our way out of that one.
The Orb: great record, great sticker
PUBLIC NME
ROCKING AT THE RUBY DOOBY DO!
Can we throw a party or what?
Not only have we put together the world's most brilliant album with ‘Ruby Trax’, but our launch for said fund-raising collection proved to be a veritable celeb magnet.
The doors of the Design & Decoration Building in Pimlico Road opened early last Monday night and the star-studded stampede commenced.
And just who was there, we hear you ask?
Well, just about bloody everybody, mate.
to name but, erm, lots.
Sadly, wayward genius GEORGIE BEST, who turned up with The Farm, slickly eluded our lensman and left after about ten minutes to dance his studded boots off at some West End nightclub.
More fool him, say we!
Public NME says ta very much to the numerous volunteers from The Spastics Society who helped make the bash such a big success.
Enjoy the snaps, then turn the page and find out how to get your mitts on the magnificent ‘Ruby Trax’.
Stripes are smart!
Who would have thought that the dapper VIC REEVES and the delicate DANNII MINOGUE would shop on the same sartorial street?
You would not believe it, ladies and gentlemen.
‘Anyway, Miles, as I was saying…
Julian Cope's new single, as I said in the NME, is a taster from the ‘Jehovakill’ album and once again finds the old maestro…’
MILES HUNT enjoys a chinwag with SEAN HUGHES
BOB MORTIMER and MILES HUNT discuss SEAN HUGHES' views on pop music
What?
Surely world drinking champion MIKI from LUSH can't be sick after just 217 ‘strong’ lagers?
Oh no, ROB NEWMAN's just told her a joke!
‘Party?
What party?’
Youngsters, eh?
A couple of beers and BLUR (right) find themselves in the ‘Where Are We Now?’ file.
Just out of shot: the DALAI LAMA shares a joke with GEORGE BEST.
‘Ruby Trax’ chart stars DANNII MINOGUE and CATHAL COUGHLAN give marks out of ten for Bryan Adams' original of ‘Everything I Do’.
‘Wouldn't bother with the shades, mate, nobody'll recognise you anyway…
WORLD PARTY animal KARL WALLINGER enjoys the ever perky company of IAN McNABB
‘Are you sure you can manage all that?’
Left: PETER HOOTON and ROY BOULTER of THE FARM ask SHANE MACGOWAN a very silly question, while (right):…
SHANE MACGOWAN continues to enjoy his bottle of wine, while JON BEAST has to settle for a double chin.
GREAT POP THINGS — Career Guide £2: THE OPEN UNIVERSE HOW TO BE A PROPER ‘STUDENT’ CUT-OUT AND KEEP GUIDE TO SEX, FOOD, CULTURE AND SPENDING YOUR GRANT!
By Colin B. Morton + CHUCK DEATH
Another thing you will have to do is have a BIG AFFAIR.
Make sure it's a really traumatic one which will haunt you throughout your adult life, like them plays on thursday night T.V.
FRIDAY 3rd OCTOBER fresher's week starts: I think I will  **** X and then cruelly discard him/her
4th OCTOBER  ****ed X last night and then discarded him or her Aren't I cruel tee he?
SUNDAY 5th OCTOBER X  ****ed me, I am in lurve…
MONDAY 6th OCTOBER X only wanted me for my body I will commit suicide 
IMPORTANT STUDENT OBJECT: Your diary.
Be sure to record details of your student life every night before you go to sleep, maintaining brutal honesty re: SEXUAL ENCOUNTERS
if you want to be a student you'll need some exam passes (a-levels or G.C.S.E.s) or to be a member of the Royal family…conversely you don't need any academic qualifications to be a Royal (see  Phillip , Prince) Di, Lady etc.
But just who can be a student?
Not everybody, it seems.
Those of you who are not students yet but are contemplating it consult our informative qualification guide (above)…
HANGING…
This has several advantages:
1)
It gives you a stiffy if you're a chap.
2)
Fringe dangles down elegantly, clothing retains its ‘ruffled’ lines.
You are hep even unto death.
3)
Fellow students will be traumatised etc.
DEAR GREAT POP THINGS, I THINK THIS IS IN BAD TASTE MY FRIEND JUST COMMI…
If studenting gets too much for you, you can always commit suicide: Try hanging — this is very popular and has several advantages — see above.
Good Luck with your studies!
THE END
MAKE MINE A TRIPLE (OR A DOUBLE)
So sorry you couldn't schmooze your way into our fabbo album launch shindig, dear reader (see pages 28 and 29 for celeb-filled fun), but hey!
Why not buy a copy of ‘Ruby Trax’ and have a party of your own?
Orders have been flooding in since the offer started last week, so make sure you're not last on the block to get your hands on what is not only THE ALBUM OF THE YEAR, but THE BARGAIN OF THE YEAR.
For a paltry £19.99, the triple CD package can be yours; for a mere £14.99 the double cassette box can be, erm, yours too.
And when you consider that those prices include a £5 donation to The Spastics Society, the music works out at a fiver per CD or cassette!
Can you seriously say no to that?
Cheque books at the ready, pop kids, here comes the nitty gritty.
Fill in the coupon on this page and send it off with the appropriate cheque 
Marvellous.
Those ‘Ruby Trax’ in full…
FILM
EDITED BY IAN McCANN
DO THE RIGHTS THING
‘Optioning’, they call it; nicking best-selling authors' plot-lines we call it, but increasingly novels have formed the bedrock of Hollywood's biggest grossing films.
NICK HASTED investigates the often perilous journey from printed page to silver screen, reveals a few stories still waiting in the wings — and dares film-makers to have a crack at some of literature's more, erm, cerebral delights…
HOLLYWOOD HAS never been too sure about reading.
But it knows a good book when it buys one.
In fact, a large proportion of American cinema has been based on the ‘optioning’ of best sellers, in an endless, sleazy scramble for respectable cash.
Some of these options have been wildly productive: Margaret Mitchell's Gone With The Wind and Harper Lee's To Kill A Mocking Bird exist to this day in relation to broadly faithful films.
Other books have been championed for years by obsessed option-owners, like Saul Zaentz's doomed production of Peter Matthiesen's At Play In The Fields Of The Lord , and Cronenberg's Naked Lunch , the latter understanding that cult novels can't usually be filmed at all.
As Catch 22 ,Slaughterhouse-5 and others have shown, some books have too slippery and permanent a place in people's lives to become credible movies.
Still, the buying goes on, with almost every major writer currently loaning at least one title to Hollywood.
Some of the titles currently optioned have been around for years, but the prospects are tantalising.
JUDGE DREDD
ONE OF the legendary ‘properties’, Fleetway's comic-strip psycho-cop has been optioned for eight years.
Lost in legal wrangles as Fleetway changed owners, it was beaten to the punch when Robocop hit big with eerily ‘similar’ ideas.
Now it's finally ready to happen, with Arnold Schwarzenegger musing whether to donate his presence or not, while two teams of screenwriters work feverishly to November deadlines, and four top directors — including Paul ‘Basic Instinct ’ Verhoeven, Peter ‘Bill And Ted's Bogus Journey ’Hewitt and George ‘Mad Max ’Miller — politely wait for the Terminator's nod.
FEAR AND LOATHING IN LAS VEGAS: Hunter S Thompson
GONZO JOURNALIST Thompson's chemically-aided vision of American apocalypse has been attempted on film before — in Art Linson's Where The Buffalo Roam — but, in an interview with Ian Parker in 1988, he claimed adapting Fear And Loathing itself, his infamous account of a hallucinogenic journey to a cop convention, was also on the cards.
The only problem was the, term,drug content , a problem Dr Thompson planned to solve personally, by an ingenious change in his ending; instead of driving up to a plane, he would drive into it, and explode.
‘All dope fiends would be punished,’ Thompson explained, ‘along with a lot of innocent people, it would be an anti-drug film, in a way.’
Surprisingly,Fear And Loathing In Las Vegas remains unmade.
Fear And Loathing In Elko , Thompson's recent account of a night of whores, sex dolls and gunfire with Judge Clarence Thomas (allegedly) has yet to be optioned.
NEUROMANCER: William Gibson
GIBSON'S VIRTUAL reality- noir best seller was optioned in 1985 by Cabanas Roy Productions, set up by two kids at the Beverly Hills Hilton Hotel who, with backing from the bored wife of a prominent New York plastic surgeon, decided to become movie producers.
After commissioning a script from Buckaroo Banzai 's Earl McGroush and scouting locations, they quietly returned to their previous existence as bellhops, allowing Neuromancer to return to Gibson's agent, where it attracts continual interest, notably from Robin Williams and a desperate Bruce Willis.
MONEY: Martin Amis
WHILE ITS successor,London Fields , a classist, sexist,very cinematic yarn of femmes fatales , darts and death in the capital awaits a buyer,Money 's comedy of '80s excess just awaits a budget.
Debut screenwriter Adam Brooks may one day direct for British producers Enigma, while Gary Oldman waits patiently to play cleverly-worded ‘hero’ John Self.
HARLOT'S GHOST: Norman Mailer
ONCE THE hippest and most respected writer in America, Mailer's stock has fallen since the early '70s, a trend not helped by his disastrous relationship with Hollywood.
Arriving in LA in the ‘50s to write screenplays, his own film-making began with underground crashes like Maidstone , and ended with self-adapted bomb Tough Guys Don't Dance — a failure which at least stopped schlock producers Cannon from exercising their option on Ancient Evenings , a book of reincarnation and endless sex.
Now his latest novel,Harlot's Ghost , a CIA-based counter-history of post-war America, is being adapted for Francis Ford Coppola by Apocalypse Now co-writer John Milius — a mingling of warped machismo which promises greatness.
THE CEMENT GARDEN: Ian McEwan
CURRENTLY RACING past EM Forster (dead) as the most popular British novelist to film, only McEwan's ‘difficult’The Child In Time remains un-optioned.
His original screenplay,The Good Son , awaits the unwanted attentions of Macauley Culkin, while John Schlesinger makes spy novel The Innocent with Anthony Hopkins and Isabella Rossellini in Berlin.
Meanwhile The Cement Garden is finally being shot in Britain by writer-director Andrew Birkin, with Andrew Robertson, Charlotte Gainsbourg and Sinead Cusack — eight years after it was bought.
HENDERSON THE RAIN KING: Saul Bellow
BELLOW'S 1959 account of an American millionaire's existential adventures in Africa was optioned in 1966.
In the decades since, it's been glanced at by the likes of Hal Ashby, Anthony Quinn and Jack Nicholson, before finally arriving on the desk of Blake Edwards, where a script by Cry Freedom writer John Briley jostles for space with Son Of Pink Panther .
FILM THIS!
FOUR BOOKS THAT DEFEATED HOLLYWOOD
GRAVITY'S RAINBOW: Thomas Pynchon
NOT ONLY the classic time and dimension-bending post-modern tome — as the notorious recluse's agent informed me, ‘Pynchon does not allow film .’
Erm…
KATHY GOES TO HAITI: Kathy Acker
EXUBERANT, EASY-going porn from Acker's paying-the-rent days, an X certificate wouldn't cover chapter one.
The film Jonathan Demme was born to make, but never will.
THE SATANIC VERSES: Salman Rushdie
‘NONE OF Mr Rushdie's books are optioned at the moment,’ said his agent, mysteriously.
THE SPY WHO LOVED ME: Ian Fleming
A DARK, unsettling tale told by an abused woman trapped in a motel with two killers, with Bond making a strange last-reel entrance, Fleming was as unnerved as anyone, forbidding a film.
The producers nabbed the title, remade You Only Live Twice , and probably breathed a sigh of relief.
TOME BE ANNOUNCED: FIVE BOOKS THAT SHOULD BE FILMED
ON THE ROAD: Jack Kerouac
THE BOOK director Bob Rafelson kept almost filming with Jack Nicholson in wistful '70s classics like Five Easy Pieces .
Rafelson could still direct it; a young Dennis Hopper could be speed-talking jazz-junkie Dean Moriarty, with a young Jack N as the semi-straight Sal Paradise.
In the '90s, Crispin Glover would be Dean, Kyle MacLachlan Sal — but who'd give them a lift?
A PRAYER FOR OWEN MEANY: John Irving
OWEN MEANY is a boy who kills his best friend's mother with a baseball, and decides he is an instrument of God.
The best of Garp writer Irving's quirky yarns must be a movie: Jonathan Demme to direct, John Turturro as the older Owen, a young Donald Sutherland as his mournful mate.
USA: John Dos Passos
THE ORIGINAL and the greatest Great American Novel, a suppressed Depression best seller which captured the American Century's rancid first quarter.
An epic requiring Coppola and Scorsese:The Godfather 's socialist flipside, and a white Malcolm X .
DANCE WITH THE DEVIL: Stanley Booth
THE NOVELISTIC story of The Rolling Stones and Altamont, a tale so glamorously awful it took its author 15 years to recover enough to write it.
A cortisone-lipped Daniel Day-Lewis as Mick, Tim Roth as Keef, Gary Oldman as Brian; Charlie Watts as himself, Bill Wyman written out.
A Ken Russell picture, naturally.
THE QUIET AMERICAN: Graham Greene
GREENE'S '50s novel of a naively evil American agent in Indo-China and the cynical English hack who befriends him has been timely ever since it was published.
Tim Robbins as the well-meaning monster, Richard E Grant as his nemesis, Roland Joffe to direct, back in the killing fields.
ALSO IN DEVELOPMENT HELL:
ADRIAN ‘FATAL Attraction ’ Lyne is considering a James Dearden-scripted remake of Nabokov's pre-teen-temptress tragedy Lolita , previously filmed by Stanley Kubrick, Lyne's recent Jacob's Ladder suggesting he may do a decent job.
Most alarming delusion-of-grandeur award is a dead heat between Hugh ‘Greystoke ’ Hudson's Moby Dick and Richard Attenborough's ‘version’of Thomas Paine's democracy treatise The Rights Of Man .
Hard-boiled thriller king Elmore Leonard, a long-time victim of awful movies, is now at the mercy of Bruce Willis, intending to produce and star in Bandits and, more encouragingly, star in Killshot for Henry: portrait Of A Serial Killer 's classy director John McNaughton.
Jack Nicholson follows 1987's Ironweed , his last substantial acting job to date, with another William Kennedy Depression-era novel,Billy Phelan's Greatest Game , playing a ‘tarnished pool hustler’ involved in the kidnapping of a city boss' son, while Mickey Rourke may play Kennedy's gangster hero Legs for Ironweed producer Gene Kirkwood.
Nic ‘Don't Look Now ’ Roeg intends to direct wife Theresa Russell and James Spader in Chicago Loop , Paul Theroux's tale of transvestite Chicago psychotic the ‘Wolfman’.
The Silence Of The Lambs director Jonathan Demme and screenwriter Ted Tally are preparing an unlikely adaptation of David Lodge's Midlands college — and-factory novel Nice Work , already filmed by ITV.
David Lynch has optioned D M Thomas' story of Freud, a woman and Russia,The White Hotel , and has a more obviously Lynchian novel in development, Delacorta's Vida , about a 16-year-old who becomes a private eye just as someone starts shooting the architects of America.
Superstars in search of role models; Bette Midler is developing a biography of Berlin chanteuse and Kurt Weill wife/collaborator Lotte Lenya, Barbra Streisand does the same for pioneer Time photographer Margaret Bourke-White, and one-time Billie Holliday Diana Ross produces and stars in one of three current versions of Naked At The Feast , '20s Folies Bergere legend Josephine Baker's biography.
Randy Shilts' AIDS exposé And The Band Played On will be an HBO docu-drama directed by Joel Schumacher, a specialist in the life-death borderline after Dying Young and Flatliners .
John Malkovich wants to direct Libra , Don DeLillo's highly-regarded, post-modern examination of the JFK killing.
Two of America's hippest and quirkiest directors, Paul ‘Eating Raoul ’ Bartel and Gus ‘Private Idaho ’Van Sant, are collaborating on a feature version of the biography of prime hipster Warhol.
Gary Oldman: poised to play Martin Amis' gross ‘hero’ John Self when Money makes it on-screen
John Turturro: what a Meany
Hunter S Thompson: the dope fiends would be punished in the celluloid Fear And Loathing In Las Vegas
Jack N waits to flex his acting muscles again
AS YOU LIKE IT
SHAKESPEARE, EH?
They teach him at school, they teach him at college, and they keep making films of him, too.
Must we throw these iambic pentameters at our pop kids?
As You Like It doesn't even have the cinematic crutches of the few Shakespeare movies that have worked — no Henry V trench-warfare here.
Just the boy-meets-girl tale of Orlando (Tiernan) and Rosalind (Croft)— all in ‘relevant’ modern dress.
Amazingly, it works.
The film's main assets are Croft and Tiernan, both young enough to ignore the weight of Shakespeare's name and get on with acting — they put their words at the service of fresh emotions, not the other way round.
Edzard's staging of much of the film in London waste ground also works well, making most of the characters' wandering dossers in a very modern vacuum.
In fact, the film's whole feel is current, going from scene to scene in an inconsequential manner more Mike Leigh than Sir Larry.
As You Like It is also very British — it mixes ages and accents and acting styles enough to suggest an island-full of people falling in and out of love, or at least bumping into each other.
Only the ‘comic’ gabbling of alleged joker Jones spoils the mood, but this is still a pleasant way to spend a couple of hours.
It's also a relaxed, romantic ad for Bill S, more alive here than he has been for decades.
People's Poet, we salute you!
Emma Croft as Rosalind in As You Like It: Shakey in Cardboard City shock!
OTHELLO
WRESTED FROM obscurity and restored to something approaching its original state, Orson Welles' 1952 film of Shakespeare's play is a visual feast and an aural dog's dinner.
Shot in high contrast black and white, on location in Rome, Venice and Morocco, it was financed with money Wells made by acting in films like The Third Man and The Black Rose .
Shot, as a result, in sporadic bursts, it combines awesome monochrome compositions with abysmal post-synchronised dialogue that bears little relationship to the character's lip movements.
Nothing if not bold, Welles opens with a funeral procession in which the bodies of Othello and Desdemona are borne away by a line of figures dramatically silhouetted against a pale sky, while Iago is led away in chains to be hoist aloft in a metal cage.
The image is stunning, both for its bold conception — starting at the end of the play and therefore reinforcing the fatalistic inevitability of the star-crossed lovers' fates — and for its self-conscious echoes of Soviet director Sergei Eisenstein's graphic silent movie style.
Throughout the film, Welles makes extraordinary use of architectural space, dramatic lighting and judicious camera movement.
Just before the climactic murder, Desdemona's maid Emilia is shown in deep focus closing her mistress's door, while in the foreground Othello's dark shadow looms ominously on a white wall.
But for every example of an imaginative triumph over adversity — Roderigo's ill-fated attempt to murder Cassio was staged in a bath-house for want of the necessary costumes — there are half a dozen examples of night scenes clearly shot in broad daylight, choppy scene transitions, and poorly recorded dialogue that drains Shakespeare's lines of much of their beauty and meaning.
that said, it's a must-see revival, but expect to enjoy more with your eyes than with your ears.
WHITE MEN CAN'T JUMP
OH YES they bloody can, even if they don't know when to stop jumping and when to get their lives together.
White Men Can't Jump is a little big movie.
Nothing happens.
Guys play basketball, goof off, gamble, hang out, argue and ignore their women.
There's also a sub-plot about Gloria, one of the guy's girlfriends, wanting to be on a TV game show.
Sidney Deane (Snipes), a black street basketball player in Los Angeles, plays for money.
One day this long-legged white geek turns up at the court and the two get into an argument.
Any fool could see that the geek is Woody out of Cheers , but maybe Sid is too busy shooting baskets to watch it.
Anyhow, Geek proves he can beat Sid as good as anyone else, even though White Men Can't Jump, and the pair team up to lick all-comers.
But Geek er, sorry, Woody, er sorry, Billy, has problems, such as the mob after his butt and a pretty bad temper.
What he should do is chill out, get a job and pay off his debts, but he doesn't.
Gloria (Perez), his girlfriend, wins a lot of money on a gameshow she's spent her whole life practising for, but Billy bets it all on a basketball game.
Will he win?
And if he does, will she still be there to celebrate?
A few points to bounce around.
Billy is a dickhead.
Rosie Perez is the sexiest actress in the world bar none.
Only a headcase would prefer a ball to her.
Sidney is almost as dumb.
He's got a job and everything going for him, and yet still he teams up with Billy.
And basketball is boring.
White Men Can't Jump is funny, touching and slushier than a wellington boot full of dog's wee.
It is entertainment and no more.
You might just love it, or it might just drive you mad.
VIDEO
U2: Achtung Baby, The Videos, The Cameos And A Whole Lot Of Interference From Zoo TV
THIS IS the London Planetarium, that is a waitress dishing out freebie glasses of wine, and over there is a Zoo TV camera crew interviewing tall men in suits.
Yup, while most bands ship out promotional copies of their videos, U2 bring the Mohammeds to the mountain and turn the viewing experience into something (typically) larger than life.
Then they don't show the video in its entirety.
Rumour has it this Achtung Baby  thang actually lasts for an hour — the assembly is being treated to a full 36 minutes of footage. this either means that a lot of it is rubbish or it's so blinking brilliant They couldn't show the lot lest our brains exploded with pleasure.
To get to the point,Achtung Baby (from the bits I've seen), is a rough ‘n’ ready run through U2's career from ‘Boy’to Lads In Shiny Leather.
For a band who've frequently balanced on that tightrope ‘twixt credibility and downright incredulity, it's a fittingly bewildering mish-mash of live footage, snippets of interviews, shots of them recording the ‘Achtung Baby’ album in Berlin and stacks of stuff from the first leg of the current World Tour.
To be honest, the early footage is excellent, a sassy spin through the spiky likes of ‘I Will Follow’ and ‘October’which, unless you lived in Ireland at the start of the '80s, is rarely-seen-before material.
It made me want to run out and play the first two albums post haste, which is no bad thing.
Then comes the bluster of ‘War’ and the flag-waving foolishness of Red Rocks; the consummate sleekness of ‘Unforgettable Fire’, dancing with the crowd at Live Aid and the brooding ‘Joshua Tree’; and drummer Larry Mullen Jr admitting, with a sly grin, ‘I don't think the lyrics mean shit!’
It's a whirlwind ride which rarely lingers for more than a minute on individual songs until we reach the '90s and the Zoo TV extravaganza.
Between you and me, ‘Achtung Baby’ is a moderately invigorating record which tends to suffer from abusing every gimmick in the proverbial rawk 'n' roll Bible.
Sure, the scrambled images and snappy messages vomited forth by the touring technology are a visual blast from the present, but take away the Trabants, the self-mockery and the TV sets and the musical fabric is thinner than an anorexic aardvark.
Still, worth the admission price for ‘Stories For Boys’ and the chance to see all those Bono hairstyles in full.
Chris Waddle perm?
This way, sir…
Bono: perms, I got ‘em!
REELING AROUND
WOODY's family affair cash-in…
TIM BURTON's Plan 9…
WHOOPI gets spooked again…
DARYL walks tall
What Woody should have done was get divorced sooner.
As predicted, the box office receipts on WOODY ALLEN's Husbands And Wives , his film of the script of the, allegedly, life, is busting New York cinema receipt records.
Maybe Woody, Mia and Soon-Yi will announce that the whole business is a publicity stunt for the movie, but somehow that doesn't seem likely.
Spike sells out?
SPIKE LEE has entered into a contract with Universal Pictures that is scheduled to run for years.
It gives Universal the rights to first refusal on all Lee's projects as writer, director, producer and actor and everything developed by his 40 Acres And A Mule company.
Lee has worked with Universal before, teaming up with them for Do The Right Thing ,Mo’ Better Blues and Jungle Fever , and it was his experience with the company that has encouraged him to sign his life over to The Man.
The deal allows Spike to acquire other film-makers' projects in a production role, with Spike telling Variety magazine, ‘I'm serious about producing scripts, giving young film-makers a chance.
We're also trying to find young, female African-American film-makers to give them a shot.’
So if you're Afro-American, female, below the age of 12 and with the next Do The Right Thing in the back of your mind, call Universal and ask for Spike.
Spike's Malcolm X biopic is due for release on November 20.
TIM BURTON, currently Hollywood's golden boy with Batman Returns , is not just sticking to the obvious — even if there's a vast amount of money in it.
His next direction project is a biopic of EDWARD D WOOD, acknowledged as the worst film director of all time.
The role of Wood is reckoned to be going to JOHNNY DEPP, who Burton directed in Edward Scissorhands .
Wood, whose films were so far away from the mainstream that they didn't even make it as C-movies, was responsible for Plan 9 From Outer Space and Glen Or Glenda , a transvestite special in which Wood appeared in several parts…male and female parts.
Exactly why Burton is so interested in Wood is yet to be revealed, but if some of the crankier bits of Scissorhands are anything to go by, he's just managed to lift himself above that level…
Is there no stopping the woman?
WHOOPI GOLDBERG, queen of the movie-stealing cameos, is to reprise her role as a medium for Ghost II .
Currently in pre-production, Paramount have their top scripthounds on a storyline dominated by the part  that won Whoopi an Oscar in the original movie.
Whoopi is already in a regular psychic-type role in Star Trek ,The Next Generation , so it should be a doddle for her.
After the Unforgiven comes the unlikely.
JOHN MILIUS, writer of the crummy Judge Roy Bean , is getting a chance to redeem his vision of the American West in The Texas Rangers , which, as a teenage western, should cover the bases that Eastwood's OAP-packed epic didn't.
Milius is directing, and it's the supposedly true story of teenagers recruited as lawmen in the 1870s.
More trash movies adored by Hollywood?
It is said that a remake of the legendary crap shocker Attack Of The 50-Foot Woman is in the works at HBO, the cable production company with, no, surely, it can't be true, DARYL HANNAH in the title role?
Apparently so, although it's not been confirmed who'll take Hannah's place when the big babe is normal-sized…
Ms Hannah's agents are tight-lipped at present.
More likely casting: NICK NOLTE in a musical?
JAMES BROOKS, director of Broadcast News and Terms Of Endearment , and producer of The Simpsons , is overseeing I'll Do Anything .
It stars Nolte, although we're told he won't actually sing but he plays the dad of someone who does.
Songs are supplied by Prince and Sinead O'Connor.
ROBIN WILLIAMS, as previously suggested in Reeling Around , will not be playing The Penguin in Batman Re-Returns after all.
However, to compensate, he's in the latest DAVID PUTNAM production,Being Human .
Director is BILL ‘Gregory's Girl /Local Hero ’ FORSYTH.
Doubtless Williams is getting five times the salary of everyone else in the movie — but that's fair: he's playing five roles.
Whoopie sees a ghost — or is it Ghost 2?
Johnny Depp as Edward Scissorhands, director to Tim Burton's homage to cult crap film-Maker Edward D Wood (it sez here)
SOUND AND VISION
WEDNESDAY OCTOBER 7
Banana Splits on THE BIG BREAKFAST SHOW (C4, 7.25ablimmin'm!)
ROUGH GUIDE TO CAREERS advises you on how to get into the theatre.
Having a ticket should do the trick.
Captain Kirk is turned into a robot on STAR TREK.
Fill in the joke yourself…
Ah!
The pilot episode of M*A*S*H*, ie before it went craposki.
INSIDE STORY: MULES looks at women who smuggle drugs and THE PRISONER looks like was made by men on drugs.
Why is Lou Costello on THE STEVE ALLEN SHOW every week?
Bit late to ask now, I suppose.
HIT THE NORTH sees Mark Radcliffe take on a session from No Man who are some of Japan.
THURSDAY 8
Hurray!
RISING DAMP is still on.
WAITING FOR GOD, ONE FOOT IN THE GRAVE.
How old are we anyway or what?
About six, if BOTTOM is to be believed.
Then there's LATER, a new music show which this week has Was (Not Was), Khaled Disposable Heroes of Hiphoprisy and Sugar.
Let's hope it's not crap, eh?
Get weird!
Watch Jan Svankmajaer's totally terrifying ALICE.
VIBE has Betty Boo and John Fashanu.
FRIDAY 9
SOUNDS OF THE SIXTIES goes very pop.
It's a laff but is THE MAN FROM UNCLE?
EAST looks at racist violence tonight.
BLACKADDER GOES FORTH in which Hugh Laurie shouts too much and then I RENOUNCE WAR does conscientious objectors.
TERRY AND JULIAN is as ever followed by PAUL MERTON Don Cherry is the focus of BIRDLAND tonight and there's Nic Roeg's BAD TIMING with, erm, Art Garfunkel.
Whoever Portuguese rockers LX90 are, they're on EUROMIX tonight and RAVE is in Cardiff.
SATURDAY 10
HEAVEN CAN WAIT is a brilliant 1943 movie about a dead bloke.
DAD'S ARMY have fun with animals.
Hurray for CASUALTY, eh?
It certainly isn't as silly as RENEGADES, a 1989 ‘thriller’ with Kiefer Sutherland and Lou Diamond Phillips.
Crikey!
GOODBYE COLUMBUS is six hours of TV about that bloke what invented America, ranging from COLUMBUS O about Columbus, Ohio to SOAPS AND SALSA, about Latin American soap operas.
It all ends at 3.55am.
America is also represented by the legendary ONCE UPON A TIME IN THE WEST.
SUNDAY 11
The Quireboys and Betty Boo appear in THE O-ZONE.
Dickie Attenborough goes to public school in THE GUINEA PIG.
Mr Magoo meets a bear in GRIZZLY GOLFER, A WORD IN YOUR ERA features dreadful people from history — like Ned Sherrin, Helen Lederer and Rory McGrath.
Ha ha!
THE LOOK looks at the concept of logos.
Fabnatch!
At ten o-clock it's that old stand-by ICE COLD IN ALEX.
Fair enough.
Or there's Streepowoman and Bob De Niro in the soft FALLING IN LOVE.
ACROSS THE LINE gives us the live joy of Peace Frog.
MONDAY 12
PEBBLE MILL is back!
BROOKSIDE is on.
It always is.
A BIT OF A DO might be fab and the great fat Mexican folk hero Superbarrios is in THE ‘OTHER’ AMERICAS.
A civil rights campaigner dressed as a wrestler in a cape?
Yessir!
FILM ‘92 interviews the bloke whose fault Fatal Attraction was, director Adrian Lyne.
The great Cathy Dennis sings and Jeremy Hardy, and others jest on LONDON UNDERGROUND.
THE MIX says a big hello to Jamiroquay live.
TUESDAY 13
OMNIBUS does Ridley Scott's Columbus film tonight.
Was Shakespeare gay?
Why is Brigitte Bardot so interesting?
If you care, then watch some people on WITHOUT WALLS go on about these topics at great and possibly mind-numbing length.
The great NETWORK is on.
Mad as hell!
EARSHOT features everyone's favourite band The Shamen who talk about being famous, and, presumably, anything else that comes to mind.
They're a laff, eh?
The Shamen: A laff-riot awaits listeners to Radio 5 next Tuesday (allegedly)
Sugar: raw cane roll on new series Later, Thursday
LONG PLAY
EDITED BY ROGER MORTON
NEW FAST AUTOMATIC DAFFODILS
Body Exit Mind
SO THE new FADS have, ironically enough, outlasted that most infamous of fads.
While most of the Manc pack ran aground by the time their debut albums hit the bargain bins, these ugly ducklings have started the second lap with their feathers unruffled and their rhythms decidedly unflurried.
Good for them: the New FADS always had a tough, idiosyncratic streak, and nowadays it's holding them in chompingly good stead for the guitar-slashing likes of ‘It's Not What You Know’.
Theirs has always been an unflappable fusion of brawn and brain, a gang of studey types overloaded on steroids and early '80s angst.
I guess that their time should come now, that ‘Body Exit Mind’ is the lump of plastic destined to send the band soaring away from the peripheries and into the teeny publications.
Yet — for good or bad — this is a record that's difficult to love, being as it is a stubborn, stand-offish stab into the darker areas of pop.
You can spot the weirdy inclinations from several kilometres, like the one and a half minute wig-outs of ‘How Much Longer Must We Tolerate Mass Culture’ and ‘Missing Parts Of Famous People’, or the eight-minute wibbling challenge that is ‘Music’.
Here are people who quite blatantly don't give a  f— for social pleasantries, leastways not when they can lock themselves into a groove and cunningly misplace the key.
The snag is, once you've wobbled your head through the enthralling opening trio of ‘Bong’, ‘It's Now What…’ and ‘Stockholm’, a greyer shade of pale takes a stranglehold on proceedings.
‘Bruises’ is an elongated approximation of head music, but it is too sturdy to be outright trippy; ‘American Money’works itself into a right old livid lather, but Andy Spearpoint's guttural snarls hardly qualify the song as a great party trick of our time.
Even the drowsy breeze of ‘Patchwork Lives’ feels weighed down by its grim surroundings.
‘Body Exit Mind’ is the sound of a band sticking to their guns, no matter the tidal wave of opposition.
But this is a sprawling, occasionally crawling album made for the New FADS' fans more than Mr & Mrs Casual Punter.
What's it all about?
I can only (hap) hazard a guess.
BAY CITY ROLLERS
The Collection
THE SWEET
Blockbuster
THE PUNK generation now spend half their time whining about the smothering blanket of baby boomer nostalgia.
They spend the other half engaging in a noxious nostalgia of their own.
Currently harking back to the '70s are When Saturday Comes , Vic Reeves, Teenage Fanclub, Carter, Morrissey and me.
The Bay City Rollers were the first and greatest of the manufactured teenybop pop bands for gurlz.
Unlike their prototypes (The Monkees, The Archies), the Rollers were all hideously ugly, wonky, Scottish and gonky.
Only The Glitter Band and Leeds Utd were uglier.
Not one of them had even a plucked smidgeon of the pseudo-lesbian strap-on-dildo  shaggability of a McCartney or a Cassidy, but that did not matter.
They were the ugly Stones to the Osmonds' beautiful Beatles and, luckily, ugly was in.
Aaaaaah, young pop fan, we ‘ad proper music in them days.
‘It's A Game’, ‘Money Honey’, ‘Shang A Lang’ and, um, a lot of padding from the Rollers' post ‘77 career after they'd been shot down in flames, plucked, shucked, gutted, roasted, eaten, shat out and buggered in the back of the neck and then locked in the attic with Mad Auntie Maude from Nottingham for two weeks by the ultimate manufactured band, the Sex Pistols.
The Sweet were a lads’ band.
Part car park attendant and part prancing transvestite from The Rocky Horror Show , in the horny hands of killer songwriters Chinn and Chapman they were gods of brutally plastic pop.
‘Ballroom Blitz’, ‘Hell Raiser’, ‘Little Willy’, ‘Wig Wam Bam’, ‘Blockbuster’ and a lot of self-penned and inferior shit that we won't mention here.
Mixing mincing aggro with stubbly-legged transvestite chic, The Sweet were the hideous hangover soundtrack to which the hippies awoke, nearly gagging on the stench of soured patchouli, spermy dog-ends and drugvomit filled ashtrays.
Little did they know what further horrors lay in  wait .
UNDERGROUND RESISTANCE
Revolution For Change
VARIOUS
Trance
HERE ARE two compilations whose existence obviously means more than a desperate milking of the public udders.
For a start, the compilers obviously knew what they were doing.
The Underground Resistance double set captures hard-to-find missives from the Detroit techno-terrorists' formidable back catalogue.
UR say their tracks mirror their moods.
If there's a riot going on — whether in the street or their heads that particular day — they'll hack out brutal cyber-groove assaults like ‘The Punisher’ or, erm, ‘Riot’.
A bright, cornflakes-ad kind of day could bring out an airy item like ‘Sometimes I Feel Like…’
UR continue to expand their operation with new labels, but maintain a staunchly underground bunker mystique which could never come out and turn to breakbeat commercialism.
The slogans and symbolism (sometimes reminiscent of early Clash) would be meaningless if the music itself wasn't ever-progressing, innovative and darkly atmospheric in that classic Detroit kind of way.
When the Motor City's techno scene was dying in the early ‘90s, they took hold of the tattered flag and now it stands proud and menacing.
This is their first high-profile UK release and a very good place to start if you're cheesed off with squeak-core.
The ‘Trance’ compilation immediately lays its cards on the table.
This collection of hallucinogenic hypno-grooves from the likes of Herbal Infusion, Boomshanka, Mind Over Rhythm and Acorn Arts is the sound of the UK club scene in late 1992.
All emphasis is on groove and mood as tracks develop, meander and ease their way into limbs and consciousness through a subtle, irresistible blend of spicy aural tinkerings and cavernous basserama.
The cumulative effect is often a contagious euphoria which some call ‘progressive’.
Guerilla tagged it the ‘dub house disco’.
I call it heaven.
PHLEGM WERE THE DAYS
SEX PISTOLS
Kiss This
NEVER MIND The Box Here's The Sex Pistols, rising again like the most filthy and glorious cadaver ever to rest its bones in rox coffin.
Here the band finally make the transformation from good looking corpse to attractive corporate venture — and a lot of fun it is too.
Fans of the band's music don't particularly get anything extra from the rag-arsed studio orphan ‘Don't Give Me No Lip, Child’ or the ‘Live At Trondheim’CD which ends, in tribute to ‘Metallic KO’, with the sounds of dumped instruments and broken bottles.
But perhaps they're allowed a new perspective.
To understand the rage you had to see the age, when art curses and kicks society so much it changes it, you have to realise they arrived in a perfect time-spot.
No matter what the intellectual window dressers did to make these boys seem less attractive, the fact of the matter is Guy Debord could never play guitar like Steve Jones, and the only Society Of The Spectacle anyone in rock ‘n’ roll is interested in nowadays is that of Messrs Bausch & Lomb of California.
Shame.
Creative politics may well have served the lads handsomely at their inception, but it's the stupid sounds that secure their place in history.
Lie-don's lyrics, his jack-knife turns on single words like ‘Va-cunt’, the inspiring segueing of jackboots marching, hands clapping, and a drum's beat, and the basic thrill of the most rancid and magnetic voice in rock made the Sex Pistols the most intimidating and exhilarating fanfare of contempt and discontent going.
And at the heart of all this is a thuggish rock ‘n’ roll band not too distant from the young Who or Slade — though historians would prefer The Stooges — singing songs about laziness, boredom, theft and sekshual anguish.
Kicking in the brains of anyone intent on settling down.
If the unique guitar/drum intros of many of the recorded works here (you know them all) are proof of their creative gift, the live CD is an example of the contempt they had for the carnival going on around them.
‘Gud Seive The Quinn, Gud Seive The Quinn’ chant the lambchop Euro punx, much to the disgust of the band who can be heard narkily having a go at the audience and each other between the awful squawl of their live sound.
If it's attitude you're after, there's gobfuls of it.
Suspicion, contempt, hunger and aggression, but that's enough of me.
The package leans nicely towards self-parody with the title of the album drawn by hand in a pool of phlegm.
Considering the amount of Pistol-packing product available (and you could print a booklist here), ‘Kiss This’ does actually add more, if only for the sleevenotes.
The memoirs of four men sitting back in The Garrick, perhaps.
‘The fanatics out there take things far too seriously.
They'd probably be appalled by the way we view our own material,’ says Honest John.
If you're looking to history for inspiration or entertainment, or an indecently brilliant rock ‘n’ roll story, then comes feast on ‘Bodies’, ‘Anarchy’, ‘Problems’, the finer recorded works of Ye Olde Sexe Pistols.
If you're Pist Off by the ‘Sell Out’, forget it.
But remember this:
‘I recommend a lousy record company every time you run out of songs.
The material is glorious.’
Today's rebels have good intentions and weedy records, The Pistols had bad intentions and brilliant records.
May history preserve them in venom.
No future?
Don't make me laugh…
NINE INCH NAILS
Broken
TRENT REZNOR (for he, and not a proper band as such, constitutes Nine Inch Nails) has often been regarded as the poor, weedy, commercial relation of Al Jourgenson and Jim ‘Foetus’ Thirlwell when it comes to unlistenable industrial hardcore.
But this album suggests otherwise.
‘Broken’ is a mini-album, recorded without the permission of the American record company, a much harder, uglier affair than the debut album, ‘Pretty Hate Machine’, and all the better for it.
The Adrian Sherwood-isms which previously dominated NIN's sound are gone, replaced by an incredibly aggressive but still quite electric musical approach.
They occasionally lapse into the one-dimensional hatecore tedium that makes the likes of Foetus and Nitzer Ebb so unbearable in more than small doses, but elsewhere they sound like Metallica-esque grindcore, MBV bliss-noise, Napalm Death and even, on the best and last track of the album, dub reggae.
On the down-side of this variety is the fact that ‘Broken’ doesn't hang together that well as a whole package, probably because it's essentially a compilation of unreleased tracks from the last year's studio experiments.
Trent's an obnoxious, contrary bugger at the best of times, as the lyrical concerns show — in between the obligatory expletives, they range from hate through the sub-Nietzschian ideas of cultural slavery and, well, back to hate again.
More irritatingly, for reasons best known to his ego, the last two untitled tracks are situated ten minutes into the abyss after the last listed track of the album.
And they just happen to be two of the best tracks.
What a twat.
Gripes aside, though, ‘Broken’ shows all the signs that Trent Reznor has shaken off the shackles of influences and found his own suitably idiosyncratic niche.
BAKE MY DAY, PUNKS!
MUDHONEY
Piece of Cake
ONCE UPON a time, not so long ago, Mudhoney swore an oath of allegiance to independent labeldom in the belief that small was best…
No sell-out.
Trends have since changed, however, and Mudhoney have forced themselves to jump on the major label bandwagon, if only to survive.
Older fans have been irked by this change of direction.
Mudhoney's move from hardcore grunge to quite melodic (with a serrated edge) pop has caused a few followers to bail out in search of more ‘serious’ stuff.
I stopped listening to Mudhoney after ‘This Gift’, the follow-up to their still superior ‘Superfuzz Bigmuff’ which failed to deliver anything as immediately impressive.
‘Piece Of Cake’, however, suggests that my loss has probably been greater than theirs.
This second slice of the band's ‘dessert album trilogy’ may not be as abrasive as Mudhoney's earlier attack, but there's still enough cut and thrust to enjoy and thrill along to.
The 45 they've decided to pluck from this last collection if ‘Suck You Dry’, a glorious slab of grunge that opens with the innocent sound of a tambourine beating time and then explodes into a vampiric rocker that comes across like the successor (at last!) to ‘Touch Me, I'm Sick’.
From this they slide into ‘Blinding Sun’, which has the mighty Mudhoney wallowing in a '60s psychedelic timewarp where the influence of the 13th Floor Elevators can be clearly heard wailing in the basement.
The joy is, though, that they do it well and they do it their way, in the same spirit that Primal Scream celebrated The Elevators' ‘Step Inside This House’…with style.
What also keeps ‘Piece Of Cake’ interesting are the short instrumental segues that flit between tracks, a simple and effective way for Mudhoney to let off some creative steam before thundering into another, more constructed, song.
It's like The Who's fab ‘Sell Out’ LP of yore, how that particular record's charm relied on its novelty value as well as the strength of the songs.
‘Piece Of Cake’ has that same plaything quality running through it; a record to be cranked up loud, hit with a hammer — but never really forgotten.
VARIOUS
Panic In Detroit
THERE IS, it is generally agreed, something going on in Detroit right now.
And it's not a riot.
The Motor City may be burning again, but with a bush-fire eruption of techno creativity and high-profile activity which sees new labels starting every week, previously underground legends like Eddie ‘Flashin'’ Fowlkes and Carl Craig taking on world dance music arenas and long-silent pioneers like Derrick May and Juan Atkins recording again.
Although the UK's pure techno underground is starting to clamber out of the bunker, it is a telling indication of the music's current polarity that this marvellous compilation should emanate from the Belgium Indisc operation (distributed here by Pinnacle).
Detroit's electronic foragers have had pitifully few outlets in Britain — but it is in countries like Belgium, Germany and Holland that Detroit's sonic architects are honoured and near-deified (obviously they're too deep for new jack wank-happy US).
This album gathers together a cutting edge slice of Detroit ‘92 and — if it gets the right profile — could have the same seismic effect as Virgin's ‘Techno’ collection did in the late '80s.
Using customary pseudonyms, the artists to be found on this album will give any Detroitphile palpitations, especially as they are previously-unheard tracks.
Juan Atkins is in electro moonscape mode, Eddie Fowlkes hits the deep garage button, and the much-loved Open House team, who so impressed on Carl Craig's now-defunct Retroactive label, display their lush aural waterbed.
There's the rapidly-rising Kenny Larkin with his exotically sepulchral ‘Serena X’, and two deep, dreamy excursions by new blood Dan Curtin.
And could the mysterious Voyager Times Two responsible for Inertia's Saturn-skimming ‘Satisfaction’ be Carl Craig himself?
Such are the mysteries and such is the music which made Detroit techno the most innovative musical event of the last decade.
This record shows that it's on the rise again.
And before misguided preconceptions regarding that T-word nip possible investigation in the bud, this music is as far removed from our pitiful squeak-core as it is from Billy Ray Cyrus.
Start to panic.
VARIOUS
Honeymoon In Vegas
(SCENE: A huge golden tub, studded with emeralds and filled to the brim with the tears of baby narwhals.
Sitting in the tub, naked except for a top hat, BONO whiles away the evening playing Monopoly with the ancient Chinese philosopher LEI PING)
LEI PING:
One night I dreamed I was a butterfly and, upon waking, was never able to discern whether I was a man who had dreamed that he was a butterfly or a butterfly dreaming that he was a man.
BONO:
That's nothing, me bucko!
Once I dreamed that I was asked to contribute to the soundtrack album of a film called Honeymoon In Vegas , featuring a selection of Elvis Presley songs performed by a variety of artists.
The whole thing was not much cop, from Billy Joel's photocopy of ‘All Shook Up’, Bryan Ferry's comatose assault on ‘Are You Lonesome Tonight’ and a whole host of country dullards called Travis Tritt and Vince Gill doing drab versions of the usual suspect songs.
And not even Willie Nelson's charmingly languid ‘Blue Hawaii’, Jeff Beck's weird instrumental ‘Hound Dog’ or John Mellencamp's Tom Waits-esque take on ‘Jailhouse Rock’could avoid the final horror — me doing ‘Can't Help Falling In Love’.
In the dream, I was singing it in all me funny voices, from the squeaky one to the gruff one and it was a pile of bollocks.
And when I woke up, it was true.
LEI PING:
Are you going to throw that flaming dice or do I have to do it for you?
BONO:
Those dice.
Dice is plural.
(LEI PING thumps BONO and goes home with his top hat.)
Mudhoney, fathers of the Seattle sponge scene.
NURSE, THE SKREEEEES !!!
MEDICINE
Shot Forth Self Living
NOW, THIS won't hurt a .Initially, Medicine seem more like a disease than a cure, their West Coast noise-annoys noodlings symptomatic not of any revolution or vital new musical movement, but of grudgingly dragging second-hand ideas through a hedge backwards.
You'd dearly love to claim them as one of ours , the latest American band to owe an unpayable debt to Brit-rock's influence — in this case My Bloody Valentine and what that yanks dozily call ‘Dream Pop’— but that would be too simple.
Medicine's all-at-once repellent and resplendent feedback hell racket has so many hidden depths and intricacies, it defies easy write-offs and hamfisted pigeonholing.
Yeah, that's great, it starts with an earthquake, ‘One More’, an insistent dentist's drill squeal out of which real drums — courtesy of seasoned pro Jim Goodall — and a rolling bassline eventually emerge, blinking.
The guitars scratch at your eyes, Medicine lynchpin Brad Laner mutters away in the background, and all of a sudden, it's nine minutes, eight seconds later.
Laner's controlled interference covers a lot of ground in its quest for perfection.
‘Aruca’ 's (yep) indie-dance beat/migraine squall play-off becomes the album's sublime, bittersweet pop song; ‘5ive’(sic ) mocks itself with hippy harmonies, and ‘Defective’actually charts standard MTV-rock waters, except with guitars tuned to stun.
Gorgeous pedal steel (suitably disfigured) hot-wires both ‘A Short Happy Life’(‘Dear Prudence’ for the ‘90s) and ‘Christmas Song’into weird, doomed life — which tells us much about Medicine's power to experiment.
What at first sounds like Americans with too much free time on their hands soon evolves into a startlingly open-minded and enriching panorama of soundgames and rock ‘n’ roll graffiti.
10,000 MANIACS
Our Time In Eden
THIS RECORD is the sound of a band trying to sneak out of the house without us noticing.
Five years ago or even longer, 10,000 Maniacs were a group mere millimetres away from a bursting greatness.
Natalie Merchant's voice — so emotive it could make you like a song about King Of The Gits Jack Kerouac and feel sorry for the little bunny rabbits that we cruelly kill for a laugh — rose through songs which flew and were simultaneously ecstatic and melancholy.
By rights, then, ‘Our Time In Eden’ should be their best record yet.
It ain't; it is a snoozesque item which rehashes old ideas in dull ways.
A song like ‘There Are Days’ is a four-minute summary of the highlights of ‘Blind Man's Zoo’— as indeed are ‘If You Intend’, ‘I'm Not The Man’, ‘How You've Grown’and most of the rest of this record.
The lyrics are pleasantly vague except for the curiously annoyed ‘Candy Everybody Wants’, which veers close to wounded cynicism and nothing much else happens.
Things sound glum.
To add some sort of spice, someone has had the bright idea of bringing on the JB Horns.
But 10,000 Maniacs might as well have added the sound of fishing slapping each other, so irrelevant is the instrumentation.
But it fits well with the plodding pointlessness of it all; ‘Our Time In Eden’ is a nice, ordinary, listless album.
SOCIAL DISTORTION
Somewhere Between Heaven And Hell
THOSE OF you who are old, sad, or obsessive enough to remember Social Distortion from their days as an early '80s San Francisco hardcore band might be surprised to learn that they now shift units by the truckload in America.
But it's not that surprising when you hear this rather dull collection of radio-friendly trad-rock numbers.
Judging by the picture on the LP cover, Social Distortion look like they would cut off your extremities and stuff them in your mouth if you even thought about calling them ‘easy listening’.
But all the previously jagged edges are ironed out and the sound watered down, presumably by the omnipresent hand of The Man, so that Billy Ray Wanker fans will buy it.
‘Somewhere…’ is a mixture of blues, country and Ramonesian punk which might be good if it wasn't played like Status Quo on an off-night.
The '50s/biker ‘live fast, die young’ ethos runs through every lyric, but the plodding pace of the music belies titles like ‘Born To Lose’, ‘99 To Life’, and ‘Cold Feelings’.
‘Somewhere…’ isn't a bad album, but it's terminally mediocre because there's no spark, no thrill, and not a whiff of danger or unpredictability within it.
All the same, it makes an ideal Christmas present for your dad.
EXTREME
111 Sides To Every Story
THEY'RE FAMOUS.
They're sexually attractive.
They went to music school.
This much we know about Extreme.
Musically, however, they have always been something of a mystery, flitting from style to style like a sort of rubbish Paul McCartney, cruising round different aspects of pop and soiling them.
Now we have ‘111 Sides’, a record which consolidates the sound, fury and attitudes of Nuno Bettencourt and his mates.
‘111 Sides’ is an artistic statement whose clarity of aim, musical achievement and depth of vision would make a dog puke up its ring in horror at how pompous, unfunny, dull, long-winded and self-indulgent Bobo The Pop Star can be after a couple of hits.
Extreme have made a concept album (Rule One of life: All concept albums are shit).
It has a chunk bout war and racism which suggests that these things are bad, a chunk about love and God, which is generally in favour of them, and a third chunk about life, also in favour.
No views of any interest are expressed.
Martin Luther King is dragged in yet again to deliver his ‘I Have A Dream’ speech.
Jesus is asked if he is angry.
God's death is posited.
A song called ‘Politicalamity’ wittily compares politicians to animals.
Musically, things are even worse.
The war stuff is generally bad Red Hot Chili Peppers riffs overlaid with unimaginative Queen-style harmonies.
The love and God stuff has lots of harmonies, acoustic guitars and, in ‘Seven Sundays’, a fairly near cousin of a half-decent tune.
The final 20 minutes is filled up with a song in three parts (Rule Two: All songs in three parts are shit, too) called ‘Everything Under The Sun’, which attempts to be like ‘Abbey Road’, ‘Tommy’, and ‘Dark Side Of The Moon’ all at the same time and instead sounds like the worst moments of 10CC, REO Speedwagon and every other would-be epic turd factory band of the 1970s.
It is, of course, a good thing that Extreme dislike war and racism, print addresses for Greenpeace and Amnesty on the sleeve and so forth , but they have nothing of interest to say on the topics (Nuno wishes that ‘we were all colourblind, so we could live together peacefully’, which is bad news for traffic light designers) and blow up their tiny philosophical points and questions to elephant size, but in the end, orchestras, big productions and songs in three parts cannot disguise lame tunes and lack of anything to say.
Away with this bloated crap.
JOHN CALE
Fragments Of A Rainy Season
SINCE LEAVING the ranks of The Velvet Underground for a solo career, John Cale has gone on to record a catalogue of solo work that is both voluminous and impressive.
Newcomers to Cale would therefore be advise to start with this collection, a live selection of works old and new with the occasional cover version throw-in for good measure.
Cale performs his songs simply, pounding out confident chords from a grand piano and then turning to an acoustic guitar in order to add another shade of grey to his musical palette.
His voice is strong, stark and brooding, but not without a certain amount of tenderness on occasion.
‘(I Keep A) Close Watch’, a Cale standard of great beauty, is treated like an old friend, a version that he gently teases from his keyboard with the skill of a poacher tickling a trout.
On ‘Guts’ and ‘Fear (Is A Man's Best Friend)’, however, the mood is one of aggression, especially at the end of each song which is deliberately hammered into oblivion with a few short, shocking strokes.
The same feeling of brooding menace wells up on his version of Presley's ‘Heartbreak Hotel’, only he decides to leave any anger on hold and transforms the rock ‘n’ roll classic into a haunting ballad that sounds as though it came from the pen of Edgar Allan Poe rather than that of Axton, Durden and Presley.
He resists playing the same trick twice with Leonard Cohen's ‘Hallelujah’, but the end result, together with its rainstorm finale, still manages to cast a gaunt and dramatic shadow behind it.
John Cale quotes from Macbeth on the cover of this.
With good reason…it's a bloody fine record.
PEEL ME A GREAT
VARIOUS
Ruby Trax
TUNES FROM pop's age of innocence — pause for mirthless laughter — visited by a charabanc-load of brawling E generation brats.
First important question: how many of the young people contrive to alert us to their cultural soundness by working  ‘motherf—er’into their interpretations?
Answer: At least two.
Carter introduce the exciting 12-letter word into ‘Another Brick In The Wall’ and EMF manage, barely credibly, to include it in a ramshackle trouncing of Joe Dolce's horrid ‘Shaddap You Face’.
Speaking as a man who rather enjoys cover compilations — and remembers with gratitude the ‘NME 's role in bringing us The Fall's ‘A Day In The Life’— I have to concede that the normal response to such collections is a powerful yearning to hear the originals again.
Popsters recording something for ‘Ruby Trax’ were faced, essentially, with two courses.
Either they win the faint gratitude of listeners by reminding them of the original with a faithful remake, or they rip the original to shreds and reassemble it in a manner pleasing to themselves.
I would rather musicians took the latter course — and so, I bet, would you.
Given the excellence of the cause which benefits from the sales of ‘Ruby Trax’ and the generosity of the artists etc, etc, it would be churlish of me to rubbish individual tracks — although there are one or two here which have tempted me sorely — so I will pick out some highlights for you.
Billy Bragg has the unusual gift of making other people's songs his own by the simple expedient of singing them.
His version of the Three Degrees' ‘When Will I See You Again?’ is wonderful; affectionate, warm and direct.
It is preceded by a respectful Wonder Stuffing of Slade's ‘Coz I Luv You’ and is followed by an astonishing cover of Willie Dixon's ‘Little Red Rooster’by The Jesus And Mary Chain.
‘Rooster’ comes to the compilation courtesy of The Rolling Stones' 1964 remake of Howling Wolf's original, yet I doubt any of these would recognise the song from the Reid boys' howling assault on it.
It is frustrating to know that they can still, if they wish, punch the button marked ‘Excess’.
When I was eyeball-to-eyeball with the humiliations of puberty, my greatest hero was skiffler Lonnie Donegan.
Lonnie's art lay in the reinventing of American folk and blues tunes and his anguished keening on such glories as ‘New Burying Ground’ and ‘Frankie And Johnny’is as unforgettable as a first kiss.
The Wedding Present approach his ‘Cumberland Gap’ but must have known they were doomed to failure.
Plucky kids, though.
‘Where Do You Go To My Lovely?’ is, in its original by Peter Sarstedt, one of my least favourite songs ever, and not even Welfare Heroine's best efforts can redeem it.
On the same disc, Teenage Fanclub engage those Byrds comparisons head-on by doing ‘Mr Tambourine Man’.
They emerge sounding just like The Byrds, but deliberately.
The second CD is given over in the main to what I think of as Mark Goodier bands (not a breath of criticism implicit in that, by the way).
Blur tussle with ‘Maggie May’ and Suede, whose current B-sides show them to be a better band than the extremes of hype surrounding them might have encouraged you to believe, cover ‘Brass In Pocket’.
The Farm seem to be this year's Band You Love To Hate, but their version of ‘Don't You Want Me?’ is by no means the throwaway novelty it has been presented as being.
A further use for ‘Ruby Trax’ on those long, winter evenings might be as catalyst for a ‘Who The Hell Did This One, Then?’party.
There are several songs here that I can't remember in their original form — not that I'm going to tell you which ones they are.
I remember Status Quo 's ‘Down Down’, though, and was disappointed that Cud drew back from an attempt at reproducing Quo's perfect repetition.
Elsewhere, I would recommend Ride's brave stab at ‘The Model’ and Vic Reeves' ‘Vienna’is certainly no sillier than the original.
Criticisms?
Why are so many of the tracks by cute white boys strumming guitars?
Man Of The Match?
Well, that would be between The Jesus And Mary Chain and a version of Dave Dee, Dozy, Beaky, Mick and Titch's ‘Legend Of Xanadu’.
This, in a classic demonstration of how to cover someone else's chart biggie, becomes, from the opening gurgling, at once and unmistakably the sole property of The Fall.
These people are beyond price.
Laughing all the way to the Banquo: Joanna-stompin' doom-rock behemoth John Cale
ELECTRONICALLY TESTED
The NME team's pick of the month's best LPs
PUBLIC ENEMY: Greatest Misses
FROM THE cocktail-lounge keyboard riff in ‘Louder Than A Bomb’, to the no-nonsense, horn-riffed hip-hop of ‘Radio Consultant’, ‘Greatest Misses’ is a fine compilation album, so don't come to it expecting another ‘Black Planet’.
But at this time, it's probably the only record Public Enemy could, or should have made.
BRIAN ENO: Nerve Net
‘NERVE NET’ is not the cure-all for Orb fans; no soothing meditative moods here.
This is Eno on the jagged tip, stabbing bits of broken glass into funk, jazz, electro, world and other-world to produce a sonic mutation clearly ahead of its time.
He's out there on his own, and that's,out there , in another squelchy world.
STEREO MC'S: Connected
A JOYFUL collision of sounds and vibes, influences and attitude, uptown trains and downtown nights, this album knows the score, and also for good measure, what time it is.
This, their third album, will see them jostling with Arrested Development, dcBasehead and Hiphoprisy for the rap rosette in all of those end of year round-ups.
CONSOLIDATED: Play More Music
THE ALBUM offers 70 minutes of Consolidated studio beats, mass production hip-hop honed into diamond-hard shapes by Jack Dangers' mixing, broken by snippets of Consolidated versus several audiences.
Not content with just threatening the ears, Consolidated seek to challenge the mind too.
And they do.
‘Play More Music’ makes that clear.
INSPIRAL CARPETS: Revenge Of The Goldfish
THE INSPIRALS' sound is the real thing: noisy, tinny, grumpy, fast, lyrical, roaring, dossy as a billygoat's eyes.
‘Revenge Of The Goldfish’ is a mighty, storming assault on the ears.
It has depth, fury and scalds the walls.
It is richer than its predecessors and more ridiculous.
‘Revenge Of The Goldfish’ is perfect Inspirals.
SINEAD O'CONNOR: Am I Not Your Girl
SINEAD HAS really pulled it off in a big, bold way; her honesty and emotional intensity permeate every bar, every nuance of every lyric.
Against the odds, she succeeds in making an intimate personal statement out of tunes that are almost public property.
She could sing ‘Chirpy Chirpy Cheep Cheep’ and make it hurt .
MOOSE: XYZ
AT A time when the easy option for a band like Moose would be to step up the distortion, rip off a few riffs and steam into the easy-money heaven where rock pigs run wild, they've flipped away on a heady, affecting tangent that's been traced in the last five or ten years by The Weather Prophets and Lloyd Cole, but rarely with such grace.
REM: Automatic For The People
THEY'VE CREATED an LP you can gain a lot from in times of trouble, that might be heavy going but helps you deal with life.
In their hands, music is no longer wallpaper, but a living breathing organism as old as the hills, an old friend.
Their hearts might be heavy, but there's a glint on the horizon, a new sun rising.
THE BALANESCU QUARTET: Possessed
POP FREQUENTLY benefits from string sections enhancing a song, but here Balanescu has altered the very nature of Kraftwerk — injecting flesh and blood, evoking warmth, passion and feeling where only industry and technology had previously operated.
If you believe classical music to be just the sound of margarine and cigar ads, get ready to have your preconceptions rumbled.
HAPPY MONDAYS: Yes Please!
WHAT SHAUN has arrived at is a shivery, discomforting after-thought on the Madchester boom — where the party people have to go home, after all — back to sore heads, stained sheets and bad habits.
And in so doing he has given us the joyrider's equivalent of Neil Young's ‘Tonight's The Night’, The Pogues' ‘Hell's Ditch’ and the Stones' ‘Exile On Main Street’— one of those awful black records to turn to when you're feeling at your most morbid.
SHORT CIRCUIT
EDWIN POUNCEY sifts through the latest crate of weirdness from the States, including The Cramps, Green On Red and a farmhand singing the psychedelic blues
ANDROMEDA: Return To Sanity
DULCIMER: Room For Thought
A DOUBLE dose of '70s UK rock which is sure to go down well.
Andromeda were a hard rockin' psychedelic trio who managed to put out one impressive LP on RCA before nose-diving into obscurity.
‘Return To Sanity’ gathers together all the odds and ends from that session and, in so doing, provides the full picture of a band who probably deserved better treatment.
Dulcimer churned out highly complex folk rock ditties with a strong sense of theatre added to spice their material.
They too released one, well weird, LP for Larry Page's Nepantha label, together with this unreleased (until now) psychotic gem.
‘Room For Thought’ is stomach-churningly twee in places, but there are moments when something spindly struggles to be heard through the forest of strings.
These two are not quite as intense as Background's recent ‘Traffic Sound’ collection, but they scrape pretty close.
CELL: Slow Blow
LOVE CHILD: Witchcraft
CELL, FROM Hoboken, New Jersey, slung a 45 out on Thurston Moore's Ecstatic Peace! label a couple of months ago and the word on the street was that here comes the New Nirvs!
Cell have got all that — and more — going for them, without having to resort to drooling over Kurt Cobain's toe caps.
Cell are the new breed with a sound that is confidently their own.
No wonder DGC are (allegedly) getting twitchy to sign 'em up.
This taster of better things to come sucks you in and hugs your soul close.
Love Child once paid homage to street musician Moondog on an EP called ‘Love Child Plays Moondog’ which Forced Exposure mag released with much snickering.
‘Witchcraft’ keeps the oddball theme rolling with tales of sexual fantasy with a Triple A man (the US equivalent of an A man) and ‘self-sabotage’.
All yelped out in a voice that would wake the dead or summon up the devil from the deepest ring of hell.
Originally formed ‘sort of as a joke’, Love Child sound like they're still grinning from ear to ear.
ROKY ERICKSON & THE NERVEBREAKERS: Live Dallas 1979
JOHNNY THUNDERS: Have Faith
A COUPLE of cults (one crazed, one dead) recorded in the death throes of their tempestuous careers.
Roky Erickson plays and hollers like the madman he ultimately became, rock's very own Richard Dadd, raving on about demons, dogs and alligators from hell.
Spooky, but somehow the world seems kinda empty without his eccentric personality to relive the tedium that rock has since slid into.
Thunders is another ‘hero’ who sold his soul to rock ‘n’roll.
Recorded live in Japan in '88, Johnny slams into a set of songs which bear all the hallmarks of his wild and reckless lifestyle.
Most telling of all are the three ‘drug’ songs which sign this selection off.
‘Too Much Junkie Business’, ‘Chinese Rocks’ and ‘Born To Lose’are pared close to the bone and chillingly too close too comfort.
NEGATIVLAND: Points
LONG BEFORE Negativland got right up U2's collective nose, they were busily cranking out a different kind of musical anarchy.
Their ‘81 ‘Points’ LP is considered to be their least successful venture by those who know, but what rattles out from every angle imaginable sounds pretty damn good to me.
Along with the usual sax, guitar, percussion set-up, the Negs have added a moped, puppies, meat, insects, a radio and some paper!
Their lust to be different is what produces music that is both peculiar and powerful.
You too should be listening to Negativland.
OLIVER: Standing Stone
THE OFFICIAL, artist-approved re-release of a private pressing from ‘74 that has since become a sought-after collector's item.
Oliver was, and still is, a farmhand who put down his spade one afternoon and picked up his guitar to tell the Robert Johnson story his way.
He also added his own adaptation of early Beefheart into his strange songs, recorded them and pressed up a couple of hundred records for friends, family and whoever.
Then he went back to tilling the land.
This personal and peculiar record is a treat for all who relish the sound of psychedelic blues, a form that few apart from Beefheart and Oliver, have ever satisfactorily mastered.
Oliver's hell hounds are on his trail for sure, great slavering paisley-patterned beasts with saucer-sized eyes and claws that catch.
Here are dreams and fantasies that are wholly original, pure and surrealistically sublime.
(For further info write to:)
PRAXIS: Transmutation (Mutatis Mutandis)
FURTHER PROOF that producer Bill Laswell's Axiom label is the one to watch if the unusual is your particular fascination.
His latest project, Praxis, involves space bassist Bootsy Collins, chainsaw guitarist Buckethead, keyboards wiz Bernie Worrell, drum-maniac Brain and beat demolisher/ex-Jungle Brother At Next Man Flip-Lord Paradox (aka Afrika Baby Bam), all thundering the funk out of a set of tunes that sound as though they were composed on Mars.
Imagine Sun Ra and his Arkestra fumbling through a version of Funkadelic's ‘Maggot Brain’ while a backbeat of earth-shaking dub hardcore metal and jazz squeal swirls in the distance…and that's only a fragment of Praxis' power!
These boys could be the biggest  thang since the Disposable Heroes Of Hiphoprisy landed and let rap.
SKATENIGS: Stupid People Shouldn't Breed
SKATENIGS HAIL from Austin, Texas, weirdo capital of the world.
They also have their ‘Loudspeaker’ 45 high in the UK indie charts and an LP that has been produced by Ministry man Al Jourgensen.
This is it!
A brute wall of sound over which the 'Nigs have scrawled their own, bug-eyed 'n' ugly messages.
It will be doubtful if Bush or Clinton are tuning into their raps from the frontline, but that's no excuse why you're not glued to their every word.
Essential for ‘Chemical Imbalance’ alone, their first freaky 45 which has an additional vocal by wild woman Lorri Jackson.
Yeehaw…
HA!
WALT MINK: Miss Happiness
A FUSION of pop and hardcore grunge that comes up smelling of the '60s summer sound, but to this they have fitted on a beat of their own which is well worth sitting up and paying attention to.
If the fear of encountering yet another Nirvana soundalike is too great, then try tuning into Walt Mink's upbeat pop charge.
The kind of record that rings with the influence of many (Hendrix, Beach Boys, Beefheart for starters), but still stays true to its own school.
Luckily too old to know any better: the amazing Cramps THE CRAMPS: Off The Bone THE ULTIMATE collection of gassed-out, greased-up garage rock from the top gorehounds when they were at the peak of their creativity.
Here they play homage to B-movie monsters on ‘Human Fly’ and ‘Goo Goo Muck’; wrestling on ‘The Crusher’; low life and worse on ‘Domino’, ‘Garbage Can’and ‘Drug Train’and the best version of the Trashmen's ‘Surfin' Bird’classic ever .
In short, you need this thing.
It takes Tuscon: Green On Red go back to their roots GREEN ON RED: Too Much Fun DAN ‘N’ CHUCK head back to Tuscan to find their roots and team up with guest co-producer and long-time band member JD Foster.
The result is this, the usual top-notch selection of strange, sad (as in pathos rather than pathetic) and massively moving material that will thrill fans of the band and probably puzzle the uninitiated (again!).
Not the place to leap on if you've never heard a single GOR song, but the dedicated and the brave newcomer will find much on ‘Too Much Fun’ to fall in love with.
METAL MICKEYS
There's none so queer as Suffolk, as follicle-flowing grind merchants and Bury boys JACOB'S MOUSE have discovered in their illustrious nine-year history since meeting at a swimming gala, aged 11.
SIMON WILLIAMS hums the Status Quo hits and listens to King Kong farting in a bathful of badgers.
Bury St Edmunds, according to three people who live there, is an odd place.
According to Jacob's Mouse the Suffolkian town is also ‘slow’, ‘quiet’ and, erm, ‘everybody hates us there’.
‘It's true — there's a hate campaign against us, in the local alternative nightclub,’ explains singing drummer Sam marsh.
‘This guy wanted us to do a gig in this really horrible place.
We've played there before and there's no stage, no PA, no nothing, so we said we didn't want to do it again.
‘Then one night Hugo and Jebb (The Mouse's twanging Boothby twins) went there for a quiet beer and the DJ was going, ‘I've heard that a couple of Jacob's Mouse are here and I want to tell them to get off their high horse and come down to play here.
they think they're too big to play Bury now, and that reflects upon you, the public, and this venue, and it's an insult to us all’!!!
Then all these people started chanting, ‘JACOB'S MOUSE ARE  C—S !
JACOB'S MOUSE ARE  C—S !’ and going completely mental.
I mean, who's got the attitude problem?’
So why don't you move away, Sam?
‘Oh, I love the countryside,’ leers the singer, ‘and I'd miss the sheep.’
NO DISRESPECT to the alternative inhabitants of Bury St Edmunds, but if Jacob's Mouse are a cluster of front bottoms then I am Inspector Poirot's moustache.
Squeezed into an Islington drinking hole prior to an onstage engagement, Sam sips tentatively at a half of lager while the siblings go the whole hog and guzzle pints of water.
And if you think that's strange behaviour for a bunch of follicle-flowing grind merchants who make a noise roughly akin to King Kong farting in a bathful of badgers, you haven't heard the full story.
‘We met at a swimming gala 'cos we used to be competitive swimmers,’ recalls Sam.
‘I was racing against Hugo — I think I beat him actually — then, when we got changed afterwards I saw that he had an AC/DC T-shirt on and he saw my Iron Maiden shirt and as metallers do, they get very intimate, don't they?’
Probably.
As fate would have it, Hugo had a guitar.
Even luckier, Sam was a drummer.
By another stroke — nay, complete coronary — of fortune, Hugo's bro Jebb was a bassist.
Smart.
Sam suggested starting a band.
Jebb laughed his bollocks off.
A tricky task seeing as how they hadn't yet dropped.
See, all three wannabe rockers were, like, 11 years old.
A Mr Big character showed the pre-pubescents the gigging ropes, a set of Status Quo covers taking them to the giddy heights of 600 capacity community discos.
Sam starts humming the riff from ‘Caroline’ with a fondness that nine years' respite should have erased, and then snaps back into historical mode.
‘After that, we became even more metally,’ he enthuses.
‘Getting more into the technical metal, as most bands do.
Actually, we were probably more technical than we are now, 'cos we had a year's break between the two bands and in that time we lost all our talent, so we had to start again.
That's when we started to hit things even harder…
‘Metal's the only form of rebellious music you can get into at that age,’ expounds the singer.
‘It's very easy to discover metal when you're young, whereas you're not gonna discover Sonic Youth 'cos it's really underground.
Of course, metal isn't rebellious at all .
It's marketed as easy rebellion, like you pay your money and you join that clan.
You go to Donington and that's it — you're a fully fledged rebel.’
So what is the fundamental difference between Donington and Reading?
‘I don't think there is a lot of difference, actually,’ frowns Sam, cruelly.
‘You're still listening to a bad PA, the music's blowing all over the place, people are crashed out in the mud…it's exactly the same!’
SAM HAS a point.
If, for a moment, you could imagine next year's Reading line-up then you would be looking at bands building momentum now as 1993's potential headliners.
Let's say for argument's sake that Ozric Tentacles, Primal Scream, Soundgarden, Suede, Morrissey and Smashing Pumpkins are in the running.
Then stop and think, f— , what decade are we in?
If this year's hairy, cosmically-inclined fest is anything to go by, Reading ‘93 will be alarmingly similar to Reading ‘73, where ten-minute tom tom solos meet spliffed-up, spaced-out poses, the Glam lies down on that boggy broadway where the Salvation Army tent provides soup and a roll for ten pence and Manic Street Preachers are the punk rock of the future.
Jacob's Mouse certainly have the hair and the history to fit in.
Their feisty ‘No Fish Shop Parking’ LP of earlier this year suggested a three-pronged assault lurking somewhere between Therapy?,
Nirvana and Midway Still, all headbanging aggression and cork screwing quirks aligned to a pop nous.
But there's more to the Mouse than meets the eye.
Primarily, the fact that nostalgia has been thrown out the window and crushed by the futuristic steamroller from hell.
‘I can't stand metal now,’ gripes Sam, grimly.
‘It's my least favourite kind of music ever, because I can see through it all.
I don't even like bands like Soundgarden, who are slightly metal.
They're not shit, I just…don't like them.’
‘We listened to Ministry the other day,’ nods Jebb, ‘and even that was…’
‘TOO METAL!!’ shouts Sam.
The thing is, Jacob's Mouse are travelling into weirder territories.
I suggest that the floppy funhouse groove of ‘Oblong’— from the trio's new ‘Top Up’ EP — is strongly reminiscent of Happy Mondays, and they don't immediately nut me.
Good.
‘That is basically a house track incorporated with hardcore,’ explains Sam.
‘In some ways it doesn't come out exactly right, but that's the way it goes.’
‘That's precisely what I imagine it's like, Sonic Youth playing over a Mondays track,’ agrees Hugo, as Sam starts espousing the virtues of ‘Bummed’and how ‘the best bands don't know what their appeal is’.
Yet the Mouse know what appeals to them: mixing hardcore techno with punk; creating hybrids; searching for a musical solution and an aural solvent; covering that vast expanse between Terminal Cheesecake and Teenage Fanclub.
Lack of money is holding them back — new sounds have to come from fresh effects pedals rather than a sampling machine — but the ambitions are burning: ‘I don't think we actually achieve the crossover,’ admits Sam, with a who-gives-a-flying-  f— -shrug, ‘but that's certainly what we want to do.’
GIVEN THAT Jacob's Mouse have been involved in this rock ‘n’ roll malarkey in some form or another from an age when your hack still believed a bosom was Captain Birdseye's right hand man on the SS Fishfinger, you would, perhaps — just like the kids of Bury St Edmunds — expect Sam, Jebb and Hugo to be precocious little shits with heads as big as Frank Sidebottom's.
But, as their pint-of-water escapades suggest, you couldn't get further from the truth if you said that the NHS was a financially viable concern.
They admit that they get pissed off with bad gigs, not getting enough sleep and tour vans breaking down so often that they end up ‘losing it’ and crawling over the banks of motorways looking for crisp packets.
Other than that, incessant touring with the likes of Captain America and Midway Still makes them ‘the happiest we've ever been’.
The (very) old ‘American bands get treated like gods in the UK while homegrown talent is treated like a joke’ argument is met with a smile and a calm, ‘Yeah, but we get the advantage when we go to America,’from Hugo.
When on tour the band confess to being ‘more mellow than normal’.
But what about their shaggable potential?
‘I did get a letter once from a girl asking if I wore my underpants,’ admits a shame-faced Sam.
‘We don't get any groupies, really,’ blushes Hugo, ‘but I'm quite pleased about that.’
‘Someone did ask us for some nude photos as well,’ frowns Sam, desperately, ‘But I reckon that was just people trying it on more than anything else.’
SEX, DRUGS and rock'n'roll…
NOT !
Verily, Jacob's Mouse are squeaky clean.
There's just one thing: what happens to band who've been together for virtually a decade?
They start getting conceptual, that's what, farting around with triple albums and tripod-style sleeve packaging and getting, like, too bloody heavy for their own good.
Jacob's Mouse are nine years old.
Take care, pop kids — torture this way comes.
‘I reckon by the time we're 22 we'll be doing a folk album,’ yells Hugo, worryingly.
‘Mental folk music — can you imagine that?
How do you do it?’
Luckily, I have absolutely no idea.
Who's in the mouse?
Reformed metal-bashers Jacob's Mouse 
NME GIG GUIDE
MANIC STREET PREACHERS celebrate the Top Ten success off their ‘Suicide Is Painless’ cover featured on NME 's ‘Ruby Trax’LP, with four UK dates this week.
The band play Nottingham (Wednesday), Hull (Thursday), Sheffield (Saturday) and Newcastle (Tuesday) with special guests Kinky Machine, whose second single ‘Swivelhead’ is new out on the Lemon label.
vibes
EDITED BY SHERMAN
Kick off your hand-tooled leather moccasins and kneel in a prayer-like manner as we parade the rumpy pumpy king of lurve techno, BLAKE BAXTER, before your reddened and disbelieving eyes, or go and see a play about clubbing,Excess XS , check out the GROOVE CHECK Single Of The Week, and familiarise yourself with BUMP's all-time prime movers.
Whichever, we beseech you,Vibes -mates, to enjoy!
BLAKE'S HEAVEN
Techno is not usually renowned for its love gods.
Its perpetrators are often mysterious and anonymous, and when they're not, you sometimes wish they were!
However, Blake Baxter — although graduating from Detroit's old school — has a distinctly steamy mood firing his music.
Blake is one of the few techno artists who chooses to use his voice, and his semi-whispered seductions have earned him the title of ‘The Prince Of Techno’.
Baxter songs have titles like ‘Ride ‘Em Boy’ and ‘Get Laid’.
They feature moody, hypnotic backdrops topped with his breathy intoning.
On ‘One More Time’, the single which launched his relationship with Germany's Logic Records, Blake simply recites the first verse of the garage classic ‘Let No Man Put Asunder’ and sounds like her's got his tongue in your ear.
But for his new single, ‘Brothers Gonna Work It Out’, the man who gave new meaning to the term ‘bedroom producer’ has turned up with a contagious call for unity.
It's already his most high-profile record to date.
Success has been a along, hazardous journey for Blake Baxter.
He began his recording career in 1985 with DJ International, before hitching up with Derrick May, who introduced him to Kevin Saunderson.
Techno-rumpy classics followed, like ‘Forever And A Day’, ‘When We Used To Play’ and ‘Un Deux Trois’.
Like many, he got known in the UK through the Virgin ‘Techno’ compilations but, when he came to Britain with Inner City's ‘Big Fun’tour, his career and personal life nose-dived when Blake discovered he was epileptic.
‘I became really sick here for the first time and didn't know what was going on,’ he recalls.
‘I was sick for two years.
I wasn't coming to terms with it and didn't know what to do.
I wasn't taking care of myself.
Then I decided I really wanted to do music again, started taking care of myself and now things are a lot better.’
Despite Blake being one of techno's true characters, it took Underground Resistance to hoist his star from the mire of obscurity.
Jeff Mills and Mike Banks first brought him back into public view with the ‘Prince Of Techno’ EP, a milestone groin-level mesmeriser.
Then they suggested he check out the thriving scene in Berlin, where Eddie ‘Flashin'’ Fowlkes — a similarly-underrated innovator — has also found a second spiritual home.
Blake DJ-ed at the city's legendary Tresor club and then hitched up with the club's label and producers Thomas Fehlmann and Moritz Von Oswald.
The first result was the ‘Dream Sequence’ EP which yielded ‘One More Time’.
Blake now divides his time between the two cities.
‘Berlin is a fresh new place, open to everything,’ he says.
‘I moved to Berlin to get my music out.
I want to do this.
I want to catch up now.
I'm ready to be productive and take my place in the techno world!’
But how did the Love God intoner develop (which sometimes sounds like hell-marriage between Minneapolis' Purple Glistener and a high-octane Barry White)?
‘I always wanted to sing but I'm really self-conscious about it.
I've always liked Prince, which is obvious, and I've always liked Teddy Prendergrass because he talks so much shit.
So I started doing this on a sexual basis.
I see a lot of things on a sexual basis.
Passion makes the world tick.
It's funny and fun — just like when you're making love!
When I do music I always think of this style.
‘Techno is very cold and hard.
I don't want to sound like a computer.
I always like to know there's a light at the end of the tunnel.’
So what of the future?
‘I've been out of the picture so long that I just want people to know what I'm about.
I want people to experience my pain and passion.’
Sunscreem, those top raving pop stars, return with another scorcher to piss off those Top Of The Pops people in the form of ‘Perfect Motion’.
A high point of their explosive live set (huge tour itinerary in last week's issue), ‘Perfect Motion’ is released on October 5 featuring the superb ‘Boys Own Mix’and Leftfield's ‘Vocal Mix’, followed a week later (October 12, diary fans) with the band's own ‘Perfect Chaos’version.
This reaches to the outer limits of hardcore with Carl Cox's ‘Rhythm Is A Drug’ and the Wizard Of Oz's ‘Drowning In Your Blood Mix’which cleaned up at the band's recent Heaven gig (also backed with an ‘Ahhhcapella’version which had them climbing the walls round at my place the other week!).
The stadia beckon.
PLAY FOR TODAY
The prospect of a play attempting to deal realistically with the phenomenon of drug and club culture would seem to be setting itself up as a target for scorn and ridicule from people involved in the scene and as a scapegoat for moral guardians who bitterly oppose it.
Excess XS is based on a series of interlinking sketches, with ‘Ecstasy’ personified as the gregarious MC E Byron.
Writer and creator Kevin Fegan combines humour, razor-sharp observations and occasional flex of his poetic licence to shed a little light on what, to outsiders, must appear to be a very peculiar practice.
Taking the stance that we all have habits, some legal, some not,Excess tries its hardest not to preach, opting instead to cover a range of perspectives and experiences from inner city drug dealer to suburban moral guardian, jacked-up junkie to weekend binger, loved-up football fans to clubbers on come-down.
Indeed, its strength is that it casts a caustic eye over the club scene, dealing with familiar situations with enough self-deprecation and sarcasm to stem any pretension.
However,Excess loses the plot when it attempts to trace club culture back to its black and gay roots in half-a-dozen rhyming couplets or explain the appeal of Ibiza as club nirvana through two camp characters who, one assumes, symbolise ‘hedonism’.
The dialogue, full of all the right buzz words and curses, might relate to hip kids, but will probably confound the very people it's trying to enlighten.
And when the six-strong cast burst into stumbling raps or ranting incantations, even the ravers dotted in the audience look confused.
It's unlikely that this play will close the generation gap or produce many converts, but then if you're that eager to open your mind to the joys of clubbing, going to the theatre is hardly the place to be.
‘Is that a bouncy castle I see before me?’
Excess XS runs at Contact Theatre, Manchester until October 17.
3 DECREES
BUMP
1 PHOTON INC: Generate Power
‘SURPRISE, SURPRISE!
Undoubtedly one of the most ingenious house tracks ever.
The wild pitch sound was born, Mr Pierre proving that there was more mileage to be had in ‘Essential Acapella Vol 1’ than most people imagined.
(Sorry to be a trainspotter, but I first heard this in the Zanzibar, courtesy of Mr Tony Humphries).’
2 CHARLES B: Lack Of Love
‘A CLASSIC from the days of bandanas and Smiley T-shirts.
The most outrageously original vocals coupled with the living acid riff.
A hallucinogenic hero of a track.’
3 INNER CITY: Hallelujah (Reese Spiritual Sample Mix)
STEVE:
‘MY first spiritual house experience.
Top Of The tunes.’
MARK:
‘ F—ing brilliant.’
GROOVE CHECK
VIBES SINGLE OF THE WEEK
RADIANT BABY FEATURING NINA SIMONE: New Dawn
A STRANGE, almost haunting track with a five am coming-down vibe.
Nina Simone goes house (!) with easily shrugged, low-slung vocals over hypnotic grooves, pleasant horns and shimmering organs.
The three mixes vary between the commercially oriented pianos ‘n’ ravey bits ‘Shining Path’mix, the incessant trance-out throb of the lead ‘Jazz Tip’version and the ‘New York Mix’which is a driving dub with succulent morsels.
A dreamy, psychedelic feel permeates throughout, which pulls this off-the-wall concept together and makes it stand out as one of the most sensuous British house tracks around at the moment.
HYPNO GENESIS: The Induction Of A Hypnotic State EP
WHILST THE clever money nowadays is on back-to-basics house grooves and the more progressive, sub-techno trance, let us not forget that much-maligned beast, the rave record, is still alive and kicking.
This one sums it all up.
A no-nonsense, bang your head and raise your hands by numbers track entitled ‘Take Control’ in three mixes.
Both the ‘Original’ and ‘Club’mixes have beautiful male vocal epic intros which then descend into completely manic bass wobble frenzy.
The ‘Jungled Up To  F— ’ mix brings in XTC (ho ho) of Manchester's Mix Factory to remix and get down with some roughneck business.
There's also the weird extra track, ‘Survey Bass Tune’.
Rave suffers from a slew of sub-standard rubbish, but compared with the general bollocks Hypno Genesis shine through with a tongue-in-cheek optimism reminiscent of early Altern 8.
WW: Small Town Boy
IN THE absence of original ideas, programmers and producers seem very keen on the old cover version.
However, this cover version of Bronski Beat's first single is really very good indeed.
On something of an Italo tip, it thunders along at a fair old rate, brings synth nostalgia to the fore and is an all-round bumpalong winner.
The real highlight is the chunky ‘Cry’ version, which takes this tune to an ethereal level.
THK: France
ORIGINALLY ON the German Rough Mix label and now sensibly picked up by Sheffield's Warp label, this one's been around for a while now and has been described as potentially the next Gat Decor.
Basically, it fiddles around with the ‘Twin Peaks’ /Moby strings and then slides gently into a totally infectious organ and horns track that should put an uplifting smile on many a clubber.
Loads of power without being completely wild.
IRON LION ZION TRY-ON
‘Iron Lion Zion’, and that four-CD career retrospective, have reaffirmed BOB MARLEY's rep as the mane man all over the world.
Except, that is, in his native Jamaica.
There, raggamuffin rules and Tuff Gong is just a part of the dollar-hoover tourist industry.
IAN McCANN cruises the mean streets of Kingston to find out what a crap fist they're making of the great man's legacy, and to talk to some of those who helped make him the Third World's finest musical ambassador.
Dread-ful photos (ho ho): DEREK RIDGERS
It's like a scene out of Mystery Train .
It's raining.
Fat, lazy raindrops rattle the tin roofs of Kingston.
It's bad news for the Jamaican economy, but the greenery surrounding the capital loves it.
If it wasn't such a poor country, in necessary debt to America — remember the invasion of Grenada?— and the vagaries of the bauxite and tourist industries, this would be an Eden of mango and banana trees.
As it is, run by successive governments who can't seem to help, Jamaica needs a steady trickle of tourist dollars.
Anything bringing hard currency into the island is welcomed.
And the warmest welcome is extended to Bob Marley, who draws the sort of tourists that don't mind the rain.
You remember Bob.
The guy with the locks and the lyrics whose ‘Legend’ LP hasn't been out of the UK Top 75 album chart since 1984.
The symbol of Third World resilience and black freedom who, when you play his records alongside those of Dylan, The Beatles and the other antiques of ‘rock culture’, effortlessly outshines them with integrity.
Here he is now, cast in cement, somewhat undersized Gibson slung around him, coloured in garish as the statue, showing dully familiar images — Bob, Bunny and Peter in Wailing Wailers suits, Bob at the Peace Concert in 1978, linking the hands of opposing politicians whose supporters were shooting it out on the streets.
A few yards away, a crippled rasta sits in his wheelchair, killing time.
The tourists ignore him, like they ignore the battered silver Capri that crunches up the drive and dispenses a solid, mature dread into the yard.
It is time for the visitors to see Bob's pink bed, the kitchen where Bob's chef Gilly would simmer stew, and the walls smothered in yellowing press cuttings, including several from NME .
The bullet holes in the back wall, from an attempt on Bob's life in 1976, aren't mentioned.
Weirdest of all is the studio, in which a Madame Tussaud's waxwork stares out of the half-light at you from behind the control-room glass.
It's more than a little eerie, perhaps because waxworks always look like death masks.
It brings home the fact that there's no life to be found here; there's no Bob Marley anymore.
Meanwhile, the living parts of the legend remain outside.
The tourists buy their mementoes, feeling maybe they're taking home a bit of Bob.
The crippled dread and the guy with the Capri remain ignored.
The paraplegic is Vincent Ford, who wrote ‘No Woman, No Cry’, Bob's breakthrough record.
The Capri-driver is Aston ‘Family Man’ Barrett, bass player and lynch-pin of Marley's band.
And the tourists have no idea who they are.
ALL MUSIC fans are tourists, fed stories about people and places, while other people and places, arguably just as important, are ignored.
Black music has always had a locale as part of its make-up; the Philadelphia sound, Chicago house, Motown and techno in Detroit.
For every Marvin Gaye there's 20 like JJ Barnes, a huge talent squashed by the Motown machine.
You can visit a Motown museum in Detroit, but if you want to meet Kevin Saunderson or see where Derrick May grew up, you'd be out of luck.
In Jamaica, it's not like that.
The Bob Marley Museum might be a skank down memory lane, but the reggae tourist — with a degree of protection from the rude-boys — can easily absorb the current ragga vibe.
The cab drivers know where the studios are; the music is an integral part of their life.
Booming out of speaker boxes perched on the kerb, thundering from bars and shops, every corner has its own sound system.
But although Bob would recognise its shape and energy, this is not the music that ran the borders when he was alive.
This is where Sanchez transforms Boys II Men hits with a precise ragga clip and Buju Banton raps of the ‘Bogle Dance’ for girls in clothes that make the word ‘skimpy’seem overdressed.
In Britain, there's an old reggae and ‘new dub’ cult.
In Jamaica, it's strictly ragga, and the occasional old tune, pumped through new silicon chips and piezo horns, sounds like ragga.
One voice you never hear on the street is Bob Marley's.
The statue of Bob outside his old HQ in Hope Street, Kingston, complete with undersized Gibson and Dulux gloss overcoat in red, gold and green
In search of a legend: the gates of the Museum of Bobness
BACK AT the museum, Family Man Barrett sits on a concrete block that once housed the diesel tank to fuel Bob's pressing plant.
To his right is the permanent photo exhibition and an ‘African Gift Shop’ full of pendants.
Malcolm X badges and Air Bart shirts, on which a black Bart Simpson rises, Michael  Jordan-style.
Very cultural.
Behind Family Man is a chicken coop, a true sign of Jamaica, and in front, an old flight case rots, telling of the years of hard graft that brought this posthumous glory.
Stencilled on the side is ‘Bob Marley & The Wailers’.
Towards the front gate, Bob's old Land Rover slowly disintegrates.
No-one has bothered to tax it since 1989.
Family Man doesn't see the garden he created here often.
He's on tour with the Wailers Band alongside Earl ‘Wire’ Lindo and Junior Marvin from Bob's era, with his brother Carlton's drum seat taken by Mikey Boo, another veteran.
Carlie Barrett was shot outside his home in April ‘87, a fate that also met Peter Tosh, Marley's ex-Wailers partner, in September that year.
The band still play Bob's songs, although they don't receive the royalties on his LPs, a matter being ironed out when Bob fell ill in 1980.
‘Fams’ describes re-starting the Wailers as ‘rough’and it might not be as glorious a gig as playing Zimbabwe's independence celebrations with Bob, but it's better than the fate of most reggae elders; redundancy thanks to computerised ragga.
‘I don't remember it,’ says Family Man of ‘Iron Lion Zion’, the current, refashioned Bob Marley hit, ‘but we did so much…there's some with just Bob and an acoustic guitar.’
He can remember, however, life at Hope Road.
‘It was paradise when we moved here from Chancery Lane and Idler's Rest (rough spots of Kingston).
I used to live here with Bob.
We were always working, and other musicians used to come up to play with us.
Jimmy Cliff, Zap Pow.
It was the only place like it in Kingston.’
Ask him if it seems dead here compared to those days, and he smiles gently.
‘Everything changes,’ he says.
Drive for five minutes into town and you're in a different world.
Packed minibuses with ‘Operation Desert Storm’ stickers on their windscreen rock by.
Jack Radics' silky ‘Why Can't I Touch You’ bursts into the warm air from a shop at Halfway Tree.
The higglers flog everything from dope to Biros.
Windscreen washers greet you at every corner, and if you give money, lean into your car window, shouting ‘We a one blood!’, the words ringing with pride.
They may be broke but they're not broken.
Jamaica is the most alive place in the world.
The street signs ring with energy: ‘This is Ting Country’, ‘Who God bless no Man CURSE’, ‘Judith's X-RATED Fashion & Design’, ‘Beware of Bad Dogs’.
‘PNP Rule’ says a Kingston wall, a graffito ad for the People's National Party.
It's a sad indictment of Jamaica's political failures.
The N is scrawled back-to-front.
JUDY MOWATT, one third of Marley's backing singers, The I-Threes, is not rich, asking a hundred US dollars for an interview, but she lives in the better part of Kingston.
Her gate is topped with lions behind which two ‘bad dogs’ prowl, and her verandah is enclosed in wrought iron locked by a heavy padlock; you can't be too careful here.
The ironwork has hearts, stars of David and crosses, covering as many bases as possible.
Judy, an elegant woman in her early 40s with a peaceful demeanour, bids us sit down in the verandah.
A hummingbird, taking advantage of the dying minutes of daylight, feeds on flower nectar in the fragrant garden.
An occasional raindrop slips through the roof.
I tell her that her house is lovely and Mowatt waves a smooth dismissive hand, saying ‘This is down to Bob’.
As one of The I-Threes she sang alongside Bob's wife Rita and Marcia Griffiths.
While she had a career as a leader of The Gayles before joining Bob, and later kept her own label, Ashanadan, she is still best-known for her work with him.
‘I remember meeting Bob,’ she says.
‘I was rehearsing at the Ward Theatre, Kingston, singing ‘Suspicious Minds’, Elvis' song.
Behind, I could hear someone singing three octaves higher than I was.
I turned round to see who it was and it was Bob Marley.
He was so funny.’
That was in ‘72.
She joined The I-Threes in ‘73, who became part of Bob's show when Bunny Wailer and Peter Tosh quit in rows over touring and star billing in 1974.
‘Bob is a regimented person, he works until he gets something right.
Bob is always creating a song.
The only time he wasn't was on the football field.
Bob works relentlessly for one purpose; that his music could change mankind's thinking to bring about unity among the races, and more so for the oppressed people.
Towards the end, there was this haste, a determination to get the work done.
He recorded two albums in one, ‘Survival’ and ‘Uprising’, he did not have any patience, not even with The I-Threes.
He knew he had to get things done before it was too late.
‘I remember vividly the last concert in Pittsburg (September 23, 1980).
We went to the concert by bus, and Bob was left in New York (he had collapsed while jogging in Central Park ) and came along later in the day.
We met at the soundcheck.
He was aloof.
We knew he was sick but we didn't know to what extent and he didn't want any sympathy.
‘I remember he was singing ‘Keep On Moving’ at the soundcheck.
He sang the same song for three-quarters of an hour, he'd go sit on the drum riser, and come back to the mic and sing a verse, and then sit and stare into space and then come back again and again.
And we really felt it was a message.
It was a signal to us that he was moving on.’
He died eight months later, riddled with cancer that had apparently begun as a football injury.
Judy speaks of Bob in the present tense.
This is no accident.
‘To me Bob is just carrying on his work in another realm.
I can't see him physically but I meet with him in dreams.
Sometimes I go to bed and he comes and says he has a lot of hit songs for me.’
That might sound like vanity but there's no doubt that she means it; she says she looks forward to sleep if she feels Bob might be part of her dreams.
‘The spirit remains, it's just the physical communication is not there.’
The rain continues to fall, as it did in a storm on the day that Bob died.
Judy's house was struck by lightning during that storm, and moments later she switched on the radio to hear that he had died.
In Jamaica, the elements are regarded as part of life's mysteries.
That night a big dance featuring Stone Love, Jamaica's hottest sound, is cancelled.
There's a curfew, like something out of Marley's ‘Burnin' And Lootin'’.
It seems like Ms Mowatt's mysticism is at work, but the curfew is called for more earthly reasons.
There's been a murder in Kingston, and burning tyres have been laid across roads in a protest against rising school fees.
There's also talk that an outlaw called Ninjaman was killed by police at the same time that DJ Ninjaman (no relation) was visiting the copshop to pay a minor fine.
The local rudies stoned the police station, confusing the two events.
The next day we drive up into the hills two hours from Kingston to see Bob's tomb in his village birthplace of Nine Miles, St Ann's parish.
The Marley industry thrives here too.
You know you're in the right place when the attitude of the locals subtly changes; as you drive past country kids coming home from school in crisply-pressed uniforms, they shout ‘white man’! and grin at you.
At Nine Miles, they want to sell you T-shirts.
There's a bar, and maybe 30 people hustling weed or posters of Bob.
The tomb is next door to Bob's old home, housed in a building like a little cottage.
The official tour guide, a close-cropped ragga called Garfield Logan, asks us to leave our shoes outside.
It's hardly like a burial-place at all; there's photographs that tourists have sent pinned on the wall, records, a midi system playing the ‘Survival’ LP, an inevitable football.
Despite the music, the hustlers and the phut-phut of hired mopeds carrying tourists — 7,500 a year, estimates Logan — it's still quiet here.
I ask him if he's as raggamuffin as his appearance suggests.
He says he is, and I wonder  it there's a problem being one of the new generation at a rasta stronghold.
‘Well,’ he says easily, ‘I'm raggamuffin, but rasta still.’
The attitude is practical.
A decade has passed since Bob died.
The people earning a living from him have moved on.
They pay respect to Bob, but to ignore ragga culture is to live in the past.
When you're poor, the future holds hopes that the past can't compete with.
The Nine Miles graffiti that declares ‘Bob lives’ is not just there for romantic reasons.
THE LABEL Bob Marley founded, Tuff Gong, is now Jamaica's second biggest record distributor, situated on Marcus Garvey Drive, Kingston.
This is where he's most alive, apart from in Judy Mowatt's night thoughts.
Bob once sang ‘If you are a big tree, we are a small axe’, and besides the revolution it demanded, it was an attack on the big three record companies in Jamaica: Dynamic, Federal and Studio One.
Tuff Gong's premises were once Federal, owned by Ken Khouri and Edward Seaga, the latter later to become Jamaican Premier and holder of one of Bob's hands on the Peace Concert stage.
The Big Tree fell; Bob's dreams came true; only Dynamic thrives in Jamaica.
Tuff Gong employs 65 people and began in earnest at Bob's Addis Ab shop on Orange Street in 1977, when he first pressed records on the manual machines that now stand in the yard.
Peter Prendergast, Tuff Gong's friendly, determined MD, describes the company as an ‘aid to the trade’, handling 470 different record labels and the local rights to Phonogram product.
It's the sort of place where you can get everything done, from mastering to stampers to putting your cassettes in the shops.
Prendergast knows the kudos of Jamaican vinyl for reggae fans and Tuff Gong will soon issue a vinyl version of the ‘Songs Of Freedom’ box set.
However, he won't divulge Marley's Jamaican sales figures; ‘That's the 64,000 dollar question.’
Like I said, you don't hear Marley here.
Tuff Gong maintains Bob's fastidious attitude towards ‘slackness’, the graphically rude lyrics of raggamuffin.
‘There are other distributors who can deal with that,’ says Prendergast.
The feeling of Bob-ness in the air here is enhanced by his apparently constant musing on Bob's utterances.
He plays us some of the interview material on the ‘Talking Blues’ LP, staring into the distance while it fills the plain office.
You can almost feel Bob in Tuff Gong's mixture of business smarts with almost religious principles.
Marley must have been like that himself.
It was said at the height of his fame that Bob was giving a living to ten Jamaicans.
Now the figure is multiplied several times, from shirt vendors to tour guides to the youths who hustle tapes of ragga dances — usually just pirated radio shows — near the museum.
There's Ziggy's career, and the Wailers Band, and the success of Tuff Gong, whose future is now beyond the doubt of innumerable posthumous legal wrangles.
There's also Bob's ‘Songs Of Freedom’, a force worldwide, but out of fashion in Jamaica, a country that has moved on to the more bodily delights of raggamuffin.
But those raggas are glad of the dollars Bob brings to Jamaica; maybe when they open a Shabba Ranks Museum they'll be gladder still.
Bob graffiti: He Lives, and is now giving a living to more Jamaicans than when we walked the streets of Kingston
‘Family Man’ Barrett, lynchpin of Marley's band
LIVE
Edited by Simon Williams
LUNA 2 
AS LUNA 2 are a grand collusion between Galaxie 500 ringmaster, Dean Wareham, and erstwhile members of The Chills and The Feelies, respectively Justin Harwood and Stanley Demeski, they were inevitably going to produce more expectancies than a fieldful of bunnies at the height of spring.
That this mild-mannered three piece manage to fulfil those rash dreams is a genuine joy at a time when so many bands seem to have one trick less than a dead pony.
Luna 2 are masters of understated melodies, rippled with smooth guitar lines that lend a spooky groove to the jaunty introspection of Wareham's songwriting.
The songs, deceptively simple on the surface, yet painstakingly crafted, are unafraid to deal with texture and tone.
At times, brash, slashing guitars suddenly rip through a sublime melody, only for Luna 2 to deftly heal the wound within the lick of a well-aimed riff.
‘Slide’ opens the set, all big chords and yeah, slide guitar; ‘Smile’, with a dangerously narcotic and very BIG bassline that takes control over your entire body, is brain-bruisingly splendid, as is ‘Hey Sister’, the song that proves that they can do fast ones, they can do slow ones and they can then do ones with car-alarm noises in the middle.
Though visually unprepossessing, their fumbling onstage shyness is oddly affecting, adding even greater poignancy to their brilliant array of Luna tunes.
This is one Luna that deserves asylum in your record collection.
DIVERSION
YOU'RE GOING to hate this band.
At , if you see them live without hearing them on record, you will.This is because they look like three sixth-formers farting around in their bedroom with a drum machine, busy drowning in a prog-rock flood of their own ideas.
And first impressions last.
But this first impression is grossly misleading — as you'd realise if you heard Diversion's rather wonderful EP, ‘BZ’— four short, sharp pop songs which roll around experimentally in a wide field of influences and still come up smelling of roses, mainly because they're all squashed together into spunky two and a half minute blasts.
Tonight, though, they rarely come across as well, because instrumental fluff and dead wood have crept in between the sharp spikes.
The 13 headfuls of ideas they've got show occasional but disturbing signs of driving them aimlessly away from what makes them so good in the first place and into acid rock tedium city.
But when Diversion hit their stride as they do tonight with the EP's lead track, ‘Cheese’, they can make guitar pop which is unpredictable and original, seething with speedy adrenalin, immediately catchy and funkily danceable.
Just like the combination of everything bands like Talking Heads, Wire and Gang Of Four once tried to do.
They've got all the potential to be gloriously life-affirming.
Just pray they don't turn into The Grateful Dead.
THE POPINJAYS
THE POPINJAYS are currently shifting serious units on the continent.
Their ‘Vote Elvis’ single did big things in America, and they've subsequently signed a big-bucks US deal with Epic.
Clearly, despite their terribly twee name, pudding-bowl haircuts and crap clothes, they are not the washed-up jangle group their detractors would have you believe.
What separates them from the dwindling ranks of mediocre C86-type bands are their songs : sparkling things that are packed full of love-drenched sentiments, mood-lifting hooklines and wonderful tunes.
Though proceedings occasionally teeter over into winsome cuteness (witness the sugary pap of ‘Sun’ and ‘Helicopter People’), most of tonight's set sounds like the work of people with a sound grasp of pop virtues.
Better still, they occasionally manage to scrape the dizzy heights reached by the past monarchs of indiedom: at least three of their songs (‘Too Jung’, ‘Perfect Dream Home’ and the aforementioned ‘Vote Elvis’) are the equals of ‘Ask’, ‘What For’, and the other landmarks of the floppy-fringed generation from which The Popinjays are drawn.
All of which would make for a rave review, were it not for the fact that, for all their charm, the Jays' every move oozes lamentable irrelevance.
If you treasure a vinyl copy of ‘Hatful Of Hollow’, remember dancing to ‘Crash’ at student discos and once thought The Darling Buds were dead good, the shiny, happy,(yes!) jangly Popinjays are bound to be your scene.
CLUB DOG
I REMEMBER the innocent days back when Club Dog used to be run out of a scout hut in Wood Green.
Massive bikers hung around the door arguing like crazy with their denim-clad babes, intimidating newcomers and ensuring only the bravest got in.
One particularly memorable Easter Friday say two tall, hooded monks hammering a papier mache dog onto a six foot crucifix in the middle of the dance floor and parading the impaled club-mascot high above their chanting heads.
I thought it was a fine display of irreligious pop art myself, but the local Scout Master must've taken offence, for the Dog pack packed up and headed for  The Robey, where they currently host their anti-establishment, multi-media club nights.
Now, the Club Dog is the howling interactive success its humble beginnings promised it could be.
This is the first night of the new season, and it still looks intimidating from the outside, with long queues of tough-looking crusties replacing the bikers.
But the inspired wraparound decor inside transforms this workaday pub into a Tardis-like temple of Caligulan dimensions.
Check your preconceptions at the door, for you are entering the twilight zone.
The bands playing tonight are secondary to the club itself, a gentle womb-like receptacle for hardened humanity, draped and gently lit, with baubles and bobbles dangling overhead and a vast array of music everywhere.
Nipple to shoulder-blade standing room only is available as you slither and squeeze into the orange glow of the poodle room for some meditative madness from the Zumo Men.
Nuff said?
In the hippy dementia of the dog room I catch the screaming antics of The Moonflowers aspiring to be weird simply for weird's sake.
Occasionally they manage, most of the time they don't.
Who cares?
There are so many visuals, wild lights and a myriad other bizarre things grabbing your attention it's enough to send you barking mad.
SCWEAMING TEASE!
DAISY CHAINSAW
KATIE JANE scweams and scweams and scweams until she's sick, and you're sick of it.
She slaps her brand new skinhead again and again, as if to check that she really was wild enough to shave all those ratty locks off.
She rams a power drill into the ear of her baby doll while going through appalling ‘cute’ histrionics that are like Kate Bush with a soiled nappy and a gallon of helium.
She snarls and scrapes and squawks and stares.
She pants and pouts and poses and scweams.
And scweams.
And SCWEAMS!
SHUT UP!
SHUT UP!
SHUT UP!
Plenty of singers, wisely or otherwise, have modelled themselves on the heroes and villains of great literature.
The young Edwyn Collins wanted to be Holden Caulfield.
Robert Smith fancied being glamorously alienated Arab-killer Meursault for a bit.
Kylie thinks she's Lolita, Morrissey's currently trying to ignore a hideous truth dark enough to match that of Dorian Gray, and Bob Geldof was Jesus Christ before breakfast.
Katie Jane Garside, meanwhile, aims a little lower.
She wants to be Violet Elizabeth Bott; the screeching, lithping, secretly smart brat who hung around with the nice-but-dim lads until she annoyed them into letting her join the band.
And just look what she's made of it.
Daisy Chainsaw try to shock and scare and upset as art terrorists detonating nailbombs in the nursery, subverting our notions of how a little girly and her backing bullies should behave, and fail dismally.
When they just try to entertain, to be stompy dynamic pop punks with a snigger and a scream — and that amounts to about two and a half tracks tonight — they are briefly, brashly terrific.
‘Love Your Money’ is still an unstoppable shocking pink bulldozer of a song, all runaway ‘Milk And Alcohol’riffs and total adrenaline psychosis.
‘You Be My Friend’ is more flailing fun, with farting guitar from grotesque Manics reject, Crispin, and ‘Pink Flower’begins rabidly before drifting off into the Eeky Squeaky Ooky Kooky Land where the other songs — and I use the term out of tradition rather than fact — live.
It also contains Katie Jane's best, gulp,coup de theatre of the evening, when she pours a teapot shower of glittery stardust over her head.
The rest, though, is rubbish.
The first sign of how bad things will get is when Daisy Chainsaw allow their crap squatmates — the worst performance artists in Britain — FACT!— to flap around to clompingly useless New Beat for the best part of half an hour.
A metal tree, a Nina Hagen impressionist, a randy vicar puppet, a suit with a clock on his head, chains, apples, knitting needles, molested dollies and still fathomless boredom.
Katie Jane's been stricken by the acting but too, floating in as a jilted bride in wig and mask before revealing her new crop and slinging on the trademark tousled Ophelia barnet.
From then on, she trips and twirls like a prima donna at an infant ballet class, gurgles and squeaks to the point of practically begging to be mercy killed, and generally flaunts a dodgy child sexuality that is neither funny nor subversive, but is stupid and dangerous.
In the meantime, the lads bludgeon out wodges of cacophonous, shapeless noise, like ‘Waiting For The Wolves’ and ‘Hope Your Dreams Come True’, which revel in being unlistenable squalls far away from the succinct migraine catchiness of that hit single.
Shock tactics are fine when they really are shocking, and new, and exciting, and well done.
Daisy Chainsaw, for the most part, manages to do none of the above.
Hell, bands should be challenging our tolerance and expectations of how they should sound and behave, but there must be better ways than this drama-school drop-out, turgid, clumsy, aimless artwank that tip-toes far too close for comfort to being morally repugnant.
Still, I suppose it's an experience .
Miss Violent Elizabeth herself, Katie Jane Garside (inset) wigs out
BETTER PUPATE THAN NEVER
NEW FAST AUTOMATIC DAFFODILS
ONE OF those gift moments.
A big, bright Red Admiral butterfly is playing serenely around the New FADS' merchandise stall.
Attracted, presumably, by the bright whites and reds, it flits deftly from shirt to shirt, with no intention of going anywhere.
Music might be shit, but life itself is fully equipped to deliver magic if you stick around long enough to wait for it.
There's a pained analogy in there somewhere — butterfly, daffodil, ugly caterpillar, cocoon, new life — but sod it.
Let's call it a flash of colour in a world of twits.
With the Mondays struggling to get arrested and the Roses still in exile, we have pronounced the Madchester ‘scene’ dead.
But maybe there never was one, and it was all a journalist's dream.
Either way, we must count the casualties.
World Of Twist, Intastella, The Mock Turtles, Paris Angels, Northside…all dead.
The New FADs…still alive.
It's not how many people come to the first night of your tour in Windsor, it's what they do when they get there.
And this lot treat the New FADS like nothing less than their favourite pop group.
Remarkable.
Not that their newly re-upholstered troubled-funk rhythms wouldn't make converts of you all on the spot, but it's heartening to see so many so attached to, well, so little.
The FADS' criminally disappointing first album, ‘Pigeonhole’, hung, albatross-like, around their necks for the whole of last year, marking them out as no-marks, never-rans, couldn't-have-beens.
That its first track was entitled ‘Get Better’ merely stoked the irony bonfire.
And yet plenty of unpigeonhole-able types in here seem to hold that flawed artefact very dear indeed, relentlessly calling for minor track ‘Penguins’ throughout the set (in vain), and pummelling the air with knotted fists for ‘Partial’.
‘STAVE-DIVING IS PROHIBITED.
OFFENDERS WILL BE ASKED TO LEAVE’, goes the notice behind the bar.
Take a running jump!
Somehow, I think the New FADs crowd are above all that.
Anyway, there's a sort of picket fence at the front of the stage, behind which Andy Spearpoint ducks and dives like a zoo animal in degree course specs.
He could, as the song says, get a good job if he tried, but what's the point?
What's the point when a minor throng,just far enough outside London to be irritating, is hanging on his every word?
If the New FADs ever were dead and buried, take your partners for the resurrection shufflebeat.
They always were rhythmic, percussive, beaty, tinny, rattly — a tease , in fact, they tickled your feet and left you begging for more.
Well, now the FADs are galvanised — on record, thanks to Fall producer Craig Leon, who transformed recent comeback single ‘It's Not What You Know’ from a bitter mumble into a magnificent, eloquent tirade — but live , they appear to have been studying drama at summer school.
While many of the older songs that survive in the new set —‘Big’, ‘Fishes Eyes’, ‘Partial’— hang on to Justin's overweight basslines for their effect, newer material enjoys a much broader baseboard.
‘Stockholm’(current single, and, they tell me, the immediate pop antidote to ‘It's Not What You Know’ 's wilful obscurity) saunters in on a charming guitar line from the imposing Dolan; ‘Beatlemania’and ‘I Lead On’allow Andy's vocals to take centre stage.
Democracy, in this case, is the mother of re-invention.
The lynchpin's still the rhythm, mind.
Since there really is no comparison, let's make one.
The (ahem) mirror-smooth coffee-table sheen of the Mondays' ‘Yes Please’ conjures up little but complacency and water-treading: Shaun and co were once kings of the dirty, demonic rhythmscape, now the New FADs have moved in on their old manor and staked whole new claims in the still fertile soil of rock-dance crossover.
Techno and grunge might be the merry divorcees these days, having won custody of their constituent parts and gone their very separate ways, but the middle ground is not lost.
The forthcoming and immense FADs album ‘Body Exit Mind’ will, I predict, clear cross-pollination's name for good.
All hail the new conquistadors of loaded power angst!
Spearpoint throws his stocky shapes, Manchester's only livid boy from New Cross and ghost of Ian Curtis, I'm convinced; rock-hard drummer Perry and professor of percussion Icarus (who, excellently, used to play bongoes for some fire-eaters in a previous life) whip up yet another two-way beat concerto and Dolan throttles further tactile machine gun fire from his weapon.
It's ‘Beatlemania’ and its central mantra ‘His loving kiss, his loving kiss, his loving hands, his loving hands’holds you, no intention of going anywhere.
Within seconds of house-lights-on, all five set-lists have been swiped.
New FADs as reborn, odds-on invaders of the chart?
Might be worth a flutter.
Justin wobbles under those ‘overweight basslines’
Andy Spearpoint: next stop, a cover of ‘Butterfly Collector’?
FLIP YOUR WHIG
AFGHAN WHIGS
SLIPPERY CUSTOMERS, these Cincinnatti guys.
You think you have Afghan Whigs figured out as more hairy, never-do-well Sub Pop screwfaces with a nice line in (yawn) grunge and they proceed to stuff your preconceived notions back in your face.
Worse still, as the proceedings unfold, each time you think you've got the right handle on them, another different-coloured cat is let out the bag and there's no use trying to spot the genre/influences.
Merely saying ‘they rock’ is like just calling The Mona Lisa ‘a painting’.
Woefully inadequate, in other words.
So what gives?
Frontman Greg Whig is certainly one of the more possessed performers extant.
And he's blessed with a gift of a voice that swoops from arcs of strangulated screeching to the huskiest falsetto.
He offers heartache loud and clear on songs that are more than just minor vehicles of angst.
And the music, while not necessarily the most inventive guitar-drive stuff you've ever heard, has its splendid moments.
Not for Afghan Whigs the cop-out of basing songs on a single, howling riff.
Rather they explore the possibilities of rhythm and use the two contrasting guitars to show every instrument doesn't have to play the same melody.
And if this sounds like a recipe for wanton experimentalism, rest assured that tight guitar-pop limits are imposed so the end result doesn't get too wayward.
It's as if , instead of turning towards metal, early '80s hardcore decided to drop the politics for the personal and pursue some semblance of catchiness.
Afghan Whigs cover a lot of ravaged ground.
And, while not necessarily eclipsing their own songs, the rash of covers — chosen for maximum heartbreak potential — offer pointers into their mindset.
Two Supremes tunes get the rocket treatment (the ravishing current single ‘My World Is Empty…’ and the overhauled ‘Come See About Me’) and these point to unsteady, uneven love lives.
On the other hand, a medley that includes Pink Floyd's ‘Mother’ and a Teenage Fanclub song, topped off with some desolate a  cappella bars of ‘Blue Christmas’, shows that there's a warped sense of humour at work.
All of which is confirmed totally by Greg slipping Madonna intros into a powercrush ‘Miles Is Dead’.
Despite what they might say, Afghan Whigs aren't all dressed up with nowhere to go.
They're just confirming that not everyone has to sing the same song.
You should be glad.
Gunning for the Afghan rebels
THE JAYHAWKS
‘YOU SOUND like The Rockingbirds!’ shouts — funnily enough — a member of The Rockingbirds in the audience.
He's being provocative.
Hell, America's Jayhawks have been stoking the old C&W fire for almost eight years now.
The real point is, country music is back — like it or not.
And why is it suddenly fashionable?
Because despite ignorance breeding a precious snobbery towards the seemingly ‘uncool’, all it takes is one rock hero to mention Gram Parsons to inadvertently give the all-clear.
The Jayhawks will fill that gap in your record collection between The Eagles and The Byrds.
Better still, they're fresh, they release new albums with original material and you can watch them live.
Who says we're living in the past?
Tonight is very much here and now, even if between their own — perfectly harmonised — gems like ‘Take Me With You’ and ‘Waiting For The Sun’, we're treated to the odd classic cover version.
The Flying Burrito Brothers' ‘Send Me Back Home’ adds familiarity, links them to their roots and gives singer Mark Olson a reason for looking like Neil Young circa ‘73.
Their British counterparts are missing one important element, a real country heritage, the stamp of authenticity.
The Jayhawks know what it's like laying dimes on  railroad tracks and bareback horse-riding through Nevada (trainspotting in Crewe and donkey rides in Brighton don't have quite the same ring).
Like any particular field, there's good and bad: there's Gram Parsons and then there's the ‘Twenty Country Grates’ compilation.
The Jayhawks are reaching backwards and running forwards.
TENDERLOIN DAN DARE'S DOG
THE MAIN attraction of Dan Dare's Dog is their singer, a screamingly uptight individual who tonight breaks a world record, with 76 different kinds of nervous twitch displayed in one minute.
His band make out like Gallon Drunk minus the drunken-ness and plus the focused attack of Killing Joke.
His counterpart in Tenderloin has equally pressing concerns on his mind, but the kind that pop kids can relate to.
You know — unrequited love, more unrequited love, and a bit of rampant lust to be getting on with.
They play early '80s-style American guitar rock in the vein of REM circa ‘Reckoning’, but with tunes pulled backwards, forwards and sideways off the beaten track by unusual chord progressions and smatterings of psychedelic-tinged guitar.
On first encounter it can sound pedestrian, but there's always something not quite right about the melodies they produce, and the more curiosity that provokes, the more you're sucked in.
For the impatient and cynical, they've still got nice beat-pop choruses which a chimp could learn and sing but, if you let them, Tenderloin's just-slightly-strange songs grow in your subconscious like lovable brain tumours.
THE JESUS LIZARD
SIMPLE SIMON says shake your head; Simple Simon says this bunch are cool 'cos they're friends of Steve Albini; Simple Simon says stage-dive.
Unfortunately, Simple Simon knows shit.
The Jesus Lizard aren't very good tonight…but will we forgive them because they're excruciatingly loud and American?
No.
OK, so they don't tour Britain very often (they're here to promote their third album), their records are great (especially their last single, ‘Wheelchair Suicide’) and we should enjoy the wretchedness of their songs and stage personae.
We shouldn't, however, go home fulfilled, self-satisfied and smug.
There really is no excuse for this fumbling, flaccid performance and yet this crowd act like they'd grebo to a belch if it was feedback and amplified.
When menacing frontman David Yow begins to scream, ‘I'm calm now/I've calmed down/but I'm shaking’ during ‘Boilermaker’, you know he's aware of the situation.
At one point he humorously remarks: ‘Please, we're trying to rehearse — can you keep your noise down?’
Listen to the man — he makes sense.
This Chicago band are an aggressive bunch, not the kind of guys you'd take to meet Beelzebub, let alone your mother.
They're tongue-tied and festering, sick bastard sons of possessed virgins.
If you can make out the lyrics — and it's difficult enough to find a song in this aural tirade — you'll be subconsciously ordered to slaughter small children on the bus home.
If they sound, on paper, like every other American thrash band currently on the treadmill, it's probably because they are.
They're ideal for the Stateside retentive but Simple Simon says…that's not always good enough.
HYPERHEAD BLAGGERS ITA
If there is indeed a parallel universe, Blaggers ITA are undoubtedly from it.
They come across like Shaun and Bez fronting The Ruts and sound like Dexy's playing Clash covers.
Naturally, they're bloody marvellous.
Theirs is an uncontrived anger and aggression straight outta south London: they dedicate one song to the memory of race murder victim Ronan Adams, and their cover of ‘Guns Of Brixton’ goes south to the tenants on their estate who are still fighting the Poll Tax.
Despite a penchant for shouting ‘Go!’ at every available opportunity, they're as relevant a reaction to real hard times as the Cypress Hill record the DJ plays after their set.
In this universe they ought to be huge.
Hyperhead, too, are both exciting and impressive.
Not least when their percussionist hits an artificial tree containing a drum sampler, two car wheels and a vacuum cleaner that looks like one of Ministry's skeleton mic stands.
The likes of ‘Pre-Emptive Counter Attack’ are almighty roars which recall Nine Inch Nails and the Zep, but they can still switch effortlessly to the vibrant urban funk (with  f—off guitars) of debut single ‘Teenage Mind’and make the transition sound natural.
Despite this being only their fourth gig, Hyperhead have gone way past the ‘influenced by’ stage and instead shovel the relevant parts of recent musical history into a blast furnace.
The results can hardly fail to come out smoking.
They make a couple of mistakes, the most regrettable being an abominable version of ‘Ghost Town’, but get it so right the rest of the time it's easy to forgive them.
It's a mite premature to forecast global success or world domination, but Hyperhead are already close to being essential.
CUM ON STEAL THE NOIZE
THE JOYRIDERS
CALL IT teamwork, call it intuition, or perhaps summon that perennial old-stage Lady Luck, but The Joyriders' opening gambit in the face of a non-committal Saturday night gathering bears the hallmark of an almost supernaturally-gifted outfit.
As his colleagues make some final pre-set adjustments, front-seat Rider Murdo Macleod jokily launches into the gut-grapping riff to Metallica's ‘Enter Sandman’, only to be joined within seconds — to his obvious astonishment — by the rest of the band, grinding the  thang out with nonchalant ease.
Wa-hey!
This is the second skirmish in a brief cross-border raid for Edinburgh's Joyriders (the previous evening had seen them on the charity gig trail with Mega City Four in Tufnell Park), out to bludgeon the capital's callow youth into line with their handsomely appointed tuff-pop manifesto.
The watch-word here is ‘big’: big guitar-licks, big melodic surges, big-hearted words and, erm…big blokes.
Tall, strapping, hairy — jings, to look at them, you wouldn't fancy spilling this lot's collective pint, and there are a good few nervous coughs when Murdo invites those in attendance to ‘go and  f—ing buy’‘King Of Gasoline’, their essential recent EP offering.
But despite such ribald repartee, The Joyriders appear calmly determined in the face of various, invariably logistical, hassles suffered by the handful of Scottish bands not currently claiming residence in Bellshill.
For a start, Murdo has been here before with his previous band, the cruelly ignored Cateran, and has no desire to repeat that experience.
But, assuming song-savvy still counts for anything, then the game's already in the bag, since as well as‘Gasoline’ there's at least half a dozen similarly melancholic roars in this honest beast's breast, including one titled — with disarming candour —‘Hüsker Dü FC’!
So the engine's ticking over nicely.
In spurious Caledonian footie parlance, if The Cateran were a Willie Johnston sorta band — fiery, brilliant hot-heads with a tendency to put their foot in it — then The Joyriders are much more in the Alan Hansen mould: cool, confident on the ball and capable of supreme moments of inspiration.
Fasten those seatbelts now.
Joyrider Murdo: this week's pin-up
THE POET YELVERTON
IF, AS those in love with Super Mario and techno believe, we are to become a society where people bleep instead of laugh and the written and spoken word is confined to that particular history drawer already full of white football boots,Swapshop and pogo sticks, then it is possible this will be the last ever poet to be reviewed in the NME .
In the Perfect Future Of Those Obsessed With Electronic Fantasy, Ted Hughes will be replaced by the Sega Laureate, who will spend his days inventing computer games especially for national occasions like royal divorces, and the rapper from The Shamen will be considered a cultural visionary.
It is highly unlikely that Stephen Yelverton will ever command the attention of as many people as have already danced to the Poing!
Poing!
Poing! record.
There is, however, still time to capture one last attempt to use the genre to articulate rage and frustration, The Post Yelverton being the man.
Suede enjoyed his recent London debut but, tonight, literary heavyweights Keith Waterhouse and Martin Amis are watching.
And yet it's not Yelverton's poems that win your attention but his performance: he believes in rock'n'roll — Lord Byron style.
Not so much Allen Ginsberg as Alien Ginsberg, he handles the reverence expected of poetry meetings like a man beating a rat.
As tall as John Cleese and looking like Stan Bowles, he passionately regales you in a pained South African accent, all wild gesticulation.
He flips way off the handle, often too ridiculous for his own good, but his unfaltering sincerity and self-belief is steadying and dispels any giddy embarrassment brought on by such behaviour.
The subject of his poetry stretches from sex and sin to the downfall of C&W stars, and his lust for language prevails.
You can't help but notice some lousy couplets, but he invariably ends in style, spitting the final words, crumpling his lines, and discarding them with a terse ‘that's it’.
Yelverton is a long lost lepers' bell, a simple reminder that all isn't well beyond Game Boy.
From strange quarters superstars come.
SUBMARINER CYMBALINES COMPANY FOR HENRY
LEICESTER HAS always produced good bands, and the latest crop is no exception.
Company For Henry look like the original lunatics who took over the asylum — all shaven heads and murderous expressions.
Their lyrical sentiments are perfectly sane, though, such as running over our beloved PM in an ambulance.
The ram the point home with a stabbing, jerky version of Dead Kennedys-style punk-pop, but with a Gang Of Four influence to keep you on your toes and screaming choruses to knock you off your feet.
The Cymbalines, on the other hand, are the sort of boys you could take home to your parents along with their jangly, tuneful brand of guitar pop as-it-used-to-be-played before the hairies took over.
They're already legends in their own village shop after a play of their single on Radio 1, and judging by their quietly addictive sixth form pop tunes, the whole of Rutland could soon follow.
Submariner have their fair share of the swagger and spunk of Leeds' divinest, Cud.
But they've also got breezy tunes reminiscent of Thousand Yard Stare and slow, twisted torch songs reminiscent of no-one in particular due to awkward, obnoxious rhythms backing them.
Lord knows where they're heading, but you really should go along for the ride.
ROBINSON
A DEMO tape from Robinson arrived in the NME office about a month ago.
It contained only two songs: ‘Soiled’, a frothy, winsome pop thing, and ‘Soup’, a luscious paean to Judy Garland that was supremely infectious, full of wry wit (‘You're much thinner when you're ill’) and packed with aural surprises.
‘Soiled’ was instantly forgotten —‘Soup’, by contrast, was deservedly proclaimed a hit.
As tonight attests, a tape of two halves was the product of a band with a split personality.
Robinson begin by rattling off a handful of saccharine songs that sound like little more than fast-paced lift music.
‘Beaks’, ‘Kill’ and ‘Squeekers’are heavy on chirpy keyboard inflections, Beach Boys harmonies and nifty guitar breaks; but they're so bland as to be downright irritating.
And then, right in the middle of a well-executed display of crushing mediocrity, these four grinning long-hairs launch into ‘Soup’, which succeeds in being every bit as stunning as the recorded version.
It's followed by ‘Gibbet’, a lush, textured tune that scrapes the impressive heights reached by its predecessor, only to give way to more featherweight tat.
‘Confused’ isn't the half of it.
IT'S ONLY ROCK 'N' STROLL
STROLLERCOASTER
BREATHE IN — Jon ‘Fat Beast’ 's ‘Indie Variety Spectacular’is coming to a college near you.
Forget your Rollercoasters and Lollapaloozas, this is burgeoning Indiedom in a shrink-wrapped package.
The idea took shape some five years ago in the back room of London's Bull & Gate, and it's taken until now to get it on the road — for 32 days only.
Unfortunately, the idea is possibly the best part: take three, as yet unsuccessful, bands on tour, invite special surprise guests each night, add Jon Beast (made famous by Carter USM) and his ‘outrageous bits’ and you've got a top night out.
Haven't you?
Tabitha Zu, The Hinnies and The Cuckoos are Stollercoaster's featured bands and, to be honest, they're not the best of the new bunch.
Voice Of The Beehive are tonight's special guests but they don't turn up ‘til nine so fillers The Janasen and Genius Feak go onstage and get lost in the chaos.
This isn't their tour so they've nothing really to prove.
Tabitha Zu, on the other hand, have.
And at last they appear to have thrown off the similarities with Daisy Chainsaw (which stemmed from their singers being sisters) to adopt a Hazel O'Connor/Sugarcubes approach.
Mel Garside doesn't squeal, she sings.
They look great, they rock out occasionally and she's nothing short of captivating.
All Tabitha Zu lack is a hit song.
The Cuckoos’ hit is painful.
They make the kind of music which makes sense if you're driving down 200 miles of American highway, which doesn't mean it's particularly good, as anything loud and vaguely melodic would sound great speeding along Route 66.
Tonight, The Cuckoos are more like listening to Radio 1 on the M25.
The question still remains — will The Hinnies ever be able to order delivery pizza again?
This lot wrote the music score to the ‘art’ porn film starring Antonio De Sancha and as that's been the highlight of their career so far, it can only get better.
The North Londoners have been loitering on the ‘average’ line for a few years now, and finally they're staggering towards a state of ‘alrightness’if the harmonious ‘Doodle’is anything to go by.
Voice Of The Beehive offer familiar pleasantries, but their jolly pop only adds to the constant onslaught.
We need a reprieve and closing guests The Australian Stooges see we don't get one.
It's a gruesome finale and no mistake.
The Iggy-mimicking singer, having removed his trousers, is prancing around in red underpants as Beast joins him for a rap style duet.
A mad, bad hectic night out.
But, don't forget…
It's a good idea.
Tabitha Zu's Mel Garside swaps sisterly influences for, erm, Hazel O'Connor
SHEFFIELD BLOODY SHEFFIELD
FEW PEOPLE seemed particularly interested in the second annual Leadmill-hosted festival.
The roll-call of young hopefuls looked to be crammed with too many no-hopers, too many Sheffield-based bands who'd failed to progress from local lustre to national notoriety.
And that was thinking positively!
Well, pass me that pie labelled ‘humble’, Mr Shopkeeper, I was wrong.
On with the show!
Unfortunately suffering from a highly developed case of techno-phobia, the first night ‘WARP’ special was the very stuff of my personal nightmares.
LFO were four boys with keyboards and a curious interest in speed-chewing.
Cold, claustrophobic rhythms stripped of humanity and humour and performed with a complete disregard for such niceties as, well, performance, LFO's brief  appearance was not for the faint-hearted.
Millions Of Honey opened Saturday night with a sparky set of robust, melodic guitar songs that have toughened and matured over the last year of line-up shuffles, and should justly set them up for a spot of national service.
Which leads to the brightest bulb in the Sheffield chandelier of pop, the Longpigs.
Cheekbones!
Shirts that don't fit!
Fey vocals and gritty guitars!
All are pressed into service to create gorgeous glam-tastic tunes brimming full of charm, wit and unexpected bits where Crispin Hunt's voice seems inebriated on premium-strength helium.
Supporting The Beautiful South on their recent European tour has left Blammo with a Transit-load of confidence and a poppier set.
They now rely less on naff novelties and more on structure and nuance, while still retaining an Alec Gilroy-sense of showbiz.
A Sunday night in September may be a bit early for Christmas but the Leadmill has already got the turkey in.
And it's called ‘V’.
Like the ‘Mef if they'd been brought up in a Yorkshire pit village instead of some jessified ‘forest’, but with scurrilous standing in for the keyboards, ‘V’ are an untutored Stooges. that's the Three Stooges, mind.
Recently signed to Gift records, Newspeak are another vastly improved Yorkshire mob.
Occasionally occupying a perch not a million miles from The Black Crowes and unafraid to cross the bridge from ‘metal’ to ‘mayhem’, Newspeak are creating a fusion nicked from the frankly, ‘heavier’stalls of the pop market and the kind of tunes that you could probably whistle if your eardrums hadn't just been blown away.
Proceedings are drawn to an equally raucous but somewhat frothier close by Sheffield's youngest recording band, the Various Vegetables.
Inclined to be an unpredictable live outing, the Veggies do the business with an energising blur of Neds-ish guitar fodder.
The snag is, they're not as relevant as they could be; they have the tunes, energy and visual appeal but continue to deliver them in an increasingly obsolete vehicle, leaving themselves in danger of being left behind by their natural audience.
WRITE SAID FRED
EDITED BY THE INFO-MOUS FRED DELLAR
THE DOPE ON COPE
Just a couple of questions about JULIAN COPE: What happened to the album of TEARDROP EXPLODES B-sides that had the proposed title ‘Christ Vs Warhol’?
Also, where is his autobiography, supposedly finished over a year ago?
Cope reckons that the album of B-sides will emerge one day but, with a ‘Best Of…’ currently on sale, the idea has been placed on the back-burner indefinitely.
Much the same goes for the autobiography, which was completed in 1991.
Says a Cope aide: ‘Julian actually had a publisher for the book and everything was ready to go ahead.
Talk was that it would be out by last autumn.
Then he just pulled it.
I read the book and thought it was very funny.
Then there was some talk of placing portions in various magazines, so that you had to buy the lot in order to read the book.
But that was another idea that got shelved.’
And so the wait continues…
DELICIOUS WOUNDING
I've become interested in that odd-bod group NURSE WITH WOUND but don't know much about them.
Can you help?
NWW is basically graphic designer Stephen Stapleton, who lives in Ireland and is responsible for several productions (The Legendary Pink Dots, for example) and lots of art work.
Since NWW's debut album, ‘Chance Meeting On A Dissecting Table Between A Sewing Machine And An Umbrella’(!),
Stapleton has been knocking out roughly an album a year and, about three years ago, released ‘Psilotripitaka’, a boxed set of the first three NWW albums.
More recently, a CD entitled ‘Thunder Perfect Mind’ arrived on United Dairies, while also around is ‘Sugar Fish Drink’, a best-of NWW that contains input from Foetus.
‘Chance Meeting…’ now sells for around £250 a time.
But beware, because the bootleggers have already moved in!
TALKING INNOCENCE
Further to Allan M of Reading's query regarding Pennsylvanian quartet THE INNOCENCE MISSION (NME , September 19), you neglected to mention that they had a second A&M album released during 1991.
It was titled ‘Umbrella’ and the song ‘And Hiding Away’, to which Allan referred in his letter, is in fact the first track on the album.
Perhaps it's not surprising you overlooked the release — I don't think it was ever issued here in the UK, and the copy I own is an import.
Once again Larry Klein (that is, ‘Mr Joni Mitchell’) is given a co-production credit and, like the band's debut A&M release, it's another gorgeous, unique slice of dreamy ‘ethereality’.
Incidentally, Larry Klein is supposed to have produced the new Shawn Colvin album, which should have appeared by now.
So where is it, Sony-Columbia?
OOH WALLA WALLA!
Could you please help me.
I've heard that KING KURT have reformed and are to do a London gig.
Could you find out if they have any plans to release new material?
Have you any news regarding the various members of KING KURT, who split in 1988?
By the time this answer gets into print, King Kurt will have played their reunion date at London's Astoria.
But guitarist Paul Laventhol explained, prior to the gig: ‘This is just a one-off, because we had so many people wanting us to get together for a show.
If the response is strong, I suppose there could be other dates, but really we're regarding it just as a single date right now.
There are also no plans for a record though, again, things could change.’
Laventhol, who makes most of his loot as a carpenter these days, explained Smeggy and Maggot would be the other former Kurt mainmen engaged at the Astoria soirée.
But Dick Crippen, one of the non-aligned members of the one-time food hurlers, apologised for his absence: ‘When the band split, we ended up on very poor terms and neither I nor Rory will be involved in the reunion.
In recent times, Rory's worked as drummer with Boys Wonder and roadie with the Manics and Black Box, among other things, while I've got my own record company these days.
In fact, there are two labels — Flat Records and U4RA — and we've put out records by Boys Wonder, MacCavity's Cat, Surfin' Dead and Sun.
I also do a lot of production work and I'm currently working with all-girl rockers Lovecraft.’
And just where is guitarist John Reddington?
‘Oh, he decided that he'd had enough and wanted to go back to being a teacher.’
WHERE'S CHAD?!
Could you possibly find out what Chad Channing, sexy ex-drummer with NIRVANA, is up to these days?
Has he joined yet another ‘seminal’ Seattle grunge band or what?
Have you any info regarding Sub Pop band THE BEST KISSERS IN THE WORLD?
According to Sub Pop HG, Chad Channing is now in a band called Fire Ants.
As for The Best Kissers, the communiqué reads: ‘After several line-up changes and acquisition of a new manager, they have signed with alternative heavyweight MCA.’
All together now, ‘Destination Zululand…’
Tall tales: Nirvana (Chad Channing, right)
DISCOGRAPHY
THE PRIMITIVES
Leading lights of the staggeringly short-lived ‘blonde pop’ boom, rampant three-minute wonder workers, Coventry's last great band (sorry, Adorable) and, scarily, coverers of ‘I Wanna Be  Your Dog’— The Primitives, we salute you!
Primitive Primitives, lazy and proud of it
NME CHARTS
Bjork's ‘Birthday’ comes around again
Up 'n' Athens: REM take up their Number-One-with-the-people spot
Those ‘hunky’ Neds wisely opt for the ‘safe sex’option…
House Of Pain: white men can jump
The Flowerpot Men after a visit to the local haberdashers
FRED FACT
FOR YEARS, chart books meant very little in Britain.
There were some handy ones around — Charlie Gillett and Simon Frith's Rock File series and Dafydd Rees' Star-File were among those that first made waves of a sort — but it wasn't until Guinness published their initial British Hit Singles , in 1977, that the genre became part of the UK's list of best-sellers.
Since then, every aspect of both the US and British charts has been investigated, one remaining gap being filled by 40 Years Of NME Charts , the week by week UK rundown just published by Boxtree Press.
With every niche filled, the only option left is the update, and here Guinness have been steaming ahead yet again, the two most recent arrivals being the fifth edition of Billboard's Book Of USA Top-40 Hits and the third edition of The Billboard Book Of Number One Hits , both bookshelf benders, the former boasting 674 pages while the latter weighs in at a hefty 844.
The problem is, to some extent, that because of the research involved and other factors, such offerings are often out-of-date by the time of publication.
Top 40 Hits , for instance, only lists records that entered the US Top 40 up to July 27, 1991 and thus is well over a year in arrears.
Happily,The Billboard Book Of Number One Hits , compiled by Fred Bronson, hardly suffers from this affliction and provides a complete summary on every single to top the US listings from 1955 through till April this year.
For the chart nut, it's an essential addition to the library.
Apart from providing such basic info as the date that any hit reached pole position, the length of time it held on to the top spot and a full rundown on catalogue numbers, songwriters, producers etc, there's also a full page of background on the history of the song and its performers.
Investigation seemingly proves that there's less of a gap between the US and UK charts than once was apparent.
These days, most US chart-toppers can be expected to notch reasonable placings in the UK listings, though there are exceptions.
During 1991, for instance, Hi-Five's ‘I Like The Way (The Kissing Game)’, a Jive release, headed the US listings but failed to dent the Top 40 here, a similar fate befalling Surface's ‘The First Time’.
Even so, there's not the disparity that once existed.
But there are some things that never change.
Thumbing through the trivia section of Number One Hits , it's obvious everything remains Beatle-oriented.
The Fabs are still the act logging the most US Number Ones since 1955, 20 in all, while Paul McCartney (32) is the most successful writer, followed by John Lennon (26), the all-time ace producer being George Martin (22).
Only in the ‘Most Weeks At Number One’ do the foursome get the shove, Elvis Presley notching a tidy 79 weeks at the top, in all, against The Beatles' 59.
Doubtless all this will please those who think in terms of Grammys.
For, in yet another publication,Broken Record (US Birch Lane Press), author Henry Schipper documents the manner in which the National Academy Of Recording Arts And Sciences, the organisation that sponsors America's most prestigious music awards, has continually looked to the past, even The Beatles losing out to the Grammy gang during 1965, when the award for ‘Best Vocal Group’ went not to John, Paul, George and wotsisname (who, that year, went to Number One Stateside with ‘I Feel Fine’, ‘Eight Days A Week’, ‘Ticket To Ride’, ‘Help’and ‘Yesterday’) but rather to Nashville's pure MOR Anita Kerr Singers, who also won in 1966!
Since then, things have changed but fractionally, many classic rock records still having failed to be recognised in ensuring years.
Showing how hip they really are, the Grammy judges dished out their 1992 ‘Record Of The Year’ award to Natalie Cole for ‘Unforgettable’, a single that utilised a track Natalie's pater made back in 1951!
US chart-toppers Surface: not very big in the UK
ANGST
EDITED BY DAVID QUANTICK
GAY-BASHERS GET BASHED…
THAT BLOKE WHO USED TO BE IN THE SMITHS CAUSES A BIT OF A STIR AGAIN…
READING TOILETS ARE SHIT SHOCKER…
AT LAST— SOMEONE SANE WRITES TO NME 
Dear Thug, I also believe that Right Said Fred should be shot (Shot?
Knighted, you fool!
Beware, lest your dodgy pop tastes invalidate the splendour of the rest of your letter!— DQ), not because they are gay but because they are crap.
People should be free to do as they wish — I believe that this should be so, even dickheads like you should be free to spout off their racist homophobic thoughts, and what is so  f—ing good about the Union Jack?
There really is a lot to be proud about the economy here, isn't there?
Good old England.
If anyone should be shot, it should be you.
Seeing as you only like bands who seem to have the same attitudes as you, I'm sure you will be pleased to know there is a band called Guns N' Roses who have this same attitude.
Seeing as you seem to have such a small and narrow-minded attitude, you will never have heard of them.
Perhaps you could answer me another question — name one band that tells people they should be gay.
Even if a band that I liked did this, I'm sure that it would not make me gay (And even if the power of rock introduced you to the delights of homosexuality, who cares, eh?
It's only polymorphous perversity — DQ).
It is only morons like you who, after listening to some crazed lunatic spouting his thoughts, would follow such thoughts.
The reason why the Nazis persecuted the Jews was so that people would forget their own problems; perhaps the reason you do this is so that you can blame someone else for your failings?
…
A Thug from Darlington should be hanged, drawn and quartered.
It is people like him who gave birth to people like Adolf Hitler.
If he can actually make an effort to write in and persecute gays and ‘ethnics’, then it is he who is spreading a terrible disease and ‘twisting young kids’ minds’.
Why can't people accept things for what they are rather than going all out to destroy the things they don't agree with?
(Letter goes on to let itself down rather through derogatory references to ‘shell-suits’ and ‘Northern bastards’)
Let me tell you something, A Thug.
The amount of sorrow, grief and hatred that gay men and women have to put up with just to SURVIVE instantly makes them infinitely stronger than you.
You are so shit-scared of homosexuality and so utterly stupid, small-minded and screwed-up that your only reaction to ‘faggots’ is that ‘every one of them should be electrocuted or shot’.
Please start thinking — now.
Ideas very close to these turned into the Holocaust.
Do you know what that was?
Watch the news.
What you have expressed so far leads me to believe that you totally agree with the concept of ethnic cleansing concentration camps because, unfortunately, such bigoted homophobia suggests equally bigoted sexism, racism and nationalism.
In April you probably voted Conservative (scary to think people fought for you to have a vote), not because you agreed with their policies, but because Neil Kinnock was a ‘Welsh wanker’.
One wonders why you even bother reading the NME — perhaps you should stick to The Sun in the future.
You may well end up working for them.
Of course, I could be wrong.
Perhaps Thuggy is just a poor ironic joke, or an ill-educated nine-year-old.
 F— off, homophobes and die — VERY VIOLENTLY.
…
While this letter may not be similar to certain ones you've had recently, I must say that the Morrissey saga has been somewhat overplayed, don't you think?
Not really, Jimbo.
I'd rather fill this page with angry letters attacking people who are entertained/moved by fascism, racism, homophobia, whether it's Morrissey ‘exploring its fascination’ or someone scooping out their own shit and trying to sell it to us as ‘common sense’, than have another letter like yours, the first half (not printed here, lucky readers) of which is something incomprehensible about The Wedding Present — DQ
NEWS OF FIERCE DEBATE REACHES AMERICA!
I had the privilege of spending an afternoon with Morrissey shortly before the release of ‘Kill Uncle’.
That day (as evening's purple light gleamed softly through our brandy schooners, etc — DQ) he told me: ‘I'm not international.
I'm completely British…
I think I am the last British poop artist because the total effort of all groups now in 1990 is to be as international as possible…but I'm not a part of it.
Why it's so unfortunate for England that other cultures seep into England.
I don't think England seeps into other cultures.’
What is so terribly wrong about defending one's culture against homogenisation?
Why not stand up for the uniquely British spirit embodied by Richard Lester (who's American — DQ), Rita Tushingham, Shelagh Delaney, Tom Courtenay, etc.
I don't think the England Morrissey pines for is a particularly mythic one.
I'd like to read some discussion on this view rather than allusions to this idyllic England of yore.
By clinging to the Union Jack, isn't Morrissey clinging to what makes England distinct from, say, the United States and the rest of the world?
What's wrong with individuality?
Furthermore, as far as skinhead paraphernalia is concerned, isn't Morrissey telling his fans (supposedly alienated from society's mainstream) that we may have something in common with the frightening skinheads?
Why not view that skinhead ideology from a new perspective, for I think it brings us closer to understanding what motivates their hate instead of pumping us full of the old clichés about how inhuman they are…
I know many reading this must feel as I feel: torn between the raw genius of Morrissey's Smiths writing and his latest batch of tunes, which I personally feel very much cheated by.
I believe that, in Morrissey's heart, he knows he has erred, he has become comfortable and his brand of far right sloganeering befits the temperament of a man who not six years ago was wryly spinning the world of pop on his ring finger.
He wants so desperately to be vital, but he is being terribly dishonest with himself.
Perhaps the entire ‘racist’ debacle is a scapegoat for Smiths fans who can no longer bridge together the genius of The Smiths with the impersonal flatulence of Morrissey's latest recordings.
It makes for a quick and easy way out of their alliance.
Blimey.
A few points here, the quickest being that people don't accuse their pop heroes of being racists when they make crap records, they accuse them of making crap records.
As for‘defending one's culture against homogenisation’, some of Morrissey's songs and attitudes seem more worried about cross-cultural fertilisation.
There's a world of difference between longing for a McDonald's and Coca Cola-free world and longing for a world without Bengalis who don't ‘belong here’.
His remark about England not seeping into other cultures is garbage of the worst sort.
Ask any cricket fan.
Ask anyone who's lived in a former British colony — English culture has been imposed on and been absorbed by countries on every continent on this earth.
As for‘clinging to the Union Jack’, maybe Morrissey is trying to reclaim the flag from the right, maybe he's trying to make us think about what we have ‘in common with the frightening skinheads’.
From here, it looks more like he's trying to stir up some shit that's already been stirred up too much by the neo-Nazis.
We've said it before, we'll say it again; playing with right-wing nationalism at a time when refugees area being murdered in Germany, when people are being put in camps and ‘ethnically cleansed’ in Serbia, and when people here are being attacked for being black is stupid and dangerous.
Morrissey says he's not a racist; now let's see the evidence — DQ
Dear Morrissey, ‘Repeat after me/  F— Queen and country/Repeat after me/Death sentence heritage/Repeat after me/Useless generation/Dumb flag scum.’
PS: 'Cos I'm a slut and you just suck.
ONE MORE REASONED POP AT ‘QUIFFY BOY’
You're the one for me, Fatwah!
It doesn't sound like Mozzer is going to have to explain himself; last week I saw an Asian punk rock band called Cornershop articulate many people's feelings by setting fire to a poster of the misguided buffoon.
Their T-shirts screamed ‘This Is An Asian Rut’ and had Morrissey's picture with a Hitler moustache scribbled on.
This band are part of the repoliticised scene along with Huggy Bear and Nation Of Ulysses!
It looks like it's going to be difficult to shrug this one off, picking at the racist scab was never going to do anyone any good, quiffy boy.
MEANWHILE, BACK IN THE ‘REAL WORLD’…
The Shamen are the Chas'n'Dave of rave.
Angry Of Marple
So what are Flowered Up?
Bad Manners?— DQ
I enjoyed Reading, a few beers, good atmosphere and some good bands, but…what the bloody hell was going on hygiene-wise?
I mean toilet bowls.
Bowls as in containers; when you take a crap you don't say ‘I'll just go and smear my excrement up a wall’.
You wouldn't bloody do it at home, you dirty bastards!
Thumbs up to the poor people that had to clean it up.
I hope they don't smoke rollies.
Still Reeling Of Plymouth
Hello to Alice P Farmer.
And hello to you too, Alaric — DQ
ARE STAMPS FREE IN YORKSHIRE OR WHAT?
I'd just like to say that it's good to have The Sundays back in action after their long break.
Now all we need is for The Stone Roses to resume their proper business (which is making records) and clear away all the current rubbish in the chart (That would surely mean that The Stone Roses would have to release 100 singles which would all have to chart.
Unfeasible,non ?— DQ).
Oh well, I guess having one classy band make a return will have to do for now.
In this lark, pal, we don't save you a seat.
You flaming work for it.
I for one shall not be waiting with hope a-beating in my breast when Manchester's Most Indolent resume their careers — DQ
WE REMEMBER PUNK ROCK
Lesson II: Repackage, reissue, reiterate.
Exhume the wormy corpse of the Sex Pistols.
Shit on their memory and we'll go through the motions.
Anarchy in the Wembley Arena?
Viciousburgers on sale in the foyer…now.
Get pissed?
Destroy?
This person's had enough of useless memories.
‘That was the PUNKtabulous Sex Pistols, mate.
Waddya think of ‘em, Smashy?’
‘ F— off mate! they're as much of a joke as you are.’
There's no future, so let's sell off the past again.
Dave Greenfield, down the pub
IT'S LIFE, READERS, BUT NOT AS WE KNOW IT
Shamen and Altern 8 in shambolic death of rock implix.
Wrong on counts 4(a)rf.
Rock gains from fashion fall-out.
Timeless quality born out of shared elements, and to why ‘Atmosphere’— Joy Div bench-mark sounds more valid than Omega Amego.
BPMs are a brush with transiency.
Greatness comes from a knowledge of the past, a present sentiment, and a vision of the future.
Rave is a corrupting virus in the double helix, tatty construx that hint at a moon-booted, gold lamé future which is always just out of reach.
The last lie, a soundtrack to the washing of brains.
Drugs PLC involved on a huge scale — human guinea pigs readily available.
To put it in a capsule, CLUBS ARE LABS.
Clearly living so near to the home of Julian Cope has affected your judgement, Jase.
Or perhaps one day we will all be like you.
Let's hope so, eh?— DQ
In reference to the ‘Mark E Smith Vs I, Ludicrous’ article, I was again struck by Mark's persistent use of the word ‘soccer’.
The man seems hell-bent on using the word.
In common with most of the population, the word ‘soccer’ has connotations of Americanism or cheap commercialism, not the dialect of a person who appears to epitomise your typical working-class northerner.
Has Mr Smith a phobia about ‘football’?
I fear the people will never uncover the mystery obsession surrounding the pioneer of Britain's best band.
A Kurious Fall Fan
Language, William Burroughs say, is a virus.
If so, Mark E Smith has the measles in a bad way.
Or something — DQ
Gosh, what wags The Shamen are with their record ‘Take Drugs, They're Great’.
Seeing the singer on telly squawking ‘E's are good’ was like watching a kid waving its potty around its head.
E's haven't done him much good, have they?
He's given up washing his hair and just dyes it instead, his skin has been surgically replaced with grey rubber, and his eyes!
Hell, they've gone on holiday and left their bags behind.
Shamen indeed!
They'd have trouble talking to a budgie, never mind a bison.
The only bison they need to get acquainted with is one with soap and water in it.
It's about time the music press woke up to the fact that rave is the new heavy metal, sucking innocents in and destroying their musical tastebuds.
Why do you not realise that it has to be stopped, and that you're the ones to do it!
You have the influence to destroy The Smiths, baggy and shoe-gazing, so why not this evil noise that is killing pop?
Steven Moz, Student Tosser, Dublin
Is it true that before singing in Suede, Brett played the part of Jill in Eastenders ?
How do you turn a duck into a soul singer?
Put it in the microwave until its bill withers.
And on that note, we fold up our tents of correspondence and steal gladly into the night — DQ
Dr. Crawshaft's World Of Pop
Mr. Weller's Return To The ‘Chart World’
Ah, it is good to see Mr. Weller ‘wheeled out’ once again!
CHER TYPE STUFF
What type of vehicle has he arrived in this time?
I do not recognize it, but I hope it is as sturdy as his previous ones of ‘modish punk’ and ‘jazzy café soul’
DANCE
Drop me down anywhere!
BRYAN ADAMS TYPE STUFF
I think this new ‘cart’ is an amalgam of nearly every pop style!
INDIE