

14 November 1992 Psalm Enchanted Evening!
On The Road with MINISTRY NEW MUSICAL EXPRESS Carter re-elected!
BILL HICKS * SEBADOH RED HOUSE PAINTERS MADNESS * EAST 17 JULIANA HATFIELD BETTIE SERVEERT DROP NINETEENS VOTE IN THE NME READERS POLL!
NEW ENGLAND'S DREAMING Carter's US Campaign PLUS: JULIAN COPE, SUGAR, L7, FAITH NO MORE, STEREO MC'S LIVE
NEWS
News Editor: IESTYN GEORGE
George sues Sony for £50m
GEORGE MICHAEL has launched a legal battle against Sony Records to try and escape from his contract.
Following a precedent set by The Stone Roses, who broke free from the Silvertone label by claiming that they were tied to an unfair contract, Michael is to sue Sony on the grounds that his deal is restrictive and financially inadequate.
The former Wham! singer, who is signed to Sony until 2003, has reportedly threatened never to sing again unless he is freed by Sony.
Music business lawyer John Kennedy (who successfully fought similar Stone Roses and Frankie Goes To Hollywood cases) has been enlisted by Michael for his tussle with the corporate giant.
Michael's lawyers have complained in a High Court writ that the label's right to reject his work is unreasonable and the legal action goes on to allege that the distribution of profits from his albums ‘Faith’ and ‘Listen Without Prejudice Vol 1’was unfair.
George, who has earned £80 million in ten years, collected 57p a copy while Sony made £1.83p.
A sum in the region of £50 million is thought to rest on the outcome of the case.
Gallup home for The Cure
THE CURE's Simon Gallup was rushed to hospital last week having contracted pleurisy on the band's current European tour.
The band were forced to cancel their appearance at the recent MTV awards ceremony due to Gallup's ill health.
The bass player was finally flown home from Milan, however The Cure opted to continue their European dates with temporary replacement Shellyan Orphan bass player Roberto Soave.
A spokesperson for the band, who begin their UK tour at Birmingham NEC on November 18, told NME : ‘Simon is comfortable in hospital.
Obviously everybody is hoping he'll be well enough to play the British shows.
But in the event that Simon is not fit enough to appear, Roberto will stand in.’
In addition to the Birmingham date, The Cure play .
U2 go wild in the country
U2 issue a radically re-worked version of ‘Who's Gonna Ride Your Wild Horses’ as a single at the end of this month and are expected to announce the UK stadium leg of their current world tour next week.
The single, taken from the band's multi-million selling ‘Achtung Baby’ album appears in ‘Temple Bar Edit’form, backed by a cover of The Rolling Stones' ‘Paint It Black’.
The CD includes a version of ‘Fortunate Son’, originally recorded by Creedence Clearwater Revival, as well as the full length ‘Temple Bar Mix’ of the title track.
Meanwhile, a spokesperson for the band confirmed that live dates are due to be announced in the coming days: ‘There will be a handful of shows spread across the country.
At the moment the band are in California, and the US leg of the tour carries on until the end of November.’
Cope's career in runes?
JULIAN COPE, who was forced to cancel the remainder of his UK tour last week due to a throat and chest infection, has been dramatically dropped by Island Records.
The label has decided to sever its working relationship with Cope after the release of four albums and the Double LP compilation ‘Floored Genius’.
The news comes less than a month after the release of his latest acclaimed opus, ‘Jehovakill’, and the announcement that three Town & Country club shows had sold out prior to the tour being pulled.
Insiders in the Cope camp claim that the 34-year-old singer was deemed to be too old and uncommercial by Island.
A spokesperson for Cope told NME : ‘It's ironic that he should be released (from his contract ) at a time when he's at his creative peak and his work is more popular than ever.
I wonder whether the same view would apply if Neil Young or Van Morrison came knocking at the door.’
Meanwhile, the cancelled shows at Cambridge, Birmingham and London have been rescheduled for January, along with a number of additional dates.
Cope now plays .
Tickets for the original Cambridge and Birmingham gigs remain valid, while fans holding tickets for the London shows on the first, second or third nights must attend the equivalent evenings in January.
Refunds will be provided at point of sale for fans unable to go to the relevant dates.
Cope had intended to raffle his infamous ‘Cosmic Asshole’ mic stand on the tour, with the highest bidder donating the money to anti-fur trade campaigners Lynx.
This fund-raising sideshow will now take place in January.
LEVITATION, Terry Bickers' experimental spacerock outfit, are to sign to Chrysalis.
The band, who recently left the Rough Trade label despite having signed what was rumoured to be the indie label's largest deal since The Smiths, are set to sign on the dotted line with Chrysalis within the next two weeks.
Levitation, who became the subject of intense interest from major labels on leaving Rough Trade, plan to play low-key shows at the end of November before going into the studio to record material for New Year release.
ICE CUBE issues his third solo LP at the end of the month, despite rumours that the record would not be released in the UK.
Cube, one of the major attractions on last summer's Lollapalooza II tour in the US, follows up last year's ‘Death Certificate’ album with ‘The Predator’on November 30 through Island.
Featuring current import hit ‘Wicked’, insiders suggest that the material is unlikely to cause the outrage sparked by ‘Black Korea’, Cube's condemnation of the Korean community in LA which appeared on ‘Death Certificate’.
U2, headed to an enormo-dome near you
Raw deal: life's a beach for Julian Cope, speechless and label-less
BETTIE SERVEERT, acclaimed Dutch quartet, have added a couple of headline dates in London and Bristol.
The band follow their string of support dates on Belly's current UK tour with shows at .
Support at Bristol is provided by Sun Tribe, Clive TV and Spirit Box while former Moose and Stereolab member Mick Convoy unveils his new band Treetop at the London Show.
Following their UK gigs, the band embark on their first US tour in December.
Rollins speaks out
HENRY ROLLINS (left) embarks on his first major spoken word tour early next year, in conjunction with the release of a double album of wry wisdom from the former Black Flag frontman.
The new album takes a humorous view of rock 'n' roll lifestyles in Los Angeles.
Until now he has fitted in spoken word stints between recording and touring commitments with The Rollins Band.
A spokesperson told NME : ‘People have this idea that this is some kind of punk poetry reading session, but Rollins the speaker is a completely different animal to Rollins the musician.’
The dates are expected to be announced in the coming weeks, including a London show at the Hackney Empire.
The LP is tentatively scheduled for January 18 release.
Meanwhile, his book,Black Coffee Blues , is due to hit the shops in mid-December.
JAMC roll back into UK
THE JESUS AND MARY CHAIN follow their recent string of rollercoaster shows in the US with a one-off British date.
The band return to the UK to play London's Brixton Academy on December 5.
Support acts for the night are yet to be confirmed.
Following their Brixton date, The Reid brothers will start work on their previously rumoured acoustic album, said to involve guest contributions from Bob Dylan, Shane MacGowan and influential US country guitar guru Lee Hazelwood.
The band plan to finish the LP in time for a spring release.
Meanwhile, THE JESUS AND MARY CHAIN along with HAPPY MONDAYS, THE SHAMEN and SILVERFISH are amongst the bands lending their support for a new Charter 88 campaign against violations of human rights in Britain.
A host of celebrities from music and showbusiness put their names to an advert in last Saturday's Guardian , launching a campaign to publicise abuses of power on our doorstep.
The list of names backing the programme, which plans to issue a series of hard-hitting pamphlets describing specific cases of abuse, also includes Peter Gabriel, Bernard Sumner from New Order, Pete Townshend, Labbi Siffre and Swervedriver.
Commenting on his support for the campaign, Fuzz from Silverfish told the NME : ‘I believe Charter 88 is creating awareness of the many injustices doled out by society today.
I have been hassled and discriminated against a number of times just because of the way I look.
Most people are too wrapped up in their own lives to be bothered that other people's freedoms and rights are being infringed, until it happens to them, and then it's too late.’
Details of how to obtain pamphlets and membership information can be obtained from Charter 88 .
Rollins: Laugh?
We almost went to the Hackney Empire
US NEWS
NWA rapper Eazy-E has filed a $54 million lawsuit against Sony Music Entertainment, Los Angeles Records, Death Row Records and 11 individuals, claiming racketeering and extortion.
Easy-E says representatives of Sony intimidated and threatened him during a meeting in 1991 at the SOLAR Records office in Hollywood.
He says he was physically threatened in an attempt to get him to sign over the rights to three groups he represents to Sony.
He told reporters: ‘They had bats and lead pipes and said stuff like, ‘I know where your mother stays…’ little things like that.
I was  intimidated .’
Eazy-E's attorney also says Sony engaged in money laundering by releasing productions by Dr Dre and then depositing ‘the proceeds of the productions into an institution’.
Sony has issued a statement defending itself.
It reads: ‘We are confident that Sony music executives acted at all times lawfully, ethically and with sound business judgement.’
MICHAEL JACKSON, whose recent world tour visited 34 countries, has announced that sales of his latest LP ‘Dangerous’ have topped the 15 million mark in its first ten months in the shops.
‘Thriller’ managed a paltry 13 million in the same period, but has achieved over 40 million total sales since its release in 1982.
DAVID BOWIE will be the executive producer of a film about Austrian physician Franz Mesmer.
The $7.5 million film is being produced by Lance Reynolds, former head of an Australian record label and manager of Air Supply.
SINEAD O'CONNOR has received support from a group which tore up photos of the Pope outside New York's St Patrick's Cathedral.
Calling themselves the Sinead Brigade, about two dozen people from different activist organisations protested outside the cathedral as the singer's namesake, Cardinal John J O'Connor, said Mass inside.
Many protestors wore Sinead masks and carried signs reading ‘The Pope Must Apologise, Not Sinead’.
Washington state's so-called Erotic Music Bill, signed into law last June by the governor, has been struck down as unconstitutional by a state superior court.
No arrests had been made under the law, which regulated penalties for records deemed ‘too erotic’ by the state's legislators.
The bill was challenged by the American Civil Liberties Union and the Washington Music Industries Coalition, which includes members of Nirvana and other Seattle bands.
VINCE NEIL, ex-Motley Crue singer, has filed a $5 million lawsuit seeking to be reinstated in the band.
The suit also alleges Crue members Nikki Sixx, Tommy Lee and Mick Mars libelled Neil by announcing he had left the band.
Neil claims he was sacked in February.
JAMES BROWN told students in Oakland, California to stay in school because ‘the worst killer in the world is ignorance’.
Hinting at his two-year prison term on assault and weapons convictions, Brown said, ‘With all the success I've had, I've been broke four times because of ignorance.
There's nothing can take the place of knowledge.’
Brown also hit out at the content of rap music, saying, ‘I'm not knocking rappers, but there's no reason children have to hear four-letter words on the radio.’
Brown's upcoming album, ‘Universal James’,(his 79th!) features six songs written by Soul II Soul's Jazzie B and one by C+C Music Factory's Clivilles & Cole.
The stage musical of THE WHO's Tommy , which recently enjoyed a successful run in La Jolla, California, is on its way to Broadway.
It opens in New York next April, followed by a national US tour.
No cast members have been announced.
Y'Knaa that Cathal Coughlan…
FATIMA MANSIONS frontman CATHAL COUGHLAN and comedian SEAN HUGHES are joining forces to record a series of cover versions for a forthcoming album.
The pair plan to collaborate on interpretations of Julian Cope's ‘Jellypop Jerky Jean’, The Birthday Party's ‘Release The Bats’ and Wild Cherry's rare groove classic, retitled ‘Play That Funky Music Irish Guy’for the occasion.
All three tracks will appear on Coughlan's eccentric offshoot group BUBONIQUE's debut album, to be released on Kitchenware.
A date has yet to be set for its release.
Meanwhile, Fatima Mansions issue a video compilation titled Y'Knaa on November 30.
Featuring ‘Blues For Ceausescu’, ‘Only Losers Take The Bus’, ‘Shiny Happy People’, ‘1000%’ and ‘Bible Mike’as well as footage from the band's recent support tour with U2 on the European leg of their world tour assembled by splatter movie director George Seminara,Y'Knaa is available in the shops or through mail order from The Fatima Mansions .
Cheques for £8.49 should be made payable to MCA Records Ltd.
ELTON JOHN has topped recent multi-million dollar deals signed by PRINCE and MADONNA by inking a $39 million contract with Time-Warner.
The deal, signed by John and his lyricist Berni Taupin in Los Angeles last week, grants music publishing arm Warner/Chappell Music the sole rights to market the superstar's back catalogue from 1974, plus the next six Elton John albums.
THE POGUES have added two extra shows to their short Yuletide tour.
The current Pogues line-up, featuring Spider Stacey on lead vocals, now play , in addition to the previously announced Liverpool Royal Court and London Brixton Academy dates on December 9 and 10.
Tickets are priced £10 for Glasgow and £9 for Leeds.
The band will team up with producer Michael Brook when they start work on their new album in the New Year.
Brook has previously worked with Brian Eno, Youssou N'Dour and Cheb Kaled.
Do they mean ‘Lazarus’?
THE BOO RADLEYS (singer Sice pictured right) issue a new 45, ‘Lazarus’, through Creation this Monday.
The title track is accompanied by three further songs, ‘At The Sound Of Speed’, ‘Let Me Be Your Faith’ and ‘Petroleum’.
The band, who are currently supporting labelmates Sugar on their US tour, return to the UK for shows at .
R.E.M.
follow up their recent ‘Drive’ single with a new 45 taken from their ‘Automatic For The People’album.
The band issue ‘Man On The Moon’ through Warners on Monday.
The track comes with ‘Turn You Inside Out’, taken from 1988's ‘Green’ album on the B-side and there are also two CD formats available.
The first features a previously unreleased Robyn Hitchcock cover, ‘The Arms Of Love’, the limited edition CDX adding two bonus tracks, ‘Fruity Organ’ and ‘New Orleans Instrumental 2’.
The men from B.R.O.T.H.E.R
B.R.O.T.H.E.R, the Black Rhyme Organisation To Help Equal Rights, issue a three-track EP ‘Ghettogeddon’, through Tribal Bass label on November 16.
The EP, which seeks to publicise the problems of ‘escalating black on black violence in Britain’, features contributions from  amongst others.
B.R.O.T.H.E.R, set up in 1989 to give a collective voice to Britain's top black rap and ragga artists, have previously released one EP — 1989's ‘Beyond The 16th Parallel ’, which focused on the problems in South Africa.
Proceeds from the EP are to be donated to Sickle Cell Anaemia research.
SUGAR, currently on tour in the States, return for a second set of UK dates this year.
The Bob Mould-fronted trio, who sold out their early Autumn shows, celebrate the Number One indie chart success of their recent ‘A Good Idea’ single with pre-Christmas shows at .
Covered up: Sean and Cathal look forward to Bubonique plays
Sample Notes
ERASURE follow the success of their ‘Abba-esque’ EP with a compilation album ‘Pop — The First 20 Hits’issued through Mute on November 16.
The album covers their chart career from the debut ‘Who Needs Love Like That’ in 1985 through to this year's Abba cover ‘Take A Chance On Me’, and is accompanied by a video compilation ‘Pop!— 20 Hits’, which brings together the promos for the band's biggest singles to date.
THE JIM ROSE CIRCUS SIDESHOW, surprise sensation of this year's US Lollapalooza II tour, have made alterations and added new dates to their forthcoming British tour.
The show, featuring The Amazing Mr Lifto, Slug The Sword Swallower and Mat The Pharmacist amongst others, plays Bradford University and London's Clapham Grand, not The Astoria, as previously reported.
Further dates are to be announced later.
STEREO MC's, who climbed into the Top 20 with their ‘Connected’ single recently, have announced details of a follow-up 45 and New Year date.
The South London groove maestros issue ‘Step It Up’, featuring remixes from Leftfield and Ultimatum, through 4th & Broadway on November 23.
The band, who supported Happy Mondays on their Autumn tour, play a headline show at London's Town & Country Club on February 5, 1993.
Special guests for the night will be announced later.
THE COCTEAU TWINS unveil their first recording since 1990's ‘Heaven Or Las Vegas’ album and the group's subsequent departure from 4AD, in the forthcoming Volume 5 CD magazine.
‘Frosty The Snowman’ is made available on December 7 alongside further contributions from .
EMF issue their new single ‘It's You’ through Parlophone on November 16.
The track is backed with a live mix of ‘Dog’ from Jim ‘Foetus’Thirlwell and also comes in two separate CD formats, the first featuring three mixes of ‘It's You’from Nirvana/Pearl Jam producer Butch Vig and the second, issued a week later, featuring an Orbital remix of ‘It's You’plus a Joey Beltram remix of ‘The Light That Burns Twice As Bright’.
A Dream remix of ‘They're Here’ is also included on a white label promo.
The band are currently on tour in Europe.
SIDI BOU SAID have signed to Ultimate Records.
Greenwich's answer to Throwing Muses, who are in the process of choosing a producer, issue their first Ultimate single in January, followed by February live shows as part of an Ultimate package four featuring Sidi Bou Said, The Werefrogs and Submarine.
HOUSE OF PAIN, Irish-American hip-hop cropheads, follow the success of their ‘Jump Around’ 45 with a new single ‘Shamrocks And Shenanigans (Boom Shalock Lock Boom)’.
The track is lifted from their eponymous LP, and comes as a rock mix from Nirvana/Pearl Jam producer Butch Vig together with the original album track on the B-side.
The band are currently playing dates in the US with The Ramones, Suicidal Tendencies and Cypress Hill.
STING has a new single, album and dates set for the New Year.
The ex-Police multi-millionaire issues new 45 ‘If I Ever  Lose My Faith In You’ in January, followed by an as yet untitled album in February.
The new LP, recorded with Sting's 1991 touring band at the studio in his Wiltshire home, will be premiered at Sting's Royal Albert Hall shows set for March 8 and 9, 1993.
BILLY BRAGG plays his annual New Year shows with THE RED STARS at London's Hackney Empire on December 29, 30 and 31.
The Hackney shows are the fifth year in succession that the Bard of Barking has sung in the New Year.
MORRISSEY has a second collection of solo videos, titled The Malady Lingers On , issued through PMI on November 23.
The long-form follow up to the Hulmerist package contains promos for eight UK and US singles, with some of the tracks taken from Morrissey's last two LPs ‘Kill Uncle’ and ‘Your Arsenal’.
The promos on show include the video for Morrissey's next single ‘Certain People I Know’, issued through Parlophone on November 30, as well as.
RECORD NEWS
45s
THE BLACK CROWES: ‘Hotel Illness’ lifted from the group's acclaimed ‘Southern Harmony And Musical Companion’LP and coinciding with their UK tour, B-sides include a cover of Bob Dylan's ‘Rainy Day Women No 12 And No 35’and the previously unreleased ‘Words You Throw Away’
THE B-52's: ‘Is That You Mo-Dean?’ beehive-pop folk precede their forthcoming UK tour with a single taken from the current Don Wax/Nile Rodgers produced album ‘Good Stuff’, 12 inch and special hologram CD include various remixes by house evangelist Moby
CHUMBAWAMBA: ‘Behave’ a bold ‘cock up the arse of homophobia’from dancefloor friendly agit-pop folk, featuring two mixes from labelmates Papa Brittle
WHITNEY HOUSTON: ‘I Will Always Love You’ soul power-ballad composed by Dolly Parton and one of six Whitney tracks featured on the forthcoming soundtrack to the US movie The Bodyguard , in which she stars alongside Kevin Costner
HYPNOTONE: ‘Be Good To Me’ trancey house quartet issue their first single since splitting with Creation and joining Manchester music figure Dave Haslam's new First Love label
MOTHER EARTH: ‘Hope You're Feeling Better’ funky East End six-piece with disparate musical influences from the JB's to Jimi Hendrix issue their debut single to coincide with their co-headlining tour with The Sandals
THE PALE: ‘Shut Up Venus’ taken from the oddball Irish trio's debut album ‘Here's One We Made Earlier’, flipped with new tracks ‘Unless It's From You’, ‘Opium Poem’and, erm…
‘Willie Song’
DR PHIBES AND THE HOUSE OF WAX EQUATIONS: ‘Misdiagnosedive’ third single from Scouse psychedelic groove merchants, issued to coincide with their extensive UK tour
THE POPINJAYS: ‘I'm A Believer’ fresh from London-based melodic pop folk, a brace of covers featuring The Monkees hit and a version of Simon And Garfunkel's ‘59th Street Bridge Song (Feelin' Groovy)’
MAXI PRIEST: ‘Just Wanna Know’ soul-reggae superstar teams up again with Tucker, Morales and Bennett, the production trio behind his ‘Housecall’collaboration with Shabba Ranks; acclaimed Brit-ragga rapper Apache Indian and Jamaican DJ Tumpa Lion guest on the flipside
SIMPLY RED: ‘Montreux EP’ three covers  plus the Hucknall-penned ‘Lady Godiva's Room’recorded earlier this year at the Montreux Jazz Festival, available in various special formats including gatefold seven inch, jewel case and digipak CD with booklet
VEGAS: ‘She’ Dave Stewart and Terry Hall join forces to resurrect The Monkees classic made famous by Charles Aznavour and previously covered by Hall during his time with The Colourfield
LPs
ADEVA: ‘Hits’ soul belter releases a compilation of sturdy garage house sounds including ‘Respect’, ‘Musical Freedom’and her collaboration with Monie Love, ‘Ring My Bell’
JOHN BARRY: ‘Moviola’‘Midnight Cowboy’, ‘Born Free’, ‘Dances With Wolves’ and many other Barry faves recorded with the 70-piece Royal Philharmonic Orchestra last July at London's legendary Abbey Road Studios
CODEINE: ‘Barely Real’ mini-LP from acclaimed US slow-core outfit betraying signs of accelerating into mid-tempo; issued prior to the band's European tour with Love Child in November and December
DA LENCH MOB: ‘Guerillas In The Mist’ uncompromising debut release on LA rapper Ice Cube's label from long-time collaborators currently on tour in the US with The Beastie Boys and Henry Rollins
DEMON BOYZ: ‘Original Guidance’ eagerly anticipated second album from London ragga-rap pioneers, produced by DJ Pogo, Cut Master Swift and Rebel MC
EGGSTONE: ‘Eggstone in Lemon Grove’ CD only release from Swedish guitar merchants with a healthy obsession for Californian psychedelic-tinged pop
GENESIS: ‘The Way We Walk Volume 1: The Shorts’ the newly crowned kings of pop irony (are you sure about this?— Ed) issue a live album compiled during their never-ending ‘We Can't Dance’world tour
AMY GRANT: ‘Home For Christmas’ treacly Christmas LP from country-crossover star including contributions from Carly Simon, Linda Thompson and the London Philharmonic Orchestra
M-PEOPLE: ‘Northern Soul’ re-promoted debut from Mike Pickering and Paul Heard's disco tinged house outfit, including the hit singles 
FREDDIE MERCURY: ‘The Freddie Mercury Album’ 11-track posthumous release neatly timed for the Christmas market, featuring the former Queen singer's solo output remixed by Nile Rodgers, Richard Wolf and Steve Brown
ROY ORBISON: ‘King Of Hearts’ posthumous collection of recent hit singles along with previously unreleased material from the vocal legend's ‘Mystery Girl’sessions recorded in 1989 and featuring contributions by Don Was, kd lang,
PINK FLOYD: ‘Shine On’ seven album boxed set of remastered material charting the group's career from 1968's ‘Saucerful of Secrets’to 1987's ‘Momentary Lapse Of Reason’, also including a compilation of rare singles and a 112 page hardback booklet
FRANK SINATRA: ‘Music From The CBS Mini-Series’ 28-track collection taken from the forthcoming biopic, spanning Sinatra's work with Capitol, Reprise, RCA and CBS; also includes contributions from Benny Goodman, Billie Holiday and  Big Crosby
SUPEREAL: ‘Elixir’ occasional Meat Beat Manifesto members issue their eagerly awaited debut of trancey house rhythms, co-produced by former ABC and Unique 3 collaborator John Crosley
VARIOUS: ‘Mesmorph Enduros’ ultra-low priced collection of US underground music compiled by Jim Foetus, featuring tracks by The Melvins,, and, surprisingly enough, Foetus Inc
VARIOUS: ‘Musical Freedom — Classic Garage Vol II’ 13-track compilation of recent garage house classics including 
DAISY CHAINSAW: ‘Hope Your Dreams Come True’ re-recording of the song which appears on the band's ‘Eleventeen’LP, issued prior to their world tour taking in America, Japan and Europe
JOHN LEE HOOKER: Boom Boom’ record-breaking 70-something blues man issues his latest LP, including the recently re-recorded ‘Boom Boom’, featured on the latest Lee Jeans commercial
TOUR NEWS
THE ADVENTURE BABIES, ROBINSON, RAINDANCE and SEED play a benefit for Boothe Children's Hospital at .
CAST, ex-La's bass player John Power's new band, play a string of support dates at Hull The Adelphi with Pele .
CHUMBAWAMBA, Leeds pop anarchists, play .
DELICIOUS MONSTER flaunt their current single ‘Power Missy’ with shows at .
D-INFLUENCE, London-based soul-rap-house blenders, who recently supported Michael Jackson, play a pair of support slots with Galliano at  and their own dates at .
ENERGY ORCHARD, Belfast purveyors of Celtic rock, head out on a Murphy's Irish Stout sponsored tour visiting .
THE FRANK & WALTERS, Irish fruitcake popsters, whose ‘Trains, Boats And Planes’ recently, jump on board The B-52s' pre-Christmas tour for shows at .
MORE TOURS ON PAGE 47
KINKY MACHINE (below) brassy rock tunesmiths, follow their support slots with the Manic Street Preachers with a run of pre-Christmas dates at .
THE FRAMES, who recently had to cancel their US tour due to violin player Colm MacConlomaire suffering a collapsed lung, return to all-round fitness to plug their ‘Turn On Your Record Player’ EP with shows at .
FREAKY REALISTIC, kitsch multi-cultural '70s-influenced dance trio, who recently invaded NME 's On page, play early evening and late evening sets at London's Milk Bar on November 10.
GENESIS follow their run of dates at Earl's Court with further ‘intimate’ shows to promote their live single ‘Invisible Touch’, at .
HP ZINKER, Austrian-born, New York-based avant-rock noise merchants, tie in the release of their new single ‘Reason’ on Roughneck Records with a trio of dates at  with Bowlfish and Skyscraper supporting.
J, 22-year-old German anti-Nazi rapper, accompanies his ‘Born On The Wrong Side Of Town’ single on A&M with his first British dates at .
JAH WOBBLE'S INVADERS OF THE HEART, GARY CLAIL and rapper BLADE are confirmed as headliners for a World AIDS Day Benefit at Portsmouth's Pyramids Centre on December 1.
JC001 and D*ZIRE, the speed rapper and mixer duo support the release of their ‘Sea Of Mcs’ single with dates at .
KEROSENE, Manchester guitar-shredding combo, play London shows at the Powerhaus ‘Smashed’ night, the mean Fiddler supporting Belly and The Bull & Gate Pop Club, followed by Manchester University, a support slot with Ned's Atomic Dustbin at Manchester Academy and their own London show at The Camden Falcon..
LOVECHILD, pop-noise merchants, push their second album ‘Witchcraft’ with a trio of shows alongside Codeine at .
MANIFESTO, Washington DC's medium-fierce guitar outfit, whose ‘Pattern 26’ 45 was an NME Single Of The Week in April, return to the UK for a string of London dates at , supporting Skyscraper.
MINT 400 accompany the issue of their ‘Gas’ single with dates at .
THE RHYTHM-ITES and DUB WARRIORS play the opening night of New Age indie night ‘Earthcore’ at London's Camden Lock T E Dingwall building on November 11.
SENSITIZE, Cumbrian indie guitar bunch, precede the issue of a new EP early next year with a short run of live dates at .
SWEET JESUS, West Midlands drone guitar pretties, accompany their new single ‘Albino Ballerina’ on Chapter 22 with a one off date at Manchester University on November 12.
TERRORVISION, grunge metallers, push their ‘My House’ single with dates at .
WHAT?
NOISE, pop sculptors formerly on One Little Indian, tee up for the release of new material in the New Year, with a one-off date supporting Sebadoh at .
ZODIAC MINDWARP AND THE LOVE REACTION, returning leather rockers, promote their new mini-LP ‘My Life Story’ with dates at .
KINKY MACHINE (below), brassy rock tunesmiths, follow their support slots with the Manic Street Preachers with a run of pre-Christmas dates at .
THRILLS
EDITED BY STUART MACONIE
‘BIG MOUTH’
‘I fantasise about giving important political speeches.
When I couldn't get to sleep as a kid, I'd imagine that I was a political leader.
I'm odd, I know.’
Richard Fairbrass
‘There aren't any lies about Mudhoney — except for the shit we make up ourselves.’
Matt Lukin
‘My sideburns sort of took on a life of their own.
They even get their own fan mail.’
Luke Perry
‘I've seen Madonna in person and, before that, I thought she was at least cute.
But she looked like somebody from Beetlejuice , man.
Now Kylie,she's alright!’
Marky Mark
‘I haven't got a shower.
I've got an antique bath that leaks.
I have a bath every day.
Soak in the bubble bath and play with my toys.’
The exceedingly clean Peter Hooton
 ‘On Suggs On Sunday I'd interview people like George Best, who was brilliant.
But the assistant on the show got so pissed that she put her head on his lap, after which he got up and walked off in the middle of the programme.’
Suggs on headers and sendings off
‘I really like a particular kind of Calvin Klein panties because they feel really comfortable and you don't get a VPL.’
Betty Boo on the curse of the Visible Pantie Line
‘There were a few kids who came up to meet me and said that they weren't going to vote until they heard what I had to say.’
Political advisor Dave Ellefson of Megadeth 
President Gas Richard Fairbrass
THE RECENTLY DISCOVERED DIARY OF A 70S' TEENAGER
WHAT A start to the day.
Ed ‘Stewpot’ Stewpot was just playing ‘Hot Love’by Ron Wood's Wizzard this morning when he was interrupted by a newsflash saying the Right Honourable Gary Kibbett had died.
Who cares?
I'm a child of the revolution.
I never got it off on that Gary Kibbett stuff.
Fancy interrupting Ron Wood for that.
So I got dressed and went to the corner shop to nick three Wormy bars, but Brett and Damon snuck up behind and they said they'd tell if I didn't give them a bar each.
So my breakfast was only one Wormy bar.
Then Brett started laughing at my Brummy vest.
They said it was out of date and that I should get a Parrot jacket like the one Adam Faith wears on telly.
To be honest I've never seen Parrot .
Mum says it's too rude for a 15-year-old.
Huh, bet I've done everything he's done, with Ange Dolittle behind the youth club.
So Brett 'n' Damon ‘m’ me hand about playing Stackheel Olympics for a bit and then we go into town to look at the girls.
There are some real dollies about today and we followed one into Spinnadisk Records.
She was wearing a channel seam donkey coat, split level knees in purple and tartan loon shoes.
Talk about tasty.
She looked just like Cherry off The Forever People .
But I never talked to her.
She was too stuck-up.
In Spinnadisk I nicked some record sleeves, but some of 'em were crap, like ‘Meat Power’ by Mungo Midge and ‘Tubular Bells’by Mike Orbfield.
Damon kept rolling them up and using them as megaphones.
What a divvy.
Then we went back to Brett's to watch the Les And Niblet Show .
It was great but it smells funny round there.
I think it's probably Gramma Anderson.
Went to Rubella's in the evening but they wouldn't let me in because I had a bit of instant Whip on my Brummy vest.
So I bunked in the toilet window and I couldn't believe it!
The band, Deep Throat, were playing all these Brontosaurus Rex numbers instead of that underground what they usually play and everyone was doing this smart dance.
I don't know what it's called but there's this bit where you go down on the floor like an anteater.
I must find out what it is.
Now I'm writing this in bed.
It's midnight and I'm feeling hungry.
I'm looking at this pink spot on my chest when suddenly I notice a bit of Wormy bar stuck in my belly button.
It must have been there since breakfast.
Great.
There's nothing like a moonlit feast, is there?
Smart Brummy vest, Kev mate
SHURELY SHOME MISTAKE?
IT'S OK for you fortunate legions who read NME week in, week out, and have grown used to an undiluted diet of accuracy, stringent copy-reading and diligent research.
You can enter confidently into any public house argument knowing that, unlike the readers of the Doncaster Evening Post , you will not make a chump of yourself by claiming that The Wedding Present are a ‘top rave’ band.
A PROFESSOR ENO'S POP SCHOOL SPECIAL…
MONDAY
HURROY!
WE are all going on a big buzz to the countryside for the week on a special nature trip!
Oi asked Miki from Lush if she would tell me about the birds and the bees but instead she twatted me with a flange pedal.
There wuz a bit of trouble outside the school gates when Sinead O'Connor said she wasn't coming on the trip because she disapproved of buzzes and then she got on and took the best seat, ie the one at the back where me and Graham normally sit and smoke No6.
We had a bit of barney when Sinead said ‘No6?
You've never been higher than Number 42’, but Prof Eno sorted it out by letting her organise the singalong.
Which she totally buggered up by getting us to sing the theme from Aspects Of Love and then making a big speech about the Pope.
TUESDAY
HERE WE are at Pontin's Ambient Holiday Camp — motto, book early and very quietly in the background.
Up at 6am for callisth…callith…jumping up and down, then a sizeable breakfast of chips and beans.
Magic!
Then we went on a nature ramble and we saw two men cows doing it.
Bez got all upset and started muttering and picking at his scabs and Shaun Ryder kept going on about how it was Bez didn't like to see men cows doing it and he wasn't going to apologies for it.
WEDNESDAY
SHAUN IS still apologising.
Prof Eno took us round to see Morrissey, because he lives nearby in Oscar Wilde's old cottage and he was too ‘ill’ to come on the outing.
Derry from EMF put a frog down Morrissey's shirt and Jim Bob off of Carter taped snooker on his Bernard Manning videos then Morrissey got dead upset and his mum asked us to leave.
Which we did — but not before putting bogies inside all his Suede records!
THURSDAY
BIT EMBARRASSING today because Kurt Cobain and Courtney Love were caught feeding something when we visited the boring but compulsory Old Mill today — and it turned out that it was a baby that they were feeding!
On Twinkies, whatever they are.
Prof Eno took us aside and explained about mummy rabbits and daddy rabbits.
Oi was sick.
FRIDAY
WE'RE GOING home!
Today we went to a fair in the morning and Loz from Kingmaker won a goldfish in a plastic bag and Bobby Gillespie got thrown off the bumper cars for saying he was Marc Bolan in a Mini and Polly Harvey was a tree.
In the afternoon we all packed — and had a laff at Paul Weller who's only got a crap Adidas bag and Peter Hooton who keeps his stuff in a stupid black plimsoll bag — and got the buzz.
Oi was sick.
Worse, I was sick on Jeremy out of The Levellers and he ate it.
Oh well, mock GCSE's when we get back, so maybe my dream of becoming a judge will come true.
Hurroy!
Clint learns to write
MATERIAL WORLD
JULIANA HATFIELD
WHERE ARE YOU AND WHAT ARE THE VIBES LIKE?
Virgin Airlines — Everything is red and turbulent
WHAT WAS THE LAST THING YOU ATE?
A skittle
WHAT WAS THE LAST VIDEO YOU RENTED?
In Bed With Madonna (called Truth Or Dare in the US) for the fifth time so far
WHAT WAS THE LAST GOOD BOOK YOU READ?
FAVE POLITICAL FIGURE
WHAT TV SHOWS DO YOU TRY NOT TO MISS?
WHAT WAS THE FIRST RECORD YOU EVER HEARD?
Jiminy Cricket singing Disney songs
WHO DO YOU THINK YOU MIGHT HAVE BEEN IN PREVIOUS LIVES?
Bill Janovitz's sister (a psychic told me this)
WHICH PUBLIC FIGURES DO YOU MOST DESPISE?
Bob Roberts and Christian evangelist hypocrites
WHAT WERE YOU GOOD AT AT SCHOOL?
Everything (including all sports) except physics
FAVE TV SHOWS OF YESTERYEAR
MOST EMBARRASSING RECORDS IN YOUR COLLECTION
NAME THREE GREAT SONGWRITING PARTNERSHIPS
3) me-myself-I
NAME SOME GOOD THINGS ABOUT ENGLAND
I lose weight when I go there because there's absolutely nothing good to eat and, even if there were, it would cost too much.
Also, rain is good for the skin.
FAVE SCI-FI MOVIES
FAVE PUNK ROCK RECORDS
Black Flag ‘Damaged’
X ‘Los Angeles’(is that a punk rock record?
I think so)
FAVE HISTORICAL FIGURES
WORST LYRIC YOU'VE EVER HEARD
‘And it's almost driving me wild,’ from ‘Missing You’by John Waite
WHO'S UNDERRATED?
Jason Patric.
He was in After Dark My Sweet and Rush 
WHO'S SEXY
WHAT SCARES YOU?
The thought of impending cancer or heart disease, or any kind of disease, really, and worse, the thought of being maimed
WHAT BORES YOU?
Sitting and listening to records
PUNCHLINE TO FAVE JOKES
You're so ugly I wouldn't  f— you with HIS dick!
WHERE WOULD YOU LIKE TO RETIRE TO?
Jason Patric's house
NAME A RECORD THAT CAN MAKE YOU CRY
WHEN WERE YOU LAST DRUNK?
Never been drunk, I don't drink that much
WHAT WAS THE LAST DREAM YOU CAN REMEMBER?
I was being chased by a bunch of snakes
THREE RECORDS GUARANTEED TO MAKE YOU DANCE
I don't know how to dance.
I can't dance
CURRENT CATCHPHRASES
‘Duh’, ‘No duh’
FAVE TAKEAWAY FOOD
MOTTO
What's yours is mine
HOMES OF THE RICH AND FAMOUS
THIS WEEK: JULIAN COPE
IT TAKES me ages to find Julian Cope's secluded hideaway in a remote coastal area of North West Scotland.
When I eventually find him, I tell him of my difficulty, and he sympathises.
‘Yes,’ he says, ‘I know what you mean.
When I first moved here I would wander around for days, not knowing where my home was.
Then I solved the problem by getting a special radar device installed in my brain, which gives me a headache.
The further away I go from my triangle, the greater the pain becomes.
The last time I was in Liverpool, my head exploded, so I'm not going there again!’
Julian's house is very unconventional, and has no doors, windows, rooms or corridors.
In fact, it barely fits the definition of being a house at all, looking more like a big triangular thing.
Why so, Jules?
‘Well, it's all to do with harmony.
I read a great book recently by a guy called Yoop Hoopla, who's done a lot of research into Stone Age leylines, ancient mythology and things like that.
He says that apparently the ancient Celts who lived around here had no concept of shape.
Circles, squares, triangles, they all looked the same to them.
And, incidentally, they couldn't count either.
They didn't understand that, for instance, two cows is more than one cow.
Anyway, because they had no concept of shape, they couldn't build anything.
So they had no houses.
But, and I didn't know this until I read the book, if you stand next to something that is triangular shaped, like, say, a triangle, it will give you a great feeling of harmony, and you won't give a  f— about not having a place to live.’
Beside Julian's house there is a small swimming pool.
‘That's where I keep my friend dolphin, Floogie.
Notice I didn't say ‘pet’ dolphin.
No, Floogie's my friend, and I go swimming with him every day.
He co-wrote a song with me on my new album and plays a bit of guitar.
You should see him playing guitar!
It's the funniest thing!
Actually he hates the music business, and that whole London scene.
The only time he's actually been in London was a few years ago, when he accompanied me on a poll tax demonstration.
I'll never forget, he called a policemen a ‘wanker’, and nearly got arrested!’
Julian, you're as lovably eccentric as ever.
ON ON ON
EDITED BY STEVE LAMACQ
Dutch ado about nothing?
Why no, it's already 30-love to Holland's own BETTIE SERVEERT, but don't go to San Francisco — you can treasure the intensely sad and beautiful RED HOUSE PAINTERS in the melancholy gloom of your own front room
THE SERVEERT UNION
Who would have thought that a band named after a tennis player would turn out to be one of the best new things of the autumn?
Come to think of it, who would have thought that the expanding, spruced-up pop campaign would start with a band from Holland?
Not me.
But this foursome, BETTIE SERVEERT, are about to sweep through the dusty old indie charts with the ease of Mary Poppins in full flow.
There is an amount of innocence and naivety present in their songs that glides over current dour factions in the alternative sector.
They are a revelation of sorts.
Playing their debut British gig last month supporting Throwing Muses at London's Clapham Grand, they looked nervous, but enchanting: occasionally coy, but powerful with it.
Now comes the first LP — picked up by Guernica in the face of widespread interest — which confirms the potential ‘Palomine’, with nine original tracks, and one Sebadoh cover, is a warm, uplifting and engrossing record.
‘And maybe melancholy,’ adds singer/guitarist Carol Van Dijk, in a voice barely audible over the racket of the NME pub.
‘The reason we do this, why we play music is because…we like doing it.
It's fun,’ she adds.
‘You're not supposed to say that, are you?’
Formed from the ashes of various small-time Amsterdam bands, BS had been minding their own business playing local gigs until a friend sent a demo to Gerard Cosloy at Matador Records in America — first home of Teenage Fanclub and currently Superchunk.
Cosloy, impressed, invited the band over to play at this summer's New Music Seminar in New York, where they pulled apart the Knitting Factory with a glorious show that proved to be one of the most talked about of the week.
On their return to Holland they were contacted by Ivo at 4AD, who set about organising the Guernica debut.
‘Palomine’ cruises through '60s California, through new wave '70s, up to laid-back guitar regions of the underground '90s.
Bettie Serveert — it's Bettie serves, in Dutch, after '70s tennis pro Betty Stove — are good clean fun.
And more.
This band will shine in ‘93.
PAINTER YOUR WAGON
Mark Kozelek didn't sleep at all last night.
He doesn't look at me.
He doesn't laugh.
He doesn't like his photograph being taken.
He doesn't like interviews much.
This, undoubtedly, is how the leader of the most intensely sad and beautiful band of 1992 really should behave.
With the RED HOUSE PAINTERS, Kozelek sings articulately and movingly about his troubled relationships, his fears and his self-imposed isolation, using music as a confessional, or as therapy, rather than as a career.
Without his band's stealthy, elegantly precise backing and stuck in front of a tape recorder, he sits shyly, sucking ice cubes and claiming — wrongly, as it happens — that he can't express himself.
‘I don't drink, I don't use drugs, I live a pretty solitary life.
If my girlfriend  f—s somebody else, or if I  f— somebody else, or we're not getting along, it's always my reaction to write about things.
I'm not afraid to examine myself.
I take my life very seriously, that's all.
I don't wanna think too much about ‘This is weird, Mark; you're solitary, you write about hating people, so why are you on the stage singing?’
I dunno, it's weird.’
A little history may be in order here.
Mark went into rehab 11 years ago when he was 14, then spent every night for three years at Narcotics and Alcoholics Anonymous meetings.
Ever since, he seems to have led a near-monastic existence.
‘I got to were I was 17 or 18 and I decided I just wanted to live my life.
Before I was dependent on drugs, then I was dependent on people hugging me and talking about my problems.
I didn't want to depend on anything.’
Then, however, he became involved in bands — including the excellently-named God Forbid — before drifting out to San Francisco and forming Red House Painters.
After a few gigs and demos in the late '80s, they eventually — with the help of local soulmates American Music Club — came to the attention of 4AD's Ivo Watts-Russell, who, enraptured, put out six of these demos from 1989 –'90; as the ‘Down Colorful Hill’ album last September.
Now they're putting the finishing touches to a new double album for release next March, which, if songs like ‘Evil’ and ‘Mother’, showcased at their recent London gigs are anything to go by, promises to be an even more intoxicating opportunity to see inside Mark's troubled, immensely talented psyche.
‘For two years I lived with a girl named Susan, who I wrote ‘Medicine Bottle’('Down Colorful Hill’ 's harrowing stand-out ) about,’he says, circuitously explaining the next album.
‘Since we broke up a year ago I've been through so many relationships, and my songs are now a lot more about being really fickle with women, and not knowing who I like, and being really insecure about who likes me.’
Mark Kozelek thinks about finding someone else to sing his songs, so he can hide all the time.
He thinks about whether he really wants to be doing this with his life at all.
The thinks comparisons with Morrissey are inaccurate because Moz is ‘a lot smarter than I am.
I'm more emotional.
I just sing about stuff that's directly involved with me.’
He is charming in spite of himself, in spite of this alienating introversion and the over-riding sense of melancholy he generates…
Just like his band, in fact.
Treasure him while you can.
Red House Painters (l to r): Gordon, Anthony, Jerry and Mark…weep…sob
‘'DOH WHAT A LOVELY WAR
Sick of plaid-toting, attitude-brandishing, Seattle-worshipping corporate rock wannabes?
Then seek a cure with SEBADOH, who speak the unspoken and think music is a huge and powerful force that could stop wars and stuff.
DELE FADELE joins Lou and Eric on the trail of the perfect, red-raw song.
‘Doh boys: STEVE DOUBLE
One blustery day, Lou Barlow finally gained the ability to speak for himself.
He'd been bullied into silence all those years in Dinosaur Jr.
Audiences often wondered if the bass-grappling guy who stared them out as if totally helpless was actually mute.
His friends at the time knew better, especially the seemingly laid-back J Mascis, who couldn't eject him from the group on a face-to-face basis.
Rather, J told the world the group had split — without consulting members — and promptly inked a major-label deal under the same name.
All that time, Lou had been writing songs with Eric Gaffney, little nuggets of openness and hysteria he felt couldn't compete with J's ego-driven broader strokes.
Now he wasn't held down, he could unleash them on the world.
Jason Lowerstein was drafted in and Sebadoh were in business.
Deafening silence greeted their first efforts, yet nothing dissuaded the instrument-swapping Boston crew.
Then came ‘Gimmie Indie Rock’, a funny and sarcastic swipe at all the unit-shifting alternative rock dinosaurs of the time, and some people noticed.
A prolific spree of low-fi ‘unproduced’ recordings followed, including the ‘Rocking The Forest’mini-LP, the overwhelming ‘Sebadoh III’LP and, now, the ragbag mixture of genius and wilfulness of ‘Sebadoh Versus Helmet’, another mini-LP that includes affecting takes on David Crosby and Nick Drake songs and breathless pockets of beauty like Lou's ‘Brand New Love’and ‘Soulmate’.
Still, why bother with Sebadoh when there's a wealth of grungy talent that can do this ‘pushing-indie-limits’ stuff just as well on these isles?
Aren't we sick to the back teeth of flannel-wearing, attitude-brandishing, Seattle-worshipping, corporate rock wannabes saying ‘I'm American, therefore I am’?
Well, just, but no-one writes 'em like Sebadoh, unless you're talking of the surfeit of spirit that infused Alex Chilton's wildest torch-songs, the challenging of expectations Sonic Youth practise or the studied waywardness of The Fall.
And these are in no way direct comparisons — that's near impossible.
What makes Sebadoh so  f—ing special is the way Lou Barlow's take on the vagaries of love still shines through the democratic group process.
Think of '70s soul and the entreaties of Candi Staton, the exaggerated seductions of Barry White, and the smoothness of Teddy Pendergrass.
Back then, those things which couldn't be said were hinted at in the grain of those luscious voices.
What Sebadoh do, when at full pelt, is to speak the unspoken, to be brutally honest about relationships often shift on their axis.
They do not offer comforting platitudes.
They make red-raw-with-feeling love songs.
‘Manufactured love songs,’ Lou says, prior to a gig in Camden, ‘all seem to me like seduction ploys.
It's all about trying to get laid.
It's like, ‘I luuurve you, I love you forever’; and that's just bullshit.
The fact is, something really  f—ed up is gonna happen in one year, two years into your relationship; someone's gonna  f— you over or you're gonna  f— them over.
Human relationships are totally imperfect and I just reflect that in song.
‘I've been going out with the same person for five years,’ he reveals.
‘I've been through a lot of stuff because of it.
We've broken up, I've been heartbroken through bizarre circumstances…but I still live with that person.
I don't think I'm being pessimistic, just realistic about the fact that's really hard to keep things together, with friends or lovers.
Eric writes from his perspective as well, and the common thread is that things don't last — nothing lasts.’
Eric relates an anecdote about finding out how certain animals only mate for four years and thinks that this probably applies to humans.
He's a quiet but often voluble ex-veteran of the Boston hardcore scene and seemingly the most welcome member of Sebadoh.
Jason, who, like Eric, is learning the songwriting craft as he goes along, is completely inscrutable until he starts howling away on his songs later that night.
It's then that you realise he keeps his psychotic tendencies hidden, only to be let out onstage.
MAKE NO mistake, Sebadoh love what they're doing.
And they know what they don't want.
Lou is aggravated by the production sensibilities of English groups to the extent that his trio prefer to present their songs naked, free of ornamentation.
He's not a big fan of the Trevor Horn kitchen-sink ethos.
And he thinks the gloss that surrounds some 4AD groups is only there to mask the lack of real songs.
The instruments should say it all, according to Eric.
Music should literally ‘speak for itself’.
Partially, this refreshing attitude to sound comes from Lou's and Eric's hardcore roots.
They loved the way acts like Hüsker Dü and The Minutemen (so named because, in the beginning, all their songs were under a minute long) made sharp, concise statements about love and life, without introducing dubious concepts (that came much later).
And Sebadoh are continuing this glorious tradition by eschewing heavy metal for noises and silences, thunder and ‘the quiet storm’.
A welcome beatnik element even creeps into their gig later tonight, with the band accompanying a Kerouac-style poet as interludes between songs.
You also notice that Sebadoh aren't afraid to improvise live and that they're so prolific, perfectly-formed new songs seem to drop from the sky.
As far as politics go, they don't shy away from the subject.
‘Abortion,’ Lou states, ‘is an important issue to me.
And health care too.
I just think it's sick that, if the three of us got ill or had an accident right now, we'd be broke.
And we'd be working to pay off medical bills.
You're bummed if you're poor in the States and people just look down on you.
I hope that, as I get older, what I write becomes more mature and more universal, so I can tackle these things.
‘I've always got the greatest thrill from music when it communicates directly to me.
That's why I approach lyrics the way I do.
I want people to tell me exactly how they feel, because I find that, when people speak exactly what they feel, it's usually what I feel too.
It just gives me hope that there are huge groups of people that feel exactly the same thing.
‘In America, it's so easy to feel alienated and isolated 'cos you're poor.
And your self-esteem is just attacked by that dog-eat-dog system.
It's hard for people like us because I think playing music is a legitimate goal in life and you're not made to feel legitimate, you're made to feel opportunist.’
And you sometimes get hounded by Tipper Gore and groups of Washington Wives for spreading evil through music.
What's really evil is the spectacle of governments encouraging divisiveness among people, catering to only the well-heeled, well-schooled and well-fed and keeping everybody else down.
What's evil includes governments starting unjustified wars for the sake of oil and then all but ignoring a war that demands their intervention.
The best rock attempts to make society better, even if it takes gross self-laceration to get to that point…
‘Music is a huge, powerful force,’ Lou considers his reply.
‘I think there are equal parts black magic and goodness.
It's a magical force.
I would never say it was only evil or only good.
It's just this big, scary force.
If you think it's evil, it's just because you're afraid of it.
We're not afraid of music, we can use it to challenge…
‘I've got letters from people recently with big crosses on them, people who've accused me of using my lyrics to subvert people.
Luckily the main guy was able to call me and we discussed it for quite some time.’
What could be worrying is the extremity of some of the observations on rap records, for instance.
What if people acted on these inflammatory statements?
I know this may sound like a long shot — but someone who's been listening to 2 Pac's ‘2PacalypseNow’ super-LP was recently arrested in a stolen car (with the tape still playing) for killing a police officer in America.
The LP in question has never made me personally want to kill cops, but it's made me think about police brutality.
‘Someone like Ice Cube says, ‘This is me speaking from the street’.
Rap, at least in the States, is the most direct and powerful form of music available and I think it does have the power to change the way people feel and think.
I don't think that's bad or that it should ever stop being that way.
I just think it's important to be responsible.’
SEBADOH THINK their best-known-song so far, ‘Gimmie Indie Rock’, is only really good for two listens.
Superchunk have covered ‘Brand New Love’ as some kinda tribute.
A few major labels have been sniffing around on the strength of ‘Rockin' The Forest’.
They kick mellow ass live.
But there's one thing to be sure of; their hearts are in this game for keeps.
Are you sitting comfortably?
MINISTER OF HUN
They burst out of Chicago like a howling nightmare to bring anarchy to the UK…
And this may well be your first and last chance to surrender.
MARY ANNE HOBBS witnesses MINISTRY slay Berlin in their debut European tour.
Departmental as anything: KEVIN CUMMINS
‘I must be the only American citizen who doesn't drive a car.
Do you wanna know why?
See, the first time I got behind the wheel, I hit a deer and killed it…
Nowadays I don't drive cars, and I like to  f— deer.’
These are the first words that Al Jourgensen ever said to me.
Jourgensen is the face of Ministry.
He has an extraordinary reputation.
Earlier today I was told by a representative from the band's record company, Warner Brothers, ‘Al will kick anybody who touches him.’
Rumours are rife that several members of the Ministry entourage who toured on Lollapalooza II in the US bowed out, unable to come to terms with Journgensen's appetite for Bushmills and worse.
More recently, Jourgensen himself told a journalist: ‘I read somewhere that I had contracted AIDS and was visiting a Mexican treatment centre.’
TONIGHT, MINISTRY will play the second date of their European tour in Berlin.
They grey and filthy 2,000 capacity venue looks like an outsized Hammersmith Clarendon.
‘Who the  f— is that?’ tweets the Warner Brothers executive, who has clearly never actually met Al Jourgensen.
‘A Gestapo general?’
Jourgensen arrives in a sheath of black leather.
He greets his crew like a Godfather.
Extending an arm across the backs of shoulders; planting a vigorous kiss on either cheek of the walking wounded — one crew member is on crutches having shattered a knee while humping equipment.
‘Hey Al, have you voted?’ enquires one of the attendant, as Jourgensen toys with a ghoulish rubber George Bush mask acquired for Ministry's election night show.
‘Have I voted?
 F— me, I vote every day.’
Jourgensen attaches a Bushmills bottle to his lower lip and begins sound checking.
The monitors alone are so loud that I am baffled as to how the crew operate without some type of semaphore system.
In the backstage area, which resembles the kitchenette in Bottom , Revolting Cock Chris Connelly, is dismembering a starfruit.
What's his official capacity on this tour?
‘I give blow jobs to the band members.’
MINISTRY PLAY their first ever dates in the UK this week — keenly anticipated since the release of the fiendish ‘Psalm 69: How To Succeed And How To Suck Eggs’ LP.
Field reports from the US Lollapalooza II tour further fuelled interest.
There is no question that Ministry stole the show at Lollapalooza.
NME attended the opening night at Sana Francisco's Shoreline Amphitheater.
The local promoter had evidently not managed to summon the courage to quibble with Jourgensen over the 89 decibel limit on the main stage.
Ministry's cyber metal assault  brought out both the gladiator and the geek in the Lollapalooza crowd.
Beyond the monster human cyclone of a moshpit, audience member stood frozen like rabbits in the glare of juggernaut halogens.
Lush's Miki Berenyi needed 15 stitches after splitting open her head in a stage-diving catastrophe during Ministry's set.
She is, however, quite fond of the commemorative scar.
Insiders allege that Jourgensen was never without a sheet of acid blotters on Lollapalooza.
Meanwhile, tricky Ministry-fixated groupies were offering security not only traditional sexual gratuities, but considerable sums in hard cash in exchange for access.
Ministry return to the US after this European tour to play arenas of between 8,000 and 20,000 capacity.
The stretch on American asphalt takes in two nights at LA's Irvine Meadows and one date at New York City's Madison Square Garden.
Tragically, fans in the UK will not see the bone structures that make up Ministry's US stage set.
‘We'd have had so much shit over several hundred assorted carcases with immigration and quarantine on the borders in Europe,’ Jourgensen's partner Paul Barker explains.
Barker is a level character.
He cast a vote for Clinton before leaving the US.
Within moments of our first encounter, he has whipped out a Photo-Me booth shot of his newborn baby daughter.
Barker is perceived as the finger that plugs the Ministry/Jourgensen dam.
And since Al has decided to snub the press, he is in the unfortunate position of having to answer for him.
Barker refused to explode any of the myths concerning drug excess, bestiality, AIDS and satanism.
However, he clearly enjoys my picking at Ministry scabs, and understands rumours of such sensational value should be preserved.
‘It's like the US elections.
Everybody wants to know who's telling the truth.
Nobody's telling the  f—ing truth.
We have our thrill seekers, people who want to experiment and take risks.
But these are qualities that keep human beings vibrant.’
Al Jourgensen — swivel on this, satanists!
We discuss, instead, literary genius and smack daddy William Burroughs' involvement with Ministry.
‘We had originally planned to sample Burroughs on our next single, ‘Just One Fix’.
Warner Brothers didn't like the idea because of litigation etc.
Burroughs employs an agent, whose job it is to keep him abreast of what's happening in various fields of art and music — he's 80 years old now and he lives a very secluded life in Kansas.
‘His agent came to see us at the St Louis Lollapalooza show, and we talked about the possibility of doing something together.
Anyway, it all worked out.
We recorded some spoken word with Burroughs to incorporate directly into a remix of the song.
And we shot a video for the single with him too.’
Did Burroughs teach Al how to shoot smack through the eyeball while he was around?
‘God, I love that image…
But no.’
NOTHING THAT Ministry have ever recorded can prepare you for what the band are like live.
At its climax, their performance is so punishing that senses of sight, sound and balance break down almost entirely.
Ministry compound their sonic demons with strobe lighting, projected images of skulls, scar tissue, missiles, mutants, and (ugh!) an eyeball being dissected with a scalpel.
Jourgensen's vocal yowl sounds like somebody picking their arse with a broken bottle neck.
He is virtually static on stage — torso hunched hard — flicking an odd ‘V’ at rude moshers moving like pistons down the front.
I wonder what Ministry will provoke in the kids here inside this Berlin dope den — are they as consumed by the same perverse taste for blood as myself?
In their own time, the Ministry members listen to C&W — Buck Owens, Loretta Lynn, George Jones and Lefty Fritzell.
Band and entourage are currently loading up the trojan horse ready to re-locate form their communal urban Chicago base, to Austin, Texas.
And despite the fact that Ministry are on the brink of a Metallica-scale take-over in the US, Barker hints that he and Jourgensen are now questioning how much further they actually want to push the band.
Both despise touring.
Ministry guitarist Mick Scaccia, who drew the short straw and is rooming with Al, tells me that the singer likes to maintain a temperature of 100 degrees in his hotel room.
‘He gets real sick on the road — I guess most of it is psychosomatic, because he  f—in' hates it so much.’
Furthermore, Barker and Jourgensen are keen to begin work on material for a new collaborative C&W crossover project, Buck Satan And The 666 Shooters.
There is no telling what influence the Texas move will have on Jourgensen.
He is as impulsive and easily distracted as KLF leader Bill Drummond, and similarly shifts queer guises (with scant regard for commercial consequences) at an extraordinary rate.
In real terms, it's unlikely that the UK will ever get another fix of Ministry in their current condition.
Get on your knees for a ticket to see them.
Paul Barker (left)— the finger that plugs the Ministry dam
Al does Deep Throat
BOSTON SKREEEE PARTY
Stude frat bastards!
DROP NINETEENS are the typical American college kids next door with a bad attitude and a brilliant line in thunderous noisepop.
JOHN MULVEY corners stroppy head boy GREG ACKELL on their first visit to the UK and gets a mouthful of arrogance, power-tripping and homesickness.
Ninetimes times five: STEVE DOUBLE
‘I'm 21 years old, here I am going all over the world, and people actually give a shit what I think about things.
I'm fooling a lot of people 'cos I have absolutely no idea what the  f— I'm saying, to you or anyone else.
If you're gonna believe anything I'm gonna say, believe that.’
Greg Ackell is your average clean-cut screwed-up hyper-intense hyper-passionate hyper-hyper-arrogant middle-class American college kid.
With a guitar, naturally.
You know the sort: he fulfils damn near every anti-rock stereotype going, confirms every prejudice levelled at gilded Yank youth, stares deep into the mysteries of his navel while the world turns, or even burns, looks scarily like Paul Simon…and is the leader of an improbably great band.
The bastard.
That band, the Drop Nineteens, have finally made it to Britain, 18 months after their demos slipped out of Boston to seduce a briefly shoe-gazing-infatuated press.
Superlatives were flung, contracts were signed, tours weren't bothered with and, eventually, an album, ‘Delaware’, was released last summer, where fluffy textures were toughened up and sweetness and light was offset by plenty of calculated chaos and nastiness.
An auspicious debut — and something of a minor success in Britain, remarkably so considering they were too busy traipsing around the States with Revolver to take time to promote it here.
Now, though, as the cute and fiery new single, ‘My Aquarium’, is released, we finally have a chance to see if Drop Nineteens are worthy of all the fuss…
There are five of them, all small, all looking 12, all crashing around the stage of the Camden Palace (an unlikely, and certainly untypical, place to make a British debut) like possessed battling tops.
Greg smashes his guitar, shoulder-barges the others, lurches suggestively over his co-singer, Paula Kelley, as she squats on the floor screaming her lungs out, leads an inspired, funny and very, very noisy version of ‘Fight For Your Right To Party’, and finally stage-dives into the crush of pissed students who've spent the evening trying to steal his microphone.
They are reckless, exciting, silly, thunderously loud and nothing less than a teen Sonic Youth for the '90s.
And you thought they were just American Slowdive…
The might Drops 
WRONG!
BUT talking to Greg, in the trashy splendour of the Palace balcony that afternoon, as the others unload their gear, you'd occasionally be forgiven for thinking as much.
There's unavoidable middle-class complacency here, and a rather staid, too-sensible-for-his-own-good realisation that the Drop Nineteens won't last forever.
But it's a rich and cautious side that is weirdly contradicted by a fierce self-belief and a currently all-enveloping passion for his band, a real do-or-die enthusiasm that's frustratingly absent from so many.
If nothing else, Greg Ackell is emphatically not a slacker.
‘Look, I don't know how long I'm gonna be doing this,’ he begins pragmatically.
‘There's never been much of a plan, so there's no reason to cancel out any initial plans of getting degrees and going on and doing something else.’
That's very safe, though.
How'd you defend yourself from accusations that you're a bunch of middle-class college kids without the ‘right’ rock'n'roll attitude?
‘Defend ourselves?
We beat the  f— out of our guitars, that's how we defend ourselves!
I don't think there's anything more rock'n'roll than that.’
He's a bit angry now, and he's swearing a lot to prove it.
‘We're travelling in a van, we  f—ing move our own  f—ing equipment, we set up our own shit onstage.
This contrived notion of a rock'n'roll band touring around — we're doing all that shit and we're having a great time too.
‘We do have passion — otherwise I wouldn't be doing it, I'll tell you that right now.
That's why I'm in school, because I know there might be a day when I get  f—ing fed up with this shit.
It's not all fun — sometimes I can't sleep at night for worrying.’
Greg is lying on one of the Palace's luxuriant couches, gesticulating wildly and fixing me with a stare that is part ultimate artistic earnestness and part repressed pathological violence.
This is what we want.
‘There's no-one in the world that thinks more than I do about every goddam  f—ing thing that happens with us.’
‘Twenty-four hours a day,’ interjects his faithful first lieutenant, bassist Steve Zimmerman.
Don't you think too much?
‘Oh, totally.
There are times when you could send me away and they'd say I was certifiable.
I get so wrapped up with everything.
These things have fallen upon us, but we've  f—ing embraced them.
Greg's hard to shut up now.
Precious, precocious, pretentious and very much in control, he seems perfectly sane.
What he does have, though, is a fearsome grip on the band which looks to me like a dictatorship and which he maintains is just the way things have worked out.
‘If there comes a day when I think, ‘Jesus, I can't deal with this any more, it's too much,’ I'll drop it or I'll just fire everyone in the band.
We're constantly reworking songs and I imagine in the next few months we'll probably be reworking members too.
It's just the way I work.’
Do you feel the same, Steve?
‘Yeah, whatever direction we're heading in, we wanna get there, anad we'll do what it takes to get there,’ he says inscrutably.
‘We were all friends before we got the band together, and it's strange that there's gonna be changes,’ continues Greg, with clinical ruthlessness.
‘But I think that friendships are meant to begin and end.
I hope the others do well, but that's not really my concern.’
Cheers.
IN SPITE of all the initial press that latched Drop Nineteens into a very English tradition of sonic cathedral-building, there's a much stronger sense of American character that runs through all they do; a kind of gaucheness and wide-eyed wonder that's encapsulated in ‘Kick The Tragedy’ 's dreamy recollection of the two big orange trees growing in Greg's Mom's Florida back garden.
Even if they do slip the odd razor blade into their slices of apple pie, in general it's a view of life that's, well, kinda pretty neat.
‘I didn't have to search long and hard to achieve this wonderment with America, that's all I know,’ says Greg defiantly.
‘We passed by some mash and pie shops today, and I don't know WHAT THE  F— THAT IS, and I don't care what it is either.
‘I know absolutely nothing about life over here.
All I know is it just seems cloudy a lot.
There are no colours — it kinda bugs me out, I just feel so  f—ing glad, so incredibly lucky, that I grew up in America.
It's a wonderful place.’
Are you proud to be American?
 F— yeah!
The general standard of living is so much better, I have a  f—ed-up up family — who doesn't have a  f—ed-up family?— I'm screwed-up and should be in some psychiatrist's office, but in general there wasn't that much for me to worry about, and I think that's a lot less common in England.
You talk about spoilt rich middle-class kids over here, but the truth is if Steve or I saw their houses, we'd probably think they were lower lower lower middle-class.’
Surely that's a very narrow and complacent attitude?
I think a few rappers, for starters, might like to take issue with your vision of America.
Greg tries out his I-don't-know-any-different argument again: ‘Most bands I know in Boston come from backgrounds that aren't radically different from mine.
Bring on the argument, man, 'cos if you do you might as well kiss all these  f—ing Sub Pop bands goodbye.
I know the people in these bands and it's nothing different to what I grew up with.
‘Lyrically, I'm talking about my life.
And up to this point I haven't suffered, and there's nothing more I can really say.’
People reading this are going to see you as objectionable, arrogant, self-satisfied and only amplifying their prejudices towards a band like Drop Nineteens.
Can you deal with that?
‘Yeah I can,’ he says calmly.
That's compounding the arrogance, surely.
‘I do think I can be concerned about the problems in America, but I think feeling guilty is useless, and maybe that compounds the arrogance.
The ultimate arrogance would be to say I don't care.
I do care.
I went to very liberal schools, I'm at Boston University now, and if you saw the attitudes and prejudices there, the absolute indifference, you'd be horrified.
I was horrified at the lack of concern…but that's not the kind of thing this band addresses.’
Fair enough, I suppose …
Whether or not the Drop Nineteens should wake up and smell the coffee, the dogshit in the streets and the rest of the real world, is hard to say.
Certainly, their scraping teen reveries and gleefully shambolic trashings of the likes of ‘Fight For Your Right’ and Barry Manilow's ‘Mandy’make them one of the most entertaining and, occasionally, promising prospects around, regardless of insularity.
And Greg Ackell has the mind, the motor-mouth and the outrageously large ego to become a fine frontman.
But even if his music doesn't change, he needs to break that cosy little cocoon just a little bit, before the naive becomes the really, really offensive…he should get out more, basically.
After all, you can't be 21 forever, even in the music business…
The lynch mob gets to Greg Ackell before he can escape the country
SINGLES
EDITED BY IAN McCANN
B.R.O.T.H.E.R.
CONGRESS: Ghettogeddon
Another headcrunching mixture of ‘Jungle House’(let's have another term, please: ain't there enough jibes about black people being from the jungle in Nazis' heads already?) from Rebel MC's terrifyingly on-the-case label.
‘Gettogeddon’ is one of the biggest noises you ever heard: this is house as if made by an orchestra, not a sampler.
BROTHER is Black Rhyme Organisation To Help Equal Rights, a charitable project that offers all profits to SCAR, the Sickle Cell Anaemia charity.
Hold it right there, cynics.
Yeah, a charity record.
How passé, eh?
But this isn't bloody ‘Ferry Aid’, pal.
This is a storming record, which would cause Sir Knob Geldof to cack his pants at full volume, so treat this one with care.
Astonishing.
ABBA: Voulez Vous
Oh, is it cool to like Abba now?
Oh, and wasn't Chess wonderful?
OK dolts, get a life.
Abba were a sausage on the cream cake of pop.
Their lyrics were clumsy and their music middle-aged.
Even their bottoms — no,especially their bottoms — were overrated.
Sure, you loved them in the '70s.
What, more than punk?
Would you really have ‘Voulez Vous’ over The Specials' ‘Gangsters’, or Chic's ‘Good Times’, both out at the same time in 1979?
No, of course you wouldn't.
Beware of nostalgia.
It will turn you into the living dead.
ERASURE: Who Needs A Love Like That
Back when Abba were in their '50s, around 1975 say, they would have called this sort of record a hustle record and huge black men with names like Fatback would have been playing it for rich white nightclubs.
Now, 17 years later, the huge black men with names like Fatback are all on the dole while the rich white nightclubbers call it pop music and make fortunes with it.
An operatic, faintly hysterical vocal, a hissing-hi-hat, a disco bassdrum and a bleeping synth.
Question: why?
Coherent answers only please.
This really is a non-song.
SHANICE: Lovin' You
What is the worst song of all time?
Is it ‘The Ferret Song’?
Is it ‘My Dad's Thribbler Has Got A Puncture’?
Is it virtually anything from the Body Count LP (warning, the Ice-T backlash is starting)?
No, it's ‘Lovin' You’, the late Minnie Riperton's sexless, childish whine.
And now Shanice has done it again.
Well Shanice, that's about as good an idea as covering your arse in petrol and striking a match on your trousers, isn't it?
MOTHER EARTH: Hope You're Feeling Better
WOWWWOWOWOW!
WOWWWOWOWOW! says the guitar.
And suddenly we're on prog rock planet, but with a difference.
A funky difference.
This is, I'm told, a Santana tune.
If this should prove correct, don't use that as an excuse to find out who Santana were, as they were, and probably still are, unmitigated crap.
This, however, is a lesson to the Smashing Pumpkins and Alice In Chains of this world that you can be '70s, you can smother your records with guitars and you can play loud like you were Hendrix but you don't necessarily have to be boring, or totally lumbering to do it.
Mother Earth are a proper band with proper instruments (if that matter to you) and they make a proper noise.
And a fabulous thing it is too.
Wow.
HAPPY MONDAYS: Sunshine And Love
I know that this means that when the revolution comes I'll be the first against the wall, but I like this.
It's got a kind of happy, snappy, toe-tapping beat for all the family.
Well, actually, I'm telling lies.
It's got an absolute slammer of a mix from Justin Robertson, proving two things.
One, that working with Frantz and Weymouth was one of the worst things that could have happened to The Mondays, and two, that they've still got it assuming they're produced by someone that understands them.
Their best single since ‘Loose Fit’, and with a special version of their dreadful version of ‘Staying Alive’.
Just about live, by the sound of Shaun.
HEAVEN 17: Temptation
Because they made a crap single called ‘We Don't Need This Fascist Groove Thang’, another case of right sentiments, horrible attitude, and because they included ex-members of The Human League, League 17 were patronised heavily by the media in the early '80s.
They didn't, however, turn out to be the future of music, as predicted.
Instead, they relaunched the career of Tina Turner.
Like, marvellous idea, guys.
Here's a Brothers In Rhythm remix of one of their horrid old records.
And guess  what?
It's still horrid.
MADNESS: The Harder They Come
I remember this cover of a Jimmy Cliff song from the non-Moz night of Madstock, and a bloody mess it was then.
And, although I imagine a certain amount of tampering has gone on here (I don't recall the vocal being quite so clear, but we all like to be tampered with once in a while) this is still a bloody mess.
And that doesn't make it a good single.
SINGLE OF THE WEEK 1
GENERAL LEVY: The Whig
WAKE UP you gits!
OK, so you faithfully bought Arrested Development's ‘People Everyday’ because it was lovely.
But you want to hear something similar, but altogether more roughneck?
In which the loveliness of ‘People Everyday’ is given an altogether madder vibe?
You don't?
Then you must be dead.
‘The Wig’, available in, believe it or not, a ‘Syrup Mix’(Wig — syrup of figs — Non-Cockney Ed) as well as a straightforward ragga version and an appealing ‘Chaos Mix’, is the latest in a long line of sizzlers (‘Heat’, ‘Dem No Wicked Like Me’, ‘Breeze’ etc) from General Levy, who is probably Britain's best reggae-rapper.
Levy's voice is as rough as a shag on the floor of a sandpaper factory, the lyric is utterly ridiculous, describing the popularity and stylishness of a certain fashionable item, and the soprano sax added to that tender little guitar lick from the Arrested Development record just upsets your soul.
If you've got one, that is.
Compulsory purchase order.
There'll be hell toupée: Levy grabs SOTW
GARY CLAIL: Who Pays The Piper
After a year off following his knee operation, Gazza is back!
And here he is, ‘duckering’ his guv'nors and betters as only a plain-straight-talking Bristolian working man, with, erm, a huge sound system and a record deal, can.
And while I'm not his hugest fan, I'm certainly an admirer and this storming, bleeping, lost-in-house noise has plenty to admire about it.
He's still the most unlikely man in pop, and  as for that vocoder of a voice, it still sounds like it's coming from the very bowels of the planet.
Exactly which planet, I dunno.
A very mysterious, nasty record, and one that asks whether we're being used by the powers-that-be by going out raving on E every night instead of overthrowing the rich.
A case of bread and circuses, and it's about time someone said it for the rave generation.
Fact.
TERRY EDWARDS: Executes Miles Davis Numbers
Indeed he does.
The numbers are ‘Eighty One’, ‘Four’, ‘Seven Steps To Heaven’, and ‘Half Nelson’.
Behind his fabulous trumpet playing and cheeky alleged humour there's an intelligent, alert, artful mind at work.
OK, so I'm lying.
There's a bloody thrash metal band, actually.
CATHY DENNIS: Irresistible
Absolutely sexy and cutely delightful.
Well, sort of, considering that it's co-produced by a man named after a Blue Peter dog, Shep Pettibone.
I never did understand why Blue Peter called their dog Pettibone, did you?
UNDERCOVER: Never Let Her Slip Away
The boys are back, bless ‘em.
Personally, I prefer the bestial version by Undercover.
ELTON JOHN: The Last Song
Top geezer alert!
Elton John is probably the best bloke on the whole planet.
Who else devotes all their single royalties to AIDS charities?
Who else has got the largest record collection in the world (well, OK, the BBC, but who apart from them)?
Who else had a hair transplant that actually worked?
Who else is bright enough to understand that all these records about shagging need to be balanced out with the reality of a deadly disease?
See what I mean?
Top geezer.
Unfortunately, the thing stinks.
But he's still a top geezer.
SIMPLY RED: Montreux EP
Top geezer alert!
Oh, sorry, it's Simply Red, isn't it?
I was recently in a Mercedes minicab driven by a 97-year-old retired gangster called Scarred Harry.
On his in-car eight-track cartridge player?
‘I  fink iss corled ‘Stars’,’ he told me.
Now that's how to sell records.
If Suede could get their records into Scarred Harry's Merc then they'd really have achieved something.
Unfortunately, they'd sound like this load of old cobblers.
BOB MARLEY: Why Should I
As someone seduced by the clever remake that was ‘Iron Lion Zion’, I can't say that I feel quite as lubricated by this one.
‘Why Should I’ passes by pleasantly without you noticing it, as Bob Marley records should never quite do.
Except ‘Three Little Birds’, which, although it might have sounded like just a jolly little song, was, in fact, a metaphorical indictment of the whole superpower system.
I think.
There's also something a little cold about the remix on ‘Why Should I’, making it a bit too London and not enough Jamaica.
Perhaps a hit all the same, and still better than anything Ziggy, Jamaica's Julian Lennon, has ever done.
DAISY CHAINSAW: Hope Your Dreams Come True
Are this the lot with the doughnuts?
If they were, sounds like they were still full of them when they made this lumbering, murderous fat shitbag of a single.
If they weren't, and I'm told that it was Babes In Toyland who were full of doughnuts, then what's their excuse for sounding like this?
Let's blame that twat John Lydon, it must be his turn.
PiL have a lot of answer for.
A female out-take from ‘Metal Box’ with the guitars turned up, with a weirdo piano bit in the middle with Katie singing down a toilet and then a thrash ending.
Very, erm, wild and challenging.
Like being hit with a monkey-wrench held by  a psychopathic mechanic.
With big eyes.
THE 25TH OF MAY: It's All Right The 25th meet a slick remix courtesy of Harding and Curnow.
Does this make them less right-on?
Perhaps the Integrity Police could let me know.
Anyway, the 25thies say it's OK to break the law, they seem energetic, and the guitars ignite with excitement at their own cleverness at the end.
Unfortunately, the listener doesn't.
A very, very average thing indeed, like a potato.
If they're saying anything here, I can't hear it.
THE CUCKOOS: The Screever
The new REM.
Unfortunately, we've already got one of them.
THE AQUANETTAS: Super Absorbent Maxi Single
The female REM.
Fortunately, we haven't got one of them.
‘Mind Full Of Worries’ is a strolling, easy to like thing with strumming guitars, clever lyrics that could probably only have been written by a woman, and a somewhat dreary American voice that sounds a bit too country for my liking.
‘Hippy’ on the flip is more or less the same song with the addition of a fuzzbox.
‘Run’ isn't interesting enough to comment on.
One good song out of three.
And if you don't like it, stick it to your pants as advertised.
JIMI HENDRIX: The Wind Cries Mary
Thanks for telling us, Jim.
But I don't know what wind you've been listening to.
In Ilford, it cries kebabs, burgers, and the stink of greasy takeaways blowing down the High Road.
Or is Mary's a chip shop?
SINGLE OF THE WEEK 2
J: First They Came
And then they  f—ed up the whole world.
J is a rapper from Germany, based in Paris, who is alarmed by the rise of the New Right in Europe and isn't, therefore, trying to make money to flee them, but is standing to fight.
On record, at least.
‘First they came for the Jews, then they came for the communists, then they came for the trade unionists, then they came for me’, he repeats over a silky, mesmeric House groove, gradually adding a line each time, until he gets to ‘and there was no-one left to speak up for me’.
J is speaking up for himself, which wouldn't mean shit if ‘First They Came’ wasn't such a simmering, mystical monster.
It's records like this that make me pissed off with political thrashcore.
J is angry, but he realises that you haven't got to get totally in-your-face to get a serious message across.
As a result, while Consolidated ponce about and play the rebel and might reach 50,000, J might get the word to millions.
Sometimes being right-on can be groovy.
Sod the piper, you've missed the ferryman: Gazza
He is coming to your haus: J
THE EASTIE BOYS
They came out of the East End to save the charts from unrebellious tat and to save themselves from a life in and out of prison.
They are EAST 17, they dress like the Wombles, they want the world to be a nicer place, they're straight outta Walthamstow, and so is SIMON WILLIAMS
‘There's a market for us out there,’ announces East 17 lynchpin Tony Mortimer.
‘There hasn't been a pop band since Duran Duran and Wham! who wrote their own material and had their own points of view.’
The death of teenypop?
Step this way, and listen to a man who should know all about it…
‘People like Stock, Aitken & Waterman thought they'd discovered a formula for pop music, and there isn't a formula.
I'm 21 but I'm still a kid: I go to pubs and do this and that and I think, ‘Well, if I'm a kid, other kids must do that’.
So kids are bound to like East 17 because we're pretty real.
We really try to be clean-cut and poppy, but it doesn't work — we  f— up somewhere.
‘We ain't got criminal records no more,’ he continues, cheerfully.
‘We've all been in trouble with the police and all that malarkey, but that's all part of growing up.
I mean, there's kids round my way who are 11 or 12 years old and they're dropping Es and smoking draw.
I dunno, maybe it's just Walthamstow…‘
Maybe it is.
SO POP music as we know it is dying.
So the charts are riddled with appalling rehashes and reissues and revolting rhymes with neither reason nor sense.
 The character, the flamboyance is being  f—ed and sucked out of a business that traditionally thrives on the outrageous.
So Top Of The Pops is now officially The Worst It Has Ever Been, primarily because one sees the eclectic bunch of social stereotypes known as Undercover stiltwalk their way through their hapless cover of ‘Baker Street’ and one thinks, ‘JESUS CHRIST, YOU PEOPLE DON'T EVEN KNOW EACH OTHER!!!’
So EMF's ‘Unbelievable’ was the last great record with a bollock-tingling crossover appeal.
So East 17 are going to save us all?
So what?
Let's face it, East 17 are hardly yer average NME -friendly act.
To a rapping, dancing-type like Tony Mortimer, Moose means a bloody great lump of Canadian meat as opposed to a world-weary guitar band.
To me, East 17 must have been the kind of streetwise cock-er-nee lads I'd do my damnedest indie-kid best to avoid.
The really weird thing is East 17 were precisely the people I avoided as an adolescent.
See, London's Walthamstow happens to be our mutual home, an East End oasis situated — in soccer-speak — smack between Tottenham and Leyton Orient.
Today's photo session may have taken us from dog track to town hall, from tube station to The Longest Market in Britain (fact!), but the travelling hasn't covered the cracks in the area's cultural structure.
Except for the rock follies of The Royal Standard and the Daniel O'Donnell-welcoming confines of the Assembly Halls, Walthamstow is as rich in artistic merit as the Arctic is in elephants.
It was in this empty, aimless atmosphere that East 17 (the moniker is from Walthamstow's E17 postcode) was born.
In the local Nag's Head pub, Tony recounts his musical history with laddish brazenness, explaining how the four elements of East 17 (including singing dancer Brian Harvey, dancing keyboardist John Hendry and rapping dancer Terry Coldwell) were in the same gang, spending their schooldays bodypopping and bunking off, and generally going  f— nowhere.
It could have gone horribly wrong.
Somehow, it didn't.
‘I first started writing songs when I was about 14, because I knew that the first song I'd put down would be so crap I thought I'd get all my ideas out of the way first, and then I'd start getting all artistic,’ explains Tony.
‘Thata took about…three years!’
Fuelled by a diet of soul, R&B and Prince-style pop, Tony went through the (now) classic ravey bedroom phase, fiddling with sequencers and drum programmes.
Then he dragged East 17 together from the members of his gang.
Then he finally — after months of trying — convinced ex-Bros and Pet Shop Boys manager Tom Watkins that he was worth more than one ‘embarrassed’ business meeting.
East 17 signed to London records.
And then, by gum, their debut ‘House Of Love’ single bounced its way into the Top Ten.
‘That was shocking, really shocking,’ he admits.
‘There were all these groups or whatever, and none of them look like us on TV.
We don't look like pop stars, we're just = us!
It's very strange.
Like, why should we even be there?’
‘House Of Love’ was a weird crossover record, an earthy blend of pop swagger and ravey exuberance.
It fitted everything Tony insists is the East 17 mould, a ‘real’, personalised romp lurking somewhere between EMF's sense of fun(k) and the communal catastrophe of Flowered Up.
The single did its job — it got East 17 on the cover of Smash Hits and into the teenypop consciousness.
It even allowed them to forge a media-induced ‘rivalry’ with the abysmal, donkey-dancing Take That!, which brings us back to pop muzak and why it's dying on its arse.
‘They put together a group of people like Take That!, who didn't even know each other until they formed — not that I'm knocking them, because they've got more front than we have — but it's not going to work unless it's real ,’ gripes Tony.
‘You can show the kids something.
You don't have to go on about, ‘I love you, you love me, we were meant to be’.
Kids have had enough of that.
Pop groups are in a position to say something about…
Oh, sorry, I'm not talking about fast cars and blue-eyed big-titted women, am I?’
Nope.
Good.
TONY'S A bit of a lad.
No doubt about it.
So are all of East 17, in fact.
They dress so baggy they look like Wombles.
When they're gathered together they go ‘Phwoaaaargghh!!!’ a lot— like most lads do — and generally they're as right-on as a picket-line crossing, strike-breaking blackleg.
But things are happening in their sphere.
Tony says he was into raves until 1990, when he got bored with the same hectic beats and ‘could see it wasn't going to get any bigger because the government wasn't backing it.
Not that we're political, mind.’
Shame.
Rave kids should be throwing petrol bombs at the Houses Of Parliament over the way their right to party has been thrown in the proverbial dumper, but they aren't.
Conversely, East 17, by virtue of their teeny connections and chart status shouldn't be dissing the establishment.
But they are.
On their pumping new single, ‘Gold’, which is bizarrely reminiscent of New Order circa 1984, East 17 go for the sneeringly philosophical angle, insisting that ‘life is worth more than gold’.
Then there's a song called ‘Disagreed’, which Tony didn't think could be released, ‘for certain reasons’.
‘But maybe that's what the pop world needs — a bit of rebellious attitude.
‘Disagreed’ is just having a a pop at the governments of the world and the mess they've caused.
It's the same old message of peace and love.
We're not writing songs like ‘Drop The Boy’, I think we're doing quite intelligent stuff.
Then again, the rest of the world's probably laughing at us.
‘But I'll argue until the day I die that we are singing about something serious.
When it comes down to it, if we encourage this generation of kids to chill out then maybe we're leading the way — in a few years’ time, the world will be a better place to live in.
We hope.’
TONY'S A realist.
He knows that ‘Gold’ should go Top Five.
He also knows it might ‘peak at 114’.
He doesn't seem particularly bothered either way.
He talks about being shipped around London like cattle at the beck and call of the record company with a weary shrug.
He tells me about how he had to leave a Walthamstow pub in embarrassment when he was asked to do some karaoke, and then asked for his autograph.
But he's pretty certain that, without all this hassle, without the music, he'd have been stuck in prison by now, so he's thankful for everything which comes his way.
And if East 17 get really rich and famous, will they have to change their name to South West One?
‘Naaah!
There's some right big booming houses in Walthamstow.
If we get really successful, we could move into one of them.’
Capital stuff.
The new Duran Duran (!),
East 17, model their comedy EMF hats
TOUCH ME, I'M HICKS!
Following BILL HICKS' recent ‘it doesn't matter who you vote for, the government always gets it’ rant against the American presidential campaign in these pages, we invited him to sit in a room on election night with STEPHEN DALTON and explain why he's mellowed to the idea of Clinton
‘Is this making any sense or am I just jetlagged?’
Erm, no, please carry on.
Could you repeat the bit about the insect-headed aliens gazing down from the spinning globules of light?
‘That night we had a lot of insect realisations.
The crickets were not just rubbing their  f—ing legs together, it had deep meaning, there were these balls of light and inside were these little insect-like beings…
I don't know what all this means.’
Earth calling Bill Hicks, your signal is breaking up.
You may well be American's funniest stand-up surrealist on a whistle-stop tour of Britain.
But here in this London hotel, detailing your UFO abduction anecdotes with a perfectly straight face, you are starting to sound like a fruitcake from Planet Drugs.
‘I should perhaps first say that I was tripping.’
Ah.
‘That's what bugs me about the experience.
That's why I quit tripping, but it opened a door and I believe there will be another time.
People are starting to realise what is real, what is imagined, what's the difference?
It's very tempting to go into the desert with a bag of mushrooms right now, but I'm not going to because I want the experience to be real .’
Were these extra-terrestrial insects trying to tell you anything, Bill?
‘We're just bugs!’
Of course.
It all makes sense now.
BILL HICKS has been almost as ubiquitous in our media during recent weeks as Bill Clinton.
Usually, the former has been talking about the latter.
Whether snuggling up to Cindy Crawford on TV-AM , riffing madly on late-night comedy shows or dissecting the US electoral circus in these very pages.
Hicks displays a rare gift of extracting informed humour from randomly assembled streams of bemused observation.
We meet as the first polls are coming in, but Hicks is rightly confident of a Clinton landslide.
‘It's like voting for your dad or for your wacky cool uncle who plays the sax.
It's a generational thing, a big deal.
Both him and Gore smoked dope, or said they did.
They might be lying…’
But in the article he wrote for NME two weeks back, Bill was understandably cynical about the whole two-party farce.
Why is he getting so affectionate for Clinton now?
‘I am cynical, but I believe he offers a very small, narrow, tiny window of opportunity.
The rhetoric alone will open people's hearts.
It already has.
It really is the difference between hope and fear.’
Hope and Fear's crazy bus, maybe (top '70s joke for Pulp and Denim fans).
So what does that make Ross Perot?
‘Perot is just some screaming bat out of hell.
If it's a choice between your dad and your cool uncle, Perot is your grandad who wants to take us all back in time and harness us behind mules!’
Surely Clinton's presidency will be a double-edged sword for comics like Hicks?
Who can possibly replace barn-door-sized targets like Bush's evil drawl and Quayle's retarded ramblings?
‘They should give Quayle his own network and just ask him questions, that's the show.
He's brilliantly funny, there's nothing there, he's a cypher.
And it's just wonderful he has to feign emotions, he has to be coached on emotions.
When he does anger he smiles !’
Hicks traces the explosion which created America's current comedy network back to Reagan's first election victory in 1980, ‘which is no coincidence, all this propaganda bullshit being shoved down our throat.’
So how will Bill and his fellow dissidents react to a presidential team who can spell the name of major vegetables?
‘Obviously a Clinton victory will be bad for comedians.
Comics have had the greatest punchbags and been the antidote to 12 years of Republican rule.
Now the enemy's all deflated and dead, I feel like all my friends and all the artists were like little pygmies and we've been trying to kill this elephant all these years with little arrows, and finally tonight…
CRUNCH!
Now what?
We've got to go hunting again.’
You won't have too long to wait.
No doubt Clinton will soon be as shit as every previous president: breaking promises, screwing up the economy, stomping on small countries.
‘You're right; even when Kennedy was in office we were undertaking policies that were absolutely horrible, unknown to Americans, as they still are.
So what does it all mean?
But also during that time there was Martin Luther King and the music and everything.
There was hope.
My theory is we're going into this horrible downward spiral and Clinton is a poor imitation of Kennedy.
Madonna's a poor imitation of Marilyn.
If they hook up and Clinton is assassinated, it's just going to be too corny .’
IN HIS new live video,Relentless , Hicks plays a boggle-eyed Pied Piper leading several hundred frightened Canadians into a customised universe inhabited by hillbilly aliens, imaginary Iraqi soldiers and moths who fly all the way to the sun.
There are no actual jokes.
It is hilarious.
Bill stepped into this personalised galaxy aged 13 and hasn't yet emerged.
That was when he started writing routines.
Five years later, in 1978, he joined the Comedy Workshop in his native Houston and stumbled upon a motley team of like-minded souls.
‘All the guys there are still my friends, still totally cool comics, and I think one day the Houston influence will be a chapter in the development of comedy.
We really believe in what we're doing, we believe it has a meaning other than making money or that it's a cool showbiz job.
Which it's not.
We have a philosophy that's very overt.
You talk about everything, don't care if you provoke people, there's no rules, it's very free-form.
Life can be good if you choose to make it that way, you should tell the truth, expose lies and live in the moment.
It's a very Eastern philosophy…’
Bill explains his philosophy a bit more.
It seems to involve space, peanuts and a stoic refusal to believe in past or future time.
It does, at least, sound refreshingly optimistic.
‘Yes, but then again, there's another side to me.
I am a misanthropic humanist.
It's a weird conflict when you are your own bête noir .
Do I like people?
They're great in theory .’
A friend of Bill's and fellow graduate of the Houston comedy school was Sam Kinison, the controversial stand-up rant artist who died in a car smash earlier this year.
Kinison was often accused of spreading hate, although Hicks himself employs far more gentle tactics.
‘Thank you so much for seeing that.
A lot of people compared Sam and Andrew Dice Clay and I thought that was completely untrue.
Sam was a satirist , Dice Clay's a moron .
Sam made some odd choices, and I guess as the venues get bigger you've got to get broader.
You lose the subtlety, the click with the audience.’
Hicks spent two years in LA in his early 20s and hated it.
Ever the pragmatist, he decided to return there when he recently turned 30.
And he still hates it.
‘I live in Los Angeles, I just moved there, but I'm moving back to New York.
I hate LA with all my heart, the sooner it falls into the ocean due to a major earthquake the better the world will be.
I'm going across the board on this one.
I don't like Los Angeles.’
Stop being wishy washy and evasive, Bill, do you like LA or not?
‘Oh, it's alright.
Who am I to complain?
Ha Ha!’
OH DEAR.
Bill Hicks is not entirely happy being a comedian.
For as long as he can remember, he has yearned to be — wait for it — a rock star.
He is even signed to a UK-based record label, Invasion, and is currently touring British rock venues with support from wry, introspective folkies Balloon.
How serious are these musical ambitions?
‘Serious enough that I'm following up on it.
I'm in a band, and when I get back from England I'm going into the studio to do an album of music with my comedy over the top of it.
An experimental album, but I think its time has come, and I don't think anyone else could pull it off but me and my friends.’
Hmm.
So when can we expect Bill to ditch comedy for good and go all-out rock on us?
‘It's really hard to schedule this being-a-rock-star thing.
There's no date on that, ha ha!’
Bill's manager call's him a ‘rock 'n' roll comic’.
What does that mean?
‘Now it means nothing , because rock 'n' roll is dead, and so is comedy.
Ha ha ha ha ha !!!’
Not for the first time, Bill Hicks tosses back his huge insect head and erupts into fits of strange, cricket-like laughter.
Now it all makes sense.
vibes
EDITED BY SHERMAN AT THE CONTROLS
Understand this groove…
FRANKË PHAROAH gets ready to be Hooj, GLASGOW's dance labels are uncovered, THE APHEX TWIN releases one of the albums of the year, and MC CANN is Groove Check's reggae selector
OUR FRANKË
‘Understand This Groove’: The Story So Far…
In February 1990 Virgin Records released a tune by United Funk Industries called ‘Understand This Groove’, which featured the tones of American singer Frankë Pharoah.
It was a minor club hit.
Earlier this year, Frankë's manager Jake Fior went to see Virgin about revitalising the cut after it had been sampled by Sweden's Swemix crew under the Sound Factory banner and released to some success under its original title.
Virtin A&R Rob Manley, who also runs the Union City dance offshoot, said he couldn't find the original master tapes, according to Franë.
So Frankë went off and, with Hooj Choons' studio warrior Rollo in the producer's chair, resang and remodelled ‘Understand This Groove’ into a lean, mean 1992 floor-killing machine.
By amazing coincidence, just as  Frankë new version emerged on China Records (home of The Levellers ) out popped liberal quantities of the same tune on Union City promo — with Frankë's sampled vocals.
There's an old English saying —‘the proof of the pudding is in the food fight afterwards’.
Two weeks ago the Frank ë/Rollo; version — an epic trio of mixes capped by the aptly-named ‘Big  F— Off Mix ’was Vibes SOTW.
‘Maybe to Union City it's just a record,’ says a passionate Frankë.
‘But to me it's my life.
This could open doors for my career so it's not just a record to ome.
It's just good that it looks like we're winning.
‘But what I can't understand is why they didn't just take our project in the first place.
I mean, if you're gonna do it properly…
But I'm happy now that I didn't sign with them.’
Frankë's concern is understandable.
His career so far has been a lengthy dues-paying climb which has taken him from his Arkansas birthplace to Los Angeles, San Francisco, the US military in Germany and finally London.
A band called Eric And The Good Good Feeling and a stint with EMI led up to the original UFI deal and now finally maybe Frankë's time has come.
‘I think it's just a great dance records,’ adds Frankë.
‘I just hope it translates into sales.
This has given us a story.’
Time to listen to what Frankë says, children.
GROOVE CHECK
VIBES SINGLE OF THE WEEK
BAJJA JEDD: Bed Work Sensation
EXPLAIN THIS one.
The lyrics are pretty much standard, if mild, slackness, a typical ragga-gruff voice explaining how you've gotta be a top shag to please a girl.
And to think you never realised, huh?
However, the music is seriously mental.
I mean I've never heard a reggae record like this, nor any other record, come to that, imagine the sort of slow, two-note bassline of De La Soul's ‘What's More’ taken back to its R&B roots, with copping guitar, honking sax and leering swagger in the rhythm.
This is where Duane Eddy meets Shabba Ranks.
No dub version on the other side, but this might be a musical revolution happening right here.
If it isn't, it's certainly one of the best accidents of the year.
CHRIS GOLDFINGER ETC: The Heat Megamix
YOU'RE NOT the only one whose heart sinks at the sight of the word megamix .
However, this one makes it by virtue of it being an array of versions of General Levy's fine ‘Heat’ rhythm.
Mixed in a sometimes a  cappella , always mental style, including lumps of ‘I've Got The Power’ and introduced by the slick mid-Atlantic (or at least, Miami-Caribbean-London voice of Chris Goldfinger).
Big respect to Wacko Jacko in the middle, too.
SLY & ROBBIE: Hot Milk
THOSE OF you who remember Sly & Robbie's so-called golden period, when students would approach reggae DJs and ask for ‘something by Sly & Robbie’ when the DJ had already been playing records driven by them all night, had better get used to some changes.
The S&R approach is almost totally computerised today, and relies as much on the keyboards of Kotch's Herbie and the crafty arrangements of guitarist Lloyd ‘Gitsie’ Willis as it does on their own unerring sense of what constitutes a great rhythm.
This remake of Jackie Mittoo's Studio One organ classic is typical of current Taxi fare: subtle, gently rocking, and offering more than a nod to rocksteady, right down to the drum fills probably sampled from the original version.
JACK RADICS: Tequila Sunset
AND HERE'S another Sly/Willis arrangement, a tender, smooth rub-up-a-gal ballad fronted by the astonishing voice of karaoke king Jack Radics.
While it never moves far beyond the intro's initial premise, it's full of charm, as all Jack Radics records must be.
The flip, ‘Peacock Dub’, shows up all the ‘Sexual Healing’ elements of the groove and is recommended to all Radio 2 DJs.
MICKEL ROSE: Monkey Business
LAST IN the Sly Dunbar entries this week, this finds former Black Uhuru vocalist Mickel (sic ) Rose reunited with the Taxi label.
Despite having a few classic samples thrown in and an anti-crack message, this is, ultimately, a little dreary.
Bristly dub on flip, complete with monkey yapping, is a lot better.
DENNIS BROWN: Poor Man Feel It
TAPPA ZUKIE'S label always seems to bring out the best in Dennis Brown, and this gentle lilt through the miseries of ghetto life is Dennis' best for a while.
The ‘Ackapella’(sic ) flip might prove useful to certain club jocks.
INI KAMOZE: Hot Steppers
KAMOZE RETURNS after a spell in a Jamaican jail, choosing a slightly rougher version of ‘Hot Milk’ than Sly & Robbie's for this typically oblique lyric about his impending dominance.
Although this certainly has the requisite speed, don't be fooled by the title; this is far more ragga than steppers.
FRANKIE PAUL/GENERAL TK: The Champion
IF WE didn't already have a Vibes single of the week, this would be it.
A bad ragga-hip-hop rhythm, a ludicrous intro, Frankie Paul's multi-tracked vocal and General TK's DJ proclamations somehow manage to rise above the mad morass of samplers of King Stitt, thunderous bassline and the ever-busy mix.
Rougher than a cat's tongue.
BERES HAMMOND: Double Trouble
I REALISE I'm in a minority of one when I say I'm bored with Beres Hammond's indisputably soulful voice, but many of his records seem to lack the sheer excitement of ragga.
Here, however, I've got no complaint, thanks to the mad Steely and Clevie dub on the B-side.
While what they've done here is nothing unusual for them, it still shocks the ear.
In regga a producer frequently utilises the same backing track for several different vocals, but only Steely & Clevie would dare let them all play at once on a dub, allowing several different melodies to fight it out for dominance of a different rhythm.
As long as you don't hear it too often, it's a thrill, not a torture.
SCOTLAND THE RAVE
It started with a debt, a bet and some sweet serendipity.
Until the end of the last year, 23rd Precinct, the label, had  conspicuously failed to emulate the success of the specialist Glasgow dance music store from whence the label was launched.
The debut release by hardcore hip-hop act 2-Tone Committee struggled.
Rave tunes by local act Q-Tex hardly raised pulses or sales.
An impasse had been reached, a new direction sought, and label manager Billy Kiltie had thoughts on concentrating instead on a less commercially ambitious underground label, Limbo.
Which is precisely the time one of the store's more regular customers dropped by to plead poverty and forgiveness.
‘I'd been getting records on tick from Billy for ages,’ explains Havanna's Tony Scott, ‘so I said to him ‘If I make up a record, would you square up the bill?’
Of course, Billy's answer was ‘certainly’, 'cos he obviously never thought I'd do it.’
Tony teamed up with long-time friend Ritchie Miller and sound engineer Graham Drinnon to conjure up ‘Schtoom’, that wondrous slice of tribal-influenced deep thumping grooves.
This wasn't the sound of young Scotland, this was trance-national, so they called themselves Havanna.
Not only was ‘Schtoom’ a resounding dancefloor success, it also served to galvanise a latent collective of creative club forces in Scotland simply waiting to be led by example.
‘I think it's always been there.
It's just that when you first hear a record and don't know how to make one, you think it's too hard until you actually meet somebody who can do it,’ offers Tony.
The success of ‘Schtoom’, along with its successor ‘Shift/High And Dry’ and Gypsy's current ‘I Trance You’looks like continuing with Deep Piece's bold and brassy ‘Bup Bup Birri Birri’.
All this in spite of the label's almost wilful determination not to dirty its mitts with such business stuffery as promotion, publicity or even press.
When Gypsy made the Dance Top Ten, the ‘video’ shown was simply a bizarre still photo of what appeared to be a bespectacled school-kid.
‘We've been caught in the middle a bit,’ explains Billy.
‘When we started off it was meant to be a serious underground label and we thought we'd just do a couple of thousand.
I am bothered that it will never be as underground as when it first started.’
The danger, of course, is that Limbo, along with newer labels such as Clubscene, Hubba Hubba, Walking Man and the rejuvenated soma, could become victims of their own  success .
With a non-existent infrastructure and a paucity of recording facilities geared to the more specialist needs of house music programmers, talk of a forceful ‘Scottish Club Coming’ is not only premature, but also unhelpful.
Echoing the sentiments of Slam, Gypsy's Graham Drinnon is keen to emphasise that the Limbo lot ‘like to see ourselves as British musicians making British music, and certainly not as a Glasgow thing…
I really hope people don't hype it as a Scottish thing 'cos then the pressure's on.’
23rd Precinct: the new Highland flingers
The Aphex Twin, responsible for re-inventing dance music with this year's ground-breaking ‘Digeridoo’ single, has released a CD and double LP of ‘Selected Ambient Works ‘85–92’on Belgium's R&S label.
It's set in an instrumental ambient world a few parallel light years away from The Orb, with titles like ‘Xtai’, ‘Ptolemy’, ‘Heliosphan’ and ‘Hedphelyn’that demonstrate the art of Chill-out techno and loads of bits that sound like your phone ringing.
Who needs lyrics?
A serious contender for Vibes album of the year.
CHILL THE CHAMPAGNE, NORTHSIDE!
NME READERS POLL 1992
Yes, it's that time of year again.
Well, actually, it's not.
We've brought forward the Readers Poll slightly this year so that we can swoon and rail and curse at the results as part of our New Year offensive.
So, come on.
Put down that Gameboy and your copy of Madonna's Sex , clean up the mess, pour yourself a pale cream sherry and mull over the year that's drawing to a close.
Re-live those great records and gigs, those hilarious TV moments, those, erm, radio programmes and try and make sense of it all.
Remember, this is the only poll that counts.
So use your judgement wisely.
Give it your most concerted attention…and then just vote for Morrissey as usual.
We're joking, of course.
Away you go, you wee things.
Send your completed poll coupon to  IMMEDIATELY!
SHACK UP WITH THE B-52'S!
The news is that those Rock Lobster lovers, The B-52's will be bringing their Love Shack to Britain in December but, hey, why wait that long?
The Break With Kit Kat network radio show, in conjunction with NME, are offering a round trip airfare to Lyons, three nights first class accommodation, a sight-seeing tour of the city AND tickets to The B-52's Lyons show on December 7 for one lucky reader and their guest.
Ten runners-up will receive The Break With Kit Kat baseball caps and T-shirts plus a supply of Kit Kats.
The Break With Kit Kat is broadcast on the following independent radio stations:
All you have to do to stand a chance of winning is answer the following questions correctly:
1
Who hosts The Break With Kit Kat?
2
What is The B-52's' latest album called?
All entries should be address to Kit Kat Competition  The editor's decision is final.
VIDEO
SAD, NOT MAD
Their comeback gig was more memorable for the, erm, flag-waving support act, and now the accompanying video is a yawnathon that misses all the fun…
So can poor old MADNESS do anything right?
SIMON WILLIAMS meets Suggs to discuss the difficult Return Of The Magnificent Seven
‘IT'S ALL about a bunch of old lags who probably shouldn't, but help themselves they couldn't, and if they had to do it again they wouldn't…‘
Stop the Madness!
Stop the Madness!
So the call went around NME towers when the rumours became reality and that ‘load of old lags’ announced a one-off (never-to-be-repeated,honestly ) date at Finsbury Park back in the summer.
The cries continued as press releases flew around with details of a live video and album and the distinct possibility of further ‘one-off’ shows at Christmas.
Stop the Madness?
Stop the sadness , more like.
Even fate appeared to be on our side: when the review copy of Madstock finally turned up on the morning of the interview, your hack managed to catch a full five seconds of guitarist Chris Foreman wandering across the park before the VHS started eating the tape.
Luckily, singer Suggs, scowling at his beer in a swanky West End joint, reckons I didn't miss anything.
Erm, what?
‘Unfortunately, it was really badly filmed,’ he rants.
‘It looks like it was made in someone's front room instead of in the open air in front of thousands of people.
There's a close-up of a guitar when someone's playing the piano, and a close-up of the back of someone's head when someone else  is  f—ing flying over the other side of the stage.
If someone had tried to make it as boring as they could they've succeeded, basically.’
CRASH!
Oh dear, the press officer seems to have fainted.
It gets stranger.
For all you Thatcher-era baby-boom victims out there, Madness remain one of the most prolific popmeisters of the early '80s.
In a nutty nutshell, Suggs, Chrissy, Carl Smythe, Mike Barson, Woody, Mark Bedford and Lee Thompson skanked their way from the 2-Tone stable onto Stiff and, ultimately, Virgin, and along the way had more bona fide tip-top selling hits than most mathematical geniuses can work out.
Their cheery, knees-up-Muvver-Brown, cock-er-nee grin gradually became eroded by a grim awareness of reality as the Thatcher years dragged on.
Hence, by the time the band split, their records were as chirpy as the average dead parrot.
Story over.
ALAS, LIKE a typical Belgian dinner, history has a horrible habit of repeating itself.
Five years on, after a variety of careers in Voice Of The Beehive, The Nutty Boys, satellite TV and A&R-ing, Madness reconvened to discuss promotional tactics with regards to a proposed Virgin Greatest Hits selection and, hey presto!
They had a bloody great row.
Then they disagreed to disagree and Madstock took seed.
The big question isn't so much how it happened as why ?
The Madness place in history was safer than a bet on a six-legged greyhound, so why did the once-magnificent seven and now decidedly muddled seven decide to blow their credibility and slop into the comeback trail?
Money, Suggs readily admits, was a prime concern.
He recalls the time when a promised £300,000 windfall from Stiff never materialised, so he had to sell his new house to survive.
‘We ended up completely skint,’ he grumbles.
But there were other reasons for his apparent pop treason besides the financial benefits of a one-night stand in North London.
‘There were loads of things we could have done in Madness that we didn't do because we were too young or whatever,’ explains the singer.
‘When we were around there was still this hangover from the '60s that said bands played continuously live, made absolutely no money and released a single every 20 minutes.
So we never had time to think or enjoy what was going up.
‘When we split up I was really pissed off that we hadn't achieved a lot of things we could have done, and that mood was coming through in the last records because it was depressing.
It could have gone much further that way, I think.
I wish there was a abetter metaphor, but like Pink Floyd we could have made music about what was really going on in my head and messed around with what being a pop star was all about.’
Even videos, a medium Madness exploited with hyper-active aplomb, didn't reap the rewards they could have done because no-one had invented MTV or The Chart Show .
And it doesn't stop there.
‘I was always pissed off that, intellectually, we were looked down upon.
It's really ironic that suddenly people from The Independent are really into it because it's safe to be behind something that's been and gone and proved its worth.
Whereas at the time it was a thin old wicket — you know, ‘Madness are a bit thick and they do come out with some bollocks sometimes, so I don't know if I can throw my weight behind them’.’
So what do you think of the Sex Pistols reforming, Suggs?
‘I think, ‘Oh God, is that how we look?’
It is painful, but what can one do?’
A ha!
AND SO, fuelled by Suggs' earnest spiel about ‘dignity, pride, entertainment and, frankly, not giving a  f— ’, Madstock happened.
If it is somewhat bizarre that after all the arguing, all the effort, the video souvenir of the event should be enormously disappointing to the band, it's not more ironic that the fact that after the show the support act stole all the headlines — for all the wrong reasons.
Enter the Mozzer, accompanied by a hail of abuse and sharp objects.
‘I felt really disappointed for him, the audience and for us,’ froths Suggs.
‘I think it would have been brilliant if they'd given him more of a chance and if he'd given a bit more.
I mean, I was on stage when he left and it didn't look like a particularly bad scene to me.
Then again, we've had Echo & The Bunnymen supporting us in front of 3,000 Seig Heil-ing loonies throwing bottles and chairs at them.
‘I think the rise in fascism is disgusting, and I thought the most disgusting thing Morrissey did was when he said it was a National Front skinhead who threw something at him because I didn't see any fascism in the crowd at all.
And again, what was he doing with a Union Jack and a skinhead backdrop at a Madness concert?
‘I don't deny him the right to use whatever symbols he wants as an artist, but as a friend I was disappointed that he knew how inflammatory that would be to a Madness audience.
For us, all that symbolism represents a really bad time in our career, and part of the reason for us packing it all in.
And if he wants to dabble in those really contentious issues then he's got to say what he really thinks, because I've had it up to  f—ing here.’
Whatever your feelings, the Madness doesn't stop here.
Suggs wants the Christmas shows to herald a new Madness, a fresh concern after the simplistic ‘Best Of…’ sets at Finsbury Park.
Naturally, he'll have to argue with the rest of the band first.
‘I think it could be really  f—ing exciting,’ he shouts.
‘We've got a capacity for doing something really  f—ing weird!’
YOU MAY sneer — God knows, my upper lip has been twitching like the pelvis of Elvis throughout this re-birth — but it is odd how bands can trundle on for decades, blithely ignored, while Madness were thrust back into a critical firing line.
Like, how long have The Cure been going?
‘Exactly!’ bellows Suggs.
‘Look at Peter Gabriel, who does in fact get slagged off, and  f—ing right and all, but he hasn't made an album for six years which is longer than me, but he's a current performer whereas I'm an old lag who's coming back.
‘I saw Gabriel on the cover of a magazine, and David Mellor was on the cover of something else and I thought, who's looking funkier?
David Mellor, actually, Gabriel looks like a drained old man.
But good luck to him.
I don't know him and…
I don't want to.’
Welcome to the Mad revival.
Suggs (left) spies arch loafer and ‘drained old man’ Peter Gabriel.
Carl remains calm
MADNESS: Madness Live At Finsbury Park
‘I HATE to repeat myself but I'm a very boring repetitive guy when you get to know me.’
Suggs' between-song banter is cynical and self-effacing, underlining the shoulder-shrugging attitude of his colleagues.
Returning to their home patch after an eight-year lay off, feted as long-lost pillars of pop's dishevelled community, Madness seem more bemused than triumphant.
The occasion called for clichés, it was a dirty job that someone had to do.
This nostalgic retread was, like revenge, a dish best eaten cold.
The reason the return of Madness got the fans out and raised critical hackles was because there'd been no outfit to take their place in the intervening years.
Presenting their greatest hits as a pension plan nest egg might not have been playing the cutting edge game but, blimey, who is?
Cockney ruffian culture hasn't been able to progress on the swaggering menace, social quirks, pithy observation and deranged vignettes detailed in the impressive collection of tunes played out here under the giant M erected in Finsbury Park.
Carter USM's idiot jukebox-come-end of the pier cabaret might be a lot of things — but it's hardly progress.
The video is a shoddy deal, though, with muffled sound and only lip service paid to the Mother Of All Rockumentaries from which it takes its title.
It could have been an honest, provocative look at the fans and the straggling sub-cults gathered for a wade down memory lane.
But it's a strictly taking-care-of-business cash-in.
Still, some things are worth another look — the bizarre and burlesque nature of saxman Lee Thompson's two solo spots emphasises hidden depths, as does Mike Barson's adept way with a Motown backliner rhythm.
Ultimately, the return of Madness is hardly something to get worked up about.
There's an inevitability about their return, just as there was an inevitability about the fate that befell Mozzer in his chosen role as God's Last English Pop Star when he played havoc with the crowd's jovial togetherness beforehand.
The version of ‘The Harder They Come’ that closes won't cause Jimmy Cliff any sleepless nights.
‘I'm going to get my share of what's mine’ sings Suggs.
On the balance sheet of Britpop, he probably deserves it.
Shady!
Suggs at Madstock
REELING AROUND
Hopper's Mario bust-up, Van Sant's Blues, Eszterhas' cow scandal, Foster honours Seberg
Gus Van Sant follows up the arduous My Own Private Idaho , a story of narcoleptic gay hustlers in Baltimore, with an adaption of Tom Robbins' acclaimed novel Even Cowgirls Get The Blues .
Uma Thurman stars as a hitch-hiker who ends up working at a pansexual beauty ranch, where she joins fellow workers in rebelling against the owners and their male-servicing feminine hygiene products.
Strong supporting cast includes Keanu Reeves (fresh from Coppola's Dracula ), River Phoenix and sister Rain, Roseanne Arnold and, replacing drop-outs Madonna and Elizabeth Taylor, Lily Tomlin and Faye Dunaway.
An adjunct to the London Film Festival, the British retrospective of Multi Screen is on view throughout November at 42 Gloucester Avenue, London NW1.
Among those featured — Steve Farrer on November 10/11, responsible for the rotating images on U2's Achtung Baby world tour bash.
Problems in the production of Super Mario Brothers , the $40 million adaptation of the best-selling computer game.
Bob Hoskins' co-star Dennis Hopper has been at loggerheads with Annabel Jankel and Rocky Morton, demanding script rewrites.
Mike Myers' follow-up to Wayne's World stars the Saturday Night Live man as a coffee house hipster.
Myers marries a sexy butcher he comes to suspect of having more than ground beef in her freezer.
Ken Loach's movie Riff-Raff , looking at the sorry lot of north of Watford construction workers working in London, has been released with subtitles in the States.
Never one to avoid controversy, millionaire screenwriter Joe Eszterhas has come up with a scenario even more controversial than the lesbian ice-pick outrage of Basic Instinct .
Sacred Cows centres on the media frenzy that results when a Democratic President is photographed in a tender but compromising situation with a milk supplying mammal.
Eszterhas got the idea for the story when he visited Nebraska in 1988 and talked to cowpokes who revealed details of intimate extra-curricular farmyard activity.
Believe it or not, Paul Newman is on hand to play the President and Susan Sarandon may play the first lady.
Rumours that Madonna is keen to audition in a peek-a-boo pantomime cow outfit couldn't be confirmed at time of going to press.
Jodie Foster is producing a biopic on the life of Jean Seberg.
Born in America's Midwest, Seberg, who committed suicide in 1979, came to prominence as Jean Paul Belmondo's co-star in the French new wave classic Breathless and starred in the first ever X-rated movie released in the States,Birds In Peru .
Recently seen opposite Warren Beatty in the title role of the re-released Lilith as a mentally ill girl suffering from ‘nymphomania’, Seberg was hounded by an FBI dirty tricks campaign after her vocal support for the Black Panthers movement, which reportedly led to her suicide in 1979.
Actress Beverley D'Angelo is taking time out from her screen career to perform a risqué country set across the Bible belt.
D'Angelo's set includes such memorable ditties as ‘I Can't  F— Without Falling In Love’.
Something nasty in the freezer awaits Mike ‘Wayne’ Myers
LONNIE DONEGAN: PUTTING ON THE DONEGAN
A NAME who inspires much mirth these days, Donegan was one of the unlikely heroes of such early British practitioners as The Rolling Stones and Van Morrison.
Here he is captured at his influential peak — 1958 –'63;— on his TV series knocking out such favourites as ‘My Old Man's A Dustman’, ‘Tom Dooley’ and the recently Dylanised ‘Froggie Went-A-Courtin' ’.
DIRE STRAITS: THE VIDEOS
A DECADE of direness from ‘Sultans Of Swing’ to Notting Hill Billies.
 One hundred minutes of increasingly state-of-the-art promos.
A chart topper all the way to Christmas and back.
RED HOT CHILI PEPPERS: What Hits?
AMERICA'S ANSWER to Ned's Atomic Dustbin offer a serving of junk food for the eyes.
Welcome to torso city: these lads don't wear shirts.
They wear sneakers, however, and do their best to look like skateboarders.
They have a lot of songs, accompanied by dubbed-up cartoon backgrounds that irritate the shit out of you when laid end-to-end like this.
‘Behind The Sun’, ‘Higher Ground’, ‘Fight Like A Brave’…they're all here, all somehow inferior on video.
This lot are no more capable of making a proper MTV-approved rock vid than my cat, despite the brave attempt of ‘Under The Bridge’.
These clips are a triumph of form over content, and by the time you reach the four live songs that close this boxful of banging and shouting, it's a relief to know that at least this is roughly what they're really like when they're not busy being hyperactive.
Buy the album instead.
THE SHAMEN: Boss Vid
YOU'VE PROBABLY seen most of what this has to offer if you've not spent the past year having a dump.
Here's the rave and new age Chas & Daves with lots of fast cuts, some standing stones and the odd scrapyard set.
While Boss Vid , the usual hits package, can get irritating, and doesn't answer any of the truly vital questions about The Shamen (such as why are those headphone mics so annoying to look at, and why does the sight of Mr C turn grown men into sobbing rags?) it does have its moments.
You know full well what they are: they're those moments when Richard Heslop's undeniably exciting monochrome, fit-inducing flashes take over.
‘Ebeneezer Goode’ wouldn't have been half the phenomenon it was without that promo vid.
Boss vid?
Not really.
But probably more authoritative than you expected.
ADEVA Video Hits!
THIS WOMAN was, such a short time ago, the future of dance music?
Blimey.
Were we really such suckers for the average disco-garage of ‘Warning!’?
Didn't we notice that her voice really wasn't that strong when it went right up to the top storey?
Were we really so suckered by her beefy dominatrix image that we didn't notice the lameness of the stuff her producers were dumping on her?
Here she is doing ‘Respect’ in a hard hat on a black stage, in a boxing ring with Monie Love for ‘Ring my Bell’, looking all Spandau Ballet/classic Harlem speakeasy for ‘I Thank You’.
Her tits wobble about like two jellies in an earthquake.
If that's sexist, I apologise, but look at ‘Musical Freedom’; it might be a song about liberation, but believe me, those tits are always in camera.
Adeva should become an actress now that she doesn't seem to have a record deal.
In one fell swoop she moves from looking like Adeva's mum to superstuff queen bitch on ‘It Should've Been Me’.
Make-up, I know, but there's talent there and she deserves more than this.
Or am I, once again, being suckered by her alluring hype?
THE STRANGLERS: The Old Testament
CERTAIN PARTIES in pop seem to have the idea that the '70s were all glory.
Well let an old git put them straight.
There was a period in that decade where you couldn't go anywhere without seeing The Stranglers.
They were the ultimate road band, gigging everywhere.
Even then they were superannuated geezers, and even though a few fools thought they were punks and the band did their best to encourage this image, really they were The Doors without Jim Morrison and with Bach on keyboards.
Think of them as a punk Dire Straits.
Sounds dire, huh?
Well, it does now, and even then, despite huge sales of their first LP, no-one was too sure.
‘The Old Testament’ lines up 27 ‘classics’either live, on promotional clips or on telly.
There are some strange reminders of the era: ‘Finchley Boys’ sprayed on the stage backdrop, a testimonial to their hardcore following.
Anti-Nazi League festivals, at which The Stranglers were so familiar that everyone probably thought they were just park trees.
‘Peaches’, the ultimate leer, now reduced to being the theme for Floyd On Food .
The Stranglers were the punk band your dad could appreciate; assuming you had a dad, that is.
Buy this for him, and thank God you're young enough to have missed them.
GARY GLITTER: Live
MARC ALMOND: Live In Concert
TWO GREAT British pop institutions, both of whom are maverick enough to belong in an institution.
Gary Glitter Live really is dire.
It's hard to believe just how dire it is.
The interview at the beginning is embarrassing enough to make you think that maybe Normski will end up this way.
Glitter answers questions banal enough that a child of six might be able to pose them, and then it's into the show.
Here he is, a terrifying old theatrical in a tinsel cape, an old trouper out for one last look at his adoring public.
The public pretend to love him out of the goodness of their hearts.
He sweats through all the hits one more time.
Hello hello, he's back again, oh yes he's beautiful, and do we wanna touch him?
No, we bloody well don't.
It's all a bit of fun, until you hear that voice.
Fortunately you can hear that voice right away in ‘Rock ‘N’ Roll Part One’an excruciating, honky bellow like the last breath of a dinosaur.
It warns you that it's time to reach for the stop button.
Glitter is Dot Cotton in foot-thick panstick, flogging a dead horse until its bones are a pile of dust.
The joke has gone on long enough.
Marc Almond: angst in the sort of leather jacket your kid brother bought down the market for £39.99, live at the Astoria with, apparently, three camera shots on offer.
His band are reedy and twiddly; to work, Almond's stuff needs a huge orchestra capable of great drama.
Surprisingly, he can hold a tune live, but what kind of tune does he choose to hold?
He's a man with no taste, still revelling in Jacques Brel, coming on like a shopgirl's Scott Walker with geek dancing like the adored boy next door.
While Almond aims for tacky, spunky cabaret rock, he's about as subversive as Come Dancing .
He should stop  f—ing around with these crummy songs, write some real ballads, have his knowing smirk surgically removed and piss off to Vegas where they still appreciate a good singer and are willing to pay.
JACK DEE LIVE
FOR THOSE who aren't aware, Jack Dee is the stand-up comedian who might look like a vampire masquerading as a stockbroker but whose singular style of delivery — deadpan sneers, disbelieving snorts of mirthless laughter, and, most refreshingly of all, blatant contempt for 99 per cent of the human race — is not only a timely call for the return of misanthropy to comedy it's also brilliantly funny.
Most of the time.
At just over an hour long, Dee's routine at London's Duke Of York Theatre, is complex, bizarre and original.
Most importantly it never flags.
The only real drawback is that anybody who's seen him live on TV earlier this year will find his set in dire need of fresh material.
On the plus side this means you get to hear classic routines like Paranoid Car Alarm, Home Knits And Craft Fairs, Radiator Men and Supermarkets again.
Not forgetting my personal favourite, a scathing attack on his Father-In-Law at his wedding (Sample line: ‘Thank you for putting on such a…clean cardigan’).
However, the jokes are a bit stale for real belly laughs, so if you've seen him before it's probably better to wait for the next batch.
JIMI HENDRIX LIVE AT WOODSTOCK
BY THE time they got to Woodstock they might have been half a million strong, but give them a few days in the mud and they'd soon wandered off into an acid daze looking for luxuries like a toilet, somewhere to sleep and a decent tofu burger.
Woodstock is remembered as both the epoch and grand decline of the hippy dream, well that's one story but here's another — black rock's firegod at the peak of his powers screwing, stabbing, firing diamond cast dreams and nightmares all over the fin-de-  siècle  '60s musical epoch.
Hendrix performed his end of the festival set under what looks like a makeshift tarpaulin stage and the band, his largest ever, seems to be swelled by all sorts of hangers-on, stage hands wandering aimlessly on and offstage.
But the organisational nightmare and sundry fall-out fade into insignificance next to Hendrix, though he'd ditched his experience for a conglomerate called The Gypsy Sun And Rainbows Band, Hendrix wasn't really looking to flesh out his playing.
Rather, the augmented backing acted as a springboard for his caustic, daring, riveting improvisations, more than ever he was the man in the spotlight.
Biographer Charles Shaar Murray reckons the toxic version of ‘Star Spangled Banner’ which entered the middle of the performance to be the ‘most complex work of American art to deal with the Vietnam war’; over 20 years of Hollywood mythology hasn't changed that at all.
Now, who's going to release the complete Sly And The Family Stone at Woodstock set?
RUBY
DULLER THAN dishwater factionalised account of the Kennedy assassination as seen from the perspective of Texan club-owner/Mafia associate Jack Ruby, Danny Aiello — a reliable supporting actor — doesn't have the presence to hold the lead role, but that's the least of the movie's problems with its mix of fantastic coincidence and dreary atmosphere.
Sherilyn Fenn provides romantic/salacious interest as the stripper who seems to osmose into Marilyn Monroe at one point.
A convenient but daft plot device.
RUSH:
TENSE, WHITE-knuckle narco drama starring Jennifer Jason Leigh as a rookie cop and Jason Patric as the seasoned, streetwise superior who takes her under his wing and into a maelstrom of danger and addiction.
Powerful headspinning direction by first-timer Lili Fini Zanuck captures junk sickness, '70s amorality and period detail in unflinching  detail .
Gregg Allmann has a brooding bit part as the all-purpose Mister Bad and, just for good measure, there's a born-again bigot sheriff expecting the impossible from his cops.
Powerful stuff, recommended.
HEARTS OF DARKNESS:
A KING-hell, behind the scenes look at the making of Apocalypse Now , this documentary is hilarious and nerve-wracking; an infinitely superior proposition to Coppola's overrated Vietnam epic.
See Martin Sheen drunkenly method act himself into a heart attack, watch made Marlon improvise pure nonsense out of thin air and discover the real-life Dennis Hopper to be more manic than his character.
The definitive movie as battleground epic.
NIGHTBREED:
DAVID CRONENBERG makes his acting debut as a psychiatrist treating a young man with schizophrenia and manic depression.
Cronenberg's diagnosis sends him to the underground of the breed; a secret tribe of shape changers and weirdos persecuted by the naturals.
They mean you and me, folks.
Yikes.
BIG WEDNESDAY:
LET'S GO surfing now — John Milius’ most successful movie sets out on the ocean wave of West Coast surfing culture following the metamorphosis of three macho beach bums during the '60s decade of lost innocence, alcoholism, the draft and the mythic rites played out on the ocean wave.
A youthful Gary Busey takes a lead role in a movie which, despite a heavy handed ending, managed to be stirring, elegiac and magical.
THE COMMITMENTS:
ALAN PARKER'S slice of gritty Dublin street life based on Roddy Doyle's eponymous novelette.
Loved and cherished by many it may be, but the cheery earthiness and rudeness is overstated and there's far too many second-rate soul cover versions by the band.
Be careful — this is the movie that gave Andrew Strong to the world.
SHATTERED:
LOST MEMORY man Tom Berenger attempts to put together the details of his pre-car crash life and stumbles into a daunting mess of deceit, adultery and murder.
Co-stars Bob Hoskins, Greta Scaachi and Joanne Whalley-Kilmer.
BILL HICKS: Relentless
TELL IT like it is, wisecracking US motormouth takes on all the sacred cows of the not-so-free world and l eaves them if not slaughtered, badly mutilated.
More controversial than Woody Allen on a shopping spree in children's world.
So it says here.
Give us a tune, Jimi: Hendrix takes the hippy nation literally at Woodstock
Shiny naffy person Marc Almond
Ruby dues day: Sherilyn Fenn pays hers
Yum!
Rush the snow: Patric and Leigh
FILM
NEOLITHIC MANN
MICHAEL MANN's moved on from Miami Vice and back to the 18th Century for Last Of The Mohicans .
NICK HASTED meets the man who's put the original western hero — in the shape of Daniel Day-Lewis — back on the big screen
‘BEING ANTI-DISCO was very important to me,’ says Michael Mann about Miami Vice , the show which finally made his name through what he calls ‘a totally contemporary vernacular — visually, musically, sonically.’
These claims may be inflated for Crockett and Tubbs, but they do suggest strengths in Mann's latest project,The Last Of The Mohicans , an American adventure story set in the 18th Century, written in the 19th and now given an energy forgotten by all but a few '90s action directors.
‘Yeah, I wanted to be very electric and immediate,’ Mann agrees.
‘For inspiration I researched what it must have been like when, after one or two volleys of musket-fire were exchanged, everybody was hacking at everybody else with edged weapons.
I was taken by the drama of it — one mistake, and somebody's at you with a meat cleaver.
And the discipline of that kind of combat, and the sheer terror of its anarchy — that's what I wanted to communicate.
And how neolithic it all is.’
Last Of The Mohicans ’ violence is also romantic, centring on Daniel Day-Lewis' virile, Indian-raised Hawkeye, a man whose creed is, as Mann says, ‘The quintessence of the American myth of liberty and independence.
The irony of it is that Hawkeye was the progenitor of every Western hero, down to John Wayne in The Searchers , who by that time is a racist.
But those values of Hawkeye's are not American, or European.
They're American Indian.’
It's the perversion of America's primal hero which makes the film's roots in American history and myth of such interest.
Most of all, Mann seems to show America's past as one of ritualised claims of violence and revenge, chains Eastwood's Unforgiven calls psychotic.
But Mann stops short of my alarming suggestion that this means America itself is historically psychotic.
‘I wouldn't use the term psychotic,’ he demurs, having just compared his Indian lead Magua to Hannibal Lecter.
‘But homicidal in its conquest of the pastoral world — yes.’
And what about Hawkeye, this cowboy and Indian who became John Wayne?
Doesn't the suppression of his Indian side in subsequent Western stories suggest a certain national…schizophrenia?
‘I think the multi-ethnic character of the frontier is a strength,’ Mann responds, annoyed.
‘I don't think that's a schizophrenic construction.
Hawkeye may appear to be an amalgam of a couple of things, but in our minds, mine and Daniel's, he is an Indian.
He's a Mohican.’
What about Mann's recent contention that being a serial killer in Paramount, California, home town of the ‘Acid Bath Killer’, was ‘a successful adaptation to the environment.’
Is this true of much of modern-day America?
‘No,’ Mann laughs.
‘But it's certainly true of a couple of places I can think of.
And Paramount's one of ‘em.’
Axe (OK, tomahawk) hero Daniel Day-Lewis
PETER'S FRIENDS
SHALLOW, SELF-important, with a reputation well out of proportion to his meagre talent, Kenneth Branagh is British Culture's idea of a modern Renaissance man.
Trumpeted as a ‘British Big Chill ’,Peter's Friends follows an opening of a Footlights-style theatrical revue on New Year's Eve 1982 with a roll call of the next ten years of celebrity news figures.
Thatcher, Reagan, Boy George, Rock Hudson, Gorbachev, Mandela, Bush and little Johnny Major all appear briefly.
They have no relevance to the story, but do bring us up to date and give the all-important illusion of gravitas which accompanies everything Branagh does.
Celibate ‘whoopsie’ Peter (Stephen Fry being very like Stephen Fry) is a newly-minted Lord and he invites his old college revue friends for a 1992 New Year reunion at his country mansion.
But the ravages of time have not been kind.
There's one-time bosom buddy Andrew (Branagh), a reformed alcoholic reduced to penning a ghastly Hollywood sitcom for his appalling wife (Rita Rudner).
There's Roger (Hugh Laurie) and Mary (Staunton), big noises in the world of advertising jingles trying vainly to repress the scars of a cot death tragedy, good-hearted but batty cat-loving loner Maggie (Emma Thompson) gagging for ‘it’ but a victim of the very self-help manuals she publishes and sexy Sarah, whose predilection for married men has landed her with the overgrown child that is Brian (Tony Slattery doing his worst).
The poor, poor dears.
Like a sitcom with too many degrees,Peter's Friends turns into a squeamish dissection of guilt, angst and neurosis — a particularly un-edifying prospect faced with cardboard cut-out, wholly unsympathetic characters.
A farrago of trite emotions, one-note acting, embarrassing giggles, self-referential markers and appalling loveyness, this is the sort of under-achieving cack that suggests British cinema's problem is more profound than underfunding.
SIMPLE MEN
WHY IS Hal Hartley?
Since his 1990 debut,The Unbelievable Truth , he appears to have slipped from obscurity to security without ever becoming popular.
Like the latter-day Woody Allen, he has nothing to declare but his auteurism, a deflection from genuine ambition much like an indie Number One — Hartley's exact current position in America.
Typically,Simple Men hardly strains itself looking for an audience.
It dumps taciturn criminal Bill (Burke) and his vacationing student brother Dennis (Sage) in a Long Island small-town.
They meet tree-planting Kate (Sillas) and Euro-glam Elina (Lowenstein).
Sometimes they get along, sometimes they don't, sometimes it's hard to know what they're doing.
And yet,Simple Men becomes compulsive.
Though Simple Men deserves to be seen, it's still too slight and self-satisfied to galvanise an audience.
To truly justify the praise he survives on, Hartley is past due a crack at the mainstream.
TV-RADIO
NOBBS' WHEEZE
Super sitcom genius DAVID NOBBS has a new show to follow Perrin and Fairly Secret Army .
Great! says DAVID QUANTICK, inevitably…
TV comedy writers are, by and large, unfêted folk.
Most people know of Galton & Simpson, Richard Curtis & Ben Elton and even the Pope has probably heard of John Sullivan.
But the rest plod on, turning out life-enhancing brilliance and shining light into the gloom of the TV night.
One such — and possible the best of them all — is David Nobbs.
When we utter the name ‘David Nobbs’, we are acknowledging the importance of the man who wrote —The Fall And Rise Of Reginald Perrin !
Fairly Secret Army !
A Bit Of A Do !
Quite a lot of seminal That Was The Week That Was !
And, in his fairly secret life as an author, David Nobbs wrote the extraordinary Second From Last In The Sack Race , the epic tale of Henry Pratt.
The sort of book that has sane adults moving rapidly  through all kinds of emotions, especially the laughing kind,Second From Last In The Sack Race is one of the best comic novels ever written, funny and sad and, perhaps inevitably, very northern.
Now it has been made into a four-part series called The Life And Times Of Henry Pratt by Granada.
David Nobbs i in London for the preview and he professes himself pleased with the TV version.
But then, he wrote it.
Certain elements in Second From Last have led people (ie, me) to assume that it's autobiographical.
Nobbs draws a sympathetic breath.
‘It's my own fault because I gave the main character the same birthday as me, so I'd know how much he would be able to remember of his past.
It isn't my story at all, his family are completely different from mine, his background is completely different…’
Nobbs wrote Reggie Perrin because ‘he was from the world I knew, we were from Kent, my father got the 8.16 to Cannon Street every day,’ but he wrote Henry Pratt because ‘it was the early '80s, Thatcher had taken over and I knew her politics would create a more divided nation.
I thought I would like to write about north and south, rich and poor, working-class and middle-class, so I had the idea of a working-class character, not from the south-east, who goes into different backgrounds.’
What the Henry Pratt books (there is a second in print,Pratt Of The Argus , and a third imminent) have in common with the rest of Nobbs' work is his love of running gags and bizarre symmetry, an interest which made Perrin so relentlessly funny and reached its peak in the near-geometric farces of the two Bit Of A Do series.
Nobbs also claims to have told his old mate Peter Tinniswood to make his first novel a comedy; the result was A Touch Of Daniel , which later became the equally God-like I Didn't Know You Cared telly series.
Both Tinniswood and Nobbs understand that comedy can be subtle as well as slapstick; and Nobbs is still very concerned with his chosen trade.
‘If sitcom dies, it'll be because of the changed nature of television,’ he asserts.
‘They're very expensive to make, compared to game shows, so companies prefer things like Blind Date .
And there are too many of these domestic sitcoms, it's boring when you see yet another washing-up scene, but there'll always be good ones coming along.’
Nobbs likes One Foot In The Grave and Drop The Dead Donkey .
He is one of our best comedy writers and we should ennoble him before sitcom is abolished in favour of something horrible.
‘It would be sad to see sitcoms go,’ he says, before heading into the night.
Fortunately, stuff like The Life And Times Of Henry Pratt makes that prospect less likely.
The Life And The Times Of Henry Pratt begins November 9.
Bicycle emptiness: Henry's dad, the aptly-named Mr Pratt
His Nobbs
SOUND AND VISION
WEDNESDAY NOVEMBER 11
Ipso Facto new kids series has kitsch popsters Shakespear's Sister guesting.
Def 2: Rough Guide To The Islands for armchair holidaymakers a visit to Hawaii and a look at the island's rare tribes — including Surfers For Jesus and Machine Guns Against Marijuana.
Mark Goodier's Evening Session session from Drop Nineteens and a repeat of the celebrated Sonic Youth spot broadcast earlier this year
THURSDAY 12
In Concert Erasure, a two hour special recorded earlier this year at Hammersmith Odeon.
Get Maastricht'd —The Essential History Of Europe looks at youth rebellion in present day Denmark.
A look backstage at last week's wild children and willy operation is featured on The Word: Access All Areas with Mark Lamarr.
On Later Nick Cave and Shane MacGowan join together for their first televised rendering of their single ‘What A Wonderful World’, Denim play ‘Middle Of The Road’ and ‘The Osmonds’, while John Prine and En Vogue complete a varied bill.
Tonight's movies are 11 Harrowhouse , an engaging London diamond heist romp with John Gielgud, Trevor Howard and James Mason and Le Petomane where Leonard Rossiter plays an early 20th Century Frenchman who makes a living by farting in time to music.
Honestly.
Lawrence from Denim guests on Vibe .
FRIDAY 13
The Mary Whitehouse Experience's Punt & Dennis guest on Ross King .
Pink Floyd and Joni Mitchell are featured on Sounds Of The Sixties .
‘I wouldn't like one of them to swim up my arse’— Paul Merton, one-time plaything of the Bishop Of Galway, stars in Have I Got News For You .
On The Word Faith No More battle with the iniquities of live pop telly.
Guests on Clive Anderson Talks To Himself include Stephen Fry, Jason Donovan and Nigel Lawson.
Future Sound Of London and Polvo are in session on John Peel .
SATURDAY 14
Male Thai teens head to the fleshpots of Bangkok to make is as transvestite beauty queens in Ladyboys .
Johnnie Walker continues his interview with Neil Young.
Gerard Depardieu stars in a 16th Century rural thriller The Return Of Martin Guerre .
Youssou N'Dour, Senegal's finest, is on Jools Holland's The Happening .
There's a two-hour Twilight Zone special to celebrate its silver anniversary.
Top acting types Charles Durning, Alec Guinness and Jeremy Irons star in a tale of '40s life in Tinseltown,Tales From Hollywood .
Tim Robbins hosts and Sinead O'Connor makes that powerful artistic statement on Saturday Night Live .
Movie of the week is the Raymond Chandler-scripted, Billy Wilder-directed Fred McMurray, Barbara Stanwyck-starring Double Indemnity .
SUNDAY 15
Paul Newman stars in the story of Israel's birth,Exodus .
Marlon The Magnificent's 1989 screen comeback A Dry White Season is about racial intolerance in South Africa.
Specially premiered for the Springbok rugby team, in town this weekend, Parker relives his safe-cracking days, setting of Bank Of England hysteria in Thunderbirds .
MONDAY 16
Bop with Belly, get fraternal with Brothers Like Outlaw all on Mark Goodier's Show .
Kylie Minogue goes ‘hardcore rave’(I think not) on Dance Energy House Party and dc Basehead also ‘kick it’.
TUESDAY 17
You'll be on all-day Drug Alert if you tune into the station of the nation who are tackling ‘the growing use of solvent abuse’.
What next?
Something practical like ‘the growing use of marijuana’?
Thirties Berlin is the setting for the Liza Minelli musical Cabaret .
Top 20th Century photographer Horst is featured on Omnibus: Sixty Years And Still In Vogue .
Showdown At Glastonbury comes to a close with the argument still raging — is it a blissful summer gathering or slovenly layabouts causing havoc in the countryside?
TOASTIN' THE MACHINE
Over in President Clinton-land, CARTER USM are gigging and plugging and finding a new lease of life winning the hearts of America's indie kids.
Back home, there's ‘The Impossible Dream’ of a Christmas Number One and a nagging feeling they might have lost the plot.
But fear not: champion STEVE LAMACQ returns from Boston with renewed optimism about their future.
Machine heads: DEREK RIDGERS
Jim Bob, thousands of miles from home, still nurturing that Fagin-style goatee, sits backstage at Boston's Paradise Club and allows himself a crooked smirk.
‘We were thinking before you got here,’ he says to me, ‘this is the first interview with ‘no angle’.
We don't have to talk about the single because that's off the album…don't have to talk about the tour.
There's nothing to hang it around.’
Wanna bet?
What about the way the band's changed over the past 12 months?
And then there's the question of whether ‘The Impossible Dream’— the forthcoming single — is a valid next move for the duo.
My first reaction is that it's a bit shabby, lifting a third single from this year's ‘1992 — The Love Album’.
And I don't think for a moment that I'm alone in feeling this way.
From outside the Carter camp it could be seen as evidence that the twosome are having trouble finding new songs.
It also seems too contrived, somehow, that Carter USM are releasing a single for the Christmas market.
Certainly, it's not my idea of the ideal way to round off a year which has found Jim Bob and Fruitbat riding out any anticipated backlash with a certain aplomb.
First, in February, there was the AIDS-awareness eye-opener ‘The Only Living Boy In New Cross’(their best single to date) and then the album itself, which, despite mixed reviews, showed a definite change in Carter's music.
Though they didn't get the credit for it, ‘1992 — The Love Album’ was a determined effort to throw away the notions of a ‘formularised’Carter sound.
Tracks like ‘Is Wrestling Fixed?’ and the poignant ‘England’were (are !) convincing enough progressions away from their old ramalama Pet Shop Boys punk to suggest that they haven't run out ideas yet.
Plus, in a delightful sort of way, Carter USM remain a thorn in the industry's side.
It strikes me, as I'm hanging around a dressing room the size of a barn, that Carter have wound up more people again this year than any other British band in the Top 40 — with the possible exception of The Levellers.
they're a band you love to hate, far more than the Manic Street Preachers, who crave to be loathed but simply aren't worth the effort.
I imagine at times the Carter pair sitting in the studio thinking, ‘What have we done to deserve this?’
And then adding, ‘Who gives a f—?’
I had my reservations about ‘1992’ initially.
It was written in a frantic one month burst and sounded hurried on first hearing.
But in hindsight it maintains Carter's idiosyncratic position within current trends — fuelled by a mix of humanitarianism and hate.
Few other outfits have stayed as conscientious and in touch as they have.
So why release ‘The Impossible Dream’?
Well, apart from the promise of an epic accompanying video, with Jim Bob in the role of Don Quixote and Fruitbat as Sancho Panza, you also get one OK and two great tracks on the B-side. then there's the fact that ‘The Impossible Dream’ is the Carter anthem they never actually wrote — an optimistic two-fingered ‘we'll show you’to the rest of the world; so cute but so ill-mannered.
Who would have thought that the terribly modern Carter would end up having a crack at the Christmas Number One with a song written in the 1950s and once covered by Elvis Presley?
‘Most people think we wrote it anyway,’ grins Bob.
‘The whole stupid, f—ing happy idea of putting the song on the album was to say something about struggle,’ adds Fruitbat.
‘And if it is Number One for Christmas, it might become an anthem for 1992 and someone might actually think about it.
Someone's got to have hope and want to change something — because the UK's going down the pan.
It's like, ‘Wake up you silly  c—s ’!’
Didn't you ever think it might be a shabby move lifting it off the album — a lot of people have mentioned this to me.
Before ‘Do Re Me’, you'd never taken a single from an album.
‘I knew you were going to say that,’ interjects Jim Bob.
‘But that's why we did three new songs on the other side.
Just for you,’ he laughs.
‘Well, OK, yes, we do feel shabby — in the same way that I felt bad when we re-released ‘Rubbish’.
But how many other bands release a third single from an album with three new songs on it and at least one of which is good enough to be an A-side?
‘If we'd put ‘Bring On The Girls’ on the A-side and ‘Impossible Dream’on the other side, I wonder if anyone would have moaned about it?
The reason it's on the A-side is because we think it should be a single and it might appeal to people who aren't necessarily Carter fans.
Your mum likes it!’
Strange but true!
Not very punk rock, eh?
But fear not, the B-sides are.
‘tune On, Tune In And Switch Off’ is a TV news nightmare, which sounds like CNN reporting from hell.
Then there's a Poppies-style drama, ‘When Thesauruses Ruled The Earth’.
But it's the aforementioned ‘Bring On The Girls’ which gives the most away.
I mean, has Jim Bob really spent the last six months watching cable TV?
Leading in with a Simon Templar-style '60s intro, it rips into a raw guitar riff part nicked from old punk chestnut ‘Jet Boy Jet Girl’, Jim Bob ranting eloquently about the state of pop and the industry's gratuitous use of  glamour girl sex to prop up videos by losers like Lionel Richie and Robert Palmer.
There's enough drive and bite here to satisfy even the most cynical that Carter haven't worn themselves thin just yet.
Far from it.
AND FAR from home, in terribly Anglophiled Boston, here we are with a lot of catching up to do, prior to the penultimate date of Carter's six-week American tour.
‘No-one in Britain knows we're here,’ says Jim Bob, ‘they think we're at home counting our money.’
Why are you here?
‘Well, I once said that the reason we went to America was to make money, but over the last six weeks I've really changed my mind totally.
I actually quite like it here.
There's not a great deal of difference to being at a Carter gig in America and a Carter gig in Britain.
‘You should have been at the Washington gig at the 9.30 Club.
We're at the same position here as we were when we were selling out Harlow Square with the audience going mental.
There were people dancing right at the back of the hall.
‘And also, when you meet them, they're exactly the same people — it's just that they've got different accents.
I mean, they're not all ‘Have a nice day’.’
Carter are touring America in a huge tour bus, which has been home to the ten-strong crew and band for a month-and-a-half.
I'm surprised they haven't all gone mad.
But the scene backstage is surprisingly sober, despite the bags-under-eyes and hangovers.
If anything, Carter seem more relaxed and sane here than on previous occasions when I've met them back in Blighty.
Jim Bob (left) and Fruitbat ponder their entry into the hotel business, and dream of love songs and the genius of The Frank & Walters and, erm, gherkin-eating contests…
Jim Bob: full of sound and fury in NY
‘Are you sure this isn't the Harlow Square?’
‘The thought of going back to Britain is frightening really,’ says Jim Bob.
‘I'm not really interested in what's in the Evening Standard .
If I'm  going to be honest, all the things I find annoying and frustrating are created by other people.
And I'd much prefer it if that didn't happen.
It's a terrible way of looking at it — but, if people weren't being blown up, I wouldn't have written ‘Look Mum No Hands’.
It'd be much nicer if we were in the position where we could write love songs.
In an ideal world, we wouldn't exist.
But we do.’
Have you felt any pressure to be a spokesperson in your songs?
‘There is that pressure…
I mean, at the moment, instead of writing about the crap that is England I'm writing about the crap that is America.
But the kind of songs I really want to write — and I'm not saying I will — are the kind The Frank & Walters and the Lemonheads write, the sort of people who have a genuine love for other people and can see past all the crap that goes on.’
Do you think you've become typecast?
‘No.
But those bands can write songs that are very moving in a different way.
I mean, I love people, but I find myself driven towards hate rather than love.
It's almost like I want to write about the people who are in our songs, rather than what happens to them.’
AFTER THE soundcheck in Boston, a car arrives to whisk us outside of town to the local alternative radio station.
It takes just five minutes for the interviewer to ask, ‘So where did you get the name from?’
The point is that Carter USM are in the same position in America as they were in Britain two years ago, constantly gigging and doing pithy radio plugs to make their mark.
Having a Number One LP in Britain doesn't mean much here.
All three Carter LPs are now available in the States, released within a year of each other, as the American record company tries to catch up.
The gruelling US tour has had its ups and downs too.
Tour manager Terry Coyle tells me that Texas was the main downer, playing three nights in front of audiences which would look embarrassing even at the Camden Underworld.
Washington and New York have been among the highs — alongside a triumphant LA show, the same night that Morrissey played across town.
The rejuvenated energy of the live show is a good pointer to Carter's ongoing enthusiasm.
Despite reservations, America has given them a new lease of life; a new challenge.
It's almost as if Britain, without playing down its importance, has lost some of its challenge, now Carter are playing to predominantly converted crowds.
It's not so much that they undersell themselves in the UK, but they have to really pull their fingers out in the US.
At the Paradise Club they come out fighting — with a set tailored to be brash and bruising.
Tonight's gig is top-and-tailed by tracks from ‘101 Damnations’— starting with ‘Every Time A Church Bell Rings’ and closing with ‘Perfect Day To Drop The Bomb’.
The encores are covers — Jim Bob playfully changes the lyric to ‘Prince In A Pauper's Grave’ to ‘He runs up a bill Ross Perot couldn't pay’and ‘GI Blues’is a singalong for the UK indie kid lookalikes among the fashion casualties, Harvard students and snogging couples.
Predictions of how the duo will fare in America still vary, but one argument goes straight down the hole tonight.
Anyone who thinks that Carter don't translate outside London would have been stunned into submission.
‘Half the songs are more relevant to America than they are to Britain,’ agrees Jim Bob.
‘A song like ‘Rubbish’ for example— people selling crack to kids happens more here.
And ‘Perfect Day To Drop The Bomb’ could have been written about America.’
‘There's a body of opinion over here that we're too British,’ adds Fruitbat, ‘and that does make me feel like I'm banging my head against a wall at times.
But then you listen to alternative radio over here and you get non-stop Smiths…and you think, ‘Great, in seven years’ time, they're going to be playing Carter and they'll think we're great’.
Which will be seven years too late as far as I am concerned.’
‘All you really have to do here is get a big tour with someone,’ adds Jim Bob.
‘I mean, if this six weeks had been with U2 or Faith No More, we'd obviously be doing better than we are.
But you can't tell.
Jesus Jones and Morrissey did tours where they were playing to 100 people — and now Morrissey's playing to 12,000.
You just having to keep going for it.
But I'd hate to be huge in America and hated in Britain.’
WE TUMBLE straight back on the enormo-bus after the gig and travel for five hours to New York in preparation for playing at the NY Academy two nights later.
In between their own dates, Carter and their crew make sure they see Ned's Atomic Dustbin at the Irving Plaza.
The morning after, Jim Bob bears the scars of a sojourn in the moshpit.
And there's worse!
‘We had a gherkin-eating contest last night after the gig,’ he admits sheepishly.
‘I won.
I managed four, but they tasted like they'd been pickled in piss.’
He frowns for a second, and then breaks into another warped grin.
Daft as it may seem after three years of knowing Jim Bob, I still don't know him at all.
This is something to which 70 per cent of the Carter camp will likewise admit, at a push.
You feel there's always more going on underneath the surface than he's prepared to let on.
Or that he's wary of giving too much of himself away.
Even his softly spoken voice suggests a reticence toward off-stage communication.
In comparison, Fruitbat is slightly easier to figure out in his cheekier moments.
But even he can be a complicated character at times.
The one thing which the duo share is a certain sensitivity and insecurity.
‘I still find it incredible that I do this at all,’ Fruitbat admits at one point.
‘I never believed I had the front.
If you'd known me when I was 12 or 14, there was no way I'd have got near a stage.
The most uncomfortable part now is the interviews, because I can't put on an act, particularly on TV, I get really embarrassed seeing myself.
It's very distressing.’
Jim Bob, laughing, says that some of the crew are here, as much for him to talk to as for their tour responsibilities: ‘Because if we weren't having a good time with our friends we couldn't do this.’
Do you ever wish you were someone else?
‘There's other people I'd rather be.
I mean, I'm the most unsociable person I've ever met.’
On the other hand, there's an inbuilt defence mechanism in Carter which is activated by criticism.
‘I find it frustrating the way we're perceived by a lot of people,’ explains Jim Bob.
‘Because I'm proud of what we've done as Carter.
Not just the songs and what they mean to people, but all the silly little things we've done, like playing for no money so someone else could have some — and selling T-shirts for less money than we could have.’
What do you see as your biggest achievement?
‘After The Watershed’, for me,’ says Jim bob.
‘That was more important than getting a gold disc.
We had an alarming amount of letters after we released that from people who were abused as kids.
That's why I feel a certain amount of responsibility when I'm writing.
‘But there's other things I'd like to write about.
I'd like to write a really good love song — did I say love song?— I dunno, a song about my girlfriend and my daughter.
Not a cheesy one that mentions their names, but they're the people I miss.
One of the last things I've written — it's not finished yet — but the first line is, ‘I'm in love with my wife’ and I probably wouldn't have written that two years ago.
‘Out of the stuff I've heard, ‘This Is Not A Song’ by The Frank & Walters is one of the most moving songs in a long time.
Music like that has always inspired me, music that's upsetting.
It's got a lot to do with the melody but he sounds like he really means it.
Like seeing Henry Rollins at Reading was very moving because it was real.
And it didn't matter what the music was like, it was just like a real person singing about how they feel.’
All this signals something more from Carter in the future.
Something deeper, maybe?
Certainly they're moving in various directions.
There's never been a time when you've nearly split up?
Fruitbat: ‘Twice, erm three times.
Once on this tour…he wanted to throw me out!’
Jim Bob: ‘The only big one was when we played the NME party (back in 1990 — Ed), because we had such a big fight.
We were just drunk as usual, but everybody was arguing with each other and it came to a head and we had a fight.
I broke my guitars — then we had another fight around at his house.
There's been times, erm, other things, usually something unconnected with the music.’
What would you do if it happened?
Fruitbat: ‘Well, we'd be stuck, wouldn't we?
Settle down and live off the back catalogue: I don't know, I don't think I'd just stop.
I think I'd do something else musically.
I couldn't be an A&R man because I hate that side of the business.
I'd rather go back to the Ministry Of Defence!’
THERE'S NO sign of a split tonight.
Finishing the US jaunt with a furious and emotional show, Carter look agitated but, simultaneously, at ease with their anger.
Jim Bob very nearly loses the plot during the encores, extending every song by at least a minute with a series of unaccompanied vocal chants (including the now familiar climax to their version of ‘Another Brick In The Wall’: ‘There is a song that'll get on your nerves, get on your nerves, GET ON YOUR NERVES!’).
There is an especially uplifting ‘GI Blues’ and a fierce version of ‘Bring On The Girls’.
And that's it.
Two days off for them, then back to the UK for a change of laundry, before beginning their European tour which hits Britain in December.
Billed as ‘the silliest tour we've done…very pantomime’, it's one of the few winter tours selling well in a chilly economic climate — testimony again to the loyalty afforded the duo by their UK following.
I don't think you'll be disappointed.
I arrived in America with a cloudy view of Carter's future.
My overwhelming impression now is one of revived optimism.
Slowly but surely Carter are on the move again, still pertinent and still clinging to the plot.
That's the angle.
The rise and Fall of Carter…
LONG PLAY
MERCURY REV
Yerself Is Steam/Lego My Ego
PROGRESSIVE ROCK made by musical retards?
Quaint nursery rhymes defiled by crashing noise nightmares?
A Grateful Dead for the slacker generation?
A band whose main influence seems to have been the orchestra tuning up backwards on ‘A Day In The Life’?
God alone knows, to be honest.
Well over a year since ‘Yerself Is Steam’ was first released, the appeal of Mercury Rev — a reason why , dammit — is still as hard to pinpoint.
Symphonic and shambolic, they stumble out of contorted, scratchy dins and into lurchingly beautiful crescendos again and again with a clumsy, haphazard kind of grace.
Like some of the best American bands to have emerged in the past couple of years — notably Pavement and Sebadoh — there's a sense here, contrived or otherwise, that Mercury Rev make occasionally astonishing music entirely by accident .
A great band — perhaps.
A bloody frustrating one — certainly.
So the wobbly beauty of ‘Chasing A Bee’, ‘Frittering’ and endless mantra ‘Very Sleepy Rivers’is offset by tangled thickets of sound, where David Baker  practises his booming space cadet comedy voice and improvisation becomes a euphemism (as only too often) for indulgent incompetence.
Always fascinating, though, if not strictly listenable.
To snare a few old fans, then, this reissue is packaged by Mercury Rev's new label with ‘Lego My Ego’, an hour of Peel session tracks, live epics and odd singles, that is not just more of the same, rather the same — but more so.
That means, basically, more silly noises, more stoned babbling, a mind-bogglingly cacophonous live version of ‘Shhh/Peaceful/Very Sleepy Rivers’, some fine alternative takes on ‘Yerself’ 's best tracks and a burbling, very funny run through Sly Stone's ‘If You Want Me To Stay’that is funk interpreted by Martian children drunk on paint stripper.
Kinda.
And best of all, inevitably, the celestial ‘Car Wash Hair’ is included here, where the band successfully sound like an entire orchestra swapping instruments mid-song, just about keeping their cool and gliding off into deep melody space, against the odds, with real elegant chaos.
Just then, the madness in their method makes perfect sense…but don't ask me why , that's all.
(7) apiece.
Ego a-go-go: Mercury Rev's David Baker
VARIOUS
The Psychedelic Years
THIS ALBUM'S predecessor, ‘The Psychedelic Years’, was possibly the best compilation album ever, in the sense that it contained the best songs by the best bands in its field of reference; in fact, it seemed to have all the good songs that came out of psychedelia (It also had The Incredible String Band, but presumably only as a sorbet to clear the palate.
Wow!
They were bad!).
The sequel suffers rather from this fact.
In all its major value for money three and a half hours and 50 tracks, ‘…
Revisited’ has only got about 15 minutes of decent songs — and eight of them are a live version of The Velvet Underground's ‘What Goes On?’which isn't psychedelic at all, really.
Instead, we are reminded that for every shining ‘Eight Miles High’ or raving ‘Psychotic Reaction’, there were 20 million twee twats wheedling through wank called ‘Strangely Strange But Oddly Normal’, and an infinity of squeaky-voiced college boys pretending to be on acid and singing garbage called ‘Ego Trip’.
Psychedelia was the first music where having special effects mattered more than anything else and, as a consequence, this bilge is all laced with temple bells, squitting stars, stupid echo effects and God knows what else.
The only fascination is listening to a song that should have been at most ten seconds long and hearing some fool trying to get ten minutes out of it.
The end product of psychedelia was not a new way of looking at the world and a liberation of the mind, but rather a lot of shit concept albums in the 1970s and an inaccurate belief on the part of pop stars that they were somehow important.
This belief has lasted to the present day; and, in revenge, we should round up all the people who made these awful hippy records and make them read old Charlatans interviews until they beg for mercy and we hurl them into a well filled with angry weasels.
ALL ABOUT EVE
Winter Words, Hits And Rarities
Ultra Violet
ALL ABOUT Eve are quite happy to see one of these albums released and the other one makes them rather mad.
The Vertigo album (the one they don't like) is a collection of the old hits, the odd unreleased track and old B-sides from the label they left in inglorious circumstances.
Yet when the band first appeared, they were quite refreshing.
They may not have been original, but they were honest and wrote fine four-minute pop songs with hooks and an enchanting whimsy that caught the imagination.
Their story-book lyrics and whiff of traditional English folk music was just the tonic we needed in the late '80s and Julianne Regan was a strong front woman.
Often written off as all hippy-dippy and girlie flower stuff, she was in fact, a woman with balls and had a voice which, although could lean towards finger-in-the-ear folkiness, had charisma and power.
When she stretched herself and her interpretive talents, like on the great ‘Martha's Harbour’, we all forgot that our cred was round our ankles for liking them and wept.
True, they could wimble (see ‘Flowers In Our Hair’ and some of the later stuff for evidence) but they were different.
So what a monumental shock to find that with ‘Ultra Violet’ they appear to have undergone a massive personality switch and, hey presto!
We have All About Curve!
The last vestiges of their former jolly sound has been drowned in swathes of layered, fuzzy guitar and Julianne sounds as if she's had a surgical appliance attached to her vocal chords.
Instead of the pure, clear cut tones we're used to, she sings as if she's swallowed a bag of sugarcubes complete with bag.
Ditched in the Vertigo dumper are the pop songs and in their place comes track upon track of similar-sounding, decidedly gloomy psychedelic romps which they do, on occasion, pull off by the skin of their mushrooms.
‘Freeze’ is a slab of sensual lugubriousness while ‘Things He Told Her’captures some of the pop spirit of old.
‘Ultra Violet’ is both a brave and a foolhardy step.
They've sacrificed some of their originality for a more ‘contemporary’ sound, yet it's encouraging that they show such willingness to innovate — even if it does sound as if they're still stumbling through the undergrowth.
They're also supremely naive if they don't think at some point in the future that MCA will hike out a similar compilation to the one Phonogram just have…that's always assuming that they sort themselves out enough to have the required amount of hits.
(6) for ‘Hits’,(5) for the newie.
Julianne Regan: Sex Toni Mark II?
FLOYD: THE HAUL
PINK FLOYD
Shine On
LIKE THE band itself, ‘Shine On’ is a shark-sleek and automatically impressive product to come into contact with for the first time.
A black box with silver-stamped title and logo, the lid of which is further decorated with a colour plate depicting yet another Hipgnosis-styled water illusion, once inside you are faced with an equally elaborate 112-page hardback book of pictures, lyrics and description to wade through.
Underneath sits an envelope containing a set of full colour postcards, some strange origami object and a set of remastered/repackaged CD versions of ‘Saucerful Of Secrets’, ‘Meddle’, ‘Dark Side Of The Moon’, ‘Wish You Were Here’, ‘Animals’, ‘The Wall (Pts 1 & 2)’ and ‘A Momentary Lapse Of Reason’.
For those out there wondering aloud ‘where's Syd?’, a bonus ten-track CD entitled ‘The Early Singles’ has been thoughtfully included by the compilers of this Porsche of a box set.
The question has to be, however, are Messrs Waters, Gilmour, Wright and Mason worthy of such a monument and, more importantly, is the music they made together all those years ago still alive in the '90s?
Listening to the bulk of ‘Shine On’ the answer has to be a firm yes, but with reservations.
It may look invulnerable but ‘Shine On’ is far from being perfect.
Those who have been sucked into the orbit of such musical cosmonauts as Spiritualized, Spacemen 3, Sun Dial and The Orb, however, will find much here that is  revelationary .
For long before Pink Floyd became so big that they disappeared from view, they were darlings of the '60s underground scene where, with madcap leader Syd Barrett, they played regularly at legendary hot spots such as The UFO Club in Swinging London's Tottenham Court Road.
It was here where they dazzled the minds of the masses with their pioneering space rock sound, a true alternative to Lennon & McCartney's elegant pop confections and one that would later become the blueprint for numerous ‘progressive’ outfits in the early '70s.
That essential part of Pink Floyd's history is captured on ‘The Early Singles’, where such Barrett creations as ‘See Emily Play’, ‘Arnold Layne’ and his haunting ‘Scarecrow’are re-energised.
Syd also makes an appearance at the end of the ‘Saucerful’ CD on ‘Jugband Blues’, a last gulp of creative oxygen before surrendering to the madness that would eventually engulf him.
‘Saucerful’ was also the debut for new guitarist Dave Gillmour, who would replace Syd and become a key member of the band.
‘Meddle’ showcases his influence which gave Pink Floyd a more fluid sound.
Especially memorable is ‘One Of These Days’, which come across like a ‘Tubular Bells’ with balls.
Both the multi-million selling ‘Dark Side Of The Moon’ and the finely tuned (and superior)‘Wish You Were Here’display Pink Floyd at the zenith of their creative powers.
Both records ooze class, confidence and, it has to be said, unfettered genius.
‘Shine On You Crazy Diamond’ from ‘Wish You Were Here’is a particularly beautiful final tribute to Barrett from the band he once used to lead, even though it confuses you into thinking he has passed on.
After ‘Wish You Were Here’, Pink Floyd had shot their finest bolt and the socially condemning ‘Animals’ and ‘The Wall’(both of which sounded more like vehicles for Waters' psychiatrist couch rantings) still fail to impress.
Pink Floyd had ceased to be a band at this stage of their career, overshadowed by the excess of past successes and Roger Waters' ego.
Something had to give and Pink Floyd shed Waters to go it alone as a trio.
‘A Momentary Lapse Of Reason’ was their first experiment together, a back-to-basics show of rock strength that borrowed from their past in a noble effort to face the future head on.
While nowhere near as impressive or effective as their earlier work, this is certainly nothing to be ashamed of.
While ‘Shine On’ has too many holes in it (the exclusion of Syd's ‘Piper At The Gates Of Dawn’is a gaping omission) to be considered a ‘definitive’historical document of Pink Floyd, it does contain some quite magnificent state-of-the-art rock music.
Despite all the hype, hate and hysteria that has gone before, something magical and mysterious can still be heard shuffling around in the dark, and this celebration is the spotlight that picks it out.
‘Shine On’ is therefore a flawed but necessary indulgence for the fanatical and the curious.
DA LENCH MOB
 Guerillas In  Tha Mist
SHAME ABOUT the, by now, heavily over-used title.
Da Lench Mob are Ice Cube's pals.
This means that they talk about the Devil, but they're not born-again Christians: in this case, the geezer with the goat's eyes and barbed tail is the white man.
Clever how they don't show up in photographs, eh?
Being one of Cube's posse also means they never smile.
It's a serious thing being an outlaw rapper.
Despite the problem of trying to maintain a straight face, there are distinct advantages to being on Cube's team.
You appear on some of the best rap records ever made, like ‘Death Certificate’ and ‘Amerikkka's Most Wanted’.
Once Cube has sorted out his Street Knowledge label, you make records that are comparable too, if not as mighty, as the boss' own.
And you've got instant kudos and attitude.
‘ Guerillas In  Tha Mist’ is not a great album by Ice Cube's standards, but it's still stronger than the average hardcore LP.
It fits neatly between Cube's own black radio revolution — lots of sound snippets and bags of hissy atmosphere — and his cousin Del  Tha Funkee Homosapien's lighter but still political style.
‘ Guerillas ’ opens with ‘Capital Punishment In America’, a recital of how America treats its criminals.
‘All On My Nut Sac’ is a slow-grooving fight that's unpleasant listening, but it is probably what this sort of argument is like in their neighbourhood.
If you're gay you're reviled, but Cube has always revealed the sick shit from the grubby corners of his mind, and you can't expect someone from the wasted landscape of black urban America to think like a white liberal.
That's no excuse, but it's a fact.
The rapping is almost exactly like the chanty parts of Cube's own albums, offering nothing of the intimacy of ‘Dead Homiez’ from Cube's ‘Kill At Will’.
There are flaws: ‘Lenchmob Also In  Tha Group’ is a total waste of time, and ‘ Guerillas In  Tha Mist’is an idea already sued twice.
‘Ankle Blues’ is musically perfect and lyrically revolting, assuming that all white people are fair game and that they all love John Lennon — the ultimate insult.
Ranged against those aberrations are ‘Lost In  Tha System’, ‘Nut Sac’ and the call-to-arms of ‘Freedom Got An AK’.
There are, of course, plenty of swear words for those that collect them.
Since Cube is also producing Del, Yo-Yo and his own material (his new LP is reputedly incredible), it's hardly surprising that this isn't perfect.
It is, however, a gutsy and typically offensive record — what else do you expect from a group called Da Lench Mob?
Flower arranging?
HAL WILLNER/VARIOUS
Weird Nightmare: Meditations On Mingus
EVERY WEEK seems to bring an album where another bunch of likely suspects pay half-hearted tribute to the work of a past icon.
Then, every four or five years, there's a Hal Willner record, ostensibly similar to these tribute ventures but, in reality, a wholly different proposition.
On past albums, Willner has directed a large cast of performers through selected works of Kurt  Weil , Thelonius Monk, soundtrack supremo Nino Rota and, erm, Walt Disney.
‘Weird Nightmare’ is where he develops an intense empathy for both the music and spirit of jazz revolutionary Charles Mingus.
The Mingus music this reviewer knows offers a richness and sophistication that compares with the exultant mastery of Duke Ellington.
While there's some of that in ‘Weird Nightmare’, Willner has fashioned an altogether darker ride, placing the shocking, brutal stream-of-consciousness prose from Mingus' Beneath The Underground autobiography in the mouths of a droll, disembodied Leonard Cohen, a stentorian, harassing Chuck D and Doctor Joh, the latter back in a setting that recalls the Bacchanalian exotica of his classic ‘Gris Gris’ psychedelic gumbo album.
True, not all the voices work — Robbie Robertson and Elvis Costello fail to convince — but the sheer scope, rhapsodic disruptiveness, sonic shockwaves and unsettling juxtapositions of the music makes the best of this album phenomenal.
The breadth of Mingus' work is represented by everything from jug-band jollity, the wounded blues of ‘Atom Bomb’ featuring Rolling Stones Watts and Richards, Henry Rollins' hipster piss-take on ‘Groovy’and the bad blood and subterranean tremors of ‘Erectus’, effortlessly contrasted with the tingling majesty of ‘Love Bird’.
The players include three guitarists, Bill Frisell, Vernon Reid and Robert Quine, who rage and soar far over the gutters of grunge-making ‘Nightmare’, among many other things, one of the guitar albums of the year.
As alchemist and visionary, Willner is unique among those who raid the past.
The house band and the musical instruments he gathers together here — drawn variously from the ranks of primitive innovator Harry Partch and his disciple Tom Waits — are as far from normal as you can get, as far from easy listening as you could be and go right to the psychic core of the Mingus muse.
A most extraordinary record.
HEX MANIACS
THROWING MUSES
The Curse
STOP ME if you've heard this before, but I've always considered Throwing Muses to be the Pixies' most aloof siblings.
First impressions lasting longest and all that, when 4AD's Boston Seethe Party first toured the UK in its full label package glory, while the Pixies were the kind of nutters you'd gladly go joyriding with, The Muses…well, the Muses were the kind of band you respected from afar and near really wanted to share a six-pack with underneath the baseball park grandstand.
Let's face it, they're weird.
Hardly earth-shattering confessions, I admit.
But that attitude has prevailed for over half a decade, and ‘The Curse’ doesn't know whether to clear up the situation of simply amplify the confusion.
Herewith a ‘special-cheap-ish limited edition CD-only jobbie featuring 18 tracks recorded at the Muses’ two London Grand shows way back not so long ago.
Which makes it the bargain of the week or a disposable donkey of a release, depending on your perspective.
Whatever, if your intestines get tied up in knots over bootlegs, ‘The Curse’ could cause terminal internal damage.
The applause is comfortingly distant, Kristin Hersh's vocals are reassuringly muffled — a sure sign this is an ‘authentic’ recording — and the three Muses rumble their way through their career from ‘Hate My Way’to ‘Fire Pile’, sounding suitably tired and emotional come the close.
Good.
Again, it's a fascinating mixture of maudlin moods and berserk outbursts.
Again, it fails to hit the target every time.
For sure, ‘Hate My Way’ is excellent, a whiplashed stab of emotions throughout which one can shiver along to the demons cartwheeling through Kristin's mind.
But against that, a version of Hendrix's ‘Manic Depression’ is a cerebral card trick which warrants polite applause and scant gut reaction.
Which isn't bad for a blinkin' instrumental…
The good thing about ‘The Curse’ is the way the music strains at the sociable leash; the lyrics are frequently impossible to fathom simply because Kristin's guitar is cranked up so high, creaking across ‘Furious’and ‘Snail Head’like a particularly malevolent bulldozer.
There's a pleasing roughness to proceedings which one wouldn't instantly equate with the Muses' (supposedly) more careful instincts.
And how apt a title is ‘Mania’?
Oh, very.
In the end one has to err on the plus side, if only because ‘The Curse’ has the ability to knock preconceptions into a cocked hat and it makes the gigs sound like they were bloody good fun.
Some of my colleagues would gladly drive blindfold into a brick wall for this band, and while this collection hardly brings out the suicidal in me, I might be tempted to start coming along for the ride.
Six-packs and all.
Shhh!
Some ghosts are being laid to rest.
IZZY STRADLIN AND THE JU JU HOUNDS
Izzy Stradlin And The Ju Ju Hounds
IT MUST be awful being in Guns N' Roses, standing next to Axl Rose and listening to him making that funny noise all the time.
Axl sings like a yowling inflatable doll that has been wounded and is taking it personally.
No doubt this is the real reason for Izzy Stradlin's departure from Guns N' Roses; that, and the increasing crapness of their records.
And the proof is Stradlin's debut album, which is great.
Stradlin sings like a proper rock singer; gravelly and unshaven and with just the tiniest hint that he would like some sex fairly soon.
He writes songs that bare their roots with an unsubtle pride, and in choosing to cover both a Ron Wood song and a very Clash-version influenced ‘Pressure Drop’, he has outlined his mission very clearly; namely, to be the sort of rock musician who thinks that Keith Richards is a force for change in the world and that Los Angeles poodle metal is bollocks.
Thus ‘Somebody Knockin'’ would have sat happily on ‘Exile On Main Street’(as would ‘Cutting The Rug’and half the rest of the album), ‘Time Gone By’has all the shambling grace of The Faces and everything is beef with tunes, guitars with feeling and amplifiers with revolvers and somehow it all sounds fresh as dew.
This is clearly an enthusiast's album.
Admittedly, it is an album by an enthusiast for mid-'70s Rolling Stones records and will offer nothing to people who have never felt the sexual tug of an overly-loud Chuck Berry riff, but for anyone else, it is top rock and to be cherished.
Anyone not a fool or a maniac should acknowledge Izzy's ability to make this stuff work; most people do this sort of thing very badly and so we call ‘rock’ inane and hopeless, but Stradlin brings verve and love to his work and the drooling beast is once more revivified.
Indoor fun at its best.
MEGA CITY FOUR
Inspiringly Titled
THE ARRIVAL of a live album usually comes with a tacit admission that a band are either low on new material or about to suffer an imminent career flop and need one last cash-in.
Neither reason, however, applies in this case.
If anything, Big Life are probably unnerved by how prolific the Megas are (they've already demoed 12 new songs to follow up this year's sparkling ‘Sebastopol Road’ album).
Apart from that, there's a certain justification for the MC4 clasping the live album nettle — given that it was their constant, sometimes belligerent belief in gigging that helped them establish themselves in the first place.
Hence ‘Inspiringly Titled’, the live LP recorded at Kilburn National and featuring roughly the same set they toured with in the spring, from the opening ‘Start’ to the closing Hüsker Dü cover, ‘Don't Want To Know If You're Lonely’.
Some of the tracks have been available already — if you bought the limited edition live versions of the singles ‘Stop’ and ‘Shivering Sand’— but ‘IT’still holds up as a worthwhile representation of the Megas' consistent live set; in full and in earnest.
Focusing on ‘Sebastopol Road’ material, there are urgent interpretations of ‘Peripheral’and ‘Clown’, plus appearances from older numbers like ‘Finish’and a hectic ‘What You've Got’, the count-your-blessings anthem from their first album ‘Tranzophobia’.
Only the hideous over-dubbed (or double-tracked) crowd noise at the start endangers the gutsy honesty of the whole thing.
Aside from that, this is the Mega City Four, dreads'n'all, in a fleshed-out show of their still-maturing guitar pop.
Wiz sounds as elusive and fragile as ever — lost somewhere in his own private world — while musically the songs take on a rougher-edged, gritty power.
Inspiringly, this is not just a filler LP, it's another insight into the Megas all-round durability.
BON JOVI
Keep The Faith
THE STREAMLINED hairdo, the synth-dance, U2-ish single, the grittier personas — aah, watching the reincarnation of Bon Jovi's been a great hoot.
The video for ‘Keep The Faith’ tells all.
It's out with the old hairdressers, the cliff-edge guitar posturing, the in-stadium clips of religious fandemonium, and in with pumpingpop bass-lines, strutting down mean urban streets and becoming part of the real world.
And hey Jon, I bet your '90s cred soars when you tell folks you cut your hair after it caught alight while you hung out at Ice-T's barbecue, right?
Fresh attitudes have breezed into big buck metal since Bon Jovi's nine million seller, 1988's ‘New Jersey’.
The corporate rock machine's loved them all the way, but the goal posts have shifted since Lollapalooza and Seattle, and to sniff out where the dollars are now, Bon Jovi — symbolic of all that was egotistical, bland and stale in hard rock — have to move too.
I was actually quite thrilled about this, relishing the prospect of these old guard bastards curiously  metamorphosing to look part of the present.
Thrilled, that is, until I played this damn record and discovered they haven't changed at all .
Their new wave cash-in doesn't go any deeper than Jon Boy's new perm, and, apart from the title track and a couple of nonentities, they retain all the circa ‘85 Cola and passion and AOR guitar wank moves even the metal fraternity despises them for.
Bon Jovi never did dirty their songs with real spunk, anger or despair, on in fact any emotion that wasn't packaged up in stadium size, third-hand slogans with melodies so open and bare they sound as if they've caught sunstroke in the New Jersey heat, and nothing's changed.
LIL LOUIS & THE WORLD
Journey With The Lonely
IT'S NOW been three years since ‘French Kiss’ house-humped its steamy way into world clubdom's consciousness and catapulted Lil' Louis into the overnight celebrity which comes with sudden chart action.
Except Lil' Louis was no one-night novelty destined for quick obscurity.
For year's he had been one of Chicago's most respected DJs and individual producers.
The hit's mother-album, ‘From The Mind Of…’, showed that rumpo-epics were a mere facet of the man's unique sound and vision — wildly creative, slightly sinister and a bit mad.
‘Journey With The Lonely’ is a more refined affair than the untamed experimentation of its predecessor.
The minimal Chicago acid-weirdness is a barely discernible shadow and the bedroom just gets a fleeting visit on the breathy steam-groove of the self-explanatory ‘Aahhhh!’.
The first two singles (melancholy ‘Club Lonely’ and bouncy ‘Saved My Life’), plus cuts like ‘You're My Reason’and the yearning ‘Do U Luv Me’— one of the most heart-tweaking love songs you'll hear this year — are luxurious, bumping grooves with vibrant hookos and sensual vocals from Joi Cardwell and Stephanie McKay.
As Side Two progresses jazz creeps in, the bpms cool down and pumping beats chill into elegant soul mode.
Louis himself handles the whispery vocals of the delicate ‘Share’, which recalls the elegant Chic ballads.
The closing ‘Jazzmen’ is a jazz-house tour-de-force displaying Louis' burgeoning prowess on the ivories.
Inspired!
The dread-swinging, goatee-toting, guitar-slashing, spring-heeled rock behemoth that is Wiz Mega
Curses!
Kristin Hersh feels the Muse trying to break out again
Hounded!
Izzy rocks on doggedly
CUL DE SAC 
Ecim
THIS ‘MOSTLY instrumental’ band from Boston, Mass, have managed to wire together a record that can without hesitation be branded a unique adventure.
If the early experiments of Pere Ubu and Eno-era Roxy Music excite; if the guitar gutsiness of such acoustic masters as John Fahey, Leo Kottke and Robbie Basho interests; if space rock ritual music or Stockhausen's concentrated short-wave radio twiddlings tease the imagination — then Cul De Sac have something they'd like you to tune into.
‘Ecim’ is a towering tidal rush of fresh ideas run riot.
A gorgeous, eerie swell of all-American guitar music that Cul De Sac have decided, in their wisdom, to smother in a thick electronic brine.
It is this mixture of natural and mechanical sound that makes ‘Ecim’ so absorbing, where the feeling that one half will overcome the other keeps the excitement captured here at a fever pitch.
Of course, this never happens, instead they manage to weave together without hardly ever touching.
Vocals here are sparse.
When a voice is heard it either comes from the throat of some growling bluesman, or from some ghostly visitor who is trapped behind the veil of life and death.
‘Nico's Dream’ is a fine example of this, where a sampled fragment of the late ice queen's vocal is caught in a metal mesh of shifting sound that, for a fleeting moment, brings her spirit back from the dead.
A song with the power of a seance attached.
Their version of Tim Buckley's ‘Song To The Siren’ is equally marvellous, an exhibition of style, simplicity and sympathy that takes Buckley's artistry and poetry one step beyond.
‘Ecim’ is loaded with such pleasant surprises, a record that simply squeaks out to be heard.
LUREX-CELLENT ADVENTURE!
ERASURE
Pop!
The First 20 Hits
FUNNY TO reflect that, if the Rock'n'Roll Hall Of Fame wasn't a self-stroking shithole concept graveyard for Rolling Stone readers to drape their senile drool over, Vince Clarke would have been in it years ago.
In Depeche Mode, Yazoo, The Assembly and Erasure, he's been fully or partly responsible for some of the best music of the past ten years.
I say ‘music’ and not ‘pop music’because ‘pop music’is what you say when you want to suggest that songs with tunes and so forth are somehow inferior to the tortured crap that most rock bands put out.
Mind you, the evidence for the past seven years of the Clarke genius is at last collected on an album that, like the Pet Shop Boys' ‘Disco’, knows where it came from and is chuffed about it.
‘Pop!
The First 20 Hits’— which is a title that says ‘ F— off!
How shit are you ?!’ to every talentless flop-haired indie guitar loser of the past decade — also reveals what anyone sane knew already; that the reason Erasure are better than the early Depeche Mode or Yazoo is because of Andy Bell.
Funny how it was ‘alright’ to like Alison Moyet because she had a proper soul voice or some such Eric Clapton fan cack but Andy Bell was not a proper singer because he liked to dress funny and was quite clearly in the rugger team drinking club.
Homophobia is always a handy excuse for not buying records, but it still reeks of the subhuman.
Bell's contributions to Erasure — the glam, the camp, the drama — brought out Vince Clarke's dry and brittle sense of humour.
The ultimate outcome was the straight-faced hilarity of the ‘Abba-esque’ videos, but it's always been there, from the mad stage shows to the dummy Vince and Andys on TOTP .
And Bell also brought tubs of emotion to Erasure — the longing of the astonishing ‘Oh L'Amour’, the raging of ‘Respect’, the sheer Swedishness of ‘Take A Chance On Me’.
And, in the end, feckless ones, it is, as we must always say, the songs that prove it all.
The 20 songs here are extraordinary, all classic arrangements, mad spiralling tunes, glorious singing and mondo disco stompo.
They nearly all contain the extraordinary adrenalin tug that marks pop off from everything apart from the madder bits of techno — songs that make you feel like you are on speed are harder to write than ones that make you cry — FACT.
This is a brilliant record, the compilation of the year and a sexy tune farm that you should leave to your grandchildren in your will.
SIMPLE MINDS
Glittering Prize '81/'92
JIM KERR's heartbeat is loud enough to wake a whole sleeping city.
And, as far as ridiculously pompous, overblown musical statements go, no-one holds a candle to Simple Minds.
Not even Emerson, Lake And Palmer.
This is what received wisdom says.
In reality, Scotland's premier stadium-fillers have always striven for scale on a windswept, neo-Celtic level; grand dreams, grander schemes, the proverbial men of the people reaching for the impossible.
And ‘Glittering Prize’ is a timely resumé, a collection of singles that shows their gradual but assured effect on the global mainstream.
When you wipe away the spectre of communal singalongs and seriously hamfisted, guitar-drenched versions of these songs in their live incarnation from your eyes, what's left — on the supercool tracks, at least— are lessons in intimacy, humanistic notions of caring and something approaching religious rapture (the old adage, ‘Do good, for the good you do will live after you’ applies).
If Simple Minds stopped being valid and visionary after the ‘New Gold Dream’ LP, as the critical consensus goes, how come ‘Let There Be Love’is so slinky on the verses (before bombastic choruses) and how come ‘Belfast Child’is so heartfelt (fartfelt, more like — LPs Ed)?
Of course, America had a near-disastrous effect on the group.
The pungent AOR rockisms of ‘Alive And Kicking’, the clod-footed thump of ‘Sanctify Yourself’ and the messiness of ‘All The Things She Said’, coupled with wilfully obtuse witterings by Jim Kerr, will still wind up anyone who marvelled at the loneliness at the centre of ‘Someone, Somewhere In Summertime’or the wistful catchiness of ‘Promised You A Miracle’, the Euro-disco made flesh on ‘The American’or even the neon womb-glow of the recent ‘See The Lights’.
The lesson to be learned is for Simple Minds not to let the sheer size and conflicting visions of the 50 States overwhelm them.
And to remember those roots in punk and dance.
SCISSORMEN
Nitwit?
NITWIT?
IS Scissormen's first release, a six-track mini-LP that goes some considerable distance towards explaining their steadily-growing popularity in the capital.
What Scissormen do is take a series of chaotic noises, disturbed atmospherics and fragments of other people's music, then hammer melodies and songs out of the cacophonous melée.
That they make it sound as natural as breathing is something of an accomplishment.
There's depth to this band, too.
For every session of primal thrash therapy there's a slower and more contemplative series of ideas — for each bout of mental health histrionics there's a potential hit single.
‘The Real’ rides a Hendrix riff and is none the worse for it.
‘Still Alive’ could be the next truly great Seattle band, or Fugazi, but for Chris Fuge's unmistakably English vocals.
The nearest Scissormen come to a pop song, ‘Where's My Body’, is both taut and relaxed, a paradox they exploit throughout.
Adam Lamprell's often stunning guitar playing dominates each song, but never overpowers.
If he wanted to, he could be a real show-off: ‘My Own Private Catastrophe’ is pure restraint, feedback and harmonics adding a peculiar tension to the track, whereas the apocalyptic ‘Sever’has him seeming to invent a new ‘Semtex’effects pedal.
The record's production, partly the work of Steve Mack, is gloriously dirty and relaxed, affording Scissormen the luxury of capturing their live sound faithfully on their first record.
Like their record label's slogan, Scissormen are ‘Independent, NOT indie’, and are deserving of your time.
Now, can we please have a few more bands that intend to be this good?
Some chaps have all the pluck: Andy Bell gets all shy and retiring
SHORT CIRCUIT
IAN McCANN greets the new beats — and says hello to the Rev Al Green…
BIZARRE INC: Energique
BIZARRE INC's debut LP is excellent, but so it should be, since it's effectively a greatest hits.
Here are the singles that filled floors and fields throughout 1991, plus a pile of newer tunes to match; ‘Raise Me’, ‘X-Static’, ‘Playing With Knives’(thankfully not the Blue Pearl version), the mighty ‘Plutonic’ and current monster ‘I'm Gonna Get You’.
The quality is uniformly high, the beats still rough despite the delay, and the vibes heavy.
More than that you can't ask of a techno record.
ADEVA: Hits!
NOW DROPPED from Cooltempo amidst rumours of frayed tempers after a crummy last LP, Adeva gets the usual compilation as a bye-bye.
All the hits are here; ‘Respect’, ‘Musical Freedom’, ‘Ring My Bell’, ‘Warning’ etc, but this isn't what it might have been.
Adeva needs to extricate herself from the hands of Smack Productions, hardly the dynamic force in garage music they once looked like they'd become, in order to capitalise on what is still a growing surge of goodwill in America.
Let's hope this proves to be an introduction rather than her swansong.
AL GREEN: Al
THE BEST, more or less, from the last great southern soul singer.
Unimpeachable classics, one and all.
Time to cut the waffle: essential.
E-ZEE POSSEE: The Bone Dance
UNFORTUNATE THAT their debut LP should arrive just as Virgin are dumping Boy George's label, since E-Zee Possee's stuff is not all as piss-poor as singles like ‘Breathin' Is E-ZEE’ might lead you to believe.
‘Cake’ craftily samples Kate Bush and is the sort of subtle start that makes you pant for more.
And they give it to you with ‘Dream All Your Troubles Away’, which boots out the ambient side of ‘Cake’ and adds a vocal and hard groove.
‘Koyanisqaatsi’ is another gleaming, spacious instrumental, and ‘Deliverance’mixes a jig with ragga, a bizarre compound.
It's only when they're knocking out tosh like ‘Everything Starts With An E’ that you start to yawn.
Since they've been dropped, maybe they don't need a hit anymore.
This is better than anything the comparable Beats International ever achieved, anyway.
Oh, and I almost forgot: there's a geezer shagging a goat on the sleeve.
INNOCENCE: Build
ALARMING HOW careers can stick in the quicksand of dance fashions.
Innocence, fronted by the oddly fragile (she was once a Hi-NRG diva) voice of Gee Morris, once bridged the gap between Soul II Soul, indie-dance and trippy house with plodding beats and Pink Floyd samples.
Now, a couple of years after a huge hit, ‘Natural Thing’, they return to little acclaim.
‘Build’ is a strange, maverick record, assembled around a suite of songs on Side One, with the title track thrown in twice for good measure.
A seamless, patient record, it does seem too precious at times.
However, two tunes stand out: the single ‘One Love In My Lifetime’, and the alluring, groovy ‘Looking For Someone’, a song so lazy that it must still be living with mum in middle-age.
COURTNEY PINE: To The Eyes Of Creation
ANOTHER PRETENTIOUS title from Courtney.
Wouldn't ‘To My Daughter’ have made more sense?
Anyhow, this is saxman Courtney mixing his jazz with his other tonic, reggae, adding a splash of what must, unfortunately, be called world music.
Contains covers of Don Drummond's ‘Eastern Standard Time’, a ska classic in a cold modern studio, and Marley's ‘Redemption Song’, already saxophonised years back by Dean Fraser and no better here.
Probably a transitional affair, ‘To The Eyes’ does have one major bright point: he's stopped trying to fill all the gaps in the mazz.
Now that's jazz.
SOUNDS OF BLACKNESS: The Night Before Christmas — A Musical Fantasy
JAM & LEWIS have been here before, and that's why you can't trust 'em.
America's top mainstream soul producers stick out a Christmas LP from their current hottest act, gospel choir Sounds Of Blackness.
They also did it a few years ago with their then hottest act, Alexander O'Neal.
Do we smell a formula here?
Anyone who understands gospel choirs and Jam & Lewis will know what to expect.
Great singing, nuff God, and slick, not-altogether authentic dance and soul grooves which are amazingly dated in places.
Better than Alex O'Neal's offering, but that's not saying much.
A&M, get some remixers to save this West End musical shit from more embarrassment.
URBAN HYPE: Conspiracy To Dance
THE FORMULA is getting irritating.
Drag something out of the rave crowd's past — in this case Trumpton — and set it to a bangin' tune.
Wind it up and watch it shoot up like a dirty old man's dick at the sight of a Madonna book.
Urban Hype do it as well as anyone else, but you crave more than the Barney McGrew nonsense of ‘Trip (geddit ?)
To Trumpton’.
They're capable of it too, as their subtle debut single, ‘Teknologi’, here twice in heavily remixed form, made clear.
At other points they examine the Italian style for ‘Living In A Fantasy’, and offer current single, ‘The Feeling’, which resembles a less rubbishy Oceanic.
The question is, how long can this go on before the bubble bursts?
Probably until the drugs run out…
VARIOUS ANONYMOUS DRUMMERS: Simon Harris' Beats Breaks & Scratches Volume 9 DJ SUPREME: Stolen Beats & Ripped Off Scratches
ALTHOUGH THESE are aimed at DJs and producers, they do make astonishingly effective, minimal listening in their own right.
Funk stripped to the bones, with a few basslines, groans, wails and bits of keyboards, plus a variety of effects and noises at the end.
DJ Supreme from Hijack's offering is particularly raw, and seems mightily generous: you wouldn't expect Terminator X to give away his secrets, after all.
Since so much of house is pure beats, why not buy your funk in skeletal form too?
VARIOUS: Earth Beat
BRILLIANT COMPILATION from Earth Beat Studios, the home of Brian Dougans and Garry Cobain, pioneers of intelligent techno and sometime ambient bods.
Includes , Indo Tribe's brutal ‘Owl’, the new Age funk of Semi Real's ‘People Living Today’ and Yage's other-worldly ‘Theme From Hot Burst’, a tune to shake the radiators.
The fact that all the acts are the same couple of blokes is just the way it is in modern dance.
VARIOUS SOULSTERS: Expansion Soul Sauce Volume One
EXPANSION IS a worthy label devoted solely to putting out the sort of soul music you might have thought had died with Philadelphia International in the early '80s.
It didn't, but it is almost exclusively an independent sector these days.
Here are those tasteful synth parts, crystalline saxophones, and aching, hurt vocals in unashamed full-frontal exposure.
Includes a few names Paul Daniels might conjure with: Leroy Hutson, the two-step hero; Leon Ware, formerly Marvin Gaye's co-writer/arranger, former Motown genius Ronnie McNeir, and General Crook; Rockie Robbins and Keni Burke, all massive heroes to a tiny audience.
Great as far as it goes, but where are the mighty affirmations of life that soul once was?
Curiously anodyne music from heroes that hip-hop forgot.
NME GIG GUIDE
MINISTRY, who issued the acclaimed ‘Psalm 69: The Way To Succeed And The Way To Suck Eggs’ album last July, follow their Lollapalooza shows in the US with a full British tour kicking off this week.
Al Jourgenson and co take their apocalyptic samplecore assault to .
HAVE WE GOT SCHMOOZE FOR YOU
OUR MEN AT CMJ, STEVE LAMACQ, SIMON WILLIAMS AND KEITH CAMERON, WITH THE SIGHTS, THE SOUNDS AND THE SHITMAN FROM NEW YORK'S OTHER SEMINAR
It was Brian May who summed it up best.
Blinking politely at the assembled masses hanging on his every syllable, the poodle-headed astronomer and Friend Of Freddie swiftly got to the point of his keynote address to the CMJ Music Marathon.
‘What's it all about?’
What indeed, Brian?
What exactly is this thing called the CMJ?
A smaller version of the New Music Seminar with extra-added-indie-generic-overlay?
A meeting of earnest college radio heads, from Tacoma to Tallahassee, Syracuse to Sacramento, all a-quiver at the prospect of comparing notes on dual formatting programmes and how to blag more CDs off The Man at Warners?
A whole load of boring industry heads droning on about how important they are and trying to cop off with each other?
Or just (just ) four nights of gig madness in New York, that this year just happens to coincide not only with Halloween and the annual marathon — that's 26 miles, not 26 bands a night — but the last weekend before the presidential elections?
As it's a little bit of all of this, the CMJ might fairly be viewed as someone's idea of a sick joke.
On any given night you simply couldn't see every decent band without inventing a time machine.
And staggering from seminar to seminar during the day, you encountered enough bullshit and banter to last several lifetimes.
But hey!
It's Noo Yawk!
It's Halloween!
So hail that cab and don't forget the driver won't know the way, he only lives here.
WEDNESDAY
THIS IS the day for signing in and checking out fellow schmoozers; for ploughing through the completely bewildering gig schedule, and trying to work out just how we're going to survive the next 100 hours without losing any important internal organs.
It's a low-key opening — low-key in the sense that The Mekons, Bats, Dentists, Band Of Susans, Quicksand, Jawbox and Girls Against Boys are all playing that night.
Oh, and Iggy Pop, David Byrne, Laurie Anderson and a load of mates are dong a benefit show in town for ‘Rock For Choice’, but none of us can afford the $20 ticket price.
Proof that all is not free in Schmoozerland!
At the Irving Plaza, a gaggle of girls are wandering around conducting a poll.
Another countdown towards the end of the Presidential race, perhaps?
Nope, this is a ‘Who Is Your Favourite Ned?’ poll.
we haven't the courage to ask who is winning, let alone who's losing.
Before Ned's Atomic Dustbin, though, come another post-Nirvana new signing to A&M, the infinitely-better-than-Pearl Jam four-piece, Paw.
Their laid-back but provocative grunge paves the way for Therapy? who cause mayhem in the moshpit with one of their best American gigs to date.
with space to manoeuvre for once, they look and sound gigantic, climaxing with a serrated version of ‘Potato Junkie’(or ‘Potatoe Junkie’, if you're in the Dan Quayle camp).
The Neds, in front of a sell-out crowd of 700, prove that the success of their debut LP ‘God Fodder’ in America isn't a fluke.
Elastic singer Jonn Penney is in animated form — are as various members of Carter USM's crew, dancing drunkenly down the front.
Sadly, thought, there's nothing new on the T-shirt front to match last year's classic ‘Did You Miss Ned's Atomic Dustbin — Then You  F—ed Up’.
THURSDAY
TODAY'S WHEN everything starts really taking off.
It's time to shift into top gear, to ignore the throbbing migraines and pretend that feeling jetlagged is good fun.
Just to confuse us further, the ‘opening party’ takes place tonight, with Bleach and Smashing Orange cutting the proverbial ribbon to start proceedings a day after they've, erm, started.
In front of a crowd full of proverbial ‘sore thumbs’— ie, delegates with no friends to talk crap to — Smashing Orange are surprisingly good, in a rock 'n' roll-meets dreampop kind of way.
This, despite the singer's Mick Jagger shirt and Tim Burgess haircut.
Bleach sound like they've benefited from their month of gigging in America — with Salli Carson's voice back to full-strength (after she'd lost it in Boston two days earlier).
They start with the tribal favourite ‘Wipe It Away’, but it's new songs like ‘Hit On Me’ which have started to attract attention in the States, where their label, Dali, are committed to breaking the band.
Prior to that particular jamboree, it was schmooze city down at the World Trade Center (sic ) for the first lot of talks/panels/seminars which seemed to cover everything from How To Get A Record Deal to How To Lose A Record Deal to How To Fry An Egg.
Iggy Pop handled the first of four keynote speeches with admirable aplomb, setting himself up for a neat career in stand-up comedy after this rock 'n' roll malarkey is over.
He nattered his way from university, through Chicago jazz combos and on into the birth of punk rock as the UK Subs never knew it.
Quote of his speech?
Twist our arms and we'll plump for his brilliantly-executed diatribe against the somewhat larger rock acts currently doing the rounds: ‘Gimme something small and poisonous, with teeth, born out of the gutter,’ oozed The Ig, eyes bulging as if strapped to the electric chair.
‘With a brain like a 7-11 on speed — up all night.’
Watch out, Emo Phillips.
More weirdness of a different sort at the loosely dubbed ‘Dance’ panel, where Moby and a various assortment of exceedingly smart-casual panellists were joined by Altern-8 — decked out in full boiler suit stage gear, including the dust masks.
Their replies to questions were consequently restricted to ‘Mumblemumble Detroitmumble.’
We could have done with the masks upstairs at the ‘Music Journalism’ gathering, where a group of rock writers were taking themselves — and their, ahem, Art — extremely seriously.
Big show of the night is without a doubt the Mudhoney/Flaming Lips/Eugenius bash at the Roseland Ballroom.
The Euge boys are whipping up considerable consternation over here largely because, as every single Atlantic Records' employee is wont to point out, the fella from Nirvana likes ‘em.
The songs don't change, they just get better.
For openers, the Lips proffer an ominously ragged blast through John Lennon's ‘Mind Games’, and it soon becomes apparent they have some Road-To-Damascus compatible lighting effects.
cheers, boys.
Once the temporary blindness passes, half the set has elapsed, but it's pretty obvious that this is a trip that gets ever more virile with age and experience.
Fire-eaters too!
There are two sorts of Mudhoney show: the one where they piss about all night and sceptics just scratch bonces and bugger off, and the one where they rip through their best songs, old and new, with hardly a murmur and plenty of bovver.
This one falls uncompromisingly into the latter category and makes you wonder why it ain't always this way.
Highlights elsewhere include Bad Brains (with new singer) opening up for dc Basehead and Consolidated at the Marquee, plus a menagerie of talents such as Spectrum, The Lunachicks, Pooh Sticks, Ween, Seaweed and The Belltower doing their various weird things around town.
Not only that but Carter USM are rounding off their American tour at the Academy with support from Thousand Yard Stare — and Boston's 360s, who are joined onstage by a desperate Inger Lorre, formerly of the Nymphs, who flaunts her way embarrassingly through three songs and rants occasionally about women-power.
Gerrrroff!
Hot-footing across town to the Knitting Factory, we see the Lower East Side's cosiest rabbit hutch temporarily transformed into the Hampstead White Horse of beloved memory, courtesy of Moonshake, Th' Faith Healers and Stereolab in a Too Pure block vote of daunting capability and, in the cast of Th' Healers, unprecedented execution.
Sticksman Joe mans a wild but never woolly rhythm base to rival the show's more obvious stars — honey-throated haranguestress Roxanne, and tom, the one-man post-whatever guitar genre.
What with the ‘Shake's Callahan breaking sweat and strings in bullish fashion and Stereolab set adrift on Sean O'Hagan's organ-ic flights of fancy, this was perhaps the choice threesome of the entire bash.
It all winds down — or rather,up — with God Is My Co-Pilot.
Fittingly, after an ex-McCarthyite and Wolfhound have been peddling their wares, God Is My…stutter back to the ‘C86’ era when Stump were taken seriously and people would bend their guitars into curious shapes without being openly ridiculed.
But there's more to this agitated fivesome than meets the eye, like a heady dose of Huggy Bear's violent femme fatale fury, and almost jazzy flicks from their drumming duo.
Oh, and (natch) songs about  f—ing .
Frankly, we don't know whether to laugh or cry.
So we go home.
FRIDAY
ACCORDING TO one anxious soul at the previous day's college radio seminar, the burning issue of the moment is shelves.
Like, uh, how does WNKER Toronto hope to deal with the switch in formatting from vinyl to CD without breaking the semester's budget on new shelving?
One panel member explained he had a friend who was handy with a bit of wood and some nails — why didn't WNKER insert a new shelf in between the existing shelves, thus doubling the CD capacity?
Ah, but what would they then do with all the vinyl stock?
As the UN Security Council debated whether to intervene, most New Yorkers appeared to be knuckling down to what they do best: driving gratuitously badly and yelling at each other.
Some of the most accomplished yelling was conducted by men for whom the only college worth getting in a strop over was of the electoral variety.
Yup, if the music marathon ever began to flag and the 26-mile version was a non-starter, then the TV election race made for a vital diversion.
CMJ Vice-President: Joanne Abbot Green, Jesse Jackson and Robert K Habere (CMJ President) share a joke at Th'Faith Healers' gig.
Probably
Mudhoney: on a good night, apparently
There was, for instance, New York's Republican Senator Alfonse D'Amato.
Despite representing a normally staunch Democrat state, being under investigation by a host of law enforcement agencies for various instances of corruption  and abuse of power and tarred with The Bush Factor Thing, this abrasive native Noo Yawker was running neck and neck with his Democrat rival, attorney-general Robert Abrams.
The chief reason for this appeared to be D'Amato's obnoxiously entertaining performances on the crystal bucket.
Abrams did his best to be Mr Clean and avoid direct confrontation with his guttersnipe opponent but to no avail, and just weeks before polling day had been harried into calling D'Amato, a ‘fascist’.
Bearing in mind his rival's Italian heritage, this was a bad move — on which Alfonse pounced gleefully, demonstrating that, whatever else he might be, a '90s Mussolini wasn't it.
Abrams' experience proved that being a solid but unspectacular TV performer is no longer enough in these days where a politician risks instant oblivion unless he can turn in the hustings equivalent of an MTV award winner.
CMJ must surely have had this in mind when they invited the Reverend Jesse Jackson to address the convention a mere four days before the country went to the polls.
No other current statesperson can move an audience on the same primal, visceral level as popular music.
He is truly rock 'n' roll for president.
There could also have been no coincidence in the scheduling of Lou Reed to speak before Jackson.
Reed had called Jesse to book on his ‘New York’ album over the Rainbow Coalition leader's alleged reluctance to condemn the anti-Semitic utterances of black Muslim leader Louis Farrakhan, and sure enough made pointed reference to this particular troubled racial undercurrent in an America riven by the Reagan-Bush years' divisive culture.
To a packed, silent hall, Lou talked in the measured monotone that has detailed the tragic inhabitants of his last three albums.
He began by saying he had been asked to speak on censorship and that he had been upset by the reception meted out to Sinead O'Connor at the Madison Square Garden Bob Dylan tribute.
‘I was surprised when the crowd at the Dylan show booed her.
It was a shame, terrible and painful to watch.
Not everyone in Madison Square was a believer.
Did they all object to the style, not the message?
The times certainly were not changing.
Which brings me to my point.
‘Anyone has the right to say whatever they want and anyone, you, has the right to answer them back.
She did what she thought was right and in this country she said a price.
I wonder why?
But then I wonder lots of things.’
At which point, Reed returned to the anti-Semites and the absence of a clear voice from the black leaders.
But his subject had extra currency, due to the acquittal the previous day of a black youth accused of murdering Yankel Rosenblum, a Jewish student, in racial unrest sparked by the death of a black child under the wheels of a convoy of cars following the Grand Rabbi.
The city's Jewish community were outraged, as the youth had previously confessed to the killing and a guilty verdict had been virtually taken for granted.
‘I'd like to know how much elation black leadership feels for this occasion, if any, of murder by mob, murder by trial, murder by jury,’ Reed stated, his voice rising for the only time.
‘I would hope black leadership can rise above the celebration of this particular verdict.
Or is it really time to light the torch that brings Brooklyn sizzling to the ground?’
Like a true pro, Jackson did not respond directly to Reed's challenge.
His riveting address, in which he lucidly, brilliantly demolished the moral authority of the outgoing US regime and urged his audience of ‘young Americans’ to come alive, could have been (and probably was) delivered at any point during the campaign.
But he had clearly heard Lou's words.
Arriving at the podium to a standing ovation, Jesse asked for the house lights to be raised —‘so that I may speak unto the people’.
Lou had stood in darkness apart from a single spotlight.
He had looked and sounded alone, and inadvertently given the impression of paranoia.
Jackson, on the other hand, by raising the lights, was signalling he had nothing to hide.
Reed, the reluctant rock performer, had been outflanked by Jackson, an natural public orator who also wields an acute political sensibility.
Hardly a fair ‘fight’ really.
Where Jesse Jackson and Lou Reed share common ground is in the potency of their words.
Jackson shuffled his parables, both Biblical and homespun, and used the gospel preacher's cadences to entrance the gathering for well over an hour.
How much did he know about CMJ?
About WNKER Toronto's shelving problems?
Probably not very much.
‘Young America, you keep dreaming that dream — make America better!’ he concluded.
‘Heal us and reveal us, take us beyond racism!
Beyond sexism!
Beyond anti-Semitism!
Beyond homophobia!
Beyond Asian bashing!
Beyond Hispanic bashing!
Make room for all of us!
Everybody's somebody!
You keep that hope alive and make America better!
Stop the violence!
Keep hope alive!’
How long before America allows its most inspirational son to address the most important audience of all?
The evening's proceedings struggle to match up to Jesse's performance.
Even a jingle jangle frenzy at The Ritz in the company of Cows, Melvins, Surgery and Helmet strangely fails to tickle our tastebuds.
Also missing in traction: the Fontana showcase with Catherine Wheel, House Of Love and Ocean Colour Scene: the rumoured-to-be-great Grifters and recent On -sters Gigolo Aunts.
Over at CBGB's it's fan club night.
David Baker from Mercury Rev is checking out the soon-to-be-signed-to-Geffen St Johnny; Sonic Youth are hanging out with Cell, no doubt priming the newcomers for their forthcoming Euro jaunt with the Yoof; and Canadian lungers Sloan fall victim to the complimentary charm of the Lemonheads' Evan Dando.
In direct contrast to all this hectic, hedonistic activity, over at the Marquee, The Red House Painters are propping up Belly with weary tenderness.
‘I'm looking at the ceiling/With a lonely feeling,’ murmurs singer Mark at one point, which says a lot, really.
The Painters are delicate, cautious and unsmiling.
They sound like a stupendously stoned Smiths.
And they're excellent, thoroughly blessed with a poignant grandeur.
Which is quite odd, considering they look like extras from Dukes Of Hazzard .
‘I want you to give attention to my belly button,’ sighs Mark in ‘Mother’.
Oh, I'm sorry, we've got to dash…
Off to Tilt, where Daisy Chainsaw are one of the proverbial ‘buzzes’ of the convention.
As we stumble in, Mad Richard from Verve is inadvertently pulling down chunks of the ceiling.
The man is clearly a tree.
As ever, Verve are a mix of the sublime and the downright ridiculous, with brilliant bursts of noise being usurped by daffy spacecake wanderings.
Yup, they've got a Verve .
Downstairs, the widely-recommended Best Kissers In The World are rocking through a set of, well, consummate rockiness, to be honest.
They're OK, we guess, which doesn't say much for them until you realise that thousands of their guitar-laden brethren are desperately striving to funk up and freak out and end up sounding merely like a 15th rate version of something that was once quite good.
Gaaah!!
At least Shudder To Think refuse to hold history hostage.
Weirdness abounds in their pseudo-hardcore outbursts, a sound which, like Verve, has the capacity to amaze and upset in equal measures.
So someone faints with pleasure.
So someone else gripes about ‘ripping off Peter Gabriel’.
So Katie Jane from Daisy Chainsaw has plasters on her newly-shaven head from where she collided with Crispin Gray's guitar a couple of nights earlier.
So no change there , then.
The Yanks consider the Chainsaw to be punk rock.
And in a spiritual, spazzy kind of way, they are.
We put an A&M lackey on the spot and he decides, after years of going ‘errrrmmmm’ and ‘uuummmm’that they signed the band because ‘They're, eerrmmm, ‘different ’.’
Rabies in Toyland.
And time for bed.
SATURDAY
ANOTHER DAY, another hangover.
It's Halloween, but alas, Smashing Pumpkins aren't playing — a shame, considering the potential for onstage antics, but no matter.
The final seminar day is highlighted by that speech from Brian May, which somewhat undermines CMJ's ‘alternative’ stance.
Particularly as Bri's talk is (loosely) based upon the question, ‘What's it all about?’
Specifics?
We've got ‘em.
Brian seems confused.
Not half as much as we are.
He draws his ‘impression’ of the entire music business on a Nobo board based 50 yards away from where we're sitting, and then tries to explain his theories behind the Rolf Harris-style scribblings.
Which doesn't make anything clear.
Brian May has spent five years making his debut solo album.
Hey, what's that all about?
Don't ask any of the ‘Artist Encounter’ panellists.
After we witness the ‘World Premiere’ of a new  charidy single for ‘Victims Of War’, which is — good intentions aside — probably one of the most hideous experiences we've had in our lives, a motley crew of indie stars shambles on to the platform.
With exquisite logic, Sonic Boom is on the panel, a man who couldn't stop talking, I'm sure, if he could be bothered to open his mouth in the first place.
Fruitbat and Jim Bob are probably overawed into virtual silence by sharing a platform with Erasure's Andy Ball, a seven-foot tall transvestite called RuPaul and Shitman.
Yup, a man dressed as a turd (see page 55).
Someone in the audience asks a ridiculously convoluted question about ‘oppositional consciousness’.
Even Adam Sherbourne from Consolidated — the most intelligent person on the panel — doesn't understand that one, so he leaves to catch a plane.
So does Eugene Kelly from Eugenius.
Then panellists start wandering off without making excuses and someone tops everything by asking ‘Crispin of Chainsaw’ how he gets his guitar sound: ‘Like, do you kick in your amp or do you use distortion pedals?’
‘Umm, I just turn my guitar up as far as it will go,’ explains the puzzled axe hero.
So there you go.
Dodging the Halloween parade in Greenwich Village heralds a fruitful evening beginning around 9pm at CBGB's, where the latest Sub Pop scallywags are holding court.
Six Finger Satellite might look unpleasantly like a '90s misappropriation of Devo, but in the dressed-down flesh they are a groovesome hardcore update of Wire with a head honcho given to lurching about like an adolescent, erm, Lurch.
Spicy, without a doubt.
A dash down the road, and happily on the first song of Monsterland's set has gone a-begging.
This Connecticut trio have already garnered an NME SOTW, and although that particular gem, ‘Peanut Butter Karma’, glints most favourably from their brisk melodic manoeuvres, it's by no means the only one.
They're currently ‘talking to people’, but hey, anyone can do that!
Make yer mind up time: Laughing Hyenas at the Marquee or Mark Eitzel at the bleedin' Knitting Factory again?
Hobson's choices don't come much more painful, but as ever Eitzel rewards the faithful, rifling some quite astounding new American Music Club material for an acoustic show that was often too painful to bear — and that's just for the audience.
‘I'll get off quick,’ he burbles after three numbers, eliciting screams of protest.
‘Hey, the next band, they've come all the way from Chicago!’
It seemed churlish at this point to mention that Eitzel had come all the way from San Francisco and is one of the greatest songwriters humanity has ever known.
‘Cos, like, Mark just doesn't wanna know that stuff.
It all cruises to a close at around 2am back at CBGB's.
As herds of humans dressed as cows (at least, that's what our eyes told us) wander up and down Bleecker Street, we slump and watch The Shams, three women dressed as men, play an acoustic set which publicised their sexual fantasies.
One of them has a fake beard.
Obviously.
A more suitable way to end the CMJ Marathon would be impossible to imagine.
We came last, by the way.
‘Artists Encounter’ one: Jim Bob makes a point to Shitman
‘Artists Encounter’ two: A meeting of like minds or what
Roxanne Faith Healer: Th'hit of Th'CMJ
Sub Pop's ‘C86’ revisionists Velocity Girls.
Primal, presumably
LIVE
BEET ON THE BRATS!
SUGAR
THE BOO RADLEYS
BOB MOULD is doing a Stormin' Norman.
No, really.
Look at the stern hair ‘style’, the regulation undershirt, the sweating discipline — here's a man who's built to blast ; to pummel audiences first and ask questions (like, was that good?) later.
Fact is, he makes The Boo Radleys resemble a scruffy bunch of Scouse noiseniks.
Get a haircut!
Get some exercise, guys!
And get a grip on that trumpet player, before the more lascivious elements of the crowd jump in.
See, just after the last spate of dates, when they were bolstered by an extra guitarist from Attic Head, The Boos have now plumped for a classier kind of act altogether.
She's called Ginetta Minichiello, she's got alarmingly along blue nails and she (along with‘Meester Trumpee’) anoints The Boos with a hitherto unseen live sophistication.
Where they used to fumble, they now rumble.
Where they used to rely on incessant effects, now they aren't afraid to leave gaps and swoon around in a beautiful noise of their own making.
The Boos' welcome maturity makes Sugar appear all the more primitive and pained.
Launching into their set with the kind of pace not seen since Linford Christie last left the blocks, Bob's mob have dashed through the splendid opening trio of ‘The Act We Act’, ‘A Good Idea’ and ‘Changes’before most of the audience has sussed there's no beer on sale.
Which is pretty bloody quick.
Yet they're a tad more composed tonight, not averse to pausing for breath on occasion.
Like, you can actually tell where the songs end and begin for once.
Better still, for the first time in Sugar's brief living memory, the sound is sufficiently balanced for Mould's vocals to hold their own with his cranked-up guitar.
And if the rumour about Kevin Shields presenting Mould with the very pedal (ab) used on ‘Isn't Anything’ is true, it's not bloody wonder Sugar are slamming at the moment.
Yeah, ‘Hoover Dam’ may be more laid-back than its surroundings, but all things are relative and this is a giant sound, a power-crazed inferno that puts the bludgeon into bludgeoning.
To describe Sugar as merely ‘tight’ would be an insult: at times they make even the pathologically disciplined Therapy? look like a doped-out Happy Mondays.
By the time the three-quarters mark of the set screeches past, you're almost hankering after some form of relief.
Like a nice nap.
What pulls Sugar (and the innocent bystander) through is their stunningly simplistic pop prowess and the fact that some of the new material — already recorded for the next album — is actually better than ‘Copper Blue’.
None more so than the delirious ‘Out Of Time’ and a cranky, slow thing called ‘Creeps’, wherein bassist David Barbe gets an opportunity to frighten small children.
Then there's ‘JC Auto’, which is more wired than a plug factory and finds Mould screaming ‘JESUS CHRIST!
JESUS CHRIST!’ when he shouldn't feasibly be capable of breathing — a testament to the levels of punishment Sugar inflict upon themselves, at the very least.
By the close, even the sight of a man in yellow trousers surfing across the battered crowd can barely raise a flicker of surprise.
Quite right, too.
Soldier on.
Stormin' Bob Mould: the rigorous face of rock 'n' roll
Stormy Boo Martin: the sloppy face of rock 'n' trumpeting
VELOCITY GIRL
BLOODY INDIE bands.
I mean, they get a room packed full of people half-fainting from heat exhaustion and half-shocked from seeing party types walk around in Halloween Dr Seuss hats, and what do they do?
Twangtwangtwangtwing, that's what, methodically tuning up their guitars until you want to rush the stage and just bloody well get on with the set yourself.
If this suggests that Washington DC's Velocity Girl wouldn't be out of place at our very own Falcon or Bull & Gate, then fair enough.
Yet more evidence for the argument that a whole posse of Stateside groups are basing their entire musical career upon British ‘C86’ -era stumblings, seeing Velocity Girl in New York is akin to carrying ice cubes to the North Pole.
Almost.
Jeez, even the name is from an early Primal Scream b-side!
The fivesome are a comfortable shambles, wandering around and, like, being nice and loose about this whole gig scenario.
Oh, apart from when they ask for a ‘tad’ more/less bass in the drum monitors.
Sarah Shannon is the constant centrepoint amidst all these shenanigans: it's her hip-swinging harmonies on the admirably tuneful likes of ‘My Forgotten Favourite’ that have incurred more comparisons with the Valentine's school of ethereality than even Lush would have considered possible.
The boys do their bit as well, throwing out diseased white-outs of noise and drenching the most innocent of melodies in liquefied squalor.
Such grungeplay is probably the strongest link to Velocity Girl's new deal with Sub Pop: other than that, they hardly fit the Bud-swilling, neck-thrusting bill, and the world is probably a better place for it.
RAGE AGAINST THE MACHINE
SOME BANDS take time to grow on the listener.
Other bands don't: they eschew the arty deliberations of the underground in favour of an all-out assault upon preconceptions and asinine posturing.
Rage Against The Machine belongs to the latter category.
And then some.
Apparently forged from a mad mixture of screamingly right-on individuals from West Coast hardcore outfits, Rage Against The Machine are everything millions of moshpit enthusiasts have come to expect from music, only several times better.
I must confess that I have spent barely a fraction of my life paying any attention to the ragbag of funk/rap/rawk stomps that have swanned across the Atlantic over the past three years, but even RATM are sufficiently wired to blow several of my brain cells.
Yup, this is the old ‘cultural crossover’ in first gear, a barrage of noise which flinches not in the face of a Panzer tank.
Take Zack de la Rocha — he's where the cutie Cookie Crew collide with a lurid John Lydon, with wide-eyed results.
It's Zack who leers, ‘This one's called ‘Bullet In The  F—ing Head’.
It's Zack who stagedives — twice!
And it's Zack who gets the crowd bouncing up and down in time to his dazzling raps.
Out of all the bands the NME posse catches at the CMJ, RATM are by far the most brilliantly relevant : the first to grab political issues by the scruff of the neck and ram them down the toilet pan.
‘Wake Up’, ‘Settle For Nothing’, ‘Take The Power Back’…every title is a slogan, every lyric ricochets with independent ideals and anti-establishment arrows.
They rap, they rock (rack? rop?), they're tighter than a miner's shopping budget, they scare the shit out of the entire convention with a brutality that could put Rollins to shame and they are so flabbergastingly right for 1992 they can't possibly fail to sell, ooooh, millions.
‘ F— you!’ screams Zack.
‘I won't do what you tell me, MOTHERF—ER !!’
Exactly.
COME
FOR A birthday boy, Mark Ibold is in rather disgruntled form.
‘Man, I just don't like this venue too much,’ frowns the just-turned-30 Pavement bassist, clutching a bottle of the official CMJ beer of the moment, Yeungling Peter.
‘I mean, there's no way Come should be playing here.’
The cosy two-tier wooden crate that is the Knitting Factory sweats in sympathy.
With even half its present occupation the place would feel cramped, but this is patently ridiculous.
Come's manager has a guest list that alone exceeds normal capacity; quite how one is to witness a band to their best advantage in such conditions is hard to fathom.
Come's stint on the toilet trail may be short-lived if the critical hoo-hah they've elicited thus far translates into sales, but actually this is a band better suited than most to the world's more fetid punk rock bunkers.
Assuming the nearest psychiatric clinic is unavailable, then yer friendly local fire hazard — in this case over-cooked and rapidly on the turn — provides the ideal circumstantial boost to these oh-so-desperate, suicidally unhappy songs.
Even so, Come don't quite pull off the nerve-ends-shredded-into-mulch effect that is their widely acknowledged forte.
Tunings are tumbling quicker than under-prepared marathon entrants, as Thalia Zedek and Chris Brokaw struggle to tame this turbulent beast in the spiralling temperatures, and prompt frustrated stares from her, fulsome apologies from him.
But at least the Knitting Factory is blessed with a far better PA than is the normal preserve of such places — donated, apparently, by no less than Laurie Anderson — and the fragile webs of such head-in-the-oven epics as ‘Power Failure’ and the pulse-pummelling opener ‘Bell’remain sufficiently well-spun to snag even the most neutral observer.
As they lurch with some aplomb through The Rolling Stones ‘I Got The Blues’, Brokaw's guitar falters horribly and the huddled masses groan in supplication.
This is Come's style: why have a drama when you can always settle for a crisis?
Thalia Zedek takes on all-Comers
YES PLEASE!!
STEREO MC'S
BLADE
JUMP!
JUMP!
Jump!
Jump!
I came to get down, I came to get down, so get outcha seats and…well, tell that little bloke on stage to SHUT UP!
Blade, right, amiable enough bloke, Lewisham, all that, smiling all the time, may as well be wearing carpet slippers onstage instead of the uniform open-mouthed trainers — but what throwback tosh he spouts between songs.
The Marquee is not yet packed and heaving when he pads on to the boards (oh, but it will be), hence the pre-requisite warm-up panto that kills most rap gigs dead before they're begun.
I hate to be the party-pooper,again , but rabble-rousing sexist nonsense is not to be forgiven, even if it's done with Blade's A1 golden retriever smile.
Hell, Jim Davidson smiles all the time.
So Blade urges punters to fill the gap between him and the bar before he kicks off.
Smiling, snickering, he says ‘If you like girls come down front!’ referring to some ‘tasty’‘bird’already there.
Then he gets us to (YAWN!
YAWN!
YAWN!)‘make some noise,’ Inevitably splitting the house into men and women, ‘If the guys are good in bed, MAKE SOME NOISE, If ladies give good satisfaction , MAKE SOME NOISE!’
Yeah, like this:
‘PI-I-I-I-I-I-SSSSS OF-F-F-FFF!’
I'm embarrassed for Blade.
His rapping is assuredly excellent (and he's a rapper, right, not Bernie Clifton at the Wimbledon Playhouse), his mail-order independence is a real shot in the arm, some of his homespun original prankster rhymes are refreshing, and the sheer ebullient power of his music can knock you flat.
And yet he stumbles back into the crap rap trap between every number.
Supporting cast DJ Renegade and secondary shouter Blue Eyes provide hardy back-up; previous single ‘Mind Of An Ordinary Citizen’, the breakneck ‘Forward’ and a dangerous tear through manifesto track ‘Survival Of The Hardest Working’to close, are the muscular set's highlights, and the moment where Blade gets our own Chris Hughes onstage to photograph him with his fans is cute — QED, this jolly, gentle, reassuringly chubby little geezer does not need to pander to the male hormones and the baser instincts of his audience to get noticed.
No such complexities for the Stereo MC's (can we officially quit calling them ‘the underrated Stereo MC's now then?).
They really are entertainers.
No ingratiation of millions to hold them back.
After the minimalist hyena pacing of the trad live hip-hop set-up, it appears the Marquee stage overfloweth with six whole people and a drum kit.
The Stereos are a showband, idiot joy notwithstanding, they turn the grubby and inauspicious Marquee into the Harlem Apollo within minutes, fanning the fire limit into a regular blaze without so much as an ‘everybody in the house say ‘Ho!’’
That their slowhand groove hypnosis and generous sing-song commerciality made mincemeat of the Happy Mondays at Brixton a fortnight ago is easy to fathom tonight.
They might not have the ready-laid personality or boys gang mentality of Shaun's forgotten foot-and-mouth soldiers, but the Stereo MC's could certainly fill the musical gap with their protracted athletics and Rob Birch's geezer-good vocal patois.
The essential backing vocal trip — Cath, Verona, Andrea — are placed upfront, no uncomfortable, tail-feathered-shakin' Rowetta-isms here; drummer Owen is strapped inside his kit like a space pilot for maximum rocket'n'roll.
You'll never catch me toeing the tiresome MU ‘Keep Music Live’ line, but an organic drummer does wonders for my feet.
‘We do live beginnings, live middles, live play-outs and live stops!’ brags Rob B, staling his space like a cross between Dave Wakeling, Catweazle and Joe Brown at mime school.
Upstairs on the balcony, Peter Hook and Graham Popple are exercising their hips to the now-familiar breakthrough mover and shaker ‘Connected’— never mind white , the Stereo MC's can make an old man dance!
Companion stuff from the new album — a gloriously lolloping ‘Step It Up’, the pre-packed next single ‘Ground Level’— rubs slick shoulder with pre-acceptance vintage like ‘Lost In Music’, and the show goes on and on until people are dripping off the walls, and the last kind of urban excitement we need is a joke security alert on Charing Cross Road, which means we are all shepherded out of the Marquee's tradesmen's entrances like nuisances, sticking to each other and sapped of claustrophobic dancenergy.
Pity, I never came to get down.
Congratulations, you have just crossed over.
From ferocious hip-hop to coffee table funk, from plug-in effect to flesh'n'blood persuasion, from obscurity to chartbound eternity, from warm-up to heatwave.
And, as the old singalong goes: ‘I wanna do it again/I wanna do it again.’
Jump this way.
And mind the doors.
Rob B, a cross between The Beat's Dave Wakeling, Catweazle and Joe ‘Bruvva’ Brown (it sez ‘ere)
THE ROCKINGBIRDS
YOU ALL know the story by now.Five talented misfits from Camden form a band playing the most ridiculed form of music in the world, are picked up by the chief of the record label that brought you the Manic Street Preachers — and ZAP! country is sincerely rehabilitated.
Pop hacks start talking about Merle Haggard rather than Morrissey, and the gates are finally open for honest, hard-grafting good ‘ol boys (eg The Jayhawks) to follow in the ‘Birds’ wake.
Cynics, of course, will have a slightly different idea of the plot.
If some know-all sourpusses are to be believed, The Rockingbirds aren't appreciated in the same way as Suede or Kingmaker or Therapy?: they're just an average bunch of Luddites being championed because of kitsch, ‘so out it's in’ considerations.
Another year, and the arbiters of cred will have moved on to something else, leaving the hapless ‘Birds to return to a deserved place on the pub circuit.
If the debut album wasn't enough to send such theories flying towards the bin, tonight deals them a death-blow.
On the muso technical side, The Rockingbirds deliver a note-perfect performance — and in the ‘what really matters’ department, they confirm their uncanny knack for evoking the highs and lows of life to marvellous effect.
It all becomes clear after a below-par start that comprises rather forgettable readings of ‘Further Down The Line’ and ‘Where I Belong’, which sound a little too like formula, ie, dashed-off fillers (railroad rhythms, big-hearted sentiments etc, etc) to prompt anything other than reserved foot-tapping.
The Rockingbirds then play the heartfelt ‘Standing On The Doorstep Of Love’, the anthemic hero-tribute ‘Jonathan Jonathan’, and a run of crowd-pleasers that culminates in a cover of ‘In Tall Buildings’ which is plain perfect.
The engagingly clumsy band throw themselves around like ecstatic infants, a surprisingly large audience greets the cream of the set with near-passion, and even a clutch of low points (the aforementioned kick-off songs, the band's stand-offish charity stroll through ‘Deeply Dippy’) can't sully The Rockingbirds' aura of rich, tune-drenched quality.
An hour in ‘Birdland provides conclusive proof that this lot's link with the thigh-slapping world of rhinestones, rodeos and people who say things like ‘yee-haw’ is immaterial — the best label to stick on The Rockingbirds reader ‘very good band who'll be around for ages’.
Or something like that.
THE SULTANS OF PING FC
YOU CAN hear Clive Anderson crisply phrasing the challenge impersonate a pop group in the style of The Ramones meets Half Man Half Biscuit, fronted by Marc Bolan crossed with Rik Mayall.
Oh yes, and the audience have to pretend they're at a football match.
ULU is electrified with unruly anticipation.
Terrace chanting begins even before support band, the undervalued Wonky Alice, have left the stage, and continues for a solid 20 minutes until the Sultans finally strut out to the opening strains of ‘Land Of Hope And Glory’(very Gary Glitter).
Waving a cigarette between two artfully poised fingers, singer Niall O'Flaherty warns would-be stage-divers ‘Come anywhere near the fokin' stage and yer goin' ‘ome early’ before diving into the post-punk, Dury-esque ‘Kick Me With Your Leather Boots’.
Niall, in camp costume of red PVC hotpants and outrageous leopardskin tights, is a fully paid-up member of the Fred Fairbrass school of posturing: he simpers, minces, points and pokes fun at the audience.
‘I've learnt to live with people, learnt to get on with people.
Even sad wankers like you,’ he informs us before launching into ‘Karaoke Queen’and posing his way through the three-minute Buzzcock guitar pile-ups and singalongs of ‘Indeed You Aaaagh’, and ‘I'm In Luff’(its not really how you spell the song titles, it's the way he tells ‘em).
If ‘Two Pints Of Wazzer’ and ‘Clean As Clark’are dull, overdone and in danger of slipping into pantomime rather than humorous satire, they are but mere red herrings before the frenzied energy and monstrous drum rolls of ‘Japanese Girls’and ‘Later  F—Off ’.
‘Trouble Fish’, with its strutting Stray Cat bass riff, sees the student body collapsing on to their bums, feet airborne for the traditional anti-gravity dance bit: char hit ‘Veronica’, where Niall gets to show off his ability on the mouth organ, sets every man-jack scruffy co-ed in the house moshing like fury, which they continue to do through the Tim Curry vocals of ‘Teenage Vampire’ and the rollicking romps of ‘Stupid Kid’, ‘I Am I Said’and ‘No More Nonsense From Sidney’.
God-like, Niall flings himself on to his adoring audience, sinks beneath the waves and is eventually restored to the stage in time for the anti-rap encore of ‘Where's Me Jumper’.
Seduced by their own success, the Sultans stay on to wring one more blast of good clean fun out of‘Are You Experienced’ and finally leave.
The final score?
Clive Anderson O, while the mighty Sultans take the biscuit.
KINKY MACHINE
UH-OH!
Take cover!
Make for all the exits!
I think…she's about to blow Captain!
The Bull & Gate surely wasn't built for this sort of punishment.
Like a depth charge casually placed in a goldfish bowl, Kinky Machine look all set to bust this incongruous little hole right open.
No disrespect to the Bull & Gate, right, but it's just no place for Kinky Machine to be hyperventilating their thang within.
Or maybe it is.
Maybe the Town & Country would dull the effect of a mere guitarbasseddrumsvoice four-piece challenging both venue and lacklustre audience to a duel!
Remarkable singer Louis Elliot snottily refers to the place as ‘the London Dungeon’.
Like an unearthly cross between Paul McCartney, Gerry Sadowitz and someone you beat up every day at school, Louis is Kinky Machine's trump card, illegally bad leather jacket cast aside to reveal bare chest within seconds, silly guitar played above the head on all-too-many occasions, halfway-house haircut shaken at the crowd as if he's trying to violently throw off a wig.
If the band are an ugly Suede, then so's their sound — all grand, effusive '70s gesticulation and rather traditional rockboy moves cast into the stratosphere of genius by pretending each one is their last.
While frank HM opener ‘Swivelhead’ tears the teeth out your gaping mouth, ‘Candy Deceit’slows the whole thing down to ‘Drowners’speed, daring confetti to rain down on us as if to finalise the effect.
Kinky Machine's songs sound written and rehearsed (check ‘Sister Magpie’ for craftsmanship, it's not a dying art)— and even though Louis chucks his pale form about like a public schoolboy possessed, there is something verging on studied about his  exhausting stage persona.
Are these guys for real?
And are they famous enough to ask?
Surely their drummer shouldn't be wearing headphones yet !
Not here!
If he was stupid, Louis would start cutting himself with a broken mic stand at this point, and their drummer would smash his headphones.
No need.
The Bull & Gate is still standing, somehow, and a lot wiser for this night.
There is a Machine in the ghost.
JONI'S BUTTERFLY
ONCE YOU'VE got over the severe attack of ‘Ooer’ s which this band's rather indecent euphemistic name inevitably provokes, Joni's Butterfly reveal themselves (sorry) as perfectly innocent pop fun for all the family, with a lyrical undercurrent of sex, drugs, avarice and  Satanic goat-molesting.
They look like someone's ill-conceived idea of mixing diverse cultural influences: an archetypal shoe-gazer guitarist complete with fringe, hooped T-shirt and effects pedals, a grinning Lenny Kravitz lookalike bassist, complete with Lennon shades and dreads, and a drummer straight out of some Midge Ure video, complete with beard, pot belly and baseball cap.
But none of them upstage Stella, the blonde lead singer already battling those patronising Primitives/Darling Buds comparisons, and physically assaulting her fellow band members, monitors and mic stands in her righteous over-enthusiasm.
It's a strangely riveting spectacle, but just in case your eyes get poked out in the moshpit, they've got a quite daring array of slightly goth-laced nagging pop tunes, pinned by means of twiddly guitar hooks and belting choruses to that corner of your brain which is exclusively reserved for tunes to whistle in the supermarket queue.
So if you fancy a bit of innocent perv-pop with skeletons in the closet, catch this butterfly before it mutates into a monster.
BRIGHTER
BLUEBOY
WHERE'S THIS Blueboy then?
There's a girl onstage, she's not blue and she's, well, a girl and apparently, her name's Gemma.
Right, that's the surprises out of the way, for Blueboy are, together with co-headliners Brighter, residents of the Sarah Records stable, which means that delicate, dreamy, demure guitar songs are on the agenda and crotch-related stage action is not.
Blueboy's songs, all clocking in at well below the boredom threshold, are a naively affecting clutch of simple, sparse tunes, engagingly ramshackle and, except for a nostalgic over-employment of the jingle-jangle pedal, refreshingly unreliant on an arsenal of guitar effects.
Pure and simple.
Brighter, sadly, are not.
The Brighton-based threesome are duller than Nanette Newman's dishwater.
Brighter are so deeply drippy that they make Blueboy look like the English Metallica, Brighter sound like they've been locked in a bedroom for the past six years and are still trying to come up with that ‘C86’ audition tape.
To call them criminally yawnsome doesn't do them (in) justice.
The limp tunes appear to be played at the wrong speed, stretching them out until they become transparent and meaningless.
If Brighter are an option, I'd rather just watch dry paint.
And make that beige, please Mr Dulux.
LIVING IN THE PASTURE
THE FARM
FABULOUS
AS WAS surely the intention from the outset, Fabulous seem a strange choice of support for The Farm — glamour, rebellion and superficiality supports worthy but dull, genuine, salt of the earth brickie pop.
Who'd have thought it?
And, more to the point who gives a toss?
‘We're gonna play some DEVIL SATAN WOCK AND WOLL MUSIC!!!’ announces Fabulous' strangely Mr Bean-like guitarist to the severe bemusement of a hall full of Farm fans, as he launches into the first of two bloody many dismal three-chord punk thrashes, and on struts Simon Dudfield, oozing ugliness from every pore.
He jumps up and down with a vague look of aggression on his face, puts his hand on his hips and shows us his pot belly.
In case you hadn't realised, this is what pop music needs in 1992.
Sid died for this.
Your parents hate it and would gladly lynch this band rather than let them dabble with your adolescent hormones that can't help wanting to shag them senseless in a vat of cold custard.
As I write, an emergency cabinet meeting entitled ‘ F— Maastricht — What the hell are we going to do about Fabulous?!’ is considering declaring a nationwide state of emergency to deal with this unprecedented revolutionary threat.
You can see it in the glazed looks on the faces of the crowd tonight — they've never seen anything like it!
They're rushing, wide-eyed, out to the bar, shell-shocked, dazed, muttering, ‘Oh my God!
That band!
Fabulous!
They're…they're…they're…
SHITE!!!!’
As he is dragged away by men in white coats to the Gerry Marsden Home For The Incurably Sad And Pathetic, sexy Simes appeals one last time to the kids —‘Do you lot think a rock 'n' roll band can ever change anything?’
Alas, no-one's listening any more.
The Farm evidently believe that a rock 'n' roll band CAN change the world, through playing anthemic but, for the most part, bland and uninspiring, ham-fisted indie-dance with vague, unchallenging, uncontroversial truisms for lyrics.
And when they've got a sell-out crowd singing along, you wonder if they might be right.
In the view of many discerning pop fans, The Farm are, of course, shite, the most recent and worst atrocity being their ‘reading’(or should we say brief flick through, glancing at the pictures) of ‘Don't You Want Me’, which, contrary to popular belief, is not entirely a third-rate copy of the Human League original.
The difference is a ‘squiggly bit’ in the middle detectable only by dogs and the insanely optimistic.
Yes.
The Farm are bollocks — official.
Pointless samples start every song; the beat is ridiculously loud and trying to be ravey but is too cluttered and shuffling; the addition of a backing singer adds little to Peter Hooton's irritating foghorn voice; the guitars are still chiming, charmless indie-dance sounds throughout; they still look like brickies and Peter Hooton still dances like my dad.
But dammit if The Farm don't make a lot more sense live.
Admittedly, the ‘eat shit — a million flies can't be wrong’ argument never did hold much water, but when every single person in the place is singing ‘Altogether Now’or ‘Love See No Colour’, waving their arms and jumping about, with sweat dripping from the walls, you'd have to be a hell of a snob not to be slightly moved.
Tonight's gig encapsulates everything The Farm are good at — simple, terrace-anthem pop which can be entertaining and more affecting than a thousand Simon Dudfield pouts.
Regardless of what anyone thinks, The Farm will no doubt continue doing what they do, but I suspect it will get steadily more unfashionable and irrelevant.
Nice work if you can get it, but we really do deserve much better.
‘Don't you want me?
Why not?
Is it the way I look?’
The inimitable ball of sex, fury and pot-belly that is Simon Dudfield
HUGGY BEAR
IT'S DIFFICULT to know whether Joe Bear's statement ‘we're out of tune but you'll just have to put up with it’ is an apology or the title of the first song, as Huggy Bear embark upon a set that includes lots of shouting, inept but enthusiastic attempts to play their instruments and generally deconstructs the rock myth with the viciousness of a tantrum in the nursery.
Huggy Bear are like a fractious baby, communicating their youthful frustration through noise, abrasive confrontation and complete confusion, screaming out at the unfairness of a world they don't fully comprehend.
The only clue that they are no longer children is their adult-like assumption that they have something important to say.
Sounds like a familiar blueprint from a previous decade.
More interested in the style than the fashion, Huggy Bear are carrying on the feminist tradition of punk bands like The Slits and X-Ray Spex with all the musicality of Pete Duel & The Shit or Alien Sex Fiend.
In (quite accurately) evoking the hoary old spirit of punk, it helps that The White Horse is smaller and more cramped than ever the original Marquee was; that the stage is only centimetres off the floor and resembles a cloakroom, as bags and coats are dumped onstage; that there are mates and friends standing virtually onstage and the whole place is a hot, airless, shambolic morass of so-called Huggy nationalists.
There is even a punk poetess in the familiar Joolz guise of goth gone wrong; Elvira Flower introduces the Huggies in a polemic of poetic licence and leads the dancing (?) thereafter.
Irreverent, anarchic, and compulsively out of tune, HB are reinventing the original punk ideals of confronting perceived agendas in music without the assumed glamour and retro posturing of many of today's neo-punks.
JULIAN COPE
STRIPPED OF the spiritual baggage, philosophical hokum and rune mythology he usually insists on dragging around with him, Julian Cope is revealed here as a rock 'n' roll archivist par excellence .
He somehow manages to distil the very essence of everything good in the lineage of Bobby Vee, Jefferson Airplane, Bob Marley and The Fall, mangle the results in the scrambled computer of his mind and offer up a new vision so convincing you forgive his rants against organised religion.
And, of course, he's so revered for this sleight-of-hand that he's constructed a two and a half hour show to appeal mainly to his legions of cultish disciples who've been waiting quite a few years for him to make sense again.
They're in rapture tonight.
The walls are heaving.
The smoke machine is working overtime.
The lights are playing tricks with your mind's eye.
The songs are flying fast and thick, signalling a remarkable renaissance for the man once thought too fried to communicate.
And the band cooks and splutters, pistons and relaxes, chews things over and lets them ride.
Phase One deals strictly with ‘Jehovahkill’, save the odd excerpt from ‘Peggy Suicide’.
As Julian & co limber up for the long haul, you get the feeling they never really hated rock as the survivors of post-punk seemed to.
Instead, the sometimes delicate and often ravishing songs from the aforementioned recent LP get shot through with bolts of pure electricity.
Sometimes there's bluster, other times overstatement creeps in, and on two occasions ham-fistedness drops its calling card (concept instrumentals like ‘Necropolis’, for instance).
But you can't argue with the propulsion of ‘No Hard Shoulder To Cry On’, the inventiveness of ‘Slow Rider’ and the odyssey inscribed in ‘Safe Surfer’(though you do worry when Cope loses it in the mid-section).
After an interlude, the man who would be sage returns with an acoustic guitar and offers chestnuts like ‘Passionate Friends’ for perusal.
This makes perfect sense in that a certain intimacy is restored and those r'n'r roots show when ‘Julian H Cope’ offers up a Lou Reed pastiche — with ‘Summertime Blues’thrown in — masquerading as a song.
Then the plangent bass, reflexive guitars, jungle drums and keyboard spooks rejoin the man with many voices to set Phase Three in motion.
‘World Shut Your Mouth’ seems impossibly majestic and you realise that, even when seemingly in the wilderness, this guy could still chop out cool tunes.
There are snags here and there, and your patience is somewhat tested by the sheer overload of songs, yet you can't complain when both ‘Read It In Books’ and ‘Bouncing Babies’retain their original qualities, and especially when ‘Out Of My Mind On Dope And Speed’condenses three decades into three minutes.
Julian Cope: making a Jehovah killing
FRIGHT TO THE FINNISH
FAITH NO MORE
L7
THE NORDIC winter has frozen The Gulf Of Finland.
There's a blizzard raging, two feet of snow on the ground, it's minus four degrees and tonight's mammoth gig is to be held inside Helsinki's Ice Stadium.
Hell, it's too cold to live, let alone rock.
‘Ladies and gentlemen,’ screams guitarist Suzie Gardner.
‘The soft white beer belly of rock'n'roll — L  F—ING 7!’
Well, if anyone's gonna break the ice, it's the band.
L7 give better than they get, but the kids don't get it at all.
There's 9,000 shivering punters in here, 7,500 of which have blank faces.
Look,forget there's four ‘chicks’ up there.
Close your eyes if you have to, just stop gawping and dance.
L7 aren't half-arsed rockers, they trample over most of their rivals, they don't want to be blokes.
They aren't playing a man's game, L7 are playing music, music that says so much more than merely suck this !
LA's L7 are natural performers; nothing about them is fake, so when Donita rocks out and grapples with her ‘axe’ during ‘Wargasm’it doesn't look misplaced or ludicrous.
It looks real, because L7 have convincing songs to support their actions.
Real, dynamic — secretly sensitive — life-affirming songs, which fall somewhere between The Beastie Boys and The Ramones.
Brilliant.
Faith No More are a phenomenon: a stadium rock band who really don't fit in with the whole rock grandeur.
FNM are also a sensitive lot, although their sensitivity is as twisted and tormented as vocalist Mike Patton's melodies.
‘Be Aggressive’(all about swallowing semen!) could be all trousers and no brain but instead the lyrics reek of understanding: ‘Tall and reckless/Ugly seed/Reach down my throat/You filthy bird/That's all I need.’
Then there's tonight's classic cover versions: The Commodores' ‘Easy’ and The Dead Kennedy's ‘Let's Lynch The Landlord’, which infiltrate their own headstrong panic attacks.
FNM stretch their own limitations and the starched boundaries of their ill-fitting genre.
Take the rap-like ‘We Care A Lot’ or ‘Epic’, the all-out thrash of ‘RV’or ‘Midlife Crisis’, then try and fit in ‘Easy’.
Confused?
You will be.
Hanging behind the hairy guitarist is a banner which reads, ‘Jim Martin is the techno king’.
Jim Martin looks like he should be in Thin Lizzy.
In fact, they all look like they should be in different bands — which is how they manage to slip from soul to jazz, from funk to thrash, so easily.
Time to wade through the shite and allow Mike Patton to take us to his demented world — a warming thought indeed.
Lonely goatee-herd Mike Patton tries out that ‘Be Aggressive’ technique
The soft white beer belly of L  F—ING 7's Jennifer
EARWIG
BRIGHTON'S EARWIG have come over all weird.
Their sound, previously user-friendly indie guitar pop, is now deeply mood-led and spine-tinglingly atmospheric, ethereal master class stuff.
Singer Kirsty Yates' vocals and spooky lyrics provide the strongest bridge between Earwig past and present.
The difference is, now the voice has an upgraded environment in which to shine, like a great oil painting shifted from bedsit to art gallery.
Her caressing, lullaby tones couple child-like sensitivity with reflective awareness, and as such is an ideal vehicle for telling fairy tales.
Kirsty could convince any kid that goblins and fairies reside in the bottom of the garden, no problem.
Earwig only do four numbers tonight, but as ‘Every Day Shines’, ‘Scraped Out’ and ‘Sickhair’brood on considerably longer than average songs, the set's not over abruptly.
Frequently, purveyors of delicate doodlings aren't much cop live, tiresome mumble 'n' fumble trappings making you wish you'd stuck to the vinyl.
Earwig, thankfully, aren't that retiring and introverted, blissed out on personal dreamscape excursions yes, but not painfully so.
That said, they do deal with an all-too familiar problem.
While the audience isn't completely shut out, with much material pre-programmed, some of the reasons for offering the songs live are redundant.
For them maybe the experience is cathartic, but for us, ready-made perfection equals staticity.
Earwig want to communicate equilibrium, purity, dark simplicity.
With sequencers that's achievable, but then much of the performance is over before they touch the stage.
INDIGO GIRLS
THE INDIGO Girls are so…well…um,inoffensive they should be presenting Play Away or running musical workshops for the under fives.
Who else would wear Andy Pandy candy-striped dungarees on stage, other than Philip Schofield?
But hell, they are American after all, so style is not a consideration here.
After all, thirtysomething literary lyricists Amy Ray and Emily Saliers have already managed to shift over two million copies of their first two albums in the States without the use of heavy make-up and conical tits.
Their apple pie 'n' homily blend of familiar Vega introspection coupled with fold rock vocals and occasional bluegrass guitars, not to mention beatific harmonising, is a powerful magnet for every homesick US student in town.
Partisan sentiments aside, these girls are cool .
Budgie likes them so much he's slipped Siouxsie's leash and is playing drums, Sarah Lee (ex-Gang of Four) is on bass, with a  fiddler and cellist augmenting the intricate acoustic melodies.
Pithy and intellectual, the Indigo Girls deal with the ordinary as in ‘Airplane’(the fear of flying) and the esoteric, ‘Galileo’(about reincarnation) and ‘Ghost’(romanticised memories of love).
‘Chickenman’ is a  roguish Pogue-ish fiddle-dee-dee, ‘Prince Of Darkness’is beautifully simple and stark, while ‘Kid Fears’managed to be menacing and delicately haunting.
There are only two duff blueberries in the pie: a Dylan cover, ‘Tangled Up In Blue’, is transformed to no obvious end, into tangled-up harmonies and folk rock fiddling, while an acoustic Dire Straits cover, ‘Romeo and Juliet’, just begs the question; why?
Back on their own territory, ‘Closer To Fine’, a campus anthem with a line about graduation sending an end-of-term whoop through the preppy crowd, the girls give up trying to sing and just let their fan(atic)s sing it back to them, eerily word-perfect.
MARTIN STEPHENSON & THE DAINTEES
HE'S THE Tynemouth tyke, the cheeky chappie with the porkpie hat, award-winning dimples and, erm, a plectrum glued to his forehead.
And as I arrive at the university, Martin Stephenson is well into a meandering anecdote about Hoovers, the capacity audience hanging on every word as he does what he does best.
Just be himself.
With tunes.
Although the set-up with The Daintees is basically the matey-blokes-next-door scenario, Stephenson deals the unique card of being the star-next-door.
His is a warmly engaging personality, a man of wit, charm and humility without a trace of the usual pop-essentials, pretension and arrogance.
When, a few bars into ‘We Are The Storm’, he casually leaves the stage in the charge of his bemused bass-player, the essence of the Stephenson performance become clear.
He re-appears, gently strumming his 40-year-old acoustic guitar in the midst of the audience and proceeds to busk around the crowd!
For ten minutes he becomes a wandering minstrel, illuminated by the bass-player following him with a torch from the stage.
OK, on paper it all sounds like nausea-inducing stuff, the kind of thing that would cause any self-respecting Popkid to  pack up his T-shirts and join the next peace convoy out of town.
But this really is life-enhancing stuff, a genuine triumph for the good guys, a feel-good experience for the dumper-bound '90s.
So, he's — hey!— a good bloke, but so what?
Like Edwyn Collins, Stephenson marries an endearing sense of self-parody — the occasional wayward foot on the monitor, whacking the microphone with his head, a make-it-up-as-you-go-along approach to live performance — with a tenacious grasp of melody and a literate lyrical style.
‘Rain’, ‘Trouble Town’ and the poignant ‘Nancy’affirm Stephenson as one of his generation's finest songwriters.
So pack away those prejudices, it's official — Martin Stephenson is cool.
Shame that more didn't realise it before this farewell tour.
WRITE SAID FRED
EDITED BY THE INFO-MOUS FRED DELLAR
IF YOU WANNA GET AN 'ED
With ED KUEPPER due to make a UK visit, is it possible to have a discography of the man's vinyl CD encounters since quitting The Saints?
A full discography would be too space-consuming.
So here's an all-inclusive checklist that includes both UK and Oz releases.
SCHLONG MAY HE RUNDGREN
Where is TODD RUNDGREN now that we need him most?
R Palmer (no relation), Bristol
According to a recent Hollywood Reporter piece, the Runt is currently labelless but has been working on a project which has been hailed as the first interactive album.
Apparently Rundgren has pieced the music in segments so that those who own CD-I or CD-ROM units can construct their own songs from the assembled musical blocks.
Reckons Rundgren: ‘The album can be different each time you hear it…you swim in a musical direction until you change the vector.
Or you can hang out in a part of the music if you like the verse.’
But, because an album released in CD-I format isn't likely to set the charts alight right now, a standard CD version of the album will also be made available — when Rundgren eventually gets to signing on the dotted, that is.
IT'S LIFE, CAPTAIN…
In the recent NME 4AD retrospective, the author asked of various one-off bands, including MY CAPTAINS, ‘who the hell were you?’
Well, I was 25 per cent of My Captains, playing drums.
About the time that the 4AD single was released, in 1981, we parted with our bass player due to‘musical differences’.
The three of us remaining thought it would be simple to replace him but, after various attempts, failed to do so.
It seemed that we auditioned all the local misfits and no-hopers and we eventually even used backing taped instead of a bassist, but it wasn't comfortable.
Currently, all three remaining members of My Captains still live in Oxford.
I am a trade union representative and Labour councillor, John Lisle is a law lecturer in Luton, while Richard Rowland is an English lecturer at Oxford University.
So here's the proof that not all one-miss blunders end up on the dole queue.
Tarver still has copies of the original EP for sale if anybody wants to hear My Captains' Joy Div-derived music at this late stage.
Which is why his address is printed in full.
CALE'S No. 10 WINNERS
The winner of the complete JJ Cale CD collection is Stephen Garrison of Rotherham, S Yorks, while those due to receive copies of the special Cale promo are:
FREE WHEELIN' IT AIN'T
Having noticed an item in the US News section of a recent NME claiming that an original stereo copy of BOB DYLAN's ‘Freewheelin'’ album had recently been sold for $US 12,000, I hastened to check my dad's original copy.
And there, beneath the sleeves notes by Nat Hentoff, I found an asterisk and the description ‘Stereo’!
So how much can I get for it now?
Flashback to 1963 when Dylan was due to appear on the Ed Sullivan Show and planning to sing ‘Talkin' John Birch Society Blues’, a cut from his forthcoming album.
He auditioned the song for the show and all went well, but on the night of the big gig itself, the Editor of CBS-TV Programming decided to give it the chop, fearing that the talking blues, which lampooned both the society and racism in general, might upset redneck viewers.
Dylan immediately walked.
But, in the aftermath, Columbia pulled the album shortly before the projected day of issue and deleted not only ‘Talkin' John Birch Society Blues’ but also ‘Rocks And Gravel’, ‘Let Me Die In My Footsteps’and ‘Gambling Willie's Dead Man's Hand’.
A few mono copies of the album with the deleted cuts did make it out of the factory but no stereo version was believed to have been pressed until early this year, when the only known copy was advertised for auction by Strider Records of New York.
It's this version which is now recognised as the rarest Dylan record in the world and valued in Neal Umpred's Goldmine Price Guide To Collectible Record Albums as being worth $10,000, though a bid of over $12,000 eventually secured a deal.
Unfortunately, the ‘normal’ 1963 UK stereo edition of ‘Freewheelin’on SBGP 62193 (which is probably the one your father stored away) would only pull in about £12 in mint condition.
‘Todger’ Rundgren in classic trouser-stretching mode
DISCOGRAPHY
MEGA CITY FOUR
Everything that the Megas have achieved has been received with a degree of surprise.
Sometimes it seemed that those who loved them were almost willing the band to spend their lives touring pubs, returning to Farnborough merely to return the empties and pick up the bills.
When ‘Tranzophobia’ arrived in trendy non-vinyl form, one pundit was moved to declare: ‘The Megas on CD?
Ye Gods, whatever next?’, while another spent a fair bit of lineage explaining that the foursome, who moved decidedly upmarket via their first Big Life LP release, were now ‘fitting in’ Tokyo and Paris as well as Norwich and Wigan.
Now, unbelievably, they have become the subject of the ultimate accolade — an NME discography to tie-in with the release of their current live album.
The Megas circa 1986.
Oh dear, oh dear, oh dear…
CHARTS
Rock dinosaurs The Loveblobs
Turn it up!
Neil's ‘quiet one’ makes Number Ten
Club Medic: Therapy?
With a twist: Lemonheads' Evan Dando
Wicked Cube: you only live Ice…
Butterfly shirts, stripy tank-tops: that's why the '70s were great, sez Donny…
FRED FACT
IT WAS almost shock horror time when the blues recently got up one morning and decided to take a walk through the pop charts in the form of John Lee Hooker's ‘Boom Boom’.
‘Unbelievable!’ cried a media unused to hearing from singers who habitually hate to see the sun go down or sleep in hollow logs.
Then, they'd never read their chart books, otherwise they'd have known that the blues has always provided record companies with a regular and often low-cost source of income.
It's probably that Robert Johnson, who finally headed for the crossroads in 1938, made more money for Sony/Columbia last year than many of their more super-hyped contemporary acts.
Come to think of it, Columbia wouldn't have been around if it hadn't been for the blues.
The whole deal began back in 1920 when Mamie Smith, the first blues singer to be commercially recorded, cut ‘Crazy Blues’ for the Okeh label, a song that came backed by ‘It's Right Here For You (And If You Don't Get It…
Tain't No Fault Of Mine)’.
On release, the single went to Number Three in the US charts of the time, after which Mamie logged another seven Top Ten hits.
But it was Mamie's namesake Bessie Smith (no relation) who really whooped it up.
In 1923 she recorded ‘Downhearted Blues’, one of the 14 releases Bessie had on Columbia that year, and it became a million seller, helping to save the company from certain bankruptcy.
The thing was that her records, though initially aimed at a black music market, sold equally well to whites, who loved the risqué nature of the blues.
Essentially, the bisexual Bessie was the Madonna of her day, the Queen Of The Blues, the Empress Of Erotica, her ‘Empty Bed Blues’ providing a catalogue of lovers who had satisfied her sexually, while ‘Foolish Man Blues’found her musing about homosexuality: ‘There's two things got me puzzled, there's two things I don't understand/That's a mannish-acting woman and a skipping, twistin' woman-acting man.’
From there on, the blues never went away, moving into country music — Jimmie Rodgers, ‘The Father Of Country Music’, established a chart career by means of such records as ‘Blue Yodel’ and ‘Brakeman's Blues’— linking with gospel and jazz to become R&B, which itself mutated into rock.
Bill Haley would chart with Big Joe Turner's ‘Shake, Rattle And Roll’, while Elvis would record bluesman Arthur ‘Big Boy’ Crudup's ‘That's All Right’at Sun Studios, as producer Sam Phillips played John Lee Hooker records between takes.
The arrival of skiffle in the UK during the mid-'50s also added to blues awareness, Lonnie Donegan even nicking his stage name from New Orleans' blues giant Lonnie Johnson.
By the early '60s there were hundreds of kids in Britain who toted guitars and had ear-tested the wares of Hooker,.
The early careers of The Rolling Stones, and others were littered with blues covers and, as a result, originals, like Hooker's 1956 Vee-Jay version of ‘Dimples’ and Tommy Tucker's ‘Hi-Heel Sneakers’(but unfortunately not his recording of ‘Hey Lawdy Mama, Whose Funky Drawers Are These?’) filtered through to the upper echelons of the British pop charts.
More recently, there'd been further reappraisal of America's bluesmeisters and U2 hauled in BB King to jointly provide a Top Ten single in ‘When Love Comes To Town’, while Gary Moore charted with the aid of Albert King.
So, in a week that found Hooker registering his fourth UK album success, it could hardly come as a complete surprise to find ol' John Lee celebrating 43 years of chart activity by appearing on Top Of The Pops .
But, as John Lee once proclaimed: ‘Rock 'n' roll is still the blues.
They jazzed it up, dressed it up, but it's still the same old bag, you know.’
Boom boom!
John Lee Hooker: ‘Woke up this mornin', found I'd had 43 years of chart activity…’
ANGST
EDITED BY BETTY PAGE
SINEAD — THE DEBATE: IS SHE TOP OF THE POPES?
THE NEW JOAN OF ARC?
IS SHE DISSING THE BIBLE?
WHAT PLANET IS SHE ON?
THE DECISION IS YOURS…
HOLY ROMAN UMPIRE
RE: Stuart Maconie's article Mouth Almighty .
It does take courage ( though perhaps not integrity) to rip up a picture of the Pope on prime-time TV.
This should not be seen as an attack on a balding old Pole but on the institution he leads — ie the hierarchy of the Catholic Church, whose attitudes towards gays, women and other oppressed groups belong in the dustbin of history as do those of most religious hierarchies.
Whether Sinead's outburst was an ego trip or not, it does raise important issues and she should be applauded for that.
Mr Maconie should realise that the Roman Catholic hierarchy does  f— all to help AIDS victims, seeing it as a gift from God to rid the world of some of its scum, when it has the power to change attitudes for the better all over the world.
And therefore, to attempt to uncover the said hierarchy as a grotesque sham, guilty of appalling crimes against humanity over the centuries is a valid political and social comment.
If all church hierarchies and their friends in high political office preached tolerance and compassion, the need for groups such as The Terrence Higgins Trust would be reduced, if not eliminated.
The State should take the roles that charities are forced to provide for the sick, needy and downtrodden of all races, sexes and sexual orientations, and the churches, if they are God's houses on Earth, should highlight problems and press for change.
Sinead O'Connor should be congratulated for her stand (what the hell does Bob Dylan do these days?) against church hypocrisy but not for her recent album which is, to be frank, boring.
Murdered Guatemalan street children, intolerance of the AIDS problem, church hypocrisy and Western power, society, culture and commerce are all inextricably linked, so a stand against any should be a stand against all.
Opinions about Sinead in the NME office is sharply divided between those who admire her outspokenness and bravery and those, like Mr Maconie, who  think she's a talentless baggage who should keep her mouth shut.
You, D, obviously aren't sure you like her very much, but at least you'll admit that she is trying to raise awareness about important issues, like Mr Dylan, when he was alive.
Even if she is an overpaid brat in danger of losing her marbles, at least she provokes a reaction, and is 500 times more controversial than Madonna.
Ego trip?
Why would anyone renounce their entire career just to boost their ego?
No, I think she really means it, man.
How extraordinary that a waif-like singer in her 20s — however you judge her talents — can stir up so much feeling.
And it's a scientifically proven fact that she is Mary Magdalene reincarnated — BP
WOULD YOU LIKE A CUP OF INTEGRITY?
While I do not agree with much of what Sinead says, I feel I must defend her from your ridiculous slurs.
Firstly, you describe the cover of ‘Success Has Made…’ as a Benetton-type marketing move.
It could equally well be seen as an attempt to draw attention to problems in the world that her audience might not be aware of.
You may be right, but your cynicism would be easier to accept if it was universally applied.
The Heavenly EP is, according to you, ‘A  charidee EP of rubber soul classics, namely Right Said Fred songs, all proceeds to the ace Terrence Higgins Trust’.
It seems more likely that is a marketing ploy from Heavenly Records to earn airplay and novelty hits for the less successful artists on its roster.
Secondly, you assert Sinead does not have ‘courage and integrity’ and then follow this up with an argument that these nouns should be reserved for Mother Theresa and fellow carers.
This is a specious argument.
In what way does stating (correctly) that some people possess these qualities to a greater degree mean that Sinead does not?
It seems transparently obvious that Sinead, love her or loathe her, does possess those qualities.
She says what she honestly believes in a brave, even foolhardy manner.
You conclude your article by suggesting to readers that they reserve their money for those with integrity and courage, such as Amnesty International…and the Heavenly Records EP!!??
I don't know about you, but courage and integrity are the words I always think of when I consider record labels.
In this business, you're on dodgy ground trying to attach the words ‘courage’ and ‘integrity’to anything; certainly the Heavenly EP is for a good cause, and those involved are doing a lot for their profiles in the worthiest possible way, blah blah, charidee , blah blah AIDS, but Sinead has done too (see following letter) and in any case, she's on another planet to these people.
She will doubtless soon announce that AIDS has been planted by the Holy Roman Empire to stop us having sex.
And who knows, she might be right — BP
Sinead O'Connor's use of a picture of a murdered Guatemalan street child can't really be compared to Benetton's shock-ads-for-profit.
It ties in with her comments on the abuse children throughout the world suffer.
So what if it has nothing to do with the record inside?
She's putting a message across, that's what matters.
On the back of the sleeve we can read about what happened to the boy.
Benetton just showed us the pictures not the background to the pictures.
If Sinead had wanted to do a Benetton shocker, the photograph used would have been of the boy's body.
‘People are really suffering out there,’ says Maconie.
Yes, that is exactly what the record sleeve is saying.
Maconie then goes on about the ‘Fred EP’ and how the proceeds  go to THT.
Well, excuse me, but didn't Sinead sing ‘You Do Something To Me’ for ‘Red, Hot And Blue’?
Hang on, the B-side to ‘Success…’ is in fact the same track, and lo and behold, all royalties are donated to AIDS charities…
That might genuinely do some good, eh Stuart?
 F—ing hell, she can't be Elton John every day!
I'm also sick to death of patronising DJ shits like Simon Bates saying that Sinead is ill and that when she is being nice, she is the loveliest person in the world.
Well, she is a woman, so perhaps she shouldn't have a strong point of view.
People are really suffering because of the church and we need Sinead O'Connor to state that fact.
And she's right, the answer is love.
WITCH-BURNING TO RETURN!
So Sinead is the new Joan Of Arc.
‘Burn witch, burn’, and your music and radical views, too.
Somehow I just don't agree.
Looking at her recent outburst on America's Saturday Night Live , in many ways the girl was right.
The controlling hierarchy of the Roman Catholic Church is, quite frankly, living in the Middle Ages.
Supposedly grown-up people that believe human beings cannot practise safe sex and contraception, or that it is right to deny a 14-year-old girl who has been raped an abortion because it would be morally wrong in the eyes of God, are not living in the real world.
I liken the recent televised steamrollering of Ms O'Connor's merchandise to the nightly book-burning sessions by the Nazis in the '30s.
Would any of the people who jeered Sinead at the Bob Dylan Concert in New York have the bottle to go on live prime-time TV, to criticise her?
The silence and hypocrisy is deafening.
God — who said religion and pop music don't mix.
And how pathetically ironic that a bunch of Americans, who normally carp on about freedom of speech and the First Amendment, resort to crushing records which contain perfectly innocent torch songs when they defend to the hilt the right of misogynist swine like 2 Live Crew to peddle their filth with impunity.
Sinead's right, there's a hell of a lot wrong with the world — BP
AND YEN AGAIN…
In Sinead's interview, she proposed a motion which says: ‘If everyone else was going to do it, would you be prepared to live without money?’
I'm glad to say that I'd definitely vote for it.
I'm quite convinced that society could be run without money and every one of us would actually become far better off — not economically, of course, but emotionally and culturally.
You may say that you could hardly trust me saying it because I'm wealthy enough to be able to come here from Japan to study.
In that case, don't take my word for it, but please read News From Nowhere by William Morris.
Then, if you still can't imagine a world without money, there must be something wrong with you.
I'm not saying I want to see Morris' Utopian vision in action exactly as it is, but a lot of his idea is still very inspiring a century after it was written.
If money disappeared from this world entirely, then I would not have to come here in order to get the sort of education I want.
Money shapes certain ideologies and that ideology defines what education should be.
As Sinead says, we need to act very quickly.
However, I have one thing to say to her: please, please, please don't let yourself be ruined by those who don't understand you.
Perhaps you are provoking those people a bit too much.
Take away money, then you take away the pillars of society.
If there is no structure to society, you have anarchy.
Is that the alternative that you, and Sinead, want?
Money may well be the root of all evil, but what choice do we have?
Right now, no money equals no power.
No power equals a voice in the wilderness.
Sad, but that's the real world — BP
ALTARED IMAGES
I am a Catholic and as opposed to the narrow-minded Catholics of America as Sinead.
I was in no way offended, though, by O'Connor's simple action of tearing up a picture of the Pope on television.
Catholics are only angry because they feel threatened and so there must be some strength and force in what she is trying to say.
People don't have to agree with what she believes, but if you don't like it, just ignore it and stick to your own views.
However, if it strikes a chord — as many of her views did with me and my already shaky faith then and requires you to question your faith — QUESTION IT and stop following like sheep.
How can Sinead O'Connor talk about Christianity?
Christianity is about following Christ as He is portrayed in the Bible.
What Sinead is trying to give us is Sinead-ism, yet another new belief disguising itself as Christian truth, ripping out the easy parts and leaving behind the parts that are harder to stomach, the parts that demand commitment to Christ.
There are enough people already trying to distort the truth, selectively quoting The Bible in order to push their viewpoint.
If people want to be misled, then follow Sinead-ism, but if they just want the simple truth without any religious crud, then accept Christ's teaching.
That is, that he came to Earth to save mankind from the wrong in the world, which separates us from God.
Christ, in dying, took the punishment for all the world's evil, so that anyone who accepts this truth can be forgiven.
Christ is the only way to God.
It's as simple as that.
So why does Sinead say that the New Testament was forged, and then tell us to read the book of Revelations.
This is part of the New Testament!
Come on, if she is going to feed us this crud, she could at least get her research right.
If she ever bothered to read the so-called ‘forged’ New Testament then she would realise that it states very clearly that Christ was a direct descendant of the Jewish King David.
Never mind the historians, for the whole truth, read The Bible !
‘People won't have to go to work, so they can sit around having a good laugh.’
This is Sinead O'Connor's wealthless Utopia, and it's an insult to the millions of people who work hard, not for money, but because some work just needs doing.
Who, in Sinead's world, would treat the sick?
Provide shelter?
What planet is she on?
This NEEDS to be done.
We can't all sit around laughing, 'cos we'd all die pretty soon because there was no-one to gather food, or make sure it was safe.
Just because she's never had a proper job.
Why didn't she  become a rape counsellor or a psychiatric nurse?
So, she chose to become a pop star, in a business which champions immorality, or, at the very least, amorality.
She must have known that anyone who tries to convey a message in rock music is brushed aside as being pompous or bombastic, because journalists in their King's Reach Ivory Towers think rock is too sacrosanct to be tainted with the real world.
The point is, there would have been some validity to her claim that she was making a point through music…if she had made one.
But where was it?
In cover versions of Prince and Lloyd Webber?
I don't respect O'Connor because she suggests that decent working people just give up everything, and because she doesn't genuinely make the best of the power she HAS got.
Sinead is just a rock'n'roll chick who forget to write any songs.
So she can sod off now, with my blessing.
Sugar Spun Sister, Birmingham
Phew, she says, collapsing in Sineadist exhaustion.
How excellent to see that Sinead has brought out the closet intellectual and spiritual in all of you.
It's heartening to realise that you have taken the Sinead interview seriously and not just dismissed it totally as the meanderings of a bonkers woman.
I return again to the point that I made originally — why is it that this vulnerable, waif-like, often frighteningly naive girl who always speaks her mind — but is after all only a pop singer — is taken seriously at all?
Why don't you just all ignore her and hope she goes away?
By God, she must have something if she stirs up so many polarised opinions.
For what it's worth, I think she's an utterly compelling, beautiful woman who is struggling with herself and her confusion and just hasn't learned how to channel her power yet.
When she does, watch out world…
I'd rather there were ten million Sineads and no Madonnas — BP 
PUBLIC NME
While America goes crazy over its new President elect, CARTER USM are busy making themselves the next most popular thing with the inhabitants of that wacky continent and really should have done the decent thing and put themselves up for election.
Now there's a concept for you.
When not busy whipping crowds to a frenzy (but more of the Skin 2 Rubber Ball later), they became the first band to play the newly re-opened Stone Pony Club in Asbury Park, New Jersey where, of course, BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN first launched his career.
Apparently the club lost its license and was shut down after a series of lawsuits stemming from car accidents involving drunk punters — and under American law, bar staff who serve drunk drivers are liable to get hauled up in front of the local beak of those people are later involved in accidents.
Anyway, further down the Carter tour sheet, the band had an evening off in Atlanta and decided to go and check out a local restaurant which, they found, belonged to MICK JAGGER.
Feeling a bit of a jape coming on, they went in and ordered a veggie omelette.
When aforementioned item arrived, a snickering Jim Bob sent it back saying ‘This isn't original!’
A bewildered staff didn't quite know what to do next as they were completely ignorant of the ongoing wrangle between Carter and the Stones over ‘Ruby Tuesday’ which, it seems, still hasn't been sorted out.
One thing which, it seems, has been sorted out is that contrary to what SINEAD O'CONNOR said in this very organ recently, her record company have emphatically denied that she's going to stop making records.
Well, they would, wouldn't they.
Party of the week had to be the one which was held this week to launch NEW ORDER manager ROB GRETTON's latest business venture.
No, it isn't a home for fat, elderly over-the-hill musos, but a record label called simply robsrecords.
Taking over the brothel-like SW1 Club, it was Manc yobboes night out as half of the Hacienda descended on London.
Taking part in chilling out were NEW ORDER, minus BARNEY who was still confined to quarters agonising over album lyrics, CABARET VOLTAIRE, PETE WYLIE (what was that about the class of ‘82?),
BIG COUNTRY (wot?) and representing the more youthful end of the spectrum INTERSTELLA, MOOD SWINGS, SENSITIZE, SUGARBLAST, hotly-tipped newcomers FLOWER SERMON and a whole host of DJs, liggers and ‘colourful’ characters.
The evening passed largely without incident, with no wars breaking out in the terraces.
Which is more than can be said for the album sleeve of the new ACR album, which has caused unheard-of dissent at the offices of British Coal who claim that the artwork looks too much for comfort like the British Rail Freight logo and are threatening legal action.
Someone from British Coal rang a bemused Rob Gretton to find out what ‘the political content of the record was’ as, what with the goings-on with the imminent pit closures they claim not to want any more adverse publicity!
While MICHAEL PALIN goes Pole to Pole, ZODIAC MINDWARP and enigmatic KLF mastermind BILL DRUMMOND have decided to go on an Arctic adventure all of their own and without the help of special medication…
Their latest exploit to stun and confuse the world involves them embarking upon a mission to the North Pole to place a photo of ELVIS PRESLEY there.
Along the way they intend to write a book of their experiences, most of which will undoubtedly be totally unprintable.
And do we care anyway?
Do we heck, Mrs Hoskins.
Oh no, it's a Transit van story!
Well, it's more of a Rolls-Royce story actually…
Most arduous and spectacular gig trip of the week has to be the odyssey which befell SEAN O'HAGAN and the HIGH LLAMAS on their way to the Mean Fiddler.
Halfway there, said van blew up nearly taking their gear with it.
However, to the rescue comes their driver, an enterprising Swiss chap who announced that they were not to worry, he had a friend who lived nearby who could help them out.
Off he goes and returns a few minutes later with friend and a dirty great Roller, all pristine chrome and gleaming fenders.
Unbecoming as it was to their cred, the embarrassed band loaded themselves and gear into the vehicle and tried very hard indeed not to be seen getting out of it at the other end.
The extremely well-britched U2 are about to incur a few expenses as it would appear that they have half-inched some of the NME 's STUART BAILIE's bon-mots.
The king of Yodie Bodie was watching the latest U2 full length video, which features various video remixes, when suddenly, during the clip for ‘Nothing But The Real Thing’— which features cut-ups of sentences interspersed with the action — he thought, hang on a mo' this is all looking mighty familiar.
Getting the slo-mo on the go, to his horror he discovered that the band had half-inched whole chunks out of his maiden U2 feature!
Copyright!
We scream.
IPC will be sending Bono and Co the bill or failing that, a crate of champagne delivered to the Rancho El Bailie would be most welcome.
THOUSAND YARD STARE got themselves into a bit of a fix while on tour in the US supporting Carter.
At the drink-up after their New York appearance, the band were hanging out with ex-Nymph INGRE LORRE, who invited them all back to her mother's house for a Halloween party (surely an offer not to be passed up).
The band trundled back to their hotel — the infamous Chelsea Hotel — to get their best party rags on and were halfway through their quick-change when the NY police burst into their room and hauled them off to the station.
It seems that a passer-by had spotted a naked man frolicking on the balcony — who happened to be in the room next door — and somewhere along the line a case of mistaken identity occurred.
Spotted grooving on down amongst all the leather and rubber clad ravers at this  week's Skin 2 Charity Rubber Ball which was held at Hammersmith Palais were one or two leather-togged pop stars believing themselves to be invisible in the throng.
Glimpsed working up a sweat were designer JEAN-PAUL GAULTIER, HOOKY and the OTHER TWO from New Order, CHRISTOPHER QUENTIN and hiding in the gloom was a small figure in a baseball cap with his hands in his pockets…a man Carter would very much like to have half an hour with…a man who went unnoticed due to the abundance of facial hair under his proboscis…yes, it was the rocking grandad himself, MICK JAGGER!
Tough girls LOVECRAFT are currently on the continent wowing all and sundry.
Amongst those who have fallen prey to their charms are none other than the Beaujolais Brothers, who whisked the merry troupe off to their chateau and cracked open a few bottles of ultra-rare white Beaujolais Nouveau.
We hear that they made a few proposals of an undetermined nature which we are sure do not involve recording contracts…lives of the rich and famous, eh?
Where are they now corner…in the wake of the current ORANGE JUICE resurgence, we hear that former bassist DAVE MCCLYMONT is currently employed making rice balls in an ethnic restaurant of some description in Sydney, while MALCOLM ROSS works in a hospital shop in Southend selling bottles of Lucozade to visiting relatives but still gives guitar lessons in the evenings.
Of course, STEPHEN DALY is now getting his own back on all the groups in the universe making a living as an NME hack, while JAMES KIRK is currently resident in PAUL QUINN's new band.
Whatever happened to ZEDE MANYIKA, we cry?
Definitely not on the missing list, we hear, is the elusive BLACK FRANCIS who is currently well on his way to finishing a solo album which is scheduled for release early in the New Year.
Release those bats, we say!
While we're on the subject, 4AD are anxious to point out that the PIXIES are not splitting up and their album should be ready for next year, too.
Onstage mayhem on the last date of the mammoth KINGMAKER, BLEACH and KITCHENS OF DISTINCTION US beano.
Everyone got up on stage for the final encore and launched themselves into a shambolic but passionate rendering of ‘Wild Thing’ which involved a bit of hot action in the shape of LOX from Kingmaker snogging an alarmed PATRICK from the Kitchens during the chorus.
Doing a lot of finger-pointing this week were MIRACLE LEGION, who are currently supporting GREEN ON RED.
After the Glasgow gig, the lads got talking to JERRY from the TEENAGE FANCLUB who came back to pay his respects and nick the beer from their rider.
Sadly this wasn't the only thing to be nicked.
Two guitars went mysteriously missing.
Anyone knowing the whereabouts of a Fender ‘69 Jazz bass and a Washburn Hollowbody should call the band's press officer Heather on 081–846 8090.
And while we're on the subject of missing musical objects, SCORPIO RISING have suddenly found themselves minus a bass player and interested parties, willing to relocate to Liverpool, should contact Marc on 051–608 2084.
THE SHITMAN AND HER
Flushed with success after his appearance on the Indie panel at the recent CMJ seminar in New York, new skid on the block SHITMAN could soon be coming to England as a new face on yoof TV.
Rumours that he is to host a new programme for Janet Street-Porter's Defecate II , featuring MC Wormski, have been strenuously denied, and plans to front a relaunched Top Of The Plops or join Katie Muckrik on The Turd were pooh-poohed.
However, it's believed he is set to clean up with his own rock-bogography Diarrhoea Of A Rock 'n' Roll Star .
(That's enough crap shit jokes — Ed)
GREAT POP THINGS — Goes shopping with the stars (an occasional series) this week…
‘MARK.
E. SMITH’ BY COLIN & CHUCK
I'd likeaaa somE toilet rollsxxx pleaseaaa…!
Would you like a bag luv?
no  Thanx u
she asKed me if I  wNted carrier bag it WAS onleeee toilet  rRollsaa 
 hva you ANY INsectaaaside? for the BUGS and MIDGES are rankED in League VendettTa agaiNST the FAUL-UHx
Come again luv?
Now to buy SoMe cIgs as is My customM 200 B&H…
I'm not wiv yer mate…
boTtom phutt packet lead to pterodactYL Coughcrackle on lungs 555aaaa
y'wot lad?