

She knew what she wanted to do was wrong.
Not really wrong.
Not a sin.
Not the sort of thing she would have to confess to Father Molland at St Clement's on Wednesday afternoon.
After Mr Coleby's visit, she needed the relief it would give her.
John had asked her not to go up to the loft.
But he hadn't forbidden her.
‘Please, Lucasta,’ he'd said.
‘Just for me.’
‘I'm not an invalid.’
‘Yes, I know, dearest.
But it's a heavy ladder, and you'd have to lug it all the way upstairs.’
‘I'd be very careful.’
‘You might slip off the stepladder.
Lifting the hatch is rather tricky even for me.’
He ran his finger down the nape of her neck.
‘And then you'd have to haul yourself into the loft.
Once you get there, it's a minefield.
It hasn't even got a proper floor.
You could trap a foot between the joists or something.’
‘But it's such a mess,’ she said.
‘I'd like to sort things out before baby arrives.’
He knelt down beside her chair.
His face was only inches away from hers.
His concern warmed her.
‘The nesting instinct?’ he said.
‘But seriously — if you had an accident when I was at school, you might lie there for hours.
It's not as if people are popping in and out of the house all day.’
No, this was their home; they didn't want strangers to disturb them at 29 Champney Road.
That was the way it would always be.
For ever and ever.
Amen.
All right, dear John didn't like her going up to the loft, especially when he was out of the house.
She would never disobey him; she had promised.
But he hadn't actually made it an order.
In any case, when they had talked about it, the circumstances had been different.
At the time she had had Peter in her tummy and a fall could have had serious consequences for both herself and the unborn baby.
John was very late this evening.
It had been dark for hours.
In termtime he worked all the hours God gave.
The school didn't appreciate his dedication.
She wished he would come home.
She wished he had been here when that unpleasant Mr Coleby had called.
Dealing with people like Mr Coleby was a man's job.
John would have known exactly what to say to him.
Mr Coleby was clever.
He always came when John was at school.
She had been expecting Hubert Molland with the parish magazine, which was why she had answered the door.
Mr Coleby was standing right on the step.
His big brown car was parked beneath the streetlamp on the road.
As she opened the door, he leaned forwards.
She stepped back.
Too late, she realized her mistake.
He was in the house.
Flecks of rain sparkled on the shoulders of his navy-blue overcoat.
Mr Coleby had a loud Fen voice with broad vowels that grated on her ears.
She was afraid that he would wake Peter if she talked to him in the hall.
She retreated to the sitting room.
He followed.
He was a big man with a square red face.
The room was small and so was she; Mr Coleby was out of scale.
He took up too much space, like a baby cuckoo in someone else's nest.
‘Well, Mrs Redburn,’ he said.
‘I wondered if you'd reconsidered your position.’
She shook her head.
She sat down to conceal the fact that she was trembling.
Mr Coleby sighed.
‘It would be nice to get something settled by Christmas.’
Lucasta stared at the pile of library books on the table.
‘There's nothing to settle.’
‘Now, be reasonable.’
‘Your reasons,’ she said.
‘Not mine.’
‘You won't get a better offer.’
‘Sorry.
Not interested.’
He moved to the bay window, parted the curtains and looked out on Champney Road.
‘It's a funny area, isn't it?’ he said.
‘I reckon you'd be happier somewhere like Locksley Gardens or Ivanhoe Drive.’
‘I'm quite happy here, thank you,’ Lucasta said.
However, she understood what he meant.
Hubert Molland had said as much the other day.
Champney Road was on the east side of Plumford.
Here were the factories, the council estates and — just a few yards beyond the Redburns' back garden — the railway.
Most of John's colleagues lived to the west of the town centre in a suburb where the professional classes clustered in a grid of tree-lined streets with names taken from the works of Sir Walter Scott.
‘Not much of a house, either.
Don't you find it dark?
A bit depressing?
Needs a lot of work done to it.
Anyone can see that.’
She shrugged.
Money was tight, especially since Peter's arrival.
She didn't think the house was dark.
True, it faced north, but you got used to that.
Number 29 was their home.
‘You're quite isolated, too.
Not even a telephone.’
Mr Coleby peered into the darkness on either side of the streetlamp.
‘Big hedge in front — needs a trim, that does.
A blank wall the height of a house on your right.
Can't say I'd like to live next to a bakery.
And on the other side you've got all those trees on the strip of wasteland.
My wasteland now.
You must find it quite worrying.’
He  turned, slowly, and stared at her.
‘Seeing as you're on your own for so much of the time.’
The little room filled with menace.
It hung like a haze and obscured the outlines of the furniture.
Mr Coleby was a huge shadow.
His face dissolved.
Only his eyes were as crisply defined as before: cold, clear and blue.
If only John were here.
Lucasta touched her breast.
It was full of milk.
The knowledge steadied her.
Peter was still feeding from her, and would continue to do so for months.
She had to be strong.
The haze cleared.
‘I'm afraid you're wasting your time, Mr Coleby.’
‘Am I?’
He raised his eyebrows.
‘Why don't you have another little think about it?
It's a big decision — I know that.
You've got to look at all the angles.’
‘The decision's already —’
‘Like, for example, what happens if you have an accident when you're alone in the house?
Or if there's a fire in the night?
Or if some of the local yobbos come round in search of beer money or a bit of fun?’
Deliver me from evil, she thought.
For Thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory.
‘You're threatening me.’
‘Me?’
He chuckled.
‘That's a good one.
Just trying to help, Mrs Redburn, that's all.
You know me.
Anyway, I mustn't keep you.
Don't bother — I can find my own way out.
I'll be in touch.’
Mr Coleby's footsteps echoed in the uncarpeted hall.
She hoped that they wouldn't wake Peter.
She heard him open and close the front door.
The latch on the front gate clicked.
She went to the window.
A moment later the big brown car pulled away from the kerb.
Lucasta went into the hall.
She was tempted to bolt the door.
But if she did that John wouldn't be able to let himself in with his key.
She never used the bolts when John was out.
Hurry home, John.
She listened at the bottom of the stairs.
All was quiet, which was a blessing.
Peter had only just begun to go through the night without demanding a feed.
Unbroken nights were such a luxury.
In the evenings she and John had time to be together.
Gradually the trembling stopped.
She tiptoed upstairs and listened outside the door of Peter's room.
She didn't dare go in: he was such a light sleeper, and he seemed to know by instinct when his mother was in the same room.
She glanced upwards, at the hatch that led to the loft.
The temptation was so strong it made her feel breathless.
John wouldn't mind if she went into the loft.
He would understand.
She would tell him about Mr Coleby's visit and her going to the loft as soon as he came in.
She crept downstairs, through the kitchen and out into the little back garden.
It was much darker on this side of the house.
Behind the garden were several acres of rough pasture, which Mr Coleby had bought at the same time as he bought the strip of wasteland that linked the pasture to Champney Road.
The railway ran in a cutting along the far boundary of the fields.
You couldn't see the trains but you could hear them.
The stepladder was strapped to the outside wall beneath the kitchen window.
John had built a little shelter for it; he was so clever with his hands.
She undid the straps and carried the ladder into the house.
Mindful of what John had said, she stopped to rest — once in the hall, twice on the stairs and once on the landing.
She set up the ladder beneath the hatch.
Practice had made perfect: she hardly made a sound.
Peter slept on.
Rung by rung, she crept up the ladder.
Two-thirds of the way up, she paused to get her breath back before lifting the heavy hatch and sliding it away from the opening.
A shower of gritty dust pattered on her face.
Try as she might, it was impossible to keep the loft as clean as she would have liked.
She climbed higher and at last managed the difficult transition from the top of the ladder  to the edge of the hatch frame.
She glanced down at the landing and the dizziness swept up to meet her.
‘Serves you right, my girl,’ she whispered.
‘You know you've got no head for heights.’
Lucasta reached through the darkness for the light switch.
The loft sprang to life.
She sighed with relief.
The loft ran the length of the house from front to back, and it was lit by two unshaded forty-watt bulbs.
Down the centre was a narrow gangway; she had placed boards across the joists to make movement easier.
On either side of the gangway were neat piles of trunks, cases, cardboard boxes and tea chests — even a bed, propped on its side and wrapped in polythene.
Everything was as she had left it.
Everything was in apple-pie order.
For a moment she stood listening.
Peter was still asleep.
She walked slowly down the gangway, her eyes lingering on the treasures she passed.
She paused twice.
First she lifted the lid of a trunk plastered with the labels of railway companies.
The smell of mothballs rose to greet her.
She stroked the lapel of one of John's old suits, a Prince of Wales check that he had bought before they even met.
She shut the trunk and moved on to a large cardboard box.
She eased off the lid.
Inside, buried in acid-free tissue paper, was her wedding dress.
She closed her eyes and let her fingers burrow through the tissue paper until she felt the lace of the collar.
One day, God willing, she and John might have a daughter; one day their daughter would want to get married.
Carefully she replaced the tissue paper and the lid of the box.
Her excitement grew steadily higher.
On the left, near the end of the gangway, was a blue suitcase resting on top of a tea chest.
John kept the photographs here.
Before their marriage he had made quite a hobby of photography.
Some photographs were in albums, others in envelopes and folders, and everything was neatly labelled.
John was a scientist by training and inclination; he had  a passion for order.
It was one of the many characteristics they shared.
She stared at the contents.
Spoiled for choice, she thought, like a kid in a sweetshop.
She glanced at the framed print of John at the Salpertons' wedding, which was lying on top.
John had been best man; he looked so beautiful in morning dress, far more handsome than the groom.
Tonight, because of Mr Coleby's visit and because John was so late, she deserved a treat.
She would compare the snaps they'd taken of Peter on the lawn in the summer with the photographs of John as a baby.
She delighted in finding resemblances between father and son.
‘My two men,’ she crooned.
She lifted out the Salperton photograph.
Underneath was a team photograph — a schoolboy cricket eleven with John the second from the right in the back row.
As she lifted it out, she realized that the backing was beginning to come away from the heavy cream cardboard of the mount.
Perhaps the loft was too damp to store photographs.
She would have to mention it to John.
She examined the edge of the mount.
All it needed was a little glue.
She would do it this evening.
John would be pleased.
The edge of a sheet of paper between the mount and the backing caught her eye.
She widened the gap and tried to see what it was.
Not the print itself — that was further inside the mount.
She gripped the edge of the paper between thumb and forefinger and gently pulled it out.
It was a letter written in blue ink.
The handwriting was small and upright.
Lucasta knew instinctively that it belonged to a woman.
There was neither date nor address.
Johnny, The doctor agrees, so there's no doubt any longer…
She read to the end.
A mistake — it must be a mistake or a forgery.
Pain stabbed at her chest, twisting like a barbed snake.
Lucasta screamed.
The pain retreated.
The snake was biding its time.
She stumbled down the gangway to the hatch.
Sobbing for breath, she lowered herself on to the ladder.
For once in her life she left the loft with the lights on and the hatch open.
The letter slipped from her hand and fluttered to the landing floor.
John, how could you?
Lucasta pushed open the door of Peter's room and went in.
She wanted, more than anything she had ever wanted in her life, to pick up her baby and cuddle him: to feel his warmth, to feel his need for her.
‘Peter — wake up.
It's Mummy.’
But the cot had gone.
In its place was a narrow bed, stripped to its horsehair mattress.
‘My baby —’
As she screamed, Lucasta remembered that she had lost even Peter.
As she remembered, the barbed snake slashed across her breast.
The pain radiated across her chest and pierced her neck.
The snake wrapped its coils around her.
She could no longer breathe.
She fell — first to her knees, then forwards on to her hands.
The snake squeezed.
The dim light from the landing shone on her hands, the hands of a woman with breasts full of milk for her baby, with a husband working late at school.
They were the last thing that Lucasta Redburn saw.
The last thing she felt, apart from the pain, was surprise.
She recognized her wedding ring but nothing else.
The finger joints were inflamed with rheumatoid arthritis.
The nails needed trimming.
Wrinkles and brown spots disfigured the skin.
The hands belonged to a stranger.
‘Coronary thrombosis.’
Hubert Molland sounded surprised that Peter had asked.
‘The doctor said it could have happened at any time.
I'm afraid it was third time unlucky.’
Third time?
Peter thought.
How typical of her not to tell me.
Behind him, the train shuddered and pulled slowly out of the station.
The doors of the ticket hall were open.
He stared at the darkened forecourt.
Molland's rust-streaked Morris 1100, glossy with rain, was the only car in sight.
Plumford felt much colder than London.
‘How did it happen?’
The old man peered down at him.
‘Very suddenly.
She can't have felt very much.
It looked as if she'd been up in the loft for something, which I suppose was rather rash in her state of health.
She managed to get down the ladder.
And then she collapsed in one of the bedrooms.’
His voice had the hesitancy of age.
It was still flat and harsh.
Years before, at Abbotsfield, Kate had told Peter that her father was tone-deaf.
As a boy, Peter had been afraid of Hubert Molland.
‘Who found her?’ he said.
‘I did.
I went round this morning with the parish magazine.
The milk was still on the step and the curtains were drawn.
Eventually I called the police and they broke down the door.
I found your phone number in her diary.’
‘It was kind of you to let me know.
You shouldn't have bothered to come and meet me as well.’
‘I thought I could give you a lift,’ Molland said.
‘And there are things we need to talk about, naturally.’
He took a step in the direction of the car.
Peter stayed where he was.
‘Naturally?’
Molland turned back.
He flapped his arms against the long, dark coat he wore.
The narrow dog-collar made his neck look even longer than it was.
‘Well, for example, the funeral.
I've already put the arrangements in hand.’
‘You have?’
‘As her executor.’
‘I see.’
‘I assumed you knew.
She discussed the arrangements with me not long before she died.
No doubt she wanted to spare you as many decisions as possible.’
‘Will there have to be a post mortem?’
‘No.
Dr Haines was treating her, so he has issued a death certificate.
We shall need to settle a time for the service — the sooner the better.
I've already had a word with the vicar and made a provisional booking for Friday afternoon.
You'll need to register the death, of course, and lots of other people will have to be notified too.’
‘I take it there's a will?’
‘Yes — lodged with her solicitor.
It's quite straightforward.’
Peter wanted to ask about the contents of the will but that seemed in slightly bad taste.
Suddenly it occurred to him that his mother might still be in her bed at Number 29, waiting for the undertaker.
He had no idea what the procedure was.
‘I — er — I assume the house is empty now.
There's no reason why I shouldn't stay there tonight, is there?’
‘None at all.
Alternatively, I booked a room for you at a bed-and-breakfast.
But that doesn't matter.
In any case, I'll give you a lift.’
‘No, really.
I can manage by myself.’
‘Are you sure?
It would be no trouble.’
‘Quite sure,’ Peter said.
‘I made an appointment for us to see Mr Barnes — your  mother's solicitor — at ten o'clock tomorrow morning.’
‘I'll be there.’
‘Number nine Church Row.
You know it?’
Peter nodded.
Molland cleared his throat.
‘God bless you,’ he said gruffly.
He limped across the pavement and clambered into his car.
Peter turned up the collar of his coat.
He walked down the station approach to the main road, where he turned right.
The rain had a fine and penetrating quality about it that reminded him of the oil you squirt from an aerosol can.
The old part of the town lay half a mile away in a shallow bowl, through which meandered the river that gave the town its name.
The Christmas lights glittered on the tower of St Clement's Church.
From the middle of the nineteenth century, the town had spread east towards the railway and, after the war, crossed over it; now it had flooded over the land between the railway and the new by-pass.
St Clement's clock chimed half-past nine as he reached the beginning of Champney Road.
It was a wide street, and cars were parked continuously along both sides.
The pavements glistened beneath the yellow lamplight.
He hesitated at the gate of Number 29.
The house wore a permanently uncompleted air as if , sixty years before, the builder had intended it to be part of a pair of semi-detached houses but had run out of money or enthusiasm before he started on the second one.
The gate opened silently.
Peter walked up the concrete path and let himself into the house.
He shut the door behind him as quietly as possible.
He was breathing more quickly than usual.
He felt automatically for the light switch but did not turn it on.
The first thing he noticed was the tang of disinfectant, mingled with the familiar smells of polish and coal ash.
The newel post of the stairs gradually emerged from the  gloom, then the mirror on the hatstand and the half-open kitchen door at the end of the hall.
A goods train thundered by.
The silence returned, and he switched on the light.
Inside the house, nothing had changed.
His mother's mackintosh dangled beside her tweed coat on the hatstand.
Above them was a trilby that had belonged to Peter's father.
Yellow and brown linoleum stretched down the hall to the kitchen.
The hall was a place of shadows.
His mother had believed that forty-watt bulbs were perfectly adequate for overhead lights.
Peter pushed open the door to the sitting room.
The sewing bag was on one side of Mrs Redburn's chair and a pile of library books, their corners aligned, on the other.
His mother had read biographies and history, never fiction.
She had listened to the radio occasionally but had never owned a television.
The grate was empty and swept.
The coal scuttle was full.
Peter suddenly realized how cold the house was.
He almost ran down the hall, through the kitchen and into the little utility room that had once been a scullery.
The blue pilot light glowed behind the window of the central-heating boiler but the pump was switched off.
Peter snapped the knob round to its twenty-four-hour setting.
Back in the hall he pushed the thermostat up to seventy-five degrees; he doubted if his mother had ever set it above sixty.
He switched on all the lights downstairs and put the kettle on to boil.
He surprised himself by talking aloud: ‘A nice cup of tea, that's what I need.’
The cold was making him shiver.
‘But first I'd better check the bedrooms.’
The ladder was propped against the landing wall.
The smell of disinfectant was strongest in the little room that had once been his.
The window was open.
Otherwise everything was just as he remembered, even the faded yellow curtains decorated with turquoise flowers and  green leaves: a relic of the 1960s.
The bookshelves were empty and so, he knew, were the drawers and the wardrobe.
He had taken what he wanted when he moved to London after leaving university; the rest of his possessions he had thrown away.
In the spare room, the beds were covered with embroidered bedspreads of slippery green satin.
As far as he knew, no one had slept in either bed since his mother's parents died.
He would sleep in one of them tonight.
Finally, he kicked open the door of his mother's room.
Her nightdress was on the pillow of the double bed, her dressing gown behind the door and her handbag on top of the chest of drawers.
On the bedside table was a glass of water and a bible.
Peter opened the drawer beneath.
Inside were three bottles of pills, a card on which was printed a prayer invoking the assistance of the Virgin Mary, and a small black book.
The front cover was instantly familiar: gilt lettering set in a white rectangle, with some sort of pattern behind it.
The pattern resolved itself into a jumble of items: an aeroplane, an arrow, a cricket bat, a globe, a boxing glove, a book, a set-square, a pair of goggles, a stamp and a football.
The title they framed said: LETTS SCHOOL-BOY DIARY.
Peter glanced inside.
It was a 1964 diary.
The title-page was partly covered by a smear of what looked like dried blood.
Downstairs the kettle began to whistle.
Peter opened the diary at random.
He was staring at the double-page for the week beginning Sunday 23 August.
The thirteenth Sunday after Trinity; a full moon; the 236th day of the year.
Only the Sunday had an entry, which read:Emor.
Good lunch.
Richard said he saw a raven.
Stupid git.
‘Oh Christ,’ Peter said aloud.
Towards morning, Peter dreamed the old dream for the first time in months if not years.
The diary must have sparked it off, perhaps aided by his mother's death and meeting Hubert Molland.
He was standing on the lawn at Abbotsfield, aware of wet, chilly grass beneath his bare feet, and aware, too, of the sleeping house behind him and the utter silence all around.
(Surely the birds must have been singing?
No birds sang, either in memory or in the dream.)
He followed the path through the old orchard.
He saw the pond they called the lake and the grey bulk of the Mithraeum on the farther shore.
The dawn played strange tricks with the pond: it was no longer a muddy puddle, less than ten yards in diameter, but a shining expanse of water, tinted red and silver, and fringed by a belt of trees that seemed more like a forest than the overgrown shrubbery it really was.
It was very beautiful.
In the dream, but not in memory, a mist rose a few feet above the surface of the water like a veil over a familiar face.
And floating on the water, partly shrouded by the mist, was a great black bird.
At that point Peter woke up, as he always did.
The blankets were on the floor and his feet were freezing.
Sweat, rapidly cooling, had soaked his pyjamas.
A faint yellow light filtered through the thin curtains.
For an instant he wasn't sure where, or when, he was.
Then the cross-shaped glazing bars of the window told him he was in the spare bedroom of Number 29.
Had he screamed this time?
Finally he remembered that he was alone in the house, and therefore it didn't matter if he had.
‘It's over,’ he said aloud.
‘It's all over.’
His mother's death was the first he had been intimately concerned with — his father's hardly counted, because Peter had been only thirteen at the time.
He had not realized that there would be so much to do.
Mr Barnes's firm occupied a small Georgian house on the south side of St Clement's.
Hubert Molland was in the waiting-room when Peter was shown in.
Last night, the old man had seemed much the same as ever, but in daylight the effect of the intervening twenty years was cruelly apparent.
Always thin, Molland now looked a caricature of his former self: the flesh beneath the pale, almost yellow skin seemed to have wasted away, accentuating the prominent bones beneath.
The coarse, crinkled hair had faded to grey.
His black suit, now tinged with green, was shiny at the elbows and knees.
Molland picked up the Daily Telegraph lying on the chair beside him and held it out.
‘Have you seen this?’
Peter glanced at the newspaper, which was folded in four.
A wavering red line enclosed one of the announcements of death:
REDBURN.
— On Dec. 12, Lucasta Edith, wife of the late John Henry Redburn, of Plumford.
‘Who put it in?’ he demanded.
‘I did.’
Peter wondered how much it had cost.
‘I'm sure she wouldn't have wanted this.’
‘As I told you last night, she made all the arrangements herself.’
Molland's large blue eyes gazed unblinkingly at Peter.
‘This is one of the things she wanted me to do.
I can show you the memorandum she gave me.’
‘It doesn't matter,’ Peter said.
‘I was surprised, that's all.’
‘She was quite lucid, you know.
Lonely, yes, and perhaps a little eccentric.
But she knew perfectly well what she was doing.’
A secretary came into the room.
‘Mr Barnes will see you now, gentlemen,’ she said.
She held the door open and waited for them to file through.
‘Upstairs and on your left.’
Clive Barnes's room was on the first floor, overlooking  the churchyard.
He was a wiry man with dark, curly hair, whose cavalry twill trousers and tweed jacket clashed with the pair of trainers on his feet.
Molland made the introductions.
‘Do sit down.’
Barnes darted behind his desk.
‘I was sorry to hear about Mrs Redburn.’
He rubbed his hands and looked at Peter.
‘Are you familiar with the contents of the will?’
‘As a matter of fact, no.’
‘Mrs Redburn gave me a note about her financial position.’
He opened the folder in front of him.
‘That was in August, after her first heart attack.’
Peter wondered if he were the only person she hadn't bothered to tell.
‘As I expect you know, most of her income dies with her: she had the old-age pension, plus a private occupational pension as the widow of your late father.
The will appoints Mr Molland her executor, and you the residuary legatee.
Apart from one legacy, the estate will come to you.’
‘What legacy?’
Peter said.
‘Mrs Redburn had a life insurance policy.
She's left the proceeds from that in trust to the parish of St Clement's.
Mr Molland and the vicar are the trustees.
The legacy is to be used as the trustees think fit.’
‘Then what does the rest of the estate consist of?’
Barnes glanced at the sheet of paper in his hand.
‘Her personal possessions — jewellery, furniture and so on.
Whatever is in her current account at Barclays Bank.
Her savings — in August, that was about £1200 in a post-office account, and a little under £4000 in the Leeds Permanent Building Society.’
Peter was surprised his mother had managed to save so much.
But £5000 wasn't exactly a fortune.
‘And then, of course, there's the house itself.’
‘The house?
But I thought she rented it.’
Barnes looked puzzled.
‘What gave you that idea?’
‘I — I just assumed it, I suppose.’
Peter shrugged.
His mother had always flaunted her poverty as if it were a virtue, so there had been no reason to believe she owned an asset as substantial as a house.
‘My mother never talked about money, you see.’
‘Your parents bought it in nineteen-sixty from their landlord.
Your father had taken out insurance to cover the mortgage, so after his death your mother owned it absolutely.’
Barnes went on to talk about the valuation of the estate, applying for probate and the possibility of Inheritance Tax.
The possibility?
But that must mean that the estate might run well into six figures.
Peter nodded every now and then, but his mind was elsewhere.
He owned a house.
A three-bedroom house even in Champney Road must be worth something.
It changed everything.
With a reasonable lump sum behind him he could afford to throw in his job, sell the London flat and move to the country.
It didn't matter where so long as it was cheap.
If he were careful, he could survive for years and, for the first time in his life, do exactly what he wanted.
‘Right,’ Barnes said, glancing at his watch.
‘I'll get things moving.
It should be quite simple.’
He stood up.
‘Do let me know if there's anything else I can do.’
Peter tried to detach himself from Molland as they left the solicitor's office.
Molland, however, had other ideas, which involved visits to the vicar, the undertaker and the assistant manager at Barclays Bank.
These people concentrated most of their attention on Molland, a fellow professional who talked the same language.
He fought against the sensation that Molland had strapped him on a sort of conveyor belt in a factory that processed death.
It seemed to Peter that everyone else had known his mother better than he had.
Afterwards, Molland drove Peter back to Number 29.
They sat in the sitting room, now unusually warm but still filled with traces of Mrs Redburn, and drank coffee.
The old man insisted on taking Peter step by step through everything he had done and everything he proposed to do.
Gradually it dawned on Peter that Molland wanted more than confirmation of his decisions and to demonstrate his own honesty: he honestly believed that this numbingly tedious attention to detail was doing Peter a favour by distracting him from his grief.
‘I've made a list of payments I have made so far.’
Molland took a sheet of paper from his Docket.
‘If you'd care to —‘
‘Please — I've had enough for one day.’
The old man frowned.
‘I'm trying to help, Peter.’
‘I appreciate that.’
Peter hesitated.
‘What did you mean by saying that my mother was eccentric?’
A flush spread across Molland's cheeks.
‘Nothing to worry about.
She didn't get out much, except to church.
Her mind was beginning to wander — only in the sense that she tended to get a little confused about time.
I think she was rather lonely.
This house must have been a lot to cope with.
I was trying to persuade her to move to a retirement flat in Waverley Road.’
‘I didn't see her very often.’
‘No.’
‘I thought she didn't want me to come.’
‘On the contrary, I think she missed you.’
Molland's voice was naturally hard, naturally designed for expressing disapproval.
‘No,’ Peter said.
‘She missed my father.’
When at last he was alone, Peter went back to the sitting room and sat down at his mother's desk.
On it was a solitary photograph in a silver-plated frame — of John Redburn as a young man; he was wearing uniform and sported a narrow, black moustache.
He opened the drawers.
In one of them he found a collection of cheque stubs and account books that went back to the 1940s.
His mother had always been careful  with money.
She used to dole out weekly pocket money to her husband as well as to her son.
Each month, for as long as Peter could remember, she had gone through the bank statement and done the accounts.
On one or two occasions the figures had failed to balance; any discrepancy deeply upset her and Peter had learned to avoid her until she had resolved it.
He sorted the contents of the desk into two piles, one for Molland and Barnes to deal with, and the other for himself to look through at his leisure.
Neither the current cheque book nor the building society passbook was there.
He went upstairs to find her handbag.
On the landing he noticed a piece of paper lying on the floor between the stepladder and the wall.
Automatically he stooped to pick it up.
One side was blank.
On the other was a letter.
The writing, which was in blue ink, was small and upright, as though the writer had used a set-square for each character.
The letter began without date or address:
Johnny,
The doctor agrees, so there's no doubt any longer.
Darling, it's good news, really.
Perhaps it's the best thing that could have happened.
I don't think it will be a problem here — quite the contrary in a way.
As long as it doesn't look too obviously like you, he'll be thrilled.
This had to end.
We knew that from the beginning.
We never had a future.
Can you imagine what it would be like, for both of us (and both of them), if we did what you suggest?
Now you have given me something permanent to remember you by.
I am happy, I really am.
Don't write again, please.
Too many people could be hurt, including you and me.
Goodbye, my love.
M.
P.S. Johnny, please burn this.
Peter read the letter twice before its meaning sank in.
As he walked downstairs, he read it a third time to make sure.
The letter had destroyed at one blow a certainty so obvious that he had never even questioned it: his conception of the relationship between his parents.
All his life, he had taken it for granted that they loved each other to the exclusion of anyone else.
In a sense John Redburn's death had made no difference to Lucasta Redburn.
His hat remained in the hall; his photograph in the silver-plated frame, polished twice a week, presided over the sitting room; his memory was invoked, especially during Peter's teens, in sentences that began with the ominous words, ‘I know for a fact that your father wouldn't have wanted you to….’
Yet the same John Redburn had had an affair — probably after his marriage, and probably with a married woman.
He had wanted to continue the relationship but the woman wouldn't let him.
He had made the woman pregnant, and the woman had intended to have the baby.
And he had been too stupid, or perhaps too sentimental, to destroy her last letter.
Worse than that was the knowledge that his mother had found it, presumably in the loft.
It had probably killed her.
What else had she found in the loft?
What else had she known?
What other surprises were waiting for him?
By a natural progression Peter thought of the Letts School-Boy Diary for 1964.
He remembered the diary very well; it had been a Christmas present from his father in 1963.
He had resolved to keep it for the whole year, egged on by his father, who had promised him a new bicycle if he succeeded.
And Peter had managed nearly two-thirds of the year.
But after August 23 he no longer wanted to continue; the present was best forgotten as soon as it slipped into the past.
In any case, by Christmas  1964 his father had been too ill to remember his promise and too poor to fulfil it even if he had.
He had no idea what he had done with the diary.
In all probability he had thrown it out with the rest when he had moved to London in 1973.
‘Are you sure you want to throw all that away?’ she'd said.
She was standing in the doorway of the sitting room, watching him carry.the first of the cardboard boxes downstairs.
‘I could store them in the loft for you instead.’
Peter had marched on down the hall.
‘I'm not going to want this stuff.’
Regiments of Airfix soldiers.
Eagle Annuals and Dinky Toys, both of which had now become collector's items.
Old school exercise books.
A Hornby clockwork train and a Number 4 Meccano set, both of which had given far more pleasure to John Redburn than they had to his son.
An embarrassing collection of clothes from the 1960s — hipsters, a floral tie and a pair of suede boots that Peter had once loved more than anything in the world.
‘Well, it's up to you.’
Lucasta Redburn rubbed her hands together as though washing them in invisible soap and water, a sign of displeasure.
‘You'll regret it one day.’
At the time Peter had felt a condescending pity: a defect of her personality, no doubt exacerbated by the deprivations of war and the poverty of peace, had made an obsessive hoarder of her.
Now he had to face the possibility that his mother had combed through the cardboard boxes he had left by the dustbins, searching for things that were too good to throw away and also, perhaps, for clues about himself.
God knew what she had found.
Emor.
Good lunch.
Richard said he saw a raven.
Stupid git.
There had been letters, other diaries and all the secret debris of adolescence.
He remembered in particular a long and mawkish poem he had written when his father died: an attempt to create emotions that hadn't existed.
Peter picked up the photograph of John Redburn.
The eyes were narrowed against the sun.
A pipe projected from one corner of the smiling mouth.
On paper, Peter could have described his mother's face in terms of its component parts but he could not visualize it as a whole.
When he tried, all he saw in his mind was a blurred grey oval.
Oddly enough, his father, whom Peter had known for a much shorter time, was quite distinct in his memory, right down to the smell of Palmolive shaving cream and Gold Leaf cigarettes.
On the last occasion he had seen his mother, which was when he came down to Plumford for lunch at Easter, he had thought that to all outward appearances she was exactly the same as she had always been.
Throughout his life, it had seemed to him, she hadn't changed.
The same narrow, lined face, the same grey eyes, the same grey hair with the same permanent wave.
Circumstances like time and widowhood and loneliness had failed to make a mark on his mother.
She was stronger than they were.
It was nonsense, of course— he knew that now.
She must have changed over nearly forty years; he'd simply failed to notice.
Suddenly he was angry.
Deliberately, he lifted the photograph and flung it at the fireplace.
The silver-plated frame winked at him as it turned over and over in the air.
It smashed into the pastel tiles above the grate.
The glass shattered.
On the afternoon of Friday 15 December, the rain stopped, the sun came out and the temperature rose.
To his surprise, Peter almost enjoyed the funeral.
It was not a well-attended affair — perhaps fifteen people, mainly old women, at the church, few of whom came on to the cemetery.
During the service, Peter was agreeably conscious that they were all looking at him as he sat in splendid isolation in one of the front pews.
His role as chief mourner gave him a certain glamour.
He paid little attention to the service itself.
Molland's voice grated away in the chancel.
Peter speculated about the rest of the congregation and thought about the future.
That morning he had visited several estate agents, and his researches indicated that Number 29 might be worth as much as £80,000.
The sale of his flat should raise, once the mortgage was repaid, something in the region of £20,000.
After the service, the other mourners came to offer their condolences.
Some of the faces were vaguely familiar.
A tall woman of about forty, who had sat at the back, slipped away without speaking to anyone.
At the time Peter supposed she was either a connoisseur of funerals or a casual visitor who, finding herself in the middle of the funeral, had stayed because she was too embarrassed to leave.
St Clement's was one of the better-known wool-churches of East Anglia, and even in winter it attracted tourists.
The last in the queue to shake his hand was a large, red-faced man of about his own age.
He was decorously dressed in a navy-blue overcoat, a black tie and a dark suit.
He seized Peter's hand and pumped it up and down.
‘Sorry to hear about your mum.
I saw her quite recently.
Thought I'd pay my respects.’
The accent was local.
‘You remember me, don't you?’
‘Sorry,’ Peter said.
‘I left Plumford a long time ago.’
‘Wise man.
I'm Bill.
Bill Coleby.’
The name unlocked Peter's memory: Coleby, a farmer's son, had been in the same year as Peter at Plumford Grammar School.
They'd been almost-friends for six years.
At sixteen, Coleby left school with two ‘O’ levels, while Peter went on to the sixth form.
Puzzled, Peter said: ‘I didn't realize you knew my mother.’
‘Oh yes.’
Coleby smiled.
‘Look, will you be in Plumford over the weekend?’
Peter nodded.
‘Well, why don't we meet for a drink?
Or better still for lunch.
What about tomorrow?’
Peter said yes because it was easier than saying no.
‘Great.
Saloon bar of the Angel, 12.45: how does that suit you?
We'll take it from there.’
‘That'd be fine.’
‘Okay.’
Coleby smiled, and Peter thought there was a touch of relief on his face.
‘Till tomorrow then.
Bye.’
Peter watched him as he walked down to the lych gate.
Hubert Molland was at his elbow.
‘The cemetery, Peter,’ he said sternly.
He too was watching Coleby.
‘Do you know him?’
Peter asked.
‘Bill Coleby?’
The voice was harsher than before.
‘I imagine everyone in Plumford has heard of Bill Coleby.’
Peter had planned a small and solitary celebration for Friday evening.
On the way back from the cemetery he visited Sainsbury's and bought half a pound of fillet steak, the materials for a green salad and a bottle of champagne.
After dinner he planned to make a proper start on sorting out the contents of the house.
The steak was hissing in the frying pan and he was slicing Chinese leaf on the kitchen table when the doorbell rang.
He threw down the knife, turned off the gas ring and stamped down the hall.
But it wasn't Hubert Molland on an errand of Christian mercy.
It was the tall woman who had slipped away after the funeral service.
‘Mr Redburn?
I'm sorry to disturb you.
I would have phoned but….’
‘No, we're not on the phone,’ Peter said.
‘What can I do for you?’
‘Well — I saw the announcement in the Telegraph .’
The voice was low and hesitant.
‘I happened to be in the area and Lucasta Redburn's not a common name, especially in a town the size of Plumford.’
‘You knew my mother?’
Peter said gently.
The woman smiled.
Her hair was short and dark, and she had a long face with a mobile mouth and crooked teeth.
‘I met her once, a long time ago.
She and your father stayed with my parents.
But in fact I knew you much better.
Look, I'm not explaining this very well.
You probably won't remember me.
I'm Virginia Salperton.’
Peter stared at her.
He thought:Emor.
Good lunch.
Richard said he saw a raven.
Stupid git.
‘Have I come at a bad time?’
Ginny said.
‘Or perhaps I shouldn't have come at all.
Do be honest.’
She took a step backwards, and suddenly he realized that it hadn't been easy for her to come here.
‘I can tell you exactly when I saw you last,’ Peter said, the urge to surprise her briefly triumphing over the other emotions she aroused.
‘It was in nineteen sixty-four.
Sunday the twenty-third of August.’
‘Lucasta Redburn died on Tuesday,’ Ginny Salperton said.
‘Did you know?’
Barbara Quest stopped shaking the salad dressing.
‘Who?’
‘Lucasta Redburn.’
Ginny wondered if she had imagined the flash of panic on Barbara's face.
‘You remember — Peter's mother.’
‘Oh,her .
No, I didn't know.
Why should I?
I haven't seen her since I left Plumford, and I saw as little as possible of her before that.’
‘There was an announcement in the paper — the Telegraph , I think.
My mother saw it.’
‘Really?
Come to think of it, weren't your parents quite friendly with the Redburns at one time?’
Barbara had put down the salad dressing and was examining her face in a small mirror.
She dabbed at a smudge of lipstick with a tissue.
‘It's an extraordinary name, isn't it?
Lucasta, I mean.
Most inappropriate.
Makes you think of — I don't know — buxom Restoration beauties in yards of satin and lace.’
‘The literal meaning is ‘chaste Lucy’,’ Ginny said.
‘Are you sure?’
Barbara put down the mirror.
‘Would you mind if we eat in here?
I've already laid the dining-room table for dinner.’
‘Of course not.
Who's coming?’
‘Just family: James and Kate.
I don't suppose you'd like to come too?
It's always a little tense when there's just the four of us.
You could spend the night if you wanted.
The spare bed's made up.’
‘David's expecting me.
I'd better not.’
Barbara, never the subtlest of people, was trying very hard to change the subject.
She was one of nature's ostriches, the sort of person who tries to deal with anything unpleasant by pretending it doesn't exist.
‘I went to the funeral yesterday,’ Ginny said.
‘Hubert took the service.’
‘Lucasta was just the sort of woman he used to like.
Knew all the responses and had a suitable respect for the cloth.
No sense of humour.
At least she didn't gossip, I'll give her that.
How did she die?’
‘Heart attack, I think.’
‘She can't have been more than seventy,’ Barbara said with a hint of anxiety; she herself was in her middle-sixties.
‘Where did I put the peppercorns, darling?’
‘Behind the salad bowl.’
Another diversion?
‘Do you remember the husband?
What was he like?’
‘John Redburn?
Quite human, really, compared with her.
Liked a laugh.
I think Lucasta bullied him.
He was always rather subdued when she was around.
And then of course he got ill.
Why do you want to know?’
‘I just wondered.
Seeing the name in the paper triggered a lot of memories.’
You can ask your parents about John Redburn,’ Barbara said, and her voice was unusually sharp.
‘They knew him much better than I did.
Why ever did you go to the funeral?’
‘I was driving back from a conference in Norwich, and I wanted to see the church in any case.
It was interesting to meet Peter again.
You know he's a writer?’
‘Yes, someone did mention it.’
Turning her back to Ginny, Barbara tugged open a drawer and took her time over choosing the cutlery.
‘Tell me, how did Hubert look?’
So she didn't mind talking about Hubert Molland.
That was natural enough.
Divorced people almost always  nursed a fierce and secret fascination for the subsequent doings of their former partners.
‘Old, rather weary.
He's retired, according to Peter.’
‘And he went back to Plumford?
There's no accounting for tastes.’
‘Why shouldn't he live in Plumford?’
‘Because all the old cats will be sniggering at him behind his back, that's why.
Tattling about him over the teacups.
And about me.’
‘But that was twenty years ago.’
‘What's that got to do with it?
Hubert's still the clergyman with the flighty wife, the one who used to play cards on Sunday and then did a bunk on him.
Oh, they'll remember, all right.
They hadn't had such fun for years.’
‘I'm sorry.
Maybe I shouldn't have mentioned it.’
‘Don't be silly, darling.
I'm not upset.
It's just that Hubert was always such a fool when I knew him, and I hoped he might have acquired a little common sense in the meantime.
Stupid of me.’
Ginny laid the table while Barbara broke four eggs in a bowl and whisked them vigorously.
She seasoned the mixture and poured it into the pan.
‘So you actually talked to Peter?
Did he recognize you?’
‘No — I had to introduce myself.’
A pause.
The omelette sizzled in the cast-iron pan.
Barbara patted her blonde-rinsed hair.
She looked at least fifteen years younger than she was.
‘I'm surprised he remembered you.
It was all so long ago.’
‘We all remember,’ Ginny said.
‘We had dinner together last night.
Peter cooked it — fillet steak and champagne, no less.’
‘Lucasta must be turning in her grave.
Celebrating, was he?
Or consoling himself?’
Ginny shrugged.
‘I didn't ask.’
Barbara was bending over the hob, edging a spatula  between the side of the pan and the omelette.
‘It seems a little odd.’
‘The steak and champagne?’
‘No.
Your going out of your way to see him again.’
‘It was an impulse.
I suppose I've got to the age when I've started to find the past interesting.’
‘Look forward, darling, that's my motto; don't look back.
Will you see him again?’
‘Maybe.
I liked him.’
‘When was the last time you met?’
‘At Abbotsfield.’
On Sunday 23 August 1964.
Ginny moved towards the window.
From there she could see Barbara's profile.
‘The omelette's ready,’ Barbara said.
A tear welled up in her eye and rolled down her cheek, leaving a streak of eye make-up behind it.
‘It's the onions.
I knew I shouldn't have put any in the salad.
They always make me cry.’
‘So what are you doing with yourself these days?’
Bill Coleby asked.
‘I work part-time in a library,’ Peter said, and as usual a hint of apology crept into his voice.
‘Just to pay the mortgage and keep the wolf from the door.
Really, I'm a writer.’
As he heard himself speak, he realized he must be a little tipsy.
He wasn't used to alcohol at lunchtime.
Normally he kept quiet about the writing.
‘That's interesting.
Stories, is it?’
Peter nodded.
‘What kind?
I like a good thriller myself but I never have time to read them.’
‘Just novels.’
The conversation followed the usual pattern.
‘I don't think I've seen your books in the shops.
Sell well, do they?’
‘I won a prize, actually.’
Coleby looked impressed.
‘So you're quite a celebrity.’
‘I wouldn't say that.’
Peter had won a south-east regional first novel award in 1976 for a book that had sold 2186 copies before being remaindered.
Since then he had been trying to write the second book.
Coleby refilled their glasses.
They had had two large whiskies in the bar downstairs, and they were now near the end of a bottle of Château Margaux.
‘How do you get your ideas?
Do you just sit around and wait for inspiration?’
‘It's not quite as simple as that.
Writing's ninety-nine per cent perspiration.’
Coleby threw back his head and laughed.
‘I like it.
Perspiration, not inspiration.
That's a good one.
What are you working on now?’
‘It's a novel called London .
A metropolitan epic.’
‘Sounds fascinating.
How long does it take you, a book like that?’
‘It depends.’
So far London had taken Peter over thirteen years, and all he had to show for it was six box files bulging with notes, newspaper cuttings and botched openings.
‘This one's going to be big — about a hundred and fifty thousand words.
It's not the sort of thing you can dash off in a couple of months.
I may have to give up my job in order to finish it.’
‘You could afford to do that?
Have your publishers given you an advance?’
‘Not exactly.’
‘Sometimes you have to invest in yourself.
Me, I've been doing that all my life.’
Peter seized on the opening.
‘Hubert Molland said you're a builder.’
Coleby speared a slice of lamb and grinned across the table.
‘Quite a lot of other things, too.
Diversify: that's the secret.’
‘I thought you were going to be a farmer.’
‘Like Dad?
Never much fancied it myself.
No, we sold off thirty acres to a developer in nineteen seventy-three  and that was a lot easier than-working.
So I developed five acres on my own account and things just went on from there.
Can't complain.
It makes a decent living.’
Rather more than decent, Peter guessed.
He judged by the Bentley in the Angel's courtyard, the Margaux that wasn't even on the wine list and the deference verging on sycophancy that the headwaiter showed towards Bill Coleby.
At school, however, Coleby had been one of those brainless nonentities who never belong entirely to any one social group, who seem destined for failure.
Plumford Grammar School, like all societies, mysteriously created its second-class citizens and Bill Coleby had been one of them.
‘I remember the farm,’ Peter said slowly, trying to recall something he and Coleby had done together.
‘We used to pelt the pigs with rotten potatoes.’
‘So we did.
God, the things we got up to.’
‘Do you remember Emor?’
Ginny hadn't mentioned Emor last night but her very existence was a reminder of it.
And of course the 1964 diary and the Abbotsfield dream had already stirred up Peter's memories, like sticks stirring the bottom of a muddy pond.
‘Emor?
What was that?’
It was difficult to know how genuine Coleby's ignorance was.
True, he had only been on the periphery, a bit-part player who could usefully be dragooned into secondary roles when a little muscle was required.
‘A sort of game we used to play.
I thought you were involved in it but maybe you weren't.’
A game?
Emor was a lot of things, but to call it a game was doing it an injustice.
‘I know some people say their schooldays were the best days of their life.’
Coleby finished his wine and signalled to the head waiter.
‘Load of rubbish, if you ask me.
If someone offered me my life again, I'd ask to be born aged sixteen.
Otherwise, no thanks.’
They ordered puddings from the trolley.
Coleby seemed disappointed when Peter turned down the offer of another bottle of wine.
‘What are your plans, then?
I suppose if you're a writer you can do it anywhere.
Must be wonderful.’
‘I'm not quite sure.
If I leave my job, there's no reason to stay in London.’
‘Even for the book?’
Coleby looked puzzled.
‘I thought you said it was called London .’
‘It is but it's not that sort of novel.’
It was impossible to explain to someone like Coleby that the London of London was essentially a metaphor.
‘I don't actually have to live there while I'm writing it.’
Coleby wasn't listening: ‘But you won't come back to Plumford, will you?’
Returning to Plumford was the last thing that Peter intended to do.
Coleby was leaning forward, his small blue eyes gleaming in his bland red face.
‘I could do, I suppose,’ Peter said.
‘You said you'd seen my mother recently?’
‘Yes.’
Coleby shrugged.
‘There's no point in beating round the bush.
I wanted to buy her house.
I presume it's your house now.
I offered her a good price but she wasn't selling.
I was hoping maybe we could discuss it.’
‘Why do you want to buy it?’
‘It's not the house I want, Peter, it's the ground it's standing on.
You know the land at the back of your garden?
The fields that go down to the railway?’
Peter nodded, and the memories came, unbidden and unwanted: the Field of Mars, the arena and the Dacian swamps where once an army had drowned.
‘I own it now.
I've got outline planning permission for a shopping complex with secondary access to Champney Road via that bit of wasteland by your house.
The trouble is, it's not wide enough.
To be perfectly frank, I need Number 29 if I'm going to go ahead with the scheme.’
‘So why wouldn't my mother sell?’
Coleby made a coffee-pouring gesture at the waiter.
‘At first I thought she was against the project, full stop.
It's aroused a little local opposition.
Anything like that always does, even though it's in line with the Structure Plan and the District Council's in favour.
So I tried raising the price — that works with a lot of people; you'd be surprised.
She wouldn't have got seventy-five thousand for that place, not with the planning permission on the land behind.
So I offered her ninety-five.
Then a hundred and ten.
She wouldn't budge.
If you ask me she didn't give a monkey's about the shopping complex or the money.
She just wanted to stay in that house.
Some people — old folks, especially — get like that: too attached to bricks and mortar for their own good.’
‘I see,’ Peter said, and waited.
‘Well, the offer's still on the table.
Tell you what, no point in cutting corners, I'll make it one-fifteen.
How does that grab you?
And remember, I'm a cash buyer.
No messing about with estate agents’ percentages and other people's mortgages.
I can get you a banker's draft by Monday morning.’
‘I'd like to think about it,’ Peter said.
‘It's a big decision.’
Coleby stared at him across the table.
Peter looked away — out of the Angel's big bay window, across Market Street to the Dutch gables of the old town hall.
‘But you can't want to live there, surely?’
Coleby said.
‘Not somewhere like Champney Road.’
‘I don't know what I want.’
Among other things, Peter wanted to enjoy the brief sensation of power that Coleby's offer had given him.
‘I just want to think about it, okay?’
‘Don't take too long.
You never know, I might change my mind.’
‘More chocolate mousse, James?’
Leo Quest asked, raising his black, bushy eyebrows.
‘Sometimes a man must live dangerously.’
‘Not for me, thanks.’
‘You're probably right.’
Leo spooned some into his own bowl.
‘It is rather fattening.
I imagine you have to watch your figure.’
Barbara Quest exchanged glances with her daughter.
Kate said quickly, ‘Have I told you the latest about Carinish Court?’
‘No,’ Barbara lied.
‘Not another disaster?’
‘Deathwatch beetle,’ Leo said.
‘Rising damp.
Subsidence in the stables.
That worrying crack on the north wall.
Repointing, rewiring, replastering, redecorating.’
His memory, as always, was uncomfortably accurate.
‘That's the trouble with these old houses.
They just gobble up money, don't they?’
‘No, it's good news, actually.’
James smiled at Barbara, and she found herself smiling back; his charm was the kind that, while it is directed at you, makes you feel you are the only person in the world.
Its power had nothing to do with sexual attraction, and a great deal to do with wanting to be liked.
‘Believe it or not,’ he went on, ‘the place should be habitable by Christmas.’
‘So the builders have nearly finished?’
‘I wouldn't go as far as that.’
James switched the charm to his wife.
‘Did you tell your mother about the drains?’
Kate launched into an account of the problems associated with Victorian drainage, notably lack of maintenance in the past and rats in the present.
Barbara frowned at Leo, who pretended not to notice.
Men were so childish.
It was not as if James had ever given Leo any justification for disliking him.
But Leo, usually the most tolerant of men, had suddenly decided shortly after James and Kate's wedding that he didn't like his stepson-in-law.
He refused to give his reasons.
Barbara suspected they boiled down to plain jealousy.
Leo was plump, dark and old, and James was lean, fair and young.
Leo had dragged himself up from the East End, where his father, a first-generation  Jewish immigrant from the Ukraine, had worked as a tailor's cutter; James, on the other hand, had had one of those privileged English upbringings.
Leo had climbed laboriously up the promotional ladder of merchant banking to one of the higher rungs, earning every penny of his salary, whereas James seemed to accumulate money without even trying.
Leo, bless him, was as ugly as sin; and James had been referred to by more than one gossip columnist as a sex symbol.
All good things come to an end, even drains.
When Kate ran out of material, Leo leapt back into the conversation.
‘How's the autobiography going?’ he enquired.
He knew of course, because Barbara had told him, that James had already missed one deadline and was more than likely to miss another.
‘Slowly, I'm afraid,’ James said.
‘Now we've finished the last series of Pemberley , I hope I can get down to some serious work on it.’
‘I can't tell you how much I'm looking forward to reading it.
Who did you say your publisher was?’
‘Channel 20 Books.’
‘I don't think I've heard of them.’
Leo managed to imply that if he, a collector of twentieth-century first editions, hadn't heard of the firm, there must be something seriously wrong with it.
‘They're relatively new.
They specialize in media-related stuff.
Television tie-ins, that sort of thing.’
‘You must show me their list some time.
Perhaps they're collectable.
Have you got a title yet?’
‘No, not yet.’
‘Well, there's no urgency, is there?’
Kate said.
‘I'd leave that till last.’
‘Anyone like some cheese?’
Barbara said.
‘Just help yourselves.’
Leo refused to be deflected.
‘Perhaps we can think of something.
Salperton on Salperton ?
No, too dull.
How  about A Person from Pemberley ?
Or something straightforward like My Life and Times ?‘
‘I might have a bit of Brie,’ Kate said.
Leo passed her the cheeseboard.
‘Now, what about —’
‘Did I tell you that Ginny came to lunch today?’
Barbara said to no one in particular.
‘What about My Struggle ?’
Leo suggested.
‘She told me Lucasta Redburn's dead.
Ginny went to the funeral.’
Leo was interested in other people's deaths.
‘And who on earth is Lucasta Redburn?’
‘Before your time, darling.
Someone we used to know at Plumford.’
‘Peter's mother,’ Kate said.
Two seconds of silence ticked by.
Barbara thought, why did she have to bring Peter into it?
‘I remember her,’ James said.
‘She and her husband stayed at Carinish Court.’
He looked from Barbara to Kate.
‘It was years ago, wasn't it?
When Peter was at Abbotsfield with you.’
Usually none of them talked about Abbotsfield, including Leo, who knew the outline of what had happened.
‘Your mother saw the announcement in the paper,’ Barbara said to James.
‘And Ginny was in the area so she decided to go.’
‘Was Peter there?’
Kate said.
Barbara nodded.
‘They had dinner together.’
‘How is old Peter?’
James asked, contributing to the elaborate pretence that everyone was thinking about the Redburns, not Abbotsfield.
‘Apparently he's a writer,’ she said.
‘Always had a lot of imagination.’
James dropped a crumb of Stilton on the tablecloth.
Frowning, for he was fastidious in all his personal habits, he picked it up between thumb and index finger, deposited it on his plate and wiped the soiled fingers on his napkin.
‘Where's he living these days?’
‘London, I think.’
‘Perhaps he could give you a few tips,’ Leo said.
‘I'm sure he'd be only too glad to help a fellow author.’
‘Well, I hope you're satisfied,’ Barbara said when Kate and James had left.
‘Yes, indeed.’
Leo was stacking plates and bowls in ascending order of size on the dining-room table.
‘A wonderful meal.’
‘You know what I mean.’
‘I would be if Kate were happy.’
He looked at her and for once he wasn't smiling; the mischief had drained out of him.
From the first Leo had treated Kate as his own daughter and her marriage to James hadn't changed that.
Kate was family: she mattered to him.
‘But it's ridiculous.
I've never seen such a perfect couple.’
‘A marriage made in heaven?’
‘I should know if there were something wrong.
You know what I think it is?
You've got a chip on your shoulder about James.’
‘Perhaps.’
Leo carried the pile of crockery into the kitchen and began to load it into the dishwasher.
Barbara followed.
His quietness frightened her.
‘What's wrong with him?’
At last Leo exploded.
‘On the contrary, everything is almost offensively right.
The way he looks.
His haircut, with that floppy bit of hair at the front he always has.
Know why?
So he can look boyish and appealing when he sweeps it back off his forehead.
And those oh-so-perfect suits he wears.
The charm he switches on and off like an electric fire.
The flat in Montpelier Square.
And now Carinish Court.
As far as he's concerned, Kate's part of it.
Don't you see?
To him she's not a person.
She's just a prop.
Part of his setting, if you like.
Another slice of  perfection that is now the exclusive property of James Salperton.’
‘You don't mind Ginny.’
‘What's Ginny got to do with it?
It's her brother who's the problem.’
Ginny was now living on a part-time basis with David, Leo's son by his first marriage; Leo hoped that Ginny and David would marry and produce a host of little Quests for him to dote on in his old age.
‘This autobiography,’ Leo went on, cramming forks into the dishwasher.
‘It's typical.
He agreed to do it because it flattered his ego.
Never mind he can't string two sentences together — he'd never admit that .
What makes him think he's so wonderful?’
‘It's what Kate thinks that counts.’
‘That's the whole point.’
Then, with the massive illogic he was sometimes capable of, Leo said in a quieter voice: ‘That's what I've been trying to say.
Kate's scared of him.’
Kate scared of James?
The idea circled round Barbara's mind.
Beside her, Leo was snoring gently.
Every minute or so, the snores would stop, he would snuffle like a satisfied baby coming off its mother's breast, and then the snores would start again.
His ability to sleep annoyed her.
When they had a quarrel, it was always she who lay awake afterwards.
The whole world seemed to be sleeping, apart from Barbara.
It was nearly 3 a.m.
She got out of bed, slipped on her dressing gown and tiptoed to the window.
She looked down on a motionless gathering of Mercedes, BMWs, a Range Rover and the occasional Rolls.
Lavender Lane was reputed to be the wealthiest road in Edgware.
Nevertheless, the people who lived here were only comfortably rich, not seriously rich like those who lived, say, in the Bishops Avenue.
James was said to have made a fortune after the divorce from Ursula, his first wife.
An unpleasant business all  round.
Barbara preferred not to think about it.
What did it matter, anyway?
Was Kate afraid of him?
Leo had refused to give reasons for his belief.
Like so many men he sneered at women's intuition but conferred a quasi-biblical authority on his own.
‘Little things,’ he'd said when, just before he fell asleep, she'd asked him the question once more.
‘Don't ask me for chapter and verse.
You have to trust your gut-feelings.’
Barbara remembered last Wednesday and the odd little incident in Harrods.
The cashmere shawl hadn't been expensive.
Only just into three figures, which was nothing these days, and in any case the money couldn't have been important.
Kate had liked it: you could tell by the way she fingered the material, by the way she looked at herself in the mirror with her chin lifted just a little higher than usual.
‘It's perfect,’ the woman had said; and for once a shop assistant had said no more than the truth.
‘It brings out the colour of your eyes.’
‘It's lovely, darling,’ Barbara said.
‘Go on.
Treat yourself.’
‘I'm not sure.’
Kate draped the shawl on the counter.
‘I'll think about it.’
As they left, Kate glanced back, her eyes searching for the shawl.
But the woman had already put it away.
Later that same afternoon, they had walked to Montpelier Square for tea.
‘Where's James?’
Barbara had asked as they went in.
‘He was having lunch with his agent and some Americans.’
Kate pulled off her coat and turned away to hang it in the hall cupboard.
‘So he said.’
The tone of the last three words was neither bitter nor jocular, merely neutral, as befits a statement of fact.
Barbara caught the possible implication at once, that what James said was not necessarily the same as what James did.
‘Is there anything I can do?’ she asked with deliberate ambiguity.
‘No.
Why don't you go and sit down?
The tea won't be a minute.’
Barbara didn't want to think about it.
Anyone could tell that Kate and James had everything they wanted — except, perhaps, children, and there was still time for those.
She shivered; the central heating was off.
Hadn't she earned a little peace and quiet?
A girl needed her beauty sleep.
The grandmother clock in the hall whirred, then struck three times.
Barbara padded across the carpet to the en-suite bathroom and opened the medicine cabinet above the basin.
At 3 a.m. in the morning of Sunday 16 December, Peter Redburn was also awake.
He was in the loft of 29 Champney Road.
He was too excited to sleep.
£115,000 needed a lot of thinking about.
Coleby was a shark, not the sort of man to pay more when he could pay less.
If the offer were a serious one, why should Peter be content with £115,000?
If Coleby needed the land the house stood on, he would be prepared to negotiate.
The loft was very cold, very crowded and very tidy.
Apart from the central gangway it wasn't boarded.
Peter had never been up here before.
When he was a child, the loft had been out of bounds.
As an adult he had had no interest in it.
He would never understand how his mother had managed to manoeuvre so many bulky items up the stepladder and through the hatch.
From their discarded belongings she had made a museum that recorded forty years of family history.
He found his father's suits, carefully folded and smelling even now of camphor, and his mother's wedding dress, the silk rotting and the lace yellow with age.
The Eagle Annuals were here, the Dinky Toys, the  Hornby train and the Meccano set.
Even the hipsters — a purple and blue check, with a wide black plastic belt — had been preserved.
In the same tea chest he came across a cube-shaped case made of orange plastic.
It contained his collection of singles and EPs from the early 1960s: the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, Cliff Richard.
One of the singles was ‘A Hard Day's Night’.
They'd seen the film that summer at Abbotsfield.
Mr Salperton had paid for them to go.
He still remembered the excitement generated by the opening chord of the title song and remembered, too, Kate saying afterwards, ‘I'm going to buy the record.’
‘The single?’ he'd said, knowing that she hadn't any money.
‘No.
The LP, of course.’
She'd run on ahead to join James, her bare legs flashing in the sunshine.
He brushed a cobweb out of his hair.
Damn James, damn Kate.
He thought too much about them.
Every time he'd had a few drinks, they took starring roles in the fantasies that played themselves out in his head.
It was time to go to bed.
As he turned, his foot slipped off the joist.
His ankle twisted.
He fell on to the tea chest.
A metal-rimmed corner dug into his side, and he shouted with pain.
He rested his hand on a cardboard box behind the tea chest and pushed himself up.
The box looked familiar — but then almost everything in the loft looked familiar.
It was a sturdy affair that had once contained twelve bottles of South African sherry.
Tugging out the tea chest, he brushed the dust from the top of the box and pulled open the leaves of the lid.
The first thing he saw was a buff-coloured exercise book.
The royal monogram ER was on the front cover and immediately beneath the monogram were the words SUPPLIED FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE.
EXERCISE BOOK  NARROW RULED.
Peter opened the book.
The metal clips that held the pages together had left smears of rust on the paper.
Each of the narrow lines was filled with small round handwriting in blue Biro.
The light was bad but Peter deciphered the first few lines of the left-hand page.
…was made Chancellor of the Exchequer, Guillielmus Colbiensus was Chief of the Secret Police, and Josephus Sartor was secretary to the Emperor and Director of Foreign Trade and Commerce.
The reign began badly when the IX Legion, commanded by an incompetent Legate, was lured by treacherous barbarian allies into the swamps of Dacia, and completely wiped out.
Meanwhile the Chancellor was shocked to discover that the Civil War of the previous reign had swollen the National Debt to a record level…
Peter turned back to the front of the book.
There was a title page decorated with red, green and blue Biro.
The Secret History of Emor Volume I As from the death of the Emperor Josephus Sartor Imbecillus In the Year of Rome 862 Compiled by the official Historian of Emor Gaius Marcus Mollandius and by his posterity The past exerts a sly but terrible fascination.
It is sly, Peter thought, because the fascination masquerades as harmless nostalgia.
You don't realize that nostalgia is addictive.
The pleasure it gives is rapidly subsumed by emotions that squeeze the heart.
Worst of all is the sense of utter futility because it is far too late to change anything.
Peter rummaged through the top layer of the box's  contents.
He found bundles of Emorian bank notes, a membership card for the casino, despatches from Dacia and Tunisia, an immensely detailed drawing of the Imperial Trireme ('With the compliments of Gaius Marcus Mollandius, Lord High Admiral'), and a map of the empire which Peter remembered tracing with uncharacteristic patience from the original in Hubert Molland's classical atlas.
Even now Peter didn't want to think about Emor, because Emor led to Gaius Marcus Mollandius, who led in turn to Richard Molland and the raven on the water.
He remembered when Barbara Molland had given him the box.
That had been in May 1970, almost six years after the end of Emor.
‘Richard wanted you to have it,’ she'd said.
‘When I was clearing out after Kate left, I found a sort of letter.’
Barbara had been standing very close to him, and he had been conscious of the nearness of her left breast and the faint smell of perfume mixed not unpleasantly with sweat.
‘Kate's left?’
‘Didn't she tell you?’
‘Kate's left ?’
And Kate's mother had put her arm around him and pulled him towards her.
What he remembered most about that was the sense of unreality.
Panic, too, and also an unbearable excitement like an itch you were forbidden to scratch.
‘You poor darling,’ she said.
In 1970 — if you were eighteen and could lay your hands on a little ready money — it was almost de rigueur to travel overland to Greece where, in an idyllic island setting, you could hang out in the coolest way imaginable with amiable drug-dealers and liberated chicks.
Peter planned to beat the rush by leaving at the end of May.
He had left school the previous December, having failed to get into Cambridge, and was due to go to Essex University in September.
To raise the money for Greece he went to Ipswich, the nearest city to Plumford, and worked as a labourer at a warehouse belonging to a mail-order company.
He earned nearly £22 a week and lived in a bedsitter.
On two occasions he failed ignominiously to lose his virginity to a girl called Rosie in the packing department.
‘Stop messing about,’ Rosie had said at his first attempt.
‘Who do you think I am?’
The second time she was blunter: ‘Why don't you piss off?’
In the third week of May he went back to Plumford to prepare for the journey.
However, Peter didn't go to Greece that summer.
Instead he renewed his acquaintance with Kate Molland.
If he'd arranged the circumstances himself he couldn't have done much better.
At nine o'clock on his second evening at Plumford, he was sitting on the terrace of the Ferry Inn.
Joe, a friend from school, had been due to meet him there, half an hour earlier.
Joe's absence almost certainly meant that he had succeeded  in persuading a girl called Jill into going out with him.
Peter was feeling irritable, partly because Joe's putative success contrasted with his own failure to acquire a girlfriend, and partly because Jill was reputed to be hot stuff, a chick who positively demanded to go all the way.
Peter, now on his second pint of beer and his fourth cigarette, was picking his way with some difficulty through Les Fleurs du Mal .
He looked up, and there was Kate, hesitating in the doorway that led to the bar.
In the last six years he had seen her occasionally — in the street, at the Ritz (Plumford's only cinema, which was known locally as the Fleapit) and once at a party.
Before Abbotsfield, he had been to all intents and purposes an honorary member of the Molland family.
At Abbotsfield itself he had lived in the same house as Kate for nearly a month.
But since then there had no longer been a reason for them to meet.
Quite the contrary.
He knew, because in a town the size of Plumford everybody knew these things, that Hubert Molland had been given a combined parish a few miles outside Plumford, and that the Mollands were now living in Champney Crucis; he knew that Kate had left school and was now doing something at the technical college; and, more importantly, he had heard from Joe that she was going out with the local MP's youngest son, whose name was Julian and who drove a Triumph Spitfire.
Peter often tried to describe what Kate looked like as she stood in the doorway, half in, half out, glancing at her watch and swinging an embroidered bag barely large enough to take a packet of cigarettes.
She was dressed very simply in a short blue dress belted across the hips.
She wore leather sandals with straps that came halfway up her calves.
The belt and sandals were fashionably ethnic — the sort of accessories that were made of buffalo hide by a little man in Kabul.
Usually her blonde hair stretched down to her elbows but on that evening she wore it up, tied with a black ribbon.
Her head swayed  like a heavy and exotic flower on a delicate stalk.
Huge blue eyes floated in pools of mascara.
She stood there for perhaps three seconds.
Her eyes glided over Peter, apparently without recognizing him.
He couldn't stop looking at her.
Kate was like a natural force — an earthquake, perhaps, or the movement of the tides: inevitable, invulnerable and irresistible.
‘Looking for me, darling?’
A man in a tie-dyed tee-shirt and cut-off jeans loomed beside her in the doorway.
Tattooed women snaked up his forearms and his belly gaped like a mouth between the bottom of the tee-shirt and the waistband of the jeans.
Kate glanced round, saw him, and stumbled on to the terrace.
The man followed.
‘What's a nice girl like you doing in a place like this?’
Peter stood up.
His chair fell over.
Around him conversations faltered and people stared.
‘Kate — over here,’ he called.
This time she recognized him and waved.
Without a backward glance she walked slowly towards his table.
The man blundered after her, colliding with one of the cast-iron tables.
Peter wished that he had some kind of weapon.
Kate nodded to him and sat down.
She didn't look at her pursuer, who stopped inches away from Peter.
‘She's with you?’
Peter tried to speak, failed and cleared his throat.
‘She certainly is,’ he said in a voice that hardly quavered at all.
‘Okay.
Just wondered.
Always worth a try.
You never know, do you?’
‘No,’ said Peter.
‘You don't.’
The man swayed.
He was not much older than Peter and he looked puzzled, as if wondering not only how to end this conversation but how he had begun it in the first place.
‘Keith!’ someone shouted in the bar.
‘It's your round, you bugger.’
‘Got to go,’ the man said.
‘Nice meeting you.’
His eyes lingered on Kate but he spoke only to Peter.
‘See you, mate.’
Kate opened her bag and took out a packet of Consulate.
‘Are you going to buy me a drink as well?’ she asked.
‘Or do I just get rescued from a fate worse than death?’
‘Of course.’
Peter was still standing.
‘What can I get you?’
‘Gin and angostura, please.
With ice.’
‘Gin and…?’
‘Just ask for a pink gin.
And don't forget the ice.’
Inside, Keith was propping up the bar and waving a £5 note at the landlady.
He made room for Peter.
‘Jesus,’ he said.
‘What's the secret?
How d'you get a girl like that?’
Peter said with perfect truth that he wished he knew.
‘What are you having then?’
When Peter told him, Keith insisted on including Kate's pink gin and Peter's pint in his order.
‘It's my round,’ he kept saying.
‘Jesus, what a girl.’
Peter carried the drinks outside.
Pink gin seemed a wonderfully sophisticated choice; he had only read about it before.
He was prepared to find that Kate had gone, or that in the meantime her boyfriend had turned up.
But she was still at the table, alone and looking across the river.
Peter's eyes lingered on the line that swept from her head down her neck to her shoulder and along her extended arm.
She smiled at him as he put down the drinks.
‘Julian was meant to be meeting me.’
She took it for granted that he would know who Julian was.
‘He's stood me up.’
‘That makes two of us.
I was meant to be meeting someone too.’
‘It's turned out rather well.’
She sipped the pink gin, and for a few delirious seconds Peter wondered if it had turned out well because she had met him instead.
‘I've been trying to find a tactful way to drop him for ages.’
‘What's wrong with him?’
‘Julian?
He's dull .
Who were you meeting?’
‘Just someone I know.’
‘A girl?’
He nodded, adding, ‘No one important.’
‘Someone said you'd gone to university.’
The fact that she'd remembered him gave him pleasure, even though she had evidently misheard what had been said.
He explained about the year off and told her about hitchhiking to Greece to sleep on beaches beneath the Mediterranean sky.
He hoped that at the very least she would approve of the idea, and at the back of his mind there was a fantasy in which she offered to come with him.
‘I'd prefer to fly there, and rent a villa,’ she said.
‘Why Greece, anyway?
Everyone goes there.
I'd rather go to Kashmir or Goa.’
Peter said feebly that he was thinking of going to India next year.
Then he asked what she was doing.
She told him about the secretarial course at the technical college and her plans eventually to go to London, perhaps to model.
‘What does your dad say to that?’
Peter asked.
‘I haven't told him.’
Kate smiled, making them conspirators, and offered him one of her menthol cigarettes.
‘Would you?’
They had a second round of drinks and talked for another twenty minutes.
Kate borrowed his denim jacket, which she draped across her shoulders.
It was the first time they had been alone together since Abbotsfield.
Afterwards, Peter remembered far more about his feelings than the content of their conversation.
The feelings  retained their freshness in his memory: the delicious agony of watching her; the frustration of not being able to touch her; the pleasure he had when someone he had known at school passed along the towpath, looked up and saw him, Peter Redburn, having a drink with Kate Molland.
He also remembered the goose pimples that appeared on his arms as the evening grew cooler, and how he didn't suggest they went inside because he was afraid she would say that it was time to go.
Suddenly she looked at her watch.
‘Oh Christ.’
‘What is it?’
‘I've just missed the last bus.
Julian usually drives me home.
I'm just not used to thinking about buses.’
‘I'll take you back,’ Peter said.
‘It's six miles to Champney Crucis.
Have you got a car?’
‘I'll phone for a taxi.’
When the cab came, Peter ushered Kate to the road and opened the door for her.
He wasn't sure what she expected him to do.
To his relief she wriggled across the seat, leaving room for him to get in beside her.
The journey was the best part of the evening.
The driver didn't talk and nor did they.
He was very aware of her body beside his, of the long legs that shimmered in the semi-darkness, and of the smell of her perfume.
Once when they went round a corner she swayed against him and caught his arm to steady herself.
At Champney Crucis Kate directed the driver up a lane beside the dumpy little church.
She told him to stop just after they had passed a small, modern house with a Mini Clubman parked in the drive.
Peter managed to get out first.
He ran round to open Kate's door for her.
She handed him his denim jacket and swung her legs out of the car.
‘Is that the Rectory?’ he asked, nodding towards the little house.
He'd been expecting something like Abbotsfield  or the decaying Georgian splendours of St Clement's Vicarage in Church Row.
‘Yes,’ she said in a colourless voice and began to walk away from him.
‘Kate?’
He moved after her.
She turned.
‘No, don't come up to the door.
It'll only cause problems.’
‘Okay.’
The fear of never seeing her again swamped his other feelings, even lust and shyness.
‘I was wondering if you were doing anything tomorrow night.’
‘Maybe.
Why?’
‘They've got Midnight Cowboy at the Fleapit.’
‘I saw it in London.’
‘Just an idea.’
The shyness flooded back, and he desperately wished he had left the invitation unsaid.
‘Maybe something else, another time.’
‘I didn't say I didn't want to see it again.’
She moved a little closer to him.
‘It's a good film.
Why don't you pick me up at the Tech?
I've got a meeting so I'll be staying late.
Six-thirty in the car park?’
‘Yes.
Yes, of course.’
The technical college was on the outskirts of town, miles away from the cinema.
He could hardly expect her to queue at a bus stop.
It would mean another taxi.
Well, why not?
‘Great,’ Kate said.
‘Well, goodnight, and thanks for the lift.’
She came a step closer, rested her hands lightly on his shoulders and kissed him full on the mouth.
The kiss was so brief, and he was so surprised, that he had no chance to respond.
Kate walked away, swinging her bag.
She might have been alone in the world.
Peter stared after her.
His lips tingled.
The taxi-driver revved his engine.
‘Goodnight,’ Peter whispered.
Kate didn't answer.
Peter saw Kate the next evening, which was a Thursday, again on Saturday, three times the following week, and twice the week after that.
He couldn't believe this was happening to him — that he was going out with Kate and that the whole world could see it.
On the days he was going to see her, he woke up feeling that anything was possible, that the world was his for the asking.
On the second Saturday they took the train to London.
Kate wanted to go to Biba in Kensington High Street and Peter wanted to be with Kate.
In Biba she tried on a black, floppy hat and a midi-dress, and they browsed among tasselled lampshades and satin sheets; but neither of them bought anything.
Later, however, in Kensington Market, at a booth that was so saturated with the stench of joss-sticks that Peter couldn't stop coughing, he bought her a pair of boots in maroon suede.
The boots had platform soles and they cost him more than his weekly wages at the warehouse.
When they were in the market she insisted on his buying a pair of white loons, which were just coming into fashion.
The bell-bottomed trousers were so tight round his hips that he could hardly walk in them.
If you wanted to take them off or even go to the lavatory, you had to undo a complicated buttoned flap at the front.
Considered objectively, they were an instrument of torture; but the discomfort they caused was a small price to pay for the knowledge that Kate had persuaded him to buy them.
She wanted to see him in loons;she let him buy her those boots.
These things were symptoms of intimacy, like the way she talked of Julian or the things she said about her father.
She kissed him goodnight on two other occasions, briefly but hard on the lips.
Sometimes they held hands.
Once, in Ipswich, she clung to his arm during a sudden rainstorm that plastered her Indian shirt to her body.
She wasn't wearing a bra and, when he glanced down, he  saw her left nipple quite distinctly beneath the thin and now almost transparent cotton that covered it.
She came with him to Joe's birthday party and danced mainly with Peter, though in the slow numbers she gave him no encouragement to smooch with her; and when she danced with other people he thought that, quite literally, he was going to die of pain.
Early in their relationship Peter learned that he must not try to take more than Kate was prepared to give.
When he reached for her hand, it slid away from his.
Often she would leave him unkissed at the Rectory gate and forget to wave when she went inside the house.
He decided that this must be because Julian had hurt her more than she cared to admit.
Julian had made her shy away from physical contact.
The solution was to let her initiate everything, to allow her to come towards him in her own time.
He constructed an agreeable fantasy in which Julian pestered Kate and he, Peter, rescued her, showing in the process his immense spiritual, intellectual and physical superiority over Julian; immediately after the confrontation, Kate fell into his, Peter's, arms.
He made his preparations.
The packet of Durex, bought in a chemist's at Ipswich to meet an eventuality that Rosie had never allowed to materialize, lived permanently in his wallet; he put them in a brown envelope in case a chance sighting made his intentions too crudely obvious.
To guard against accidents — such as the loss of the first packet, for example, or a furious spate of activity when the chemists' were closed — he bought another packet of condoms and secreted them under the lining paper of his sock drawer.
In the space of seventeen days, Peter saw Kate eight times.
The period stood out as something qualitatively different from what came before and what came afterwards.
It was as if he had been running a high temperature or tripped out of his head on acid.
Everything was  more intense, not just his emotions.
Colours were brighter.
The books he read and the music he listened to took on profounder significance than ever before.
She even affected his attitude to his mother.
For the first time in his life, Peter found her pitiful, a tiny figure who had made a cage of her routines and spent her life staring through the bars at the glorious unpredictability of the world outside.
He never took Kate home or mentioned her to his mother.
He had a superstitious fear that talking about Kate would mean losing a part of her, would be a sort of sacrilege.
Besides, what could his mother know of love?
It was only with the greatest difficulty that Peter could imagine the mechanics that must have led to his own conception.
‘When are you going to Greece?’ his mother asked on the Wednesday of the second week, while they were doing the washing-up.
‘I don't know,’ Peter said, dragging his mind away from Kate and not bothering to conceal his irritation.
‘I might stay here and get another job.’
‘Why?’
He shrugged, and that was the end of the conversation.
The future shrunk.
All that mattered was the next time he would see Kate; beyond that he looked forward with an urgency that hurt to the first time they would make love.
And in the far distance beckoned the possibility of marriage, a state so close to paradise that he hardly dared imagine it.
His savings were evaporating.
At the beginning of May he had had nearly £300 in his bank account; the balance was now down to double figures and falling fast.
Usually Peter paid for whatever they did.
It was a privilege to spend money on her; she could measure his love by his diminishing bank balance.
Even if he had wanted to, he could no longer afford to go to Greece.
But he didn't want to go if it meant leaving Kate behind.
On one of their trips to Ipswich, Kate insisted on buying  him a present, a Ronson Varaflame gas lighter.
That night and for many nights afterwards he took the lighter to bed with him, and lay there, thinking of Kate and feeling the metal growing warm in his hand, until he fell asleep.
Another episode that gave him much reassurance was the time when Kate invited him in for tea at the Rectory.
Hubert Molland wasn't there.
Peter stayed for an hour, feeling that the visit confirmed him as Kate's official boyfriend.
Barbara was wonderful: unlike some people who had known him as a child, she treated him as an adult.
It was difficult to believe that she was only a few years younger than his mother; both mentally and physically she belonged to a different generation.
They talked about travel.
‘I wish I was your age again,’ Barbara said.
‘I wouldn't just go to India.
What about Burma?
Thailand?
There's a whole world out there.’
‘You'd hate it,’ Kate said.
‘Think of all the bedbugs and snakes and surly natives.’
‘I'd find myself a rich protector.
Travel on his yacht.
Much more civilized.’
None of them mentioned Richard or Hubert Molland; nor did they refer to the last time they had all had tea together.
Peter endowed the occasion with an atmosphere of reconciliation: the fact that he and Kate were together somehow made up for Abbotsfield; there was no longer any need to feel guilty.
On the last day they met, a Friday, Peter realized at once that something was wrong with Kate.
Lovers are the most sensitive animals on earth, though often the strength of their feelings warps their interpretation of the signals they receive.
It was lunchtime and they were on the river.
Kate had decided to skip the afternoon's classes and arranged to meet him at the boatyard near the Tech.
They hired a punt, which for Peter was a craft bristling with erotic  potential.
He had come equipped with a bottle of white wine, pâté, French bread and fruit.
Peter poled upstream, away from other people.
He didn't talk because he was afraid of losing the pole or, worse still, falling in.
Every now and then he glanced down at her.
She was lying on the cushions, smoking a cigarette and paying no attention to him.
She wore flared jeans and a tight shirt, a sort of cotton grandpa vest that outlined her breasts, and her feet were bare.
Peter waited until they had left the spectators behind-before he risked speaking.
‘Do you want to open the wine?’
Kate nodded, and rummaged in the carrier bag for the bottle and the corkscrew.
‘Can you manage?
I'll do it if you want.’
‘Don't fuss.
Peter, this wine is practically hot.’
‘Sorry.’
‘It should be chilled.’
‘I know but I didn't have time.’
‘Then why didn't you hang it over the side of the punt?’
‘Sorry.’
'Where are the glasses?’
‘Oh hell, I forgot.’
He fought back the word ‘sorry’, which was threatening to erupt for the third time.
‘Can't we drink from the bottle?’
Kate shrugged.
‘It looks like we'll have to.’
‘Shall I find a place to stop?
There's a willow tree coming up.’
‘All right.’
He rammed the punt into the trailing branches.
It bumped into the bank just as Kate pulled the cork from the bottle.
Peter nearly lost his balance.
Kate spilled wine on her jeans and swore.
Peter.
apologized.
He joined her on the cushioned seat.
Their hands touched as she passed him the bottle.
I burn with unrequited  lust, he thought, surprised that a cliché should so accurately express what he was feeling.
‘Do you want to go to a party tomorrow night?’ he asked.
‘Whose is it?’
‘Bill Coleby's.
Joe told me about it.
Bring a bottle.
Everyone's welcome.’
‘I can't.’
‘Look — what's wrong?
Have I done something?’
She turned her head.
‘It's nothing to do with you.
Why do you have to take everything so personally?’
‘Then what is it?’
‘What do you think?
My bloody father.
We had another row on Wednesday.
He thinks most of my clothes are — and I quote —‘indecent’.
He doesn't approve of the way I spend my free time.
He says I don't give my mother enough help around the house.
Oh, you know — it's the same old story.
Story of my life, really.
But this time he's put me under a curfew.
Jesus, I might as well go into a nunnery and be done with it.’
‘What did your mother say?’
‘Not much.
She's even more stuck with him than I am.’
Greatly daring, Peter put his hand on her thigh.
She stared at it.
‘I'm sorry,’ he said.
‘I really am.’
‘So am I.’ She was still looking at his hand.
‘But being sorry doesn't help, does it?
And nor does having your hand on my leg.’
He snatched it away.
She grabbed the French loaf and wrenched it into two unequal halves.
‘Let's eat, shall we?’
They ate in silence.
Neither of them had much appetite but they finished the wine.
‘I'm sorry too,’ Kate said.
‘I'm not very good company today.’
‘It doesn't matter.’
‘You can come over tomorrow afternoon, if you want.
Around teatime.’
‘To the house?
But won't your dad —’
‘He won't be there.’
A little later, Kate said she wanted to go home.
Peter punted back to the boatyard.
He hadn't enough money for a taxi so they took the bus back to Champney Crucis.
Neither of them said much on the way.
Peter felt he had missed an opportunity.
He had failed her and he didn't even know how.
The following afternoon he struggled into the white loons, which he had washed and ironed himself.
He caught the bus to Champney Crucis.
Barbara Molland opened the front door of the Rectory.
She was wearing a short, summery dress and no stockings.
Peter thought she was more like Kate's elder sister than her mother.
‘I'm glad you've come,’ she said.
‘I've got a box for you.’
Her lips were trembling.
‘Richard wanted you to have it.
When I was clearing out after Kate left, I found a sort of letter.’
The world became a place that Peter no longer recognized, an unmapped wilderness.
Kate had gone to London, Barbara said.
They'd left early this morning.
‘They?’
Peter said.
He felt the warmth of Barbara's arm against his cheek, and her breast pressing into his body.
‘She went with Julian.’
‘I thought she'd finished with Julian.
When's she coming back?’
‘She said she isn't.’
‘But her clothes, all her things….’
‘She took everything she wanted.
Told me I could burn the rest for all she cared.
Peter, I am sorry — I thought you'd know.’
‘But where will she go?
Where will she stay?’
‘Julian's sister's flat.
She's going to get a job and look for a place of her own.’
‘Why?’ he said.
‘Why?’
‘It had to happen sometime,’ Barbara said.
‘She couldn't stay here all her life.
Anyway, you know that Kate doesn't get on with her father.’
Peter pictured Kate and Julian in the little red sports car, hurtling through the sunshine to London on a straight, empty road.
She was laughing at something that Julian had said and her hand was resting on his leg.
‘Kate's gone ?’ he said, yet again.
‘Poor darling,’ Barbara said.
Suddenly she was kissing him and he was kissing her back.
Peter didn't open the box containing the Archives of Emor.
In 1970, the last thing he wanted was to be reminded of Richard and the silly game they used to play.
Barbara Molland had found the box in a trunk that stood under the window in Kate's room.
A few of Richard's toys were there as well, and some that had belonged to Kate.
And underneath the toys she found the letter.
It was dated 19 July 1964, just before they went to Abbotsfield.
To Whom It May Concern:
If I should die, I leave my possessions to Charity, except any documents whatsoever that relate to Emor, which I leave to my friend Peter Redburn.
Signed (in my blood),
Richard F. Molland.
Kate went away on Saturday.
The following Monday Peter packed his rucksack and caught the train to Ipswich.
He left the cardboard box on top of his wardrobe, where it remained until 1973, when he cleared  away every trace of himself from 29 Champney Road.
He failed to allow for the fact that Lucasta Redburn could not bear to throw away anything that might one day come in useful.
Peter went back to the bedsitter, back to the same job at the mail-order warehouse.
He got drunk three times a week and made copious notes about Kate Molland and the human condition in his journal.
Now that he was no longer a virgin and now that it no longer mattered very much, he succeeded in seducing Rosie.
‘Don't get me wrong,’ Ginny Salperton said.
‘There was never anything like that.
We were much too young.’
‘Balls.’
David Quest took a forkful of Ginny's scrambled eggs.
‘You were what?
Nearly fifteen?
And he was maybe a year younger.’
‘Exactly.
Much too young.
Not to mention innocent.’
‘At that age, the kids round here are copulating like rabbits.’
‘This is here and now, that was then and there.
Anyway, in those days Peter was all teeth and nose.’
‘But he's improved a bit since then?’
‘Yes.
Nowadays he's gaunt and interesting.’
‘Instead of fat and boring like me?’
‘Would I be here if you were boring?
I can live with fat.
Peter's got one of those lined foreheads a woman longs to soothe.
He made me slightly tiddly on champagne so perhaps he was trying to seduce me.
Do you think so?’
David said nothing because his mouth was fully occupied by the last of Ginny's breakfast.
Still chewing, he balanced the plate on the top of the pile of books on the bedside table, put his arm around Ginny and squeezed.
‘Have I made you jealous?’ she asked.
With his free hand he flung back the duvet, demonstrating that she had aroused quite different emotions.
Ginny twisted towards him and they slid down the bed.
The phone began to ring.
Ginny tried to pull away from him.
‘Leave it,’ he said.
‘But it might be urgent.’
‘I doubt it.
If it is, they'll call back.’
In a while the ringing stopped.
Only then was Ginny able to enjoy what was happening.
As always, the pleasure was heightened by the sense of guilt that accompanied it.
When she was a child, Ginny Salperton followed the forms of religion that her school and to a lesser extent her parents laid down for her.
Towards the end of August 1964, she officially embraced atheism.
What happened at Abbotsfield that summer left her with a distaste for all religions, not just Christianity.
You could say that Mithras was as much to blame as Jesus Christ.
If there were a loving God, she argued, he would never have allowed it to happen.
Therefore, either God did not exist or, if he did, he was not noticeably loving.
Atheism was a satisfactory response to both alternatives: if God did not exist, atheism was merely a recognition of the truth; and if he did, atheism was the spiritual equivalent of Ginny's giving God's face a well-deserved slap.
This phase lasted until after university, though Ginny flirted with agnosticism in times of stress.
Neither position proved to be tenable in the long run.
The trouble with atheism was that it was no more susceptible to proof than the notion that God was a bearded gentleman of advanced years.
Agnosticism wasn't much help either, not when God kept talking to her.
It was most inconvenient and she often wished he would leave her alone.
Why me, for God's sake?
He sidled into her mind, usually when she was by herself but not always; he wasn't shy.
The salient impression he left behind him was one of calmness and loving kindness.
Put baldly like that, her experience of God sounded like a symptom of madness.
But she didn't feel mad, just harassed.
‘Sometimes he doesn't actually talk,’ she had explained to David Quest soon after they met, which was at the  wedding of Kate Molland and James Salperton.
‘But it's as if he's in the same room.
Do you think I'm mad?’
‘I think we're all mad,’ David said.
‘My father says I'm mad practically every time I see him.
Your sort of madness sounds quite pleasant.’
‘It isn't always,’ Ginny said, wondering what on earth (or in heaven) was making her talk like this to a little man whom she'd met only once before; she hoped it wouldn't put him off her.
‘Sometimes I know he wants me to do something and usually it's something I don't particularly want to do.
And when I do it, whatever it is, I feel glad and I think he does too, but that's not much consolation before I do it.
Besides, I don't like being manipulated.’
‘You've considered the standard explanations?
Other than madness, that is.’
‘Of course.
For all I know one or more of them is right.
But that doesn't alter how I feel.
It's like being a very little fish on the end of a very long line.’
‘And the divine angler is slowly hauling you up to heaven?’
‘You're laughing at me.’
‘Of course I am.
Do you go to church regularly?’
‘I try.
I don't like it much, I'm afraid, or most of the people you meet there.
Aesthetically it's a dead loss now that they've tried to modernize everything.
But it seems logical to go.
Or rather it would be a bit dishonest if I didn't.
Do you understand?’
‘I think so — as far as I can, bearing in mind that I'm Jewish and that I've never been remotely religious.
Does this mean you won't come to bed with me?’
‘No,’ said Ginny, trying to conceal the relief she felt.
‘It just means that I'll feel guilty about it.’
‘So what does God think about me?’
‘I think he rather likes you,’ Ginny said.
‘But that may just be wishful thinking.’
The phone rang again when Ginny was in the bath.
David appeared in the doorway with a towel round his middle and the cordless phone in his hand.
‘It's your brother,’ he said, holding up the phone so she could see that he was pressing the mute button.
‘Do you want to talk to him, or shall I say you're otherwise engaged?’
‘No, I'll take it.’
Ginny wiped her hand on David's towel and took the phone from him.
Her immediate reaction was to fear that something had happened to one of their parents.
She and James were not in the habit of phoning each other regularly.
‘Hello, James.
How are you?’
‘Fine.
Sorry to bother you on a Sunday morning.’
‘What's up?’
‘Nothing's up.
Barbara said you'd seen Peter Redburn.’
Ginny frowned.
‘His mother's just died.
Mum saw it in the paper.’
‘Do you have a phone number for him?’
‘You want to see him?’
‘Why not?
Nice to make contact with an old friend.
Besides, if his mother's just died, he's probably feeling a bit low.’
Ginny switched the phone from one hand to the other.
She didn't believe James for a moment.
He was not the sort of man who gets sentimental about old friendships.
Maybe Kate was behind the approach: she must have known Peter far better than either of them.
The phone was now covered with bath foam.
Ginny tried to blow it off.
‘Are you still there?’
James said.
‘Yes.
I've only got his London number.’
‘I've got that.
It's in the phone book.
But no one 's answering.’
‘He's probably staying in Plumford for a while.
The house isn't on the phone.
I can remember the Plumford address.
Would that be any use?’
‘I might as well have it.
Just in case.’
‘Twenty-nine Champney Road.’
A pause.
‘Are you staying in Bristol?’
‘No, I've got to get back.
Ralph's coming to stay.
I'm picking him up after lunch.’
‘Rather you than me.’
‘I'd feel just the same,’ Ginny said.
‘Or rather I would if you'd give me the chance.’
‘He doesn't get on with me.
Anyway, he drives Kate round the bend.
How was Mother when you saw her?’
‘She's fine.’
‘How long is she going to be in the Lake District?’
‘Well into the new year, I think.
She feels she deserves a bit of pampering.’
‘What's new?’
Ginny agreed with him.
Their mother had made a career out of being cosseted since she had left their father.
She was fortunate in that her income came from a family trust fund, so Ralph had never been able to get his hands on the capital.
They had separated in 1976 and Mrs Salperton had immediately embraced the privileges of old age.
She lived in Putney, in a flat at the top of a mansion block overlooking the river.
Two or three times a year she exchanged the cushioned existence she had constructed for herself for something different but equally restful, like a prolonged stay at a good hotel in the country or a cruise on the QE2.
‘The change does me good, dear,’ she would explain gently but firmly to anyone who would listen.
‘At my age, one deserves it, don't you agree?’
She was sixty-seven.
‘How long have you got to put up with Ralph?’
James asked.
‘Three nights.
I don't suppose you'd like to ask him to dinner?’
‘Sorry.
We're fully booked up.’
‘Of course you are,’ Ginny said.
‘It was just an idea.’
The bath water was getting cold and her spirits were  dropping with the temperature.
Talking with James often had that effect on her.
She sent her love insincerely to Kate and hung up.
David came back as she was getting out of the bath.
He was wearing paint-stained jeans and a baggy jersey with holes at the elbows.
His black hair sprouted at all angles from his scalp and he still hadn't found time to shave.
‘What did wonder boy want?’
She told him.
‘You'd think Peter would be the last person James would want to see.’
‘After Abbotsfield?’
David took the towel from her and began to dry her back.
‘Did he ask you why you went to see him?’
‘No.
But he wouldn't though.
James isn't curious about other people except when it affects him.’
‘I expect he has his reasons.
He usually has.’
David ran a finger down her spine.
‘Like you had your reasons.’
Ginny pulled up beside Wistaria Cottage and said, ‘Shit’.
Ralph Salperton was standing at the living-room window.
He must have seen her but he didn't wave.
The tip of his cigarette glowed on the other side of the glass and then vanished into the darkness of the room behind.
As she was getting out of the Metro he opened the front door.
‘You're late.’
He was wearing his raincoat and behind him in the hall stood his suitcase and a scuffed, imitation-leather flight bag.
‘It's two thirty-five, you know.’
Ginny braced herself and kissed him.
His cheek smelled of aftershave and stale tobacco.
His hair, which was smothered with grease, badly needed cutting.
She wondered when he had last had a bath.
He accepted the kiss but did not return it.
‘I said I'd get here about half-past two.
How are you?’
‘Me?
Oh, I'm all right.
Anyway, I'm all ready.
Shall we go?’
Without waiting for an answer, he picked up the case and the bag, deposited them on the path and fumbled for his keys.
‘Damn,’ he said.
‘I forgot to plug in the timer.’
She followed him into the house.
‘The timer?’
‘It was an offer in one of those magazines,’ he said, suddenly animated.
‘You plug it in when you go away and it switches on the light for you at the same time every evening, and switches it off too.
Marvellous things.
You should get one.’
Ginny had owned a timer since 1977.
Ralph was the only person she knew who believed that the special offers in magazines actually were special.
Had he seen the timer in a shop window at half the price, he would have ignored it.
‘Bloody thing won't work,’ he said a moment later.
‘Can't make head or tail of the instructions.’
‘Shall I try?’
Ginny said.
‘What times do you want it set for?’
He told her; and he watched suspiciously as she glanced at the sheet of instructions, set the timer and plugged it into the power point that controlled the standard lamp.
‘There,’ he said, claiming her achievement as his own and inflating it in the process.
‘Marvellous things.
If everyone had one of these, the crime rate would drop by about fifty per cent.’
Ralph hustled her out of the house, locked the door and preceded her down the path to the car.
He was in a hurry.
He was always in a hurry to get where he was going and always in a hurry to leave it when he got there.
They drove up to the crossroads at the centre of the town.
Paulstock wasn't architecturally distinguished but the church and the stone-faced cottages looked their best in the thin winter sunshine, like a faded watercolour by a gifted maiden aunt.
The signpost outside the post office told her that it was ten miles to Abbotsfield and twenty-five to Bristol.
They did the journey to London within two and a half hours.
Ginny had driven this route dozens of times, in the last year to Paulstock and before that eight miles further south to Carinish Court, which lay in a fold of the hills on the Paulstock side of Abbotsfield.
Ralph spent most of the time studying his newspaper.
He was not a man who bothered with small talk.
As they drew closer to London, Ralph abandoned the paper and stared out of the window.
Occasionally he grunted or coughed.
Ginny stopped at a zebra crossing in Fulham Palace Road.
A West Indian woman wheeled a pushchair slowly across.
‘Where do they all come from?’
Ralph asked.
‘It beats me.
In a couple of years we'll be outnumbered.’
Ginny's flat was in Wandsworth.
Every time she crossed Putney Bridge she could see her mother's windows high above the north bank of the Thames.
A few minutes later she turned into Varney Street, a cul de sac west of the common, and parked outside a late-Victorian terraced house near the end.
Ralph looked at his watch.
‘I'll unload, shall I?’
Ginny left him to it and went inside.
Her flat was on the ground floor.
The few rooms were large and high and she had painted the walls in pale yellows and greens.
Keeping furniture to a minimum, she had filled the place with books and plants.
She walked through the living room to the long window at the end.
The back garden belonged to her as well.
When she'd moved in, it had been no more than a yard full of builders' rubbish.
Now she grew herbs along the south-facing wall at the end; and in summer she sat on the tiny lawn, smelling the yellow roses and watching the clematis creeping over the fence from next door.
The flat and garden were private property like her relationship with God.
She could count on the fingers of one hand the people she actually enjoyed having on the premises; most of her other visitors she merely tolerated  and a few of them had the power to make her feel violated.
Ralph poked his head into the living room.
‘I'll just put my bags in my room, all right?’
Ginny put the kettle on and went back to the car for her bag, which Ralph had left on the back seat — not so much from laziness but because he was not in the habit of thinking of others.
He was waiting in the hall when she came out of her bedroom.
He padded after her.
She gave him his tea and put the plate of chocolate biscuits on the table beside his chair; he had a sweet tooth.
Ralph ate five biscuits, drank his tea, accepted another cup and lit a cigarette.
At this point he departed from the script that Ginny, on the basis of previous visits, had laid down for him.
According to the script he should have suggested that she turn on the television.
Instead he grunted and said, ‘Something I want to talk to you about.
I'm seeing my solicitor tomorrow.’
‘So you told me on the phone.’
Ginny had never been able to understand why Ralph continued to put up with the expense and inconvenience of a London solicitor; the legal advice he received at Lincoln's Inn was available far more cheaply in Paulstock.
‘I'm changing my will.’
‘Really?’
She was surprised he still had anything left to leave.
Debts had swallowed up most of the money he had got for Carinish Court.
Wistaria Cottage wasn't worth much and in any case he had talked at one point of trading it in for an annuity.
‘You know why?’
Ginny shook her head.
She didn't want to know why, either.
‘There's a fellow I sometimes see in the Dragon.’
The Dragon was the main hotel in Paulstock.
‘Robert something — can't remember the name.’
Ralph chewed his lower lip.
‘Doesn't matter anyway.
Point is, he's an estate agent.
We got talking one evening last week, and he was  asking about Carinish Court.
He knew the place, you see — he'd been over quite recently to do a valuation for insurance.
‘Marvellous house,’ he said.
‘Marvellous.’
Well, he'd had a few — I mean, he probably shouldn't have said what he did.
I happened to let slip how much James gave me for it.
He was shocked.
He said I'd been cheated.’
‘Not necessarily,’ Ginny said.
‘The sale was nearly two years ago.
And you said yourself that the house was in a terrible condition.’
‘I told him all that.
Didn't make a blind bit of difference.
‘You've been cheated, old man.’
Those were his very words, I promise you.’
‘But didn't you have it valued before the sale?’
‘James did all that.
Said he'd save me the trouble.
Some man came round, and James phoned me afterwards, told me what he'd said.
I never saw anything in black and white.’
‘Maybe James was making allowance for the fact it was a private sale.
No estate agent's commission.’
Ralph grunted.
‘Some commission.
Robert reckoned I'd dropped thirty or forty thousand pounds.’
‘You can't be sure.
This man didn't know the house before James started to have it renovated.
He's probably making a mistake.
You said he was drunk.’
‘I said he'd had a few.
That's not the same thing.
No, there's no doubt in my mind.
And that's why I'm going to change my will.
When I pop off, everything will come to you.
That little bastard won't get his hands on another shilling.’
Peter Redburn wasn't altogether surprised when, at five o'clock in the afternoon of Sunday 17 December, he opened the front door of 29 Champney Road and found James Salperton on the doorstep.
For the last few hours he had been thinking about James and Kate and the rest of the Mollands, the  Salpertons and the Redburns; and it would not have shocked him if any or all of them who were still alive had turned up unannounced at Number 29.
The Jungian concept of synchronicity was much on his mind because he was toying with the idea of using it to underpin the narrative structure of London .
The novel would deal with a single moment in the life of the city; and one of its themes was that there was an acausal link uniting all its apparent diversities into a single interdependent whole.
Outside it was already dark and a squall of rain burst into the house when Peter opened the door.
He recognized his visitor at once.
He had seen him often enough on TV, and when you hate or love a person you know his face as well as you do your own.
James was wearing a full-length waxed coat.
His head was bare and his smile was just a little rueful, as if he were uncertain of his welcome.
A silver Mercedes was parked beneath the streetlamp outside the house.
‘Peter?’ he said.
‘Peter Redburn?’
‘Yes.
Come in, James.’
James stepped into the hall.
‘You recognized me.’
They shook hands.
‘I imagine most people do.’
‘Even so, I'm impressed.’
James shrugged off his coat.
Underneath it he was wearing a thick cream jersey, dark green corduroy trousers and brown shoes that looked hand-made and probably were.
‘After all these years, who'd have thought it?’
‘Come and get warm by the fire.
Would you like a drink?
Some tea?’
‘Whatever you're having.
Tea, perhaps; I'm driving.’
James glanced round the living room, moved towards the fire and held out his hands to the heat.
‘I happened to be passing — hope you don't mind me barging in like this.
Kate and I have been meaning to get in touch for ages.’
‘It's been a long time.’
‘Far too long.
Ginny told me about your mother.
I'm so sorry.’
‘One of those things,’ Peter said.
‘Sorry about the mess in here — I'm trying to do some clearing out.’
The Secret History of Emor lay open on the arm of his chair.
Peter picked up the exercise book and slipped it into the box he had brought down from the loft.
He pushed the box with his foot behind the chair.
‘I remember her staying with us at Carinish Court,’ James was saying.
‘A nice woman; I know my mother was fond of her too.
I say, I hope I'm not interrupting you?
I'm sure you must be awfully busy.’
‘Glad to have an excuse to stop.’
Peter felt the impersonal force of James's charm as James was feeling the warmth of the fire.
‘I won't be a moment.
I'll just put the kettle on.’
‘I can't tell you how nice this is,’ James said.
‘It's as if the last time you saw me was yesterday.’
Not yesterday, Peter thought grimly, as he stood at the kitchen table laying the tea tray with his mother's china; but certainly last week or the week before.
It wasn't easy to avoid James Salperton.
For a start there were the Trumper's advertisements on TV — a whole series of them, which had been running for years.
Each was a romantic saga in miniature and each had the same basic plot: in a variety of vaguely 1930s settings, James played a wealthy philanderer who appeared to have a fetish about tea since the common feature of the married women he pursued was their taste for Trumper's Tea Bags.
A traditionally minded bishop had given the advertisements a welcome boost by complaining in the pulpit and in The Times that the campaign glorified adultery as well as Trumper's Tea Bags.
When the gossip columns got hold of the business with Ursula Salperton, almost everyone was delighted — including the bishop, who felt that events had proved him right.
Pemberley , however, was the main reason why James Salperton was famous.
Peter Redburn hated Pemberley and he had fed his hatred by watching every episode.
Everyone else appeared to love it, not just in Britain but throughout the English-speaking world.
During the first series, people stayed in to watch it.
Dinner parties were built around the episodes.
The second series established Pemberley near the top of the TV ratings.
The third series kept it there.
A supermarket chain gave the name Pemberley to its own brand of champagne.
Enterprising entrepreneurs set up Pemberley Trails and Pemberley Weekends.
You could buy Pemberley calendars and Pemberley diaries.
Sales of Pride and Prejudice rose.
The fourth series was due to be shown in the spring.
They said that James Salperton had turned down the offer of a fifth series and the producers were unwilling to continue without him.
Success breeds success.
To add to the unfairness, James was independently wealthy.
And to add to the unfairness still further, he had Kate.
‘Kate sends her love,’ James said.
‘I told her I'd try and see you while I was down in this part of the world.’
‘How is she?’
As he poured the tea, Peter wondered if she'd told James about how she'd made a fool of him; perhaps they had laughed at him together.
‘Blooming.
She said if I found you I had to ask you to dinner.
Do you think you could manage it?
Once you're back in town, I mean.’
‘I'd love to,’ Peter said.
‘Great.
I'll give you a ring when you're back.
We're quite central — Montpelier Square.’
‘I know.’
‘You know?’
‘There was an interview in one of the colour supplements.’
‘I keep forgetting our lives are public property.
We get people hanging around outside the flat.
Very tiresome.
You know I bought Carinish Court from my father?
We hope to spend a lot of our time there.
Much easier to be private in the country.’
‘It's a lovely house,’ Peter said.
‘I envy you.’
‘You remember it?’
‘Very well.’
‘I don't mind telling you we nearly lost it.
Ralph — my father — let it get very run down.
And then he just couldn't afford to live there, and he had to sell it.
It all happened very quickly.
It was only by the grace of God I could afford to buy it.’
The grace of God and the acumen of Ursula Salperton.
Peter said, ‘I thought your parents were very comfortably off.
Or rather they seemed to be.’
James shrugged.
‘They were.
But that was before inflation, and Ralph's not much of a businessman.
Between ourselves, he's gone downhill recently in more ways than one.
Did you know that he and my mother have separated?’
Peter shook his head, surprised by the suddenly intimate turn the conversation had taken.
‘Not divorced,’ James went on, as if the precise terms of his parents' separation were important.
‘They just decided they'd be happier living apart.’
‘Talking of parents, I suppose you must see something of Kate's mother.
She lives in London, doesn't she?’
‘Barbara?
Good lord, yes.
We had dinner with them last night.
You know she's married again?
Chap called Leo Quest — works for a merchant bank.
It was she who told me you're a writer.’
‘Only a part-time one.’
‘You'll have to forgive me but I've never read any of your books.
It's something I shall remedy.
Barbara said that one of them won a prize.’
‘The Babylon Baby ,’ Peter said.
‘As a matter of fact, it's the only one that's actually been published.’
‘It's in print?’
‘I'm afraid not.
You might be able to get it from a library.
Alternatively, I could let you have a copy if you'd really like one.
I've still got a few spares.’
‘I'd love it,’ James said.
‘I do envy you, you know.
There's something so permanent about a book.
Whereas with acting you're here today and gone tomorrow.
The sort of stuff I do isn't exactly high art.’
He hesitated, perhaps waiting for Peter politely to disagree.
Then: ‘I know from personal experience how difficult it is to write a book.
I just wish I had your talent.’
‘I didn't realize you wrote.’
Peter's curiosity momentarily swamped his irritation.
If James wrote a book, it would no doubt be a bestseller, which would make another point of contrast between the two of them.
‘That's the problem.
I don't.’
James flicked his hair off his forehead, and his signet ring glowed orange in the firelight.
‘Do you know an outfit called Channel 20 Books?’
‘I don't think I do.’
‘They commissioned me to write my autobiography — oh, it must be eighteen months ago.
I'm still on page two.
It's not for want of trying.’
‘What's the difficulty?’
‘I don't know.
I just can't cope with the written word, I suppose.’
‘Can't you just explain that to your editor?
If you repaid the advance, I'm sure they'd let you off the hook.’
‘Too late for that.
It's my own stupid fault.
My first deadline was the end of last March, and I hadn't even started thinking about it by then.
So I got the woman — Clare, she's my editor — to extend the deadline until the end of next month.
I didn't want to tell her I'd done nothing at all so I told a sort of white lie — said I was halfway through the first draft.
And of course she leaked that to the press.
You know what these publishers are like: they'll do anything to whip up a bit of interest in a book.
The result is, I'm stuck with it.
I can't just turn  round and say, ‘Sorry, chaps, it was all a mistake.’'
‘Why not?’
‘Think of the publicity.
People have got nasty minds: believe me, I know.
They'll either hint I was downright dishonest to sign the contract in the first place or they'll make out I can't even spell my own name.
I can't win.’
‘You could explain to your editor and ask her to find you a collaborator, a ghostwriter.’
‘If I'd had the sense to be frank with her last March, maybe I could have done that.
But it wouldn't work now: I've got to have something to show her, otherwise she'll know I lied to her.
Anyway, publishing's like acting.
It's a small world.
Even if she guaranteed the discretion of the ghostwriter, everyone would know.’
He hesitated and added softly: ‘I don't think I could bear that.’
Peter lifted the teapot.
James passed his empty cup.
‘I was wondering whether you'd be willing to help.’
‘Me?’
Peter's hand wavered.
Tea spurted into the saucer.
‘How?’
‘Would you write the bloody thing for me?’
As in the past, James's smile promised everything but gave nothing away.
‘Would you be my ghost?’
‘But why Peter?’
Barbara Quest said.
The phone hummed and crackled.
Kate said, ‘How should I know?
James got the address out of Ginny and drove up to Plumford yesterday afternoon.
He didn't discuss it with me beforehand, just told me when he got back.’
‘He must have a reason for choosing Peter.’
‘I think it's because he used to be a sort of friend.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘James likes everything to be on a personal basis.
Like he always has his hair cut by the same man.
He was at school with his solicitor.
I don't think he likes strangers very much.’
Barbara wondered if that were part of the reason for his marrying Kate.
‘How do you feel about seeing Peter again?’
‘Me?
Why not?’
‘I think he felt very bitter.’
‘That was years ago.
Anyway, we were just friends.’
‘I'm not sure Peter saw it like that.’
Barbara groped for another objection.
‘I thought James was going to write the book himself.’
‘He says he hasn't the time to do a good job.
Actually, I think he's found it harder than he expected and he needs help.’
‘If you ask me, the whole thing's a mistake.’
‘Look, there's nothing to worry about.
It's still James's book.
All Peter will be is a sort of glorified secretary.’
‘All it needs is for a journalist to go down to Abbotsfield.’
‘Mum, you're overreacting.’
‘If people read the autobiography, they'll start thinking about the past, James's past.
Once someone makes the connection, there's nothing we can do.’
‘But it doesn't matter if they —’
‘It matters to me, darling.
And it would matter to James, too.
With all the publicity he's had, I'm surprised no one 's mentioned it already.
That you knew each other when you were children, I mean, and what happened that summer.’
‘We were only there for a few weeks.
Why should anyone remember?’
‘The Timballs might.’
‘Who?’
‘Timball was the vicar at Abbotsfield.
Didn't you meet his son?’
‘Frank?
Yes, I think we did.’
Kate sighed ‘Anyway, I couldn't stop James, even if I wanted to.
I really don't see what's worrying you.
When James and I got married there was a lot of publicity.
All that business with Ursula, remember?
If anyone was going to make the connection, that was when they'd have done it — when all the muck-rakers were going full blast.
This book is nothing in comparison.
Just a bit of PR.’
‘I hope you're right.’
‘Do you and Leo want to come to dinner on Tuesday?
Peter's coming.’
Barbara wished they were talking face to face.
Nothing in Kate's voice revealed her feelings.
She made Peter sound like just another duty guest.
‘No.
I'm afraid we can't.’
Barbara swiftly invented a reason: ‘Leo's got something arranged.
He told me this morning.’
‘Shame.
Oh, and talking of Leo: James is a bit sensitive about Peter helping him with the book.’
‘You mean you don't want me to tell him?’
‘Only under oath of secrecy.
Personally, I don't care one way or the other but James wouldn't be very happy if he knew that Leo knew.’
‘Is everything all right with you and James?’
‘Of course it is.
Why do you ask?’
‘Oh, I just wondered.
Sometimes these little problems can —’
‘What problems?’
Kate interrupted with an urgency that made Barbara instantly suspicious.
‘Everything's fine.
We have the occasional argument.
Who doesn't?
But we don't have problems in the sense that you and Dad used to have.’
The problems with Hubert had begun if not on their wedding day then certainly during the honeymoon.
Barbara married him in 1950, early in September.
She wanted a church wedding with as many of the trimmings as they could possibly afford.
‘I'll only get married once in my life,’ she'd said, inaccurately as it turned out.
‘I'd like it to be something to remember.’
‘You don't mind that I'm an atheist?’ he'd said with a frankness that at the time she'd admired.
‘Of course not, darling.
I think I am, too.’
‘The point is, in my job it's not something you can afford to shout from the roof tops.
The Thirty-nine Articles are practically part of the curriculum.
I don't like to be hypocritical about it but in fact I haven't any choice.’
Barbara, who was uncertain what the Thirty-nine Articles were, patted his hand.
‘I do understand.
As far as I'm concerned, it doesn't matter.’
Looking back, she could see that she had married for all the wrong reasons.
She was afraid of staying single all her life and everything she had ever been told supported the belief that a woman's highest ambition was to become a wife and mother.
When she met Hubert Molland she was working as a secretary in London.
Her boss was the managing director of a firm that sold fertilizers and animal feeds.
In July 1950 he asked her to drive down to Cambridgeshire and collect his son from boarding school.
Barbara liked Rosington immediately.
It conformed to her image of what a public school should look like.
It had ivy-clad buildings that looked old even if they were not, rolling lawns, elm trees, a small lake and a chapel with a portico.
It had the glamour that attaches to other people's privileges; Barbara did not resent the lack of advantages her own parents had given her, but she wanted those advantages for her own children.
Perhaps, she thought later, it was Rosington she fell in love with, not Hubert.
Once at Rosington the car refused to leave.
Hubert, who was the boy's housemaster, summoned a mechanic and invited Barbara to lunch.
During lunch he treated Barbara with a grave courtesy that she later realized was a mask for his shyness.
Nevertheless, she was both surprised and touched when, with an obvious effort, he said that he would be in London at the weekend and wondered if he might have the pleasure of taking her out to lunch.
Lunch on Saturday led to dinner on Monday.
On Tuesday they spent the day together, and he proposed.
On Wednesday she handed in her notice to the managing director, who was touchingly reluctant to accept it.
The honeymoon lasted only a week because Hubert had to be back at school for the start of the Michaelmas Term.
They went to the Highlands, which was where the problems began.
Hubert wanted to tramp across as many mountains as possible, and he assumed that Barbara wanted to do the same.
In her memory it was always raining and always cold.
On the third morning, she slipped in the omnipresent mud and sprained an ankle.
This at least meant that she was no longer expected to walk.
‘What awful luck,’ Hubert said.
‘Will you be all right here if I go and stretch my legs for a while?’
‘Yes darling, of course,’ Barbara said, hastily revising her ideas about the purpose of honeymoons.
It wouldn't have mattered so much if the nights had brought the compensations she had been led to expect.
However, on their first night she felt like a patient strapped to an operating table without the benefit of an anaesthetic; and the surgeon was not only blind but expected the patient to give him directions.
‘Left a bit.’
She wriggled beneath the weight of Hubert's big, bony body.
‘No, not there.
Actually, it is hurting rather a lot.
Try it from the side.
Yes, that's it.
Oh dear, I think it's come out again.
Never mind, try again.’
On subsequent nights their fumblings in the darkness were equally painful and messy.
Barbara, whose previous experiences in that line had been few but enjoyable, remembered with guilty nostalgia the handful of nights she had spent with the managing director at the Royal Albion in Brighton.
After the honeymoon she and Hubert slept in the same room but in single beds.
‘I don't want to disturb you if I work late,’ Hubert explained.
She felt starved of physical contact.
Hubert would kiss her on the cheek in the morning and when she went up to bed.
If they were walking he would sometimes take her elbow — less to support her, she thought, than to steer her.
Apart from that, Barbara had to be content with what happened on almost every Saturday night of their life together.
Hubert would stand in his dressing gown beside her bed.
‘May I?’ he would say, as if asking her to dance.
They never made love with the light on and the act itself was too brief and impersonal to give her any pleasure.
But she thought these occasions were important to him and perhaps constituted another reason why he wanted to marry her.
If nothing else, she enjoyed feeling  needed; but sometimes she dreamed with disturbing vividness about the managing director, who had believed in full-length mirrors, bottles of champagne and the importance of taking one's time.
In return Hubert gave her security, pleasant surroundings, a degree of social standing and, of course, the twins.
Richard and Kate, the fruit of her weekly meetings with Hubert, were born in July 1951.
They chose to arrive prematurely — on Speech Day, as it happened, which was most inconvenient for their father.
The twins were demanding — in the first few years she thought she would go mad from lack of sleep and overwork — but at least they touched her and hugged her and kissed her and loved her.
Hubert was intensely ambitious.
He worked very hard, even in the holidays: he threw himself into all the activities of the school and contributed a number of well-received papers to conferences on education.
Barbara thought that he was driving himself too hard.
She knew that he often slept for less than four hours a night.
Occasionally he talked in his sleep but she could never make out what he was saying.
His efforts to move to a better school were unsuccessful.
On the other hand he became Deputy Headmaster of Rosington in 1957.
In 1959 he applied for the headship of another minor public school, which had the disadvantage of being in Northumberland.
‘I'm getting older,’ he said to Barbara.
‘The money's good, and I think there's a lot of potential for expansion there.
It'll be a useful stepping stone.’
Hubert went for one interview, along with six other candidates.
He liked what he saw of the school and got on well with the Chairman of the Governors, a fellow classicist.
His optimism grew as he made his own assessment of the other candidates.
A few weeks later the appointments committee asked him back for another  interview; only one other candidate remained on the shortlist.
‘I don't think there'll be any problem,’ he assured Barbara as she drove him to Rosington station; he hadn't slept the night before.
‘The other man's a makeweight — an insurance for them in case I withdraw.
This is really just a formality.’
Hubert was nearly right in his assessment of the situation.
But he was the makeweight.
The following afternoon, the appointments committee told him that they had offered the job to the other man and that he had accepted.
As he told Barbara afterwards, he had never felt more depressed.
The long railway journey added to his distress.
One train broke down, causing a two-hour delay.
At Newcastle station, the buffet was closed and someone stole his wallet.
Reporting the theft delayed him even longer.
It was after midnight by the time he was able to continue his journey.
Somewhere south of York, Hubert was alone in a second-class non-smoking compartment.
He was tired, hungry and humiliated.
‘I was actually thinking about suicide,’ he confessed to Barbara.
The door to the corridor slid open.
He looked up, angered by the intrusion.
A man came in and sat down in the seat opposite him.
Later, Hubert had no memory of the newcomer's face or clothes.
He remembered only the hands.
The man leaned forwards and spread out his hands.
According to Hubert, blood oozed from the centre of the palms.
Several drops fell to the floor.
‘My son,’ the man said to Hubert Molland.
‘It is time for you to serve me.’
Leo had chuckled when Barbara told him the story of Hubert's conversion.
They were in the middle of a leisurely Saturday lunch, the sort of meal that stretches  imperceptibly into afternoon tea.
In the interests of discretion — Leo was always discreet — they had driven out of London to Faringdon.
The hotel was just outside the town.
It was a warm day, one of the best that summer, and they ate on the terrace.
The lawn glowed green below them, drawing the eyes down to the sparkle of the stream at the bottom of the garden.
It was August 1980 — after her divorce from Hubert had been made absolute.
The miracle, if that is what it had been, was something that she'd never discussed with anyone.
The whole business sounded so ridiculous, and in any case the past was the past and she preferred to live in the present.
She talked about it today partly because she was warm, relaxed and happy, but more because she felt she owed it to Leo.
He had just told her about Miriam, his first wife and David's mother, who had eloped to Dayton, Ohio, with a dentist whom she later married.
By that time Barbara knew Leo very well, and she guessed how much it had cost him to tell her the whole unsavoury story.
One confidence deserved another.
In August, she was still working at Chessington-Harris as Leo's secretary; but for over a year their relationship had been considerably warmer than any of their colleagues realized.
‘Like Saul on the road to Damascus,’ Leo said.
‘A traditional volte-face, from one extreme to the other.
But why did he have to leave his job?
After all, he was teaching at a Christian school.’
‘Because that's what God wanted him to do.’
‘He was quite a good teacher, right?’
‘Yes.
At least I think so.
Everyone used to say he was.
He got results, and he knew how to keep the boys quiet.
I'm not sure how much he enjoyed it.
What he really liked was the administration.’
‘And what was he like as a priest?’
‘He tried hard.
But people tended to be afraid of him  or he was afraid of them.
Everything was too messy for him to cope with.’
‘Then I think God made a mistake,’ Leo said.
‘Or Hubert did.’
‘The funny thing was, no one would believe him.
He went to see the bishop, the Bishop of Rosington, to ask about training for the ministry.
I think the old man thought he was mad.
Tried to argue him out of it, even suggested — very tactfully — that he saw a doctor.
I got the impression that the Church of England doesn't like you to have visions.
But Hubert just wouldn't accept that.
He said to me that God had given him a chance to expiate his past life, and that was what he was going to do.
He didn't care about the effect it had on the rest of us.
It was his soul that counted, that's all.’
‘Then why didn't you leave him to it and get on with your own life?’
‘I don't know.
The children — that's what I told myself when I thought about it.
But I think force of habit came into it, too, and fear of what people would say.
And also I was a little sorry for him.
Everyone in Rosington seemed to be laughing at him behind his back.
He knew that.
He isn't a fool.
He said it was part of the price he had to pay.’
‘Perhaps the bishop was right.’
Barbara shrugged.
‘Anyway, Hubert got what he wanted in the end.
He was ordained.
The first place they sent us to was a parish in the East End.
He nearly had a nervous breakdown so they made him go to Plumford.
A senior assistant curate, no less — do you know what that is?
Just about the lowest of the low.’
She was silent for a moment, thinking of the drudgery to which Hubert's vision had condemned her and of the advantages it had denied the children.
‘Seven years later they gave him a parish of his own.
Do you know, he was in two minds about accepting?
Honestly, he wanted life to be as hard as possible.
I think he even thought that what happened to Richard was all  part of God's plan for him, Hubert.’
Her voice rose, and she knew she was close to tears.
‘Something to be grateful for.’
‘Tell me something.
After you'd stuck it out for so long, why did you leave?’
‘Once Kate had left home, there was no need for me to stay.
I couldn't leave her there with Hubert and I couldn't afford to take her with me.’
‘There was no other reason?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘I thought perhaps you might have had an affair.
A trigger of some sort.
Something that finally made up your mind for you.’
‘Nothing worth mentioning,’ Barbara said.
Leo looked at her for a moment.
Then, changing the subject, he told her that he was going to be the new head of economic analysis at Chessington-Harris.
The promotion would bring a seat on the board.
‘But, darling, that's wonderful.’
‘They'll make it official on Monday.’
‘What do you want me to do?
Move with you?’
‘No.
I'd like you to resign.’
‘Are you giving me the sack?’
Leo picked up her hand and planted a kiss on it.
For an actuary, he was a very romantic person and he had no inhibitions about showing it.
‘I want you to marry me,’ he said.
‘Please say yes.’
On Monday morning, Peter Redburn walked down to Market Street.
At Barclays Bank he paid in the cheque from James Salperton and cashed a cheque of his own.
Then he found a telephone box and made three calls.
The first was to the area librarian whose responsibilities included the branch library where Peter worked.
‘When do you think you'll be able to come back?’ she said.
‘Don't think I'm hurrying you but we're rather short-staffed what with Christmas and everything.’
‘That's what I was phoning about,’ Peter said.
‘I'm not coming back.
I'm resigning.’
‘But, Peter —’
‘Don't worry.
I've written to the Borough Librarian so it's all official.
I know I should give a month's notice but I've got some leave due; you can take that instead.’
Afterwards he dialled Bill Coleby's number.
A secretary answered.
She said that Mr Coleby was in a meeting and offered to take his name and a message.
‘Would you just say Peter Redburn called?’
‘Oh, Mr Redburn.’
Suddenly the secretary's voice was warmer, almost flirtatious.
‘I'm sure Mr Coleby wouldn't mind if I disturbed him.
Could you just hold a moment?’
‘Actually, I'm in rather a hurry.
It doesn't matter.
Goodbye.’
Finally he phoned the solicitor.
Mr Barnes was delighted to hear from him, which made Peter suspect that he knew of Coleby's interest in 29 Champney Road.
Peter explained about Coleby's offer of £115,000.
‘Will you accept?’
‘No,’ Peter said.
‘He'll go higher.’
‘Can you be sure of that, Mr Redburn?
If Coleby's overheads at the development stage go over a certain figure, he may decide that the game's not worth the candle.
He's not fully committed yet.
Or he may have an alternative up his sleeve.’
‘I think he'll raise the bid.
On the assumption that he does, and that we reach agreement, would you be ready to handle the sale?’
‘Of course, with pleasure.’
‘And I wonder if you could recommend an accountant.’
Again, Barnes was only too pleased.
Then: ‘Don't think I'm prying, but why are you so certain that Coleby's prepared to raise his offer?’
‘Call it intuition,’ Peter said.
‘Did you know that he and I were at school together?’
Peter's near-certainty had a little to do with intuition and a lot to do with the Letts School-Boy Diary for 1964.
If used properly, the diary was a mine of information.
Peter had begun to study it on Sunday, chiefly to discover what he had had to say about Abbotsfield.
The entries were not much immediate use to him.
You could read very little into Went to see A Hard Day's Night — Fab or Went swimming at CC.
Ginny lent me The King Must Die .
The Mithraeum wasn't even mentioned, though on August 9 he had written:I AM NOW A RAVEN !!!
At first he was disappointed that he had recorded so little.
Gradually, however, he realized that he could become a detective investigating his own past and that what he gleaned might have a bearing on the present.
After all, there was plenty of material.
He had three main sources of information: the diary, the Archives of Emor and his memory.
It was not easy to combine them.
His memory was often inaccurate.
Many of the documents in the Archives were dated either not at all‘or according to an incomprehensible Emorian system invented by Richard; and it sometimes proved impossible to link the events they recorded with events in the world beyond Emor.
The diary entries were tantalizingly brief.
But the three sources complemented one another and their sum was greater than their parts.
Peter thought it best to start with the diary because it provided a chronological framework.
Charles Letts and Co Ltd had clearly believed that the average school-boy had a voracious and undiscriminating appetite for facts.
The first sixty-four pages of the little book included information on everything from jet engines to German strong verbs.
He turned to the entries he had made himself.
Many of them recorded complicated transactions in cash and kind, often accompanied by the laconic comment ‘massive profit!’
Several of the deals had been with Bill Coleby: ‘Got 2/6 off Coleby for Yugoslav note worth 1s’ was one  which Peter did not remember.
Another, however, jogged his memory: ‘Coleby gave me 10s for my old penknife — very massive profit!’
In those days Peter had haggled as a matter of course.
Scenting the strength of Coleby's desire for the knife, he had beaten him up from two shillings to ten over a period of three days.
Peter wondered how much people really changed.
In 1964 he had been prepared to back his hunches.
In the past Coleby had paid over the odds for things he wanted.
His offer for Number 29 had already increased.
It was time to gamble again.
Peter remembered the motto he had chosen for the Emperor's Luck Casino in Emor.
The motto formed part of the coat of arms he had designed for the establishment — five poker dice surmounted by an imperial crown.
‘The gods help those who help themselves.’
The Bentley arrived before lunchtime on Monday.
Peter, who was in the front room, saw the brown car pull up outside.
Even though he had been expecting it — hoping for it, really — he resented the interruption because it broke his chain of concentration.
Also, of course, he was nervous; these days he was unused to gambling.
He shovelled a handful of Emorian documents back into the box and reached the front door before Coleby had time to ring the bell.
‘Peter.
Good to see you.’
Coleby stepped into the hall and stamped his feet on the mat.
‘My secretary told me you'd rung.
Stupid woman — I'd told her to put you through if you called.’
‘It wasn't her fault,’ Peter said.
‘I didn't want to disturb you in the middle of a meeting.’
Coleby kept on his overcoat.
Without waiting for an invitation, as if the house were already his, he led the way into the sitting room.
Peter followed, thinking how  such behaviour would have infuriated his mother, and how it strengthened his own position.
‘Thank you for lunch on Saturday,’ he said.
‘I really enjoyed myself.’
‘Well, what's the verdict?’
‘I don't know.
It's a difficult decision.’
Coleby turned slowly to face him, like a liner manoeuvring to ram a tugboat.
Peter held his ground.
‘Would you like a cup of coffee?’
‘Coffee?’
Coleby frowned at the idea.
‘No, I can't stay long.
What's the problem?’
‘It's a very generous offer and all that.’
‘You won't get a better one.
And maybe I should remind you that it won't stay open for ever.’
‘The point is, I'm wondering about living here myself.’
‘Why, for God's sake?’
‘Difficult to explain,’ Peter said.
‘Another writer would understand.
I seem to be able to work here,’
‘Surely you can work anywhere?’
‘In theory, yes; but some places are more conducive than others.
It's a matter of atmosphere.’
‘Have you thought what the atmosphere will be like once the building starts?’
‘If the building starts.’
‘Not if: when.
Something'll go up on that land behind the house.
I can promise you that.
Simple economics — I can't afford to leave it lying idle.
Take light industry, for example, which wouldn't have the same access requirements.
Have you thought what that would mean?
I'll tell you: a lot of dirt, a lot of noise, a lot of traffic.
Wouldn't do much for the value of the house, either.’
‘I could live with that.
Money's not the only consideration, is it?
As for the noise, my flat in London is on a main road, and the noise never really stops.
It doesn't worry me.
Besides, it's the house itself I like, not the setting.’
Coleby glanced around the little sitting room.
His face darkened.
‘I'm not saying that I shall live here,’ Peter said.
‘Only that it's a possibility.
I thought it only fair to let you know.’
Coleby plunged his hands into the side pockets of his coat.
‘When are you going to decide?’ he said.
‘I can't wait for ever.’
‘Of course you can't.
A few days, perhaps.’
‘You'll be staying in Plumford while you make up your mind?’
‘Some of the time at least.
I've got to go up to London.’
‘If I go up to one-twenty, will that help you make up your mind?’
‘It could be a factor,’ Peter admitted.
‘Oh, while I remember: there was something else I wanted to mention.
At the Angel, you were asking about my book.
London .’
Coleby grunted and began to move towards the door.
‘And I asked you if you remembered Emor.’
‘Yeah, the game you said we played.
What about it?’
‘I think I might be able to work it into London .
The fantasy city that interacts with the real one.’
‘I see,’ Coleby said.
‘Well, good luck to you.
As I told you, I hardly remember it.’
‘I wondered if you might have any papers relating to it.’
‘Papers?’
‘Emor generated a lot of paper,’ Peter said.
‘Don't you remember?
A typical bureaucracy, when you come to think about it.’
‘If you say so.’
‘Do your parents still live at the farm?
In the same house, I mean.’
‘As a matter of fact, they do.’
Coleby was frowning now.
‘What's this all about?’
‘Well, it's just possible that anything you had from  Emor might still be there.
In your old bedroom.
Stuffed at the back of a drawer.
Or in the attic, maybe.
And if there is something, I'd like to see it.’
‘If you think —’ Coleby thought better of what he had been going to say.
He jingled his car keys and said in a quieter voice: ‘Has this anything to do with whether you keep this house or not?’
‘It might do,’ Peter said.
‘To be honest, I'm not sure.
Put it this way, Bill: if you can come up with something from Emor — despatches, that sort of thing — I'd really appreciate it.
You'd be doing me a favour.
One good turn deserves another.’
Coleby looked as if he thought Peter were mad.
He marched into the hall and opened the front door.
On the step he turned back.
‘You want this stuff for the book?’ he said in a voice that was nine parts disbelief to one part disgust.
‘Are you having me on?’
‘Why on earth should I?’
Peter said.
‘I'll be in touch.
Goodbye.’
When Coleby had gone, Peter leaned against the wall and stared down at the worn linoleum.
He was trembling — partly from exhilaration and partly from anxiety.
Coleby hadn't really changed for all his success.
Underneath the mohair coat and the surplus flesh lurked the second-class citizen they had grudgingly tolerated at Plumford Grammar School.
More to the point, Peter hadn't changed either.
He had lied to Coleby, and done it convincingly, as part of the negotiations to drive up the price of Number 29; he was still capable of taking risks.
And Coleby was as hampered now as he had been in Emor by his lack of imagination: get him away from a straightforward discussion of bricks, mortar and money, and the man was lost; give him a load of crap about the artistic temperament, and his sense of smell deserted him.
Peter began to laugh.
If he kept his nerve he would  squeeze more money out of Bill Coleby.
If he were very lucky, he would also get a bonus: Coleby might provide him with evidence of murder.
On Monday evening Ginny left the office without her usual sense of mild relief.
She worked for the British Council in the monolithic Spring Gardens building between the Mall and Trafalgar Square.
Normally she tolerated her job and relished her home.
At the present the position was reversed.
The streets were more crowded than usual.
Ginny waited for a bus and watched people darting along the pavements and in and out of shops.
All they had in common was their sense of urgency: the mass hysteria that characterizes the week before Christmas.
A bus came and she squeezed aboard.
As it trundled towards Wandsworth, Ginny thought about Christmas.
There was only a week to go.
She hadn't even started to buy presents and make preparations.
She and David planned to spend the long weekend alone in Bristol.
Last night, however, Ralph had begun to angle for an invitation by reminiscing about the joys of the traditional family Christmas at Carinish Court.
It astonished her how the passage of time had censored from his memory everything except the trimmings like crackers, turkeys and mince pies; and he'd imagined, in the place of the emotional strain and physical surfeit he'd forgotten, a wholly fictitious jollity.
At Wandsworth, it was a seven-minute walk from the bus stop to the end of Varney Street.
Ginny bought some milk from Mr Ahmet's Corner Emporium & Newsagent's on the corner.
When she let herself into the flat, Ralph was waiting in the hall.
She guessed that he had been  standing at the window or listening for the sound of her key in the lock.
The television was on in the living room.
The flat smelled like the lair of a strange animal.
‘Hullo,’ he said.
‘Still raining?
There's something I want to show you.’
Ginny wished that he had allowed her to take off her coat before he started.
She followed him into the bathroom.
The basin was ringed by a tidemark composed of specks of hair and shaving cream.
‘See this?’
Ralph wrapped his hand round the cold tap of the bath.
‘It drips.
If you ask me you need a new washer.
Quite apart from the waste, it'll stain the side of the bath if you're not careful.’
‘Yes,’ Ginny said.
‘You're right.’
‘Just thought I'd mention it.
Hope you don't mind.
Oh, and another thing.
You're getting very low on milk.
I think there's about half a pint left.
Not much, when you think of breakfast.’
‘It's all right.
I got a couple of pints on my way home.’
Ralph looked disappointed.
‘There was something else.
I should have made a list.
What the hell was it?’
Ginny tried to back out of the bathroom.
‘I know,’ he said.
‘You had a phone call.
I made a note of it on the pad.’
It couldn't have been David because David knew she would be out at work, and knew that Ralph was staying with her.
The pad wasn't beside the phone in the hall.
Ralph searched the flat, clucking anxiously.
Ginny managed to take off her coat, put the milk away and turn on the oven before he ran the pad to earth on the table beside his armchair.
‘It was about four o'clock,’ he announced.
‘Chap called Peter something.’
He peered at the piece of paper.
‘I said you were at work but I didn't let him have your number.
Just in case, you know.’
In case of what?
Ginny could only suppose that Ralph thought he was protecting her from a possible nuisance.
Perhaps he thought British Council employees who received personal calls at work were instantly dismissed.
Perhaps he suspected that Peter Redburn intended to whisper obscenities in her ear.
‘Did he leave a message?’
‘Said he'd ring back later.
Hope I did the right thing?’
‘Yes, fine,’ Ginny said, and her irritation with Ralph was suddenly replaced by pity.
‘I think I'll have a drink.
Would you like one?’
‘I wouldn't say no to a small G and T.’
She carried their drinks into the living room and asked Ralph if he had managed to see his solicitor; the appointment had been at 2 p.m.
‘Oh yes,’ he said.
‘Do you know they've got a Jew in the partnership now?
Incredible, isn't it?
They get everywhere.
Even James married a Jew's stepdaughter.
I honestly don't see what Barbara Molland sees in that fellow Quest.
An attractive woman like that could have had anyone.’
And I sleep with the same Jew's son, Ginny thought, whenever I can.
‘What we need is a sensible immigration law,’ Ralph said.
‘There was something in the paper.’
He pawed at the Daily Telegraph but failed to find whatever he was looking for and lit a cigarette instead.
But he had not exhausted the subject.
‘In my humble opinion —’
‘How are you getting on with the family history?’
Ginny interrupted.
‘Eh?’
Ralph switched from one hobbyhorse to another.
‘Oh, there's a lot still to do.
There would be with a family like the Salpertons.
God knows how many generations — right back to the Conquest.
Backbone of England.’
When Ralph Salperton sold the business his father and his grandfather had built up, he had announced his intention of devoting much of his newly won leisure to compiling the family history.
In her late teens Ginny had surreptitiously investigated the notes he had made.
It had  not taken her long.
Ralph had succeeded in proving his descent from his great-grandfather, a grocer in Whitstable, who had married in 1838.
Thereafter his researches had moved into the realms of fantasy.
There had indeed been a family of minor gentry called Salperton in the later Middle Ages though they had no demonstrable connection with the Conquest.
Their last known descendant, Nathaniel Salperton, was among those executed after the Monmouth rebellion in 1685.
By an act of faith that spanned one and a half centuries, Ralph had assumed that Whitstable grocer must be the lineal descendant of the Protestant rebel.
‘Trouble is,’ Ralph was saying, ‘it involves a lot of work, a lot of travelling.
In fact I was wondering if you could give me a hand.’
‘I wish I had the time.
Perhaps James would help.’
‘I wouldn't ask him for a drink of water if I were dying of thirst.
I meant what I said last night.
I'm changing my will.
Mark my words, he'll regret it.’
Regret a half share of nothing in particular?
‘And to think I was pleased,’ Ralph said.
‘Keep the old place in the family, I thought — best thing that could happen if I couldn't stay there myself.
Goes to show: you can't trust anyone.
When I think what I've done for that boy.
He wouldn't be where he is today without me.’
He stared into his gin and tonic.
‘Beautiful house.
We used to have super parties there.’
‘When was that?’
Ginny asked.
Carinish Court was a safer subject than James, less objectionable than Ralph's views on racial purity and closer to reality than the history of the Salpertons.
‘Eh?
In the first few years.
We moved in, let me see, it was a wedding present from my father: that would make it nineteen forty-seven.’
He rubbed his chin.
‘I'd just come out of the army.
We did a lot of entertaining.
Though I say it myself, your mother and I knew how to throw a party.
I remember old Johnny Redburn saying, ‘I've got to hand it to you, Ralph, you know how to make things go with a swing.’
Poor old Johnny.’
‘I remember him coming to stay.’
‘When was that?’
‘Nineteen sixty-four, I think,’ Ginny said carefully.
‘Must have been the last time I saw him.
Came with his wife, didn't he?
Can't recall her name.
Of course, he was dying then.
But he used to be very different.
We had some great times in the army.
You know he was my best man?’
Ralph's eyes were watering.
‘All gone now,’ he said.
‘All gone.’
Ginny stood up.
‘I'd better do something about supper.’
Ralph-appeared not to hear her.
‘Johnny liked Carinish Court.
He stayed there once — by himself, without that dreary wife of his.
Must have been the same time I did my leg in.
I remember him outside the front door, getting out of the taxi.
He looked up at the house, at your mother and me in the doorway.
You know what he said?
‘I envy you, old man.
Christ, I envy you.’'
Carinish Court had aroused some people's envy: that at least was true, even if Ralph had perhaps been mistaken about Johnny Redburn's reaction to the place.
Ginny left him brooding on the past in front of a game show on television.
('Load of nonsense,’ he always said about television; nonetheless, he liked to have it on.)
In the kitchen, she opened the freezer and found a Chicken Kiev for two, which she put in the microwave to defrost.
She stared at their supper as it revolved on the turntable.
Ginny used to think that Carinish Court tried too hard to be something that it wasn't.
The entrance to the drive, for instance, was marked by stone piers surmounted by pineapples, but the piers were stunted and the pineapples crudely carved: had anyone really been fooled?
James had always loved the place.
In summer, he used to take friends through the drawing room, out of the French windows and on to the terrace.
And there in front of them was the blue rectangle of the swimming pool, framed by the green of the grass and the darker green of the box hedges that acted as windbreaks.
If the friends weren't expecting to see the pool, their eyes would widen and James's lips would twitch.
‘If you'd like a dip, we can lend you a costume,’ James would say casually.
‘Unless you'd rather play tennis, that is.’
To reach the hard court, you walked out of the garden door of the house, over the lawn, past the cedar of Lebanon, and there it was, between the rhododendrons of the drive and the wall of the kitchen garden.
Ralph had laid it down in the 1950s.
In those days he still played a good deal of tennis.
One of Ginny's earliest memories was of the contrast between the white of his shirt and shorts and the brown of his skin; his legs and arms had been heavily muscled and covered with a sprinkling of dark hairs, and beads of sweat on his upper lip drained into his thin moustache.
It was true that both the house and the grounds had the curious quality of seeming larger than they were.
Carinish Court had once been a farmhouse.
Its origins were Queen Anne but it had been remodelled several times, most radically at the turn of the century when it had become the holiday home of a London architect.
The drive wound through tall trees and bushes, creating the impression that the house was much further away from the road to Abbotsfield than in fact it was.
Suddenly the drive ended in a gravel sweep and the house reared up on the left.
The frontage was stately and symmetrical, promising similar qualities within.
Apart from the drawing room, however, the rooms were small and low.
There were winding passages, interconnecting rooms and two staircases.
Some of the bedrooms were at mezzanine level between the main floors.
The kitchen wing was at the back and to the side so the house was L-shaped; and  beyond the kitchen was a cobbled yard bounded by the stables, where they kept the cars.
The house was an ordeal for visiting children, who were always getting lost.
It made a perfect setting for Murder in the Dark.
The memory of that game brought Ginny back to Johnny Redburn: the last time Ginny remembered playing it was when he and his wife came to stay in August 1964.
The whole weekend had been unsettling, which was perhaps why the game had stuck in her mind.
The adults had gone out.
The five of them were alone in the house: herself and James, Kate and Richard Molland, and Peter Redburn.
The game had been James's idea.
Richard had been the detective.
Ginny had hidden in the big cupboard in the dining room.
Richard, whom they had left counting to a hundred by the mains switch in the hall, turned out the lights.
At her age — almost fifteen — Ginny was far too old to take the game seriously.
That was what she'd told herself.
She was only joining in for the sake of the others because Murder in the Dark is more fun with five than with four.
In fact the darkness, the whispers, the creaking floorboards, the footsteps and the thought of a stalking murderer had had their usual effect on her: a state of fear that had little to do with pleasure.
The cupboard smelled slightly of damp and even on a warm summer evening Ginny felt the prickle of goose pimples rising on her bare arms.
The house grew still but it was a menacing stillness, like that of a cat about to spring.
Ginny's breathing became fast and shallow, and she had difficulty swallowing.
She had left the dining-room door open and the cupboard door slightly ajar.
She wondered if the others were playing a joke on her: perhaps they'd gone out for a walk; perhaps, at this very moment, they were laughing at the thought of her waiting for a killer who would never come.
Then someone screamed.
Ginny had no idea who it was or where the scream came from.
Why hadn't Richard turned the lights on?
She burst out of the cupboard, stumbled across the dining room and felt her way down the hall to the cupboard where the mains switch was.
She grazed her knuckles on the corner of the fusebox.
At last she found the switch.
The lights came on.
Richard Molland was clinging to the newel post at the foot of the stairs.
His pupils were so enlarged that his eyes looked black.
Ginny smoothed her hands on her dress and got her breathing under some sort of control.
‘Who's dead?’ she said, trying to sound amused, an adult among children.
He looked at her.
‘Who's dead?’ she repeated, irritably because she was ashamed of having been scared.
‘Do you know?
Who screamed?’
‘I screamed,’ Richard said.
‘But you can't be dead.
You're the detective.’
Ginny heard the rising note of a car engine and the crunch of tyres on gravel.
Peter clattered downstairs.
James and Kate came along the passage from the kitchen; they were whispering and giggling.
The game was over.
Ginny never learned the identity of the murderer.
In the real world, the safe world of the present, with nothing harder to handle than Ralph in the next room, the phone began to ring.
Ginny ran into the hall and picked up the handset.
Ralph appeared in the doorway of the living room.
Other people's phone calls excited him strangely.
It was as if he were always expecting bad news to be relayed to him.
‘Hello,’ Peter said.
‘I'm back in London for a couple of nights.
I wondered if there was any chance of our meeting.
How about lunch tomorrow?’
Ginny gave him the address and phone number of her office, and arranged to meet him there at 12.45.
‘I don't know if you've heard,’ he went on, ‘but James came to see me yesterday.’
‘That was my fault.
I hope you don't mind.
I gave him your address.’
‘You know this book of his?
He wants me to help him with it.’
‘Do you think that's a good idea?’
‘Why not?
He's paying quite well.’
‘Knowing James, you may end up with more than you bargained for.’
‘Don't worry.
I remember what he's like.
He hasn't really changed.’
‘Have any of us?’
Ginny said.
‘I'm beginning to think we haven't.
I've got very vivid memories of that summer, about Abbotsfield and Carinish Court.
I'd like to talk about it some time.’
‘Okay.
If you want.’
They said goodbye and she put down the phone.
Ralph was still waiting in the doorway.
‘Everything all right?’ he said.
‘Who was that?’
Ginny wondered how he would react if she told him the simple truth.
‘Just a friend,’ she said.
‘Supper will be ready in about ten minutes.’
Abbotsfield and Carinish Court: Peter had heard the two names for the first time on the same evening in July 1964.
After he had said goodbye to Ginny, he sat down in front of his work table and opened the Letts School-Boy Diary.
He had brought it to London with him from Plumford, together with a selection of Emorian documents and one of his mother's account books.
According to the diary, it must have been Friday 17 July.
Good day.
Went swimming — temp 73 degrees!
Holiday with GMM ?
The last sentence could be expanded to ‘I may  be going on holiday with Richard Molland but I'm not sure.’
July 17 was towards the end of the summer term when the evenings seemed to last for ever.
Peter had been outside in the wasteland.
By the time he got back to the house, it was after nine o'clock.
He opened the door and slipped into the kitchen.
Technically he was meant to be in bed.
His parents were in the sitting room.
The door was slightly open.
Peter hesitated in the hall, not so much to eavesdrop as to prepare himself for a noiseless ascent of the stairs.
‘I talked to Barbara Molland today,’ his mother was saying.
‘She said they'd have plenty of room, and one more wasn't any bother as far as she was concerned.’
His father cleared his throat and said in a voice that was now almost a whisper: ‘So it's all settled then?’
‘Not quite.
She wants to ask Hubert.’
‘He won't object, will he?’
‘It's nothing to do with him.
He won't have the extra work.’
‘When are they going?’
‘Probably the thirty-first of July.
I haven't mentioned it to Peter yet.’
‘I think you should.’
‘Better not.
Wait until it's absolutely certain.’
‘Where are they going?’ his father asked.
‘It's in Somerset.
A place called Abbotsfield.’
‘Good God, that's not far from Carinish Court.
You know, Ralph Salperton's place.’
‘Oh yes,’ his mother said.
‘I suppose it must be.’
‘Perhaps I should drop Ralph a line.
His kids must be about the same age.’
‘Are you sure that's sensible?’
‘Oh, Ralph's a good sort.
Very hospitable.
It'd be nice to see them again, wouldn't it?
For us to see them, I  mean.
We've got a standing invitation.
Maybe we should take them up on it.’
His mother didn't reply.
‘You never liked him much, did you?’
‘What I think about him is neither here nor there.
He's your friend.’
Peter backed down the hall and into the kitchen.
He opened and closed the back door, taking care to slam it, and returned to the hall, whistling a Beatles' song, ‘Can't Buy Me Love’.
‘Is that you, Peter?’ his father called.
Who else could it be?
He went into the sitting room.
‘Come to say goodnight, old chap?’
Peter nodded.
‘You're late,’ his mother said.
‘Those jeans will have to be washed.
And mind you get your nails clean before you get into bed.’
He kissed his mother on the cheek.
His father twisted in his chair and gripped Peter's wrist.
‘Are you all right, old son?’ he said with an anxiety that infuriated Peter — and also upset him because John Redburn's anxiety was a sign of his vulnerability.
Until very recently, Peter had assumed that all adults — and in particular his father — were invulnerable, almost by definition.
‘I'm fine,’ he said, pulling away.
‘See you in the morning.’
Upstairs Peter looked up Abbotsfield in his Philips school atlas.
The town or perhaps village was south of Bristol.
It looked even smaller than Plumford.
All he knew about Somerset was that they had a cricket team and that the yokels drank cider and pronounced it ‘zyder’.
He wondered what he had done to make his parents want to get rid of him for most of the summer holidays.
At school the next day, he talked to Richard in break.
‘Have you heard the news?’
‘No.
What?’
‘It looks like I may be coming with you to Abbotsfield.
But keep it quiet.
It's not official yet.’
‘Great,’ Richard said.
He squared up to Peter and punched him lightly on the shoulder.
‘How do you know?’
Peter winked at him.
‘Ve haf vays of making zem talk.’
And as he was emperor that week he added, ‘My secret police are very efficient.’
If anyone had asked him, Peter would have said that the Mollands had invited him to spend the summer with them at Abbotsfield simply for the pleasure of his company.
His mother's account book revealed a different story.
30th July — To H. Molland (for P.)— £5-5-0.
It seemed cheap at the price — five guineas for travel and a month's board and lodging.
At the back of the same red Lion Brand Cash book was a note in his mother's handwriting to the effect that she had given Peter £1 for pocket money.
Before the end of the summer term, he had tried to get more information about Abbotsfield from Richard.
‘You never know with a locum,’ Richard had explained.
‘Sometimes it's awful, sometimes it's great.’
‘What does your father have to do?’
‘Just take the services on Sunday, I think.’
‘What about the other ones?
Marriages and funerals and so on?’
‘It depends, doesn't it?’
Richard said.
‘Sometimes we get a funeral.
Do you want to see the advert?’
They were in the Mollands' house — not the modern Rectory at Champney Crucis but the Vicarage at Plumford; old Hubert was still Senior Assistant Curate at St Clement's.
It was a rambling house and the Mollands lived in what had once been the servants' quarters; the vicar had the rest of the place to himself.
Richard went into his father's study and Peter trailed after him.
On the  desk by the window was an April issue of the Church Times .
One of the advertisements had been ringed in green ink.
House for duty, 4 Sundays from August 2.
PB Catholic.
Somerset village.
Write: Timball, The Vicarage, Abbotsfield.
‘’ House for duty’?’
Peter said.
‘Clerical duties.
Taking services.
And in return the locum can use the Vicarage rent-free.
‘PB Catholic’ means Prayer Book Catholic, which is sort of high church like St Clem's.
You know, incense and crossing yourself.’
Peter, who resented the air of omniscience that Richard assumed on matters ecclesiastical, stared out of the window.
The study overlooked the churchyard.
Kate was walking towards the Vicarage, arm in arm with a schoolfriend.
They wore light-blue blazers and short gingham dresses, and their heads were very dose together.
Until recently, Peter had thought of Kate as someone to be avoided: a member of an alien species who happened to be Richard's sister.
Lately, however, he had begun to be curious about her — almost against his will.
He wondered if her hair were as soft as it looked.
Richard had seen them too.
‘I bet they're talking ‘secrets’ again.
Typical girls.’
Peter, hoping his interest in Kate had not been obvious, turned his back to the window.
‘Look here, we've got to have a conference about the Sinking Fund.’
The front door banged.
Richard put a finger to his lips.
‘We'd better go up to my room, Your Majesty.
This is no place for state secrets.’
The secrets of Emor.
Peter pushed back his chair and stood up.
There had been so many secrets.
He stood at the window, watching the traffic on Willesden High Road.
On the opposite  pavement, three West Indian boys waggled their bodies in time to music coming from a nearby shop.
How old were they?
It was hard to tell: perhaps no more than twelve or thirteen.
Peter wondered whether they had secrets, whether they lived much of their lives in private worlds.
The public fantasies of television might have destroyed the need for private ones.
They must still have secrets, though; everyone needed secrets.
The secrecy that surrounded Emor had been a large part of its charm.
At school they concealed it automatically from masters and other boys: the secrecy was enjoyable for its own sake, and in any case Emor would have been labelled ‘childish’— the sort of behaviour that was only one step removed from taking a teddy bear to bed with you at night.
Emor had similarities with Freemasonry or Rosicrucianism.
On impulse Peter crossed the room to the bookcase and took down Jung's Memories, Dreams, Reflections .
It was years since he had read it but he thought Jung had said something about the universal need for secret societies.
He checked the index and found the reference.
There is no better way of intensifying the treasured feeling of individuality than the possession of a secret which the individual is pledged to guard.
The very beginnings of societal structures reveal the craving for secret organizations.
When no valid secrets really exist, mysteries are invented or contrived to which privileged initiates are admitted….
The need for ostentatious secrecy is of vital importance on the primitive level, for the shared secret serves as a cement binding the tribe together….
The secret society is an intermediary stage on the way to individuation…
The chronology of The Secret History recorded the events of more than 200 years.
In real time, Peter worked out, Emor began towards the end of 1963 and flourished for  nearly two years.
In the outside world the Profumo scandal and Philby's defection rocked Macmillan's last government; President Kennedy was assassinated; the United States made its first air raids on North Vietnam.
He and Richard must have heard about these things but in general they had failed to register.
News headlines were part of a game that adults played.
Peter returned the book to its place on the shelf and went back to the table.
He leafed through a pile of documents until he found a sheet of paper torn from an exercise book.
It was a formal agreement between himself and Richard, signed in their mingled blood on 29 November 1963.
They had pledged eternal friendship between the Gens Redburna and the Gens Mollandia.
In Article 3 of the agreement, each had promised to avenge the violent death of the other with the blood of the murderer.
‘Emor?’
Ginny said.
‘Oh, I remember.’
‘But you weren't really involved, were you?’
Peter said.
‘You were too old.
The only girl we allowed in was Kate and that was only right at the end.’
It was Tuesday lunchtime, and they were sitting in the restaurant at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in the Mall; Ginny often ate there when she had had enough of the food and the company in the canteen of the British Council.
‘I probably knew more than you realized,’ she said.
‘James told me a lot.
He wanted me to give him ideas.
One of my ideas was Mithras.’
‘Don't blame yourself for that.’
‘Easier said than done.’
‘In a sense we were all to blame.
And me more than most.’
She smiled across the table, grateful that he'd understood.
Peter fiddled with the handle of his coffee cup.
He  looked very tired.
‘Emor was extraordinarily detailed by the time we got to Abbotsfield.
Have you ever come across anything like it?’
‘Not directly,’ Ginny said.
‘But it's not uncommon, is it?
The Brontë children had a fantasy world, and C.S. Lewis and his brother.
You've got respectable literary antecedents.’
‘I found the Archives in my mother's loft.
That's what started me thinking about it.’
‘I never really gathered how Emor began.’
‘By accident.
I'd swapped some toy cars for a set of poker dice in a red leather case.
Richard and I used to play with the dice at school.
We started gambling with scraps of papers because we hadn't any real money and matchsticks were forbidden.
We marked the papers into denominations — ones and fives and tens.
And then one of us said, ‘Let's make them sesterces.’
It just went on from there.’
Rome, which was reversed to Emor for reasons of secrecy, grew out of a set of poker dice.
Richard and Peter acquired roles to match the sesterces, and names to go with the roles: Gaius Marcus Mollandius and Petronius Redburnus.
Since he owned the poker dice, Peter claimed to be the proprietor of the Emperor's Luck Casino, which proved to be a far-sighted move.
As time went by, the casino diversified to embrace other gambling games — pontoon, for example, knock-out whist and finally bezique.
Long before that, however, Emor had developed its own momentum.
The casino demanded a context — and soon the context was far more important than the casino itself.
The great merit of Emor was that it could be adapted to suit the requirements of almost any activity you cared to name.
It hovered like an invisible metaphor over their lives, transforming a school lunch into a banquet, a classroom scuffle into a gladiatorial duel, haggling into cabinet-level negotiations.
As the scope of Emor expanded, so the available roles increased.
One by one, other boys were absorbed into the empire.
Peter could not remember asking them to join; he thought they had volunteered, driven by the craving for fantasy that is common to all children.
At the empire's peak in July 1964, there were seven boys at Plumford Grammar School who played parts of varying importance.
Nevertheless, Richard and Peter remained at the centre.
They had invented Emor; they did ninety per cent of the paperwork, agreed the salaries of the officials and devised most of the activities.
There was plenty of material to work from: Latin was compulsory at Plumford Grammar School; the English master had drummed into their memories large sections of Macaulay's Lays of Ancient Rome ; they had read novels with a Roman background, like Rosemary Sutcliff's Eagle of the Ninth and Robert Graves' I, Claudius ; and they could plunder Hubert Molland's classical library for further information as the need arose.
As time went by, Emor grew increasingly cerebral.
Planning its history became more important than acting it out.
They laboured to make the empire internally consistent.
He and Richard had sensed that Emor had its own self-generated laws of existence, and that these laws must never be broken.
The imperial succession was a case in point.
Fairness demanded that the throne be rotated among the players, usually on a weekly basis.
They developed a rationale to explain this in Emorian terms.
From the earliest days, no one in Emor was a mere individual: he was also the current representative of a gens , one of the great Emorian dynasties that dominated the political life of the empire.
In practice the crown passed from one gens to another.
Richard and Peter devoted a great deal of thought to the  theory underlying the succession, and made sure that there was a plausible Emorian reason for each change of emperor.
If he had no children, an emperor might adopt a son from another gens , or he might leave the throne to his sister's son, who would of course bear the name of another family.
Sometimes the Senate would decree that the son of a deceased emperor was unfit to succeed his father.
Perhaps the son was a traitor or a criminal, which led to the exciting possibility of civil wars in later reigns.
Perhaps he had been kidnapped or for some reason forced to adopt another identity, in which case he could be trusted to reappear, several reigns later, cover himself in glory and inherit the throne.
Perhaps he was too young to assume the purple, in which case the Senate would either appoint a Regent (who usually proclaimed himself emperor and murdered his young rival) or declare that, owing to an emergency (the impending bankruptcy of the empire, for example, or yet another insurrection in Dacia), the throne would pass to a full-grown man.
Once — after the reign of the philosopher emperor Gaius Marcus Mollandius Sapiens — Peter and Richard briefly experimented with a republic but this was not a success.
The gens system gave Emor an element of continuity.
As The Secret History and other records showed, most of the great statesmen and admirals of Emor came from the Gens Mollandia, and the Gens Redburna produced an astonishing number of first-class generals.
Another advantage of the gens system was that you could keep the fortune you had amassed in one incarnation and use it in the next.
That was how the Gens Redburna came to dominate the imperial economy.
Petronius Redburnus was a daring and fortunate gambler.
As proprietor of the casino he demanded and often received ten per cent of the others' winnings.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer had the tedious task of creating more money — of writing out Emorian bank notes to pay  the weekly salaries.
Successive chancellors found it easier to borrow the ready-made currency in the possession of the Gens Redburna in return for Imperial Notes of Hand; interest was paid on the loans.
The sums involved grew larger and larger for the sesterce was bedevilled by inflation.
The denominations of bank notes rose; banker's drafts were often used to replace cash; and by the end of Emor several million-sesterce notes were in circulation.
Peter Redburn had owned them all.
Technically, in fact, he owned a majority share of the treasury as well since most of the money it contained was his.
In Emor he had been rich beyond the dreams of avarice.
Suddenly Peter flushed, which made him seem much younger than he was.
‘I'm sorry.
I think I'm getting obsessed with Emor all over again.
It must be incredibly boring.’
‘Don't be silly,’ Ginny said.
‘It's fascinating.
Emor's part of my past as well as yours.’
‘I'll get us some coffee, shall I?’
She watched him as he queued at the counter.
He'd had a haircut.
His jacket looked new and he was wearing a tie.
In a curious way he seemed more formidable than before.
When he came back, they sipped their coffee and avoided each other 's eyes.
Ginny waited for him to break the silence.
‘It's odd we should be talking like this,’ he said at last.
‘I mean, you hardly know me.’
She hesitated, even opened her mouth; but, before she had time to grasp it, the moment had gone.
‘It was a bit like this with James,’ he went on, playing with the spoon on his saucer.
‘Not to the same degree, of course, but on Sunday there was the same feeling — as if we were continuing a conversation we were having yesterday, as if nothing had really changed.
Does that make any sense to you?’
‘You'll be careful, won't you?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘With James.
He uses people.’
Peter laid the spoon on the table.
Then he looked at her, raising his eyebrows.
The restaurant felt very hot.
‘Between ourselves,’ she said, ‘Ralph claims that James cheated him over the sale of Carinish Court.
It might well be true.’
‘But how could he harm me?’
‘I don't know.
It's just a feeling.’
Embarrassed, Ginny glanced at her watch.
‘I should be getting back.’
In the foyer, however, she paused by the bookshop.
‘What are you doing for Christmas?’
‘I haven't decided yet.
I'll probably be by myself — maybe at Plumford; there's a lot of sorting to be done.
What about you?’
‘I was going to spend it with David in Bristol.
I told you — Barbara's stepson.
But there's Ralph to consider.
So I'm not quite sure what we'll be doing.’
‘Have you always called him Ralph?’
‘Since I was about eighteen.
James does, too.
Somehow it's easier.’
He glanced at her.
‘You sound as if you don't like him much.’
‘I wish I did.
He was never very kind to my mother.’
Peter moved towards the door and held it open for her.
‘Don't think I'm prying,’ he said as she passed him, ‘but is it true that Ralph had an affair with Barbara Molland?’
‘It's a monster,’ said James Salperton.
‘There's something devilish and uncouth about it, so I call it Caliban.
When you switch it on, a little green eye winks at you.
I wish I'd never got the beastly thing.’
The shiny personal computer stood on a leather-topped pedestal desk between two glass-fronted bookcases with cupboards below and scrolled pediments above.
The room was uncomfortably chilly.
The few pictures — mainly landscape watercolours in gilt frames — were conservative, unobtrusive and probably valuable.
Pride of place went to an architect's drawing of Carinish Court over the fireplace.
‘I'm thinking of buying a PC,’ Peter Redburn said, strolling away from the desk.
‘A friend lent me hers for a few weeks.
They're addictive.’
‘You can borrow Caliban if you want.’
‘I might take you up on that.’
Peter examined the drawing of Carinish Court.
It showed the east façade of the house.
The ground level appeared to be slightly higher than he remembered and there was no sign of the seven semi-circular steps leading up to the front door.
The drawing was signed and dated in the bottom right-hand comer.
Carinish Court as seen in June 1904 by someone with an illegible signature.
‘Charles Curran,’ James said.
‘He was the chap who owned the place around the turn of the century.
Quite well-known in his way.
He was an architect who worked with Lutyens.’
‘Was it he who added the steps?
And isn't the pitch of the roof rather higher nowadays?’
James nodded.
‘Yes, and the roof's hipped and sprocketed now, which it wasn't then.
That was Curran's doing.
Otherwise it's remarkably unchanged, don't you think?
Or perhaps you don't remember?’
‘Oh, I remember quite well.
By the way, I brought you a book.’
Peter took a copy of The Babylon Baby from his briefcase.
He had signed the title page and added a dedication: ‘For James and Kate, with all best wishes.’
‘You didn't forget.
Wait till Kate sees it.’
James studied the title page and for twenty seconds pretended to be fascinated by the contents of page one.
‘Wonderful.
We'll fight over who reads it first.’
‘I hope it won't disappoint you.
Now, what about your book?’
James laid The Babylon Baby beside the PC.
‘I suppose we'd better make a start.
We won't be disturbed for an hour and a half at least— Kate's out, and then she'll be seeing to the meal.
How do you think we should play this?’
Peter relaxed.
Since he'd arrived at Montpelier Square he had been listening for the slightest movement elsewhere in the flat.
By now it was nearly six o'clock.
James had asked him to come early so they could do some work on the autobiography before dinner.
‘It would be useful to talk in general terms about how you see the shape of the book,’ Peter said.
‘And I'd like to get an idea of the raw materials I can use — press cuttings and so on.’
Hitching his trousers to prevent them kneeing, James knelt in front of one of the bookcases and unlocked the cupboard doors.
‘Videotapes,’ he said.
‘Just about everything I've done for film and TV.
Underneath I've got the scrapbooks.
Have a look.
Everything's labelled.’
The scrapbooks were sturdy foolscap-size volumes, bound in black cloth and with the dates they covered marked on the spines.
Peter opened one at random and found himself looking at a photograph of Kate.
She was climbing into a car and the camera had obviously taken her unawares.
Her collar was turned up, masking the lower half of her face.
Peter had the impression she was trying to run away.
The caption read: ‘Is this the new love in Darcy's life?’
James sighed.
‘You just wouldn't believe the things they say.’
He took the scrapbook and restored it to its place on the shelf.
‘In the other cupboard, I've got a collection of memorabilia.
School reports, theatre programmes, that sort of thing.’
‘The Salperton Archive?’
‘Exactly.’
James either ignored or failed to notice the undercurrent of mockery in Peter's voice.
‘Here, I'll show you.’
He unlocked the other cupboard, opened both doors and ran his finger along the top shelf.
‘This section is birth to RADA.
Next we've got from RADA to the start of Pemberley ; that goes up to there.’
He pointed to the second shelf, a third of the way along from the left.
‘And the rest of that shelf and all of the bottom one covers Pemberley to the present.’
‘You're very well organized.
We could use those as the main divisions of the book.’
‘Yes, that's what I thought.’
‘With the third as the longest, presumably.
That's what people will be interested in.’
‘In Mr Darcy.’
James swept the hair off his forehead and glanced at Peter.
‘I'm sick of him.
‘You know, when they stop me in the street, at least half of them call me Mr Darcy.
It's infuriating.
I know one shouldn't bite the hand that feeds but sometimes I feel that the roles are reversed: that I'm really William Darcy, and I'm playing the part of James Salperton.’
‘Is that why you turned down the fifth series?’
‘Partly.
Also, I've had offers elsewhere.
Even if I'd agreed to a fifth series,Pemberley wouldn't have lasted for ever.’
Peter waved towards the cupboard.
‘Just going through all that will take quite a while.’
‘We haven't got much time,’ James said.
‘That woman from Channel 20 Books phoned me yesterday.’
‘To see how you were doing?’
‘Yes.
And also to say that one of the Sundays has expressed interest in doing an extract.
Clare wants to tie in the publication with the fourth series.
It's scheduled to start in April.’
‘That's incredibly fast.
Publishers usually need about nine months to process a book.’
‘So she said.
Which is why we've got to get the typescript to her by the end of January.
We can do it, can't we?’
‘I'm sure we can,’ Peter said.
‘We'll go through the material together.
It looks more formidable than it is, and of course we'll only use a fraction of it.
I've tried to make a start already.
Listen to this.’
He pulled out a folder from the top shelf.
‘My first review — in the school magazine.’
It took him only a few seconds to find the page he wanted.
'’ Salperton made a creditable stab at Ophelia, though’' — Peter grinned —'’though his voice was a little husky for the part.’
Hamlet , nineteen sixty-five.’
James looked up and added sharply, ‘What's funny?’
‘The reviewer's phrasing,’ Peter said.
‘It's unintentionally ambiguous.’
‘Oh lord, so it is.’
James frowned.
‘I'd never noticed.’
‘Could be useful.
Add a touch of humour to the first chapter.’
‘Perhaps.
I suppose you're the best judge of that.’
James moved towards the desk.
‘I've chosen the photographs, by the way.
That's one thing you needn't worry about.
Would you like to see them?’
Taking Peter's agreement  for granted, he opened one of the bottom drawers of the desk and removed an envelope file.
‘Clare wants sixteen pages of black-and-white.
I thought she could make a selection from these.’
Peter sat down on the leather sofa, which was as uncomfortable as it looked, and went through the folder.
The photographs were like a comic-strip biography: Salperton in pictures.
James in a pram, with his parents poised above him.
James on a stout little pony beside the cedar tree at Carinish Court, and Ginny, squinting at the camera, standing on the grass with the reins dangling from her hand.
James in short trousers and a blazer; James in cricket kit; James in the boxing team of his public school.
James carrying a spear for the Royal Shakespeare Company.
James mingling with the famous, on and off the screen.
James in a toga; James in a top hat; James as Darcy.
James chatting with the Earl of Farrow outside Farrow Hall, which had been used for many of the exterior shots in Pemberley .
James shaking hands with Lord Olivier, whose mind was obviously elsewhere, and with the Princess of Wales, who looked puzzled.
James and Kate at their wedding, at which Lord Farrow had been James's best man.
James and Kate divided by a tea table on the terrace at Carinish Court.
‘That was taken in late September,’ James said, perching in the arm of the sofa.
‘I wanted to have one of us at the house.’
Peter leafed back through the photographs.
He paused at James in his pram.
‘Your parents made a good-looking couple, didn't they?’
‘Not bad.
I'm told I take after my mother's side of the family.’
‘No pictures of Ursula.’
Peter returned the photographs to the folder and handed it to James.
‘Is that intentional?’
‘I didn't want to upset Kate.’
‘We'll have to mention Ursula in the text.’
‘I suppose so.
I hoped we could gloss over my first marriage as much as possible.’
‘As you like, of course.
But people will notice.
They'll want to hear your side of it.’
‘I can't say what I really think about her.
She'd sue me.’
‘Silence might be construed as an admission of guilt.’
‘Guilt?
For what?
Ursula made my life intolerable.
If you ask me, jealousy was at the root of it.
When we got married she was a lot more successful than I was.
She was two years older so it wasn't surprising.
But she just couldn't take it when I started pulling ahead.
That was the real reason why she left acting, that and the fact she was losing her looks.’
‘There was a lot of talk about the time when she and Kate —’
‘Kate was just trying to defend herself.
Ursula leapt at her, completely out of the blue.
We were damned unlucky, actually.
If only the photographers hadn't been there, we might have been able to hush it up.’
‘And the money?’
‘Must we go into that?’
‘Other people will.’
‘I just don't see what upsets them.’
James slid off the arm of the sofa and stuffed his hands in his trouser pockets.
‘Damn it, it's so unreasonable.
Why not blame my broker?
It was he who advised the sale.
I happened to make a shrewd investment in ‘seventy-eight, and a couple of years ago I sold out.
That's all there was to it.’
‘The timing was unfortunate.’
‘That wasn't my fault.
Yes, I knew about the takeover — I could hardly avoid it — but that was Ursula's headache, not mine.
The negotiations had driven up the share prices, which was wonderful.
As far as I was concerned, it made it the logical time to sell.
The fact I used to be married to Ursula is completely irrelevant.’
‘Yes, I can see that,’ Peter said.
‘I'm sure that in your  place I'd have done the same.
Still, it cost Ursula control of the Hair House, didn't it?
And everyone knew you'd quarrelled.
The point is, to an outsider who didn't know better, your actions could appear vindictive.’
‘Rubbish.’
‘Of course it is.
But people listen to rubbish.’
And watch it on their televisions, Peter thought.
‘Leave it me,’ he went on.
‘A paragraph or two would do it, make it clear that you've been unfairly treated.
I think it would be best if you came across as nobly resigned: ‘How could she stoop to do this to me’— something along those lines — without going into too much detail.
We can hint that a less honourable man could have ground her up to mincemeat.’
He wondered if he had gone too far; but James was nodding approvingly.
‘I can see I made the right choice,’ James said.
‘You've got a talent for this.
Ever thought of trying public relations as a career?’
‘No.’
‘Just a thought.
Shall we make a start on the taping?’
Peter took a pad from his briefcase.
‘I've roughed out a few questions but they're only a guide.’
James opened another drawer in the desk and produced a cassette recorder with a built-in microphone.
He put the machine on the round table in front of the sofa, plugged it into a socket and sat down in the nearest armchair.
‘I assume you'd like to work chronologically.’
He inserted a tape in the recorder.
‘Where do we begin?’
‘Family background?’
James leant forward and switched on the recorder.
‘Testing, testing, one, two, three.’
The needle in the level indicator jumped towards the red.
‘That's all right.’
He gestured towards Peter.
‘Over to you.’
‘Tell me a little about your parents.’
‘Well, Ralph used to be a tea importer, third generation  in a family business.
Salperton's Quality Teas.
He's a bit of a genealogist — claims the family goes back to the Normans.
Minor country gentry, I suppose.
Is this the sort of stuff you need?
Seems rather boring to me.’
‘It's fine,’ Peter said.
‘Every picture needs a frame.
Do go on.’
Now the recording had started, James's voice had changed: it was richer, more assured; Darcy had pushed aside Salperton.
‘My mother was the daughter of a regular army officer — a lieutenant-colonel in the North Staffordshires.
They met while Ralph was in the army.
It was in the war, I think, and —’
A door banged.
Peter shifted on the sofa, and a spring twanged dully beneath him.
James cocked his head.
‘Ah,’ he said.
‘Kate's back.’
An hour later, James pushed open the drawing-room door.
‘Darling,’ he said.
‘Here's Peter.’
Kate was sitting on one of the two deep sofas that stood at right angles to the fireplace.
As Peter and James came in, she threw down the magazine she was reading, stood up and came towards them.
She was dressed in a cream shirt and navy-blue slacks that fitted snugly over the hips; the only jewellery she wore was a platinum wedding ring.
Her movements were fluid, economical and beautiful to watch, like those of a good swimmer.
She laid her hands on Peter's shoulders and kissed him on the cheek.
‘Peter,’ she said.
That was all.
Unlike the others, she didn't rush to say how pleased she was to see him after all this time; she didn't make polite small talk about Lucasta Redburn's death.
Just ‘Peter’, and a kiss.
‘You're cold.
Come and sit by the fire.
James always keeps the study at sub-zero temperatures.’
‘Are you cold?’
James said, surprised.
‘I can't think  straight if a room's too warm.
It tends to affect my sinuses, too.’
‘Dinner will be ready in about fifteen minutes.
Why don't you get us all a drink, darling?’
‘What will you have?’
James said to Peter.
‘Have you any angostura?
I'd like a pink gin.’
‘What a lovely idea,’ Kate said.
‘I'll have one too.’
James fussed over the drinks tray, which was on a table behind one of the sofas.
Kate sat down on the sofa beside Peter.
‘Mum sends her love,’ she said.
‘I'd hoped she and Leo could be here tonight, but they had another engagement.’
‘How is she?’
Peter said.
He listened less to the answer than to Kate's voice, and, as he listened, he watched her face.
She sounded huskier than he remembered; she spoke slowly, the full lips lingering on words as though reluctant to part with them.
She'd cut off her hair, which he already knew from seeing her photograph in the papers; it had the effect of making her head seem less of a burden on the slender neck.
There were tiny laughter lines at the corners of the eyes.
The eyes themselves were the same arresting blue that you see so infrequently.
It astonished him that her outward appearance had changed so little.
James handed round the drinks; he had poured himself a tonic water with a slice of lemon.
‘We've made a good beginning,’ he said, interrupting Kate's account of how Ginny Salperton had met David Quest.
‘Almost an hour on tape.’
‘Oh good.’
Kate was still looking at Peter but she accepted the change of subject smoothly, like a skilful footballer changing tack to cope with a pass from an unexpected direction.
‘How will you actually do it?
Isn't it terribly hard, pretending to write as someone else?’
‘It's what a novelist does all the time.
No, the idea is, I'll transcribe the tape more or less verbatim and then work in the other material.’
Smiling, Peter glanced up at  James.
‘Like how you made a stab at Ophelia in nineteen sixty-five.’
Kate giggled.
‘Do you think you'll get it finished by the end of January?’
‘I don't see why not, if we work flat out.’
‘Isn't this interfering with your own writing?’
‘I can manage.’
‘Talking of which,’ James said, ‘Peter's brought us a signed copy of The Babylon Baby .
Isn't that kind?
It's in the study — I'll fetch it.’
When they were alone, Peter said, ‘You don't have to read it, you know.
It's rather precious and juvenile.’
‘Of course I shall read it,’ Kate said.
‘And I'll tell you exactly what I think about it.’
James came back with the book.
She glanced at the dedication and at the cover.
‘Terrible jacket, isn't it?’
Peter said.
She wrinkled her nose.
‘At least you needn't blame yourself for that.’
She put down the book and said abruptly: ‘I gather you've seen something of my father?’
‘He's my mother's executor,’ he said.
‘He took the funeral service.’
‘Is he all right?’
‘As far as I know.
He's retired, of course, but he helps out at St Clem's and he's still very vigorous.
Do you mean you don't see him at all?’
‘That's not our fault,’ James said.
He picked up his glass and sank into the armchair near Kate's end of the sofa.
‘He never really forgave me for leaving home,’ she said to Peter.
‘You remember?
When I was eighteen?’
‘I remember.’
Peter thought about Julian and the red Triumph Spitfire, and about Barbara Molland in the hall of the Rectory at Champney Crucis.
‘He saw it as — I don't know — a sort of betrayal?
Later, I tried to smooth things over, but he wasn't interested.
He knew I was living with someone, living in sin.’
She  patted James's hand.
‘Before your time, darling.
Anyway, that made me a scarlet woman.’
‘We asked him to our wedding,’ James said.
‘Yes, but he wouldn't come because it was in a registry office.
Not valid in the eyes of God.
As far as Dad's concerned, marriages are eternal.
James was divorced, so that makes us both adulterers.’
‘It's primitive.’
James shrugged.
‘But what can one do?
He's too set in his ways to change.’
‘Sometimes I feel I should have made more of an effort with him,’ Kate said.
‘Maybe it's not too late.’
‘You've done all you can,’ James said.
‘No point in making yourself ridiculous.
Let's face it — we're all friends here; Peter won't mind my talking about it — your father's a little eccentric, and that's putting it kindly.’
Kate stared at the fire.
A lump of coal cracked and a tongue of flame spurted out of it.
While the others were talking of Hubert Molland, Peter had felt like a spectator at a play — as if he were watching a scene that had been rehearsed so many times that the actors spoke their lines mechanically, hardly caring about the meaning.
Were the ‘darlings’ and the hand-pattings equally mechanical?
And if they were, what did that say about the relationship between James and Kate?
‘Darling.’
James smiled at Kate.
‘I just don't want you to get hurt again, you know that.’
‘I know.’
She smiled back and turned to Peter.
‘Was it very strange, going back to Plumford?’
‘A little.
Like dreaming about a familiar place, and in the dream it fails to correspond to your memory of it.
Unsettling.’
Kate nodded.
‘It's the same when you dream about people doing things that you know they'd never do in real life.’
For the next five minutes all three of them talked about dreams.
The conversation was natural and easy.
And why not?
James and Kate were a happily married couple, and  Peter was an old friend.
Peter thought that he'd been a fool to imagine that there might be something wrong between his hosts; he put it down to an overactive imagination coloured by wishful thinking.
Kate brought them back to Plumford.
‘It's the last place on earth I'd want to live.’
Peter nodded.
‘As soon as I'm shot of the house, I'll be off.’
‘Can't you let an estate agent handle that?’
James asked.
‘Not really.
The circumstances are unusual.’
Peter explained about Coleby's offer and the planned shopping development.
‘I'd rather handle the negotiations myself.’
‘Do you think he'll give you the price you want?’
‘Eventually.’
Peter saw no reason to conceal the figure; Petronius Redburnus had never been modest.
‘I'm ready to wait if I have to.
A quarter of a million pounds is worth waiting for.’
‘What will you do with the money?’
Kate said.
‘Or shouldn't we ask?’
‘Buy a house, probably, and write.’
‘What about your job?’
‘I've chucked that in.’
‘You're lucky to have so much freedom.’
Kate stirred beside him on the sofa, and Peter smelled her perfume.
‘It must be intoxicating.’
‘Oh, it is,’ Peter felt light-headed, tipsy on a small pink gin, but still completely in control.
‘Like wine.’
Or, he thought, to be more precise, like the smell of a desirable woman.
‘Talking of freedom,’ James said, ‘Kate and I were wondering what you were doing for Christmas.’
The euphoria dissolved.
Peter said, ‘I've nothing planned.’
‘Would you like to come down to Carinish Court for a few days?’
‘You wouldn't want me there.’
Peter was aware of his  heart thudding in his chest.
‘Not at Christmas, surely?’
‘It would be lovely,’ Kate murmured.
The words were all right but the lack of emphasis made Peter suspicious.
He glanced at her, wondering if this were the first she had heard of the proposal.
She met his eyes and smiled.
‘You'd be our first house guest,’ James said.
‘We'd love it.
And also, of course, I'm being selfish.
I was hoping we could get through a certain amount of work.’
‘At Christmas, darling?’
‘Now, don't worry.
I'm not suggesting that we chain Peter to Caliban for eighteen hours a day.
But we'd be able to cover a lot of ground.
For one thing, there won't be the interruptions we get here.’
He turned back to Peter.
‘Look, we're going down on Saturday.
We're thinking of staying about ten days — into the new year, anyway.
You'd be welcome to stay as long as you wanted.
You can have a room to work in, anything you need.’
‘What about all the documents?’
Peter asked.
‘The scrapbooks and so on.’
‘Easy.
We'll take the Range Rover.
Plenty of room for everything.
Do say you'll come.’
‘It's very kind of you.’
‘Not kind,’ Kate said.
‘You'd be doing James a favour.
Me, too, come to that — if you don't come, he'll spend the whole time fretting about the book.’
‘You'll come, Peter, won't you?’
James raised one of his eyebrows, puckering the skin of his forehead, and his lips twitched in the sort of smile that invites complicity.
He was very sure of himself.
‘Look at me,’ his expression said.
‘I'm pleading with you and mocking myself at the same time: how can you bear to resist?’
‘Of course I'll come,’ Peter said.
‘If you're both certain.
Remember, you hardly know me.’
Beside him on the sofa, Kate let out her breath in an almost silent rush of air — too quietly for James to have heard.
To Peter, it sounded like a sigh of relief.
‘That's wonderful, isn't it, darling?’
James said.
‘If you want, you can drive down with us.’
‘If you don't mind, I think I'll hire a car.
In fact, I've been considering buying one.’
‘Whatever you prefer.
Let's hope it doesn't run out of petrol, eh?’
James glanced from Peter to Kate.
‘Surely you haven't forgotten?
That's how we all met.’
The car that ran out of petrol on 31 July 1964 was a six-cylinder Rover belonging to Commander Molland, Richard and Kate's grandfather.
Like the commander, whom Peter met at Plumford Vicarage just before they left for Abbotsfield, the car had seen better days.
Commander Molland, a widower, was intending to spend August abroad.
He had offered the car to Hubert for the summer on condition that everyone promised never to stand on the running boards, because they were threatening to fall off.
Like its owner, the Rover was large and upright.
It was a maroon colour, now much mottled, which was another point of resemblance between them.
The seats, upholstered in dark red leather, held you high above the surface of the road and shed a certain dignity on your journey; you did not so much travel as process.
A car was a novelty to both Peter and Richard, since neither of their fathers owned one.
At Plumford, they bombarded the commander with questions about it.
He said the Rover was about thirty years old ('and that's a damn sight younger than I am') and that it did only sixteen miles to the gallon.
‘But look at the coachwork.
Beautiful.
That's quality.
Open the door and shut it, young man.
Hear that?
No, not the squeak.
Just needs a drop of oil.
I mean the way it went ‘clunk’.
Perfect craftsmanship.
These days, if you want to hear a car door close like that, you have to buy a Rolls-Royce.’
The windows were tinted yellow and in places were now almost opaque.
The interior smelled of the commander's  pipe, and the worn carpet was grey with ash.
The dashboard and the other wooden fittings were made of walnut.
‘How fast will it go?’
Richard asked.
‘Oh, she'll reach fifty quite easily.
But I wouldn't advise it.
You get a smell of rubber if you go that fast.’
The commander puffed his pipe and looked puzzled.
‘Bit of a mystery, actually.
Never been able to find out where the smell comes from.’
‘Where's the boot?’
‘She doesn't have a boot,’ the commander said.
‘In those days your servants looked after the heavy luggage.
But there's plenty of room on the roof rack.’
The drive to Abbotsfield was a slow and unpleasant experience for all of them.
Hubert Molland was an unpractised driver and his nervousness seemed to communicate itself to the big car, which juddered and groaned alarmingly.
Even at forty-five m.p.h. the smell of burning rubber would have been overpowering if they had not had the windows open.
He drove with fierce concentration, and sometimes his fierceness spilled over on to the passengers — especially on to Barbara, who sat beside him and navigated.
‘Can't you keep those children quiet?
Which way do we go here?’
‘Left, I think.’
Barbara swivelled in the seat and mouthed threats at Richard and Kate.
‘What on earth's that lorry doing?
That fool shouldn't be allowed on the roads.’
‘Oh, Hubert — that signpost said Bristol.
I've an awful feeling we should have gone right at the last junction.
I am sorry.’
Peter, who was sitting on the nearside at the back of the car, could see a muscle jumping in Hubert Molland's cheek.
On one occasion he thought he heard Hubert's teeth grinding; but it was difficult to be sure because of the roar of the engine.
Richard was sitting in the middle of the back seat, separating Peter from Kate in the other corner.
Stacked on the floor around their legs was all the luggage that wouldn't fit on the roof rack.
The children were wedged so tightly that it was difficult to move.
Peter would have liked to sit next to Kate but he had lacked the necessary social agility to secure the centre position.
He was nervous, too, because he was stuck with the Mollands for the next four weeks, and he was terribly afraid of feeling homesick.
He didn't mind being with Richard — being with Richard was almost like being with himself — and he liked what he knew of Mrs Molland.
Kate was curiously fascinating, but mixed in with the fascination was a sort of fear; and over the last few months she had made it quite clear that the less she had to do with him, the better she would like it.
Most worrying of all was the prospect of spending a month in the same house as the Reverend Hubert Molland.
Even Richard was afraid of his father.
Mr Molland was like all the unpleasant masters at school rolled into one, with the additional drawback of a dog collar round his neck.
The Rover ambled across England from east to west.
The children read, played games and looked out of the window; they complained about the hardness of the seats and squabbled.
They had started early, when the day was still cool, but soon it grew very hot.
The squabbling became more bitter, and the adults began to snap at the children.
Twice they had to stop because Richard thought he was going to be sick.
At lunchtime they pulled into a lay-by for a picnic; and later in the afternoon they had tea in a transport café where three lorry drivers stared at them, whispered to one another and laughed.
‘How far is it now?’
Richard and Kate kept asking until Hubert Molland shut them up.
‘Are we nearly there?’
The atmosphere improved when they were past Bristol.
By now it was after five o'clock.
Barbara Molland's navigation became faultless.
When they reached the town of Paulstock, Hubert Molland even made a joke.
‘Paulstock, eh?
We must see if there's a Peterstock.’
Peter tried to smile.
‘Keep your eyes skinned for a garage, everyone,’ Hubert said.
‘I'd like to get some petrol.’
‘We're still half-full, aren't we?’
Barbara said.
‘I think the fuel gauge has jammed.’
‘Look at that signpost,’ Kate shouted.
‘Only ten miles to Abbotsfield.’
Mr Molland grunted.
‘Thank heavens for that.
I was beginning to wonder if the place actually existed.’
Eight miles later, when they were coasting down a long hill, the engine spluttered.
After a few seconds it cut out completely.
The heavy car rushed on.
Only the wind made a sound as it streamed along the sides of the Rover and poured through the open windows.
‘Perhaps we'll roll all the way to Abbotsfield,’ Richard whispered.
All of them were sitting forward in their seats, as if bracing themselves for a collision.
The ground levelled out.
Peter saw a church tower in the distance.
The Rover slowed.
Soon it was moving at the speed of a trotting horse between a high hedge on the right-hand side and a stone wall on the left.
As the wind dropped, Peter heard the squeaking of the car and Richard's fast, excited breathing.
No one spoke.
Hubert Molland pulled over towards the wall and stopped across the entrance of a drive.
‘What's that?’
Kate said, pointing.
‘It's a pineapple,’ Richard said.
‘Look, there's another.’
‘There's someone coming,’ Barbara said.
A tall boy was walking unhurriedly down the drive towards them.
Fair and slim, he wore a white shirt, tight blue jeans and black, Cuban-heeled boots.
Peter heard Kate sigh with pleasure.
He felt hot and inexplicably angry.
‘He looks like a pop star,’ she said.