

I must begin with a coincidence which I would not dare to recount if this were a work of fiction.
Coincidences happen daily in ‘real life’ which would be condemned in a mere story, so writers tend to avoid them.
But they happen.
Daily, they happen.
And on this particular day they — or rather it — happened twice.
I was working in my room, when a knock at the door heralded the entry of four second-year students.
Usually I welcome them.
They are my job.
As English tutor at Haworth College in Cambridge I deal with them every day.
But on this sunny afternoon in May, as it happened, I would not have welcomed any intruder, even the gyp with a Recorded Delivery letter announcing a big win on Ernie.
I was writing a poem.
They say that after the age of thirty, or marriage, whichever comes first, one can write no more poetry.
It is true that after the age of thirty certain poets seem to be incapable of writing much that is worth reading; there are notable exceptions, but they only serve to prove the rule.
Actually, I believe that the marriage rule applies only to women, which says something for what marriage is supposed to do for them, but on that sunny Tuesday afternoon neither of the disqualifying conditions applied to me.
I was twenty-seven, unmarried, heart-whole for the time being, and totally immersed in my work.
Which is why I should have welcomed the students who wanted to talk to me about the poetry of George Darley, which a misguided colleague of mine had included in a series of lectures on the early nineteenth century, and in so doing had worried the more discerning of my students, who were failing to see any merit there.
But I had been visited that morning by what was usually at this state of the term a rare inspiration, and was writing a poem of my own.
More important than George Darley?
At any rate better, which would not be difficult.
As a struggling poet in the late twentieth century, I often thought that some early poets achieved publication very easily.
But I did not say so to my students.
Let them now praise famous men.
They do it so rarely that it is good for them.
I said ‘Come in,’ sat them down, listened and then talked and finally got rid of them and went back to my poem.
It had gone.
The first stanza lay there on my desk, but the idea, the vision had fled like the dream dispelled by Coleridge's ill-starred person from Porlock.
I re-read what I had written, wrestled with the fading vision for a few sweating minutes, then gave up, swore, crumpled the page up, pitched it into the empty fireplace, and said, aloud: What I really need is a good old-fashioned ivory tower.’
I pushed my chair back, then crossed to the open window and looked out.
The lime trees were glorious in their young green, and, in default of the immemorial elms, the doves were moaning away in them like mad.
Birds were singing their heads off everywhere, and from the clematis beside the window came the scent of honey and the murmur of innumerable bees.
Tennyson; now there, I thought, was one of the really honourable exceptions to the rule, never failing, never fading even in old age, while I, at twenty-seven, could not even finish a lyric that had seemed, only a short while ago, to be moving inevitably towards the final tonic chord.
Well, so I was not Tennyson.
I was probably, come to that, not even George Darley.
I laughed at myself, felt better, and settled down on the window-seat in the sun to enjoy what was left of the afternoon.
The Times , half-read and then abandoned, lay on the seat beside me.
As I picked it up to throw it aside a line of small print caught my eye: ‘Ivory tower for long or short let.
Isolated cottage on small Hebridean island off the coast of Mull.
Ideal for writer or artist in search of peace.
Most relatively mod cons.’
And a box number.
I said, aloud: ‘I don't believe it.’
‘What don't you believe, Dr Fenemore?’
One of my students had come back, and was hesitating in the open door way.
It was Megan Lloyd, who was the daughter of a Welsh farm worker from somewhere in Dyfed, and who had earned her place in College with a brilliant scholarship.
Short, rather thickset, with dark curling hair, dark eyes, and freckles, she looked as if she would be most at home with dogs and horses, or with bared arms scrubbing a dairy down, and perhaps she  was, but she was also very intelligent, highly imaginative, and easily my best student.
Some day, with average luck, she would be a good writer.
I remembered that I had promised to see her about some poems she had written and had nervously asked me to read.
She looked nervous still, but half amused with it, as she added: ‘Surely,The Times ?
It's not supposed to get things wrong, is it?’
‘Oh, Megan, come in.
Sorry, was I talking to myself?
It's nothing, I was off on a track of my own for a moment.
Yes, I've got your file here, and yes, I've read them.’
I went back to my desk, picked the folder.up, and gestured her to a chair.
She looked back at me with no expression at all in her face, but her eyes were twice as big as usual, and I could see the tension in every muscle.
I knew how she felt.
Every time your work is read, you die several deaths for every word, and poetry is like being flayed alive.
So I went straight to it.
‘I liked them.
Some of them very much.
And of course some not so much…’
I talked on about the poems, while she slowly relaxed and began to look happy, and even, in the end, cheerfully argumentative, which, with Megan, was par for the course.
At length I closed the folder.
‘Well, there you are, as far as I'm able to judge.
Whether some of the more, shall I say, advanced judgments of the day will concur is something I can't guess at, but if you want to try and publish, go ahead and good luck to you.
Whatever happens, you must go on writing.
Is that what you wanted to hear?’
She swallowed, cleared her throat, then nodded without speaking.
I handed her the folder.
‘I won't say anything more here and now.
I've written fairly detailed notes about some of them.
I think it would be better — and we would  both find it easier — if you looked at those in your own time?
And of course if there's anything you don't understand, or want to argue about, please feel free.
All right?’
‘Yes.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for all the trouble.
It was just that I — that one doesn't know oneself —’
‘Yes, I know.’
She smiled, her face lighted suddenly from within.
‘Of course you do.
And in return, am I allowed to give you some advice?’
‘Such as what?’
I asked, surprised.
She glanced down at the empty hearth, where the crumpled page had fallen and partly unfurled.
It would be obvious even from where she sat that the sheet contained lines of an unfinished poem, disfigured with scoring and the scribbles of frustration.
She repeated, with a fair imitation of my voice, but with a smile that robbed the echo of any sting of impertinence: ‘Whatever happens, you must go on writing.’’
Then suddenly, earnestly: ‘I can't read it from here, but I'm sure you shouldn't throw it away.
Give it another go, won't you, Dr Fenemore?
I loved that last one of yours in the Journal .
Please.’
After a pause that seemed endless, I said, rather awkwardly: ‘Well, thank you.
But in term time…
One can't choose one's times, you see.’
‘Can one ever?’
‘I suppose not.’
‘I'm sorry, I shouldn't have said that.’
Suddenly embarrassed, she gathered her things together and started to get to her feet.
‘None of my business, but I couldn't help seeing.
Sorry.’
More to put her at her ease again than for any other reason I picked up The Times and showed it to her.
‘I was trying, you see.
A Hebridean island — it does sound like a place where one could work in peace, and they have actually called it an ‘ivory tower’.
There, I've ringed it.’
She read the advertisement aloud, then looked up, bright-eyed.
‘Mull?
An island off Mull?
You've answered this?’
‘I was thinking of it.’
‘Well, isn't that something?
Ann Tracy and I are going to Mull this summer.
Two weeks.
She's fixing it up, I've never been, but her people used to spend holidays up there, and she says it can be fabulous, weather and midges permitting.
What a coincidence!
It sounds just the thing — like fate, really, after what you were saying.
You will answer it, won't you?’
‘It looks as if I'd better, doesn't it?’
I said.
‘I'll write this very evening.’
But fate had not quite finished with me.
That evening my brother Crispin telephoned me.
Crispin is a doctor, a partner in a four-man practice in Petersfield in Hampshire.
He is six years older than I am, married, with two children away at school.
He would have preferred, I knew, to keep them at home, but Ruth, his wife, had overruled him in that, as she did in quite a few other matters.
Not that Crispin was a weak man, but he was a very busy one, and had to be content to leave the management of their joint lives largely to his highly capable wife.
They were tolerably happy together, as marriages seem to go, a happiness achieved partly by agreeing to differ.
One thing they differed about was holidays.
Ruth loved travel, cities, shops, theatres, beach resorts.
Crispin, when on leave from his demanding routine, craved for peace and open spaces.
He, like me, loved Scotland, and made for it whenever he got the chance.
There he walked and fished and took photographs which later, when he found time, he processed himself in a friend's dark-room.
Over the years he had acquired real skill in his hobby, and had exhibited some of his studies of Scottish scenery and wildlife; his real passion was bird photography, and through the years he had amassed a remarkable collection of pictures.
Some of these had been published in periodicals like Country Life and the wildlife journals, but the best had never been shown.
I knew he had a private hope that some day he might make a book with them.
When our vacations coincided, we often holidayed together, content in our respective solitudes
So when he rang up that evening to tell me he was taking a fortnight's leave towards the end of June and what about a trip north as soon as term ended, I did feel as if the fates themselves had taken a hand.
‘I'd been planning that very thing.’
I told him about the advertisement, and he was enthusiastic.
I let him talk on about harriers and divers and skuas and all the rare and marvellous birds that would no doubt be waiting around to be photographed, and then put in the usual cautious query: ‘And Ruth?’
‘Actually, no, not this time.’
The usual casual answer.
‘She doesn't like the Highlands, you know that, and she's got rather a lot on just at present.
She's planning to take a holiday abroad later on, after John and Julie go back to school.
But if you can get this place…
It could be really good.
Most of the young birds will still be at the nest, and if the weather lets up, we might get across to the  Treshnish Isles as well.
Look, Rose, why not?
It sounds great.
Why don't you go right ahead and get the details, and then we'll be in touch again?’
And so it was arranged.
I wrote that night to the box number.
And got my ivory tower.
The Isle of Moila is the first stop past Tobermory.
It is not a large island, perhaps nine miles by five, with formidable cliffs to the north-west that face the weather rather like the prow of a ship.
From the steep sheep-bitten turf at the head of these cliffs the land slopes gently down towards a glen where the island's only sizeable river runs seawards out of a loch cupped in a shallow basin among low hills.
Presumably the loch — lochan, rather, for it is not large — is fed by springs eternally replenished by the rain, for nothing flows into it except small burns seeping through rush and bog myrtle, which spread after storm into sodden quagmires of moss.
But the outflow is perennially full, white water pouring down to where the moor cleaves open and lets it fall to sea.
The island's coast is mainly rocky, but, except for the northerly crags, the coastal cliffs are low, thrusting out here and there into the sea to enclose small curved beaches.
Most of these are shingle beaches, but those facing west are sandy, the white shell sand of the Atlantic shore, backed by the machair, that wonderful wild grassland of the west coast, which in May and June is filled with flowers and all the nesting birds that any photographer could wish for.
When I first saw Moila it was on a beautiful day in the last week of June.
My term had ended a few days before the start of Crispin's leave, so we had agreed to travel up separately, and meet on Moila itself.
The island ferry, as I had discovered, sailed three times a week on Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays; it went from Oban to Tobermory on the Isle of Mull, and then called at Moila on its way to Coll and Tiree.
I had also discovered that there would be little, if any, use for a car on Moila, so both my brother and I had arranged to travel up by train.
It was a pleasant journey.
I took the night train for Fort William, which stops at Crianlarich at seven in the morning.
With a three-hour wait there, I ate a large breakfast, did a quarter of the day's crossword, then boarded the little local train that runs through Glen Lochy and past the northern end of Loch Awe, to finish at Oban on the west coast.
The ferry for the outer isles was due to leave at six on the following morning, so I checked into the waterfront hotel where I had booked, then spent the day exploring Oban, and went to bed early.
At half past five next morning I boarded the ferry, and was on the final stage of my journey.
The sea was calm, and Oban, caught in the clear light of a summer morning, looked charming and toylike, as we sailed sedately out between the islets and castle  crowned rocks, with sea-birds drifting in our wake, and everywhere, even over the smell of salt and wind, the scents of summer.
Idyllic.
Just the setting for an ivory tower.
Or so I still hoped.
Nobody I had spoken to in the train, or on the ferry, had ever visited Moila, which must support, so I was told by one slow-spoken Highlander, no more than thirty folk in all.
‘So you'll be right back to nature, and let us hope that the natives are friendly.’
The twinkle in his eye was reassuring, but when we tied up at Tobermory and the purser pointed out to sea where a group of small rocks (or so it seemed) showed strung out on the horizon like a mother duck with her ducklings after her, I felt a cowardly twinge, and found myself wondering what the ‘relatively mod cons’ could be.
‘Yon big island, see?
That's Moila,’ said my guide.
‘And the others?’
‘Och, they've all got names, but I could not tell you what they are.
There's no folk there, only the birds.’
‘Can you get to them?’
‘Oh, aye, with a bit of luck, on a fine day.
Parties do go out, folks with cameras to film the birds.
You're one of these bird watchers, are you?’
‘Not really.
But my brother's very keen.
He's coming to join me later this week.
Do you know if we'll be able to hire a boat in Moila?’
But here he had to leave me to attend to stores which were being brought on board, and some twenty minutes later I could see the place for myself.
The ferry was not big, but she dwarfed the harbour — she had to stand off from the jetty and land us by boat — and indeed the village.
As far as I could see, there were some eight or nine cottages strung out on a narrow road which circled the bay.
The building nearest the jetty was the post office-cum-shop.
A home-made notice informed me that it was kept by M. McDougall, who also did bed and breakfasts.
Some fifty yards away was a white-washed building surrounded by a stretch of asphalt; the village school, I was to discover, where on alternate Sundays the minister from Tobermory came over to hold a service.
A narrow river, little more than a stream, lapsed gently over its stones past the post office.
It was spanned by a narrow hump-backed bridge of the picturesque variety that is guaranteed to damage any car that uses it.
But, as I had been warned, there were no cars.
One battered Land-Rover stood outside the post office, and leaning against the schoolhouse wall were a couple of bicycles.
No other forms of transport.
Nor, as far as I could see, did the road continue beyond the end of the village.
And my cottage, I had been informed, lay at the other side of the island.
Well, I had asked for it.
I left my cases parked on the quay, and made my way into the post office.
Since the thrice-weekly visit of the ferry brought all the island's mail and supplies, and the post office was very small, the place was crowded, and the postmistress, busily sorting through a pile of mail and newspapers, while exchanging two days' news in Gaelic with the ferry's master, had no glance to spare for me.
The little shop had been arranged as what I have seen described as a mini-hypermarket, so I found a basket and busied myself with collecting what supplies I thought I might need for the next couple of days.
I was called to myself by the  echoing hoot of the ferry's siren, to find that the shop had emptied of its crowd, and the postmistress, taking off her spectacles, was hurrying round to the store counter to look after the stranger.
‘You'll be the young lady for Camus na Dobhrain?
Miss Fenemore, was it?’
She was a thinnish woman of perhaps fifty, with greying hair carefully arranged, and very blue eyes.
She wore a flowered smock, and her spectacles hung round her neck on a cord.
She had the beautiful skin of the islands, with hardly a wrinkle, except near the eyes, where the smile lines puckered the corners.
She was not smiling now, but her look was full of a benevolent curiosity, and the soft island voice, with the lilt of the Gaelic moving through it like a gentle sea-swell, warmed me as palpably as if the sun had come into the dim and cluttered little shop.
‘Yes, I'm Rose Fenemore.
And you are Mrs McDougall?
How do you do?’
We shook hands.
‘And yes, I'm for the cottage that the Harris Agency advertised.
Is that the one?
I don't understand Gaelic, I'm afraid.’
‘And how should you?
Yes, indeed, that is the one.
The English for it is ‘Otters' Bay’.
It is the only place on Moila that is to let.
We're not just a metropolis, as you see.’
She smiled, busying herself with my purchases as she spoke.
‘You'll not have been here before, then?
Well, if the weather stays fine you'll find plenty of nice walks, and I'm told that the house at Otters' Bay is comfortable enough these days.
But lonely.
You are by yourself, are you?’
‘Till Wednesday, at least.
My brother's hoping to come then.’
I gave her all she wanted to know.
I was part of the week's news, after all.
‘He's a doctor, from Hampshire.
He couldn't get away when I did, so I came up on my  own.
Does the Wednesday ferry come in at the same time?’
‘It does.
You have not put any firelighters in.
You will find it is much easier to get your fire going with one of those.
Are you used to a peat fire?’
‘No, but I'm hoping I can learn.
Mrs McDougall, how do I get from here to the cottage?
I'm told it's about two miles.
I can easily walk to do shopping and so on, but I've got a couple of suitcases here now, and I certainly can't manage those.’
‘No worry about that.
I saw your cases there, and Archie McLaren will have them into the Land-Rover by this time.
So will you perhaps be wanting a couple of bags, say, of coal to help with the fire?
The house will be dry enough; there was a couple in it through the middle of May, and we have had good weather, but you would be better to stock up now for what next week might bring.’
‘Yes, of course.
Thank you very much.
Two bags of coal, then, please, and the firelighters, and — yes, I think I've remembered everything else.
Oh, about milk and bread.
Can one only get it fresh when the ferry comes over?’
‘We have fresh milk here from the farm, but you would be better to take some of the long-life with you.
It's a long walk from Otters' Bay in the bad weather.
Here it is.
Two cartons, and it will keep a long time, even with no fridge.
I don't know if you have one over there…
The bread comes with the boat.
Will I keep you a loaf on Wednesday?
And another at the weekend, or two then, perhaps?
Mostly we make our own if we want it fresh.
There, is that everything?’
‘I think so, thank you.
How much is that, Mrs McDougall?’
She told me, and I paid her.
A young man, dark, short, burly, in a navy guernsey and jeans and gumboots, came in and lifted the coal bags into the Land-Rover beside my cases.
I picked up the carrier bag where the postmistress had packed my groceries.
‘I don't imagine there's a telephone at the cottage, is there?’
‘There is not.
There is one here, and one at the House, and that is all there are.
And the one at the House is cut off since the old lady died.’
‘The House?’
Somehow, the way she said it gave it a capital letter.
‘The big house.
It's not far from you, half a mile along the shore, maybe.
Taigh na Tuir, they call it.
That means House of the Tower.
There is a small island off the coast just there, with the remains of a broch on it.
I suppose that is the tower that the House was named for.
It was built as a shooting lodge in the old days, and then the Hamiltons bought it, and lived there most summers, but old Mrs Hamilton, she was the last of them, died this February, so it's empty now, and likely to stay so.’
She smiled.
‘It's not everyone wants the kind of peace and quiet we have on Moila.’
‘I can imagine.
Well, I'm all set to enjoy it, anyway.
And I don't really want a phone, except to make sure about my brother's coming.
So I'll walk over here tomorrow and telephone him, if I may.
What time do you shut?’
‘Half past five, but if you want the telephone, then come to the house door.
No, it's no trouble, it's what everyone does, and the cheap calls are after six anyway.
Just you come.
That's it, then.’
She picked up the second carrier bag and saw me to the door with it.
‘Archie will see you into the house, and if there's anything more that you need, you will let him know.
And I'll look for you maybe tomorrow.
Goodbye.
Look after the lady, now, Archie.’
Archie was understood to say that he would.
I got in beside him, and we set off.
The Land-Rover had seen better days, and once we had left the village street and taken to the track — it was little more — that wound up from the village towards the moorland, conversation was difficult.
After one or two tries, met by a nod or a non-committal noise from Archie, I gave up, and looked about me.
I suppose that there are very few places on Moila from which one cannot see the sea.
The track, rough and strewn with stones, climbed, at first gently, through sheep-cropped turf bristling with reeds and thistles and islanded with stretches of bracken.
Once we were out of sight of the village there were no trees except, here and there, thorns dragged sideways by the wind and shorn close by the weather.
The track grew steeper, and twisted.
Now to either hand was heather, at this season still dark and flowerless, except where patches of the early bell heather splashed their vivid purple across grey rock.
The whins, those perpetual wonders, were blazing gold, and everywhere over the stretches of grass between the bracken spread the tiny white and yellow flowers of lady's bedstraw and tormentil.
The very lichen patching the grey rocks was bright mustard-gold, like flowers.
Away to the right I saw the flat gleam of the loch.
Nothing could be heard above the noise of the engine, but I saw a lark spring skywards out of the heather, and another, a few minutes later, sink to its rest.
A pair of grey-backed crows — hooded crows — flew across the track, and then, as the Land-Rover topped the rise and started down into a narrowing glen, a buzzard soared up in leisurely circles, to be lost over the crest of the moor.
Then we were running gently downhill beside a burn, towards the distant gleam of the sea.
Here, in the shelter  that the glen gave from the Atlantic gales, the trees crowded close, and reasonably tall.
Oaks, mostly, but there were beeches and ash trees, with birch and hazel everywhere, tangled with brambles and wild honeysuckle.
Along the edge of the burn were thickets of alder and hawthorn standing knee-deep in foxgloves.
The track levelled out, the glen widened, and there below us was the bay.
Otters' Bay was very small, a pebbled crescent backed by a storm beach of smooth boulders.
Thick black curves of dry seaweed marked the reach of the tides.
To our left a high cliff cut off the view, and to the right a lowish headland jutted well out into the sea.
Narrowing my eyes against the Atlantic glitter I could see the line of a path that climbed from the bay and on over the headland to the west.
And beyond the crest of the headland, hazy with distance, the shape of a hill, smooth and symmetrical, like a drawn-up knee.
Then the Land-Rover came to a halt beside a rough jetty made of stacked boulders tied down with fencing wire, and there, backed against the cliff a short way above us, was the cottage.
The cottage was bigger than I had expected.
Originally it had been built on the usual pattern, a tiny square hallway, with doors to either side leading into the two ‘front’ rooms, and a steep enclosed stair up to the twin bedrooms under the pitch of the roof But someone, fairly recently, had done a job of conversion; the two downstairs rooms were thrown into one, with the staircase half dividing them.
The sitting-room, to the right, had a pleasant fireplace, and was adequately, if not well, furnished with a couple of easy chairs, a low table, and a doubtful-looking sofa pushed back against the staircase wall.
The ‘kitchen-diner’ on the other side boasted the usual cupboards and what looked like home-made worktops, and a table near the window with four chairs drawn  up to it.
On the worktop stood an electric kettle and a toaster, and these were the only ‘mod cons’ to be seen.
A door at the rear led to a narrow room which ran the width of the cottage and had originally been the ‘back kitchen’ or scullery and wash-house.
Under one window was a modern sink and draining-board, with an electric water-heater fixed to the wall above it.
Beside this stood the cooker, installed, apparently, by someone who distrusted the island's electricity supply; it was a gas cooker, and had been placed there to be within easy reach of the cylinders of Calor gas that stood just outside the window under a lean-to, beside a stack of peat.
That was as far as modernisation had gone: the other end of the scullery was just as it had always been, with the old deep sink for laundry, served by a single, presumably cold tap, and in the corner beyond it the copper for ‘the boil’.
A deep cupboard, clean and empty, would serve as a storeroom; another, beside the copper, held cleaning tools.
No fridge, but the place would be cool even in summer; those windows never saw the sun.
Peering out, I could see that there must once have been a garden or kail-yard between the cottage and the cliff; now the tumbledown wall enclosed nothing but a tangle of brambles and wild roses almost hiding a garden hut.
Alongside the wall a narrow path wound between waist-high nettles to a small structure whose function one could guess at.
The house agent had assured me that a bathroom and lavatory had been installed upstairs above the scullery; looking at those nettles, I hoped he had told the truth.
‘I will take your cases upstairs for you,’ said Archie McLaren.
‘No, don't bother — well, thank you very much.’
I dumped the carrier bags of groceries on the kitchen table and started to unpack them.
I heard him moving  about upstairs, and it was a minute or two before he came down again.
‘I was just’— he pronounced it ‘chust’—‘taking a look.
She had Robert McDougall over from Mull last year to do the bedrooms up.
That is Mary McDougall's cousin from Dervaig.
He always does a good job.
I had not seen the upstairs rooms since they were finished, but I remember the job they had with the bathroom, and with this.’
He looked about him with interest.
‘It was very different here when the family had it.
It was Alastair Mackay lived here, that was the gardener at the House.
They only moved away two years ago, to the mainland, and then Mrs Hamilton did the place up for letting.
When they took the old oven out, I brought the cooker down myself, and the fittings for the kitchen units.
The timber and the bath and such came across by boat into the bay there, and a fine job they had dragging them up to the house.’
‘I hadn't realised that the cottage belongs — belonged?— to Mrs Hamilton.
Mrs McDougall told me that she had died recently.’
‘That is so.
She was a nice lady, and when her husband was alive he was a great one for the shooting and the fishing, though there is not much fishing here on Moila.
He used to go north for the salmon every year, to the mainland, but she would stay here.
She liked it, and then after Colonel Hamilton died she never went away at all, even in the winter.
But this last winter was too much for her, poor lady.’
‘What do you suppose will happen to the House — the big house, I mean — now?’
‘I do not know.
I think that there is a relation abroad somewhere, but that is all.
It will be sold, I think, but who will buy it?’
‘Someone who loves peace and quiet, I expect.’
‘An ivory tower?’
I had been reaching up to put packets and tins into one of the wall cupboards, but this startled me into turning.
‘A what?’
‘Ivory tower.
It was what Mrs Hamilton used to say.
She was a writer, a real one who got books printed.
When she was younger she used to write books for children.
She said it was a poetic way of saying you wanted to be left alone.’
‘I see.
Yes, I see.
I did wonder.
House agents aren't usually poets.’
‘What is that?’
‘Only that the house agents called it that when they advertised it.
Rather clever of them.
That's what caught my eye.
I wonder if they'll try to sell the cottage too, or if they'll go on letting it?’
‘It has only ever been let in the summer, and no one has been here yet this year except the people last month, folk from Cornwall, I think.
They came with a boat, and did all their shopping in Tobermory, so we did not see much of them at all.’
‘I suppose a boat would make sense if one was here for long.
Do you have a boat?’
‘I do.
If you should ever want to go fishing, or maybe to take a look at the bird islands, you will just let me know?’
‘I certainly will.
Oh, I nearly forgot.
Did you unload the coal?’
‘I did.
It is out the back where the peat is kept.
Just beside the door.
Will I get some in for you now?
No bother.
Do you know how to make a fire with the peats?’
‘Mrs McDougall asked me that,’ I said.
‘I don't know.
I can but try.
I might have to ask for help with that as well.’
‘You will be welcome.
But you will find plenty of  kindling and dry wood down on the beach.
Then give the peats plenty of air.
If once you get it going, it is a good fire.’
‘I'll do my best.
Thanks very much, Archie.
Now, what do I owe you?’
I paid him and he took his leave, but in the doorway he hesitated, then suddenly, as if the question had forced itself out in spite of good manners, asked: ‘Are you sure you will be all right here, all on your own?
What are you going to do?
It's a lonely spot, and if it's walking you want, Moila is such a small island, and once you have been round it, you have seen it all.
There is nothing special about Moila, except maybe the birds on the outer islands, and they will be away soon.’
I smiled.
‘I wanted an ivory tower.
I'm a writer, too, you see.’
‘Well, now…
A writer, is it?
Yes, I do see.’
His tone and look said, clearly, that everything — any possibly lunacy — was now fully explained.
I laughed.
‘I don't intend to write all the time, though there is some work I want to do.
But I'm not really planning to be a hermit; my brother's coming over soon, and I know he'll want to go to the islands, so we'll be in touch.
Thanks again.’
I watched the Land-Rover grind its way up the track till a turn of the glen hid it from sight, and in a few more moments the sound of its engine had faded to silence.
Silence?
The wash of waves on the pebbled beach, the crying and calling of the wheeling gulls, the silver chain of sound from a lark above the cliff-top, and, as a final coda, the distant, breathy note of the ferry's siren as she drew away towards the west.
The last link gone.
Solitude.
Complete and unassailable solitude.
The sported oak.
I shut the front door gently, a symbolic gesture which  shut out what sounds there were, and went upstairs to see what that nice lady, Mrs Hamilton, had provided in the way of beds.
The beds were reasonable, the bedrooms tiny, tucked under the slope of the roof, and charming, with white paint, flowery wallpaper, a minimum of furniture, and of course that marvellous view right out to the south-west.
Storm-direction, I supposed, and spared a thought for the winter; but in June, surely, all would be well?
The windows were tightly shut, and the rooms smelled stuffy, but not damp, though the drawers of the chest stuck as I tried to pull them open.
The solitary ornament in my room was a faded copy of a Biblical scene by Gustave Doré, sinners drowning in a rough sea.
Rather too pertinent, I thought, for the place's original dweller, who must have gone down to the Atlantic in a small boat on many a stormy night.
But today the real sea looked wonderful, silken, with a gentle running glitter where the tide moved, and here and there the tilt and flash of white wings in the sunlight as the gulls sailed out from the cliffs.
It would do.
It would do very well.
I would finish unpacking, have a look at the cooker and set things ready for supper, then I would take a walk out to look at the sea, and gather kindling in case the evening turned chilly enough for a fire.
There was, as Archie had promised, plenty of good kindling among the piled jetsam on the beach.
I soon had an armful, then clambered up off the shingle to the better walking of the salt-washed turf where the burn, dividing into deep peaty runnels, cut its way to the shore.
Sea-pinks were thick everywhere, with here and there patches of small shingle glistening with broken shells.
An oystercatcher screamed from somewhere at the end of the beach, warning its young.
Not far away I caught, from the corner of my eye, the flickering movement as a ringed plover scudded and ran among the sea-pinks.
It went silently, dodging and hiding; it must have left its nest at my approach.
Any thought I may have had about finding the nest for Crispin's camera left me then.
Gradually, over the last few minutes, I had become conscious.of a growing discomfort, a tickling, burning sensation in the face and hands, and even In my hair a stinging sort of unpleasantness that suddenly became insupportable.
Midges.
I had forgotten about the midges.
The curse of the Highlands.
The infinitesimal and unbeatable enemy.
The serpent in paradise.
Tucking my load of sticks under one arm, and rubbing my free hand hard over face and hair, I scurried for the safety of the cottage.
After all, the evening stayed mild, so the fire never got lit.
I made and ate supper, washed up, then watched the changing view of evening from the haven of the cottage window, and went early to bed.
I awoke next morning to a brilliant pearly light, but when I went to the window, no sea was visible.
Nothing, in fact, was visible.
The world was shrouded in a curtain of mist.
This was not the sort of fog one is used to in towns, but a veil of salt-smelling white, damp and mild, with all the soft brilliance of a thin curtain drawn between earth and sun.
But view there was none.
I could not even see as far as the mouth of the burn.
So, no walk today, until I was a little more certain of my way.
Even the main track to the village could be treacherous in this blinding, moveless white.
I was not disappointed.
I told myself so, firmly, several times.
I had all that I had wanted, peace and privacy, a day to myself before Crispin came, and an absolute compulsion to stay indoors and take another look at the  poem that had been broken into by the tutorial in Cambridge.
I would look at it again, and see if it had been totally destroyed.
At least no person from Porlock was likely to interrupt me today.
No one did.
The day went by, still and silent but for the muted calling of the sea-birds, and the sad little pipe of the ringed plover on the shingle.
I sat at the kitchen table, staring at the blind white blankness in front of me, and slowly, like a clear spring welling up from the common earth, the poem rose and spread and filled me, unstoppable as flood water, technique unknotting even as it ran, like snags rolled away on the flood.
When it comes, it is worth everything in the world.
There is too much easy talk about ‘inspiration’, but at such times one sees it exactly for what it is, a breathing in of all experience, all apprehension of beauty, all love.
As a fire needs air to make it burn, so a poem needs to be fuelled by each one of these.
And the greatest of these is love.
When I looked up at last, it was to see the near cliffs bright with the afternoon sun, and the sea creaming calmly against the storm beach in the gentlest of high tides.
The horizon was still invisible, but above the line of mist that hid it the sky was clear, with the promise of a lovely evening.
An evening with a breeze; I could see movement in the bracken that edged the track, and cloud-shadows moved from time to time over the sea-pinks.
So much for the midges, and it would be better at the head of the track and over the central moors.
I would make myself some tea, I decided as I packed away my papers, then walk over to the post office to make my call to Crispin.
My sister-in-law answered the telephone, in the voice which, whether she means it or not, always sounds abrasive and resentful when she speaks to me.
She was sorry, but Crispin was out on call.
No, she did not know when he would be home.
When did she ever?
His train?
Well, it now seemed that there was someone he wanted to see in Glasgow, so he was taking this chance to fit that in.
He had booked on tomorrow night's sleeper, and would head up to Oban on Friday.
Then, she gathered, he would get the ferry the next morning, Saturday.
Would that be right?
‘It could be.
I was hoping he'd manage tomorrow's boat, but Saturday would be great.
I've found out more about it now, so if you wouldn't mind giving him a message, Ruth?
Have you got a pencil handy?
Well, the ferry is the one for Coll and Tiree…
C.O.L.L.
and T.I.R.E.E.…
Yes, they're two of the islands in the Inner Hebrides; Crispin will know.
It leaves at six in the morning, and they want you on board soon after half past five.
I stayed at the Columba Hotel, just near the quay.
I'll make a reservation for him for Friday night.
Oh, and tell him that Moila's too small for the ferry to dock, so he'll come ashore in a boat.
I won't offer to meet the ferry — it docks at eight in the morning — but I'll arrange transport for him to the cottage.
Did you get all that?’
‘Yes.
But wouldn't it be better if I got him to call you back when he comes in?’
I laughed.
‘It would be difficult.
There's only the public phone in the post office, and I've just walked two miles to get to that.
But I'll give you the number —’ I gave it —‘and if he wants to leave a message for me, Mrs McDougall will take it.’
‘Mrs McDougall.
Yes.’
Now it was her professional voice, quick and cool, the doctor's wife taking another  message down.
Then she was herself again.
‘Rose, what's it like?
Two miles from the phone?
And you had to walk it?
I must say, it sounds just the sort of place Crispin would love.’
‘He would.
He will.
It's quite lovely.’
I added, in total insincerity: ‘You really ought to have come, Ruth.
The cottage is tiny, but it's charming, and the views are out of this world.’
‘But what on earth would there be to do ?’
‘Well, nothing.’
Nothing, blessed state for the hard-working Crispin, and for myself after the turmoil of exams and end of term.
‘I,’ said my sister-in-law, who never, I am sure, means to be offensive, ‘simply cannot stand being idle.
I'm going to Marrakesh in September.
Marvellous hotel, bags of sunshine, and plenty of tours and fascinating shopping.’
‘That sounds wonderful.
Enjoy it.
I'll have to go now, Ruth.
I'll ring again on Thursday evening to see if Crispin's going to make it.
Goodbye now.’
‘Goodbye.’
And she rang off.
Mrs McDougall was in her kitchen taking a batch of bread out of the oven.
I paid her for the call, and stayed chatting for a while, answering her queries about the cottage and then telling her of my brother's expected arrival, and the possibility that he might telephone with a message.
‘I expect I'll walk over this way every day anyway, and if he does come on Saturday could Archie be here, please, to take him down with his bags to the cottage?’
‘He will be there.
He always meets the boat.
There are always goods to carry that have been ordered.
Well, it will be nice for you to have your brother here, and we will hope for the best.
I am afraid that there is bad weather forecast.
I have just heard it on the news.’
‘Oh, dear, is there?
Really bad?
Enough to stop the ferry crossing?’
‘It has to be very bad indeed for that.
Don't worry, your brother will get here.
But you might find the cottage a bit draughty if it gets really rough.’
‘I'll batten down the hatches,’ I told her.
She laughed, and we talked for a few minutes longer.
When I left I had a bottle of midge-repellent in my pocket, and a loaf of new bread, still warm, in a plastic carrier.
The loaf was a gift.
The natives were friendly, after all.
I went slowly, and presently found myself walking towards a most spectacular sunset.
Gold, scarlet and blazing flame I had seen before, but never like this, washing over the low clouds from below, and backed by the most delicate and limpid green which faded to primrose and then into the shadowy greys of the upper sky.
I stood to watch.
To my right was the small loch, edged with deep reedy banks of moss and thymy turf.
The water lay smooth as glass, polished with all the colours of the sunset sky.
Then something moved, and the shining world broke up into arrowing ripples, as a bird slid across the water, no more than a shape of black against the glare.
A duck?
Too big.
A diver?
It was possible.
I had never seen one, but my brother had talked of them, and I knew that he was hoping he might find one here.
As I screwed up my eyes against the dazzle, trying to see the creature so that I might describe it to Crispin, it vanished.
Duck or diver, it had dived, and, though I waited for long minutes, it did not appear again.
I walked on, and down  the hill towards the cottage which, already, seemed like home.
It is never quite dark on a clear June night in the Highlands.
And never, in the long, light nights, do the sea-birds cease from calling and flying.
I went outside again that night, just before bedtime, to look at the stars.
Back in the city, or in fact anywhere that I had lived, the night sky was disfigured by street-lamps and the city's emanations.
But here, in a clear arch of pewter-grey air, the stars were low and bright and as thick as daisies on a lawn.
I picked out the Plough, and Orion, and the Pleiades, and of course the long splashing trail of the Milky Way, but that was as far as my knowledge went.
Of one other thing I could be certain; the weather was changing.
A wind was getting up, and even as I stood there, the lower stars were obscured by drifting darkness.
The cries of the sea-birds, muted, seemed to change, too.
And the soft murmur of the sea.
It was perceptibly colder, and the wind smelt of rain.
I went indoors and to bed.
During the night the wind got up, and the morning dawned grey and blustery, with bursts of heavy rain.
Thankful that I had taken the trouble to gather dry wood while it was fine, I lighted the fire, and soon had a cheerful blaze going.
And, once the chores were done, there was nothing to do but write.
It is time, I think, to make a confession.
Though I was a student of literature and, I believe, a reasonably good teacher, and loved my work, and though I was, moreover, a serious poet who had gained some small recognition in circles even outside my own University, my writing life was not confined to poems and articles, or even lectures.
I wrote science fiction.
Not only wrote it, but published it and made what seemed to a poorly-paid lecturer to be a very acceptable amount of money with it.
Under another name, of course.
The flights of Hugh Templar's imagination paid Rose Fenemore very well indeed.
They also gave her a much valued safety-valve for an almost too active imagination.
The pure invention of these tales, the exercise of what at its best can be called the high imagination, allow the writer (in Dryden's phrase) to take the clogs off his fancy, and to escape the world at will.
So through that dismal day Hugh Templar sat at his kitchen table and pursued the adventures of a team of space-travellers who had discovered a world directly behind the sun, which was a mirror-image of our own Earth, with the same physical composition, but with a rather different kind of population, a race having strange and, I hoped, thought-provoking ideas about how to run their planet…
At ten o'clock the lights went out.
Though normally, in the Highlands, there is almost enough light at that time to write by, the storm-clouds that had thickened and threatened all day made it quite dark.
The fire had died to cold ashes, but I felt my way to where I had seen a candlestick, left ready on the mantelpiece, presumably as insurance against just this event.
I crossed to the uncurtained window and peered out.
The wind was stronger than ever, and fistfuls of rain hurtled against the glass.
A wild and nasty night.
I finished the section I had been writing — an idea left  in mid-paragraph tends to vanish very quickly — then took myself and my candle early to bed.
The walls of the cottage were thick enough to shut out the worst sounds of the storm's buffeting, and even the creaking of doors and rattling of windows could not keep me awake for long.
But something, some sharper, unaccustomed sound, brought me out of my first deep sleep into listening wakefulness.
The storm was still raging, more fiercely now than before.
I could hear the crash of waves on the shingle, and the intermittent shriek of the wind as it tore through the gaps in the kail-yard wall.
But the sound that had startled me awake was different.
It came from within the cottage, a quiet sound, but cutting through all the noise from outside.
The closing of a door; the back door, I thought.
And then sounds from the scullery.
A tap running, and the echo of metal as the kettle was filled.
Crispin?
Against all expectation, all possibility, had my brother managed to make his way here, and cross to Moila in spite of the storm?
Too bewildered by sleep to think just how impossible it was, I slid out of bed, pulled on my slippers, threw my dressing-gown on, and opened my bedroom door.
There was a light on downstairs, and as my bedroom door opened, all sounds ceased from inside the house.
For a moment I thought I had been mistaken, and that perhaps I had left the switch on after the light failed, but no, I was sure I had switched off.
And I had locked the back door.
I ran downstairs.
He was just turning from the sink, kettle in hand.
A young man, tallish, slenderly built, with dark hair dragged into a tousle by the wind, and a narrow, pale-skinned face.
A good-looking face; blue eyes, straight nose, cheeks flushed with cold and wet with rain, and with tomorrow's stubble already showing dark.
He wore a navy fisherman's jersey and gumboots, and a heavy anorak, shiny and running with wet.
I had never seen him before in my life.
I stopped dead in the doorway.
He stood, rigid, gripping the kettle.
We both spoke at the same time, and, inevitably, the same words.
‘Who the hell are you?’
He set the kettle down with a rap on the draining-board.
He seemed even more taken aback than I was, and this heartened me.
I said, with a reasonable show of calmness: ‘You're welcome, of course, to take shelter from the storm, but do you usually walk into someone else's house without knocking?
Or did you knock, and I didn't hear you?
I thought the door was locked, anyway.’
‘Your house?’
He asked it without any apparent sense of its being a stupid question.
‘Well, yes.
Temporarily, anyway.
I've rented it for a fortnight.
Oh, I see.
You know the owners?
And you thought you could just walk in—’
‘As a matter of fact, I thought it was my own house.
I was brought up here.
See?’
He put a hand in a pocket  and brought out a key, the duplicate of the one I had been given, which fitted both front and back doors.
‘I'd no idea the place had changed hands.
I'm sorry.’
‘I'm sorry, too.’
An awkward silence.
He stood by the sink, dripping quietly onto the scullery matting.
He showed no sign of offering to go, and? hearing the wind outside hurling fistfuls of rain about, I could hardly blame him.
I cleared my throat.
‘Well, this is a bit awkward, isn't it?
The people who lived here moved away a couple of years ago, so I was told.
I don't know where they went, but Mrs McDougall at the post office could probably tell you, if you wanted to get in touch again.
I think she said the name was Mackay.’
‘That is right.’
Now in his voice I could hear, through the flattening cosmopolitan overlay, the unmistakable lilt of the islands.
‘My father used to do the garden at Taigh na Tuir.
My foster-father, that is.’
‘You mean your parents lived here?
Then this was your home?’
‘That is right,’ he said again.
‘Well…’
I stopped, at a loss for words.
He smiled then for the first time, and the smile lightened his face to a sudden, vivid charm.
‘A bit of a facer, isn't it?
For me, too.’
‘You mean you really didn't know they'd left?
You just let yourself into your own home and thought they'd be upstairs asleep?’
‘Just that.’
‘But — but that's awful.
You…’
I stopped again.
There was really nothing left to say.
I finished, feebly: ‘You're taking it very calmly.
What will you do?’
‘What can I do, but wait till morning?’
The smile was still there, but behind it now was a hint of trouble, and more than a hint of tiredness.
‘It wasn't quite such a shock  as you might think.
It certainly shook me when you came downstairs, but then I just thought my people might be away, and have let the cottage.
Then I thought…well, as it happens, I did know that the old lady — MM Hamilton — had died earlier this year, and of course that could have meant that Dad's job had packed up and they'd had to move.
But then, when you said they'd been gone for a couple of years…’
He paused and took his breath in.
No smile now.
He frowned down for a few moments at the damp patch on the matting at his feet, then he shook his head, as if ridding himself of some unwelcome thought, and looked up at me again.
‘In fact, that's still what may have happened, isn't it?
If she hadn't been well, perhaps, for some time, and had lost interest in the garden, and wanted to get the cottage done over for sale or letting, then she might have told them to go?’
He finished on a note of inquiry, but I shook my head.
‘I wouldn't know.
I've only just got here, and I really haven't heard anything more than I told you.
But how does it happen that you didn't know they were leaving?
All that time ago — did they never write?’
‘I've been abroad.
Moving around, and one loses touch, I'm afraid.
I've only just got back to the UK’ He looked around him.
‘I did notice the changes, of course, but I just thought the old lady had had the house done over for them — the parents.
But she must have done it after they left; she'd have to, if she wanted to let the place.
It wasn't much before, you can see.’
A glance at the corner where the copper stood, then at the doorway behind me, where the light fell on the gleaming worktops and new cupboards.
He lifted his shoulders and let them fall in a dismissive shrug.
‘Ah, well, I can see now, they've made a pretty good job of it.
I didn't really stop to look earlier — I was just so glad to get out of the weather.’
‘I can imagine.
You said you knew that Mrs Hamilton had died?’
‘As it happens, yes.
I hired my boat on Faarsay — that's a little island south of Mull — and they'd heard about Mrs Hamilton, but they didn't know my folks, so no one told me our house was let.’
‘I — yes, I see.
Well, I'm sorry you had to find out this way.’
A pause.
There seemed to be nothing else to say.
The water dripped steadily from his anorak to make a puddle on the floor.
He looked pale and, 1 thought, tired and rather lost.
I said crisply: ‘Give me the kettle.
You look as if you could do with a hot drink, and as a matter of fact, so could 1.
'1 carried the kettle into the other room, plugged it in and switched on.
‘What'll you have, coffee?
Tea?
Cocoa?
I'm not stocked up with strong drink yet, I'm afraid.
Why don't you take that wet anorak off and get the fire going again while I make the drinks?’
He did as I suggested, dropping the wet clothes into a corner by the back door.
‘Well, God bless this house.
It's very good of you to take it like this.
I'm sorry if I gave you a fright.
The coal's still kept just outside the back door?’
‘Yes, but I brought some in earlier; it's in that bucket there, and there's peat there, too, and it's dry.
I suppose you're used to peat fires?
You can show me how.
Are you sure cocoa will do?’
‘If there's coffee, I'd rather have that, please.
Yes, instant would be fine.
Thanks.’
He came in from the scullery with the coal bucket in one hand and in the other a fat metal cylinder.
‘I'll certainly show you, but didn't you know about this?’
‘Don't tell me it's a gas poker?
How wonderful!
Where was it?’
‘At the back of the cupboard.
We hardly ever used it, but it's a great standby, and very quick.’
He dumped the cylinder down by the sitting-room hearth and knelt to stack peat and coal over the cold core of the fire.
The kettle boiled and I made the drinks and followed him through to set the mugs down on the low table near the fireplace.
‘Do you take sugar?
Will that really burn?’
‘Yes, please.
Yes, indeed, given time, it will burn well.
This always was a good fire.
They have changed the fire-place, but the chimney will be the same, and it burns hot.
You will see.’
‘Incidentally, were you hoping to get a meal here?
Because I'm afraid that all I've got at the moment-’
‘No, no, that's OK.
The drink will do fine.
I've got this to help it, anyway.’
He took the mug I handed him, then produced a flask from his pocket, and tipped a generous measure into his mug.
He held the flask out to me, but I shook my head.
The fire caught the peat and spread into a warming glow.
Feeling as if I was still asleep and having a very curious dream, I settled myself on the other side of the hearth from the stranger and took a sip of cocoa.
It is a simple drink, but wonderfully heartening.
‘My name's Rose Fenemore,’ I said, ‘and I'm from Cambridge.’
‘Mine's Ewen Mackay, from Moila, but it's a long, long time since I was here.
You're taking this very well, Rose Fenemore.
Some women would have come downstairs with the poker at the ready.’
‘I might have done, only I'm expecting my brother to pin me, I don't quite know when.
I was too sleepy to wonder how he'd managed, at this time of night.’
I glanced at the window.
‘Did you really bring a boat across tonight in that?’
‘Why not?
Rounding the Horn is worse.’
He laughed.
‘As a matter of fact, the really nasty bit was when I was walking across here, coming over the head of the cliff there with the wind trying to blow me out to sea again.’
‘Over the cliff?
The headland?
Then you didn't put into the bay here?’
‘No.
With the wind and the tide this way it's too tricky to bring a boat in here.
There's a little cove about half-way between here and the big house — the Hamilton house.
It's a safe mooring in any weather, and the nearest to home.’
The last word fell queerly in the little room, with the fire burning cosily and the insistent sounds of the storm at the window.
I sipped cocoa, and wondered how and when I would be able to turn him out into the night again.
Or even if.
The windows, black as pitch, were streaming with water, and from time to time doors and windows rattled as if the cottage were under attack.
I would not have put a stray dog out into such a night.
And the man, apparently, still regarded the place as ‘home’.
Well, Rose Fenemore, now might be the time to broaden your outlook a little.
I could name at least three of my friends who would have been prompt to offer this undeniably attractive young man a doss down on the sofa, and one of them who would have already been thinking of taking him upstairs for the night…
He was saying something about the Hamilton house, a question.
‘I'm sorry?’
I said.
‘I asked if you had been over there yet?’
‘No.’
‘You should go.
It's quite a good path over the cliff there, and the island with the broch is worth a visit.
There's a nice bay there, too, very sheltered.
You can take  a boat in there most times, except at low water, but it can be awkward then, and in this weather…
Anyway, I tucked my boat in snugly at Halfway House — the cove — and walked over to Taigh na Tuir.
That's what they call the Hamilton place.’
‘Yes, I know.’
‘I just wanted to see it again.’
He reached forward to turn off the gas poker and add a couple of peats to the fire.
‘Even though I knew there was no one there.
And even if they hadn't told me, I would have known.
She never slept well, and she used to read half the night.
It seemed queer to me to see the windows all dark and the curtains still not drawn…
I don't think I believed it till then, that she was gone, I mean.
You might say that Taigh na Tuir was as much home to me as this was.
More.
I was over there most days when I was a boy.’
‘Mrs McDougall — no, I think it was Archie McLaren — told me that your father looked after the garden there.’
‘My foster-father.’
That emphasis again.
‘I was adopted.
Did they not tell you that?
It was never a secret.
Yes, he worked at the House, and so did my mother.
But they — the Colonel and Mrs Hamilton — they had no family, only a brother who lived abroad all the time, and, well, they treated me like a son, or grandson, rather.
It was the Colonel himself who taught me how to shoot, and I always went with him for the fishing.
The way they were with me, I sometimes wondered-’
He broke off.
A quick flash of a glance from those blue eyes, then he turned away.
‘You wondered?’
‘Nothing.
Nothing at all…’
He stirred the peats, the Gaelic suddenly strong in his voice.
‘But it's a strange feeling to be robbed of both homes all in the same wild night.’
Celtic twilight, I thought.
Is he dramatising all this a bit, for sympathy and a bed for the night, or is this the normal way of the Gael?
The chill little touch of criticism roused me.
Stray dog or no stray dog, I wanted him to go.
I sat up in my chair.
‘I'm sorry.
I really am.
But-’
He smiled at me suddenly, the same flash of charm.
‘And that was not a hint for you to offer me a bed for the night, Miss Rose Fenemore.
You've been very kind, and I'm good and dry now, and I've slept on the boat many's the time before, and in worse nights than this.
The wind's dropping a bit, anyhow, and she'll be all safe and snug in Halfway House.
I'll maybe get round to the harbour in the morning, and have a talk with Mrs McDougall.
Here, let me wash the mugs up for you first.’
‘No, really, they're nothing.
Give me yours.’
As I got up to take it from him, there was a sharp rapping at the front door.
In the time it took me to turn my head, Ewen Mackay came upright, and a hand moved — incredibly — towards a pocket.
It was a movement I had seen a hundred times on television, but never before in real life.
For real life, visit Moila, the island of the ivory tower.
His hand dropped.
I said, feebly: ‘Would you answer the door, please?
And if it's my brother, don't shoot him.’
He didn't smile.
He gave me a sideways look that was curiously disconcerting, and went to the door.
It opened on a rush of air.
Outside stood a young man in oilskins, the hood blowing back from a soaking tangle of brown hair blackened by the rain, and one hand gripping a duffel bag.
Ewen Mackay stood back for him to enter.
‘Do come in.
The kettle's just on the boil.
Mr Fenemore, I presume?’
The newcomer came in on a gust of the storm.
He  stood dripping on the rug while Ewen Mackay shut the door behind him.
‘What?’ he asked.
He blinked at the light as if it hurt him.
His eyes were bloodshot, presumably with the wind, and he looked dazed.
‘Your brother made it after all,’ said Ewen Mackay to me, but I shook my head.
‘I've never seen him before in my life,’ I said.
‘I'm terribly sorry to butt in like this.’
The newcomer looked from Ewen Mackay to me and back again.
He was, understandably, taking us for a couple whose holiday idyll he had interrupted, though why we should be sitting by the fire at that hour, with me in a not very elegant dressing-gown and Ewen in stained jeans and a guernsey it would be hard to imagine.
Something of the sort was getting through to him.
He paused, and finished, uncertainly: ‘My tent was blown away, and some of my stuff with it.
I tried to chase it, but it was no good in the dark, and I went clear into a bog, and in the end I saw your light, so I picked up what was left and came along.
If I might just wait here till the storm passes, till daylight, perhaps, and then try again to track my things down?’
‘Well, of course,’ said Ewen Mackay warmly, before I could speak.
I looked at him in surprise, but he ignored me.
‘Come right in and get those wet things off.
A shocker, isn't it?
We were just having a hot drink.
Join us?’
‘Thank you.
It's good of you.
I'd like that.’
He was shedding his wet things as he spoke, and a glance at me indicated who was supposed to hurry off and get him the hot drink.
I found my voice.
I gave Ewen a chilly glance.
‘If you're the host, you make the drink.
You know where the kettle is.’
The newcomer looked surprised, but Ewen took it without a blink.
In fact, he smiled.
‘Of course.’
Then, to the other man: ‘My name's Mackay, by the way, and this is Rose Fenemore.
There's coffee if you'd like it, and it doesn't have to be totally harmless, if you prefer something a bit stronger?’
‘Whatever there is.
Coffee would be great.
Thank you.
It's very good of you.’
He dumped his things on a chair near the door, and came to the fire, hands spread out to the warmth.
‘My name's Parsons.
John Parsons.’
He spoke over my head to the scullery door, where Ewen was refilling the kettle.
He obviously still took us for a couple holidaying together, and his embarrassment at intruding took the form of ignoring my presence.
I was busy wondering why Ewen Mackay, by playing host, had taken such pains to foster that impression.
It was hard to see a reason.
A stab of male vanity, perhaps?
Discovered alone in a remote cottage with a young female whose brother had once described her as ‘a don, alas, but a dish when she takes the trouble,’ had he quite deliberately misled the newcomer?
Or, to take it further, had he begun to have hopes for the remainder of the night, and so taken this means to get rid of the other  man?
My own vanity, such as it was, could not accept any of this; in that dressing-gown, and with my hair all over the place, I was hardly something that a chance met man would want to lay claim to.
‘Milk and sugar?’
Ewen, still the charming host, was pouring hot water.
Mr Parsons had turned to stand with his back to the fire, the eternal male hogging the best place in the room.
‘Great.
Yes, both, thanks.’
He accepted the steaming mug from the other man, then addressing him, and still ignoring me: ‘Are you on holiday, or do you live here?’
I caught Ewen Mackay's swift glance as he resumed his place on the other side of the fireplace.
His look was faintly apologetic.
As well it might be, I thought.
As an exercise, even of vanity, it had been pointless.
Had he really thought that I would play along?
Out of sheer curiosity I held my tongue, and waited.
He stretched out a foot to the fire, stirring the peats.
‘I did live here years ago.
I was brought up here.
But just at present I'm like you, an orphan of the storm.
Miss Fenemore gave me shelter, too.’
‘Oh.
Really.
I see.’
Mr Parsons looked down at me at last, and I could see a different embarrassment replacing the first as he met my ironic eye.
‘Well, Miss Er, it's awfully good of you.
Quite an invasion.
I'm terribly sorry to be such a nuisance.’
‘Think nothing of it.
Where are you camping, Mr Er?’
For a moment I thought I had gone too far.
In the grey eyes regarding me through the steam of the coffee I saw a spark that might have been amusement.
It might equally well have been annoyance — John Parsons the macho male being quietly baited by the nonentity by the fireside.
Then it was gone and he answered mildly: ‘On the  machair.
But with the wind this way it's next to impossible.’
Back to Ewen.
‘You lost your tent, too?’
‘Not a tent.
I've a boat.
I tied up in a cove west of here, just beyond the headland.’
I asked: ‘Can you really see the lights of this cottage from the machair?’
A perceptible pause, as Mr Parsons turned and set his mug down on the mantelpiece.
‘I doubt it.
But when I saw it tonight I had just struggled as far as the road.
Why?’
‘I just wondered.’
‘Whereabouts on the machair?’ asked Ewen.
‘Pretty exposed for camping, I would have thought.
Or were you near the House?’
‘Which house?’
‘The locals — we — call it the Big House.
Or just the House.
The one opposite the island w ere the broch is.’
‘Oh, yes, of course.
I remember.
Isn't that the Hamilton house?’
‘That is right.
Old Mrs Hamilton who lived there died recently, so the place is empty now.
You know it, then?
You've been to Moila before?’
‘Yes, a long time ago, when I was a student.’
‘I wondered…’
Ewen Mackay had been staring hard at the other man while they talked.
Now he asked: ‘Perhaps we met then?
I've been wondering if I knew you.’
‘Perhaps.
I don't think so.’
‘So what brings you back here now?’
‘I'm a geologist.’
Mr Parsons sipped his drink placidly.
He had accepted the addition from Ewen's flask.
‘There was something I remembered that I wanted to look at, and I thought it would be an interesting place to spend my leave.
I've been working in Sydney.
I'm planning to move across soon to the broch isle.
There's an igneous intrusion there, with fragments of garnet peridotite — that's a rock from below the earth's crust — and I'd like to spend a bit of time there, though the rocks at the north-west end look pretty difficult to get at.
But that won't interest you…’
The conversation had long ceased to interest me.
I was feeling the need to get back to bed and to sleep.
From where I sat I could not see the clock on the mantelpiece.
I got up to look, and something else caught my eye.
Tucked behind the dock was a small sheaf of papers, old letters and bills, perhaps, pushed there and forgotten, presumably by the last tenants.
An address was printed, and clear: & add J. R Parsons, Esq., at Otters' Bay, Isle of Moila, Argyll.;
So ‘John Parsons’ was perhaps not genuine all the way?
When Ewen Mackay suggested that they had met before, I had thought that the other man had countered with a faintly wary look.
And Ewen himself, for all his outgoing charm, had certainly acted in a way that gave pause for thought.
All else apart, I could not forget that movement of his hand to his pocket when ‘Parsons’ knocked at the door.
I carried my empty mug out to the sink, then stood in the doorway and regarded them.
Neither of them had taken the slightest notice of my movements, except that Mr Parsons was already in my empty chair, and the two of them, with Ewen Mackay's flask of whisky now standing between them, were talking about salmon fishing.
A subject which, I thought drily, afforded a good deal of scope for liars.
The next move was mine.
Ewen Mackay had said he could sleep on his boat, but he had made no move to invite Parsons to share it with him.
There might not be  space for two, and I could hardly turn the other man out now.
Safety in numbers.
Let them both stay.
I may be a dish, but I am also a don, and not prone to see emergencies where none exist.
I said: ‘It's after three o'clock.
I'm going to bed.
The bedroom upstairs is all ready for my brother, and I'd prefer to have that floor to myself anyway.
I see you've salvaged your sleeping-bag, Mr Parsons.
I'll throw some towels down, and a couple of blankets, and you can toss for it who sleeps on the sofa and who gets the floor.’
I added, out of pure malice, to Ewen: ‘And of course you remember where the old loo is.
Not more than twenty yards from the back door.
Good night.
Sleep well.’
The morning was calm and bright, with sunlight gilding the whins and sending a glitter across the.bay.
The sea still echoed the storm, foot-high waves breaking with a long hush against the shingle, but the sky was blue and clear.
There was no sound from downstairs.
I slid out of bed, put on my dressing-gown and padded out to the tiny landing.
Still nothing.
Downstairs there was silence, the unmistakable silence of emptiness.
I went down to make sure.
Yes, they had both gone.
The blankets and towels lay neatly folded on the sofa.
In the scullery I found a note propped against a milk carton on the draining-board.
It ran: ‘Many thanks for the hospitality.
Hope you slept  well.
Gone early to hunt for tent, etc.
See you around, perhaps?’
It was unsigned.
The reference to the tent meant either that ‘John Parsons’ had written it, and was hoping to see me around, or that they had teamed up on a declared truce.
Whatever the case, my social life on Moila seemed to have begun.
I put a cautious hand to the kettle.
It was warm.
So they had managed some sort of breakfast, and without waking me.
More thoughtful than either of them had seemed last night.
It must have been a truce.
I put the kettle on again for myself, and went upstairs to dress.
I dutifully spent the morning in outer space.
Once Crispin arrived, I would want to be out and about with him, so I worked till lunch-time, and was rewarded by reaching the half-way mark, and with a new idea to carry me through the next section of the story.
I wrote up the notes, made myself some scrambled eggs, then decided to walk over to the post office to see if my brother had telephoned last night with any message.
Mrs McDougall, busy behind the counter with customers, merely shook her head at me, and signed towards the rear door of the shop, which led through into her house, where the telephone was.
I went cheerfully through, finding the coins as I went.
My sister-in-law answered, so quickly that she must have been right beside the telephone.
She spoke almost before the first ring had finished.
‘Yes?
Is that the hospital?’
‘No,’ I said, ‘it's Rose.
Don't tell me something's turned up at this stage to stop Cris getting away?’
‘Oh, Rose…’
Nothing abrasive now about Ruth's voice.
I heard her draw in a quick breath and swallow, and felt my hand tighten on the receiver as I said, more sharply than I intended: ‘Please.
Tell me.
What's happened?
Is Crispin all right?’
‘Yes, he's all right.
At least, he's hurt, but not badly.
It's his leg — the ankle.
They thought it was broken, then they said it was just a bad sprain, but apparently they want to do another X-ray, so I simply don't know what's happening.
He tried to phone you last night, the number you gave him, but there was something wrong with the line-’
‘We had a rough night.
Ruth, please, how was he hurt?
What has happened?’
‘He was in that train, the one that crashed last night, the derailment south of Kendal.
He was on it, the sleeper for Glasgow.
I thought you'd have heard about the accident.
Didn't you get it on the radio?’
‘No radio.
Go on.
About Crispin.’
‘He's all right, really.
He phoned me himself.
It wasn't a bad accident.
There was a coach dragged off the line, but it didn't overturn, apparently, till everyone had been got out.
Nobody killed, but a few people hurt.
Cris tried to help, of course, but as soon as the ambulances came they sent him off to the local hospital, and that's where he is now.
I did wonder why you hadn't called sooner-’
‘Yes, well…
Have you got the Kendal number handy?’
‘Yes, but he's leaving there today.
I told you they want to do another X-ray, and they're sending him to Carlisle for that, the Cumberland Infirmary.’
‘To Carlisle?
But you said he wasn't much hurt.’.
‘No, he's not, don't worry.
He sounded quite normal when he phoned, just annoyed about the holiday.
He said he'd call again as soon as he heard the result of the new X-ray, but not to worry about it, it's just the extra fuss they make when there's a doctor involved.
You know how it is.
So we'll just have to wait and see.
He won't be able to do much walking, of course, but he still wants to come.’
She finished on such a note of surprise that in spite of myself I laughed.
‘He sounds all right, anyway.
Try not to worry, Ruth.
I'll ring off now in case he's trying to get through to you.
But I'll come up here to the post office this evening, and call you again.’
‘Fine.
I'll get his number for you and you can call him yourself What about you, though, Rose?
Are you all right there, on your own?
I don't see how he can make it before Monday, and that'll be a whole week.’
I was surprised, and touched.
‘I'll be fine, thank you.
The cottage is rather cosy, and I'm busy on a new story, so I'll have plenty to do even if the weather's bad.
And when it's fine, well, it's a lovely little island, and I can have some bird-walks of my own.
Give Crispin my love, Ruth, and I'll ring tonight and see how things are.’
‘I'll tell him.
Goodbye, Rose.’
‘Goodbye.’
Mrs McDougall was still busy when I went back into the shop.
I collected what I needed, and when I got to the counter I found that she and her neighbours were discussing the train accident.
Mrs McDougall, with a quick, concerned look at me, took my basket from me and dumped it on the counter.
‘I hope it was not bad news, Miss Fenemore?
Did you not think that your brother might be coming north soon?
And from London, so it would be on the line where they had the accident, would it not?’
‘Yes.
And he was on that train, I'm afraid.
No, no, thank you very much, it's all right, he isn't badly hurt, a sprained ankle, and they say it isn't serious, but it does mean he can't come north yet…’
They exclaimed and condoled, with — once I had assured them that nothing serious had happened to my brother — a rather charming mixture of sympathy for me and pleasure in the excitement of the news.
I gave them their full due, repeating all that my sister-in-law had said, and told them that I would hear from my brother himself that evening, then paid for my groceries and made my escape.
I was half-way home before I realised that, with all the worry and talk about the accident, I had forgotten to ask Mrs McDougall about Ewen Mackay.
Or, indeed, about John Parsons.
Not that it mattered, as I would probably not see either of them again, but the scene last night had been strange, and my curiosity was aroused.
Take Parsons first.
He was, I was sure, an imposter.
I refused to believe that he chanced to have the same name as the previous tenants of the cottage — unless he himself was the previous tenant, and had for some reason returned to Moila without wanting to be known?
I remembered that, according to Archie McLaren, the family had used a boat, and done all their shopping in Tobermory, avoiding the islanders.
An echo of Parsons' geological jargon last night sounded in my head.
I had heard the word ‘garnet’.
Perhaps he really was a geologist.
Perhaps he had discovered a seam — did you have a seam of garnet?— and had come back secretly to exploit it, and…
This was Hugh Templar taking over.
Nonsense.
Forget fantasy and look at fact.
Take Parsons again.
He had — possibly — lied about his name.
He had certainly lied about seeing the cottage light.
if he had been chasing his flying tent up from the machair on the west of the island, he might have got up as far as the bogland near the lochan, but surely the light from my cottage would not be visible until he had followed the road downhill past the curve and almost into Otters' Bay.
Hence, his excuse for coming to the cottage was also a fake.
Now take Ewen Mackay.
Maybe he had not lied, and in any case what he had said about the cottage being his home could easily be checked.
He had known where the coal was kept, and the Calor gas poker, and he had had a key — which, now that I thought about it, I should certainly have asked him to hand over to me…
But there was that unmistakable and disquieting reaction to the knocking on the door, and then the pointless deception which followed; pointless, because he must have known he could not get away with it.
Had it merely been a quick try at getting rid of the intruder?
But why?
Then there was the rather sharp bout of questioning, which had had, on both sides, a sort of wariness about it.
And finally, the note this morning, with its suggestion of a truce between the two men.
I stopped in mid-stride, so suddenly that an oystercatcher, which had been guddling among the reeds at the edge of the lochan, took off seawards with a screamed complaint.
Supposing, just supposing, that Mackay and Parsons had arranged to meet at the cottage.
The storm had been fortuitous, an extra.
Mackay, key in hand (where had he really got it from?), had made his way to Otters' Bay, and had walked straight in, assuming the cottage to be empty.
I found it hard to believe that, even if he had been out of the country, his family could have moved away without his knowing.
Unless, of course, they had not wanted him to know, and had seen to it that he had no address for them.
Which would say certain things about Ewen Mackay.
So, for some reason impossible to guess at, he and Parsons had arranged to meet.
It was I, the unexpected tenant of the empty cottage, who was the joker in the pack.
I had made them welcome, accepted their nonsensical stories because it didn't matter one way or the other, and then gone obligingly off to bed and left them to their meeting…
Something moved on the farther side of the lochan, something hulky and dirty white, caught in the bog myrtle, where it shifted and billowed in the breeze.
John Parsons' tent?
Could there have been that much truth in what he had said?
I dumped the carrier with my groceries down beside the road, and set off across the moor.
Not that it mattered (I told myself again) one way or the other, but now that my brother's arrival was postponed at least until Monday, it would be good to have something of the story checked.
And of course, if the object did happen to be the flyaway tent, its owner would need it back.
It was not a tent, nor indeed any sort of camping equipment.
It was an old plastic sack, probably used by a farmer and left outside to blow away.
And it could have blown a good distance in last night's gale.
I regarded it with distaste, decided that the rain would have washed it reasonably clean, then dragged it clear of the bog myrtle and looked around me for somewhere to dump it out of sight.
A fox's earth, long abandoned, and not taken over by  birds or rabbits, provided the dumping-ground.
I stuffed the sack down out of sight, and straightened, to see that my search had brought me above a cleft in the moorland through which a glimpse of the western machair could be seen.
It was a lovely stretch of shore, white sand and sheep-grazed turf backed by a stretch of flat, flowery meadowland.
Even from where I stood I could see the white and yellow of dog-daisies and hawkear blowing in the sea-breeze like coloured veils over the green.
No sign of a tent, but over to the left, just showing, was a clump of trees thickly planted and apparently sheltered from the worst of the weather, and, standing up from among them, the chimneys of a house.
The Hamilton house, presumably.
Taigh na Tuir.
A big house, with no smoke rising from the chimneys.
And — I walked another few yards and craned my neck to see — no sign of life in the little bay beyond, with its boat-house and jetty.
Across from the bay, beyond a narrow stretch of water, was a small island, an islet, rather.
It was long and low, humped at the northern end and tapering to the south into flat rocks washed by the sea.
Just below the hump I could make out — I have good eyes — the dark outline of what must be the ruined broch, and beside that, in its shelter, was a speck of bright, alien orange.
A tent.
He had found his tent and had already moved w the broch island.
The oystercatcher had come back, and was wheeling noisily over the lochan.
‘So what?’
I said to it.
So what indeed.
Whatever the facts, both men had gone about their affairs, and would presumably not trouble me again.
Forget it; get back to something more reasonable in the way of fantasy fiction.
Another chapter today would see  me nicely into the second half of my story, and this evening I would talk to Crispin and get things sorted out with him.
And tonight…
Well, I had noticed that on both front and back doors of the cottage there were stout and serviceable bolts.
As I squelched my way back round the lochan's edge towards the road, I saw the diver.
Unmistakable, even though I had never seen one before; a big bird, brown and grey with a red throat, low in the water, where the wind-rippled surface managed to camouflage it in the most extraordinary way.
When I had passed the lochan earlier, there had been no sign of it.
It must be nesting, and now my near approach had driven it off the nest.
The thought had hardly occurred to me before the diver, with a weird-sounding cry, left the water in a noisy take-off, and flew seawards in alarm.
And there, two paces in front of my feet, was the nest.
Two huge eggs, greenish-brown like the sedge, with a matt surface mottled like moss, lay in a shallow depression on the very edge of the loch, with a distinct sloping runway leading to the water, so that when alarmed the bird could slide invisibly off the eggs into a deep dive, to surface many yards away from its well-camouflaged home.
I glanced around me, quickly.
No one in sight; of course there wasn't.
No one to see my interest in this spot on the lochan's edge.
I stooped quickly and laid the back of a gentle finger against one of the eggs.
It was warm.
She must just have got off, and she was probably watching me from somewhere high above the distant sea.
I turned my back on the lochan and walked a dozen paces away from the edge before heading back towards the road.
A sound from overhead made me look up.
The diver went over, high.
I reached the road, picked up my groceries, and left her in peace.
I did not see Mrs McDougall that evening.
There was a girl in charge of the place, a child of perhaps twelve, who told me that her name was Morag, and that her auntie had stepped out on a visit, but had said the young lady from Camus na Dobhrain might be there to use the telephone, and please to go through.
For what it was worth I asked her if she knew of a Ewen Mackay who might once have lived at Otters' Bay, but she shook her head
‘No.’
She spoke with an accent so soft that it sounded as if an h was attached to each consonant.
‘Not at all.
There was a Mr and Mrs Mackay living there, yes, but they moved away, right to the mainland.
My auntie would know.
Alastair he was called, though, Alastair Mackay, that was gardener to old Mrs Hamilton at the big house.’
‘Did they have any children?’
She hesitated, then nodded, but doubtfully.
There had been — yes, she was sure there had been a boy, a long time ago, that would be.
She had heard tell of him, but it was when she was very small, and she did not remember him.
He would be a grown man now.
She did not remember his name.
Ewen?
It might have been Ewen.
Her auntie would know…
I supposed that it did endorse part of Ewen Mackay's story.
Not, of course, that it mattered…
I would ask Mrs McDougall next time I was here.
On which fine piece of mental self-deceit I thanked Morag and went to the telephone.
I got straight through to my brother at the number Ruth gave me, of the hospital in Carlisle.
‘What's this about another X-ray?’
I asked him.
‘Have you had the result?
Is it really only a sprain?’
‘That's all, but it was — still is — badly swollen, and they insisted, quite rightly, on sending me here to have another look taken at it.
The first X-ray showed what might have been a crack.
But it's all clear.
No crack.
They've given me an elbow crutch, and I can make the journey perfectly well now, if I thought the blasted train would stay on the lines, but there's not much I could do once I got to Moila, is there, if I can't walk?
What's it like?’
‘I think it's lovely.
The cottage is tiny, but it's got all we need, and there's just enough island to explore without transport.
I'm afraid there's none of that — transport, I mean — except Archie McLaren's Land-Rover, the one that carries you from the harbour.
You'd be a bit stuck.
But would it matter?
You'd be away from the job and the telephone, and you'd be resting.
Unless — do you have to go back to a hospital with it, or anything?’
‘No, no.
There's nothing I can't deal with myself.’
‘Well, Archie has a boat, and he says he can take us out to the bird islands, and I'm sure we could get him to take you somewhere in the Land-Rover where you can fish.
Of course, if it's really painful, forget it, I'll be fine, and I'm writing, and if it gets a bit unlively I could perhaps find somewhere else-’
‘No, why should you?
I was only doubtful because of spoiling your holiday.
I can manage perfectly well, and I'd hate to miss Moila.’
‘It would spoil my holiday far more if you didn't come,’ I said.
‘So risk the train, will you?
And do you want me to ring the Oban hotel and tell them what's happened and change the booking?
You have?
That's great…
It really is lovely here, and — well, I didn't want to over-persuade you, but I found a red-throated diver's nest today, perfectly lovely, two eggs, and I didn't bring a camera.
Didn't think we'd need two, and mine's not nearly as good as yours, even if I could take half as good a picture.’
‘And you don't call that over-persuading?
I'll: be there,’ said my brother, ‘Expect me on Monday's ferry, then.
If I know anything about it, I'll be well and truly mobile by then.’
‘Physician, heal thyself,’ I said, laughing, and rang off, with a lightened heart.
Next morning was fair and sunny, with a breeze, but I journeyed duly into outer space, to tackle the problems of my party on Terra Secunda.
Their difficulties were rapidly threatening to become too much for them, and consequently for me, too.
In those circumstances I have always found it wise to abandon effort and leave the subconscious mind to sort things out while the conscious mind does something quite different.
Goes for a walk, for example, and takes a look at the Hamilton house and that delectable stretch of milk-white sand bordering the machair.
I followed the cliff path which led steeply up out of Otters' Bay and then westward over the headland for something less than half a mile, to bring me in sight of  the bay I had seen yesterday.
Just inland from this, against its background of sheltering trees, stood the house.
A high dry-stone wall enclosed the land round it for some four or five acres, and inside this enclosure were more trees, oak and fir and beech above the massed colours of rhododendrons in flower, with one big horse-chestnut in full bloom holding its creamy candelabra out across the wall.
A stone archway in the seaward wall spanned a tall ironwork gate.
Straight across from the house lay the broch islet.
Now, with the tide low, the causeway connecting the islet with Moila's mainland was high and dry, running across at the narrowest point of the channel.
It consisted of natural slabs of flattish stone which at some time in the past had been levelled by wedges, and ‘helped’ in places by concrete, to form a crossing-place.
But time and tide and neglect had eaten away at the structure so that even at low tide, with the slabs fully exposed, crossing would be tricky.
To either side of this causeway was a tumble of half-exposed rocks, glossy with black seaweed,.
where the water rose and fell, barely stirring the weed.
Apart from this crossing-point the channel seemed, even at this stage of the tide, to be fairly deep.
Deep enough, at any rate, for a boat to get in to the boat-house which was tucked in under the cliff at the southern end of the bay, below the path where I stood.
Beside the boat-house a jetty thrust out into the water, and from this a weedy, once-gravelled path led along above the beach to the stone archway which was the garden gate of Taigh na Tuir.
I made my way down into the bay.
That alone would have been worth the scramble round the cliff path.
I had never seen anything like it before, a crescent of dazzling  white, where a million pearly shells had been pounded and smashed by the Atlantic swells into fine sand, marked only by the tides, and above the tide-marks by the myriad criss-crossing prints of sea-birds.
It was not to be resisted.
I sat down and took off my shoes and socks — I was wearing slacks and trainers — and then walked across the bay, luxuriating in the feel of the fine warm sand under my bare feet.
I went right down to the sea's edge, but the water was too cold for pleasure, so I retreated to the dry level and sat down to brush the sand off my feet and put on my shoes again.
This done, I stood for a moment looking across at the broch islet.
Directly across the channel was another, bigger bay, a long curving stretch of lovely white sand, with above it a sweep of green turf and bracken rising as far as the dark circle of the broch.
The whole place was alive with the wings and calls of sea-birds.
It was very tempting, but it would be stupid to go across now, until I knew more about the tides.
I wondered where John Parsons was; looking for his garnet-studded ‘intrusion’, whatever that was, on the other side of the island?
I could see the tent from here, pitched in a hollow not far from the broch wall.
The entrance flaps were shut.
I trod up through the seaweed at the edge of the beach, then followed the path to the gate in the garden wall.
I peered through the bars.
Inside the grounds the path continued, curving up between the overgrown rhododendrons in the direction of the house.
I hesitated.
There would presumably be a driveway of sorts leading from the back of the house to the road and my easiest way home.
To try and get to it by going round outside the garden wall meant ploughing through waist-high nettles and clumps of bramble.
So…?
So I opened the gate and went through.
There had never been much of a garden, only the rhododendrons flowering red and pink and lilac, where bees droned happily.
Beyond the wild-tangle of flowers I could just see the upper storey of the house, grey stone with tall sashed windows and a roof of grey slate with its unsmoking chimney stacks.
There were curtains in the windows.
The place must still be furnished, then.
I tried to remember when Mrs McDougall had said the old lady had died.
February?
And Archie McLaren had told me that the house would probably have to be sold, so it was to be supposed that at any time now people might be coming to look at it.
It was the subconscious mind taking over again.
I found myself half-way up the path between the rhododendrons before the conscious mind caught up with the fact that, though there had been a padlock on the garden gate, the gate had been unlocked.
So, surely there could be no objection to someone taking a look at a place that would soon be up for sale anyway?
I crossed a lawn that badly needed cutting, and started on a cautious tour of the Hamilton house.
I doubt if there are many normal women who can resist looking at houses.
I believe, in fact, that when a house is up for sale more than half the people who look over it are not prospective buyers, but merely ladies who cannot resist exploring someone else's house.
I had never done that, but I was not immune.
I trod carefully up to the most important-looking window, and peered in.
The drawing-room.
A rather lovely fireplace, with a hideous  overmantel .
Faded carpet and curtains.
Typical family paintings of dim-looking, not-quite-Raeburns, and improbable horses and dogs.
Round tables with skirts, their surfaces smothered with photographs.
Sagging arm  chairs with faded covers, not too clean.
A quite awful vase in one corner, full of dried pampas grass.
The dining-room.
More portraits, if possible duller still, and lightened by a couple of horrendous still-lifes, dead hares and poultry, staring eyes and blood congealing from beaks and nostrils; just the thing to give one an appetite for meals.
The gun-room…
But enough of that.
It was a very ordinary, rather pleasant, Highland country house; originally a shooting-lodge and of no great size or importance for the day when it was built.
And meant only for summer and early autumn; no heating apparatus except the open fires, and a kitchen rather on a par for mod cons with my cottage at Otters' Bay.
The only thing that was quite extraordinary was what I found when I got as far as the back premises.
The back door was standing open.
My excuse, a thin one, is still the subconscious mind.
I did knock at the door, then, when there was no response, took a couple of steps through into a passage floored with stone slabs and containing nothing but some buckets of coal and a rack of ancient clothes, gardening clobber by the look of it.
In spite of the open door, the place smelled of damp and disuse.
The kitchen door was on my right.
I pushed it open.
Emptiness again; somehow a kitchen, which is the warm heart of any house, is the worst place of all when it is disused.
The house is dead without the warmth and the smells of cooking and the pulse of daily living.
In the stuffy silence the sound of the cold tap slowly dripping  was almost cosy; a substitute heart-beat.
Even so, my presence felt like an intrusion.
But as I turned to go something caught at my attention.
A key-rack just beside the doorway, with keys hanging there, labelled.
One hook was empty; the hook labelled ‘C. na Dobhrain.’
Otters' Bay.
For no good reason, that settled it, by which I mean that what conscience I had was put to sleep by sheer, raging curiosity.
Could my night-time visitor have called in here to pick up the key he had shown me, and left the back door open at the same time?
Had he put into this bay first, then come up past the house and, finding it open, taken the key?
But why should he trouble?
If he had really only been looking for shelter and a place to doss down for the night, why look further than this?
Why make the wet and stormy trek to Otters' Bay?
Even if he had thought that his parents were still there — which I found hard to believe — he could have visited them in the morning.
Somehow, this seemed to justify what I had done.
If there was indeed any mystery about Ewen Mackay's visit to my cottage, the clue to it might well be here, in the house he had claimed to be familiar with.
More, he had hinted, unless I had misread him, at a connection with the family.
Perhaps he even considered himself to have some kind of claim to the place?
At least, then, the note that had been left for me ('See you around? ') gave me some excuse for trespassing now.
I went on down the passage, towards the green baize door that closed the back premises off from the gentry's quarters, pushed the door open, and trod tentatively into the front hall.
This was darkish, lighted only by the stained glass fan-window over the shut front door.
To one side stood a heavy oak table piled with the usual clutter — magazines, newspapers, a couple of heavy electric torches, some anonymous boxes.
Opposite this another, smaller table held gloves, a sou'wester, and a gardening-basket crammed with implements.
There was a brass stand holding walking-sticks, and a dark oak settle where someone had thrown down a Barbour coat and an old anorak.
Some pairs of boots and wellingtons were lined up beside it, and on the wall, above a crude, oil landscape that seemed meant to depict the moor where the diver nested, was a long rack, presumably meant for fishing-rods.
The impression of a house where the occupants had just walked out for a stroll in the garden was very strong.
My presence there seemed, suddenly, an intrusion; my curiosity, if not an outrage, at any rate no excuse for going any further.
I turned to go out the way I had come.
But even as I turned, I heard something.
A sound from upstairs.
The creak of a door.
My heart gave a jump, then resumed something like its normal beat as I registered the fact that even in an empty house there were draughts, and doors moved and creaked with no one to push them.
But I did make for the baize door a little more quickly than on my way in, and in the semi-darkness stumbled over one of the wellingtons, kicking it half-way across the floor.
I only saved myself from falling by clutching at the arm of the oak settle.
Something came down the stairs like an avalanche.
A pair of powerful arms seized me from behind, jerking me upright and off my feet.
Clutched tightly to the breast of a Shetland sweater I took breath and screamed.
The arms, suddenly nerveless, dropped me, and the Shetland sweater retreated smartly.
I fell onto the settle, hit my elbow on the carved arm-rest, and drew in my breath to scream again.
‘Don't!’ said John Parsons hastily.
‘Please don't!
I'm terribly sorry.
I thought it was — I didn't realise it was a girl.’
I wouldn't dream of-Oh, it's you.’
I abandoned the scream.
I rubbed my elbow, regarding him thoughtfully.
He towered over me, looking anxious, rather flustered, and not in the least dangerous.
I said: ‘Well, who says it first?’
‘Says what?’
‘’ What are you doing here?’
So what are you doing here?
I know you found your tent, but perhaps you thought this might be a more comfortable bivouac than my cottage?
Is that it?’
‘Not quite.
I — actually, the tent was never lost, but —’
‘Where's Ewen Mackay?
Is he sleeping here too?’
‘No.
Why should he be?
Then he isn't with you?’
‘No, he is not.’
Because I felt both guilty and embarrassed, I reacted sharply.
‘For goodness’ sake, surely you didn't fall for all that nonsense of his the other night?
I'd never seen him before in my life!
I think he must have taken the key for my cottage from the board by the kitchen door.
It seems to be true that the cottage used to be his home, but you don't carry a big old-fashioned key like that around in your pocket for years, so I don't see how else he got it.
If he broke in — but then why come to the cottage at all?
And why should you?
Did you break in here, too, or has the back door been unlocked the whole time?’
He answered only one question out of this barrage, and it was enough.
‘Neither,’ he said.
‘I had a key.’
‘You had a key?’
The repetition sounded stupid.
But the situation was itself a repetition of Wednesday night's  adventure.
‘You, too?’
I took a breath.
‘But perhaps — did you have an order to view, or something?’
‘Not quite.
The house is mine.’
‘Oh, no!
Not again!’
I must have sounded, if possible, more stupid than ever.
‘Yours?’
He smiled suddenly.
‘Yes, mine.
I'm not sure how long wills take to prove, but I was Aunt Emily's only living relative, and it's always been understood that the place would come to me.
In any case, someone had to come and try to sort things out.
I'm Neil Hamilton.’
I managed to stop myself from repeating that, too.
‘I see.
Well, thank you for telling me, Mr Parsons.’
He said, apologetically: ‘I'm sorry about that, but there were reasons.
Why don't we go somewhere more comfortable and discuss them?
I do owe you that.
In here?’
He opened the drawing-room door and ushered me through.
He crossed to the french window and pushed it open.
Seen in this light, and in the light of what he had now told me, I studied him afresh.
He was tall, and looked sunburned, as if he had spent time recently in a climate far from the Hebrides.
Not handsome, but nice-looking in a way I had usually rather deprecated, if not despised: not the lean and craggy looks that I had always admired, but a blunt-featured face with a wide mouth, dark eyes tilted slightly down at the outer corners, and an untidy thatch of brown hair of which a couple of locks fell over a broad forehead, and were from time to time irritably brushed back.
I saw that he was, in his turn, studying me.
He would be seeing, I thought, an unremarkable young woman, rather too solemn, with  thought-lines developing too fast between level dark brows; dark-brown hair and grey eyes; tolerable nose and mouth, and — my only real claims to beauty — a good figure and a fine, fair skin.
‘So I take it that you're just here for a holiday, on your own, Miss Fenemore?
Or do you prefer Ms?’
‘Sorry?’
‘Do you prefer Ms?
If that is how one says it?’
‘It sounds just like a goose hissing.
Unpronounceable — and unnecessary, unless you don't want people to know you're not married.
Which I'm not, but I still hate it.’
‘You sound a bit fierce.
I wasn't sure.
Some ladies insist.’
‘Not this one.
Actually, if you could say it was short for ‘Mistress’, which is rather nice, and very correct in Scotland…
I'd certainly settle for that.
Or, well, ‘Rose’ would be the easiest, wouldn't it?
Sorry, don't tell me, I know.
I'm being priggish.
But I like words, and that's a non-word if ever there was one.’
‘Well, it's a good hobby-horse.’
‘Hobby-horse nothing.
It's my job.
I teach English at Cambridge.
Haworth College.
And yes, this is just a holiday.
My brother was to have come with me; he's a doctor working in Petersfield, and he's a dedicated bird-watcher and photographer.
He was to have joined me this week, but his train met with an accident, so he's been detained for a few days with an injured ankle.
He's coming over as soon as he can.
Monday, I hope.
That's all about me.
Your turn, Mr Hamilton-Parsons.’
‘Oh, well.
The Parsons bit was a not very inspired lie.
You saw it, didn't you, when you got up to go upstairs?
The postcard on the mantelpiece?’
‘Yes.
But the point is, why?’
‘I couldn't give my own name, till I found out what that  fellow was up to.
I should have thought up something better on the way over, but no one could think in that wind.
It was all I could do to keep my feet.’
‘So you knew he was ‘up to’ something?
You mean you knew from the start that he had no connection with me?’
‘No, no.
I did take you for a couple staying there together, and normally I would have retreated smartly and come back here again, but for what had already happened.
Look, why don't you sit down and make yourself comfortable?
I'd better start at the beginning, and it's a long story.’
I did as he suggested.
He stayed on his feet by the window.
‘I'm Neil Hamilton, as I told you, and Mrs Hamilton was my great-aunt.
I'm a geologist — that bit was true — and until recently I've been working in Sydney.
Then I heard about Aunt Emily's death.
The end came rather suddenly, so I couldn't have got back in time to see her, but I flew over as soon as I was free, to see what had to be done.
There's no one else.
I was very fond of her when I was a child, and used to spend most of my holidays up here with her — my father was in the Consular Service, so my parents spent a lot of their time abroad.
But latterly I've been here very little; in fact it must be at least fifteen years since I stayed here for any length of time…
Yes, I had my fourteenth birthday here.
Uncle Fergus gave me a gun, I remember.
He still had hopes of me, but I'm afraid I never enjoyed killing things.
Still don't.’
He smiled.
‘He'd have been ashamed of me.
Not the ideal Scottish laird at all.’
As he spoke, he had been wandering round the room, picking up photographs, looking at books, standing in front of the pictures; a sort of half-abstracted and  apparently unemotional tour down Memory Lane.
I brought him back to the matter in hand.
‘And what brought you to my cottage in the middle of the night, with that story about your tent blowing away?
In fact, why a tent at all?
All those lies for Ewen Mackay before you'd even met him?’
He turned back to me.
‘Yes, we come to that.
They were lies, but as it happens I had met him before.
Many years ago, when we were boys.
If you remember, he half-recognised me.
I had already recognised him, but fifteen years or so, boy to man, is a big change, and I doubt if he got it.
In fact I'm sure he didn't.
We talked late that night, and he would surely have said something.’
‘I see.
Or rather, I don't, yet.
Are you telling me that because you recognised him you had to put on that charade?
That you had some reason to distrust him?’
He nodded.
‘As a boy he was — well, shall we just say undependable?
But it wasn't that.
I had my lies ready before I ever recognised him.
I'd seen him earlier that night, here at the house, behaving in a way that made me very anxious to find out what he was doing here on Moila.’
‘Here?
You were here then?
Everyone said the place was empty.’
‘It was.
I'd just arrived, and I hadn't been up to the village yet, or seen anyone.
Still haven't, if it comes to that.’
‘How did you get here?’
‘I have a boat.
Hired.
Aunt Emily sold the one that was here; she had no use for it latterly.
I came across from Oban — made a run for it, with the weather worsening all the time, but got here safely and made straight for our bay.
Put the boat into the boat-house and made the doors  fast, then came up to the house.
I'd been to see my great-aunt's solicitors in Glasgow and they gave me the keys.
I'd bought all I needed in Oban, so I just came up here and got myself settled in.
It was pretty late and I was tired, so I found my old room and went straight to bed.
It was well after midnight, getting on for one o'clock, when I went to open the bedroom window, and saw someone coming up through the garden from the bay.’
He stopped prowling at last, and dropped into one of the easy chairs facing me.
‘Of course at first I just thought it was someone from a boat that had been driven in by the weather.
You remember that night was pretty dark, so I couldn't have seen if there was a boat tied up at the jetty.
The chap had a torch.
Coming to ask for shelter, I thought, though why he couldn't sleep in his boat…
As I said, it's quiet down there in the channel, even in a storm.
That made me wonder what he wanted, so I stood and watched.
He got as far as the lawn, just out there, and then he stopped and stood, seemingly just staring at the house.
That seemed odd, too, in all that rain.
Anyway, I came downstairs.
The front door was still locked and bolted — I'd only used the back one since I'd got here — and the keys were out the back, so I came in here to open these french windows.
I didn't put any lights on, and when I got into this room I was thankful I hadn't.
I found him trying the window.’
‘Well,’ I said reasonably, ‘in that storm, and if he thought the house was empty-’
‘I know.
I thought so, too.
But he didn't just try the handle.
He had some kind of tool, and he was trying to lever the window open.
I stood there like a fool, watching him.
Somehow one isn't prepared for that kind of situation…
Then I thought, well, I'll have to tackle him  somehow, so the best way, rain or no rain, was to go out the back way and take him from behind.’
‘He had a gun,’ I said.
That startled him.
‘Had he indeed?’
‘I think so.
But go on, please!’
‘I'm not exactly a man of action — that kind of action.
Who is, except in television series?
There used to be guns in the house, of course, but it never occurred to me to look if they were still there.
But I must have felt the need for some support, because I found I'd grabbed hold of one of my hammers — a geologist is always armed with a hammer — and when I got through to the back of the house he was there already, at the kitchen window.’
‘Good heavens!
So?’
‘I'm not quite sure what might have happened then, but for some reason he gave up.
He could have forced the window in time, anyone could, but he seemed suddenly to think better of it.
One moment he was there on the sill, and then suddenly he was gone.
I ran upstairs to see what I could, and there he was, torch and all, running down the garden and then dodging his way up to the cliff path, and fast, as if he knew exactly where he was going.
Of course I knew the path led to the Camus na Dobhrain, and the lawyers had told me that the cottage was let to a girl, so I wondered why he was headed there.
I mean, there was nowhere else he could have been going.
So I decided to follow along and see what was going on.’
‘But you had a duffel bag…
Was that just scene-painting to go with your story about the tent?’
‘More or less.
I have got a tent here, as it happens, because I want to work on Eilean na Roin — that's Seal Island, where the broch is — and the tides are awkward, so  I need a base there.
I took the tent across next morning.’
‘I know.
I saw it.
But surely you weren't really here as a student?
If you'd met Ewen Mackay then-’
‘He'd have recognised me now, of course.
Yes, that was a lie, too.
Not the igneous intrusion — that's there all right; a colleague of mine told me about it — and I did intend to work there while I was here in Moila.
Something to do while the estate business is being settled.’
‘And did you bring the hammer, too, where you came chasing over to my cottage?’
‘Er — I hardly remember.
I don't suppose I did.
And then, of course, when he opened the door to me, I recognised him.
And since he obviously hadn't recognised me, I didn't want to connect myself with the house, until I'd found out what his game was.’
‘And mine??
‘Well, yes.
And yours.’
I smiled.
‘Fair enough.
But whatever your motives for coming over, I'm glad you did.
If he was really up to no good the situation might have turned awkward — though as it happens he was perfectly civil, and I wasn't nervous.’
‘I could see that.
And that made me wonder if you were in it, too, and he'd had a rendezvous at the cottage.
I found out next morning that his boat was in Halfway House, but when I first saw him I had no idea he was a Moila man, and it didn't occur to me that he would know the mooring there.
I just assumed he was making for Otters' Bay.’
A pause, while he seemed to be studying the pattern of the carpet.
Then he looked up at me.
‘What reason did he give you for coming all the way over to Otters' Bay when he could perfectly well have slept in his boat?’
‘Oh, that the cottage had been his home, and he said  — or pretended — that he didn't know his people had moved away.
I'm sure it was true that he didn't know the place was let to me ‘
He was silent for a while, frowning at the prospect, from the window, of the neglected garden.
Well, I still can't imagine what his game is, and I can't say that I like it.’
‘When the pair of you went off to find your tent, what happened?’
‘Nothing much.
We made a token search for it on the way back to the bay, but then he went straight to his boat, and it's gone, and I've no idea where to.
No sign of him anywhere near you since then?’
‘None.
So what happens now?’
‘Nothing, let's hope.
I honestly don't see what's to be done except wait and keep our eyes open.
Nothing's happened to justify reporting to the police.
The man did nothing, after all, except shoot a line to you, and if it's a crime to wander round an empty house on a wild night, trying the windows, well…’
‘I take your point.
Nobody's going to listen.
Just one other detail; the key of my cottage.
I don't believe he's been carrying a huge old-fashioned thing like that around ever since he left.
I see there's a place on your key-rack by the back door for the cottage key, and it's missing.
Unless you took it-?’
He shook his head.
‘Then if Ewen Mackay took it, that wasn't his first visit to this house.
He'd been here before, and-’
'— And left the french windows open so that he could get in again!
You're right!
I did find the window open, and locked it myself because of the way it was rattling in the wind.
I thought nothing of it, just that whoever closed the house up had overlooked it.
So that could be it.
He came back, and when he found the place locked up again, he got a scare, or he just decided to play it safe, and made off.’
‘He did tell me he'd been to the house,’ I said.
‘He made out that he'd gone to take a nostalgic look at it, and of course he never said he'd tried to get in, or that he'd been before…
I must say I thought at the time that it was a pretty rough night to choose for a sentimental journey…
He did throw out a hint-’ I stopped.
‘Yes?
About what?’
‘No.
It was — well, personal.
Nothing to do with this.’
‘Till we know what ‘this’ is,’he said reasonably, ‘everything may be to do with it.’
‘I suppose so.’
‘So go on, please.
What did he hint at?’
‘Honestly I doubt if it matters, and I don't want…
Oh, all right.
He hinted that he might actually be connected with your family.
At least that's what I thought he was trying to convey.’
To my relief, he laughed.
‘That figures.
Great-Uncle Fergus's love-child, adopted, presumably for a consideration, by the gardener?
Don't worry, I've heard that one before.
And a few others even wilder.
He lived in a fantasy world of his own, even as a small boy.
He used to lie for no reason at all, as if he enjoyed it.
I was only a couple of years older myself, but I knew enough never to believe a word he said.
Did he shoot any more lines to you?
Tell you where he's been since he left Moila?’
‘Only that he'd been abroad.
I gathered that he'd been around in some pretty exciting — oh, do you mean he might have made that up, too?
He didn't actually sail round the Horn?’
‘I'll believe that when I've seen the boat's log,’ said Neil drily, ‘and only then after it's been checked by an expert.
And talking of checking, I'd better have a look through  the house to see if anything's missing.
The lawyers gave me an inventory.
Blast.
I had hoped to take my time over sorting out the house contents, but I'd better take a look straight away— at any rate for the movable stuff.
Tell me, how sure were you that he had a gun?’
‘Not sure at all.
It was just the way his hand flew to his pocket when you hammered at the door.’
‘Hm.
Then let's hope that was window-dressing, too.
Well…’
He set his hands to the chair arms, as if about to rise.
‘He's gone, so perhaps that's the end of the mystery.
When.
did you say your brother was coming?’
‘Monday, I hope.’
‘Then all we can do is keep our eyes open for the next couple of days, and you see that your doors are locked and bolted at night.’
‘I certainly will.
And you?’
‘As you saw, I've got my tent set up now on the island.
I'll work there, and I'll come back and sleep in the house.
If Ewen does come back, he'll see the tent, and if he thinks that ‘Parsons’ is safely out of the way, then whatever his interest is in the house, he'll no doubt show it.
And I'll be here to tackle him, hammer and all.’
‘And I?’
‘Stay safe at Otters' Bay, and wait for your brother.
Forget all this,’ he said, with decision.
‘I could try,’ I said.
He got to his feet then, and I followed suit.
The sun, slanting in through the window, showed up the faded shabbiness of the room, but outside the treetops were golden and the bees were loud in the roses.
The scents of the garden, blowing in through the open window, had removed the last trace of stuffiness from the room.
It smelt fresh and warm.
He moved to open the door to the hall.
‘So before I see you safely home, would you like a cup of tea?’
‘I'd love it.
But there's not the slightest need for you to see me home.’
‘Probably not.
But I'm going to,’ he said cheerfully.
His spirits seemed suddenly to have cleared.
The sun, perhaps.
‘This way, then, Mistress Fenemore.
But I forgot, you've already explored my kitchen, haven't you?
After you.’
After tea we walked down through the remains of the garden.
The path was ankle-deep in weeds, and to either side the overgrown rhododendrons, heavy with flowers, crowded in over the mosses and ferns of a mild damp climate.
Wild honeysuckle clambered everywhere, and the air was sweet with it.
‘We'll take a short cut.
The grass is quite dry,’ said Neil, and led the way through a gap in the rhododendrons into a broad, grassed walk leading directly down towards the sea.
At the end was an opening, now almost closed by the crowding trees and bushes, through which one could see the glimmer of the sea and the northernmost hill of the broch islet.
I was looking at this, and not at where I was putting  my feet.
I stubbed my toe, swore, tripped, and almost fell, to be saved by a robust grip above the elbow.
‘Are you all right?’
He held me while I stood on one leg to massage the injured toe.
‘It's so long since anything was done here, the place is cluttered with storm damage.
Is it bad?’
‘Not a bit.
It's okay now.
Thank you.’
He let me go, and I massaged my arm instead, where he had gripped me.
‘But you know how a stubbed toe hurts.
It must have been a pretty hefty bit of storm damage.
It felt like — yes, look at this!’
Deep in the grass, embedded like a sleeper in soft green, lay a naked figure.
Perhaps four feet high, a girl, daintily made, her body stained and streaked green with moss.
A marble girl, once white, blind eyes staring.
Somehow, you could see that the eyes were blinded by tears.
‘I tripped over her hand.
I hope I didn't damage it.
No, it looks all right.
Who is she?’
‘I think she's meant to be Echo.’
He stooped to push the grass and ferns back.
‘She stood there, can you see where the plinth is?
And there was water in a stone basin, but yes, that's broken, too.
I remember when she arrived, and was set up.
My great-uncle brought them from Italy; he was terribly proud of them.’
He laughed suddenly.
‘I'm no judge, but I believe they're quite good.
Dear old Uncle Fergus's one successful venture into the art world.
His taste in pictures was pretty awful.
You may have noticed.’
‘I wouldn't have said a word, but yes, I noticed.’
I was still looking down at the girl in the grass.
The breeze stirred the shadows over her, as if she breathed.
‘I'm not an expert, either, but I love Echo.
You said ‘them’.
Are there more?’
‘There were four.
There should be another across from  this, on the other side.
Yes, here it is, and still standing.’
He crossed the ride, pushing some of the strangling boughs aside, to show the other figure, which was in fact kneeling.
The stone basin was intact, and half-filled with black, dirty rain-water.
A marble boy, a youth, knelt over the water, gazing down.
‘Narcissus?’
‘I suppose so,’ he said.
‘I don't remember.
The others are along there, at the end of this walk.
My great-uncle made a little belvedere there, with that view of the sea and the Eilean na Roin.
I can't see them, though.
The trees grow at such a rate here that you can hardly even see the sea.’
He turned and stood looking back at the house.
In this sunlight the dilapidation showed up clearly, and the mess of the garden.
There was something in his face which made me say, gently: ‘’ But beauty vanishes, beauty passes, However rare, rare it be.’'
‘What's that?’
‘Walter de la Mare.
‘And when I crumble, who shall remember That lady of the West Country?
’ And heaven knows, there's beauty here and to spare, without anything men have built.’
He was silent, still looking at the house.
Eventually he said, as if to himself: ‘I'm glad I came back.’
Then, briskly, to me: ‘I sometimes think it's a mistake to have been happy when one was a child.
One should always want to go on, not back.
Poor old Echo.
Maybe whoever buys the house will set her up again where she can see Narcissus — and much good did that ever do the poor girl.’
‘Will you really sell?’
‘What else can I do?
I can't live here.’
‘I suppose as a holiday house it is a bit far from Sydney.’
‘Not Sydney.
I was going to tell you earlier, but somehow Ewen's misdeeds threw us off track — I'll be in Cambridge next term.
Living at Emma.’
‘Well, that's great!
Congratulations.
You'll be looking forward to it.’
‘Sure.
And more than ever now.’
He did not explain what he meant, but went on rather quickly to tell me about the appointment, and for a while we talked about Cambridge, and places and people that we both knew well.
He would be living in college at first— Emmanuel was his own college — but he would like, he said, to find a place of his own, preferably outside the town.
This brought us back rather abruptly to the present, and the house he already possessed.
It appeared that although Taigh na Tuir had not been formally put on the market, there had already been some interest shown.
A London agent, apparently acting for someone anxious for an island property, had made a good offer ‘sight unseen’, and Neil's solicitors (who knew the place and the difficulties involved) had strongly advised him to accept it.
Neil had taken their advice, and there had been the exchange of missives which, I gathered, served in Scotland as a binding contract.
‘Binding on me, that is,’ said Neil, ‘though the buyer, once he sees the property, may still withdraw.’
‘So there's still a chance you could keep it?’
He shook his head.
‘Not really.
How could I?
Even if I didn't have a job that keeps me at the other end of the country for most of the year, this sort of place couldn't provide a living.
Originally the family owned the whole island, which holds about four farms, but those have all been sold off now, and there's no land except the stretch from Otters' Bay to the other end of the machair.
And Eilean na Roin, of course.’
He shrugged, a gesture at once apologetic and dismissive.
‘But even if the estate was still intact, there's hardly a living in farming nowadays.
Or so I understand.
There certainly wouldn't be for me.
I don't know a tup from a gimmer.
Shall we go?’
When we reached the jetty we paused for a few moments to look across at the islet.
Gulls were wheeling over it, and the noise was incessant.
A different noise made itself heard, and there among the circling gulls, high up, a fighter plane among the domestic craft, tore a peregrine falcon.
‘She nests on the mainland cliffs,’ said Neil.
‘Ever since I remember there's been a peregrine on that cliff.
I tried to climb down to the nest once.
I was about eleven years old.
They caught me at it, luckily, before I'd gone over the edge.
Over there, see?
The white streaks high on the cliff.’
He was pointing northwards, to the cliffs towering beyond the machair.
I could just make out the spot he indicated.
I said, with reverence: ‘My God.’
He laughed.
‘Makes your blood run cold to think what small boys will do without a second thought.’
‘I don't suppose my brother will have any hope of a picture there, even from a boat and with a telephoto lens…
But if he can manage it, may I please take him over to the island to look at the birds there?
What is its name again?’
‘Eilean na Roin.
It means Island of the Seals.
They come ashore there to breed.
Go over by all means, but do watch the tides.
The crossing's only really safe for about two hours to either side of low tide.
You see that rock there, shaped a bit like a shoe?’
He pointed at a rock near the causeway.
‘When the sea gets to the base of that, the tide's already too high, and it comes in like a horse trotting, as they say.
You don't need my permission to go  over there anyway.
Didn't you know there's no law of trespass in Scotland?’
‘Not even in your house?’
He smiled.
‘That was a pleasure.
The whole visit has been a pleasure.
I'd have liked to prolong it by asking you to supper, but…’
A gesture finished it for him: the empty house, the deserted kitchen.
‘That was very nicely done,’ I said appreciatively.
‘Aren't you taking a risk, though?
I mean, I'm a don.
What makes you think I can cook as well as get stroppy about words?’
‘The fact that you came to Moila and took that godforsaken cottage — and that your brother agreed to come with you,’ said Neil cheerfully.
‘Besides, I saw eggs and cheese and all sorts of stuff in the cupboard when I spent the night there.
Do I take it that I'm invited, Mistress Fenemore?’
‘Well, of course, and for pity's sake stop reminding me about that.
My name's Rose.
Just tell me, though — failing our meeting this afternoon, what were you planning to do?
Suck gulls’ eggs?’
‘Come over to Otters' Bay again and beg for shelter.
What else?’
‘Considering you told me that you'd taken supplies on in Oban and that you managed perfectly well all of yesterday, and that your boat is.probably stiff with tins and even bottles-’
‘Bottles!
Now, that's a thought.
We'll collect a couple here and now…
And you might be right about the supplies.
Will you dine with me tomorrow, please?
And if your brother should happen to make it, bring him, too, of course.’
‘At the house?
Lights on, chimney smoking, and your lovely alibi wasted?
Had you forgotten your plan, Mr Parsons?’
‘Do you know, I had.
And how right you are.’
He sounded, suddenly, irritated.
‘And how absurd to think that there's any need for all this cloak and dagger stuff…
Yes, I'd forgotten.
All right, we'll give it another day or two, but I'm seeing you back home now, and don't try to talk me out of it.
I'm starving.
And for pity's sake call me Neil.’
‘All right.’
It was extraordinary, but suddenly we seemed to be on quite different terms.
‘All right, I'll feed you.
But only.
if you do get those bottles, and quickly.
I'm starving, too.’
‘Red or white?
And is it gin or sherry?’
He was at the boat-house door, taking a key from his pocket.
‘No, never mind.
I'll bring the lot.
And I promise to help with the washing up.’
Saturday morning, and once again a fair and breezy day, so fair that I decided to give myself a holiday from writing, and go straight after breakfast to pick up the supplies I would need for the weekend.
Mrs McDougall had promised to have milk and bread for me, and there might possibly be mail, brought over by the morning's ferry.
Neil had told me to try and forget about the ‘mystery’, and this proved surprisingly easy to do.
On such a morning, with the sky full of larks, and the banks beside the road stiff with foxgloves and wild roses, the odd events of Wednesday night seemed remote, and indeed little more than odd.
So I busied myself, as I walked, with plans for supper on Monday night, when I hoped that my brother would be here, and I had invited Neil to join us.
When I drew near the village I could see two girls sitting on the parapet of the little bridge.
They seemed to be watching me, and then one of them waved, and I saw that they were Megan Lloyd and Ann Tracy.
Ann, Megan's constant companion, was a complete contrast to the dark, rather intense Welsh girl.
She was a land agent's daughter from somewhere in Norfolk, tall and fair, with heavy gilt hair curling down over her shoulders, and a long, slim, slightly drooping body that had a certain elegance.
Her oval face, with its thick fair eye-brows, blue eyes, and high colour, and the small mouth with the slight droop there, too, looked deceptively gentle.
In fact I knew her for a tough-minded young woman with feminist leanings and rather more interest in student politics than would be helpful in her academic work.
At present, Ann led and Megan followed, but that would sort itself out in the long run.
Ann had a good brain, but Megan had it in her to be brilliant.
When the greetings and exclamations were over, they told me that they had been staying on Mull for a few days, and had just arrived on Moila, and were putting up at the post office with Mrs McDougall.
‘She told us where your cottage was, and we've got a map.
Not that you really need one on Moila.
We were planning to come down today and see you.’
That was Ann.
Megan put in quickly: ‘We knew you were on your own.
Mrs McDougall told us about your brother.
We're terribly sorry.
Is he badly hurt?’
‘No, no.
He says it's nothing, and he should know.
He's a doctor.
I've talked with him on the telephone and with any luck he should be over here on Monday.
I don't know how well he'll be able to get about, but we'll manage somehow.
I'd love you to see the cottage.
Were you thinking of visiting me this morning?’
‘Yes,’ said Ann, ‘and then Mrs McDougall said you'd be coming up here for your shopping, so we waited.’
‘And don't worry,’ said Megan, patting a haversack that lay beside her on the parapet.
‘We've got masses of food for a picnic, so you don't have to feed us.
We were going to say hullo to you, and then walk round to that little island — it's called Seal Island — I can't say the Gaelic name but Mrs McDougall told me that's what it means.
It's the one with the broch on it.
It looks as if there's a path over from your cottage, so perhaps we could walk round there and then come back to you for tea?’
‘Well, of course you may, but did you ask about the tides?
That's not a bridge that's marked on the map, it's a causeway that's covered most of the time.
I was down there yesterday, and I doubt if you'll be able to cross much before two o'clock.
Why not make sure?
I think I saw tide tables in the post office.’
While the girls studied the tide tables I bought my groceries.
There were no letters, and to my relief no messages either.
No news being good news, that meant Crispin on Monday.
I told Morag (Mrs McDougall was busy over the tide tables with Ann and Megan) then went out to wait for them.
It appeared that my guess about the tide had been near enough.
‘Low tide at 4.04,’ said Ann, ‘and we've been warned to leave not one second later than six, or be marooned all night.
Oh well, we'll just have to have our picnic on the mainland.
Did you say you were down there yesterday, Dr Fenemore?
What's it like?
There's a house marked, right beside the bridge — the causeway, I mean — so will there be people about?’
‘The house is empty, and the place is quite lovely.
I  was just too late yesterday to go across, but the islet looked marvellous.
There's quite a lot of the broch showing, too, almost the complete circle, with one very high bit where I'm told there are steps going up to what's left of the top level, with a view.’
‘It sounds terrific,’ said Megan.
Ann made a face.
‘You can have it.’
Then, to me: ‘We went to Orkney last summer, and she made me crawl in through a ghastly tunnel into some underground charnel-house.
Never again!
It's bad enough now, but it must have been really something when it was occupied.
Apparently they ate nothing but shellfish, and just dropped the shells on the floor when they'd finished.
You can imagine.’
‘Unfair to Celts,’ said Megan.
‘Racist.
We had middens, and-’
‘Yes, just outside the front door.
We saw those, too…’
Ann turned a laughing face to me.
‘Dr Fenemore, would you like to come with us?
We'd love you to, and you can tell Megan all about her wretched broch.
She's been reading them up for days.’
‘Yes, do!’
Megan joined her plea to Ann's, with such eager sincerity that I laughed and agreed.
‘I'd love to.
But Megan can do the lecturing.
I don't know the first thing about brochs.
Look why not come down to my cottage now, and we'll have lunch there — I never have much more than just a picnic myself — then we can go across this afternoon, and maybe take tea to have on the island?
But on one condition, that you stop calling me ‘Dr Fenemore’.
We're a long way from Cambridge now, and my name is Rose.’
We shared our resources for lunch — the girls' picnic sandwiches and a cold pie and some fruit I had bought that morning — and ate it comfortably in the cottage kitchen, with its grandstand view of the bay.
To our  delight we also got a grandstand view of the original owners of the bay — the otters.
An adult, presumably the female, came close inshore, followed by two young ones, and she seemed to be teaching them to fish, but after a few splashing sallies with no success she gave up, and dived away.
The pups slithered out onto the weedy boulders, not forty feet from the cottage window, and waited expectantly until she reappeared carrying a sizeable fish, which the two of them ate together, wrestling over it among the sea-tangle.
Then the three of them swam away into the deeper water under the headland.
‘They'll come back,’ I said comfortingly to the girls, who were lamenting that they had forgotten to bring a camera.
‘Surely they will.
This isn't called Otters' Bay for nothing.
And if they come when my brother's here, he'll get some marvellous shots of them, I promise you, telephoto lens, the lot, and I think he's got a video camera now, too.
He'll make prints for you.
Now,.
anyone for coffee?’
‘It is thought by some,’ said Megan, in a smooth lecturer's voice from which all trace of her faint Welsh lilt had vanished, ‘that the Scottish brochs may be an extension of the southern round-house culture, as exemplified in some sites of south-western England, but this seems unlikely, in view of-’
‘The Scots'll be pleased to hear that,’ said Ann.
‘But I'm not just enthralled, and I'm sure Dr-I'm sure Rose isn't either.’
‘Do I really sound like that?’
I asked.
Megan gasped and went scarlet.
‘It wasn't — I didn't-’ Then she saw me laughing and flopped her hands forward in a gesture of relief.
‘Of course you don't!
I was quoting, anyway.
I've been reading up on brochs, but when you're actually there it's really just the setting that's so marvellous, and trying to imagine the sort of life they lived.’
‘Raw shellfish for breakfast,’ muttered Ann.
She was ignored.
‘Weren't they really forts?’
I asked.
‘Defensive places?’
‘Yes.
They must have been the Iron Age equivalent of the mediaeval castle with the village and everything clustered round.
You can see where there could have been some buildings outside the main ring wall.
Hey, Ann, be careful!
Where d'you think you're going?’
Ann was already half-way up the primitive stairway, a series of flat stones jutting out from the inner surface of the highest section of wall.
‘To look at the view.
It's quite safe.
They're solid.
Come on up.’
And Megan went, as she always went where Ann led.
As she had said, there was really nothing left here but the view, and the girls were exclaiming over it now, talking eagerly, and pointing.
I left them to it and made my way along the inner side of the curving wall towards the doorway.
This high western section was remarkably well preserved, the stone slabs tightly laid, and the primitive stairway safe and solid.
But apart from this the broch wall showed only as a circle of raised turf, with a tumble of stones here and there.
Outside the circle a few mounds and stones were all that remained of the huddle of huts that had once crowded under the broch's protection.
Nettles grew everywhere, and ragwort, and the wall itself was thick with plants growing in every available gap.
I saw saxifrages and wild thyme and others that were unfamiliar to me.
There was a lot of some sort of stone  crop, which was pretty enough, but smelled at close quarters rather like cleaning fluid.
The girls were still on their perch.
I called out: ‘I'm going over to look at the birds,’ and left them to it.
From what Neil had told me over supper last night, I knew that the main bird colonies were on the western side of the island, where the cliffy coastline was cut into deep gullies, some of them sheer, and some filled with tumbles of massed boulders.
I walked across that way, over the crest of the island, easy walking on wind-swept turf which in a short distance sloped gently down towards the head of the cliffs, where clouds of sea-birds were already wheeling and screaming at my approach.
There was a long promontory thrusting out to sea, with a deep inlet to either side where the tide sucked and swirled among fallen rocks.
Above the water the cliffs rose sheer, but seamed with ledges and tufted with sea-pink and white campion.
The birds were there.
I had never seen a big sea-bird colony before.
The noise was horrendous, and the depths in front of me, filled with whirling wings, were frightening.
I backed a step or two and sat down.
Automatically — the writer's habit — I was trying to find the right word to describe the scene.
The one I came up with eventually was ‘indescribable’.
I gave it up and sat still, content to watch.
No rare birds; just the incredible numbers, and the variety.
Every niche of the craggy cliff held a nest, every hollow of the turfy ledge just below me had eggs or young gulls nestling there.
Further down I saw kittiwakes, with their gentle dark eyes and neat nests; below them, in deeper crevices, the ugly shags with their uglier young, showing the brilliant apricot gape of their beaks as they craned for food.
Here and there, unperturbed, solitary  among the crowd, the fulmars; and out there in the air, huge and unmistakable among the teeming thousands, those unpleasant predators the great black-backed gulls, with their cruel beaks and dead eyes like sharks' eyes, and their ineffable grace of flight.
The girls arrived then, breathless and laughing, and making sounds of disgust at the pervading smell and slime of birds' droppings.
‘And to think the stuff's valuable!’
That was Ann.
‘Guano at how many thousand pounds a ton…
What a job!
I wonder what they pay the chaps that shovel it up?
Why don't they make an industry of it here?
I'm sure there's just as much on these islands as there is in Peru or wherever…
No, don't tell me.
It's a bit vertical, isn't it?
Do you mind if we move back a bit?
I don't normally mind heights, but this is different.’
We retreated to the crest of the island, and sat down where the turf was clean and dry.
Megan unpacked the picnic tea and handed me a plastic cup.
Would you like a biscuit?
We've got ginger snaps and shortbread.’
Her eyes were shining.
‘What a wonderful place!
You'd think that with all those wings the island itself would start to fly!’
‘Like that one in Gulliver ,’ said Ann, and this started a discussion as to whether Scotland could engineer the flight of its islands to hover over England and starve her of sunlight and rain, like Laputa in Gulliver's Travels .
And this, in spite of some effort on my part to prevent it, led to the subject of science fiction, and where it had gone since the original efforts of Swift and Verne and H. G. Wells.
But fortunately there would be no embarrassment: when Megan did eventually mention Hugh Templar, it was in passing, and with respect, along with John Wyndham and Arthur C. Clarke and Ursula le Guin.
Ann had never heard of any of them, and refused to be interested in a genre which she dismissed contemptuously as ‘fairy tales’.
‘But fairy tales were topical and highly moral,’ began Megan.
I had to intervene there.
‘Puss in Boots ?
Jack the Giant Killer ?
All those murderous little thugs in Grimm who cheated and stole and lied their way to the princess and half the kingdom?
No, no, I know what you mean, and on the whole yes, you're right; your modern fairy-tale — I don't just mean what's miscalled ‘science fiction’, but all the stories that feed the modern hunger for the supernatural — they do tend to be more or less moral now.
Surprisingly enough, considering the norm of fiction.’
This steered them away, as I had meant it to, and they talked for a while longer, then fell silent, enjoying the warmth and the view.
Away to the west was the enormous glitter of the sea, where the small islands floated, weightless in the gently moving water.
Even Mull, with its mountains, looked insubstantial.
I could just make out Tobermory, looking like an Anne Redpath painting, cubes of white and blue and primrose and Venetian red, the houses and shops strung out along the bay, tiny in the distance.
‘Can't see your cottage from here,’ said Ann.
She had binoculars out and was.
looking the other way.
‘Can't really see that house, either; too many trees.’
She focussed nearer.
‘I wonder whose that tent is?
No sign of them.
Rather an odd place to camp, having to keep your eye on the tides the whole time.’
‘He's a geologist,’ I said.
‘I've met him.
And he has a boat.’
She lowered the glasses and glanced at her wrist.
‘And talking of watching the tides, it's nearly half past four, and  Mrs McD does a high tea at half six.
If we're to go home through the fields by the shore — what did you call-them, Meg?’
‘The machair.
Yes, we ought to go.
Can we get there along the shore from the causeway?
Can you see?
It looks as if there's a wall sticking right out over the shingle.’
‘That's the belvedere at the end of the House gardens,’ I said.
‘But there's a path round under the wall, and the machair starts just beyond the trees.’
‘Yes.
You're right.’
Megan had the glasses now.
‘That's fine, then, we'll go that way…
These are good glasses, Ann.
I can just about see that B & B we had in Tobermory, and — hang on a minute…
I wonder?
Yes, it could be…’
‘What?’
Ann and I spoke together.
‘The Stormy Petrel .
I'm sure it is.’
‘What ?’
My voice went high with excitement.
‘A stormy petrel?
Where?’
‘There.
You see?
That boat just out of Tobermory.
You take a look, Ann.’
She handed the binoculars over.
‘Is it?’
‘Wait a mo.’
Ann stood up and focussed.
‘I don't think — I can't quite — I honestly can't tell one boat from another, but it looks different.
I think it's just a fishing boat.’
I subsided on to the turf.
‘A boat…
I thought you were talking about a bird, though how you'd spot one of those little things…
Ah, well, skip it.
What boat did you think it was?
What's this Stormy Petrel ?’
‘Oh, it belongs to a terribly nice chap we met on Mull.’
Ann lowered the glasses.
‘No, he's not coming this way, so I can't get a close look, but I'm sure it's not him.’
‘Probably just as well, from what Mrs McDougall told us,’ said Megan.
‘Just what are you two talking about?
What has Mrs McDougall got to do with it?’
I asked.
‘It's nothing, really.
We met a chap the other day when we were staying near Dervaig, over the other side of Mull.
We found a tiny B & B in a heavenly spot, a lovely bay and hardly any people.
He had this boat called Stormy Petrel and he was living on it.
Well, we sort of got together a couple of times — he was an interesting sort of man — done a lot of sailing, single-handed stuff.
He'd even been round the Horn-’
‘Had he indeed?’
I sat up again, all interest now.
‘Sorry go on, Ann.’
‘He did have some really good stories,’ said Ann, ‘and the way he told them — well, he was fun, and we both liked him.
He took us out in his boat a couple of times, and he offered to take us over to the Treshnish Isles, but the forecast wasn't too good, so we never made it.
He said he was coming to Moila later on, on business.
He really was terribly nice, wasn't he, Megan?’
‘Well, we thought so.’
I looked from one to the other.
‘And Mrs McDougall told you something about him that changed your minds?’
Ann said, judicially: ‘What she told us doesn't alter the fact that he had bags of charm, but it seems that it's his — well, his stock-in-trade…
She knew him.
She said he was from Moila, and ever since he was a boy he'd been a sort of con artist, and could get away with anything-’
‘A pathological liar and a thief’ Generations of Welsh Methodists spoke in Megan's direct voice.
‘What she told us meant just that, even though he was only a boy when she knew him.
And as for sailing single-handed round the Horn-’
‘We'd have been lucky to get as far as the Treshnish Isles,’ said Ann.
‘And Mrs McD was a bit staggered when  we told her he was in Mull.
Apparently everyone was hoping that he wouldn't come back here, because his people moved out after he went to prison, and asked Mrs McD not to let him know their address.’
‘He went to prison ?’
I caught Megan's quick glance, but Ann seemed to take my sharp interest for granted.
‘Yes.
She says he must have been released early, and she's dreading him coming to see her and demanding his parents’ address.
His name's Mackay, so if you should comeacrosshim-'
‘Did she tell you what he'd been in prison for?’
‘No.
She rather skated away from the subject after a while.’
‘After she learned that you knew me and were coming down to see me?’
They were gathering their things together, ready to go.
They stopped and stared at me.
‘Well, ye-es, I suppose it could have been?
Ann?’
‘I think so.
Why, Rose?
What's it got to do with you?’
I got to my feet.
‘Nothing, I hope,’ I said cheerfully.
‘Only that the Mackays used to live in my cottage.
They moved away two years ago.
That's all Mrs McDougall told me.
Perhaps she didn't want me to worry about it.
In any case, she must have thought he was still safely locked away.’
‘Now that you know he's out — and around — will you mind being alone down there till Monday?’
‘No.
Now, don't worry about me.
If you want to get back for your high tea, you'd better go.’
‘Aren't you coming over now?’
‘Not straight away.
There's time yet.
Come and see me again, won't you, and thanks for the tea.’
‘Thank you for the lunch,’ they said.
‘It's been a lovely day.
Be seeing you!’
I watched them down to the causeway.
Once across, they turned and waved, then were soon out of sight beyond the belvedere.
After the girls had gone I sat for a little time, thinking.
What they had told me put quite a different complexion on the ‘mystery’.
I would have to seek Neil out and tell him that his old acquaintance was now, if not necessarily dangerous, at the least some kind of villain, who needed careful watching.
Neil had told me that he might spend the daytime hours between tides over here on Seal Island.
He was working at present on the rocks at the north-west point, which were only accessible at low tide, or from a boat.
I thought that, in spite of the noise of the birds, I would have heard a hammer going down there along the cliffs.
In any case, there was not enough time left for me to go that way to look for him.
I made my way down towards the causeway.
Neil's rock, shaped like a shoe, was still dry, the causeway exposed.
I crossed carefully-even at low tide the sea-weeds made the stones treacherous — then went to the boat-house window and peered in.
No boat.
The place was empty.
It was also full of daylight: the angle at which it stood to the water had made it impossible to see from the islet, as I now saw, that the doors were open.
Well, if he was out there hammering.the cliffs to bits, he would be back keeping watch on the house tonight, and tomorrow would be time enough, surely, to see him and warn him?
After all, he had known Ewen Mackay as a boy, and was aware of the reputation the latter had had even then.
The only new thing I could add was the prison bit, and Mrs McDougall had not told the girls anything about the offence of which Ewen had been convicted.
I thought about it as I walked up through the weedy garden.
Even if I had had pencil and paper on me, I would not have cared to leave a note where someone else might see it first.
So tomorrow would have to do, and the obvious move now was to see Mrs McDougall myself and get what might be called hard evidence from her.
She might be willing to give me, as the tenant of the former Mackay home, the details she had kept back from Ann and Megan.
For my part I would have to decide how much I could tell her without giving away Neil's presence on Moila.
I did not see how he could keep it secret for much longer, but that was his business.
However, after that visit to my cottage, Ewen Mackay was mine.
For form's sake, when I reached the house, I tried the french windows, then, round at the back, the door.
All  locked.
I went home to the cottage, had an early supper, then set off on the walk to the post office.
The shop was shut, but the house door stood open.
There was no sign of the girls, so I supposed they must have gone out again after their high tea.
I met Morag on the step.
She had been a message, she told me, and was it the telephone?
Her auntie was in, but I was to go at any time for the telephone…
Well, but her auntie would be pleased to see me.
Any time.
Please to come in…
Mrs McDougall was in her kitchen, not baking this time, though a pleasant after-smell of cooking pervaded the room.
She was sitting beside the Raeburn, knitting.
She made me welcome, and nodded me to a chair on the other side of the stove.
Morag unpacked her ‘message’, which was a large cauliflower from someone's garden, and a couple of pounds of tomatoes which had obviously, from the scent, been freshly picked, then, after we had admired them, left us.
‘Tomatoes already?’
I was actually fairly ignorant about the timing of tomatoes, or indeed, of any home-grown vegetables.
But in view of the admiration that had obviously been expected, it was the right thing to say.
‘My sister,’ said Mrs McDougall.
‘Duncan — that's her man — spends near all his time on the garden when he's not fishing.
They have a greenhouse, and he keeps adding to that — he's a handy man, is Duncan — and they are always earlier than anyone else around here.’
She reached the end of a row, paused for a moment to count, then turned her knitting and started again.
‘He comes  from Achiltibuie, and worked for a bit at the hydroponics there.
So now he's trying the same way here.
Have you been there?
I have not, but my sister worked in a hotel there for a time — that is where they met — and she says it is very remarkable.’
I said no, I hadn't, and what were hydroponics?
She told me, while the kettle sang gently on the top of the Raeburn, and the creamy Aran knitting grew perceptibly on her lap.
What she told me about vegetable growing meant very little to me, so I can barely recall now what was said, except that she would let me have some strawberries on Monday for my brother's supper, but I remember how easily the talk went, my unexpected visit serenely taken for granted, with no query as to why I had come.
Just a pleased acceptance of the company, and a chat while the kettle sang its way to the boil.
It boiled, and she laid the knitting aside and made tea.
From a tin in the cupboard scones were produced, and spread with butter and honey.
I accepted plate and cup, thanked her, and wondered how on earth, into a conversation which had ranged from hydroponics to knitting to the situation in the smaller countries of the Warsaw Pact to the best breed of wool for spinning tweed to the honey and the siting of the hives — how on earth I could decently introduce my queries about Ewen Mackay.
I need not have worried.
What I was experiencing was an islander's version of the tea-ceremony and its ritual.
As she took her own cup and settled herself again in her chair, Mrs McDougall looked at me over her spectacles and said comfortably: ‘The girls will have told you about Ewen Mackay.’
‘Yes, they did.’
‘And I think that Archie told you that your cottage used to be where his family lived.
So:perhaps you are worried  in case he comes home, now that he is back in these parts.’
It was a statement, not a question.
I hesitated, then shook my head.
‘Not really.
But I did feel I'd like to know a bit more about him.
Why he went to gaol, for instance.
Was it for something he did up here — in the islands?’
‘No.
It was in London.’
‘But his parents still lived here then?’
‘They did.
And of course everyone knew all about it, just as they knew that the Mackays, poor souls, had done everything they could for the boy ever since they took him in for adoption.’
She sipped tea.
You know that they left Moila.
It was partly for shame after all the talk and the things that the papers said, but as well as that they wanted to cut him off for good.’
A little smile.
‘'For good.’
That is exactly what it was.
He was bad all through, that one, and they were good folk They wanted rid of him for good, and I think they were a bit afraid he might come back, and then how could they turn him out?’
‘Afraid of him?
Of violence, you mean?’
‘I do not know.
I did hear once that he had threatened his father, but I do not know if this is true, and they, poor souls, never said a word against him.’
‘Mrs McDougall,’ I said flatly, ‘what was he sent down for?’
She set her cup aside and picked up her knitting again.
‘Miss Fenemore, they do say that if a man has done wrong, and has been punished for it, that should be the end of it.
Do you not agree?
It is true the man is bad, but he has done two years, almost, in prison.
It might be better to forget it.’
The needles clicked.
‘No, do not look like that, lassie.
I'm not calling shame on you.
I blame myself for talking to those other lassies.
I would have done better to have held my tongue.’
‘You did hold your tongue.
You said nothing to me.
You only let it out to the girls because you got a shock when they said they'd seen.
him, and you were afraid yourself that he might come here and demand his parents’ address from you.
Isn't that true?’
‘Aye, it's true.
Not ‘afraid’, though.
There's no harm could come to me here, with good neighbours round and about all the while.
And he'd not offer harm to me, I think But you, lassie-' once more I was promoted from ‘Miss Fenemore’—‘there's no need for you to fear him coming to the cottage, even though he has a boat and could get into the bay without anyone seeing him.
He'll have been told, for sure, that his folks are gone, and the place is let.’
‘Yes.
Well…
Thank you for the tea, Mrs McDougall.
It's been lovely talking with you, but if I'm to get home…’
I rose.
‘Since I'm here, may I use the telephone, please, before I go?’
‘You may.’
The knitting was in her lap and she was regarding me steadily over the spectacles.
‘Just sit you down again for a minute, lassie.
It wasn't just for idleness that you came to ask about that rapscallion, was it?
Are you afraid to sleep in that cottage?
Because if you are-’
‘No, it's all right.
It's not that.’
She nodded.
‘I thought so.
It is something else.’
Silence for a minute.
She seemed to be deciding something about the knitting in her lap.
Then she said, with apparent irrelevance: ‘Those two lassies, they think the world of you.’
I could think of nothing to say to that, so I said nothing.
She nodded again, as if I had answered her.
Very well, I will tell you what you ask me, and I do not want to know why you ask it.’
She picked up her knitting again, and the needles clicked.
‘It came out in the court that he had been robbing old ladies…confidence trickster was  the word.
He would watch the notices in the papers, and when someone died and the widow was left alone, he would go there and think up some sort of lie — he lied always, as a boy, even when there was no need, and he looked so clean and innocent that if you did not know him you would believe him, every time.
And sometimes even though you did know him…
So he would use the charm and the lies on the old lady in her grief, and cheat her out of everything he could get.
The one they took him for in the end, she was eighty-five years old, and ailing, and he robbed her of her life-savings, and that was less than three hundred pounds.
He would spend that much, they said, in a week.
He pleaded guilty to three other offences.
Do you see what I mean about shame?’
‘Yes, I see.’
I was thinking hard.
Should I tell her here and now that Ewen Mackay had already been to the cottage?
It was possible that his return to Moila had been sparked by the notice in the papers of Mrs Hamilton's death.
He had been in gaol when that occurred.
On his release he had come straight-up to Moila, and by last weekend — it was possibly true enough — had not heard of his parents' departure, but had thought he could go straight home.
And then what?
There was no elderly widow to con, but there was an empty house, and one he knew well.
He must know, at least casually, what there was of value there.
So, no con-tricks needed here, just a simple robbery?
But his luck was out, in that the new owner, who was no old lady, but a sufficiently able-bodied young man, was here before him.
And knew him.
And Neil, for his part, knew that if anyone on Moila heard of his, Neil Hamilton's, return, the news would fly around and certainly reach Ewen Mackay.
So, since for the present Neil preferred to lie low and find out just what Ewen was up to, I could not tell Mrs McDougall of  Ewen's night-time visit.
If I could not reassure her by telling her Neil was there, and watching, it was possible, more, probable, that she would insist either on my moving into a lodging in the village, or that some of the men from the village would keep watch on Otters' Bay and the empty house.
I would have to talk to Neil first.
Tomorrow.
Tonight all I could do was make sure of Crispin.
I thanked Mrs McDougall again and went to the telephone.
The hospital answered, with cheering news.
It seemed that my brother would soon be on his way.
He had left that morning, to stay with his Glasgow friends; and yes, he had left the Glasgow number in case I should call.
I called, and Crispin answered, so cheerfully that I knew all was well.
‘Yes, I'm all set to come up tomorrow.
We'll be at the Columba Hotel, and on the ferry first thing Monday.’
'’ We?’‘
‘Yes, there was someone else heading for Oban, and we were in the crash together.
He'll be getting the same train.
To tell you the truth, I'm quite glad of his help.
I'm what they laughingly call mobile, but carrying a suitcase, as well as all my camera junk, is a little beyond me as yet.’
‘But the foot really is mending?’
‘It's fine.
Another day or two and I'll be skipping like a ram on the high hills.
Depending, of course, on what you've got laid on for me.
Anything new?’
‘Only several hundred thousand gulls and shags and things.
But I did see black guillemots swimming down in the bay, and a gully full of boulders where they probably nest.’
‘Sounds great.
Accessible?’
‘From the sea.
And there's a boat handy.
Don't forget the binocs.’
‘Is it likely?
Anything else you need me to bring?
The local supermarket's open on Sundays now, and Laura's going there in the morning, she tells me.’
‘Nothing I can think of, unless you want something fancy in the way of cheeses.
Can't get those here.
Oh, and some cream, too.
You're getting strawberries for supper on Monday.’
‘Good heavens.
The only ones I've seen here are from California, and they don't taste like the real thing at all.
What are the Hebrides coming to?
Greenhouse effect?’
‘No.
We've got hydroponics.
I must go now.
I've got a long lonely road home in front of me.
Good night, Cris.’
‘Good night.
Take care, and hasta la vista .’
We rang off.
Nearly ten o'clock, and still light.
I saw no one on the long lonely road home, and the only enemy that attacked me was the midges.
I slept later than usual next morning, and woke to see half past nine on my bedside clock, and a cascade of raindrops chasing each other down the window.
By the time I had had breakfast and done the morning's chores it was after eleven and, though the rain was letting up, it was still wet enough to keep anyone indoors who didn't have to go out.
I decided that I didn't have to go out.
It was not a hard decision to take.
Rationalised, it meant that Neil already knew enough about Ewen Mackay's record, and of course he was already on the watch for any more suspicious moves.
If he, Neil, was content to leave the house unwatched by day, and to spend his time looking at rocks on the broch island, then I could stay indoors  with a clear conscience, and wait for the rainstorm to pass.
I got back to work, by which I mean that I got my papers and notes out, and then sat looking at them for what seemed like a dreary lifetime, and was really probably only twenty minutes.
The words I had written — and had almost, in the interval, forgotten — mocked me and were meaningless.
My notes told me what was to happen next, but my brain no longer knew how to move plot and people forward.
Block.
Complete block.
I sat and stared at the paper in front of me and tried to blank out the present and get back into my story — forward, that is, into my invented future, and out of the world of queries and vague apprehensions.
From experience, I knew what to do.
Write.
Write anything.
Bad sentences, meaningless sentences, anything to get the mind fixed again to that sheet of paper and oblivious of the ‘real’ world.
Write until the words begin to make sense, the cogs mesh, the wheels start to turn, the creaking movement quickens and becomes a smooth, oiled run, and then, with luck, exhaustion will be forgotten, and the real writing will begin.
But look up once from that paper, get up from the table to make coffee or stir the fire, even just raise your head to look at the view outside the window, and you may as well give up until tomorrow.
Or for ever.
It was the rain that saved me.
I could not have looked out of the window if I had tried, the chores were all done, and there was nothing whatever to do except sit at that table and write.
I wrote.
A year or so later, or it may have been an hour, I crumpled up four sheets of paper and threw them to the floor, and started another, and I was there.
And in another light-year or two I was through the word-barrier, and the book had suddenly reached the stage — the wonderful moment to get to — where I could walk right into my imaginary country and see things that I had not consciously created, and listen to people talking and watch them moving, all apparently independent of me.
I came out of it and saw the window clear and the sun shining and the heavy clouds rolled back to leave a blue, washed sky.
I could hear gulls crying, and the soft, flattened whispering of the sea.
My watch said twenty past one.
Scrambled eggs again, and coffee, then I made a thermos of tea, pushed that, with a packet of biscuits, into the pocket of my anorak, and set off along the cliff path.
It was half past two by my watch when I reached the Hamilton house.
I went to the back door-still fast shut — and knocked.
The sound echoed through the silence with that hollow, unmistakably empty noise.
Perhaps he was working on the island again.
I made my way round the house and crossed the mossy terrace to look in through the drawing-room window.
Nobody there, of course.
It looked just the same.
If he was really living in the house he must be taking pains to leave no signs of his occupancy.
Somehow the knowledge irked me.
He had been right, I thought; in spite of what the girls and Mrs McDougall had told me, the whole idea of a ‘mystery’ was, in this place, wrong and irritating.
Whatever Ewen Mackay was up to, it could really hardly matter.
Must not be allowed to matter.
He no longer belonged here.
Had never belonged.
He was the changeling of the classic tale, thrust on good people, who was to repay good with evil.
The hints he had thrown out, that he was connected in some illegitimate way with the Hamilton family, could be dismissed as a typical lie told to impress, another Cape Horn.
I wondered what his real origins were, and if there really was such a thing as original sin, people born evil.
It was fashionable na to think so, but there were people of whom it had to be believed.
For instance—
I checked the train of thought.
This was no place for it.
Moila was too lovely, and my ivory tower was still solid.
This was my holiday, and my brother would be here tomorrow, and all would be normal once more.
The boat-house was empty again, its sea-doors fastened back.
I walked to the end of the pier and looked across at the island.
There was no sign of life except the birds, and Neil's tent was again fastened shut.
I glanced at my watch.
The tide was still falling, and should be safe for another three hours or so.
I went across.
I climbed the slope to the hollow where Neil's tent was pitched.
There was no sign of him there.
I stood still, listening.
No sound of a hammer.
There were gulls flying and calling, but I had not disturbed the main colony, and I thought that I would have heard if he had been working below the cliffs at the north-west point.
I gave it a couple of minutes, then made for the broch and the steps up to the landing where the girls had gone yesterday.
The steps looked fragile; transverse slabs of stone with one end built into the dry-stone structure of the curving wall, and jutting into the air with no other support.
But they were solid, and led safely up to the ruined top of the wall where another, larger slab made a good view  point.
From here I found, as I had hoped, that I could see down to the shore at the point where Neil had told me he wanted to work.
If he had been close to the cliff I would not have been able to see him, but I could see the whole section of shoreline, and there was no boat there.
Short of clambering down there myself I could be no surer, and there was no real need for that.
More rationalisation.
I made my way carefully down the staircase, intending to sit in the sun at the foot of the wall and drink my tea, but the breeze could find no way there, and the strange, musky smell from the wall where those plants grew was stronger than ever.
Besides, the midges were out.
I left the broch and walked uphill as far as I could without disturbing the bird colony, then made my way towards the southern end of the island, where the land sloped gradually down to the sea in long, flat terraces of rock.
I found a niche where a small landslide had left a level lawn with a backing of turf; and where the breeze still moved enough to allay the midges, and sat down to my picnic.
The silence — for the sound of birds and sea adds up to silence as beautifully as we ever know it in the noisy world of today — together with the sweetly moving air, and the scents of thyme and bell heather and sun-warmed bracken, all combined to distil something very potent.
It was the sort of time and place where one might have expected an idea, the spring of a poem to well up from the quiet and the beauty.
But sheer sensation — the warmth of the sun, the scent of the air, the mundane pleasure of tea and biscuits — simple well-being possessed me so that I could only feel, not think.
A look at the sea below me told me that the tide was still low, though presumably it had begun to turn.
A glance at my watch showed that it was still only ten past five.
I leaned  back again, shut my eyes, and let the sun have its way.
Gradually, as the breeze moved and eddied, I became conscious of a strange, soft sound that was filling the air.
It was like the sound of the sea, but it was not the sea.
It was like the wind, but was not the wind.
It was as if sea and wind together were singing a lament, mourning with a not quite human voice, the voice of water echoing in a sea-cave, weird, unearthly.
I opened my eyes and sat up to listen, with the skin furring up on my arms.
Teach me to hear mermaids singing…
The wonderful thing about literature is that great poetry can chime in on any thought or experience.
As Donne's line rang in my head I placed the sound.
Something Neil had told me about the island.
This was Eilean na Roin, the Island of the Seals, and the grey seals came ashore here to breed and to bask.
And now, perhaps, with the evening tide coming in, the seals had come with it, and were singing.
It is no wonder that, hearing that uncanny sound coming out of the mist, the old sailors ascribed it to mermaids or sirens or strange creatures of the deep.
It is almost music, almost a human sound, but never quite.
It is as if a wind instrument, soulless in itself, were being played through warm and breathing tissues instead of through wood or metal.
And it is magical, compelling wonder.
For me, it was the peak of a perfect day.
I had done some good writing, and I had heard mermaids singing.
Very slowly, and keeping down below the seals' horizon, I crept forward towards the sound of singing.
At last I gained the crest of a rise, and there below me stretched  the sloping flat rocks, and yes, the mermaids were there, their fur dry in the sun, their bodies slick and contented, their eyes closed, enjoying the afternoon, exactly as I had done myself.
A fat, grey mermaid, waving her flippers gently, turned on her back to show a pale, spotted stomach.
Another came heaving out of the sea and flopped to where her calf lay, and, delightfully, the baby nuzzled in to suck.
Not very far from me another baby by, apparently full fed and contented.
It saw me, and the big eyes stared with mild curiosity, but without fear.
This was Eilean na Roin, and I was only a passer-by.
It was time to go.
Reluctantly, I inched backwards without disturbing the sleeping nursery, and stood up.
I took another glance at my watch.
Ten past five.
Ten past five?
It had been ten past five when I had last checked on the time.
I held the watch to my ear-it was battery-run, but a faint tick could normally be heard.
No sound.
And now that I thought about it, I had vaguely wondered at the ‘good time’ I had made on my walk from the cottage, and at the leisurely stretch of time I had had on the island.
Had I even left my cottage at two o'clock?
My watch must have been gradually slowing to a stop all day.
I ran.
I could still see the causeway.
I could also see the rock that Neil had pointed out to me, still half out of water.
It was all downhill to the causeway, and the turf was smooth.
I would make it.
I had forgotten the other thing that Neil had told me.
‘The tide,’ he had said, ‘comes in like a horse trotting.’
And it did.
Though the marker stone had been half out of water when I started to run, the whole barrage of banked stones, with the causeway atop, was suddenly  aswirl and, as I raced for the crossing, the level seemed to rise a foot or more.
I stood hesitating.
I could probably still have got across, but as I have said, the stones of the causeway were thick with seaweed, and treacherous even when exposed.
And though I can swim pretty well, the swirl of the tide was fierce, and looked dangerous; and besides, I had no desire to swim.
And of course the moments of dismay and indecision were moments lost.
The next wave came round the point, and the marker vanished.
So that was that.
And the tide would be high at what?
Midnight?
I had a few moments of fury, a fury compounded of shame at my own stupidity, the triteness of the situation, the thought of my cottage and supper and the cosy fireside.
Then the fury faded.
Other pictures took the place of these; Neil's tent, not far up the brae, and the possibility not only, at worst, of having its shelter for the night, but of my seeing from that vantage point when Neil came back with his boat.
If so, and if I could attract his attention, he would surely bring the boat over for me.
I trudged up to the camp-site again, to find that there was no need even to look for driftwood for a fire.
Inside that stout little tent was a very efficient camping-gas burner, complete with kettle, billycan, matches, tea bags and powdered milk.
And investigating Neil's stores I found baked beans, sardines, a couple of small tins of ham, and some crispbread.
Like the Swiss Family Robinson, I had very little to complain about.
There was also, of course, a good sleeping-bag.
I only hoped, as the sun sank lower and the breeze grew cool, that I was not going to be obliged to use it.
The seals sang until sunset, and then fell silent.
As dusk drew in, the air emptied of birds, and gradually  they, too, fell silent.
Only the tide, full and flowing, filled the half-light of the Highland night with its cold sound.
I could no longer distinguish the house, and even the boat-house, much nearer, was lost in the shadows.
But no boat came in.
Long before the sky dimmed enough to let the stars through, I lit the gas burner and ate baked beans off a paper plate and finished off with tea and biscuits.
Then I got into the sleeping-bag.
I had gone to sleep with the sound of the sea filling the night with subdued song.
What woke me was the land singing.
At first it was part of a dream, which vanished as soon as I woke and knew that I was alone on the broch island, lying on the turf in a sleeping-bag, with my head pillowed on my rolled-up sweater, but seemingly connected with the earth itself, from which, apparently right below my head, came a sound every bit as strange as the mermaids' song of the seals.
It was a soft, slow moaning, punctuated with sharp little sounds like cries; the earth grieving in a whisper, but in some weird way with a purpose as if this were a language, a communication.
Crooning would be the better word  for it, and as the word suggested itself I had a swift and vivid mental picture of the colony of birds on the west of the island, birds aggressive, protective, maternal, tender.
Weird, perhaps, but not frightening.
I sat up.
The sound retreated, but still it was there, somewhere in the night, as if thrumming along some wire sunk in the ground.
I slid out of the sleeping-bag and unzipped the tent opening.
I stuck my head out and looked around me.
Twilight still, no more than that.
The sky was clear, greyed over, with stars.
The moon, a half moon polished thin at the edges, swam low and gave a little light.
My world, the island, was drained of colour, but every shape was clear.
Nothing stirred, no bird cried.
But still, faint now but persistent, came that crooning subterraneous song.
Then all at once, so subtly that I could hardly be sure when I first saw it, I realised that the sky was full of movement, small shadowy shapes skimming low over the ground, silently, as if bats or night-time swallows were criss-crossing my line of vision, swarming between the broch and the sea.
The stormy petrels.
Mother Carey's chickens.
The fragile, tiny black birds, nocturnal and solitary, that come ashore to nest, but spend most of their lives flying close above the sea-waves, come storm or shine.
They must be nesting in the rabbit-holes beneath the turf where the tent was pitched, and in the broch, where the queer chemical smell I had noticed came, not from the plants, but from the holes where the birds sat on their eggs.
If anything had been needed to crown my day, this would have been it.
To be here, alone in the Highland night, and to witness the flight of these marvellous creatures, so shy, so rarely seen…
I found I was outside the tent, standing up with my jacket clutched to me, the better to see them.
They took no notice of me; they were  creatures of the night, the air and the ocean, and I was only a piece of the land, meaningless, to be flown round like a boulder or a stump of wood.
I was brought back to the mundane present by the shiver of chill that ran over me.
Pulling my coat more closely round me, I turned my attention from the dark shape of the broch and its flitting ghosts to my own situation.
I looked across to where the Hamilton house must stand in its shadows.
No light there.
But that, of course, meant nothing.
Even if Neil had returned while I had been asleep, he would take care not to show a light.
More importantly, somewhere in the early morning hours the tide was due to turn.
I had no way of telling what time it was, but surely it might soon be possible for me to escape from my desert island and make my way back to the cottage and a warm bed.
I was not familiar enough, yet, with the light nights of the Highlands to be able to guess at the time, but the sky was paler, and the stars were fading.
I took a few cautious steps forward to where, by craning, I could just make out the ghostly crescent of the beach opposite the pier.
I could not see the state of the causeway.
Then suddenly, I heard it.
A boat's engine, throttled back and purring softly, somewhere beyond the headland to the east.
Neil, coming back to keep the promised watch on his house.
And from where?
Fishing?
At that moment, all that this suggested to me was the possibility of fresh mackerel for breakfast…
I dived back into the tent and scrambled into my sweater and shoes.
I did zip the tent flap shut, but wasted no other time on housekeeping; I would come back in daylight to tidy up and replace the stores I had used.
It was not possible to hurry downhill in that half-light, so I  made myself go slowly, and at last reached the beach and the end of the causeway.
It was almost uncovered.
Almost — but I could just make out a narrow stretch half-way over where the water flowed smooth and fast with each swell.
As I craned to see, the next wave broke and swirled, luminous with foam.
Even if I failed to attract Neil's attention, I would probably be able to cross quite soon.
I found that I could no longer hear the boat's engine.
I knew very little about boats, and had hated what little experience of sailing I had had, but it seemed unlikely that any boat would shut down its engine until it was safely round into the bay, or even then.
I strained to hear, and had just decided that it would be difficult to hear an idling motor over the lap and rush of the sea in the channel, when I saw the light.
Not a boat's riding light; this was the small, dodging light of an electric torch coming round the path that skirted the headland.
It was the path from my cottage, and I remembered the little cove called Halfway House, a cove where in any weather a boat might tie up safely and its owner make his way round to Taigh na Tuir.
Its owner who did not want, or did not dare, to bring his boat round to the jetty?
Not Neil, then.
Someone else who did not want his visit known.
Ewen Mackay.
The mackerel disappeared from the breakfast table, and the mystery came back with a rush.
It was certainly Ewen Mackay.
I could see him now, outlined fairly clearly against the light background of the beach, as the torch-beam cleared the path and he came fast along the shore towards the boat-house.
I sat down on the sand, in the darkness cast by a large boulder.
He would never see me unless I moved.
He was at the boat-house.
A flash of the torch again, as if to check  that no boat was there, then he turned to face the causeway, took something from a pocket and raised what were apparently night-glasses to his eyes.
I froze in the shelter of my rock, but the glasses were aimed higher, at the tent.
I had a momentary qualm; what would he read into the carefully closed flaps?
That Neil was not sleeping there after all, or merely that he shut the flaps at night against the midges or the weather?
I supposed, since to him Neil was only ‘John Parsons’, it did not matter either way, and if Ewen saw the little pile of debris — tins and used paper plates and my thermos — that I had left outside the tent, it would surely go to persuade him that Neil was safely ensconced on the island.
But, unfortunately, Neil was not even safely ensconced in the house, as he should have been, so Ewen Mackay was free to resume whatever his business had been there on Wednesday night.
And with no witness but me.
I sat very still.
He turned away, apparently satisfied, then pushed the glasses back into his pocket, flashed the torch briefly down at the rough stones of the pier, and went away with long strides in the direction of the house.
The next wave broke with a crash and a swirl and a dangerous-looking suck of water back into the channel.
Not this time.
Nor next.
Nor the time after, I thought, even if the causeway came clear.
There was no way I was going across to follow Ewen Mackay to spy on his activities at the house.
If he really had left his boat in the cove round the point, he would have to come this way again, and I would certainly be able to see if he brought anything with him.
I hugged my jacket close round me, and waited.
It seemed a very long time before he came back.
The tide had cleared the causeway, and it was perceptibly lighter, when he came out through the stone arch of the garden gate.
He carried what looked like a bag, bulging with something, over one shoulder.
He made his way rapidly to the boat-house — there was no need, now, for the torch — and disappeared behind it.
Almost at once he reappeared, without the bag, and set off again, walking fast, for the house.
I stood up, the better to see the state of the causeway, and made some rapid calculations.
Though it was now possible to cross, the central stones were still wet, and in that poor light would be treacherous.
It was an easy decision to make.
Sensibly, I decided to wait and see.
Which was just as well, as this time he came back after a very few minutes.
He was carrying a flat, square object which looked heavy.
When he had left that, too, behind the boat-house, he emerged stretching his arms as if in relief, as he stood once more scanning the bay and the shadowy slopes of the broch island.
And that seemed to be it for the night.
He vanished again behind the boat-house, and when I saw him again he was aiming fast for the cliff path, with the bag once again slung over his shoulder.
I watched him round the end of the point, and out of sight, then ran for the causeway.
I got across without mishap, and was at the back of the boat-house within seconds.
The square object was there, leaning against the wall.
It looked, in that half-light, like a big framed picture, propped up with its face to the wall.
It was a picture.
I tilted it to see.
A portrait, unglazed, in oils, with a heavy, ornate frame.
The portrait of a man, not young, in country tweeds, with a gun over his shoulder and a spaniel at heel.
I did not know enough about  painting to recognise it, or even guess at its value, but in the present-day crazy art market even a relatively modern painting might well be very valuable, and this one was apparently worth the trouble and risk that Ewen Mackay had taken.
I toyed with the idea of taking it myself, and hiding it somewhere, but it was almost too heavy for me to carry, and there was nowhere much nearer than the house itself where it could be hidden.
The boat-house was too obvious, and anywhere in the woods or garden was still wet with the night's dew.
Besides, the move would hardly help, only alert him and start him searching, not just for the picture, but for whoever had moved it.
In any case, no need.
I took a quick breath of relief as I heard it; the engine of another boat, throttling down to a murmur as she crept into the bay.
This time I waited to make sure before I ventured out on the jetty, but it was Neil's boat, and Neil himself standing ready to step out of it as it nosed in alongside the landing-place.
I ran to him, stumbling and nearly falling on the rough stones of the jetty.
He jumped out of his boat and caught my arm to steady me.
‘Rose ?
Rose!
What on earth are you doing here?’
‘Sh!
Keep your voice down!
He's been here again.
I saw him go up to the house-’
‘Hang on.
Take it easy.
You're shaking…
Why, you're cold-’
‘I'm not cold.
I'm all right.
Neil, it's Ewen Mackay.
I saw him — never mind how, I'll tell you later, but the point is, he's been up to the house and taken things.
Brought them down here and then gone off along the cliff path with them.
He'll be coming back, because he left something here-’
‘Along the cliff path?
Did you hear a boat?’
‘Yes.
I thought he must have left it in that place round the point, Halfway House.
Did you see anything as you came in?’
‘No, but you can't see into that cove from the way I came.
But what are you doing here?
No, that can wait.
You say you saw him go up to the house and take something?
You mean you actually saw him breaking in?’
‘No.
I was over on the island.
I saw him take a look at the boat-house first, then, when I suppose he saw you weren't home, he went up towards the house, and after a bit he came back with a bag, you know, like Santa Claus, slung over his shoulder.
It looked like that duffel bag of yours, and it was heavy.
He dumped it down behind the boat-house and went back towards the house, then after a bit he came down again with a picture, and dumped that, then he took the bag and made off up the path with it.’
‘Hold on a minute.
A picture ?’
‘Yes.
A big one.
It's behind the boat-house, there.
I took a look at it.’
‘There's no picture in the house worth stealing.’
He moved quickly to knot the boat's rope through a ring sunk in the jetty.
‘Let's have a look.
Maybe there was one I didn't know about…
Good God!’
‘Do you know it?’
‘I should.
It's Great-Uncle Fergus.’
‘Valuable?’
‘Good heavens, no.
Not even good, apparently, though it's very like him, and dear old Sam — the dog — and Aunt Emily loved it.
She used to say it was the best thing in the house.
It was in her bedroom.’
He was looking around him as he spoke.
‘This was all?
This and the duffel bag?’
‘All I saw.
I heard the boat, and then I saw him.
He only made the two trips to the house.’
‘The duffel bag.
Could he have been carrying guns — shotguns-in it?’
‘I don't think so.
Guns?
You don't mean-?’
‘Yes.’
His voice was grim.
‘I told you I was going to check the house.
Uncle Fergus's guns have gone missing.
I've been to the mainland to report it.
So if he did take them, it must have been when he was here before.’
‘And they could be in his boat, couldn't they?
Neil,’ I said, urgently, ‘he did take this picture tonight, and whatever he took it for, it's got to mean he'll be coming back for it, and soon.
Look if you put your boat into the boat-house now, he wouldn't see it till he got right down here again, and then perhaps-’
I stopped.
Clear in the silence we heard an engine start.
Neil grabbed my arm again.
‘Quick Get in.
He's not coming back, he's running for it.
He must have heard me.
Come on!’
Somehow I was in the boat, and Neil had cast off and was edging her out from the jetty.
She backed in a gentle arc to face the open sea, and as Neil gunned the engine she jumped forward and then settled to a smooth, fast pace.
‘There he is.
No, there!
You're too far out!’
I had to shout it above the noise of the engine.
I pointed to where, just visible against the dark-background of the cliffs, the grey boat raced, the foam white under her bows and in her long wake.
Neil shook his head and made some gesture which I could not interpret, but as it was obvious that he, too, had seen Stormy Petrel and knew what he was about, I let it be.
There were a hundred questions still to be asked and answered, but at this speed and in this noise speech was impossible.
I hung on, keeping one eye on Neil in case I could help him, and the other on Stormy Petrel .
Now I thought I could see what Neil was trying to do.
The two boats were running along the coastline on almost parallel courses, Ewen close in, perforce following the jagged line of the shore, and our boat (I found later that she was called Sea Otter ) on a straight course some way out.
When on two occasions Ewen turned to make for the open sea, Neil, increasing our speed slightly, held on to what looked like a collision course.
Even though it must have been obvious that he would not hold to it at the last, the threat was enough to make Stormy Petrel veer again to her original course, and though she was trying to increase speed, and was perhaps a little more powerful than Sea Otter , we, on our straight line, could hold her comfortably.
We were almost round to Otters' Bay now.
The headland looming ahead of us out of the growing daylight would be the one immediately to the west of the cottage.
Stormy Petrel wheeled again towards us, and this time Neil gave her sea-room.
In a moment I could see why.
From the tip of the headland and for some way out to sea the waves were breaking white against half-submerged fangs and stacks of rock that had in time past broken away from the main cliffs.
They were no real danger to anyone who knew the coast, and all the time the light was growing stronger.
Ewen obviously knew his way, but although Neil gave him room he made no further attempt to break free, or even to reach open water.
He slowed down to pick his way among the! patches of white  water quite close inshore, at one point even vanishing between a towering sea-stack and the main cliff, then, once past the headland, he throttled right back and motored tamely into Otters' Bay, making for the jetty there.
I turned in surprise to Neil, to see him pointing away from the bay towards where, in a cloud of spray, a powerful-looking launch was heading fast towards us.
I had never seen a police launch, but this one had an unmistakably official look about it, and in size and speed would be more than a match for either Stormy Petrel or Sea Otter .
Ewen Mackay was still tying up when we nosed gently in to rub shoulders with Stormy Petrel , and Neil jumped ashore and turned to hand me out.
‘Why, Miss Fenemore!
You were out with Mr Parsons, then?’
Ewen straightened with a look of surprise and pleasure.
With dark hair rumpled by the wind, flushed face and those brilliantly blue eyes, he looked very handsome.
His expression was one of uncomplicated welcome, which altered as he turned to Neil.
‘Or is it Mr Hamilton?
Oh, yes, it took me a bit of time to recognise you, but I got there in the end.
Did you have a good night's fishing?
I've been out myself, and I didn't get a thing.
Not a thing.’
Another glance at me, apparently quite free of guile.
‘Well, I'm glad he got you home safely…
It seems you've forgotten how to handle a boat, Neil, all those years in Dismal Swamp With canoes and muggers and billabongs, whatever they may be.
Just what the hell were you doing?
A game's a game, but you could have piled me up back there, and then you'd have had a few questions to answer!’
‘I have one to ask.’
Neil made no attempt at a normal  tone.
His was grim and totally unfriendly.
‘Where are the guns?’
‘Guns?’ asked Ewen blankly.
‘What guns?’
It was some time later, and the scene had shifted to the cottage sitting-room which, with myself and the two men, and two large detectives, was rather crowded.
Ewen had shown surprise, which of course looked genuine, when the launch, on coming alongside the jetty, turned out to belong, not to the police, but to Customs and Excise, who announced their intention of searching the Stormy Petrel , while the detectives had ‘a few questions to ask.’
He did make the inevitable protest of the recently released prisoner: was he to be hounded wherever he went, just because of the recent trip ‘abroad’, and surely that debt was paid in full and he could be allowed to start again in, of all places, his old home, which he was only visiting in the hope of finding where his parents had moved to; to lose touch with his dear mother was not to be borne; he needed to talk with his parents, to explain things to them, and ask for their forgiveness.
And why the Customs men anyway, and what on earth did they hope to find…?
And so on, still in that pleasant, reasonable voice, with eyes that were just guileless enough, appealing for sense and clemency from his audience.
The official section of that audience was attentive but impartial.
Far from hounding him gratuitously, they said, they were acting on information received.
They would like to search his boat.
No, they had no warrant, but they could take him and the boat back to Oban, where a warrant could be obtained No objection?
Then, sir, they  were much obliged, and we'll leave it to you chaps while you, Jimmy, come with me to the cottage and talk with Mr Mackay there.
Then, to me: ‘If we may?
I understand that you have rented the cottage, miss.
Miss Fenemore, isn't it?’
I said that it was, and they were welcome to come in.
He thanked me, and introduced himself as Detective-Sergeant Fraser, and his companion as Detective-Constable Campbell.
I unlocked the door and led the way in.
Ewen came, with a shrug and a smile and a lifted eyebrow, and the two detectives close behind him.
Neil followed them in and shut the door.
He was rather pale, and tended to watch the policemen rather than Ewen.
I noticed that Ewen did not look in his direction.
'’ On information received?’'he said, looking from one detective to the other.
‘From whom, and about what?
It must be serious, to have brought you out on that TV-type chase?
And why the Customs people?
Just what is this all about?’
The sergeant consulted a notebook.
‘You hired the boat Stormy Petrel on June fifteenth from one Hector McGillivray of Uig on the island of Faarsay?’
‘Yes.
At least, I suppose it was the fifteenth…
It was three days after — Yes, the fifteenth.
So what?
I paid him, didn't I?’
‘We have reason to believe,’ said the sergeant, taking no notice of the question, ‘that this boat has recently been involved in illegal traffic, and that the said operation was centred on the island of Faarsay.’
‘Illegal traffic?’
Ewen looked taken aback then he laughed.
‘Faarsay?
Do you mean that old Hector's been poaching salmon again?
But how does that affect me?
I've only had the boat since the fifteenth, and before that I  was-’ A quick glance at me!
‘I don't need to tell you where I was, do I?’
Once again the sergeant ignored the question.
He watched Ewen steadily, while the constable, who had seated himself at the kitchen table, was taking notes.
I thought that Neil, still over by the door, had a puzzled look.
He glanced from time to time out of the window, as if to see what was happening down at the jetty.
‘Not salmon,’ said the sergeant.
‘No.
That would not bring the Customs here.
They are looking for drugs.’
‘Drugs ?’
This time, unmistakably, the shock was genuine.
Ewen went as white as paper, and jerked upright in his chair.
‘Drugs?
What are you talking about?
What's it got to do with me?
Do you mean that that bloody fool Hector McGillivray fobbed me off with a boat that's — that's been-?’
He stopped abruptly, biting his lip.
The two detectives watched him, unmoved.
Ewen sat back in the chair, and managed, very creditably I thought, a wry little smile.
‘No wonder I got the damned boat cheaply,’ he said.
‘That comes of trusting chaps you've known all your life.
Like Neil here.
Well?
Just where did all this so called traffic take place?
While I was safely locked away, I hope?
As far as I'm concerned, I went to Hector because I knew him and I knew he'd let me have a boat cheaply, and I've used it since then — since the fifteenth — for pleasure, and now to come over and look my people up.
So the Customs can search all they like; they won't find a thing.’
And he included Neil, and then me, in the smile.
‘Thank you, sir.’
The sergeant glanced across at his colleague, saw him busily writing, then turned back to Ewen.
You must understand that the boat's history is the affair of the Customs officers.
They will talk to you later.
We have our own inquiries to make.
The launch gave us  a lift over, to save us waiting for the ferry in the morning, that is all.
But their search of your boat will save us time, as well.
We have been lucky there.’
‘Haven't you just?’ said Ewen.
‘Search for what, since you're not after all the heroin, or whatever I'm supposed to have been ferrying around the islands for a week?’
‘We have reason to believe that you recently broke into Taigh na Tuir, the house belonging to Mr Hamilton here, and that you know something of the whereabouts of two valuable guns.’
‘Guns?’ repeated Ewen blankly.
What guns?
And who gave you reason to believe-?’
‘I did,’ said Neil.
The surprise and shock registered yet again on Ewen's face were so real that even I, if this time I had not known better, would have thought them genuine.
He turned to face Neil, and their eyes met.
Ewen's were wide, injured, unbelieving; Neil's stony, but I could see the effort that kept them level.
He was hating this.
So, as a matter of fact, was I. I.took the woman's way out.
I retreated to the scullery to fill the kettle for a cup of tea.
‘All right,’ said Ewen to Neil.
‘So supposing you explain.
When am I supposed to have broken into the house, and why on earth should you think I know anything about any of the guns?’
He sat back, apparently at his ease now, and crossed his legs.
He was sitting:in the same chair he had had before, on that late-night chat.
‘Go on, Mr Parsons.
Explain.’
There was a slight flush on Neil's cheekbones, and he seemed to be avoiding Ewen's eye.
In view of the latter's steady, incredulous gaze, I could not blame him.
He spoke to the hearthrug.
‘I have already told Sergeant Fraser what happened.
I was in the house the night you came back, and I watched  you try the french windows, and then go round to the back to find the kitchen window locked, too.
Possibly this made you uneasy, or possibly, with the storm blowing up, you did not want to take your boat across to the mainland again, so you decided to let things alone, and not risk taking any stolen goods on board.
I watched you make off along the cliff path, as if you were making for Otters' Bay.
The lawyers had told me that the cottage was let to a girl, who was here alone.
For all I knew she was with you, but if she was just a visitor, I had to make sure she would be all right.
So I followed you over, and found you here in the cottage.
You had told Dr Fenemore that you thought your parents still lived here.
That may have been true, but for the moment it's irrelevant.’
‘That's wonderful!’
Ewen was letting anger show now through the hurt.
‘Anything that ‘may be true’ is irrelevant!
I'll tell you what is irrelevant, all that breaking and entering bit.
You've just said yourself that all I did was try the windows.
And why not?
I'd been welcome in that house for as long as you had-longer, because you were away and I just about lived there.
So go right ahead.
What's all this about stolen goods and, for God's sake, guns?’
‘Only that it wasn't your first visit since my great-aunt's death,’ said Neil.
‘You heard me say you ‘came back’.
I don't know when the first visit was, but it must have been very recent, possibly within a few days of your, er, release.’
He paused, and looked across at Fraser.
The sergeant nodded.
We know you hired a boat,’ he said, ‘straight away after you came out of prison, and came up to Oban.
It was possible that you would come over to Moila, and of course there was nothing suspicious — about that.
And of course, to start with, we knew nothing about the boat's history, That, if you will allow the word, is also, for the moment, irrelevant.’
An explosive sound from Ewen, which was ignored.
The sergeant continued: ‘But then Mr Hamilton found the valuable guns missing from Taigh na Tuir, and he reported that, with the story of your attempt to get into the house last Wednesday night.
So our enquiries — and possibly the search of your boat-’
‘Will get you nowhere.
In fact,’ said Ewen, and was there just a shade of genuine relief in his tone?‘you don't know anything at all.
And as for the guns that are supposed to be missing from Taigh na Tuir, I can tell you all you want to know about that.
When the Colonel was alive, he always took me shooting with him, and I helped look after his guns.
He had quite a few, half a dozen there in the gunroom, with the light one he got for Neil as a boy, and I used to use.
Mrs Hamilton hated guns, and never shot.’
He looked up at Neil.
‘Nor did you, when you could get out of it.
And I was here when the Colonel died.
You were in Australia, but even if you didn't know, the police here should have know…
The guns were sold.
There were some that were quite valuable, a Churchill, I think, and a Boss, but they were sent to his gunsmith in Glasgow, Peterson and Briggs, and they were sold.
As far as I know, the gunroom's been empty ever since.
You should know, inspector.
Don't you have to check them all nowadays, ever since the Hungerford affair?’
It was Neil who answered.
‘You haven't mentioned the Purdeys.’
‘Purdeys?’
‘Don't pretend you didn't know about them.
His favourite guns, the ‘specials’ that were made for his father, my grand-uncle, in 1906, in the great days of shooting-parties.
He shot once with King Edward You knew  all that, it was one of his favourite stories, and you must have known all about the guns.
If they were valuable when Uncle Fergus died, they're astronomical now.’
‘Well, and so what about them?
Of course I remember them.
He would never let me touch them, always cleaned them himself.
They were sold with the rest, weren't they?’
‘No.
They were never sold, though the lawyers thought they had gone with the others.
My great-aunt may even have deceived them deliberately; I don't know.
I know she would never have parted with them.
Her husband had asked her to keep them for me — keep them in the family, that is, but she didn't want to be troubled with all the precautions and inspections since the Firearms Acts.
In fact I'm not sure that she even attempted to understand them.
She merely packed the pair of Purdeys away in a trunk in the attic, locked the trunk, and told no one, and it must have been assumed that they were sold with the rest of his things.
She left a letter for me, and she did include the Purdeys in her Wall, and told us where to boil I looked, yesterday, and found the trunk empty.
So I went to the mainland to report it, and we have been in touch with the lawyers, the gunsmiths, and the salerooms.
No trace, but from our description one saleroom — it was Christie's — quoted us about thirty thousand pounds.’
‘So?’
Ewen's air was still jaunty, but the syllable came tightly.
‘So it occurred to me that you, as my great-uncle's ghillie, might even have known what his plans were for his ‘specials’.
And putting that together with your visits to the house, and theguns'disappearance-'
Ewen had himself in hand again.
He appealed to the sergeant.
‘Do you hear that?
And you call this grounds —grounds for suspicion?
Isn't it time you either made a  charge and got it over with, or you damned well got out of here, and Mister Bloody Hamilton with you?’
The sergeant did not answer.
His head was turned towards the door, where we could hear footsteps approaching.
I glanced at Ewen, relaxed once more in his chair, as the door opened and one of the Customs men came in.
His eyes sought the sergeant's, and he shook his head.
‘Nothing.
Of course it's only a rummage-search, but as far as we've gone, there's nothing in that boat at all that hasn't a right to be there.’
It seemed as good a moment as any for a change of scene.
I carried a tray across and set it down on the table in the window.
Outside it was full daylight.
Soon the sun would break through the mist.
I sat down by the table and lifted the pot.
‘Would anyone like a cup of tea?’