

MONICA MANIA in MELBOURNE!
Becker's Brazilian Nightmare WHICH RACKET FOR '92?
Pam and the President
MAIN POINT
BRUSSELS — THE BALL'S IN YOUR COURT
by ALASTAIR McIVER
The deadline has come and gone for ball companies to sign up to the new and revised agreement to be part of the LTA's pool of ball sponsors for British tennis events.
Last year, there were 5 signatories to the LTA's now obsolete ball agreement.
This year, by the February 28th deadline, there were only four.
The stumbling block for Tretorn, the company which chose not to re-sign the legally amended Ball Pool Sponsorship Agreement, is clause 6.3, which states that the LTA ‘…shall be obliged to accept the best bid for each tournament in Category A (ie (ATP and WTA Tour Events, National Championships — junior and senior, LTA Volkswagen Tournaments, International Matches and in 1993, National Club League), subject to…verification of the type and quality of the tennis balls…to be supplied’
TREATY
In support of a recent complaint it had made to the EC Commission, Tretorn cites Article 85(1) (d) and Article 86(c) of the Treaty of Rome, which refers to ‘dissimilar conditions to equivalent transactions with other trading parties, thereby placing them at a competitive disadvantage.
Tretorn accept that the Association should have the right to choose the right ball on quality criteria in conjunction with the specifications laid out by the International Tennis Federation,(which Tretorn balls meet), but feels that allowing the LTA to choose the type of ball, could lead to unfair discrimination against its permanent pressure variety.
As the world's leading manufacturer of permanent pressure tennis balls,(formerly known as ‘pressureless’ and of a type favoured in European markets by the general public but not yet extensively used in professional tournament tennis), Tretorn has justifiable cause for concern.
It has it in writing from the LTA that it would not favour any tender from Tretorn for its Category A tournaments.
The new agreement, which came into being after a year of negotiations between the Association's solicitors and those at the EC Commission, has been drastically  amended to meet the requirements of the Treaty.
Amongst the changes that the EC Commission has enforced upon the British LTA,(and, for that matter, the Danish and Belgian associations), are:
1
— The abolition of the term ‘Official’ in relation to tennis balls used in LTA tournaments.
2
— A reduction in the size of the fee that companies who wish to be a part of the LTA's Ball Pool need to pay if they want to have the right to bid for LTA tournaments.
The fee has been cut by approximately half, from £20,000 to £10,000.
3
— Only one year agreements can be negotiated.
Prior to the EC ruling, three year agreements were allowed.
In the light of this amended agreement, the British LTA might have been forgiven for thinking that it had pre-empted any legal action over its former agreement, which it had sent to Brussels for consideration as long ago as September 1990.
In doing so, it set in motion a legal process, the result of which is the current Ball Pool  Sponsorship Agreement.
Indeed, confirmation of a satisfactory legal outcome would appear to have been apparent during December last year when the legal Director of the EC Commission, Mr Dubois, wrote to the Association's Solicitors, stating, ‘…
I can now consider that the new system of sponsoring foreseen by the Lawn Tennis Association no longer contains appreciable restrictions of competition and therefore the file will be closed.’
Mr Dubois went on to say, however, that ‘…the case could be reconsidered and consequently the file re-opened if the factual or legal situation changes in respect of an essential aspect of the agreement which  affects its evaluation or in the case of a complaint’
SIGNIFICANCE
Tretorn, in filing its complaint, believes that the EC Commission's lawyers may have missed the significance of the word in dispute (‘type’) because the LTA's previous ball agreement,(ie the one that the EC Commission was asked to consider) contained no written reference to pressureless tennis balls, therefore ensuring that it could not be party to such vital information.
So on February 6th of this year, while Mr Dubois was closing his file and writing to the LTA accordingly, Tretorn, having considered its position, went ahead with its complaint to the EC Commission.
Tretorn's action was activated, following correspondence in December between Tretorn's President, Michael MacCaughey and the LTA's National Events and Tournaments Manager, Gavin Fletcher, copies of which have come into our possession.
In Fletcher's letter of 3rd December, he states, ‘All professional tournaments in Britain have traditionally been played with pressurised tennis balls…
If Tretorn wish to bid for tournaments in this Category (Category A), they might assume that a bid from a company producing pressurised balls is likely to succeed.
Therefore, if Tretorn want to be selected in Category A they should offer a pressurised ball…
It follows that for practical purposes, the word ‘type’ ought to be retained…‘
CONTRIBUTION
By effectively refusing to consider a particular type of ball for Category A tournaments, the Association would appear, in Mr MacCaughey's words of response, ‘…to treat us equally with other companies, when it comes to paying over the proposal fee and the contribution of free of charge tennis balls (another condition of the Agreement), but are unwilling to do so when it comes to exposure at major events.’
This situation, according to the complaint issued by Tretorn, is ‘…unlawful’.
In the meantime, Tretorn remains outside of the group of sponsors which have signed the Ball Pool Sponsors Agreement.
This, in itself, would appear to present a further anomalous dilemma for the Association in that last year, Tretorn signed a three year agreement with the LTA Trust to sponsor its Starter programme for schools.
According to Tretorn, this confirms its continued commitment to grass roots tennis, of which the Trust is also, solely committed.
In the light of this, one wonders if there are even redder faces at Barons Court.
That one of its sponsors should be in dispute over the very issue (ie sponsorship) for which they were brought together is indeed, a major embarrassment for the Association.
In the meantime, the ball is firmly in the court of the EC Commission, which has re-opened the case.
THE UNKNOWN SOLDIER
KORDA BREAKS RANK TO ENTER THE TOP 10.
by MIKE DONOVAN
‘It might well have been true that I was guilty of wasting the talent that I have’
Petr Korda crashed into  the top ten for this year with puzzled frowns asking: ‘Petr Who?’
No wonder.
Korda may have been touted as a gifted player, but he was hardly a household name.
And anyway, even those inside tennis circles who admired his talent, believed that the little known Czech was squandering it and on a one-way trip to Reggie Perrin's Obscuresville, Arizona.
Or, as David Byrne of Talking Heads once sang, ‘…on the road to nowhere’.
‘It might well have been true, I suppose, that I was guilty of wasting the talent that I have,’ says the 24-year-old from Prague.
Korda, in between doing his national service, seemed to be building a tennis career that would merely reach the dizzying heights of an anthill at best.
EVEREST
Everest appeared out of the question, such was his temperamental and erratic nature.
He shuffled around the lower reaches of the ATP Tour's top 100, consistently breaking the hearts of those who believed he had the potential to hit the big-time.
What he needed was someone to get him by the scruff of the neck, tell him a few home truths and offer emotional stability.
The parallels to Ilia Nastase were irresistible.
Nastase had sublime skills but was careering around without much discipline and direction…a powderkeg temperament…an adorable, off-the-wall rogue.
COMFORTING
Enter Ion Tiriac, with all the advice and support Nastase needed.
It might have been a comforting word here, a quick verbal lashing there.
Tiriac became a father figure and Nastase was at least able to fulfil some of his potential.
That is precisely what Vladmir Zednik has become to Korda.
So much more than merely ‘coach’.
‘I couldn't have made it through on my own,’ says Korda.
‘Before Vladmir, I was all on my own as I toured round.
But now I have him in my corner it has turned my career around.
I owe him so much.
‘It is wonderful for me that he is there to talk to.
And the conversations aren't always about tennis.
We talk about problems I have in my life and we can talk about lighter things and have fun.
‘We work and socialise so well together.
He is just what I needed for my tennis and for my life.’
Korda came from a broken home and it left him insecure.
Zednik is helping him overcome that.
‘Petr suffered with his parents divorcing when he was 13,’ says Zednick.
‘It left him so that even though he is now 24, he is still like a little child.
‘He needs someone who will look after him and nearly everything to do with him.
And I'm not talking about tennis here.
‘I can deal with him severely and Petr is scared of me a little, I think.
But then I can be equally gentle.
It all depends on what mood Petr wakes up in as to what approach I use.
Sometimes he gets out of bed and doesn't even want to play tennis at all!’
Zednik was of the opinion that his wayward ward was throwing his talent down the waste disposal unit.
‘I couldn't stand it,’ says the 44-year-old former Davis Cup player.
‘He had so much talent and there it was, going to waste.
‘I'd worked with him about four years ago and helped him quite a bit.
He went from over 500 into the top 100.
We broke up over a personal misunderstanding.
‘Even when I decided to go back with him last year I found out again how stubborn he could be, but now everything's changed for the better.’
Korda cites an American tour as the turning point of his entire singles career.
‘That was the breakthrough,’ he says.
‘Both Vladmir and I were together, almost in each other 's pockets for six weeks.
There was no one else.
Just Vladmir and I.’
Zednik agrees that trip was the one.
‘That was when I knew he could make it in the bigtime,’ he says.
Not a moment was wasted as Korda was coached, advised and supported.
It was professional and personal; Zednik the coach, mentor and friend.
While the bigger names were following the European clay circuit, Korda was reaching only the second singles final of his career in Tampa.
It got bigger.
Korda reached finals in  Washington and Montreal before winning his first ever singles tour event in New Haven after beating fellow left-hander Goran Ivanisevic.
VOLATILE
It was with the volatile Ivanisevic that he had won the French Open doubles title two years ago.
In October another singles crown was placed on Korda's head in Berlin with Frenchman Arnaud Boetsch bulldozed in a one sided final.
That victory put him within reach of the top ten.
The following month he reached the third round of the glitzy Paris tournament and he had cracked it.
‘And now it's a wonderful feeling to know that it has enabled me to look at the top guys knowing there are only a few ahead of me.
I am much more confident.’
The talent was always there.
Now the mental approach is right.
Zednik says: ‘Petr is still extrovert on court but the difference is now that he doesn't lose his concentration on the next point as much as he used to.’
WACKY
Korda — engaged to fellow tennis professional Regina Rajchtova — enjoys video games, soccer, ice hockey, and music.
He has his  spiky hair, strong opinions and wacky humour.
More importantly, though, he has his Tiriac.
He has his Zednik.
And it has set an ex-unknown player, an ex-unknown soldier on the march towards Grand Slam singles glory.
‘Before Vladmir I was on my own.
Now I have him in my corner and it has turned my career around.
I owe him so much’
Lambada Louts
Riotous fans bring shame to Davis Cup
by JOHN PARSONS, Daily Telegraph
When the draw takes place in May to decide Britain's opponents for the Davis Cup World Group play-off round in September, it will surely be the toughest since this particular format was introduced.
Indeed, this Germany, who lost in Brazil (amidst riotous crowd behaviour), Spain, Argentina and Holland among those already sure to be involved and others such as Russia (in its new form) and Austria expected to be among them, it ranks alongside this year's World Group quarter final line-up for depth and quality.
Looking back over this year's first round matches, obviously Germany's defeat in Rio by Brazil, amid what can only be described as typical South American frenzy and excitement, was the biggest shock and one which might even lead to repercussions not only by the ITF about crowd behaviour in some parts of the world but also from within the disgruntled German camp.
While in normal circumstances, German players may not object to the sight of nubile South American beauties parading in striking bikinis which left little to the imagination, they can be a bit off-putting when they leap up and down, attracting attention to themselves just when you are about to serve.
Not only that but the din caused by, among others, a small group of drummers, who always seem to arrive at various major sporting fixtures in Brazil, hardly helped either.
It all culminated in three days of frustration which led to complaints of ‘disgusting crowd behaviour’ from the German players.
As one correspondent put it, British umpire, Jeremy Shales and Belgian official Walter Leeman frequently had to warn the 20,000 crowd to moderate their enthusiasm.
This was particularly so on the Sunday when, in scorching heat, Brazilian fans ‘danced, sang, shouted and screamed hysterically for every point scored by their players and ever fault by Germany's Markus Zoecke, standing in for heat-stroke victim Becker, in what proved to be the decisive fourth rubber.
HISSING
There was a constant hissing when Zoecke was serving and coins were thrown on to the court.
Once, when umpire Leeman gave the German a second serving chance because of unfair din after he doubled faulted, several minutes elapsed before play could resume.
It is by no means the first time that there has been unacceptable, totally unsporting behaviour along such lines in that part of the world.
The Mexico–Australia, Paraguay–USA, and Paraguay–France matches a few years ago were other notorious examples.
Indeed, back in 1988 following two of those infamous encounters, Tennis World editor, Alastair McIver, in his article, ‘When Carnival becomes Chaos’ called for the ITF to keep ‘a closer check’on the behaviour of crowds in South America whose national associations are hosting Davis Cup ties.
In my view, the Brazilians should be told in the strongest terms that any repeat when they entertain Italy (whose supporters, I admit, are no angels themselves) in the quarter finals at the end of march, could lead to them being disqualified.
I am pleased to see that the ITF has moved quickly by levying significant fines on the Brazilian Tennis Association for breaches of regulations during the tie, relating to the facilities that were made available in the temporary stadium.
I gather that the match was played at the new centre — little more than a new clay court being put down in an old car park and towering scaffolding stands then being erected around it, rising almost vertically so that it gave the impression of the fans literally hovering over the court.
CRITICISM
Germany's captain Nikki Pilic, who had barely put the debacle surrounding Germany's Olympic nominations behind him, came in for criticism for not resting Becker from the second day's doubles, especially after he had been forced to play himself into the ground to beat Luis Mattar over five sets in exhausting heat on the first day.
The former world champion had saved four match points in rallying from 2–5 in the fourth set, which he eventually won on a tie-break, before winning the fifth set 6–0 but he had little to offer in the doubles, when he and Eric Jelen were beaten in straight sets.
As a result, he was then forced to pull out of the return singles which otherwise he might have won, to keep the tie alive.
Relations between Becker and the rest of the German team would appear to have deteriorated after the incident in Melbourne when, within minutes of learning that Stich and Udo Riglewski had been nominated to represent Germany in the doubles, in Barcelona, he set in motion a chain of events which led to a quick re-think.
Now, Becker and Stich will be the doubles pairing chasing an Olympic gold, providing they can mask the thinly disguised antipathy they appear to have for each other.
We may not have seen the last of this controversy.
THE GREAT ESCAPE
Just as thrilling but achieved in a much more orderly fashion, was Sweden's remarkable escape against Canada in Vancouver,(see special report on page 25), where not only was Stefan Edberg, the world number one at the time, beaten by the little known, 237th   ranked Daniel Nestor on the opening day but Magnus Gustafsson also had to save two match points against the Canadian hero before winning the fifth and decisive rubber from two sets to one down.
The news of Edberg's defeat caused a major stir, as you can imagine, among the British camp in Bayonne, with Tony Pickard, Britain's Davis Cup captain, as well as Edberg's coach, saying ‘When I was told, I was shattered’.
On the other hand, once he knew that Edberg and Anders Jarryd had reduced Canada's lead to 2–1 by winning the doubles, he breathed rather more easily.
‘The Swedes will win it now’ he insisted.
They did.
But only just.
The relief they felt was emphasised by the way Gustafsson's team-mates jumped on to the court, picked him up and tossed him high in the air in celebration at the end.
Canada's disappointment at going so close to a memorable Davis Cup triumph was shared no doubt by Neal Frazer and his Australian team, who had faced the long journey to Cyprus for what was always likely to be a somewhat meaningless match against a no longer credible Yugoslav side, without players from Croatia, even before the injury to Slovodan Zivojinovic, in the first match.
Had Canada won against the Swedes, Australia would then have had a home tie against them with the chance to recoup some of their financial losses in Cyprus, coupled with the incentive of knowing that further success would probably earn them a home match with the United States in the semi-finals.
Instead, they now have to face another marathon journey to Sweden where, on paper at least, they may not feel quite so optimistic about winning.
TIME DELAY NEEDED
One cannot help but feel that one of the reasons why Edberg was beaten in his opening singles — without in any way detracting from Nestor's fine achievement — was that he had  so little time for either his body or his tennis to adjust after the journey to another time zone — and surface — from Australia.
It was a tragedy that this match wasn't being shown on television back home — Pickering
Vancouver is 19 hours behind Melbourne and after the Australian Open final, Edberg effectively gained a day in his life but lost a night's sleep during the journey.
It was another good example of why the sooner it is possible to delay the first round of the World Group matches so that there is more than a full week between them and the first Grand Slam tournament of the year, the better.
It is not for want of trying on the part of The International Tennis Federation.
three years ago, they actually announced first round dates which would have allowed for such a break and only changed their mind after being petitioned by a group of players who had been persuaded by ATP to say they were unhappy to play immediately after the Open.
That is not the case now.
Over the past year I have heard Edberg, Boris Becker, Michael Smith, Andre Agassi and Jim Courier, to mention just a few, bitterly critical of the situation.
The matter was on the agenda of the Davis Cup committee again in February.
Another approach to ATP for a date change seems certain and do not be surprised if this time the pressure from the players points it in a different direction.
Certainly if players such as Edberg, involved in the final stages of the Australian Open, felt even remotely like I did after the 31 hours it took me to arrive home from Melbourne before leaving on another seven hour journey to Bayonne less than 24 hours later, then it is no wonder that many of them are unable to do justice either to themselves or their countries in Davis Cup competition, as things stand.
Not only that, but because the Davis Cup ties were scheduled so soon after the Australian Open, there was no time for Holland's Richard Krajicek, or Germany's Michael Stich to recover in time from injuries to take part.
And certainly n the case of Holland's subsequent defeat by Switzerland, that may have been the crucial factor.
TV TRAGEDY
Perhaps the most apt comment, after Britain's 5–0 defeat by France, the holders, in Bayonne, came from Tony Pickard, who said ‘It was a tragedy that this match wasn't begin shown on television back home’.
Highlights were shown a few days later on Eurosport but there is no doubt that the tremendous effort from Jeremy Bates and Mark Petchey in the two opening singles matches against Henri Leconte and Guy Forget respectively, and the Bates–Neil Broad battles with the Frenchmen,(unbeaten in Davis Cup doubles), deserved a wider audience.
At least the British players demonstrated that they fully deserved to be on the same court — much against many people's expectations.
They also fully deserved the three sets they earned in the first three rubbers and with a little bit of luck would have had a least three more.
And then anything could have happened.
France were not at their best.
Davis Cup nerves certainly got to them as they started their defence of a trophy they had only just won back for the first time since 1932 but full marks to the British challengers who gave of their best in terms of commitment and attitude.
You cannot ask for more than that.
All one would hope is that they and other British players will build on this new spirit of confidence and the opportunity it   provided, by lifting their individual world rankings to a level whereby, in world tennis, they also clearly belong with the best.
AIR MILES
While I suspect that it has absolutely nothing to do with tennis matters,(although I will seek to justify its inclusion in this column in a moment), one thing I have never understood is why long haul flights in airlines are often so much cheaper than those for far shorter journeys.
This was certainly brought home to me when, by taking the long way round Australia this year, i.e. buying a round the world ticket to the Australian Open, rather than a straight forward London–Melbourne return, with a stop-off in Sydney for the New South Wales Open, I saved The Daily Telegraph, which is naturally as cost conscious as any other company in these difficult financial times, a considerable amount of money.
What is more, the journey via New York and Los Angeles included a first leg of the marathon journey on a British Airways Concorde, where I enjoyed that extraordinary experience of arriving in Manhattan — thanks to the five hours time difference — more than an hour before the 10.30 am departure time from Heathrow.
The rest of the journey, not least an eight hour wait for a connection in Los Angeles, was not, I have to admit, so memorable or pleasing.
While in new York, I learned that plans for a virtually new Flushing Meadow complex have been dropped
On the other hand, although I was exhausted by the time I arrived in Sydney, having lost the equivalent of two  nights' sleep, it was not unproductive in terms of collecting tennis news.
For while in New York, I learned that plans to build a virtually new Flushing Meadow complex, beneath the arrivals, rather than the unbelievably noisy take off flight path from La Guardia Airport, have been abandoned.
Soaring costs and the growing fear that the expected $10 million from the City of New York is no longer likely to materialise, have forced officials of the United States Tennis Association to take a completely new look at the whole project.
My understanding is that, instead of a completely new Centre, or Stadium Court as they call it over there, a major refurbishing of the existing facility will be undertaken which will probably also include the provision of a new Grandstand or No. 1 court within the existing grounds.
Even so, original estimates that the plans would cost $150 million have already risen by 20 per cent and the finishing time been put back at least a year until 1996.
While officials in New York refused to confirm that the USTA could forget any idea of financial aid, there is no doubt that, in the current world recession, New York has been hit harder than most and that Mayor David Dinkins, although an avid tennis fan, would have difficulty in getting approval for the money to be spent improving access roads etc to a new tennis facility, in view of all their other problems
FARE COMMENT
New York cabbies are notorious for complaining but Danny, an old friend, who always seems to be around when I am ready to leave The Summit Hotel, assures me that business in one of the world's busiest cities is worse than he had known it in more than 20 years.
‘The Mayor is desperate to attract more money — not give it away to things like the US Open, which is more than able to take care of itself’, he said.
‘Politically, there's no way he can give money for work at Flushing Meadow when we have thousands homeless and barely able to live’.
How effective the ‘make do and mend’ changes which it now seems will be all that the USTA will be able to carry out, prove to be, must be a matter of serious doubt.
The La Guardia flightpath problems apart, one of the main reasons why the current Flushing Meadow is a practical disaster, not least for the world's media, marooned 120 ′ above the Centre Court, where it is impossible to tell the difference between a drive and a lob, is that because of the short time available, they did try (albeit with their best efforts), to adapt the old Louis Armstrong concert stadium into a tennis arena, rather than start from scratch.
The only truly satisfactory solution would be to pull the place down and start again.
If, as now seems certain, that is not possible, then Flushing Meadow, where every regular tennis journalist has his own horror story to tell about the failures of the elevators which carry them to the Press Box in the sky, will remain  ‘the place we love to hate’.
MONKEY BUSINESS
When John McEnroe stunned the tennis world by beating Boris Becker at the Australian Open, after a succession of resounding defeats from the player who succeeded him as Wimbledon Champion in 1985, he described it as ‘getting a monkey off my back.’
For Monica Seles, the issue of her absence from Wimbledon last year remains the monkey on her back.
Indeed, if it was not clear before she went to Australia, it must have been before she left, that only when she has once more played in The Championships — and preferably won the title — will people be ready to forgive and forget.
The very first question Monica was asked when she arrived in the interview room following her comfortable defeat of Mary Joe Fernandez in the final at  Linders Park — apart form the gasp of astonishment and general approval for the 1920's style outfit she was wearing, was ‘Will you go to Wimbledon now?’
‘Yes, definitely’ she replied.
‘I'd have gone there last year but for the shin splints’ she added, before a note of irritation and frustration became evident as she went on to say ‘This question haunted me for half of last year.
I just hope i t's not going to haunt me this year because I really wouldn't want that.’
Fair enough.
It is quite obvious now that if there was more to Monica's missing Wimbledon in 1991 than the shin splints that were eventually given as the reason, she is not going to tell us.
All the intriguing questions which were asked at the time, not least as to why she contributed, either deliberately or through  naivety , to it becoming one of the sporting mysteries of the year in the first place, will have to remain unanswered.
MONICA'S HAT TRICK
I may be wrong, but I suspect that deep down, Monica, who is remarkably mature in many ways for her age, has enjoyed dangling us on a string, not only over the Wimbledon issue but also over her last minute non appearance at the Federation Cup and all the mutterings of official disapproval which that caused.
At times, it is almost as if she is trying to emulate the star-studded image of Suzanne Lenglen, which she clearly admires so much.
Hence the dress and hat which sent the photographers into ecstasy in Melbourne and generally created far more attention and comment than the match in which she had successfully defeated the first of her 1991 Grand Slam titles.
INCREASED FINES
But there has been one major repercussion from Monica's failures to toe the official line.
The Women's Tennis Association have announced that fines for playing in an exhibition without approval in the same week as a major event have been sharply increased to a level which it is hoped will help to prevent it happening again.
For instance, the fine against a player ranked in the top 4 in the world has been increased five times from $20,000 to £100,000.
It is hoped that this will be the sort of figure which will deter those exhibition event organisers, who in the past have been more than content to pay top players such as Seles a six figure appearance fee and cover any fine which they may have incurred.
Only time will tell but at least it is a step in the right direction and certainly in line with the views expressed by Mary Joe Fernandez in a splendidly reasoned and cogent article which she wrote for The New York Times at the end of last year.
In it, she accepted that exhibitions per se are ‘not inherently bad for the game’, especially if they can sometimes take top players to towns which otherwise might never see them.
Yet Mary Joe forcibly made the point that ‘exhibitions can hurt the tour when they take place during the same period, the same City or just the same continent as specified sanctioned tournaments.’
She also pointed out, quite rightly, that exhibitions can mislead the public in that it is seldom, if ever mentioned, that the events have no real relevance, except as a means of entertainment and an opportunity for players to earn more money in a fairly relaxed mood.
Not only do the results have no bearing on rankings — and therefore do not matter — but they are forgotten so far as historical records are concerned almost before the players have walked off the court.
Mary Joe, who was critical of the way Monica played the now infamous Mahwah exhibition for ‘a big guarantee’, described the former level of fines as being like $5 parking tickets.
There will certainly be no complaints from her that far more swingeing penalties have now been introduced.
In fairness, Monica is unlikely to complaint either.
There again it is not the player who pay the fines.
Incidentally as a principle advocate of the WTA's campaign for equal prize money, I wonder if Monica noticed that in 1991, from 15 tournaments, she earned nearly £65,000 MORE than Stefan Edberg, her opposite number in the men's rankings, collected from 20 tournaments.
And Steffi Graf earned £130,000 MORE than fellow countryman Boris Becker, although they both played the same number of official tournaments — 15.
Just thought you would like to know.
Becker serves and suffers in Rio
Boris — heat stroke
Trumpet voluntary in Brazil
Mac gets the monkey off his back
Mary Joe — critical of Seles
JUNIOR SET
by MIKE DONOVAN
the DELGADO EFFECT
Jamie has the ability to be one of the best players in the world — David Lloyd
Jamie Delgado's surname, roughly translated, is Spanish for slim.
That was about the chances of Britain producing any sort of major champion, let alone a world champion.
Well, 14-year-old Delgado makes his Wimbledon debut as one this summer.
And his triumph, which came in the Orange Bowl 14 and under tournament in Florida, has sparked a revolution of optimism among juniors in this country.
Top LTA coach Ian Barclay has seen how much of a kick it has given the promising youngsters under his charge at Bisham Abbey, youngsters like Alex Osterrieth (who reached the last 16 along with fellow Brit Andrew Hill in America), Steven Clark, James Cotman and Barry McColl.
And the Delgado effect is spreading.
‘It's the best thing that could have happened,’ says Barclay, who guided Pat Cash to the senior Wimbledon crown.
‘It's the best thing that could have happened,’ says Barclay, w ho guided pat Cash to the senior Wimbledon crown.
‘It has set every junior in Britain alight.
People now think they can make it and are giving that little bit extra necessary…the girls as well as the boys.’
Delgado's mentor, David Lloyd, agrees.
‘It's good for Britain’, says the former Davis Cup star.
‘And it's now made Jamie even more convinced that he can be one of the best.
He has even more inner belief.’
Lloyd recommends that the British public at large should pop along to Junior Wimbledon and get their first look at a player he believes can finally end the seemingly interminable search for  Britain's first major male champion since the sepia days of Fred Perry.
‘Jamie has the ability to be one of the best players in the world,’ says Lloyd.
Certainly legends John McEnroe, Boris Becker and Jimmy Connors cut their teeth by winning a world junior title.
But Lloyd, who has provided a one-to-one coach in Stephen Shaw, as well as the best hotels, the best tournaments, the best of everything for Delgado, says ‘It's purely up to Jamie.
We can give him the back up, but only Jamie knows if he's hungry enough, self-centred enough.
‘He's got to have that insane desire to be the best.
And I believe he has.
The big money is  irrelevant , being the best is what matters to him.
‘We must keep a sense of perspective about what he's done.
He's had a lot of fuss made of him in Britain, but if he'd have been an American, his win would probably have rated one line in their papers.’
In this country, Delgado is thrown into competitions way above his age group to get the level of experience he needs.
And after Junior Wimbledon for the under 18s he will be off to France in July for the European under-16s.
The plan is to launch Delgado onto the world senior circuit at 16 to continue his learning process.
‘Being a professional tennis player is what I want to be,’ says Delgado.
 ‘It is why my family sacrificed a nice life in Tenerife to come back to the cold of Britain four years ago.
It's a gamble.
We'll have to see it  pays off .
‘And in the meantime, I'm delighted to show juniors in Britain that the British can be winners.
There's a few more coming behind me.’
It looks as though the Birmingham-born son of a Spanish father and a Welsh mother, living in Berkshire, who represents Surrey, could have started something big.
Roll on the British revolution.
LLOYD'S LINES
A life in the day of…
By DAVID LLOYD
Tennis World is pleased to welcome David Lloyd to its pages.
David will give his forthright views on a number of issues, including the state of the game in this country.
This month, however, David reflects on his uniquely busy lifestyle, a lifestyle which sees him manage, coach, commentate, and travel.
My day starts when I climb into my ‘green machine’ and switch on that ‘phone.
The timing of that, like the timing of my whole day, depends solely on the state of the M25 motorway.
My recurring nightmare is that I circle it for ever, never able to get off.
I shouldn't criticise it as everyone else does, because without the M25, it would be impossible to get to all of the six clubs that we have built, strung out like pearls,(or glass beads, my critics would tell you) around  its perimeter.
Fortunately, I love to drive, although there seems little point in having the capacity to reach high speeds when you are bumper to bumper, even less point in having a CD player with quadraphonic sound when you are permanently tuned in to the traffic reports!
However, clockwise or anti-clockwise, the day begins.
COMPLAINING
The water tank at Raynes Park has sprung a leak.
The General Manager is inside it, in a wetsuit, trying to stem the flood.
There is no water; members are complaining.
We have lost £5000 worth of towels in 23 days at Chigwell.
I have curtained the towel service; members are complaining.
The court hearing system at Bushey isn't operating correctly; members are complaining.
The builders are renovating at Eastbourne,(our latest acquisition); the members are complaining.
I plough on, steering my way through the problems, gradually overtaking them one by one, hoping that somewhere, just beyond the horizon, the congestion will clear.
Building works are a trial, as anyone who ever undertakes them will agree.
 Unforeseen problems are around every corner; subsoil inadequacy, drainage deficiencies, utility  inaccessibility , requirements of the building inspector, the fire-officer, the highways department, the licensing officer.
Usually it all comes down to one solution — more money — and when that has been arranged, the battle with the builders is re-arranged to contain the damage.
Our other most important venture is our association with the financier, Jim Slater, to provide a training scheme for young boys to become professional tennis players.
The Slater boys used to be the brightest spot in my day.
Young, chirpy faces to greet me when I finally made it to Raynes Park.
Lately, that pleasure has become a dual-edged sword.
Those faces are looking different, more mature.
They think they can beat me.
They say I'm old and heavy and haven't got a backhand, and slow…slow, me?
Just wait until I get the time and I'll show them who's boss…but I'd better not wait too long!
‘Lloyd Dethroned’ runs a large headline in the evening paper.
My hearts sinks.
What now?
It turns out that the Heston Club team has lost a title that it had held for the past few years.
The fact that it has won it eight out of ten years isn't registered, only glee that it has been beaten.
It's the price of success, I have come to realise, but they won't appreciate the headline.
‘What's he got to do with it?’ they will legitimately ask; members will complain.
There are some days when my car soars around the M25 like a bird.
There is not rhyme or reason to that road, and just occasionally, it is blissfully clear.
There are days when members approach me, and say how much they enjoy the club members who thank me for enriching their lives.
There are builders, architects, bankers, colleagues, consultants, and coaches (with whom it is possible to share jokes and moments of relaxation, knowing what we have been through together and may have to face again, at any moment) to see.
DETHRONED
There are highs — like young Jamie Delgado, a Slater boy since he was ten, winning the Under-14 World Championships — never before in British tennis history has that happened.
And, I suppose, if I've been dethroned I must at some stage have been enthroned!
That must have been a ‘high’.
It's a close call, but days like these when there are ‘highs’ make it all  worthwhile .
I never expected it to be easy, but I do sometimes wish for those moments that I experienced in the distant past, when the umpire used to say, ‘game, set and match’, and you shook hands before entering the comparative safety of the changing room.
COMPETITION
Prevention and Cure
‘Prevention and Cure’ is the theme of this exclusive competition brought to you by the makers of PR Freeze Spray and PR Heat Spray.
Tennis players are notoriously bad in preparing themselves for the season — and especially the ‘off’ season.
They walk onto court with untuned muscles and joints in cold weather and then wonder why they pull a muscle the first time that they stretch for the ball.
It's at times like this that we say ‘thank goodness for PR Sprays’, the convenient ‘alternative’ to ice which cools the skin and offers immediate relief to the pained area.
In this exclusive competition, PR sprays are offering readers six complete kits of fitness, injury and cure equipment.
The pack, worth over £60, includes:
adidas backpack
dumbbells
ankle weights
skipping rope
wrist strengtheners
embroidered towel
wristlets
PR Heat Spray
PR Freeze Spray
All you have to do to win one of these packs, is to answer the following questions and then send your answers to: to arrive no later than Wednesday, April 15th.
DAVIS CUP SPECIAL REPORT
Canadian Rookie Nestor Shakes Edberg
by Tom Mayenknecht
In a Davis Cup debut that smacked of ‘David versus Goliath’, Toronto teenager Daniel Nestor shocked a success starved country out of its winter slumber last month.
The 19 year old lefthander created one of the biggest match upsets in 92 years of Davis Cup when he surprised world No. 1 Stefan Edberg,, in the opening singles of the first-ever World Group series played in Canada.
Edberg and Sweden did stage a solid comeback — their first from a 0–2 deficit in 46 years — but not before Nestor and the ABB Canadian Davis Cup team had captured the public's imagination of a northern nation better known for its ice hockey, snow skiing and figure skating, than for its tennis exploits.
Canadian veteran Grant Connell had set the stage for Nestor in more ways than one.
His upset victory of  over No. 15 ranked Magnus Gustafsson placed considerable pressure on Edberg and took a load of Nestor's slender shoulders.
Nevertheless, it was Nestor who stole the show…and how.
‘That Friday will go down as one of the most — if not the most important days in the history of our sport in this country,’ said Bob Moffatt, President of Tennis Canada.
Robert Bettauer, a former Davis Cup team member who now serves as Director of  Development for Tennis Canada described the series against Sweden as a ‘major breakthrough for Canadian tennis ’.
‘We did everything but win.
We did well enough — far beyond most expectations — to earn some important respect from our opponents and some confidence in ourselves.’
Connell beat Gustafsson in the opener.
Nestor followed with his shocker over Edberg.
But then the doubles, the match which most Canadians viewed as their ‘legitimate shot’, proved to be Sweden's toehold comeback.
Edberg was buoyed up by the energetic and determined play of Anders Jarryd which led to a  win over Connell and Glen Michibata.
That, as it turned out, was the beginning of the end for Canada.
Come Sunday, gone was the ‘nothing to lose’ atmosphere which surrounded the opening singles on Friday.
Edberg regained his form against Connell and played like…well, Stefan Edberg.
His backhand volley was lethal in a  decision.
In the fifth and final match, nobody expected Nestor to pull off more of his Friday night magic.
But in Cinderella-like fashion, he almost did!
He pushed Gustafsson to five sets — and led two sets to one at the traditional break — before finally succumbing in another  classic.
For Gustafsson, it was ‘the best day of (his) life’.
For Nestor, it was a courageous near-miss, an almost-historic encore that placed Canada closer to the final eight than it had been since 1913 (when Canada made the Challenge round final — with only nine countries competing).
AUSTRALIAN OPEN
McENROE MAKES AMENDS
Barry Wood reports from Melbourne on Superbrat's transformation
It didn't really matter that Jim Courier and Monica Seles won the 1992 Australian Open.
What mattered was John McEnroe.
When he last appeared at the superb National Tennis Centre at Flinders Park in Melbourne, McEnroe was defaulted after forgetting that the rules had changed and he was now allowed only two indiscretions and not three.
As he left in shame, few would have envisaged his triumphant return two years later, an  occasion that saw two brilliant victories and a McEnroe that had, perhaps, finally grown up.
HERO
When he was finally defeated, by Wayne Ferreira in the quarter-finals, the man was a hero.
Just short of his 33rd birthday, Superbrat had transformed himself into Supermac.
He beat Boris Becker, the defending champion and a player who had appeared to be relaxed and in comfortable form, and then he beat Emilio Sanchez in one of the most outstanding matches in recent history.
And he did it without once, without once, souring the air with foul language.
Time and time again he would stare at the ground, hand on hip, if he thought he had received a bad call, and then swallow his anger and play tennis.
Why?
‘It's a little bit easier now that I have nothing to lose,’ he said.
‘I felt for a lot of years I did have a lot to lose, when there was only one way to go and that was down, and when things didn't go the way I wanted them to go I blamed others.
‘I think that hurt me a lot, and hopefully this year I can just play.
It was really more enjoyable to feel I was in control.’
What is increasingly important to McEnroe, now that he is probably in his final year, in the picture he will leave in everyone's mind.
He wants to be remembered for more that his ‘Pits of the Earth’ and ‘You cannot be series’outbursts.
He wants people to remember his genius, and at the Australian Open he issued a reminder to all of just how great he still can be.
‘He played tennis on a high level for two and half hours, and didn't give me time to breathe, and that caught me by surprise a little bit,’ said Boris Becker, his prize scalp, after the German had lost .
‘He didn't give me any easy shots, and from the first point to the last he played his old way.’
Exit Becker, enter Sanchez, on a high after just winning the Sydney title.
What a wonderful and thrilling finale there was to that match, as McEnroe held and then lost three match points, saved three against him, and then eventually claimed victory on his sixth match point.
Battle-weary after the 4 hour 42 minute match, which had finished , it was little wonder that the two of them embraced at the net as 15,000 rose as one to acclaim such magnificent entertainment.
CONDUCT
And in that desperate last set, McEnroe survived the strongest test yet on his self-imposed code of conduct when a dubious ace saved the third match point he held on Sanchez's serve.
Any other time, McEnroe would have exploded into a torrent of abuse, but this time he just walked away.
‘I was very happy with myself.
I had gone so far that to blow it at that point would have been a big disappointment for me,’ he said.
‘I didn't want to get negative.
I really didn't have the energy, to be honest, to get into it.
For me to explode would have been absurd.’
McEnroe — Hero
When he did eventually lose to the young South African by , the tournament appeared to suffer from a hangover.
Everywhere was strangely quiet.
But Ferreira had just been too good.
Only one break of serve decided each set, but in reality there was a chasm between them in ability.
‘It was one of those days when it seemed like I had to climb a mountain.
He was really playing great tennis,’ McEnroe conceded, ‘I didn't realise he moved as well as he did.
He puts a lot of pace on the ball, especially with his forehand, and he's able to back it up with a volley.
‘I expected it to turn around, but I never could get over the hump to break his serve.
I don't think I was playing that badly, but I wasn't able to kick it up another gear’
And so he was gone.
Courier beat Stefan Edberg  in the final, which failed by a large margin to live up to it's billing.
The world's top two players found little rhythm, but committed an enormous number of unforced errors in what was a scrappy match best forgotten.
WONDERFUL
Actually, Edberg might not have got beyond the last eight, for Ivan Lendl played wonderful tennis to lead by a set and 5–4.
Then, with the Czech serving for what might well have been a decisive two set lead.
Edberg finally managed to snap into action to win both the set, and the match,.
Lendl is now clearly not the force he was.
Family life and advancing years are responsible for that.
‘I think if I had the confidence of 2 or 3 years ago I would have won the 2nd set and probably the match,’ he said.
‘But obviously you can't have the confidence unless you keep winning, and I haven't been winning since April when I started struggling with injury.’
the former champion said.
Courier, the French Open winner, US Open finalist and World number 2, still goes largely unrecognised, and drew little attention as he worked his way through the draw.
He received a walkover into the final when Richard Krajicek, who may well be the next ‘known’ to win Wimbledon, withdrew with tendinitis in his right shoulder.
The young Dutchman is unusual in that he travels with a ‘mental’ coach, who practices something called haptotherapy.
According to Krajicek, it's based on touching, and the idea is to relax the body so the mind is relaxed too.
It seems to work, for he is one of the most exciting players to emerge in recent times.
He already has wins over Edberg and Lendl, and it was he who ended the title ambitions of Wimbledon Champion Michael Stich.
There was little drama in the women's event, with Monica Seles beating Mary Joe Fernandez 6–2 6–3 in another fairly mediocre final.
It was the Yugoslav's fifth successive Grand Slam tournament victory.
The only doubt concerning whether she would succeed  occurred before the tournament began, when she was spotted with a neck brace.
That was the result of her sleeping badly on the ‘plane, and was serious enough for her to wear a neck scarf during her week of practice, but it caused no problems once the competition began.
Mary Joe's appearance in the final was earned with a 6–1 6–4 win over Gabriela Sabatini in the semis.
To achieve that, Fernandez changed her tactics, and the transformation was little short of astonishing as she served and volleyed her way to victory.
TACTICS
Frequently coming into the net, but solid as ever from the baseline when she needed to be, she reached her second Australian Open final in three years.
What was even more surprising was that the change had been instituted by her new coach Harold Solomon, who was a confirmed baseliner in his playing days.
So alien was it to see Mary Joe playing that way that I suspect she was injured and an android had been substituted, and wrongly programmed.
The programme was changed for the final to allow her to make unlimited unforced errors, and after holding points to win the first four games, which she didn't, she hardly raised a challenge.
Except towards the end, she reverted back to her baseline style.
But, as she explained afterwards, with Seles hitting so hard and so deep, it was very difficult to play any other way against her.
When she did attack, though, she won most of the points, and we shall no doubt see more of it.
There was sadness at the absence of Steffi Graf, who had to return home without playing because, within days of recovering from the flu that had disrupted her appearance at the Hopman Cup, she went down with German measles.
There is much speculation now that Graf's frequent illnesses at the biggest events are caused largely by stress.
It is difficult to disagree, or to see how she can overcome the problem.
There was also sadness as Jennifer Capriati was beaten, 6–4, 7–6 by Sabatini, for it was obvious she is now under considerable strain.
The once vivacious teenager now rarely allows herself a smile, and her lively personality has become buried by the strain of living up to everyone's expectations.
‘There is a lot of pressure from everyone, and it is becoming much more serious now,’ she admitted, while fighting back her tears.
She is 15.
Sabatini had sympathy for her, admitting that she went through the same ordeal before winning the US Open in 1990.
It was very difficult for me.
I was not enjoying tennis and had my doubts about playing,’ she revealed.
‘But I just tried to be patient, and one day everything just started to be okay again.
everybody has to go through those moments.’
Seles had words of encouragement too.
‘You realise a lot of players are no longer scared of you, and if the confidence goes you can go down very fast.
But you somehow get through it, and so will Jennifer.
She will be stronger, and the fun will come back, but it will always be tough at their age,’ she said.
Of the rest, Anke Huber impressed the most.
She lost 7–5 6–3 to Seles in the quarter-finals after disposing of last year's finalist Jana Novotna, but she showed enough, as he has done before, to show the rest of the watching world that she is a major force waiting to erupt.
She really made Seles fight, in a hard-hitting baseline battle which at the same time surely set a new decibel record!
Novotna really made Seles fight in a hard-hitting battle that surely set a new decibel record!
On the British front, Jeremy Bates, who last year drew Boris Becker in the 1st round, this time drew Edberg, and was soundly beaten .
Monique Javer also pulled a bad one out of the hat, and lost .
Monique Javer also pulled a bad one out of the hat, and lost 6–1, 6–0 to Fernandez with a performance that lacked any hint of a challenge.
Sara Gomer, lacking any match practice after busying herself moving house, lost 6–3, 6–2 to wild card Louise Field, and Samantha Smith, also lacking match practice because of a cold, lost  to Kimberly Po.
Clare Wood los 6–4, 6–2 to Halle Cioffe, and it was left, as it is so often, to Jo Durie to fly the flag.
But even she only reached the 2nd round, before losing  to Larisa Savchenko.
Durie and Bates lost their mixed doubles title in the quarter-final to the pair they defeated in last year's final, Scott Davis and Robin White.
And just for the record, Bates played doubles with Edberg, but they lost 6–2, 6–1 to Sergio Casal and Emilio Sanchez in the 1st round.
Courier — Largely unrecognised champion
Seles — 5th successive Grand Slam victory
Fernandez — Astonishing tactics
Capriati — Fought back the tears
VAUXHALL INDOOR TROPHY
ROUND FOUR:SCOTS ENTER THE BATTLE FOR A PLACE IN AREA FINALS 
The first activity north-of-the-border in the Men's Vauxhall Indoor Tennis Trophy saw Bridge of Allan, led by Scottish No. 3 Colin McGill, come through  to defeat Whitecraigs, Glasgow by an emphatic 3–0 margin to earn the right to meet the winner of the North of England region for a place in the National British event's Area play-offs.
Likely to meet the Scottish club are Yorkshire's Ilkley, who re-confirmed their serious intention to succeed in 1992 by beating lowly-placed Barnard Castle School, and then following up this home victory a few days later with a 3–0 away success in a delayed fixture against Topspin Darlington.
CONFRONTATION
Before their confrontation with Ilkley, Topspin scored a wholly unexpected 2–1 victory over former Area leaders Puma Sunderland.
The two sides in Contention for Area 3 honours, Hallamshire Sheffield and the City of Nottingham, both continued their winning ways, as both enjoyed fruitful home victories over Watchorn Alfreton and Melton Mowbray respectively.
CONCEDE
I the bottom of the table battle, Abbeydale Park, Sheffield were forced to concede maximum eight victory points to opponents Corby.
‘Neck and neck’ in Area 4 of this national event are Clearview, Brentwood and Puma, Welwyn.
Brentwood enjoyed a hard-fought home win over third-placed Batchwood, St Albans, whilst the Welwyn leaders collected eight points effortlessly, as their opponents Harpenden were forced to concede the tie.
EMPHATIC
Elsewhere in the division, Welwyn Sp.in made their tally two wins from four games, after their eight emphatic eight points victory over bottom placed Middlesex Polytechnic.
Area 7 champions Royal Berkshire had to work had for their 3–0 victory over Riverside, Chiswick, which makes them unique in the event with maximum points from four matches.
Reigning national champions David Lloyd Slazenger, Heston returned to winning form with a welcome 3–0 victory over Carlton, London, with Roehampton also earning maximum points in their home match against the BBC.
West Hants, Bournemouth took a commanding lead in Area 8 after their 3–0 victory in the fourth found over Manydown, Basingstoke, while Team Excel, Bath affirmed their second place position with a 2–0 win against Alverstoke, Gosport.
There was cause for celebration for the Centrecourt Cardinals, Basingstoke, who had their first ever win in the event with a 2–0 victory over  'Europ, a' Southampton.
Record Centre Maidstone consolidated their table-topping position in Area 6 with a tense and hard-fought 2–1 victory over second placed Bourne Club, Farnham.
 Elsewhere , David Lloyd, Eastbourne earned a 2–1 away win over a weakened Crawley squad, while beleaguered Chris Lane, Woking claimed their first victory of the season with a 2–0 home win against Pavilion & Avenue, Hove.
VALUABLE
The only match to be played in Area 2 saw lowly-placed Upper Armley, Leeds pick up eight valuable points from their home tie with Norman Green Solihull, whilst the second Birmingham-based club in the division, Edgbaston Priory, collected the victory spoils from Newport, Boughey Gardens, who were forced to concede the tie.
FORMER CHAMPIONS
As former champions, Queen's Club rested in the fourth round — head and shoulders above the Area 5 pack.
The battle for middle-order supremacy resulted in David Lloyd, Finchley moving into second place after a 3–0 victory over Connaught Club, London, and Ealing producing their first win of the season with a 2–1 home victory against Walton Astro's.
COACHING COMMENTARY
Catch and Throw
The Key to Good Shotmaking
by OLGA MOROZOVA
Every stroke in tennis, I think, is a natural thing.
If you don't have a racket, you can still learn to play tennis.
You can catch the ball and then throw it.
Let me explain.
I feel very strongly that in tennis, every stroke is catch and throw.
If you're on the baseline, OK the throwing motion is longer.
If you're at the net, the motion is more like a punch, but it's still there.
The throwing and catching principle is very important for the point of contact.
FREEDOM
For example, if you are catching the ball in front of the body, then you have the freedom to throw the ball in any direction but if you catch the ball behind the body, you still have to come back to the position to the front of the body and to do this takes more time.
In modern tennis, you don't have this time  any more .
If you are catching the ball behind you, you are late and you are out of position.
What you need to do to win the point is to put the other person out of position.
By doing that it will then create a situation for you to kill the ball.
If you look at Anke Huber…or Jennifer Capriati, for example, they are both young.
Huber is 16 years old.
They're great girls.
Their bodies are in such harmony.
Anke did not play at her best in the Federation Cup in Nottingham last year but the way she moved was unbelievable.
As a mother I am looking at this girl.
Everything she does is so light…everything is so beautiful.
You feel strong for this girl.
She will be very successful in tennis.
If not tennis then something else.
Her body is telling you that it is ready for anything.
It's a pleasure for any other to see her child being able to do it but of course it's hard work.
All of us are a little bit lazy.
The girls here at Bisham are working hard.
I'm not trying to kill them, but they are now working like everyone else in Europe.
I'm not saying that we are getting there, it's going to take time.
FITNESS
First, there is the physical fitness and technique to learn.
Then you have to create this confidence and confidence only comes with lots of matches.
I have had my experience in Russia and I am trying to create here, what I had there.
One thing is for sure.
We never had in  Russia what we have here.
This (Bisham), is the perfect place.
But having the perfect place is not enough.
There are still many specific things that we have to do here.
(For Olga's thoughts on what needs to be done to improve British tennis, see next months Tennis World .)
Sweetspot Fact File
Ivan Lendl
Age: 32 (on March 7)
Born: Ostrava, Czechoslovakia
Resides: Greenwich, Connecticut
Hobbies: Art, Ice Hockey, Golf
Family: Wife Samantha, daughter Marika and twins Caroline and
Isabelle
Grand Slam titles: Australian (2), French (3), US Open (3)
Career earnings to end of 1991: $18,211,061 (excluding Grand Slam Cup)
READERS' LETTERS
Agassi's American block
It would be tragic if Agassi's rare talent was not rewarded by a Grand Slam title in the near future and a World No. 1 ranking later on.
But lately he has been losing rather too many important matches.
What do David Wheaton, Brad Gilbert, Jim Courier, Aaron Krickstein and Pete Sampras have in common?
Yes, they've all beaten Agassi — in many cases more than once.
Look again.
That's right, they're all Americans.
And one more thing.
Four out of five (I'm not sure about Sampras) are, like Agassi, graduates of Nick Bollettieri's Tennis Academy.
Agassi has proved himself extremely capable against Europeans, Australians and at least one Canadian.
His performance against the Germans in the Davis Cup semi-final was crucial and impressive.
But when it comes to his fellow-countrymen and old school contemporaries, he becomes worryingly erratic.
He can play himself into a commanding position — as he did against Courier in the French Open, Wheaton at Wimbledon and Sampras in last year's ATP final — and then somehow, his judgement deserts him, every time.
It is difficult to escape the conclusion that he has a mental and emotional block about competing with his compatriots.
Agassi is, like Becker one of those players who plays straight from the heart, and unless he sorts out what stops him taking winning opportunities — on an emotional as well as technical level — he may never fulfil his incredible potential.
And that would be a criminal waste.
Video offer
If Sarah Lander (writer of the first ‘Unfair to Stefan’ letter in the December/January issue of Tennis World) would like to write to me, I would be happy to let her have a copy of a video of this year's US Open men's final.
Good luck Martina
Yes, I agree with everything that Karen O'Neil has to say about Martina, she is the greatest woman tennis player ever.
She has a good sense of humour, and very sporting: in other words a very nice person.
It's a pity some of the up and coming players don't follow Martina's example and bit a bit more cheerful on court.
I hope she doesn't retire just yet because Wimbledon and Eastbourne just wouldn't be the same.
Also, I think she has a lot more tennis left.
I also wish her good luck for the future.
Martina the greatest
It is with great pleasure that I take up Mrs O'Neil's call to arms on behalf of Martina.
Martina Navratilova is arguably the greatest woman tennis player of all time.
She is certainly the greatest serve/volley player ever, and at 35 years of age, the greatest player of this age of teenage baseline clones.
Martina is more than just a tennis player however.
She is an articulate, intelligent, well read human being, qualities which I hope she will use in other fields once her tennis career is over,(not yet however).
Exciting Agassi
After reading your December/January issue of Tennis World, I felt I must write to thank you for the article entitled ‘Agassi — A Coach's Dream’.
Since the press seem to take any and every chance they can to doubt his ability to play, this article, and indeed all your support over the last few months, has been more than a pleasure to read.
Because of his lucrative clothing and flamboyant style of play, it was possible to be unsure of his ability as a player, but since we had the good fortune to see Andrew at Wimbledon this year, many people now know what a truly talented and exciting man he really is.
For me, Andre Agassi is the most exciting player to watch.
His  sportsmanship and style of play is refreshing, and I hope to see a lot more of him in the near future.
I don't know if Andre reads Tennis World, but if he does, I'm sure he will be as delighted as I am to hear your continuing support.
Keep it up — he deserves it!
P.S. I hope you can find the room to print my letter, as I am sure I speak on behalf of many devoted Agassi fans.
Martina — the Queen of tennis
On reading Mrs  O'Neil's calling for Martina's fans to get writing, I was compelled to do so.
I've supported Martina since I was 7 years old; I'm now 22 years old.
Martina has delighted me with her form for 14 years which I'd like to thank her for.
If Martina ever retired, the likes of Wimbledon, Eastbourne would not be the same without her.
In my 14 years of support I finally  got to come close to her in 1991 at Wimbledon when she took time out to meet her fans.
I was over the moon.
I managed to get some great photographs and autographs from the Queen of Tennis.
Martina is the only person who jokes with the ball boys and the crowd, also with her opponent.
So  let's  hear it for the greatest tennis player in the world!
So we toast  to you Martina.
Please keep playing for years.
Martina — Second best
In your December/January issue of Tennis World I read a letter entitled ‘Thank you Martina’.
I am writing to say that I agree, Martina has to be the best player in the world next to Billie Jean King.
I have been a great fan of Martina's since I was about 5 or 6 and I am now 15 going on 16.
Since then, I have watched every Wimbledon she has been in.
After her quarter-final defeat by Jennifer Capriati I was very happy to see her get through to the final of the US Open, only to be beaten by Monica Seles, unfortunately.
P.S. Let's see you win Wimbledon again Martina.
Deduct points and levy fines
I was so impressed with the ‘Rule Breakers’ article by Alastair McIver that I just had to write in with my opinion on the subject.
I went to Brighton and saw for myself the absence of most of the top players due to other events taking place.
I must add that personally these absences didn't really bother me as my number one champion was there and went on to win, in what was a scary final for me.
But most of all, I wasn't at all impressed with the absence of Monica Seles.
I think she should have played a Tour Event before an exhibition event, but then again it wouldn't be the first time she hasn't turned up for a Tour Event would it?
Personally, I think and agree that much greater fines should be given as well as the deduction of points from their rankings table.
By doing this, I think players would think twice before pulling out of Tour Events as it could mean the difference of being world number one and world number two, which I believe means a great deal more to them than they would like to admit.
P.S. I would like for Monica Seles' fans to know that there's nothing personal in my mentioning her, but given the circumstances I think I am right in using her as she didn't commit herself to the Tour Events much last year.
P.P.S. I would like to thank Steffi for being herself and for being a great supporter of Tour Events from what I can see.
Good luck Steffi for the rest of 1992.
Brilliant Stefan deserves a break
I like to read all the reader's letters in the magazine.
I agree with the letter that have been written under the headline of ‘Unfair to Stefan’.
He is a very skilled and brilliant player, also a proper gentleman on the court very fair and no matter who he plays, whether a low ranked or high ranked player, he has great respect for them.
He is a pleasure to watch.
The picture in the Sweetspot is a very good one and very pleasant to see.
I am still waiting to see Goran Ivanisevic who is my favourite player in the Sweetspot, so come on, how about it.
He is cute and so sweet.
I can see him winning Wimbledon in the future.
 Editor's Note:
Thank you for your letter Mrs Surridge.
We will indeed be publishing a picture of Goran in our Sweetspot section in a future issue so…watch this space.
Edberg — Gentleman
JUNIOR TENNIS WORLD
EXPANSION PROGRAMME FOR JTC
ALASTAIR McIVER REPORTS
Junior Tennis Centres (JTC), the company formed in 1988 by Keith Sohl and Adrian Stonebridge, with the sole purpose of switching the emphasis on court time from seniors to juniors, has ambitious plan to expand its operations countrywide.
INTENTIONS
Junior Tennis Centres have ambitious plans over the next few years — Keith Sohl
Notice of managing director Sohl's intentions came recently when he brought Bruce Lawson from the highly successful Puma Sunderland ITI Centre, down to his Sutton Centre.
‘Junior Tennis Centres have ambitious plans over the next few years,’ says Sohl.
‘The Company was looking to appoint a person with a great deal of ‘hands on’ experience to take over a development role at management level.
Bruce has got the right track record and I feel confident he will get results.’
Lawson's record with junior development in the north east was, indeed, formidable, culminating last summer in recognition from the LTA, which voted Sunderland the top ITI Centre with the best junior development programme.
EXPERIENCE
It is this experience which first tempted Sohl to seek out the Geordie and eventually bring him down south.
For his part, Lawson needed little encouragement to accept the exciting challenge that confronted him.
‘I'm most impressed with what I  have seen so far,’ says Lawson.
 ‘There are plenty of juniors — some of them national standard — already participating in the Centre's programmes.’
The Concept of JTC is simple and, in British tennis terms, longs overdue.
If British tennis is to ever rise above the mediocrity that it has wallowed in for decades, then juniors have to be given greater access to courts and coaching.
MESSAGE
Traditional clubs just didn't want to hear that message so Sohl, frustrated with the depressing state of affairs, built his own centre in Sutton.
The centre, in a joint venture with the LTA's ITI scheme, has recently added five indoor courts to supplement the already existing five outdoor, floodlit courts, although the overall management of the Centre remains with JTC — and Lawson.
FUNDING
‘Indoor tennis for juniors without high charges for membership and facilities is commercially unrealistic,’ says Sohl.
‘However, with the help of considerable capital funding from the ITI, and through a joint venture approach with Sutton Borough Council, who provided capital, land and an annual subsidy, the original concept has been developed into a working model aimed at serving as an example for other local authorities to consider.’
JTC has recognised the restrictions placed on juniors because of the huge adult demand and the lack of affordable indoor tennis facilities — Bruce Lawson
Sohl is committed to ‘juniors first’, a fact endorsed by his own capital investment o £250,000 into the Sutton centre.
It is run on a ‘Pay and Play’ basis, with a small annual fee for those who want the privilege of advance booking facilities.
 Although the Centre welcomes seniors, the emphasis remains firmly with the 550 plus juniors who attended the club regularly.
Activities and programmes are organised primarily for the benefit of juniors.
‘Adults have always come first in tennis clubs,’ says Lawson.
‘JTC has recognised the restrictions placed on juniors because of huge adult demand and the lack of affordable indoor tennis facilities, which meant that those which were available were usually beyond the reach of most families.’
The accusation of affordability cannot be levelled at Sutton Junior Tennis Centre.
For just a £15 fee per annum, juniors can enjoy unlimited play year round.
CONVINCED
However, if you're still not convinced, then Tennis World can help you.
As part of our commitment to junior tennis, we are offering anyone who is interested in joining the Centre a voucher for £1 off the usual membership fee of £15.
Just cut out the voucher at the foot of the page and take it along to the Centre, which is located in Rose Hill, Sutton, and you will be allowed to join the Centre for just £14.
For further details, call  
Bruce Lawson
1991–92 adidas Challenge
The second round of the ‘adidas’ Challenge tournaments, which were held over the Christmas period, gave a strong indication of the interest and popularity that they have with young players throughout the country.
Event 14 at Nottingham perhaps attracted the largest entry for the 14 and Under and 11 and Under age groups.
Some 67 boys and 38 girls applied for the 14 and Under event with 30 boys and 25 girls for the 11 and Under, sufficient to run two separate tournaments.
Thanks to the new Corby ITI Centre being able to offer 3 days worth of court time at extremely short notice, a second event for the boys was stated resulting in all but 3 players being accommodated.
The Nottingham venue took the higher rated players with Corby taking the remainder.
Paul Delgado took the honours in the Nottingham event, adding to the success of the Delgado family following the exciting news of elder brother Jamie's victory in the ‘Orange Bowl’.
The successful entry at 14 and Under was also echoed in the South East with 42 boys and 25 girls wanting to play!
The East Region's 10 and Under event, held between December 30th and January 3rd, also proved equally attractive to young aspiring players.
Some 39 boys and 35 girls entered the event and with the aid of additional courts and clever formatting, all 74 competed.
ON THE BUSES
Cliff's Schools Initiative is Just the Ticket
— by Alastair McIver
Children from over 60 primary schools countrywide have been invited to take part in the Cliff Richard Tennis Trail, the new initiative launched at the All England Club in true showbiz style at the end of  February .
The Trail, which is being sponsored to the tune of £300,000 over a minimum of three years by Direct Line Insurance, will visit 6 cities during  April and  July , spending a week at each.
During that time, youngsters between the ages of 7 and 11 will be assessed for athletic and tennis skills.
At the end of each week, local ITI centres will be used to invite families to Tennis Extravaganza weekends which, it is hoped, will further encourage family participation in the game.
Any child who shows the right potential will be invited to return to the centres in the autumn for assessment by some of Britain's leading coaches, including .
From that  assessment , a group to be known as the Trailblazers will be formed and will come under the guidance of the Cliff Richard Development Trust, which is already supporting some 11 youngsters who previously  progressed from the former Search for a start scheme.
The new scheme, which, it is hoped, will introduce tennis to some 20,000 youngsters over the next three years, has been masterminded by former British Women's Team manager, Sue Mappin, most recently remembered for her success in staging the 1991 Federation Cup tournament in Nottingham.
Mappin has been involved with Cliff Richard tennis projects for some nine years now, and this latest development, particularly the extravaganza ‘family’ idea, would appear to be a natural progression from her success of last year.
Certainly it will benefit the regions and will be welcomed by all those who have been advocating the long overdue taking of tennis into towns and cities in a sort of ‘Roadshow’ format.
At long last, it is being done.
As Mappin says, ‘…someone had to take tennis to the public…’
That is true.
Tennis itself should be grateful that the game has thrown together people such as Cliff Richard (who modestly declines to take any credit other than that of name association) and Mappin herself, not to mention the substantial support of Direct Line Insurance, with the drive and commitment to do just that.
Footnote : The annual Cliff Richard Pro Celebrity Tennis event, which has in the past enticed such unlikely names as  onto court to raise funds for the Tennis Development Trust, will this year be played at the National Indoor Arena, in Birmingham, in December.
Formerly, the event took place in Brighton.
The move will double the number of people who can attend this popular event, from 4000 to 8000.
Cliff — having a ball
DIRECT LINE INSURANCE THE PERFECT TENNIS PARTNER
EXCLUSIVE COMPETITION
Win a week's coaching at Nick Bollettieri's tennis camp in Florida, courtesy of adidas.
It's true — one of our readers is set to win a week's all expenses paid trip to one of the world's most prestigious tennis camps.
Your week (date to be advised), will include:
Return flights to Miami
Accommodation
Coaching
All you have to do to stand a chance of winning this great prize is to answer the following questions and complete the tie break:
Pam and the PRESIDENT
In this Presidential Election Year, Pam could well treat the campaign trail once again for her friend the President.
Barry Wood reports
Pam Shriver has always been one of the most colourful tennis professionals.
She is a character, and has a biting wit, the gift of finding the right word at the right time.
Many of her comments and asides bring laughter, but she also has the ability to put her foot in her mouth with remarks that lack diplomacy and tact.
She is, for instance, a sworn enemy of the Maleeva family after nick-naming Manuela and Katerina as the ‘Boo Hoo sisters’ in her book, ‘Passing Shots’.
That lack of sensitivity has not made her especially popular in the locker room, but she has nevertheless gained enough respect to be selected to the board of the Women's Tennis Association over many years, and she currently serves as its President.
One of my favourite memories of her goes back a few years to when she was playing Martina Navratilova in New England.
Pam was losing…heavily.
So late in the second set, she walked across the scoreboard and changed it to show the match going in her favour.
Then she sat down in the middle of the court.
‘Play on’, said the umpire.
‘I don't want to,’ Pam wailed, much to the amusement of the crowd — and Martina.
BREAKDOWN
Always one of the most emotional of players, she has many times used her frustration during matches to entertain.
But so often there are tears behind the smiles, and Pam came close to having a  breakdown a couple of years or so back.
She lost interest in singles, and went around pulling out of tournaments and saying that doubles was more important.
Her self-discipline and game went to pieces, and she was stunned when Martina, disturbed at Pam's fragile mental state, eventually called time on their long-standing doubles partnership.
INJURY
Eventually the hunger returned, but her comeback to respectability was delayed by a serious shoulder condition that required surgery and months of rehabilitation.
Even now, she is still in the process of recovering lost ground.
‘A lot of things brought it on, but I guess Elise Burgin's mother being killed in a car accident definitely catapulted me further into that stage,’ said Pam, who saw tennis in a different perspective after her life-long friend's mother died in the spring of 1989.
‘But it started before that, when I came back from Australia in February.
Bush had been inaugurated while I was in Australia, and when I came home, I started getting all the bizarre ideas that maybe I'd had enough of tennis.
Maybe I wanted to go into some other field, get into politics.
DISTRACTED
‘I just became extremely distracted.
My mind was the furthest away it could be to playing singles, so I pulled out of a couple of tournaments.
I decided doubles was getting short-shrifted so went off on that tangent.
‘I would do that for about four days, and then go off on something else.
There were all sorts of things going on with the WTA board, and I took a leadership position there.
There were a lot of distractions, and I was looking for the.
I was  pursuing them.
Most recently, she had been elected as President of the WTA Board.
So, her involvement in tennis politics remains as strong as ever.
So does she regret that period of her life?
‘It was probably a very good growing stage of my life,’ says Pam.
‘It was the only time in my life that I've drifted, and I think maybe in order to grow you need to drift some.
‘But it was painful, because I was very unpredictable.
It was the only time in my life I've been a pain to my family.
I was turning to people I didn't know that well and confiding in them, and I could have been led down any garden path.
I was very vulnerable.
‘Then the thing with Martina didn't help.
It shook me up the way the split was done for the 1990 US Open.
It was a couple of weeks before and I was left high and dry without a partner.
That kind of hurt because we'd had a relationship for nine years.
But it probably helped our friendship, because we've been through a lot since then.
‘Mary Joe Fernandez and I got hooked up though, and it would have been a fairy book finish if we could have won it.
But we lost 6–4 in the 3rd in the final.’
(Ironically against Martina, who played with Hana Mandlikova).
CONFUSED
It's been a long road back from those dark and confused days, and Pam is grateful for whatever she can achieve these days.
‘If you're in the top 10 and let go even for an instant then you might as well be 200,’ she says.
‘When I realised after months that I wasn't ready to quite, it was a case of ‘okay, I've opened the floodgates, how do I close them?’
And that's been a very long process.
‘So it's all a bonus when I think of where my head was two years ago.
I feel like it's a second career.
I was so frustrated with everything, my life and my game, the whole scene, that I just couldn't see straight.
Now I'm really enjoying it.’
She's even been playing again with Martina, most recently in Tokyo in February.
UNSEEDED
In 1990, they found themselves in the bizarre situation of being unseeded at Wimbledon, where they had won the title five times.
Last year they reached the semis at Wimbledon, also unseeded.
‘We were so good for so long that we took it for granted.
We went out there and knew we were going to win our matches and crush them.
I would be lying to you if I said it was the same now.
We're at different stages in our lives, but I would love to try and get back on track to where we were playing   really good matches.’
But why, when she's been playing for so long, has millions in the bank and leads a very active life outside the tour, does she still have the desire to compete?
‘It's a great life being a professional athlete.
You travel all over the place, you meet a ton of people, you stay in great shape.
There's like a challenge to try and get the most out of your mind and body in a sport which I think is as international as any other.
I get a real charge out of working hard and seeing good results.
‘I could be involved in a number of different ways,’ she continues, ‘but I can still do it well enough, and you never know what's around the next corner.
‘Look at what happened to Gomez in 1990.
I'm not saying I'm going to have one of these Grand Slam win breakthroughs, but I think I still have enough tennis in me to have a few more great moments.
I think tennis still growing and it's a very exciting time to be involved.’
But what about when she does eventually call it a day.
Her friendship with President George Bush is reflected in her interest in what takes place on Capitol Hill, and her wonderful skill at public speaking suggests that she might take up politics.
She  admits that is one option open to her.
‘At some stage, when I stop playing competitively, I will need to make some sort of career decision about where the majority of my energies will go.
‘The easiest thing to do would be to piecemeal together a career of some commentating, corporation outings, being a spokesperson, doing a little bit of the tennis politics, doing some coaching for the USTA.
It would be very easy to put a very full life together with that, together with everything I have going in Baltimore.
‘But at some point I will need to sit down and figure out if I want to make a real career shift into another area, such as politics.
I don't know yet.
Sometime I will need to figure out if I want to make a real career shift — such as politics.
‘I might do the tennis stuff for three or four years and decide I can do it sleepwalking and turn to something I really care about and like to  pursue , which is politics.’
By the way, how did Pam get to know perhaps the second most powerful man on earth?
‘When he was vice-president, I met him at a stage dinner when the Reagans were in the White House and we had a dance and we talked about playing tennis.
‘Then, about a month later, he asked me to go up to Camp David while he and his family were using the facility.
I found out later it was the weekend that he decided to definitely make a run for the presidency.
That was in the spring of '85.
‘That was the start.
Then I went over to the vice-president's mansion and played tennis at the naval observatory in Washington a bunch of times.
We had barbecue lunches.
When you're vice-president you have a lot more spare time.’
But how come she got invited by the Reagans…?
No forget it.
Martina isn't the only player to have dropped Pam as a partner, by the way.
George Bush has too, but then he's been a rather busy fellow of late.
‘I did see him twice in May, but they were with group functions.
There aren't two days go by though when I don't think of him, because there was a time when we'd play tennis four or five times a year.
‘I just have so much respect for him, and to have known him, someone in that position, is interesting.
It definitely puts a human spin on it.
‘Lots of times I think a president seems so out of your league as far as knowing somebody.
But he's just a regular, down to earth person, so I have great faith.’
Of course, being down to earth is one of Pam's greatest strengths, and it's good to know she's back on track and that we'll still be able to laugh with her for a while yet.
Pam and Elise Burgin meet President and Mrs. Bush
Bob Thomas — Brunskill
Pam — still recovering lost ground
POWER
WHAT A RACKET!
More and more rackets come onto the market as technology moves on.
Tennis World brings you the ultimate guide for 1992…
In Kennex's NF2, vibrations simply cannot sustain themselves and are instantly muted
There's no let up, is there?
The company names might be the same — but the list of products used in the manufacturer of the rackets that they produce, becomes ever more complex.
Take Dyneema, for example.
No, it's not a new company on the market — it's one of the raw materials used in the manufacture of Mizuno tennis rackets.
What does it do?
Well, a look at the Mizuno brochure will tell you that, when used in conjunction with graphite and boron, it assists in the provision of impact resistance and vibration dampening while increasing stiffness for its pro Series 9.2, the top of the range racket for the advanced club or professional player and racket which retails for £139.
STRONGER
Dyneema fibres are ten times stronger than steel and lighter than water.
Professional players who use the Pro Series 9.2 are Amy Frazier, Susan Sloane and Nick Brown.
So what about Ivan Lendl?
Don't worry.
The Eagle 1, the stiff shaft racket with flexible head which launched the former World No 1's association with the company and its tennis programme in 1990, is alive and well and functioning well alongside Mizuno's new products.
Another company which uses Dyneema in its racket manufacture is Rossignol.
The Vectris 9000 DP employs in its manufacturing process, the Dyneema Plasma Process in conjunction with high modulus graphite and fibreglass materials.
The retail price of the Vectris DP is £149.
How about NF2?
How about it?
Well, I can tell you it's a product, a thermoplastic fibre which is strong and flexible, and which, when combined with high modules graphite, provides a very strong frame with tremendous vibration dampening properties, resulting, according to Pro Kennex, in a very comfortable racket.
The racket in question is the new Asymmetric NF2, which has an asymmetric head design, an innovative bonus for those who suffer from tennis elbow.
According to Kennex, any given section of any symmetrical frame-by width-responds to ball impact of vibrating at its own discreet frequency.
However, an asymmetrical head design, by virtue of its different width, can neither develop nor transmit vibration at that same frequency.
Vibrations simply cannot sustain themselves and are instantly muted.
The Asymmetric NF2 is Kennex's top of the range widebody and it retails for £179.95.
Also of widebody design is Dunlop's  highly acclaimed Revelation.
Launched on the back of its patented ISIS (Impact Shock  Absorption System), the Revelation, claims Dunlop's R and D manager Bob Haines, gives three times greater shock suppression than any other compression racket.
POWER
‘ISIS allows for all the power benefits of widebody rackets, but it also adds a medical advantage that is a distinct benefit no matter what level of player you are,’ says Haines.
‘Quite simply, ISIS dramatically reduces the potential for arms problems.’
It's quite a claim, but Dunlop are confident that their 100% graphite Revelation, at £169.99 will meet the needs of the UK club market.
Dunlop are confident that their 100% Revelation will meet the needs of the UK club market
And now for something completely different…a racket which the manufacturer claims has criteria which no other racket can provide.
What are they?
What is it?
Well, the racket is the Protagon racket, from Germany.
Its characteristics include adjustable string tension, a system which has been underrated in previous years but which has incalculable benefits to the regular club enthusiast.
Tension adjustment has the ability to adapt the racket to your game and conditions, a major bonus for British club players who are often forced to play in damp conditions.
The system works by way of a key inserted in the handle which can be turned both clockwise and anti clockwise to meet the requirement.
One additional benefit of adjustable string tension is that it can allow tightening to compensate for natural string slackening.
The other benefits of the Protagon are that the strings are not ‘fixed’ on the frame, rather they are guided down into the handle, ‘floating’on the frame, according to the manufacturers, thereby equalizing the tension over the entire racket face.
Because the racket has a diagonal string pattern, spin shots (top spin and slice) become easier to play, basically because the strings on such a pattern are longer and therefore the ball rests on them for longer.
Protagon rackets use ore strings (15 metres) than others, which, according to the company, reduces shock from the frame to the arm.
Dunlop — Revelation
Head — Discovery
Control
Fan stringing enables the player to impart more spin on the ball and also extends the power zone — Slazenger
New to Slazenger range of rackets for 1992 is the Mystique, a range of two (95 sq.
″ and 115 sq.
″) widebody design rackets made of 100% high modulus graphite and featuring Slazenger's Optimum Mass System, which adds weight to the head at the five, seven and twelve o'clock positions, increases torsional rigidity and works with the fan stringing to expand the power zone.
ELONGATES
Fan stringing?
It's the most noticeable feature of the Mystique design and is a system which elongates the 10 outer strings.
This enables the player to impart more spin on the ball and also extends the power zone for off centre hits.
In the Mystique, Slazenger feel that they have countered the two main problems experienced by club players, that of reduction in ball control and the increase in arm injuries.
Both Mystiques retail from £179.99.
The Omni 2 from Sp.in, in 100% graphite enjoys the benefits of two tension string technology, a system in which the 16 main strings are 50%–60% greater than the cross strings.
Such technology, according to Sp.in means that power, control and playability are all enhanced.
Another widebody, the Sp.in Omni 2 is the racket used by British No 1 Jo Durie.
It retails for £139.50.
From Yonex comes the RQ-380 widebody of carbon graphite, boron, kevlar and fibreglass construction.
The racket benefits from IPS (Integrated Power Weight System) which produces a greater ‘moment of inertia’ on the frame face to increase stability and add more power to every shot.
IPS is a system which sees integrated weights engineered directly into the frame at the 3 o'clock and 9 o'clock positions.
This, claims Yonex, reduces torque, or twisting, thereby improving player comfort and reducing the risk of injury.
The RQ-380 is Yonex's top of the range racket and retails at £184.99.
The Discovery features three technologies to increase power, enlarge the sweetspot and minimise frame weight
New to the Head range of tennis rackets for 1992 is the Discovery, a racket which features three technologies to increase power, enlarge the sweetspots and minimise the frame weight.
The Double Power Wedge (DPW) widens the cross section at the tip and base of the frame which widens the sweetspot at the throat and provides the player with maximum power.
DPW is combined with a new innovation — the Symmetrical Bridge Concept (SBC).
The throat bridge and racket tip are symmetrical which strengthens the frame uniformly, hence diminishing racket deflection and transferring more energy to the ball.
The third design feature — Integral Racket Design (IRD) allocates construction materials only to the points where they are needed.
The fibre layers are different according to the required stiffness at that point of the frame.
IRD has reduced the overall weight of the frame, providing a lighter swing weight thereby minimising the effort required by the player on the execution of his shots.
The Discovery, which comes in 3 different head sizes, retails at £199.
Hammer system technology is the driving force behind the 1992 Wilson range, with the launch of the Pro Staff Hammer alongside the Profile Hammer.
The 1992 Wilson range incorporates all the benefits of Hammer technology — superlight weight, exceptional feel and increased control and power.
Introduced specifically for tournament and advanced players, the Pro Staff Hammer, which incorporates all of the benefits of the Hammer system — superlight weight, exceptional feel, increased control and power — complements the wider audience of players currently using the Profile Hammer.
Both rackets retail for £199.
Perhaps two of the newer names to the racket market — in the UK at least— are Pro-Go and Citation.
The latter brand, which hails from the USA, and which is distributed by Fulcher Tennis, in Suffolk, is a 4 racket brand, the top of the range of which is the Citation 100, an 80%/20% graphite/fibreglass racket which incorporates the ‘Contour Step’ at three points in the frame, to eliminate shock.
The racket tapers from a continuous 28mm beam to 22mm in the throat back to 28mm in the shaft.
The manufacturers claim that this makes for a ‘powerful yet forgiving’ frame which is easy on the arm.
Prince's Vortex boasts a 96% reduction in vibration, while ‘Dynamic Stiffness’ allows the racket to adjust to every shot
The Citation 110 is a jumbo sized, widebody which retails at £139.
Meanwhile, Pro-Go, from Taiwan, are introducing the Volcano Series, which includes two Jumbo rackets, the STC-616W and the STC-616, both of graphite construction and both of ‘oval’ shaft design.
The benefits of woven oval shafts (STC-616) can be seen in the aerodynamics of the racket, which, claims Pro-Go, assists in the creation of faster movement through the air.
The woven fibres reduce torque to give stability and good balance.
This in turn allows for control even with off-centre hits.
PRECISION
Power, precision and control are the by-words for Donnay rackets an in particular, their new Ghost Series.
High on technology, the Ghost OS and SM (Supermidsize and Oversize), feature Arch Section technology, and concept inspired of Gothic and Romanesque architecture, no less.
The application of this technology strengthens the head of the racket without increasing its weight.
This increased stiffness offers more power without increasing the effort required for each shot.
The result is added comfort to your game.
The Ghost rackets are of 100% graphite construction and retail for £199.99.
AERODYNAMICS
Aerodynamics are a feature of the new ‘Assault’ range, from Spalding.
The Assault 110 (110 sq.
″) is light, stiff and benefits from the straight throat beam (STB) design which helps to prevent the racket twisting after off centre hits.
The racket also absorbs shock on impact by way of its Tri-Level Shock Suppression System.
In 100% high modulus graphite, the Assault 110 retails for £129.99
Moving up the price scale a little, we come to the Vortex from prince UK.
At £299, you'd expect something special and that's exactly what you get — a break from traditional composite racket construction and a move into US Air Force technology.
It's called Dynamic Stiffness and, claim Prince, the principle is very simple; the greater the dynamic force (hard swing) the stiffer the racket becomes for maximum power while the gentler the dynamic force (soft swing) the more relaxed the racket becomes for optional touch.
Effectively, Prince are saying that the racket adjusts to every shot, quite a claim.
The Vortex is constructed from a visco elastic polymer and continuous carbon fibres which, in addition to the Dynamic stiffness qualities, reduces vibration by up to 96%.
At the other end of the budgetary scale, Rucanor have a range, the top of which, the T550, retails for just £47.95.
Two new rackets for 1992 are the Break Through and the Break Point.
Both are aimed at club level players.
ADVANCED
The Break Through is of 50% graphite/50% fibreglass construction, and is a widebody profile for the more advanced club competitor.
The Break Point in 30% graphite/70% fibreglass, is an altogether more flexible racket.
Both rackets have a synthetic protective bumper guard and both come in two colourways.
They retail for £39.99 and £35.99 respectively.
STICH
Top of the Fischer range is the Vacuum 280 as sued by none other than Michael Stich, Wimbledon champion.
The 280 is a lightweight tournament racket of high modulus graphite.
Available in mid and oversize, the racket retails for £169.
Slazenger — Mystique
Wilson — Pro Staff Hammer
Lobster — Citation Series
Donnay — Ghost
Prince — Fortex
Try YONEX GRASP THE CONFIDENCE
Lloyd's Club Class by ALASTAIR McIVER
ALASTAIR McIVER
Tennis World reports on the growth of the Lloyd empire
It was an American who said, ‘I don't want to be good.
I want to amaze…’
It has taken a long time for such unashamed aspiration to reach these shores, yet now, that mentality which is increasingly being demanded by the British in pursuance of their leisure activities, has finally arrived.
David Lloyd clubs, all 7 of them — and more to come — are building their reputation on quality of service, something which has allowed him the entrepreneurial satisfaction of seeing his company expand, when others around him are failing, victims of all the British recession.
‘I look at quality of service everyday,’ says Lloyd's Marketing Director, Keith Furphy.
‘We have to maintain the high standards which we have set in order for growth to continue.’
Furphy, whose recent past included a spell in the United States,(where a high flyer leisure executive delivered the ‘amazing’ one liner, which has stuck in his mind to this day) is the hands on marketing man whose job it is to oversee the vast membership growth that is enabling Lloyd to expand at the rate of two clubs per year.
With an average of 10,000 tennis playing members in his clubs alone, Lloyd has hit upon the formula which by its very success, is speedily replacing the ‘traditional’ tag which had so burdened the British tennis club over the years.
For too many years, British tennis clubs have been their own worst enemies…mismanaged, misused and (not entirely their own fault), misguided.
The result has been a steady decline in membership as members began to demand the type of facilities that they saw in squash and golf clubs.
What is more, they were prepared to pay for it.
In 1982, Lloyd identified those needs and filled the vacuum by providing the first of the clubs that the 1990's tennis player — and his family — desired.
That is why today, some years on, at a Lloyd club near you, there is the opportunity not only to play tennis (naturally) squash, and racket ball, but also to benefit from the  wider aspects of health and fitness via the clubs fitness facilities and aerobics classes.
At one of Lloyds most recently opened clubs, Lloyd's Lanes, in Enfield, North London, you can even ten pin bowl your way to fitness and fun.
‘The Enfield club is split into two different units,’ says  Lloyd .
‘We are testing the market place.
We'll look at anything.
Tenpin bowling has cheap membership and I believe at the end of the day, that people want to belong to clubs.
It appeals to all the family, including youngsters.
Our philosophy is to encourage youngsters.’
EXCITING
By providing interactive and exciting programmes for women on a daily basis, and creche facilities for their children, Lloyd effectively widened the potential membership base for his clubs, a move that has paid off handsomely, with waiting lists in many of the disciplines at four of the clubs.
Health and fitness, in particular, have proved extremely popular and the clubs gymnasia are experiencing increased  usage .
Such facilities, which include homely ‘lounge’ bar and restaurant areas, have not escaped the notice of the corporate world, where an increasing demand for ‘staff awaydays’has resulted in a boom time for the clubs in this area.
PRIORITY
‘The corporate side is important to us’, says Lloyd, ‘although members will always be the priority.’
Lloyd's long term aim is to open two clubs a year for the next ten years, a target that, if achieved, would give him 23 by the end of the century.
Indeed, in a move designed to speed up the process Lloyd has made a ‘little publicised’ offer to the Lawn Tennis Associations ITI set up, which would see him build  centres — ITI centres — and run them as such, in addition to running them as private clubs.
It would appear to be an astonishingly generous offer to the game in this country, given that the only person who stands to lose out of such a venture is Lloyd himself.
‘It's the best offer that the councils could ever get involved in,’ says an enthusiastic Lloyd.
‘The council provides the site, I take care of their £400,000 investment which in the current economic climate they can't find, and the LTA gives me their £200,000 grant to run it.
‘Eight acres is all the council needs — we'd build the club and manage it both as pay and play and as a private club.
‘The first council to do it would share in enormous benefits.’
As the Lloyd empire grows, so too does the facility to create environments — facilities — from which champions can be produced.
Following the success of Jamie Delgado in the Orange Bowl tournament in Florida in December, Lloyd confirms that he is looking to expand upon the squad scheme from which Delgado has emerged.
‘It's our intention to have junior squads in all of clubs.
We'll be having open days in March and April to look at any youngsters.
Anyone who's interested should write to me at Heston.’
All of which is surely good for the future of British tennis.
Currently, his network of clubs covers the south east of England, in Heston, Raynes Park, Chigwell, Finchley, Enfield, Eastbourne and Bushey, although he is already looking at new sites in Kent and Scotland and the intention is to expand to other areas of Britain, including Northern Ireland.
BUILDING
‘We're looking at two other sites at the moment, ‘confirms Lloyd,’ and if everything goes well we can look to start building in the summer.’
That is good news for the areas concerned, in terms of both the facilities provided — not to mention the creation of jobs.
Perhaps it's no wonder that Lloyd Clubs won LBC's (London  Broadcasting Company Business Excellence Award last year.
OFF COURT
Bubbly Brown
Former British Davis Cup player Nick Brown, has formed an association with leading Methode Champenoise producer, Freixenet.
Freixenet, makers of the Cordon Negro brand of champagne, are already involved in tennis via the ‘Embassy’ National Team Conference.
Nick's association with Freixenet, which will see him wearing the Freixenet logo on his tennis clothing throughout 1992, enhances that involvement.
Tim Garland, Freixenet's UK Managing Director, said ‘This new arrangement is most timely, for in it we recognise Nick's considerable achievements of last year.
Naturally, one looks ahead to his year and we are in little doubt that Nick will provide scope for further celebrations.’
Nick toasts his sponsors Tim Garland (centre) and Tony Hoffman (Inside Out Promotions)
Sheffield to host 1992 wheelchair championships
The 1992 British Open Wheelchair Championships are to be staged at the Graves Indoor Tennis Centre in Sheffield at the end of July.
The Centre has 12 outdoor and 6 indoor courts, ample accommodation for the 150 participants expected to attend.
The event is being jointly organised by the National Wheelchair Association and the LTA Trust.
Navratilova signs up with Lotto
Martina Navratilova has signed a shoe and clothing sponsorship deal with Italian company, Lotto.
Luigi Pellizari, General Manager of Lotto UK commented, ‘With a player of Martina's calibre now wearing Lotto clothing and footwear, we look forward to the continued success of the brand worldwide’.
Croatia set to become full member nation of the ITF
Newly independent Croatia has been accepted as a provisional member of the International Tennis Federation.
Her acceptance as a full member nation is expected to take place at the ITF's Annual General Meeting, which takes place in the Dominican Republic in September.
Croatia's acceptance follows on from the recent announcement that the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania has been reinstated to their former status as full members, a status that they enjoyed prior to the outbreak of the second world war.
At the time of going to press, the ITF confirmed that it was awaiting papers from Slovenia so that it could process its application to become an associate member.
Mercedes Schools Boost
British No 1, Jo Durie and her coach, Alan Jones, hosted the inaugural Mercedes tennis coaching day at St. George's College, Weybridge, during February.
Over one hundred youngsters  benefited from the day, which acted as a pilot event for an innovative new programme designed by Mercedes-Benz and the Lawn Tennis Association Trust to provide selected schools throughout the country with the opportunity to   receive expert tuition from world class tennis players.
‘If Britain is going to produce a Wimbledon Champion it is vital that young school children are continually attracted to tennis at an early age,’ said Durie.
‘Mercedes and the LTA Trust deserve credit for devising a programme that can help to achieve this.’
Woking Motors, the oldest Mercedes-Benz dealer in the UK, recommended the venue because of, in the words of Paul Langdon-Fox its Executive Director, ‘the Colleague's strong tennis tradition and its ambition to further its excellent tennis programme by providing indoor coaching opportunities for promising Surrey schoolchildren.’
Bollettieri Collection comes to UK
Nick Bollettieri, whose Bradenton, Florida Coaching Academy continues to be the base for a whole host of tennis champions, including currently, Andre Agassi, and   who is committed to helping the Lawn Tennis Association to set up a similar training base her in the UK, has, in conjunction with adidas, launched a fast and functional range of tennis apparel for this country.
The range uses bold colours and, in line with current American trends, has a high comfort factor.
100% cotton jersey and terry are used in the manufacture of the shirts and shorts while the tracksuits come in polyester/cotton.
adidas have chosen to market 6 separate items in this country.
Available in purple and pumpkin, is the crest logo crew neck top, with matching stonewashed short.
The complete outfit retails for £37.98.
£34.99 will buy you an applique V neck in 100% cotton terry.
The matching terry pant is £27.99.
The tracksuit is being sold as two separate items and is made of polyamid with polyester/cotton lining.
The top is a pullover half zip with appliqued back logo and retails for £44.99, while the trouser is £34.99.
All garments carry the Bollettieri logo and are available now in selected sports retail stores in the UK.
The Bollettieri Collection
Catlin's Challenge
The Dewhurst Tennis Academy has announced the formation of a nursery squad to be known as the Dewniors.
The squad, which will benefit from fitness and training programmes set up by recently appointed British Athletics Olympic National Coach, Frank Dick, is to be coached by former British No. 6 Teresa Catlin, and is seen as being a vehicle that will give youngsters the opportunity to feed through into the Main squad.
Chris Bradnam, who runs the Hertfordshire based Academy, said, ‘Players in the nursery squad will be taught ‘How to Win’.
I see the Dewniors as a great stepping stone for young players, with the obvious carrot of a place on the Main Squad for those who show the right qualities  necessary to become champions.
Places on both squads are open to talented players, irrespective of their financial backgrounds’
Bracknell base for Smith squad
The Royal Berkshire Rackets and Health Club in Bracknell has become home to the Jonathan Smith Squad, a group of young players which includes Hampshire's Chris Wilkinson, who recently broke into the world's top 200, at 197.
Smith, a former Davis and Kings Cup player, currently coaches 5 players but is looking to expand the size of his squad with the help of sponsorship.
In the  meantime it continues to flourish in the luxurious surroundings of the club, which has champion producing facilities including 12 indoor courts, gymnasium, swimming pool and in-house physiotherapists.
The Smith squad
Puma on disc
Puma has introduced for 1992 a new concept in shoe comfort, the Puma Disc system.
The system consists of a distinctive control mounted on a compression unit in place of the  conventional tongue.
Turning the disc adjusts the moulded system to best fit in the instep, middle and rear of the foot.
Effectively, it takes the place of lace tying.
A simple turn tightens the system — a turn in the opposite direction loosens it and firm pressure on the centre of the disc will release the foot completely.
There are two tennis shoes in the Disc System range, the Pro Court System 5000, which retails for £89.99 and the Advantage System 4000 which is £74.99.
The shoes, which are available in the shops now, are guaranteed for 12 months.
Walsh joins LTA
Former US Wightman and Federation Cup player Sharon Walsh has been appointed by the LTA as the new Rover National training Coach.
The move continues the influx of international coaches into Britain, a group which now includes talent from three continents — Olga Morozova from Russia, Ian Barclay from Australia and now Walsh from the United States.
The American, who was ranked as high as 22 in the world in 1982, will be responsible for coaching the current Rover Scholarship players in the south east as well as taking international teams to tournaments abroad.
Back to Feet
How many of you tennis players suffer from back pain?
Recent figures show that over half the population suffers from back paint at some point in their lives and tennis players certainly aren't immune.
Much of the reason, surprisingly, is caused by foot and leg care, many people don't realise that the impact of the foot on any surface is actually felt throughout the whole of our bodies, and especially in our backs.
Now Scholl have countered the problem by introducing onto the market Backease, a shoe inserts product which has an integral heel cushion made of poron, a proven shock  absorbency material.
Tests carried out on back pain sufferers in the USA showed that 77% of those who tried the inserts said that their pain was considerably reduced after only two weeks of using the product.
Backease inserts fit into any shoe and they can be washed.
Available in Boots, Scholl Centres and leading chemists, they cost £7.99 a pair.
The Scholl Backease
Learn to string your racket
Each time you break a string or your strings go dead, your bank balance probably suffers.
Everything about tennis can be expensive.
Now you can learn how to string your own racket.
You can learn about rackets and strings and save yourself a lot of money in future years as well as developing a new skill which will help your confidence.
The courses are practical.
Three or four participants with one tutor will learn by doing.
You will learn about racket and string technology, stringing techniques and how to adapt the strings to every kind of player.
The stringing process is broken down into nine easy to follow stages and the course summary acts as a remember to jog your memory as you go along.
You can also learn about racket repairs — how to repair a badminton string, regrip a squash racket and replace grommets and strips.
You'll receive a certificate on completion of the day.
Your friends, family and neighbours are welcome to come too — even if they don't play.
It's a useful skill to learn and a fun thing to do.
For more information about the courses, please contact 
Pro Match comes to Britain
Computerisation is the name of the game in ball throwing machines these days, with the recent announcement by the Fulcher School of Tennis of its agreement with Pro Match-Holland, to distribute its electronically mains powered ball machine in the UK.
The machine, called the Pro Match, can remember 40 programmes of up to 40,000 balls.
Each programme can be set to control ball speed, interval, direction and flight.
An option also allows for topspin or slice to be added.
The Pro Match costs £2,595.
(Call  for further details)
The Pro Match
STRINGERS CORNER
— New series
Sooner or later you are going to break a string in your racket — or it just won't feel right.
What do you do?
Nothing ruins a good racket frame like poor strings.
Chances are if you bought your racket in Britain it already had strings in it — unlike in the USA where the retailer will ask you a lot of questions about how you play and then string your new frame for you.
There are hundreds of different strings for you to chose.
Like computers, most people who make the hardware (the frames) don't specialise in the software (the strings).
What about Prince, the well-informed reader has just declared?
Quite true, but in the main, the major string manufacturers are specialists in just string — like Babolat, Ashaway and Gamma.
Choosing the best mix and match for your racket takes skill.
You can develop the skill yourself (see the BSA information about stringing courses and membership on page 62) or make sure you can ask testing questions of anyone who wants your money.
You will need to restring your racket as many times in a year as you play in a week.
So if you play twice a week you need to restring the racket twice a year.
Even if the racket stays in the cupboard for six months it will still need a restring — the strings will have stretched and gone ‘dead’.
When you need to speak to your stringer — at your club or at the local shop — tell them what kind of player you are (a baseline slugger or a serve and volleyer) and if you want more power or more accuracy from the racket.
A good stringer will know the right string and tension for you.
The better you get at tennis the more you will need good strings and good service.
Ivan Lendl takes out a freshly strung Mizuno frame with Babolat VS Natural Gut at every ball change — he notices the difference after just nine games.
You too can learn to be as selective as Ivan.
JANE McINTOSH 
SPECIAL OFF COURT FEATURE
DURIE ADVISES COACHES AND PARENTS
Jo Durie, Britain's No. 1 ranked player, delivered an honest  assessment of the needs of aspiring young tennis champions when she called for the pressure to be taken off youngsters, particularly those between the crucial ages of 10–14.
She was speaking at the Howdon Tennis Centre in Eden ridge, Kent, at the 20th stop of the adidas Challenge, a series of winter tournaments aimed at bringing countrywide competition in the winter months to British youngsters.
‘This type of competition is very important’ she said, ‘but if the child loses, I would hope that the emphasis would be put on the performance rather than the result.
Coaches and parents should not put too much pressure on youngsters at this age.’
The advice was given after Jo had been speaking to both children and their parents (an audience that included 12 year old Romy Hutchins — a participant in the Challenge — and her father Paul, the former British Davis Cup captain and national team manager), in a unique question and answer session which preceded an on court clinic for the 20 or so participating juniors.
Jo emphasised the need for good movement and footwork on the court and acknowledged the work of her fitness advisor, Len Heppel, with whom she has worked for three years.
Durie, who at 31, is fast becoming one of the foremost ambassadors for the sport in this country, and known for her passion and honesty for the British game, went on to give some basic practical advice to the enthusiastic youngsters.
‘One-play competitively as much as possible…two — learn from your matches…three — go back and practice for the long term future of your game.
There is no point in thinking short term,’ she stressed.
To do this, she re-iterated the need for sound and sensible support from those who are closest to the child — ie the parents and the coach.
‘Parents need to give the right guidance’, she said.
‘They need to know what the standards are in professional tennis these days.
the have to know how tough it is out there and to be realistic.
Coaches ought to know what the children should be practising.
Parents and coaches should be encouraging children at this age.’
Jo's stopover in Kent was organised by Clifford Bloxham of Advantage (the management company), and Jackie Holden of adidas UK.
It coincided with the news that she had just signed a new one year shoe contract with the company as part of its ongoing support for British tennis.