

Introduction: An Ageing Society and Ageing People
Margot Jefferys and Pat Thane
Introduction
In this chapter we show first how the age structure of Britain's population has changed during the twentieth century, and how it is likely to change in the century's final years and beyond.
We then consider some of the current and future implications of past changes and of those still to come, both for individuals who survive into what is commonly called old age and for the wider society of which they are a part.
We challenge the need for the alarm — almost panic — which the increased rate of survival of so many more people into their ninth and tenth decades appears to have evoked in some quarters.
We consider the real challenges to society of having more octogenarians, nonagenarians , and centenarians in its ranks, and ask what is likely to be involved in meeting them.
The Changing Age Profile
The graph in Figure I.1 compares the age and sex structure of the population of Great Britain in 1901 — the first census of the century — with that of 1981.
For 1901, the graph had the shape of a pyramid — broad at the base and tapering to the top.
The pyramidical shape in that year reflected what must now be considered high mortality rates at all ages, and particularly among the very young.
A comparatively small proportion of each cohort born during the nineteenth century reached old age.
For 1981, the graph, representing in the main those born during the twentieth century, was more rectangular.
Together, the graphs sum up what happened during the intervening eighty years.
Although the birth-rate fluctuated from time to time during the century — for example, it was low in the inter-war years and high in the immediate post-Second World War years — the proportion of survivors at each age, and especially among the young, increased throughout the period.
The result was that the proportion of the population over the age at which state pensions can now be drawn (65 years for men and 60 for women), increased   over the eighty-year period from about one in twenty (5 per cent) to over one in six (about 18 per cent ).
Figure 1.1 Age and sex structure of the British Population, 1901 and 1981
At this point it should be remembered that the proportion of the population which any particular age cohort constitutes during its lifetime is not only or indeed not mainly a function of its own initial size and subsequent mortality rate: it also depends upon the absolute size of all other cohorts and their mortality rates.
Other things being equal, an increase in births decreases the proportion which all earlier cohorts constitute in the population, and a decrease in births will have the opposite effect.
Moreover, the effect is perpetuated as each birth cohort advances up the age scale, especially if its mortality rate is greater or less than that of previous cohorts.
This is of importance as long as those over a certain age, as well as those under another, are regarded as economically and socially dependent on the rest of the population.
In Britain, it has become customary to regard those under statutory school-leaving age, as well as women over 60 years and men over 65, as dependent on the remainder of the population.
The dependency ratio is then defined as the number in these age-groups as a proportion of the remaining population (Ermisch 1983)(Table I.1).
Welfare economists in particular have been concerned with actual or predicted changes in the size and nature of the ratio.
The dependency ratios in Table I.1 for 1961 and 1979 would be even greater if those aged 14–15 were included with the children and not with the working population.
We return to this issue later.
Table I.1 Dependency ratios in Great Britain in selected years, 1901–79 (per thousand population of working age)
The Male-Female Balance
It is now well recognized that, in so far as survival in the twentieth century is concerned, men rather than women constitute the weaker sex.
Throughout the century, rather more males than females were born, the ratio remaining relatively constant despite beliefs that the proportion of male births increases after wars in which the mortality of young adult men greatly exceeds that of young adult women.
From birth onwards, male mortality rates exceeded those of females.
In earlier centuries, excessive child-bearing and its short- and long-term consequences took a great toll among young women, but early in the twentieth century a fall in mortality from tuberculosis, somewhat later in maternal mortality, and the diseases particular to women's reproductive functions, left males more vulnerable than females.
When mortality for both sexes in infancy and childhood was great, as it was at the beginning of the century, it did not take long for a cohort to advance up the age scale before females outnumbered males.
In the 1980s, it is still true that males have higher mortality rates than females at all ages (except possibly after reaching the age of 100 years: OPCS 1987: 5); but the number of deaths in childhood and early adult life is now so small that it is not until individuals reach their late forties, that women actually outnumber men of the same birth cohort.
Thereafter, male mortality rates in the last decades of life have been so much greater than those for females that a significant disparity has  developed in the numbers of men and women in the older age-groups.
Figure 1.2 indicates the extent to which death continues to discriminate between men and women in older age, leaving more and more women among the survivors.
Table I.2, which shows the expectation of further life in years and of ultimate age at various ages for men and women at various periods of the twentieth century, is another expression of their different life survival patterns and of how these have changed over time.
Figure 1.2 Excess of female population after the age of 45 years and males as a per cent of the total (1981)
Table I.2 Expectation of additional years of life and ultimate age for men and women of various ages at various periods, United Kingdom
Marital Status and Age
The preponderance of women in later life, especially among the over 85 year-olds (a group which is becoming known as ‘the oldest old’), has also lead to another differentiating factor between the sexes in later life.
Not unnaturally, there are roughly comparable numbers of married men and women in the population over 65 and, because men generally marry women younger than themselves, even a slight excess of males.
Widows, however, greatly outnumber widowers (Figure I.3).
There are also fewer never-married men than never-married women.
This is partly because single status at younger ages appears to have been consistently even more lethal for men than for women.
To be married is life-protective for both sexes but more so for men than for women.
However, it should also be borne in mind that women, now 80 or more, belong to a generation whose chances of ever marrying were greatly reduced by the loss of eligible young men in the First World War (1914–18).
In subsequent cohorts which reach the age of 80 and 90, there will be smaller proportions of never-married individuals of both sexes; the trend will be particularly noticeable for women.
Figure 1.3 Marital status by age and sex (1981)
The sex and marital status characteristics of the oldest old are important because they carry implications for personal tending if and when care becomes essential.
In the recent past and currently, the never-married, followed by the widowed, are the most likely to require admission to an institution in old age.
The still-married are the most likely to continue to live in their own private homes.
The single too are unlikely to have  direct descendants, and personal tending is most likely to be done, after the death of a spouse, by daughters or daughters-in-law (Rossiter and Wicks 1982).
The Ageing Pensioner
One other feature of the century's demographic pattern to date needs emphasis.
It is the shift which has occurred within the population over statutory retirement-pension age towards the oldest old.
(Table I.3).
Indeed, it is the implications of the changing age structure of the population of pensionable age and the likelihood of a continuation of that trend into at least the first decade of the twenty-first century which have been the chief concern of social planners and welfare economists, rather than the proportion of the total population entitled to draw retirement pensions.
This latter has increased throughout the twentieth century; it is not an end-of-century phenomenon.
Table I.3 Number and percentage of those aged 60 and over in three age bands at various periods, United Kingdom (millions)
The Future
There are no certainties in the field of demography, but on the assumption that present mortality rates at all ages will not worsen, we can be fairly certain about the absolute numbers of men and women over the present statutory retirement pension age (60 for women and 65 for men) well into the twenty-first century — at least until the 2040s — because all of them are already born.
Unless there are radical changes in migration to and from the British Isles, or in mortality rates in middle age, or an unprecedented natural disaster, the numbers can be confidently predicted.
(Table I.4).
Table I.4 Projected population of pensionable age, 1991–2051 (millions)
What is more difficult to predict into the middle of the next century is the proportion of the total population that this older group will constitute, because that depends upon the birth-rate, and the latter, if past experience is anything to go on, shifts unpredictably with transient social circumstances — such as the level of unemployment or whether or not there is a war — as well as with unstable social attitudes to child-bearing and the age at which it is thought suitable for women to bear children.
Although the very long-term future plays a part in present thinking (for example, concern about the burden which present promises of pension levels may impose on future generations of working age), it is the shorter-term prospects — from now until the end of the century — which mainly concern policy-makers, the caring professions, informal carers of infirm elderly people, and older people themselves.
What that clearly involves (Table I.5) is first, a relatively stable total proportion over statutory retirement-pension age, but second, a substantial increase in the number and proportion of that retirement-age population which is over 85, and a decrease in the number and proportion of 65 to 74 year-olds who are now often described as ‘the young elderly’.
This demographic pattern was laid down in the first half of the century when the inter-war birth-rate declined markedly.
Although that smaller birth cohort, which now constitutes the young elderly, had lower subsequent mortality rates at early ages than their immediate predecessors, the differences between the two have not been sufficient to eliminate the difference in their absolute numbers as they reach statutory retirement-pension age.
Table I.5 Numbers in four age bands in every thousand of the UK population in 1981 and 2001 (estimated)
The Determinants of Demographic Change
The changing age profile of Britain and other technologically advanced countries which share Britain's pattern reflects, as we have already suggested, changes over time both in the size of successive birth cohorts and in mortality rates at all ages.
The birth-rates of the twentieth century have been consistently lower in every decade than those of the nineteenth century, but there have been fluctuations.
These appear to be associated in part at least with the state of the labour market and the demand for women's labour (Ermisch 1983).
The sudden increase in the dissemination of information about reliable and safe contraception and abortion and their availability have also played a part in creating temporary changes in birth rates, by persuading couples to postpone rather than forgo child-bearing altogether.
It is unwise to predict, therefore, either a further decline in birth-rates or stability into the unknown future.
Factors affecting mortality rates are also complex.
Epidemiological research appears to favour environmental explanations for declining mortality rates in infancy and early adult life rather than medical interventions or specific pharmacological innovations for preventive and curative purposes (McKeown 1976).
This appears convincing since the decline in mortality rates antedated for the most part the advent of efficacious pills and surgical procedures.
There is, however, continuing controversy about the extent to which reductions in mortality, especially in middle age and late life, have depended in the past and will depend in the future on collective measures to control the physical and social environment, or on voluntary, individualistic modifications in personal life-styles.
(Townsend and Davidson 1982).
The case of smoking and alcohol abuse illustrates the controversy.
Both sides agree that these behaviours lead to much if not most of the premature mortality as well as chronic morbidity of adults today, and that a reduction in them would lead to reduced mortality and an enhanced quality of life.
The ‘structuralists’ argue that the causes of such behaviours lie deep in the social organization of society, and particularly in its class divisions, and that they can only be radically modified by collective actions designed to curb the power of the purveyors of cigarettes and alcohol and to reduce social inequalities.
On the other hand, the ‘behaviourists’(for want of a better term) argue that the  responsibility lies fairly and squarely with individuals who are now fully informed of the dangers they face in perpetuating life-threatening behaviours.
Whatever side is taken in this ongoing debate, however, it appears that knowledge of the ill effects of tobacco has already led to a modification in smoking behaviour among older men, particularly those in non-manual employment.
This, together with improvements in diet and  exercise and also in the average man's or woman's physical environment throughout the century, may account for the decline in the death-rate which has continued to take place in recent years for those who have already reached middle age (see Table I.6).
If this trend continues, we can expect greater numbers of each successive cohort to reach pensionable age and to have both a longer expectation of life and fewer chronic illnesses and disabilities when it does than  its predecessor.
We return to this issue when we discuss the implications of greater numbers surviving into their eighties and nineties both for the survivors and for the society at large.
Table I.6 Death-rates per thousand population by sex and age at various periods (United Kingdom)
The Social and Economic Implications of Change in Britain's Age Profile
The increase in the number of 80 and 90 year-olds has been viewed with alarm by some members of the professional groups whose work brings them closely into touch with the oldest old — the geriatricians, general practitioners, nurses, social workers, occupational — and physiotherapists — as well as by others more indirectly involved (HAS 1982).
Prospects of even greater longevity in future among the already long-lived have served to enhance concern still further.
Particular worries have been expressed about the increasing numbers of very frail individuals in need of constant attention and of those suffering from Alzheimer's disease and other forms of senile dementia for which there are as yet no known cures.
It is estimated with some reliability that one in five of those aged 85 and over now suffer from dementia (Norman 1987a: 2).
 If there are nearly a million of that age in 2001, then almost 200,000 will be afflicted by that time.
Some official statistics of service-use, as well as data from independent surveys indicating the extent of unmet need, serve to fuel the fire of alarm.
Those aged 75 years and over use the whole gamut of health  and personal social services more than do younger people, and both usage and need increase with age thereafter.
Compared with younger age-groups, very old people have high consultation rates with general practitioners, and have many more home visits from these doctors — the most expensive form of consultation (Social Trends 1987).
They constitute the bulk — and an increasing bulk — of the case-load of district nurses (ibid.: 131).
The work of health visitors — traditionally and profitably with mothers and children — threatens to be ‘undermined’ by increasing requests from general practitioners for them to take part in the home care of the very old (ibid.: 131).
An increasing proportion of all hospital beds, not only those in geriatric or psychogeriatric wards and hospitals, are occupied by those well on into their seventies and eighties (DHSS 1987; 117–8).
Day hospitals have sprung up to assist the process of rehabilitation after acute illness which can herald the onset of chronic disability and handicap; their patients are overwhelmingly the very old (Donaldson et al.
1986).
The home-help service, to all intents and purposes, is already a service for the very old (ibid.: 131), and so also is the meals-on-wheels service (ibid.).
The number of residents of voluntary and private homes (and to a lesser extent of local authority homes) has increased, and the increase is almost entirely due to the numbers of very old entering such homes (ibid.: 133).
There is a rising demand for sheltered accommodation for those who can no longer live an entirely independent life and desire some regular supervision rather than admission to a residential home.
Local authorities, striving to fulfil the UK government's policy of community care, are facing increasing expenditure on such items as house adaptations, designed to promote continuing self-care and autonomy for the very disabled, among whom elderly people are prominent.
Providing services of all these kinds — and in this way also helping to supplement the personal tending work usually done gratuitously by relatives responding to the emotional bonds and obligations of kinship — can clearly not be accomplished without the expenditure of resources, human and material (Abrams 1978: 67).
Also, the cost of services has to be borne, in the main, from central or local government coffers, because most older people cannot meet more than a fraction of the costs of the high levels of labour-intensive care they need.
It is generally agreed that, at the present time, there is insufficient provision to meet with dignity the needs of all those over the age of 75.
If more adequate services are to be made available for the expected increase in the numbers needing them, those of working age will have to pay more in central or local taxes.
Yet the heavy burden of taxation is held, in some quarters, to be behind the late twentieth-century failure of the British economy.
The present Conservative government's proposals  are to reduce, not increase, the taxes imposed on the incomes of the population of working age.
Therein lies the dilemma.
It appears that it cannot be resolved satisfactorily without reducing publicly provided services or benefits to other sections of the population.
It is not surprising, therefore, to find a widespread feeling that an ageing population is already a burden and threatens to be an even greater one in the future.
It is a short step from such a view to ‘blaming’ older people themselves for the fiscal dilemma, another version of blaming the victim.
Such an attitude is particularly rife in the USA where the youth cult has been and remains strong (Levin and Levin 1980).
Unfortunately, the reported effect on some of the older generation is to make them regret having lived so long and apologize for their need to call on more services than do younger people (Norman 1987b).
Are the Right Conclusions Being Drawn?
If the picture painted in the preceding paragraphs is to be believed, it seems to follow that there are serious grounds for alarm.
If survivors into the ninth and tenth decades of their lives are to be adequately served, it must be at the expense of younger generations.
Does it therefore follow that an ageing population inevitably implies some impoverishment, if not among elderly, then among younger people?
There is little point in denying that if Britain is to enable the very old in the present as well as the future to live out their remaining years in dignity, more human and material resources will have to be devoted to their welfare.
Older people need to be in hospital longer, to consult general practitioners more often and take more drugs, and to have more home-based chiropody and nursing services and more personal social services than younger people (Social Trends 1987).
They also require regular long-term financial support in the form of pensions, which younger people do not receive unless they are chronically disabled or unemployed.
Pensions represent a transfer of resources in the form of purchasing power from current taxpayers or pension-fund contributors to past contributors.
The very young, of course, by reason of their educational needs and a societal commitment to encourage parenthood, are also more costly to the Exchequer than young adults, though not as costly as the very old; but there is the expectation that the former will, in turn, repay the resources invested in them, which is not present where the very old are concerned.
The question to be asked, therefore, is: can the nation afford to increase the resources it already feels obliged to expend on the very old?
The answer, in our view, should be an unequivocal ‘yes’.
It is our values and not our limited means which prevent us from recognizing that our  society possesses adequate resources for the task in hand.
It is the way in which the public is presented with the facts, rather than the facts themselves, which almost guarantees panic and resistance to the proposal to look for extra resources.
In supporting our contention, we consider the way in which statistics are presented and the assumptions generally made about the health and dependency of older people as well as about their role as consumers rather than producers of goods and services.
The Use and Abuse of Statistics
Take first the matter of numbers.
We are frequently reminded by the media and by professionals of various kinds of the size of the increase which is to be expected in the number of those aged over 75 or 85 years by the end of the century.
It is less frequently pointed out that the proportion of the population of pensionable age during the same period will not increase, and that the heaviest financial cost arises from pensions, not from use of services.
Furthermore, we are usually left to infer, wrongly, that there are already fewer men and women of working age available to support a far greater number of dependents than was the case in the recent past and that the immediate future is likely to bring a worsening dependency ratio.
Nor are we told that, in 1981, only eleven individuals in every thousand of the population were aged 85 or more, and that in the year 200 1, their number will have only increased to seventeen per thousand.
If it were put to us in this way we might be less prone to think of it as imposing a vastly increased burden on the community.
Is it really so difficult for a technologically innovative and ingenious society such as ours to support seventeen in every thousand, even if all seventeen were to be in need of continuous personal care (as clearly they will not be)?
Employment Levels Above and Below Pensionable Age and the Productivity of Labour
As we have already indicated, it is generally assumed that in future there is likely to be a further reduction in the proportion of people of pensionable age who will be earning currently and hence adding to the gross national product as the latter is now calculated.
At the beginning of the century, substantial numbers of the elderly population, especially men, continued to work, partly, no doubt, because they had no entitlement to a pension as of right and wished to avoid the fate of most survivors — an ignominious end in the dreaded parish workhouse (Parker 1982: 177).
In more recent years, 60 years of age for women and 65 for men  have tended to be the maximum ages at which permanent retirement from the labour force takes place, earnings from current employment cease, and statutory and, in some cases, occupational pensions are drawn.
In each decade of the twentieth century, fewer men over 65 have been entered in the censuses as in gainful employment.
Furthermore, as a result of high levels of unemployment in the 1970s and 1980s (and possibly also as a result of the capacity of the more affluent to accumulate enough resources to enable them to retire early if they wish), the percentage of those in their late fifties and early sixties who regard themselves as permanently retired has increased (Walker 1980; GHS 1986: 73; Johnson 1989).
The tendency to leave paid employment at or even before the age of eligibility for state pension may or may not continue into the future.
Much depends upon the general level of employment.
When it is high, employers and government welcome the labour of older workers; when it is low, there is pressure from all sides for older workers to retire (Phillipson 1982; 167).
When, in the mid-1980s, over three million of those between 16 and 65 were unemployed, there was certainly pressure for those in their late fifties and early sixties to leave the labour force and little encouragement for those over 65 to stay on.
It should be noted, however, that if one million of the three million were back at work and not receiving unemployment and/or supplementary benefits from the Exchequer, it would put less strain on the public purse and make it easier to meet the social security benefits for the expected one million over-85-year-olds.
Whether or not early retirement and high unemployment continue, however, they should not blind us to the need to consider other factors which influence our capacity to care for dependent populations.
Thus, for instance, the productivity of every hour of work — that is , the volume of goods and services that can be produced in one hour — has immeasurably increased during the present century.
One calculation, for example, showed that while the occupied population increased by 35 per cent between 1911 and 1966, the real value (at constant factor price) of the national income increased by over 150 per cent (Bacon et al.
1972; 64, 97).
In future, given the microchip and other technological advances already in the pipeline, the trend will continue.
Far fewer work-hours will be required to produce goods and services to the level needed to meet all the basic requirements for food, shelter, leisure, and health of the entire population, including the very old.
An increase from eleven to seventeen in the number of the latter should not throw us!
Only as long as old age is presented as an intolerable burden falling on the shoulders of the young are we persuaded to be pessimistic about the future.
The Old as Producers as well as Consumers
There is another assumption often made which needs challenging.
It is that those who are not currently working for money make no contribution to the nation's gross national product — that they are consumers only, not producers.
For this reason, most of those over statutory retirement-pension age are regarded as non-producers — as drones.
This too, however, must be seen as a presentation of the lives of human beings, which is useful perhaps for taxation purposes but bears little resemblance to the real world.
In this country, and indeed throughout the world, most of the productive tasks associated with sustaining day-to-day life and happiness — namely, child-rearing, care of the sick, and household management — are undertaken outside the field of paid employment and hence of the formal economy (Stacey 1981).
Such functions are basic to the sustenance of human life and societal cohesion.
Most of them are performed by women, and most women continue to perform them into their old age, whether or not they have formerly had paid employment.
If the performance were costed, the assumption that the retirement pension is not earned but an unreciprocated gift from the employed to the non-employed would be found to be untenable.
In short, the older generation not only has given by its paid and unpaid labour in the past; it continues to give as well as take in the present.
In addition, it is the young old — those in their sixties and seventies — who play a major part, disproportionate to their numbers, in the maintenance of voluntary organizations which contribute not only to the welfare of the disadvantaged but also to the cultural activities of the country at large .
These are by no means self-centred pursuits; they benefit society generally.
Family and Kin
Many of those whose professional work involves care for old people are prone to believe that there was once an extended family system in this country whereby successive generations of kin lived together, the younger ones caring lovingly for the oldest.
They point to the increasing numbers of very old people who live on their own, and draw the invalid conclusion that kinship ties have weakened, and that obligations are no longer recognized, so that old people are left to be cared for predominantly by strangers.
The work of Laslett (1972) and others has shown effectively that the multi-generational household and an ubiquitous golden old age in the pre-industrial past are largely myths.
Nevertheless, they remain strongly entrenched in both lay and professional minds.
Similarly, research from the 1940s onwards (Sheldon 1948; Shanas et al.
1968; Wenger 1984; Wright 1986) has demonstrated that the great majority of dependent people are in touch with their offspring and receive services from them.
Indeed, kinship could well be said to involve greater obligations to the  old than it once did, because survivors now live longer and have fewer descendants who can share their care.
Research has also suggested that older people prefer not to share accommodation with their offspring in joint households if they can no longer manage on their own.
Most choose to go to residential homes rather than to those of their children.
The Survival of the Unfit
Another ‘prediction’ frequently made is that there will be an increase in the extent of disability among the survivors into extreme old age.
It is beyond dispute that advances in medicine and improvements in living conditions have enabled individuals who at previous times would not have survived severe illness or chronic handicaps to live on, perhaps with some disability, into their seventh, eighth, and ninth decades.
However, those who see the longevity of disabled people as a threat also ignore other contemporary changes which will affect the future pattern of health among the elderly (Social Trends 1987: 136).
Medical advances have not only enabled some very disabled people to survive into old age; they have also reduced the dependency on others of very many elderly people.
Hip replacements and coronary bypasses are the most spectacular examples of such advances; they increase mobility and enhance the quality of life.
So can the spread of knowledge about the behaviour patterns associated with fitness in old age which has resulted from epidemiological research.
There is also already evidence that healthier lifestyles at early ages — including, in particular, abstention from smoking, a reduction in alcohol consumption, more controlled eating, and regular exercise — are now being adopted, and it is probable that they will improve health at a later stage for the cohorts which adopt them.
The cohorts now past retirement age, it must be remembered, had the experience of childhood during the inter-war depression years and then young adulthood in the war, when they were encouraged rather than discouraged from smoking.
The legacy of those eras, which fortunately have not been repeated since, will be with them today.
We know, moreover, that the more affluent among the old in Britain are more likely to feel that they enjoy good health and less likely to suffer from conditions which restrict their mobility and capacity to participate in a wide range of social and cultural activities than the least well-off (GHS 1986; 126).
There is encouraging evidence to suggest that the ‘young old’ today are generally both more affluent and in better physical and mental shape than were their counterparts a generation ago at the same age (ibid: 141).
It is probable, therefore, that, as they age and become, in their turn, the ‘older’ and the ‘oldest old’, their health will be better than that experienced by the present generation of over 80 year-olds.
Another reason for some optimism is the increase in personal possessions with which people enter the third age.
At one time it was only  an affluent few who owned their own houses or capital assets which they could invest to increase their incomes.
The proportion who are owner-occupiers has grown substantially, and most of them have paid off their mortgages (Social Trends 1987: 140).
Of course, this does not mean that accommodation problems for the old are solved for all time.
Other statistics, for example, show that households with retired heads have fewer domestic amenities of most kinds than younger households (GHS 1986: 67); and there is a serious shortage of sheltered housing at prices which older people can afford (Tinker 1984: 86–8).
However, progress on all these scores is being made, and, if it is maintained into the 1990s, should help the oldest individuals to maintain their independence — and their health — for longer periods of time.
The Challenges
In short, statistics relating to old people are presented in such a way as to spread a great deal of gloom about the future, not only for the old themselves but for society at large .If we examine these statistics critically and the social and economic context in which changes in the age structure of Britain are likely to occur in the future, we can dispel much of that gloom.
Policies and actions should not be dictated by widely held but largely unexamined preconceptions, since the distorted images which they can produce are to the detriment of ordinary people as they age.
Such a statement must not, of course, be taken to imply that the future for older people is assured if things are allowed to take their course.
Those who depend entirely for their income on the state pension and means-tested income support benefits are likely to be on the fringes of unacceptable poverty unless the level of benefits is increased.
Moreover, we have to make sure that older people have increased opportunities for personal fulfilment after their retirement from employment which may have been both meaningful and given them their self-esteem.
In order to do this, we need to challenge many popular perceptions of old age and ageing and of their impact upon society as a whole.
We need also to identify opportunities for enrichment in older age, promote them, and defend them if they are misguidedly attacked.
We should remain concerned, too, with the welfare of that substantial minority of older people for whom (and for whose families) ageing has brought little joy.
One of the greatest challenges is to convince ourselves and others that the lenses of the spectacles we are usually sold may seriously distort the picture we see.
The public generally should be equipped with spectacles which give it a clearer and more rounded view of the opportunities for all of an ageing Britain.
References
Retirement and Structured Dependency
The Politics of Retirement, 1908–1948
John Macnicol and Andrew Blaikie
In the years immediately after the Second World War, the particular concerns of old age became a subject for serious social investigation for the first time.
As Sara Harper and Pat Thane indicate in Chapter 2, much significant social and medical investigation was conducted between 1945 and 1965.
The growth in academic social gerontology has, however, been a much more recent phenomenon and it is only with this development that several important historical issues relating to old age in the present century have established themselves on the agenda for research.
Among these we may cite debates over population ageing, the funding of pensions and other social services, and differential experiences by cohort, class, and gender.
Retirement has been central to all of these, although the complexity of its impact has yet to be fully explored.
Its growth is considered here as a specific political issue which, for the purposes of both clarity and brevity, is distinguished apart from the broader social history of the period.
The first half of the twentieth century saw a considerable broadening in the provision of income-maintenance facilities for elderly people in Britain such that, dragged along behind the overall rise in living standards, their absolute material conditions improved greatly.
Yet at the same time, social policy and public attitudes combined to define the elderly as an increasingly useless group in society.
Age-related classifications became more common; older people were inexorably shaken out of the labour market and portrayed as an unproductive ‘burden’ on the rest of society; and most important of all, the concept of mandatory retirement was institutionalized in the 1946 National Insurance Act.
Such marginalization of older people was accompanied by increasing material prosperity and political activism.
This chapter sets out to explore some aspects of this paradox.
It will show that, while older people organized themselves into pressure groups and old age itself became an increasingly attractive political issue, ultimately the organizations representing pensioners found themselves powerless to combat the notion that enforced retirement should become the normal experience for older people.
Their powerlessness originated partly in ‘internal’ factors — inadequate  organizational skills, fatal reliance on labour aristocrat values, failure to mobilize a broad base of political support — but chiefly in their inability to resolve several crucial externally imposed dilemmas associated with the idea of retirement.
Retirement and the Debate on Structured Dependence
Broadly speaking, the growth of retirement in the twentieth century has been viewed in two very different ways.
Radical analysts of welfare development tend to see the imposition of mandatory retirement, encouraged or enforced by state pension schemes, as pan of the process whereby, in late industrial societies with highly specialized divisions of labour, elderly people are marginalized into a condition of ‘structured dependence’.
Peter Townsend argues that the dependence of the elderly is ‘structured’ in that it bears a structural relationship to social class inequalities, the division of labour, social security policies, social institutions, and so on.
Furthermore, social class differences in the distribution of income and resources prior to retirement will dictate the quality of retirement as a personal experience.
Some, such as Alan Walker, have gone so far as to argue that ‘retirement is largely a twentieth century phenomenon’, and that ‘the increasing dependency of elderly people in Britain has been socially engineered in order to facilitate the removal of older workers from the labour force’.
Others, still disinclined to imply a ‘golden age of sensescence’ thesis, nonetheless view the particular relationship of retirement patterns to the production process in the twentieth century as novel.
Chris Phillipson, for example, recognizing the precedents to be found in earlier centuries, and acknowledging the ‘historical consistency’ of attitudes to older people as a reserve army of labour, maintains, nevertheless, that ‘what is peculiar to our period is the scale of marginalization and the increase in the number of people directly involved’.
Proponents of this view contend that it is the intensity of social deprivation and its institutionalization in centralized state policies, production processes, and social attitudes that constitute a sufficiently novel form of structured dependence to render it qualitatively different from reliance by elderly people on Poor Law, charity, or family in the past.
Structured dependence is associated with a particular stage in the capitalist mode of production, and imposed by a paternalistic state through universalist social security provision that both protects older people and keeps them in poverty.
Thus, Walker points out that, in 1981, 66.8 per cent of all pensioners lived at or below the 140 per cent supplementary-benefit level, compared with one-fifth of the non-elderly; and the risk of experiencing poverty is three times greater for those over retirement age than it is for those below it.
By contrast, Richard Smith and David Thomson have argued, on the basis of long-term demographic evidence, that forms of retirement have existed throughout history and (particularly if one excludes the high birth-rate nineteenth century) that there have been many periods in which a simple dependency ratio of the elderly to the non-elderly population has been high.
Smith denies that a significantly new ‘problem’ of poverty among the elderly emerged in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Instead, he argues, one must recognize ‘a long series of endeavours to resolve persistent questions concerning the duties of the individual, the family and the community in provision for the less fortunate’, of which the twentieth-century saga of state pensions is but one chapter.
Indeed, Thomson suggests that, in relative terms, today's pensions are lower in value than support for the elderly through the mid-nineteenth century Poor Law.
In his view, the advocacy of family-oriented solutions in the treatment of old age was related to phases in which ‘the welfare claims on the communal funds were very pressing…during the periods of demographically induced difficulties’.
By contrast, from 1908 to 1948 ‘there was a return of the collectivity to the major role in the support of the elderly…a swing back to a larger public than private responsibility’.
In other words, if retirement, in either informal or structured versions, has existed throughout history, its recent growth may simply be a tribute to its attractiveness.
Leslie Hannah has argued that proof of this can be found in the growth of private pension schemes which, even if frequently initiated by employers for ‘labour control’ reasons, demonstrate that we have invented retirement because we want it.
A number of analytical problems are raised by the rather stark polarization between these opposing views.
The term ‘dependence’ needs deconstructing.
Notionally, at least, reliance on welfare may provide certain vulnerable groups (such as single mothers) with a degree of economic security and strengthened independence.
The Smith-Thomson critique offers no causal explanation of precisely why shifts have occurred in the balance of community and state provision.
Likewise, tables of the age distribution in certain selected parishes in early-modern England tell us nothing about how structured dependence has altered qualitatively over time.
Indeed, the central problem raised by these two opposed models is whether the qualitative and experiential features of late-industrial structured dependence are exclusive to the last half century.
Clearly, unless these features are defined with precision, there is a danger of ending up with a tautological explanation: what is recent must also be novel because it is recent.
Smith does not deny ‘the crucial character of the transformed circumstances surrounding the elderly and their relationship with the community in the mid- or late-twentieth century’, but provides no further elaboration.
Similarly, David Hackett Fischer maintains that growing old ‘is an experience profoundly different today  from what it was two or three centuries ago’, although the only explanation he can offer is one grounded in modernization theory.
Andrew Achenbaum lists four factors that have caused elderly people to emerge as a distinct social group this century — demographic trends, changing images of old age, group action by older people, and new directions in old age welfare policies.
Still, none of these can claim a historical distinctiveness exclusive to the recent past.
Again, these two models suggest an over-simplistic distinction between ‘supply-side’ and ‘demand-led’factors.
The former suggests that retirement spread through unfettered consumer desire for more leisure, that industrialization progressively excluded older workers but also created the national wealth and political will (through the establishment of mass democracy) to support them on state pension schemes, and that increasing personal prosperity led to the individual's growing ability to save through a private pension.
The latter model depicts the imposition by an all-powerful, coercive capitalist state of enforced retirement on older workers who wish to continue in the labour market until, as in the nineteenth century, they are too infirm.
In fact, neither of these two models is convincing on its own.
Supply and demand are not easily separable; indeed, it is their very overlap that is interesting.
As will be shown in this chapter, retirement was viewed ambiguously by working people who well realized that it distributes a variety of rewards and penalties, offering, for a minority, a period of welcome leisure in relative comfort, and, for the majority, a sharp drop in living standards with enforced idleness.
While this chapter emphasizes the ‘political economy’ context in which the practice of retirement spread, it also stresses the point that its institutionalization did not go unnoticed by older people themselves.
Their organizations had much to say, and the debate on pensions was affected by their marked ambivalence towards retirement as an imposed condition.
Their relative ineffectiveness, however, was the product of an inability to resolve several cultural and economic dilemmas.
Politics and Pressure Groups
At a time when the problems of war and, later, unemployment were national priorities, it would be fallacious to talk of the existence of a ‘poverty lobby’, operating on a broad front and according equal status to all disadvantaged groups.
Both before and during the inter-war depression, the claims of unemployed and poor families directly, if inadvertently, pre-empted the needs of older people.
It would be just as mistaken to assume that pensions legislation was always indicative of concessionary responses to mounting pressure on behalf of the particular groups that eventually  benefited .
If, for example, one aim of private insurance was to deflect the work-force away from militancy whilst investing  in human capital, trades union support for higher state pensions at earlier ages reflected a desire to create jobs for younger men whilst minimizing their own potential benefit payments.
Nevertheless, the study of pressure-group activity during our period shows that pensions policy was the outcome of a series of struggles which acted to curb, if not always significantly, the powers invested in successive governments.
Political theorists have drawn a distinction between ‘representative’ groups composed of interests and ‘promotional’ones which speak for or on behalf of a particular client-body.
Promotional groups will only be effective when they can deliver the full support of their clientele.
On the other hand, groups purporting to be an authoritative mouthpiece may be disregarded because their membership covers only a fraction of, say, all old people.
In recent years, for instance, Whitehall has refused to recognize both the National Federation of Old Age Pensions Associations and Age Concern as ‘truly negotiating bodies’.
As consumers, but non-producers, retired people possess no strike sanction.
Although alliances with producer groups such as the trades unions may be sought, the absence of independent industrial muscle renders them, in Bachrach and Baratz's terms, ‘influential’ rather then ‘powerful’.
Between 1908 and 1948 several groups negotiated the needs of older people, among them the National Conference on Old Age Pensions (NCOAP), the National Spinsters' Pensions Association (which played an important role in the reduction of women's pension age from 65 to 60), the National Federation of Old Age Pensions Associations (NFOAPA), and the National Old People's Welfare Committee, established by voluntary groups during the Second World War.
For the purposes of the present discussion, the NCOAP and NFOAPA provide suitably contrasting examples: to the former we might attach the tag ‘promotional’, to the latter a ‘representative’ label.
The following discussion locates the campaigning activities of these two groups in the context of changes in official pensions policy, and focuses on the crucial role of the trade unions in the process of policy-making.
Pensions and Thrift, 1908–25
Following a thirty-year campaign, during which the issue of poverty in old age was thoroughly discussed, the 1908 Old Age Pension Act was the first, and definitive, legislative step on the road to the imposition of a retirement condition some forty years later.
The Act itself carried no such condition.
It offered, as Pat Thane put it, ‘a pension for the very old, the very poor and the very respectable’ with a qualifying age of 70, a sliding scale income limit of £21 to £31 10s. per annum, and clauses purporting to exclude recipients of poor relief, those convicted of various offences, and aliens.
The immediate aim (in response to an  increasingly vociferous political campaign) was to relieve poverty in old age, and, secondarily, to lower Poor Law expenditure on the elderly.
The extent of the hidden need met by the Act was  demonstrated by the fact that 93.6 per cent of pensions granted in 1912–13 were for the full amount of 5s 0d.
Following the 1908 Act discussion centred on whether thrift could be encouraged in any way that would not be inherently counter-productive.
Most of the private members' old age pension bills that had been submitted to Parliament prior to 1908 had contained income-limit clauses; but by the early 1920s, stimulated partly by the 1919 Ryland Adkins Committee's publicizing of the  problem, increasing concern was being voiced over whether means-testing would discourage saving for old age.
Those who spoke on behalf of the elderly found themselves in a dilemma.
Means-testing was repugnant, yet how else could higher pensions be legitimated?
Between 1915 and 1918, owing to wartime employment opportunities, the number of pensioners fell; but for impoverished elderly people, inflation did nothing to improve living standards.
Politically, the leaders of organized labour were the most determined campaigners on the pensioners' behalf.
In the House of Commons, their loudest advocate, Tom Wing, sustained by resolutions from local pensions-committees and trades councils, exposed cases where elderly people had relinquished their pensions and drawn out-relief instead.
Such intervention was given its most potent fillip in July 1916 with the first National Conference on Old Age Pensions (NCOAP).
A pressure group with membership composed of affiliates from the trade unions, friendly societies, Co-operative Society committees, the Free Church Council, and others, the Conference claimed at the outset to have the support of over ten million people.
Initially, a token allegiance was offered by some forty-seven MPs from all parties.
Soon, however, over a hundred were identified with the movement which, by 1917, had ‘a very large and influential’ Commons Committee under Wing's chairmanship.
Aside from the clear financial objective of an increase in the basic weekly rate to 7s 6d, the association was mainly concerned with the inconsistencies of the 1908 Act in so far as the means test mitigated against the ‘respectable aged Britisher’.
Sir Thomas Oliver, presiding at the first conference, remarked that:
the time had come when the old age pension should be given, irrespective of social position, sex, and necessity, to every person in the UK on reaching the age of 70…the fact that some men and women had received the pension while other hardworking and deserving people had not, created a prejudice…
At present the thrifty working man could be refused the benefit of the OAP Act, while the thriftless could receive it…
The passport to the old  age pension should not be necessity, but British parentage.
In July 1916 there had been 978,112 state pensioners; by 1924 there were 916,771, over 61,000 fewer.
Against this, the number of paupers aged 70 years and over rose from 54,539 to 80,404.
For a generation ostensibly reared on the Smilesian creed, argued the NCOAP, this must be an anathema: an expensive system of pauperism was encouraged whilst self-reliance was discouraged.
In 1915 the National Conference estimated the cost of a pauper to be 14s 0d per week and that of a criminal 11s 10d net, but a state pensioner, ‘a British subject, who is required under the Act, to be a respectable and provident person’ was granted between 1s 0d and 5s 0d per week only.
Campaigning concentrated on attacking the ‘penalty on thrift’, whereby superannuation payments exceeding 8s 0d weekly from unions and, especially, from friendly societies caused pensions to be cut or disentitled claimants altogether.
To avoid similar disqualifications railway companies and others had ‘most unwillingly’ been obliged to lower occupational pensions, either at their own instigation or following requests from employees.
As the Conference's actuary pointed out, few employers would gladly contemplate taxation to finance state provision, when, simultaneously, they were developing private pension schemes.
These latter prevented employees benefiting from state provision and, indirectly, money spent by employers went to relieve the Treasury, rather than the workmen for whom it was intended.
Thrift had to be seen as a goal, not an all-pervading reality.
It meant ‘self-respect…the poor man's sword of honour’, a fine doctrine for ‘the many deserving people belonging to the small shopkeeping and lower professional classes’.
However, although it was considered a duty to encourage providence, saving was for many a stark impossibility.
The providential principle was only workable, it was argued, if the millionaire and the pauper were granted equal eligibility via a universal pension-scheme.
However, the NCOAP directed the greater part of its invective at the moral issue, rather than at the prior financial one.
Giving evidence before the Select Committee on Old Age Pensions in 1919, NCOAP secretary Longstaff Dennison stated ‘We take anomalies first…and then the reduction of age if possible, and then increased pensions.’
Because of this declared order of priorities, intensive questioning concentrated on the issue of thrift.
Were earnings to be treated in the same way as savings and gratuities?
Could hard and fast lines be drawn between one form of income (or property) and another?
He could but say that the only solution to such posers was a universal pension.
‘You have the advantage of me’, he said, outpointed embarrassingly often by the Committee's own calculations, which suggested,inter alia , that most were penalized on account of means alone.
Elsewhere, distinctions were made between self-denial, charity, and earnings, although, as Lesser remarked, the dilemma was really a moral one:
it is really very  difficult to stick to a principle when the form of capital can be changed about in the many forms that modern complex conditions will allow…the thing is to look at the spirit which initiates these particular forms of thrift on the part of people.
By the early 1920s, however, the NCOAP's rhetoric on thrift had become, in a sense, a gift to the enemy: in November 1923 the Conservatives pledged that ‘the encouragement of thrift and independence must be the underlying principle of all our social reforms’, whilst in his election address of the following year Baldwin declared that the aim of ‘all-in’ insurance was ‘to get rid of inquisitorial inquiries and encourage thrift’.
In no way was this inconsistent with the Ryland Adkins recommendations.
Mainstream social administration opinion, inevitably constrained by fiscal orthodoxy, political considerations, and the wage structure, argued that the relaxations of means-testing which were introduced in 1924 had, in Wilson and Mackay's somewhat disingenuous verdict, ‘extended non-contributory pensions as widely as the system permitted’.
The easiest way of advance was through a new contributory scheme.
The 1925 Widows', Orphans' and Old Age Contributory Pensions Act was thus the product of several impulses — desire by the advocates of 1924 ‘new Conservatism’(especially Neville Chamberlain) to forge a specifically Conservative brand of social reform in the new post-1918 conditions of virtual mass democracy, the mothers' pensions challenge by Labour, the ‘all-in insurance’ activity within Whitehall in 1923–4 (represented by the Anderson and Watson Committees), and the first glimmerings of realization that better pensions might encourage retirement and reduce the unemployment statistics.
The potential of pensions to reduce unemployment was beginning to be discussed within the labour movement, and was briefly alluded to by Chamberlain in the Commons debates on the 1925 Bill.
The sum of 10s 0d per week for the new pension was, he admitted, inadequate but it had to correspond with the level of the non-contributory pension; and such an amount would encourage individuals to take out private pensions.
Yet with contradictory logic he claimed that at this level a contributory pension would stimulate retirement, since older people would withdraw from full-time work and would ‘eke out’ their pensions by
something which they may have saved for themselves or perhaps by doing an odd job here and there, and working a day or two a week, which will not make too great demands on their strength, but will just keep the household going.
If such complacent thinking brought popular credibility to those in power, NCOAP policy was best tactically misguided and at worst symptomatic of a stubborn refusal to encounter poverty rather than pauperism.
When we consider the impact of state welfare on personal saving, the social base of the NCOAP — or National Conference of Representatives of Friendly Societies, Trade Unions, Associations, Federations and Councils, to use the full title — lends a telling undercurrent of motive.
Henry Lesser, its vice-chairman, commented that ‘the National Conference was really originated by thrift societies, whether Friendly Societies or any other societies that encourage thrift’.
Indeed, those exemplars of working-class respectability, the friendly and approved society officials, who comprised the mainstay of their membership, were suffering a crisis of confidence.
Recent econometric evidence offered by Paul Johnson suggests that state pensions actually resulted in increased working-class savings, along the lines predicted by Booth, but that a decline in working-class assets held in friendly societies occurred, specifically during the five years from 1916 to 1921.
He emphasizes that this was a time when the significance of the ‘economic security and social esteem hitherto associated with membership’ was declining.
Hence, the notion of thrift carried little meaning: it was essentially part of a bourgeois economic outlook largely incompatible with proletarian living conditions.
The aged had, nevertheless, acquired ‘a definite status in the community…and the ‘pauper taint’[was]removed by a system of personal thrift  organized by the state', a provision for which the Conference congratulated itself, claiming to have succeeded because it had placed national interests over and above political tactics.
Yet it is evident that the timing of the Act had been determined by Churchill's desire to popularize his first budget and, with the rate of pension remaining static despite inflation, the continuing poverty of many elderly people merely testified to the inefficacy of such posturing in a climate of financial stringency.
In 1919, Longstaff Dennison had claimed that the NCOAP was going to be ‘a trade union for pensioners’.
In 1926, on any economic criterion, they still had a long way to go, when, pacified by the placebos of the previous year, they claimed a moral victory, and vanished into the archives of oblivion.
If a group claiming to speak on behalf of elderly people had failed to deliver because its own interests were at variance with those of its wider public, the absence of any promotional or representative body during the following decade rendered the pensioners' position still more hazardous.
Pensions and the Depression, 1925–39
The subsequent depression-hit fifteen years was a period of very slow progress in welfare innovation, particularly in the case of pensions.
In 1935, the very same Neville Chamberlain, who ten years earlier had even been considering a contributory earnings-related scheme, could tell the Conservative Party annual conference that better retirement pensions would be prohibitively costly, would release only a paltry number of jobs and would create grave legal and administrative problems in enforcing the retirement condition: ‘Are you going to create a new penal offence — the offence of doing work?’ he asked.
However, within the labour movement, interest in mandatory retirement was growing.
Many trade unionists, acutely sensitive to wage reductions at a time of high unemployment and deflation, held two important views on the matter of pensions.
The first was that payment of 10s 0d per week by the state to pensioners still at work encouraged employers to pay correspondingly lower wages to that section of the work-force.
Thus, while trade unionists wished old people to be kept at a level of economic decency, they realized at the same time that pensions without a retirement condition would erode the wage structure and weaken trade union bargaining.
John Wheatley had argued as much in the Second Reading of the 1925 Bill, while at the same time criticizing the sum of 10s 0d as inadequate.
Again, the TUC General Council made the same accusation when it met the Beveridge Committee seventeen years later: F.H.
Wolstencroft said:
We find it surprising, the number of members in the particular craft immediately they were 65 they were 2½d per hour worse workmen than they were before.
They could only retain their job if they accepted a reduction of 2½d per hour.
It worked out at the 10s 0d a week 7pension.
We call that unfair.
This was also the view of the NFOAPA, who cited particular cases to Beveridge.
Secondly, from the late 1920s onwards, retirement as an immediate and simple palliative to the problem of unemployment was increasingly debated within reformist circles.
Evolving his own version of the Independent Labour Party's ‘Socialism in Our Time’ reflationary strategy, Oswald Mosley, when a member of the 1929 Labour government, proposed a new retirement pension.
He eventually incorporated this idea into his wider plan for tackling unemployment, the 1930 Mosley Memorandum.
Though rejected by the Labour Cabinet and the Treasury as impractical and contrary to the tenets of the prevailing fiscal orthodoxy, the notion of generous pensions with a retirement  condition did appeal to moderate Labour opinion for the rest of the 1930s.
Ernest Bevin's 1933 articles in The New Clarion , later published as My Plan for 2,000,000 Workless , argued that a new state pension of £1 per week (single person) and £1 15s 0d per week (married couple) paid at the age of 65 to all earning up to £1,000 per annum, on condition of retirement from work, would induce withdrawal from the labour market of the estimated 350,000 existing pensioners aged 65–9 working in industry.
If to this were added the effects of a special pension at 60 for those who were unemployed, a new invalidity pension, the raising of the school-leaving age to sixteen and a uniform forty-hour week, a total of 2,000,000 jobs would be redistributed to the unemployed.
Bevin's plan was only one of a number of retirement pension schemes discussed in the 1930s.
On 21 February 1934, for example, the House of Commons spent three and a half hours considering John Banfield's motion for state pensions at age 60 ‘sufficient in amount to encourage the retirement from industry’ of older workers.
It was rejected on grounds of cost and the problem of enforcing the retirement condition.
Probably the most systematic exposition of such a proposal in the 1930s came from the research organization Political and Economic Planning (PEP).
Formed in the aftermath of the 1931 financial crisis, PEP exemplified that liberal-reformist strand of ‘middle opinion’ that was to grow in the 1930s and provide the basis for the political shift leftwards during the Second World War.
A moderate reform of capitalism could, it was argued, be effected through a rational planning programme.
Hence, it was not surprising that, as an answer to the problem of unemployment, PEP should have seized upon the seductively plausible idea of retirement pensions that had originated in Labour circles ten years earlier.
Under its 1935 plan, PEP identified a total population aged 65 and over of 3,316,453.
Of these, 837,905 were ‘gainfully occupied’(this term included unemployed, casual, and part-time workers), of which 693,624 individuals were in work; 2,097,146 men and women aged 65 and over were in receipt of old age pensions (and about one-tenth of these also received public assistance).
Compulsory retirement, PEP considered, would be a political impossibility since it would interfere with individual liberty, not to speak of raising the anomaly of those in occupations with no statutory upper age-limit, such as judges.
However, a pension of 15s 0d per week at the age of 65, conditional on retirement (plus an equal amount for wives), would probably remove 316,000 individuals from employment at an annual cost of about £20,000,000.
Proposals such as these aroused considerable debate in the 1930s (particularly on the question of whether, for every job vacated by an older worker, a new one would be created for a younger person), but they made little headway with the National Government.
Jam Today!
The Politics of the NFOAPA, 1938–48
Unlike earlier efforts, pressure-group agitation during the late 1930s and 1940s owed much to the militancy of pensioners themselves.
From small beginnings the Old Age Pensions Association (OAPA) mushroomed.
The Blackburn branch, founded in October 1938 with nine members, grew to 3,500 by February 1940, whilst even small branches, such as Rhymney in South Wales, had 360 adherents by this time.
By mid-1940 their mouthpiece,The Pensioner , claimed sales in excess of 500 in several branches and reported on the ‘phenomenal growth’ of the movement — to 600 branches — within its first sixteenth months.
Meanwhile, the Scottish OAPA, formed in February 1937, comprised a total membership of 8,000 by the start of 1941.
Following splits and amalgamation, the NFOAPA, as it became, comprised some 400 branches by June 1942.
In August it was remarked in the Commons that, ‘Wherever you go now in every constituency you are met by the aged people and their organizations.’
By Spring 1944 some branches had nearly 10,000 members, and many had ova 5,000.
In villages like Dearham in Cumberland, with a total population of 1,500, 900 were members of the Federation.
Such growth owed much to the sense of purpose and national identity gained through petitioning Parliament.
The first petition, in July 1939, asked for a doubling of the basic pension to £1, and collected an estimated five million signatures during six weeks of local canvassing.
The Speaker of the House of Commons remarked: ‘This is a historic occasion.
It is the first time in the history of this House that a petition has been presented accompanied by a demand.’
This was a long way from the ‘silent suffering’ and ‘passive protest’which the NCOAP had sought to articulate.
Concessions gained during wartime followed a similarly piecemeal path to those granted after NCOAP pressure during the 1914–19 period.
Like the NCOAP, the Federation was non-partisan, but, unlike its predecessor, its hands were not tied by affiliation to (and therefore responsibility for) the friendly society or trade union movement.
This openness, together with the decentralized branch network, enabled initiatives to come ‘from below’, from the elderly themselves.
Undoubtedly, there were echoes of an earlier campaigning style, but the rhetoric of the Federation — as reflected in the pages of The Pensioner — was altogether more direct and biting, more tangible.
One issue cited a Daily Herald report on Nazi Germany which claimed that ‘About 40,000 prisoners are between 65 and 85 years old.
They live in barracks…and are allowed a shilling a day upkeep.
On this meagre subsistence allowance they die like flies ’.
‘So what?’, said the Federation, having shown by budgetary analysis that British pensioners also fared  on just 7/ a week after rent and fuel costs had been paid.
Their immediate reaction to the Beveridge Report's proposals was displayed graphically in a cartoon, the caption to which read ‘Cheer up, Maggie, we shall get £2 a week when we are 97 — a bitter comment on the gradualist compromises of the new pension scheme.
A Pensioners’ National Appeal had been taken up by the Daily Dispatch in 1938 and Ritchie Calder's articles in the Daily Herald , ‘Life on 10/ a Week’, provided a further boost for the 1939 agitation with their Orwellian revelations.
In keeping with the rank-and-file strength of the movement, however, pressure was applied most effectively at local level.
By comparison with the ‘insider’ methods of the Old People's Welfare Committees, it was also profoundly political, resembling, as later commentators put it, ‘the abrasive approach of 1960s pressure groups such as Shelter rather than the more staid ‘non political’approach' of the voluntary organizations.
Given the qualified  success of the 1939 escapade,The Pensioner remarked in April 1940 that ‘To exert pressure on the  Government as a whole is to invite failure as is demonstrated by the fate of many petitions.’
The point was regularly reiterated, passing resolutions being decried as equally counter-productive.
Since ‘not the Government, only persons can have responsibility’, the struggle was to be waged in the constituencies, against individual MPs.
‘We must carry on our guerilla warfare, sniping our members with postcards and letters’, read the first editorial.
Centralization of authority within the parties was seen as the major obstacle to the implementation of their demands.
According to the National Federation, this was clearly evident from Labour's record over the past twenty years:
One would think that, after all that time, a movement that really desired increased pensions and had failed, would have changed its tactics…the stronger a movement becomes ‘institutionally’ the weaker it becomes as an instrument for the benefit of the people.
All hinged on accountability.
Branches engaged in detailed correspondence with local MPs, demanding an explanation from them, if Federation demands — £1 (later, 30s 0d) at 60 with no means test — were not being pursued.
Several held public meetings where local MPs were put on their mettle and remorselessly pilloried if they failed to acquiesce.
The Pensioner was, however, careful to note that ‘it's the votes in Parliament that show up your MP, NOT WHAT HE SAYS ON THE PLATFORM.’
The division on the Determination of Needs Bill debate in February 1941 was reprinted from Hansard, citing all 173 who had voted for the continuance of means calculations together with  the ‘sincere few’(nineteen) who had been carpeted for defying the Labour whip.
This was a tactic borrowed from the NCOAP.
However, the Federation used its local mass support to carry the campaign further.
In 1943, the annual conference carried a motion suggesting all local branches put forward their own candidates for municipal elections.
Subsequently, Ernest Melling (now the Federation's secretary) stood for Blackburn's staunchly Labour Trinity ward on a pensioner's independent ticket.
In the 1945 general election, a mass meeting of 1,200 pensioners endorsed Barbara Castle and John Edwards, ‘not because they are Labour candidates, but because they will support YOU’.
In addition, between 1943 and 1948 several huge mass petitions were delivered to Westminster whilst the National Council of the Independent Labour Party decided ‘to place the whole machinery of the Party at the disposal of the old folk’.
In April 1944 an executive deputation to London met Liberals, Tories, the Daily Herald , and the Assistance Board, all within the space of two days.
In terms of consciousness-raising, their uncompromising approach surely paid dividends.
However, the failure to influence policy decisions to the advantage of older people became painfully clear when the Beveridge Committee on Social Insurance and Allied Services examined the question of old age.
The Impact of Beveridge
Almost as soon as he commenced taking evidence, Beveridge was inundated with memoranda on the needs of the elderly.
Thus, for example, the National Council of Social Service submitted a wide-ranging document summarizing the principal issues: the deficiencies in existing pensions coverage (such as the continued operation of means-testing through the 1940 supplementary pensions scheme), the urgent need for better medical assistance for pensioners outside the Public Assistance Committee services, the lack of institutional provision, and so on .
It is clear, however, that Beveridge paid scant attention to these wider issues.
His focus — no doubt justifiable by the Committee's terms of reference — was limited: to the establishment of a single pension integrated into the new social insurance scheme, and the reduction of supplementation by the Assistance Board.
Also, his attitude towards old age was, to say the least, brisk and unsentimental.
Though rejecting the more extreme nostrums of the eugenists, Beveridge had become very interested in the population problem and had written much on the question of declining fertility.
He accepted uncritically the simplistic concept of a worsening dependency ratio that had been popularized in Enid Charles's alarmist warnings, for repeatedly he portrayed the elderly as a social burden and welcomed any suggestion that would limit the future  cost of pensions.
Thus, for example, when meeting the TUC General Council in January 1942 he warned that he could not put money towards the elderly ‘at the cost of the children’ and that he had to give them ‘fair treatment without ruining the country’.
Again, in March 1942, he told the Parliamentary Committee of the Co-operative Congress that ‘old age is going to be frightfully expensive; there are going to be a fearful lot of old people’.
Given his attitude, then, Beveridge was likely to be favourable towards a retirement condition.
The curious fact is, however, that initially he seems to have been opposed to it, and, in altering his position, was largely persuaded by the TUC General Council.
Even more than in the 1930s, the TUC were imprisoned within constraints imposed on it by a capitalist wage-structure: the TUC argued strongly for adequate pensions (denying, for example, that an old person needed less to eat); but if this was to be implemented without encouraging further wage-cuts to elderly workers, then it appeared to them inevitable that a retirement condition must be introduced.
In his first major memorandum to the committee (the famous Basic Problems of Social Security with Heads of a Scheme ), Beveridge argued that the crux of the problem was to raise pensions sufficiently to dispense with means-tested supplementation from the Assistance Board (so that the insurance basis for the entire social security plan would not be eroded), and concluded that ‘these pensions will be paid on proof of age, without means test and without proof of disability or retirement from work’.
In his first meeting with the TUC General Council in January 1942, Beveridge rejected their suggestion for a retirement condition, saying ‘I do not believe the old people leaving the labour market really create fresh employment’, but he promised to look further into the matter.
By February he was at least considering a retirement condition, though still sceptical about its effect on unemployment, and commissioned a paper on the feasibility of enforcing it from the Ministry of Labour's representative on the Committee, P.Y. Blundun.
By May, meeting the TUC again, he found their suggestion ‘very interesting and attractive’, but was apprehensive that any consequent investigation of whether the pensioner had worked in the previous week would smack of means-testing.
The TUC were insistent, however, that pensioners should make room for younger workers and that retirement should be a time of genuine leisure on an adequate payment from the state as a reward for a lifetime's work.
Indeed, on this point they were the most vehement of the groups that gave evidence to the Beveridge Committee.
The British Employers' Confederation, for example, had no strong views on the matter, the NFOAPA vaguely opposed compulsory retirement, and only the Fabian Society had given it much thought: they proposed an interesting ‘double-decker’ scheme, involving payment  of 10s 0d per week as in the existing system, and ‘adequate’pensions on retirement.
By the time Beveridge drafted the section of his Report on ‘The Problem of Age’ in August 1942, his ideas had been formulated.
He displayed perfectly that contradiction of attitude (or ‘supreme paradox’, as Phillipson puts it) in ‘expert’ thinking on old age that had emerged by the 1940s — on the one hand portraying the elderly as a disastrous burden on society (men over the age of 65 and women ova 60 had formed 6.2 per cent of the British population in 1901, an estimated 12.0 per cent in 1941, and would be 20.8 per cent in 1971), yet on the other hand, paying lip-service to their status as an exceptionally deserving group: ‘Provision made for age must be satisfactory; otherwise great numbers may suffer.
On the other hand, every shilling added to pension rates is extremely costly in total…it is dangerous to be in any way lavish to old age.’
Subsistence pensions, at 40s 0d for a married couple or 24s 0d for a single person, were only to be attained after twenty years of slowly rising rates.
Meanwhile, means-tested assistance supplementation would have to continue.
Subsistence pensions could only be paid on retirement; failure to do this ‘would impose an unjustifiable and harmful burden on all citizens below that age’.
Yet paradoxically, the conditions governing award of a pension should encourage the older people to continue working in order to reduce the total cost of pensions, and thus the scheme adjusted to the differing capacities of individuals to work in old age.
Accordingly, postponement of retirement would be rewarded by an increased pension.
That Beveridge viewed the elderly with a notable lack of sympathy is evident in the few telling phrases which appeared in the final draft of August 1942 but were left out of the published Report: to give full subsistence pensions ‘as a birthday present’ to an individual attaining the age of 60 or 65 would be ‘reprehensible extravagance’which was ‘wholly unjustifiable’.
Where, in the Report, Beveridge talked of the ‘strong public opinion’ in favour of subsistence pensions, in the private memorandum he contemptuously dismissed this as ‘sentimental and political’, insisting that the state should retain the right to reduce pensions below subsistence on grounds of financial stringency or a fall in the cost of living, and warning of the dangers of a ‘birthday present’mentality if there was no retirement condition.
Meanwhile, as Means and Smith point out, the NFOAPA's concentration on pensions issues caused it to ignore inadequacies in medical and social provision whilst ‘its campaigning style was unlikely to have been appreciated’ within the corridors of power.
Not surprisingly, when the Report was published, the Federation's leaders were far from satisfied: ‘For all practical purposes, the Beveridge Report is  useless…and we had better ignore it entirely, concentrating on action which will secure our just rights — AND NOW — not at some vague future time.’
They went on to deride the ‘screaming headlines’, ‘spate of glorification’, and ‘premature eulogies’ which followed in its wake.
They were perhaps justified in their anger at the relatively low priority accorded to older people.
Their complaint that they had been betrayed by a Committee ‘set up as a result of the pressure by the NFOAPA upon individual MPs’ was, however, some way wide of the mark.
Conclusion
By the 1940s, retirement had been written in to state support for the elderly and, as such, became part of a new institutionalized dependence.
For the first time, a receipt of a pension forced an individual to relinquish the right to work.
The decline in economic activity among men aged over 65 progressed steadily throughout the century — from roughly two-thirds in the 1900s to one-third in the early 1950s and less than a fifth in the 1970s.
However, it is doubtful whether state pensions policies were the prime cause of this decline since it continued at much the same rate after 1948 as it had done before.
Thus, when considering the impulses behind such a transformation, both supply and demand factors should be accorded equal significance.
General ‘political economy’ explanations must be correct in locating such developments within complex shifts in the production process, industrial infrastructure, and labour force requirements occurring at a particular stage of advanced industrialization — though much work needs to be done to define these shifts more precisely.
On the other hand, political demands and the desire of citizens for leisure in old age were also important, and possibly there was a causal connection with the growth of paid holidays and a shorter working week.
This necessarily brief account has concentrated on the debate over the retirement condition between 1908 and 1948, and the curious ‘complicity’ of the labour movement in demanding a measure that was to confirm the economic uselessness of old people.
Yet it is clear that TUC leaders were trapped within constraints not of their making.
If they were both to preserve a measure of control over the wage structure in a capitalist economy and to win adequate state pensions for their members, then a retirement condition was inevitable.
As the twentieth-century economy became more specialized, older workers were increasingly occupying positions in industry that involved unskilled, light work, or were clinging to jobs in outmoded, labour-intensive enterprises such as agriculture.
This tendency was, of course, greatly exacerbated by the mass unemployment of the inter-war years.
Older workers were a highly vulnerable section of the work-force, and could offer little resistance  to wage cuts.
To protect its younger members the TUC had to sacrifice the economic freedom of working pensioners, while through Beveridge's rationalizing, the state retained a flexible reserve army of labour in the younger elderly.
Pressure groups for the older persons were caught in a similar dilemma.
The NCOAP began by pressing a universalist demand but was eventually forced to accept a compromise which, although in line with working-class notions of respectability, did not reflect the absolute material wants of the many.
A generation later, the National Federation more nearly incorporated mass demands through grass-roots support.
Such new, articulate expression may have derived from the fact that older people in the late 1930s comprised the first fully literate generation and were also members of a cohort which had ‘acquired trade union habits and organisation’.
The contributory pension lent a unifying status, making them no longer the (passive)‘aged poor’ but dignified and active ‘old age pensioner’.
Nonetheless, their pleas still went unanswered.
Meanwhile, in relying on projected trends in age structure, Beveridge forecast a certain level of dependent poverty, but failed to address the generational variations in lifetime patterns of personal economic behaviour which helped to create it.
The imposition of the retirement condition constituted a novel form of institutionalized dependence.
Pensions policy accompanied long-term labour-market trends, which increasingly confirmed the economic irrelevance of elderly workers.
However, this was not achieved with the total  acquiescence of all older people.
Their organizations, and those of the labour movement, trod the tightrope of the central dilemma contained in the notion of retirement — that old age should be, on the one hand, a period of dignified leisure, adequately financed by the state as a reward for a lifetime of work, and yet, on the other, a phase in which the freedom to participate in economic life was not denied.
Notes
Acknowledgements
We wish to acknowledge the support of the Economic and Social Research Council, under whose grant (no.
G01 250016) this research was conducted.
For allowing access to archive material, we should also like to thank the NFOAPA (Headquarters, Melling House, Blackburn) and the British Library of Political and Economic Science (PEP Archives).
Crown copyright material in the Public Record Office appears by permission of the Controller of Her Majesty's Stationery Office.
Chapter two
The Consolidation of ‘Old Age’ as a Phase of Life, 1945–1965
Sarah Harper and Pat Thane
The social construction of old age in post-war Britain
This chapter focuses upon the post-war retirement debate.
The decades following the Second World War saw an historically unprecedented growth in retirement at a fixed age for all social classes.
The accompanying debate about population problems gave rise to much published discussion and research which reveals both the experiences and societal perceptions of the elderly in this period.
It involved (not always successful) conscious efforts by influential groups and individuals to redefine the roles and popular images of elderly people.
Post-war Britain offers a suitable period in which to apply the concept of the social construction of old age.
Whilst ‘the elderly’ have long been recognized as a distinct social category, ever-stricter stratification by age has emerged since industrialization (Thomas 1976; Quadragno 1982).
This process has accelerated in the twentieth century and, we argue, reached completion in the twenty years following the Second World War.
It entailed the increasing separation of biological from socially defined old age.
In the post-war period, more universally than before, old age, and the socially accepted roles associated with it, was accepted as beginning at a fixed chronological age: the state pensionable age of 60/65.
‘Retirement’ provides an especially good opportunity to analyse this process.
At earlier times, the move from full-time work to full-time retirement, through a transitional process of gradual movement of individuals through lighter and part-time employment, typically coincided with the biological transition from fitness to dependency.
In recent times, however, most people have come to experience and to expect an abrupt transition from full-time work to full-time retirement at an age when many of them feel reasonably fit.
This experience, which spread at an unusually fast pace in our period, especially among manual workers, required adjustment on the part of individuals and society.
Taking a longer-term perspective it is also apparent that, during the post-war period from 1946 to the early 1960s, political, social, and economic changes combined to create a particular, historically new set of experiences and definitions of old age.
Thus, for example, these decades saw the development of new services associated with the emerging welfare state and the expansion of state pensions to cover almost the entire elderly population.
Also, the demographic structure was gradually shifting towards a higher representation of older age-groups (12 per cent aged 65 years or over in 1951, compared with 3.5 per cent in 1901), and changes in household composition produced increasing numbers of elderly people living alone (Wall 1982).
Geriatrics became a serious medical specialty for the first time.
Wartime discoveries of acute poverty among elderly people heightened awareness of their propensity to poverty.
These and other factors combined to give the elderly population a new and high profile in post-war public debate and social research.
In particular, concern about the long-run decline in the birth-rate and the recognition that this was the major reason for the growing proportion of old people in the population (Thane forthcoming) coincided with a post-war labour shortage, making the elderly a focus of interest in a wider range of policy-making and otherwise influential circles.
Issues concerning the elderly retained this high profile in social and economic research and in public debate until the early 1960s.
We argue that a specific set of widely held images of elderly people were constructed in this period.
We have analysed processes behind this construction by examining the publications of academic, governmental and other public bodies, and of the mass media, remembering the cultural, political, and ideological context in which they were produced.
These include the work of academic gerontologists, including industrial gerontologists, socio-medical geriatricians, social work specialists and sociologists; Hansard, the reports of government committees and other official publications; data from trade unions, business firms, political organizations, and pressure groups.
Concepts and Methods
Before considering the images of old age produced by such material, the concept of social construction itself requires brief discussion, as does the methodology employed.
We have used the concept to mean the processes whereby specific social groups, in our case elderly people, come to be defined and categorized, and have characteristics attributed to them, which then become normative.
As regards methods of analysis, it seemed most appropriate to  examine the output of selected key bodies, in order to make an assessment of the images of the elderly emerging from each and of similarities and differences among them.
The bodies fell into a number of groups: social researchers, political representatives, the medical profession, and the organs of the mass media.
The most problematic of these, in view of their diversity, were the first and the last.
Ordering and analysing the output of the mass media obviously pose particular problems.
Our approach in this case was to select specific events concerning the elderly, for example, the implementation of the new post-war pensions, the publication of official reports and of widely noticed social surveys, across the twenty-year time-span, and to review their presentation by newspapers and more specialized publications.
Research on the Elderly, 1945–65
The academic writing and research on old age from the late 1940s to the 1960s included studies of old people's economic circumstances, social networks, welfare and service provision, and residential circumstances, diet, socio-medical problems, and mental health.
The research was funded from a wide variety of sources.
There were four broad foci of research attention: employment, housing, social issues such as poverty and loneliness, and socio-medical issues.
While the research relating to the employment and retirement of older workers, as we shall see later, presented them in a positive light as net contributors to economy and society, the image emerging from other areas of analysis was more negative.
Two broad themes were apparent: first, there was a growing recognition that elderly people were mentally and physically capable of far more than had been previously assumed, and that it was medically and socially possible for them to maintain an independent and active life.
Running concurrent with this, however, was a belief that the community in the post-war period did little to ensure or support such life styles.
Medical research led the way in fostering the belief both in individual capacity and in community  responsibility for it.
Until such pioneers as Marjorie Warren began to demonstrate otherwise in the 1930s, it was assumed that victims of strokes, for example, were incapable of rehabilitation.
By 1948, however, Cosin was pointing out that the idea that most elderly patients were untreatable was a misconception.
Accurate medical and social assessment, followed by treatment, could enable such patients to return to the community.
It was this recognition that produced advances in geriatric medicine and ultimately a specialty provision in the NHS.
Such research tended to transfer the focus from elderly people themselves to their environment.
Sheldon, in particular, demonstrated  the close connection between social conditions and health (Sheldon 1948).
This was followed by a series of studies of the relationship between living environments, the elderly, and ill health (Exton-Smith 1955), and of methods of minimizing length of stay in hospital by the establishment of out-patient assessment and follow-up clinics (Adams et al 1957), day hospitals (Cosin 1954), and preventive health care (Anderson and Cowan 1955).
The theme of the developing specialty of geriatrics was clear.
Not only were the chronologically old (i.e. those over 60/65) capable of remaining within the community until biological old age was reached, but even then, given appropriate community support, many of them could enjoy a full personal and community life.
Social researchers and housing specialists produced a similar picture.
They stressed that older people preferred to live independently both in their own houses and after admission to residential care and that this was possible if they were supported by kin and the wider community.
Despite this outpouring of research findings and recommendations, however, it appears that the immediate environment for the elderly changed very little during the period (Rowntree 1947; Utting 1958; Townsend 1962; Philips Committee — HMSO 1954).
Indeed, Utting revealed that a fifth of the elderly population was at or below official subsistence level.
There also remained throughout the period a general shortage of appropriate housing — in particular, a lack of accommodation for the frail and those with special needs (Townsend 1962; Webb 1962).
None of this was surprising, since provision for elderly people represented an entirely new departure in house building.
In summary, the image created by the research of the period was of a growing sector of the population, able to remain active in the community after withdrawal from full-time paid labour, but only with the assistance of that community.
Moreover, the need for assistance increased with age.
The need to channel economic and social resources to the elderly population thus helped to present its image as a ‘burden’ on the community.
Furthermore, the growing tendency to withdraw from economic activity at a specific chronological age (60/65), regardless of physiological condition and cognitive capacity, reinforced the attention paid to the ageing demographic structure of the country.
The understandable concentration of research on the needy and on the failures of community support meant that little attention was paid to the positive contribution to the community made by many older people in the form of services to family and community.
Two further points about the research require emphasis.
First, the research relating to employment focused almost entirely upon men (with the exception of Le Gros Clark 1962), whilst that into medical and social conditions studied mainly women.
The different foci reflected the fact  that the full-time paid labour force at retiring age was overwhelmingly male, whilst the majority of old people was female.
Second, the two broad types of research focused on different age-groups.
The labour force/retirement research focused on the 60–70 age-group, indeed sometimes drawing in those in their fifties, while the social research was more often concerned with those who were older and more dependent.
The retirement debate
Data from the 1931 to 1961 Censuses and from the Ministry of Social Security for 1966 showed a continuous decline in the percentage of men over the age of 65 in full-time paid employment (Table 2.1).
The shift between 1931 and 1951 is particularly significant, since the former census was taken during a period of heavy unemployment when employment opportunities for older workers were at a low level and public opinion did not favour efforts to promote it; whilst in 1951 the exact opposite conditions prevailed.
Table 2.1 Percentage of age-group retired from full-time economic employment (males)(%)
Neither the Beveridge Report nor the National Insurance Act 1946 intended state-pension provision unnecessarily to remove able elderly workers from the labour market.
Warning against encouraging the spread of early retirement, Beveridge recommended a system of increased pension rates as an incentive to defer retirement.
The earnings allowance under the 1948 Act, which entitled those over 60/65 eligible for a contributory pension to earn a small amount without incurring deductions from their pension, was intended to discourage retirement at the minimum age (Hansard, Vol. 432, No. 150, Cols 1380–1472).
Higher pensions were payable to those who remained in work beyond this age; these rose by annual increments for all retiring up to the age of 65/70.
However, the level of both permissible earnings and of increments on deferment was too low to provide a significant disincentive to retirement — an indication of the Labour government's ambivalence on the issue.
In contrast, the pension systems introduced in most other Western European countries facilitated flexible retirement ages by establishing a  relationship on sliding scales between earnings and pensions.
The reasons why this alternative was not adopted in Britain require investigation.
Political attitudes
The picture painted by these figures drew a response from various political and social bodies.
Historically, the labour movement had been committed to earlier rather than later retirement.
The Labour Party's pre-war proposals for improved old age pensions had included a retirement qualification.
It had argued that adequate pension support for the elderly would encourage them to retire and thus increase younger workers' employment prospects.
The Party experienced considerable problems in adjusting its policy to one of delaying retirement.
However, during the Labour Government's first period of office, 1945–50, both the Ministry of Labour (through dissemination of information to employers) and the Ministry of National Insurance (through slightly increasing the earnings allowance) attempted to encourage the deferment of retirement beyond 65 and the employment of older workers.
Following their election in 1951, the Conservatives, who in principle were less fettered than the Labour Party since they possessed no traditional commitment to early retirement, introduced a more flexible retirement policy for civil servants.
In 1953, the Ministry of Labour and National Service issued a memorandum on the Employment of Older Men and Women which claimed that ‘for compelling social and economic reasons the door must be opened widely to the employment of people able and willing to work, irrespective of their age’.
The memorandum (endorsed by the National Joint Advisory Council representing the British Employers' Confederation, the TUC, and the nationalized industries) identified as the essential problem the provision of a place in society for the ever-growing proportion of elderly persons and suggested that: ‘Age sixty-five for men and sixty for women ought no longer to be regarded as ‘normal retiring age’ '.
Appealing to employers to make special provision to enable older people to continue or, indeed, return to employment, the Ministry offered the help of its industrial rehabilitation units in cases where lack of confidence and low morale were obstacles to the re-employment of older people.
It then established the National Advisory Committee on the Employment of Older Men and Women (Watkinson Committee).
The Committee, however, in the first of its two reports in 1953 admitted that, despite isolated adjustments, no general or widespread changes had yet been made (HMSO 1953).
Strongly opposing the maintenance of an essentially arbitrary general retirement-age, the Committee recommended that the test for engagement or retirement should be capacity, not age, and that all who could give effective service should have the chance to continue in work if they so wished.
The Second Report in 1955 (HMSO 1955) was more optimistic, with the Committee stating that its earlier recommendations had had some influence over employers.
However, it recognized that ‘the changes in employers’ practices are to some extent due to acute labour shortages, particularly in some industrial areas'.
Early in 1959 the Watkinson Committee was replaced by an interdepartmental committee assigned to co-ordinate research on the employment of older men and women.
This was itself dissolved two years later.
However, as the National Old People's Welfare Committee noted (1963:6), ‘Since then there has been no apparent official action to promote the employment of elderly people’.
The Trades Unions
The Trades Union Congress stated generally that it had ‘no firm views’ on the ‘problem of retirement’.
However, two main objectives remained central to the movement throughout the period: early retirement combined with adequate state pensions.
Manual workers made up a large proportion of the TUC membership, and the health of many of these was depicted as having been destroyed by their employment; and, moreover, it was held that all workers had a right to a period of leisure in later life supported by-a full subsistence pension.
Early retirement had also long been advocated as a means of cutting unemployment and of encouraging the promotion of younger workers.
Even during this period of labour shortage the fear of unemployment was ever present and remained a reality in certain occupations and regions, for example on Merseyside and Clydeside.
It was understandably difficult for those whose views had been formed in a period of high unemployment to shift them radically and swiftly.
The principle of the ‘right to work’ was extended to ‘the right to work for all adults irrespective of age’; but it applied only where the labour of older workers was needed in addition to the full employment of younger men with families (Roberts 1954; Green 1963).
The TUC was also concerned that the retention of older workers would block promotion and thus the wage increments of the young (Green 1963).
The TUC representatives on the Philips Committee issued a minority report opposing the Committee's recommendation to raise the minimum pension-age (TUC 1957:141).
In addition, they supported the principle that receipt of the National Insurance pension should be conditional on retirement, because they feared that employers would treat pensions as a subsidy for wages if they were paid automatically at the age of 65 (ibid.).
They thus called for a managerial policy to facilitate promotion earlier in life, linked to flexible retirement wherever possible.
At the same time, the unions gradually dropped their pre-war opposition to occupational pensions, recognizing the contribution they could  make to their strategy of removing older workers from the labour market (Hannah 1986).
It is apparent that the influence of the trades unions was highly significant, both at the level of negotiations with individual employers and through their influence on government policy.
Social research
Much of the post-war rise in social research into ageing and employment was under the auspices of the  Nuffield Foundation.
The Foundation's Annual Report for 1946 outlined its policy on the aged poor: ‘As machines replace muscles as the motive force, the possibilities of extending useful employment could bring new purpose and new hope to those who have reluctantly accustomed themselves to being a burden’(p. 47) In that year the Foundation founded the Nuffield Research Unit into Problems of Ageing, at the University of Cambridge, with the purpose of studying ‘those changes of human performance in middle and old age likely to have a bearing upon capacity for work in industry’(Nuffield Foundation 1953b: 160), a ten-year project.
This was followed by grants (1954) to Murrell at Bristol.
(Nuffield Foundation 1957: 87); to Szafran at Exeter (Nuffield Foundation 1958: 89); and to Le Gros Clark (Nuffield Foundation 1953a).
During the 1950s further units were set up at London and Liverpool University to assess attitudes in industry.
The Foundation's concern with employment and the aged was also furthered by the establishment in 1947 of the National Corporation for the Care of Old People (Nuffield Foundation 1951).
Inter alia , the NCCOP was concerned with problems arising from the community's attitudes to retirement (Nuffield Foundation, 1949).
The Debate
The retirement debate of the immediate post-war years was thus stimulated by a general awareness of the ageing of the population as a whole and of its work-force.
Considerable alarm was expressed at these demographic changes (Thane forthcoming) although it was apparent that there was little idea of the possible economic and social implications.
It must be noted, however, that although the work-force was ageing overall, not all sectors of industry were equally affected.
In the early 1950s, males over 65 made up 3.3 per cent of the total manufacturing work-force, but they were 4.1 per cent in shipbuilding, 5.9 per cent in cotton spinning, 5.9 per cent in cotton weaving, 10.9 per cent in lace textiles, only 2 per cent in motor-vehicle manufacture.
That is, they were more highly concentrated in the older staple industries which were in acute and widely recognized need of restructuring, the labour shortage was most acute in some of the highly skilled sectors of these very  industries, and their loss would be acutely felt, at least in the short term.
Hence, although older workers did not contribute a large proportion of the work-force, their placing in the economy and the nature of the post-war economic problem made contemporary concern about them understandable.
Of greater long-term importance was the fact that the entire work-force was shifting in its age structure towards later ages.
Realization of how little was known about the likely effects of this demographic change led to the production of the first substantial body of data in this country on the experience of ageing in industry and on the relationship of work capacity to ageing: a highly polemical debate received some empirical clothing.
Three broad streams of concern were apparent — over the national economy, over individual health and personal welfare, and over the moral obligations of society to its older citizens.
It was the first two which carried most force and were backed by the most extensive social research.
The National Economy: the Dependency Argument
The stance most widely adopted by politicians, demographers, and economists was closely related to some of the eugenist arguments of the inter-war years: namely that the ageing of the population would create an unbalanced ratio of workers to dependents, with severe social and economic consequences.
As a consequence of the belief in the unbalanced ratio, demographers advocated the long-term necessity of keeping older people in the work-force, since the birth-rate was expected to remain low despite a wartime upturn.
The Philips Report (HMSO 1954) forecast little change in the dependency ratio overall in the following twenty-five years (1954–79), on the assumption that the same proportion of persons would continue to be employed in each age-group.
In doing so it used the temporary 1951–3 increase in employment of older workers rather than the wider post-war trend to earlier retirement.
Nevertheless, the Report estimated that the proportion of dependents who were elderly would increase over that period from 12 per cent to nearly a third by 1979.
Fears were thus expressed that, while the ratio of all dependents to the total population might be no greater in the immediate future than in the past, the cost per dependent had grown and would continue to grow.
Parish and Peacock (1954) calculated that twice as much was spent per capita by the five major social services on pensioners as on children, and three-and-a-half times as much as on the active population.
Similarly, Shenfield, relying entirely upon Parish and Peacock for her calculations, asserted that while the number of old people rose by two-and-a-half times between 1910 and 1954, the proportion of the national income transferred to the elderly during the same period had quadrupled (Shenfield 1957).
The polemical and ideological edge to this debate must be borne in mind: not all those engaged in it were in favour of increased public spending, due to fears about its effects on investment and on incentives; and in some quarters it was passionately felt that the ageing of society was socially, economically, and even politically undesirable (Thane forthcoming), and hence that its dangers should be emphasized.
In fact, no calculations were published which attempted to measure the precise costs or specify the benefits to be derived from an ageing population.
The emphasis was on the burden of cost unpaid by the elderly.
The employment of older workers was seen as tackling the dependency problem from two angles.
The first was the view that such workers would make a positive contribution to the national economy and directly ease the labour shortage.
However, as the Philips Report (HMSO 1954) pointed out: ‘The contribution to be expected from any likely postponement of retirement would not appear to be large in relation to total available manpower.’
The other argument for encouraging prolonged economic activity was that it would relieve the financial burden on the Exchequer of the cost of pensions and services to the elderly population.
While accepting that if national productivity increased at the then current rate and priority in the allocation of social expenditure was given to the elderly, the current pension-policies could be maintained, the Philips Committee stressed the magnitude of the commitments being entered into on behalf of future generations of taxpayers.
Similarly, the Government Actuary reported that current expenditure on retirement pensions was already higher than that part of the insurance contribution assigned for the purpose (HMSO 1954: para. 161).
The Philips Report was so concerned about the increasing proportion of elderly people in the population that it thought some rise in the minimum pension-age inevitable.
It thus recommended that the age should ultimately be raised to 68 for men and 63 for women.
The second strand of the economic argument was the suggestion that industry would positively benefit from the encouragement, retention, and retraining of elderly workers.
Welford (1953) was a keen protagonist of this argument.
Ageing and work capacity — the arguments
Welford's Cambridge group set out to identify the nature of the work for which the older worker was best suited and the most suitable methods of retraining those whose skills had become redundant as the result of modifications in the industrial process (Welford 1951).
Its main conclusions were that while there were major changes in capacity with age, in particular in mental capacity, which affected the employability of an  individual, these could all be overcome to varying degrees by an alteration in the work environment.
While loss of learning ability among the elderly appeared primarily linked to difficulties in understanding, recall, and error abandonment, if these were corrected at an early stage ‘old people can learn much more readily than is commonly supposed’(Welford 1966: 5).
The research also demonstrated that older workers could maximize their efficiency if they were able to control their own work pace.
Hence they could cope better with heavy manual labour, which allowed them to pause when they chose, than with continuous process work, both of the latter being growing trends in industry.
Le Gros Clark approached the problem from the angle of the work environment.
Arguing that machines must be adapted to men, rather than men to machines, he was one of the first to recognize the importance of a versatile work-force, adjusted from an early age to job transference in later life, within a flexible environment which allowed movement between jobs (Le Gros Clark 1954b).
Health and personal welfare — the arguments
The second group of arguments in the retirement debate concerned the health and welfare of the older individual.
The image presented was of potentially active individuals bereft both of health and satisfaction through enforced retirement from economic activity.
The ‘retirement impact hypothesis’(McMahon and Ford 1955)— the suggestion that retirement leads to ill health or even death having been out of favour during the inter-war depression (Emerson 1959) was resurrected during the post-war period.
Support by members of the medical profession made it particularly attractive.
While this hypothesis was systematically studied in the USA, British research specifically into this area was  negligible .
One or two surveys revealed better health and a greater degree of satisfaction among the occupied over pension age than among the retired (Anderson and Cowan 1955; We! ford 1966), and the high death-rate in the first year following cessation of work was often quoted to prove that retirement might speed premature deterioration.
With the exception of certain areas of mental health, there appeared little clear medical evidence in support of these claims.
The debate appears to have been conducted in some ignorance but, as with much else in this area, a high degree of polemical certitude.
The compulsory retirement of active, healthy elderly people who were willing to continue working was seen as a contributory factor to the high rate of suicide among the aged (WHO 1959; Logan 1953) which peaked at age 70; deferred retirement was advocated as a preventive measure (Batchelor and Napier 1953).
There appeared to be limited evidence that some sleep disorders might be connected with sudden retirement (Cowan 1956) and that disability and senility might be delayed through the prolonging of an active working life (Thompson 1949; Shenfield 1963).
Beyond this, however, many of the claims were supported by anecdotal and subjective impressions only.
One exception was the work of Emerson, based at the University of Nottingham.
Pointing out the pitfalls of much of the past research, he drew on his study of 125 65-year-old men to argue that those who had recently retired were a ‘transitional’ group between those still in full-time employment and those settled into retirement (Emerson 1959).
The tensions that did arise were generated during the period of readjustment and later resolved.
Furthermore, his study suggested that, even during the first, ‘transitional’ year, retirement per se had little effect on physical or mental health.
Too much research based conclusions on too short a time-scale.
The retirement impact hypothesis appeared to spread quickly and to be widely accepted, particularly in governmental and other widely disseminated documents.
The image and the wider community
The image produced within both the political and the socio-medical arena was forceful.
It was that a significant proportion of the elderly population was an asset to the community if allowed to be economically active, but a burden, both to itself and to society, if forced to retire.
The aged as an economic asset
The economic component of the image was clearly aimed at employers, in particular in industry.
Contemporary surveys indicate that industry was either unaware of this component of the debate or chose to disregard it.
Indeed, a major theme which emerged at this time was the lack of attention given by employers to the age structure of their work-forces and the consequent lack of encouragement to older people to see themselves as potentially economically viable.
A survey in 1951 of the 400 member firms of the Industrial Welfare Society revealed that they had not attempted to consider, let alone assess, the profitability of employing elderly workers (Industrial Welfare Society 1951).
A similar picture was painted in Fleming's assessment (1955) of the iron and steel industry in 1952.
Of even greater interest was Fleming's survey of the Sheffield cutlery industry in 1960 (1963).
This revealed that the management were ‘concerned’ that the post-60/65 group comprised 18 per cent of the industry compared with a national average of 3.5 per cent, and had offered ‘solutions’.
However, not only had these been implemented by only a few firms, but the majority were also  oriented towards encouraging youth employment rather than positive action to assist older workers.
Heron and Chown concluded that ‘Industry in general simply does not acknowledge a problem of ageing’(Heron and Chown 1961: 16).
In practice, then, there appeared to be no general fixed set of expectations of behaviour towards elderly workers on the part of employers.
Shenfield's survey of the Midlands' manufacturing industry in 1954 (Shenfield 1957) revealed that over three quarters of firms had flexible pension schemes, as did the analysis of the London County Council building trade (Le Gros Clark 1954a and b).
However, the position towards the end of the decade appeared less clear.
Although policies obviously varied according to the occupational structure and size of the company (Hannah 1986), large organizations were considered more likely to instigate rigid retirement policies than were small ones (Acton Society Trust 1960).
Increasing technology (Le Gros Clark 1968) and complicated administrative structures (Green 1963) were also likely to encourage rigid policies.
The general trend appears to have been towards making it more difficult for people to stay on in full-time employment after 65 (Heron and Chown 1961).
The surveys also gave some indication of contemporary attitudes to elderly workers, although, bearing in mind the general lack of positive attention paid to such workers, it is necessary to treat the data with caution.
Indeed, several of the researchers noted that their evidence was produced after the plight of the elderly had been drawn to the attention of employers, foremen, and co-workers (Shenfield 1957; Acton Society Trust 1960; Fleming 1963).
The evidence is of both positive and negative reactions to the older worker as employee and co-worker.
The forties were seen as the age of potential transition from ‘young’ to ‘old’.
For example, a survey of just under 1,000 firms in the 1950s (Industrial Welfare Society 1951) found that, even among the employers of skilled workers, a third were doubtful as to the worth of those over 45, while 6 per cent considered such men ‘too old’.
It is clear that many of these kinds of views were based on the evidence that in some areas of employment, and in particular on production lines involving speed and pacing, problems began as early as the mid to late forties.
In industries already geared to fast-paced work, such as motor-vehicle manufacture, it is therefore not surprising that there was little interest in older workers.
One of the problems of the Ministry of Labour was to reconcile demands for increased mechanization to promote productivity with demands that older workers be kept on.
It was not therefore surprising that few industries had a positive policy of encouraging the employment of those past statutory retirement pension age.
The available survey material suggests that, while certain employers  were prepared to retain individual workers beyond the official retirement age by virtue of their particular merits (Shenfield 1957), there was no determined effort by industry to accommodate elderly workers.
The conclusion is either that the political and social message concerning older workers was not reaching employers, whose strategies were determined by other priorities, or that they put the immediate interests of the firm, as they defined them, before the longer-term interest of the national economy as the government was defining it.
Following a decade of political and socio-medical pressure to retain elderly employees, industrial management had still not given significant attention to the effective utilization of older workers.
Fleming concluded that information relating to the elderly worker did not readily reach the attention of management (Fleming 1963).
The message appeared to have reached workers more quickly.
Rose reported in 1953 that 79 per cent of a sample of unemployed older men in Hull knew ‘that the country was asking people to stay on at work after retiring age’ and 74 per cent of them thought this a ‘reasonable thing’(Rose 1953).
It seems reasonable to conclude that employers and managers were unlikely to have missed the message but had consciously rejected it.
The impact of retirement
While the concept of elderly people as constructive members of the work-force may have failed to influence industry, the idea that retirement led to death and deterioration appeared to have been widely established.
Emerson revealed that both those who continued working and those who retired ‘appeared to be to some extent affected by rather garbled information concerning retirement impact’(Emerson 1959).
Other studies reported fear among workers that the cessation of employment would lead to a rapid  deterioration in health and mobility (Townsend 1955; Groombridge 1960; Nuffield Foundation 1963).
Townsend noted a preconceived association between retirement, ill health and death within the wider community which may have had older cultural roots.
It was an image disseminated by the media.
While it is not possible to determine how widespread it was, examples were found in specialized journals and publications for the wider public.
An article in the Nursing Times of 23 August 1957, for example, stressed the importance of work as a cure for the ills of old age (pp. 945–6), followed four months later by one in the Nursing Mirror : ‘Occupation is unquestionably one of the most important factors in preserving mental alertness and bodily health.’
(10 January 1958 p. 1)
Social services personnel were also quick to take up the theme.
In  1953, the British National Conference on Social Work warned of the problems of abrupt retirement, while throughout the decade old people's welfare committees acted to find work for the elderly.
In 1951, the Employment Fellowship (formerly the Winter Distress League) turned to the problem of keeping elderly people employed for as long as possible (Employment Fellowship 1958).
In co-operation with Finsbury Borough Council it established the first ‘sheltered’ work-room where ‘elderly workers could be employed for two hours a day, on small assembling and packing jobs provided by local firms, paying the fair rate for the work completed’.
On similar lines the NOPWC reported in 1963 that some nineteen employment agencies were being run by old people's welfare committees ‘to give older workers the opportunity to continue working beyond retirement age,’ and prevent them ‘being thrown on a human scrap heap where their physical and mental health suffered and some became prematurely incapable of leading independent lives’(NOPWC 1963: 4).
Such schemes were an attempt to accommodate the desire of many older people to continue in at least part-time work and to find new ways of continuing the older tradition of gradual transition from full-time work to full retirement.
Once again, employers showed little enthusiasm for them.
In 1955, the NOPWC appointed a study group to consider preparation for retirement, which resulted in the establishment of the Preparation for Retirement Committee in 1960.
Its brief was to ‘help and persuade as many people as possible to look forward to retirement as the time of fulfilment’(Hubbard 1962).
The Committee called on industry, commerce, the education services, religious and statutory bodies, and voluntary organizations to aid it in its task.
The following year both the Industrial Welfare Society and the Institute of Directors held conferences on retirement preparation, with the Preparation for Retirement Committee holding its first national conference in 1963.
In 1960, the Acton Society Trust had reported being unaware of any company which had a programme of preparation for retirement.
Over the next five years various publications advocating such courses were made available to industry.
In 1962, the Institute of Directors (IOD) established a Retirement Advisory Bureau; and the first private retirement consultancy was set up in London in 1965 (IPM 1965).
By then at least twenty major national and international companies had established pre-retirement schemes for their work-forces (ibid.), and seventeen pre-retirement associations/councils, now extant throughout the UK, ran courses and conferences for firms and the general public on retirement.
Such schemes were generally directed at all employees, manual, white collar, and managerial, although the percentage of each section  attending such courses is unclear.
A working party set up in 1966 by the Yorkshire Council of Social Services to study regional preparation for retirement (Yorkshire Council of Social Services 1966) reported an encouraging level of interest on the part of larger industrial enterprises, but a relative lack of concern in the retail trade, commerce, and smaller industrial units.
In summary
To summarize, two positive images of elderly people were created by the employment debate.
The first defined them as potentially active and vital contributors to the economy; the second as vulnerable individuals who would be bereft of both health and personal satisfaction by enforced retirement.
The first construction was not appropriated by employers.
The second aroused more positive interest, though it is unclear with what precise effect.
While the exact relationship between retirement and ill health was unclear, an association between the two was sufficiently apparent to result in apprehension being experienced by elderly workers and their families.
Such beliefs, coinciding with the growing phenomenon of abrupt cessation of full-time employment, encouraged the growth of the preparation-for-retirement movement.
By the beginning of the 1960s the government had given up the attempt to encourage employers to take special note of the needs of older workers.
In 1964, the annual Labour Gazette stopped printing annual retirement figures.
Fears of a national labour shortage had eased and were replaced by fears of large-scale unemployment due to the spread of ‘automation’(Bagrit 1965).
The abolition of national service, Commonwealth immigration, the entry into the labour market of the ‘baby boom’ generation, and the increasing numbers of married women remaining in or returning to work all provided additional supplies of labour.
To what extent they provided substitutable labour for older, skilled workers is another, unresearched, question; but, in general, interest in older workers as a source of labour and in the effects of their work and retirement status on their own health and that of the national economy waned.
Conclusion — image, context, and control
This discussion of the main elements of the retirement debate has demonstrated the ways in which the establishment of an image of a social group — the old — was linked into the specific conditions of an historical period.
That part of the image which had the most resonance both with elderly workers and their employers was that of ‘retirement impact’— that is, of the physical and mental ill effects assumed to be associated  with retirement.
Employers in general appeared to see ageing people as a national  responsibility rather than as their immediate concern.
A new tradition of retirement was thus consolidated during the period.
During the 1950s and early 1960s, retirement at the statutory pensionable age of 60 for men and 65 for women became widely established across occupations and social classes, although least at the highest status-levels.
By the late 1960s, it was accepted that the normal period of full-time economic employment would cease for most of the population at these ages.
Society gradually adjusted to the emergence of a new distinct phase in the life cycles of most people, a period of post-employment leisure normally preceding by many years the onset of marked physical decline.
At the same time, however, no positive socially accepted role emerged for people experiencing this period.
While society may have been identifying ‘old age’ as a distinct phase of life, it was providing little practical support for individuals experiencing it.
It took a further two decades before ‘the elderly’ were once more to experience the high profile that they had achieved in the debates of the 1940s and 1950s concerning their position and role in the economy.
Acknowledgement
We wish to acknowledge the support of the ESRC under whose grant (no.
GO125007) this research was conducted.
References
Chapter three
The Structured Dependency of the Elderly: A Critical Note
Paul Johnson
Social gerontology draws on a broad range of social science disciplines for its theories and methodologies, but to date its debt to economics and economists has been slight.
Aside from a passing interest in the impact of the State Earnings Related Pension Scheme on future tax burdens, economists seem generally to have ignored the issues of elderly people and of ageing.
Economic questions have been left largely to social policy analysts to look at, and much of their writing has been placed squarely within a radical framework often described by the term ‘the political economy of ageing’.
Economic questions about ageing are seen by them to have an explicitly political dimension because the state, being the major determinant of the economic status of the elderly population, is regarded as capable (and culpable) of creating a new sort of deliberately structured dependency among old people.
This note challenges this particular thesis that has been developed most clearly in the writings of Peter Townsend, Alan Walker, and Chris Phillipson, and suggests that concentration on the concept of structured dependency has deflected attention away from more progressive and optimistic views of the economic social status of the elderly in modern Britain.
In writings on the political economy of ageing, it has been suggested that twentieth-century society has deliberately promoted the marginalization and dependency of elderly people, and that the state has played a major role in this process.
For instance, Townsend writes that: ‘the concepts of retirement [and]pensionable status…have been developed in both capitalist and state socialist countries in ways which have created and reinforced the social dependency of the elderly’; and Walker believes that: ‘dependency at both ends of the age spectrum has been enlarged by social and economic developments over the course of this century’.
The argument that the dependent status of elderly people has been deliberately structured by the state and society takes the economic conditions of the non-institutionalized elderly as being at the root of their dependent status.
The explicit or implicit argument is that elderly people have experienced a constriction of economic liberty in  modern Britain because of the sometimes deliberate and sometimes unconscious course of development of social welfare and employment policies.
Much of the detailed research that has made use of the concept of structured dependency has, however, focused on the relatively small and exceptional subgroup of elderly people living in institutions, for whom the concept of dependency seems more immediately relevant, and this may have biased the outlook of social policy analysts in their discussion of the much larger group of economically and socially independent elderly.
This chapter examines the broader economic circumstances of non-institutionalized elderly people, and the way these have changed over the last eighty years, to see how far and in what areas they may challenge the assertions of the ‘structured dependency’ school of authors.
Before doing so, some longer-run historical trends need to be mentioned briefly, because implicit in much of the writing on the social creation of dependency is the belief that elderly people were in many ways more independent in a pre-welfare state age.
Townsend, for example, has written that ‘such ‘structured’ dependency is a consequence of twentieth-century thought and action'.
Historians such as Richard Smith and David Thomson, however, have shown how enduring and old-fashioned are many twentieth-century patterns of thought and action — such as retirement from the work-force in old age, and the provision of financial and other services for elderly people by the community rather than by kin.
Thomson has taken the issue further, arguing that many twentieth-century writers on social welfare issues have been misled into believing that recent developments represent an abrupt break with historical experience because of the peculiarly restrictive and individualistic support systems for elderly people that emerged in the late Victorian period.
This historical work itself represents a strong challenge to some of the premises which underpin the idea of structured dependency.
However, the discussions of commentators like Townsend, Walker, and Phillipson focus primarily on twentieth-century developments, and it is on changes in the economic status of elderly people since 1900 that this chapter will concentrate.
The economic status of the elderly is, in outline, determined by four factors:
(1)
their employment status;
(2)
their access to state pensions and welfare benefits;
(3)
their access to private savings (especially occupational) pensions; and
(4)
their receipt of familial support.
Any attempt to determine either the direction of or the reason for changes in economic status must look at these four factors separately.
Since rising retirement rates among elderly people have been one of the striking developments in labour market behaviour this century, it seems appropriate to begin by looking at the reasons why the employment status of the elderly population has changed so much over time, and the consequences of this change.
Employment
In 1901, almost 60 per cent of the male population of England and Wales aged 65 and over was recorded in the census as occupied; the corresponding figure for women was 13.4 per cent.
These occupational rates for the elderly were virtually constant across the 1911 and 1921 Censuses.
They showed some decline in the 1931 Census (to 48 per cent and 8 per cent respectively), part of which must have been the result of high general levels of unemployment in the depths of the inter-war depression.
The most rapid decline in employment among elderly people has come about since the Second World War, with the proportion of men over 65 in employment falling from 30 per cent to 10 per cent between 1951 and 1981, although, because of a rise in married women's employment, the proportion of the female population over 60 in employment was about the same in 1981 (8 per cent) as in 1951.
These changes in the participation rates of the elderly must be due either to a reduction in the demand for the labour of this section of the population, or a reduction in the labour services offered or supplied by the elderly, or some combination of the two.
Changes in these supply and demand factors depend on the physical and mental capacity of individuals for work and the requirements of employment, but also on the personal choice of individuals, the marginal productivity of other groups in the labour market, the flexibility of remuneration schemes, and institutional factors such as pension-scheme regulations.
In much of the writing on the dependent elderly, the assumption has been made that retirement has become more common at an earlier age because of a reduction in the demand for elderly workers.
Phillipson suggests that the elderly have been deliberately relegated to a reserve army of labour, and Walker concurs: ‘Retirement is a largely twentieth century phenomenon, which has been managed to remove from employment older workers in order to reconstitute and re-skill the labour force.’
There are, however, no theoretical grounds for preferring demand-side explanations for the growth of retirement to supply-side ones, and the evidence available on changes in the retirement process in twentieth-century Britain is ambiguous.
It is true that Hannah's work on occupational pension schemes suggests that large companies may have managed the retirement process in order to control their internal labour markets, but for most of the century such schemes have covered only a minority  of workers.
Phillipson has pointed to more direct state management of retirement, in order to regulate the size of the labour force, yet the well-known attempts by the government to induce retirees back to work after the Second World War were notable for their lack of success; the reserve army of elderly labour was highly resistant to re-enlistment.
It seems likely that improvements in the health and work capacity of the elderly population over the last eighty years have more than compensated for any putative increase in the physical and mental demands of employment; if so, rising retirement rates may reflect a decrease in the demand for the labour of elderly workers over a period in which their employment capacity has risen.
The introduction by employers of fixed retirement-ages, frequently linked to the minimum age for the receipt of the state's retirement pension, is commonly viewed as an important demand-side influence, but the evidence is by no means conclusive.
It is clear from data on occupations drawn from the decennial censuses that retirement for men over the age of 65 was increasing from 1881, almost thirty years before the introduction of a state pension; and modern evidence from the United States gives good grounds for believing that, in some circumstances at least, changes in retirement age over time represent a supply-side factor, with people choosing retirement before they become incapable of work.
The 1978 Age Discrimination in Employment Act, which raised the minimum mandatory retirement age in the US from 65 to 70, was followed by a fall in the average age of retirement, and the option to choose retirement before 65 at a reduced pension is being taken by an increasing number of American workers.
In British writing on retirement, however, and particularly in the writing of the radical ‘structured dependency’ school, supply-side factors — i.e. the desires of workers — have played a muted second fiddle to demand-side analysis.
There are two reasons for the emphasis on demand, and they both relate to some of the premises built into the idea of ‘structured dependency’.
The first is that, despite their radical appearance, ideas of structured dependency or ‘the social construction of old age dependency’ have their origins in functionalist social-control theories.
They therefore stress the coherence of the views and power of the controlling group (usually ‘the state’ or ‘capitalism’), and pay little attention to the responses of the group being controlled, in this case elderly people, who are assumed to have little if any room for manoeuvre.
Exactly how the controlling group agrees on common interests and actions is not specified, though the implication is of some quasi-conspiratorial corporatist process.
(Hannah's work on occupational pensions suggests that employers could seldom conspire, because they seldom had any idea of what they were doing in the area of pension policy.)
In addition, why the controlled group chooses to be compliant, or why it may choose to  be resistant to any process of control, is also ignored.
Indeed, the very idea of resistance is generally excluded from social-control theories, because the deviant group is perceived to be powerless, forever the object of someone else's control, never the subject of its own thoughts and actions.
The intellectual origins of structured dependency ideas in functionalist social-control theories inevitably focuses attention on employers and the state, and diminishes the importance of choice exercised by elderly people themselves.
The second reason why the desires of workers are underemphasized in ‘structured dependency’ writings is the acceptance of the thoroughly capitalist convention that worth is determined primarily by participation in the productive process.
There is an explicit belief in the literature that the transition from independent to dependent status comes on retirement.
Because retirement creates dependency, and dependency is undesirable, retirement is unlikely to be chosen voluntarily; therefore the study of retirement has to focus on labour demand from employers, not labour supply from workers.
However, this line of argument is hardly what radical analysts of the welfare state should want.
It suggests that a 65 year-old retiree with a large private income is in some meaningful sense more dependent than a 64 year-old labourer in receipt of a low weekly wage.
Alan Walker acknowledges a difficulty here when he writes:
The fact that many workers in these societies are themselves dependent on the owners of capital for the hire of their labour power is one of the factors that would be included in a more considered analysis of this link [between dependency and production],
but he then goes on to ignore it.
As long as those who use the concept of structured dependency continue to make the automatic association of retirement with dependency, and of work with independence, they will continue to bolster conservative notions of the competitive work ethic.
The reason they do this is in order to link general criticisms of the capitalist economic system with a specific analysis of the poverty of the elderly, but in doing so they shift their point of reference.
The dependency that they believe results from retirement stems from an inability to produce, but poverty stems from an inability to consume.
In a world with saving and intergenerational transfers, marginalization in production need not be equated with marginalization in consumption, and any extension of savings or transfers must tend to lessen the importance of employment status in establishing overall economic status.
If it is accepted that ability to consume is the major determinant and indicator of economic status — and that is implicit in the common concern over the ‘standard of living’ of different groups in society — then the conclusion must be that retirement is only one of a number of factors that affect economic  status, and retirement alone is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for economic dependency.
If retirement does not inevitably involve economic dependency, then it is easy to see how retirement may result from a positive choice by those people who believe they will not suffer any substantially reduced ability to consume.
Of course, people do not work simply for economic rewards, and there may be other social and psychological losses on retirement (though equally there may be gains).
It is, however, the financial losses of retirement from the labour force that seem usually to be taken as the key to the involuntary shift from independence to dependency in old age.
By defining retirement as coterminous with dependency, the ‘structured dependency’ authors inevitably see the trend towards earlier retirement as regrettable, but in fact it need not be so: this depends on the extent to which retirement leads subsequently to poverty in old age, and to discover this it is necessary to look at the other three main determinants of the financial status of the elderly.
State benefits
The rise in the importance of state benefits in the financial status of elderly people over the course of this century is something noted by virtually all commentators, though it should be remembered that many elderly people relied on Poor Law support before the payment of state old-age pensions in 1909.
This expansion of the role of the state has variously been interpreted as a functional response to old age incapacity, an indication of the growing humanity of welfare capitalism, or, by radical analysts, as part of a deliberate attempt to reconcile elderly people to a status of dependency.
Again it seems that the radical critique has confused form and content, and so has directed valuable criticisms about the level of state support towards the form of state support itself.
There is no theoretical reason to suppose that a transition from labour market income to state benefit income induces the onset of dependency: indeed, logically the reverse should happen, as individuals shift from being dependent on finding employment in the labour market, to being in receipt of an independent income guaranteed by the taxable capacity of the state.
In Edwardian Britain, for example, the average working-class adult had accumulated assets of about £11, at a time when the wage for an unskilled worker was around £1 a week.
About 5 per cent of the manual work-force was enrolled in an occupational pension scheme, and well under 5 per cent owned their own property: in consequence, most old people depended on selling their labour power in an over-stocked labour market in order to live.
The payment of the state non-contributory old age pension from 1909 gave elderly people a right to an income from the state, quite independent of the vicissitudes of the  labour market, and this obviously increased their financial independence.
Recent arguments about whether the level of state pensions has or has not risen over time relative to average adult per capita income, about whether pensions should or should not be more generous today, and about how criteria for change in the level of pension payments should be set, are all important, but they are essentially distinct from the issue of whether the receipt of state benefits necessarily creates a dependency in the recipient which would not otherwise exist.
One indication of the importance of state pensions in increasing the financial security and independence of the bulk of the British population can be drawn from statistics of wealth distribution in England and Wales collected for the Royal Commission on the Distribution of Income and Wealth.
In the early years of this century, before state pensions were introduced, and when occupational pension schemes covered only a small part of the work-force, the bulk of the wealth of the population was held in the form of realizable assets, and was highly concentrated in the hands of a small minority.
This has not changed: in 1972, people in the bottom 80 per cent of the wealth distribution owned only 10 per cent of realizable assets.
However, realizable assets are now much less important in any estimation of the wealth distribution in Britain, because so much of the wealth of individuals is held in the form of pension rights, wealth which is not immediately realizable, but which is contingent on survival beyond pensionable age.
Because private-pension wealth is much more widely spread across the population than are realizable assets, and state-pension wealth is divided among all citizens, the inclusion of these two additional types of assets in a calculation of wealth distribution changes the overall picture drastically.
The addition of occupational pension rights to an estimate of the share of wealth owned by the poorest 80 per cent of the  population in 1972 raises the figure from 10 per cent to 20 per cent, and including state-pension rights doubles this again to over 40 per cent .
In other words, the introduction and extension of state-pension rights over the course of the twentieth century has been by far the most important mechanism for increasing the effective wealth of the poorer sections of the population.
Without state pensions, many elderly people would be deprived of access to any substantial financial resources in their old age.
Although the primary importance of state benefits in financing old age may decline in the future as both the opportunities and the incentives increase for today's working population to accumulate private assets for retirement, there can be little doubt that over the last eighty years state pensions have been instrumental in sustaining a considerable degree of economic independence among the retired population.
Private saving
This financial independence has also been increased by the extension of asset ownership among elderly people.
The development of occupational pension schemes, and the rapid increase of owner-occupation since the 1950s, has given many elderly people far more economic security in old age than they ever had when they were reliant on the sale of their labour power.
One consequence of the rise in private asset ownership among elderly people is that many of them do not suffer any drastic reduction of their ability to consume on retirement: indeed, tax changes in the 1970s that encouraged pension schemes to pay out some of their assets as a lump sum mean that many retirees experience an increase in their consumption propensity in the first few years of retirement.
This may be a powerful influence in any decision about age of retirement.
Since the level of owner-occupation is rising, and the number of future retirees entitled to some form of contributory pension will exceed the current number, it seems likely that private saving will play a greater role in determining the economic status of the elderly in the future than it has done in the past.
This shift in the economic status of the elderly from being predominantly without assets in the early years of this century towards having at least some private financial resources must represent an overall increase in the economic independence of the elderly population.
Family support
The fourth source of financial support for elderly people is the family, but changes in family support over time are difficult to measure and difficult to interpret.
A reduction in the level of intergenerational exchange within the family can be viewed either as an indicator of the increased independence of elderly people, or as a sign of their growing neglect by younger family members.
Work by Chris Gordon on elderly people surveyed by the New Survey of London Life and Labour in 1929–31 showed that only 7.3 per cent of the 2,286 elderly people in his sample were in receipt of any direct financial support from their family, and this accounted for only 2 per cent of the overall income of this elderly population (as shown in Table 3.1).
The household structure of this sample population had many similarities with that observed today: those living alone comprised 29. 8 per cent of the elderly population (as against 33.3 per cent in the 1980 GHS), though the proportion living with children or other kin was higher — 34 per cent as against 18 per cent today.
It seems likely that the apparent increase in the residential segregation of the elderly since the inter-war period reflects both the substantial rise in the housing stock in recent years (from 16.2  million to 20.5 million units between 1961 and 1981) and the increased financial resources of elderly people, which together have allowed more of them to continue to live private and independent lives.
Table 3.1 Main components of pensioners' income (%)
Conclusion
Table 3.1 lists the four factors which determine the financial status of elderly people — employment, state benefits, private savings, and family transfers — and it can be seen that their relative shares have changed over time, with the decline in employment income roughly matching the rise in state benefits.
It cannot be concluded from this, however, that the economic dependency of the elderly population has increased.
Only if it is believed that independence is a function of employment income can the idea of increased dependency be automatically supported.
It seems probable that elderly people as a whole have more secure incomes and are less marginalized as consumers today than they were at earlier times in this century.
Of course, considering the financial status of the elderly population as a whole provides only a partial answer to questions which need to be addressed.
Within this group there was and remains great variation in financial status by age, class, and gender.
Differences in lifetime economic and employment status are carried over into retirement through private asset ownership, and these differences have possibly not diminished significantly.
On the other hand, the increase in the importance of state benefits must have tended to reduce the inequality in the economic circumstances of the elderly that hitherto was determined in the labour market.
The idea that old age dependency in twentieth-century Britain has increased, as  propounded in the writing on ‘structured dependency’, can  therefore be seen to be highly contestable.
In terms of their asset ownership and their household structure, elderly people today have greater command over resources and are less dependent on the goodwill of their kin than was the case in the early years of the twentieth century.
In terms of their income, they are less dependent on the vagaries of the labour market, since the major part of their income today is guaranteed by the taxable capacity of the state, and is paid to them as a right.
It is certainly true that employment opportunities for older men have declined sharply over the last eighty years, but it is far from clear that this has been solely due to a contraction of demand for them.
Improved economic status now gives more elderly people the option of a fairly comfortable retirement which they may prefer to continued employment in unattractive work.
What part of any contraction in the demand for elderly workers has been caused by state action over the setting of pension eligibility terms, and what part has been due to the autonomous decisions of employers, must for the moment remain an open question.
Indeed, the whole issue of how and why employers (and trade unions) formulate policy towards the employment of older workers requires much more detailed investigation than it has so far received, and it is an area in which economic analysis may prove to be more fruitful than radical political theory.
Notes
Chapter four
The Social Division of Early Retirement
Alan Walker
Introduction
Some findings are presented from a recent study of older workers and early retirement in the Sheffield steel industry (under the ESRC Ageing Initiative).
The study consisted of an analysis of data on retirement and early retirement from the ‘After Redundancy’ project conducted by lain Noble, John Westergaard, and Alan Walker and funded by the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC).
The results reported are intended as a contribution to the debate about early retirement as a mechanism for sharing the current job shortage.
They provide a new dimension to this debate because they derive from the experience of a different socio-economic group and markedly changed labour market conditions to most of the previous research on this issue.
The after redundancy study
The study was based on structured interviews with some 370 former employees of a privately owned steel company in Sheffield who were made redundant in and shortly after the summer of 1979.
The firm's management approached us in the summer of 1980, asking if we could find out ‘what had happened’ to their former employees, and agreed to provide the names and addresses of those who had lost their jobs.
Interviews were conducted between October 1982 and February 1983.
The final response rate was 79 per cent.
(A full report of the project's findings can be found in Westergaard et al 1988.)
Until the early 1980s, unemployment in Sheffield had been below the national average for the whole of the post-war period.
The relative prosperity of Sheffield was based partly on the production of special steels (carbon steel, alloy steel, and stainless steel) and related manufacturing industry.
As a result of the cut-back in production by the steel industry's customers and the ‘dumping’ of subsidized special steel imports, the numbers of people employed in metal manufacture have declined  enormously in recent years: between mid-1979 and mid-1983 the reduction in the numbers employed in this sector was greater than in any other sector of the economy (Department of Employment 1983: 511).
Thus, from the late 1970s parts of Sheffield began, very rapidly, to experience that deterioration of the economic fabric that has been felt in other parts of the county of South Yorkshire for much longer (Walker 1981).
The majority (55 per cent) of those made redundant by the private steel firm were older workers (those 55 and over when interviewed).
The analysis reported here was focused on this group.
An age bias of this order was expected — only one in seven were under the age of 30 — because of the relatively high median age of the work-force in the steel industry (Jolly et al.
1980: 91), the greater likelihood of their older workers than younger ones being affected by redundancies (Mukherjee 1973; Daniel 1974), and the semi-voluntary nature of the redundancies in question.
The gender distribution also followed a predictable pattern, with the overwhelming majority, 85 per cent, being male.
Among the older age-groups the proportion was even higher: just under 90 per cent.
Thus, it is not possible to say much about the post-redundancy experience of older women previously employed in this sector of industry.
In view of the relative neglect of women in studies of redundancy, this was an unfortunate deficiency (see Daniel 1972; Barron and Norris 1978).
However, two further characteristics made this group a particularly interesting one for the study of the labour market experiences of older male workers in a period of high unemployment and rapid economic and social change.
First, two-thirds of them were manual workers.
This contrasts with other recent non-representative research on early retirement, carried out by McGoldrick and Cooper (1980), which concentrated on those in higher socio-economic groups (see also S. Wood 1980).
They found that the majority were satisfied with early retirement.
Although doubt has been cast on that finding by the results of the national survey (see Parker 1982: 90), McGoldrick and Cooper's research was conducted after the national survey and it has helped to encourage a view that attitudes towards early retirement are changing significantly and that it is being regarded more and more favourably by older workers (see for example, House of Commons Select Committee on Social Services 1982).
It was important, therefore, to compare the conclusion of that research with the results of the After Redundancy study which was based on contrasting socio-economic groups.
Moreover, there has been little recent research on what befalls older manual workers following redundancy, although the labour market has undergone a period of rapid change over the last few years (one recent exception is Bytheway 1987).
Second, a large proportion of the older workers had a long period of service with the same company before being made redundant.
Only  17 per cent of the older workers had been with the company for less than ten years (only 5 per cent for less than five years), while 68 per cent had twenty years or more service.
More than two-fifths of them had worked in the company for at least thirty years.
The majority had therefore experienced secure employment for relatively long periods of time.
Thus, we are able to assess the impact of redundancy and unemployment on a group for whom these were rare if not entirely new occurrences.
One in six of the older workers had experienced redundancy prior to 1979, over half of them among those with less than ten years service with the company.
Again this contrasts with other research which has examined the labour market status of older workers, but which has sampled directly or indirectly among the unemployed (Hill et al.
1973; Daniel 1974; D. Wood 1982).
Although more representative of the whole unemployed population than the After Redundancy study, research on unemployment alone is insufficient to judge the specific impact of redundancy, especially on older workers — many of whom do not choose to declare themselves as unemployed, so register only while entitled to unemployment benefit — and the experience of economic insecurity following relatively secure employment.
One further contextual factor had an important bearing on this analysis.
The After Redundancy study took place during a period when the level of economic activity among older people in general, and older men in particular , had been declining (Walker 1980; Parker 1982; OPCS 1987).
Older people in the study had to enter the labour market at precisely the time of the steepest fall in the economic activity rates of older workers at large.
The national growth in economic inactivity is also reflected in the increasing trend towards early retirement among some groups of people in the 60–64 age range.
Britain shares this changing pattern of retirement with other advanced industrial societies, although there has been no formal lowering of the age at which the statutory retirement-pension may be drawn.
(Tracy 1979; OECD 1986).
The impact of redundancy on the employment status of older workers
Older workers (aged 55 and over) in the After Redundancy study were less likely than older workers as a whole to be economically active.
By the time they were interviewed in late 1982 and early 1983 (some three years after being made redundant), they were divided almost equally between the economically active and inactive — 51 per cent and 49 per cent respectively — according to the standard definition of such activity.
However, in common with some previous research (Sinfield 1968; Norris 1978; Townsend 1979; Walker 1982a), the results of the After Redundancy study raised questions about the precise distinctions between economic activity and inactivity and especially about the  assumptions which underlie this crude dichotomy, a point I return to later.
Among those older workers in the study conventionally defined as economically inactive, just over two-thirds were retired, although only 18 per cent had retired at the normal pension age, 17 per cent were sick or injured, and 4 per cent were looking after their families.
As for the economically active, 56 per cent were employed full- or part-time and 44 per cent were unemployed.
Before they became redundant some three years earlier, all of them had been economically active and in full-time employment.
Figure 4.1 shows the employment status of two age-groups of older workers immediately after redundancy and three years later at the time of interview.
The impact of redundancy on the employment status of older workers was remarkable, with only one in six of all those aged 55 and over moving from employment with the steel company to a further spell of employment, and only one in seven to full-time work.
Although these proportions changed subsequently, particularly among the 55–59 age group, after three years only one in four of the whole group (excluding those who had retired at the normal pension ages) were in work.
In contrast three-quarters of those under 40 at the time of interview and three-fifths of the middle-aged (40–54) were employed after three years.
Nearly all of the former and two in three of the latter went straight into jobs after they were made redundant.
Figure 4.1 shows the distribution of employment statuses at two points in time.
If all the positions occupied in the intervening three years were included, the picture would, of course, be a great deal more complicated.
The figure also shows that there were important differences in post-redundancy employment status among older workers based on age, or rather, on their proximity to state-pension age.
Initially the flow out of the labour force and into retirement was concentrated among men within three years of pension age.
Three years after redundancy the picture had changed, with the level of employment rising among those still under pension age and the level of unemployment falling.
However, whereas for the 55–59 age-group the fall in unemployment was compensated for by an increase in employment, as well as in sickness and disability, for the 60–64 age-group early retirement increased more substantially than employment.
The pattern of changes in status over the three years since redundancy was broadly similar for those aged 55–59, 40–54, and under 40 at the time of redundancy.
However, for those aged 60–64 the pattern is quite different, the clear difference in the direction of the flows is indicated by the arrows in the Figure 4.1.
(For a detailed account of the post-redundancy experiences of all of the older workers in the study see Walker et al.
1985).
With cross-sectional data it is not possible to make precise comparisons between changes in employment and economic activity over time.
However, we collected detailed information on the employment and labour market histories of respondents in the three years between redundancy and interview, and previous research indicates that such information can be collected reliably for such relatively short periods (Walker 1982a).
The following analysis uses these post-redundancy histories as a guide to some of the influences on older workers when they came to decide whether or not to take early retirement.
Figure 4.1 Employment status of older male workers following redundancy according to age at time of redundancy
Reasons for taking early retirement
As Figure 4.1 indicates, early retirement was the major route out of the labour market, from economic activity to inactivity.
Over three-quarters of those who were retired when they were interviewed had done so before pension age.
Just over half of those who retired prematurely did so at the same time as their redundancy.
The rest took early retirement at different points over the following three years.
There were four main characteristics which distinguished the early retired from other older people.
First, age, or more precisely proximity to the state-pension age, had an important bearing on early retirement.
This relationship was also found in the national study of retirement and early retirement, conducted in 1977 (Parker 1980: 13).
Answers to questions about their fellow workers' reactions when they heard the news of planned redundancies suggested a difference in attitude between some of those who were close to pension age and had been with the company for long periods and other workers.
The following comments were typical:
Some were very angry, they thought it would last for ever; yes a bit down in the dumps, especially the younger people, some old people looked forward to it.
(Man 65, early retired)
It just depends, some of them were laughing, they were pleased enough.
Those that had any length of time in, they had a hand-out.
Quite a few were very upset, they'd only twelve months to go — it was just like turning them out on the street.
(Man, 66, early retired)
The older ones were pleased because they would get a lot of money, the younger ones were upset because they were thinking about the future.
(Man, 58, early retired)
The division between those close to pension age and others suggested by these quotations was confirmed by analysis of other variables.
Thus, for example, when asked whether or not they would describe their own redundancy as genuinely voluntary, the oldest group (those over 65 when interviewed) were much more likely than the rest to say ‘yes’(83  per cent compared with 46 per cent of those aged 55–59 and 65 per cent of those aged 60–64).
Furthermore, they were less likely to have applied to be taken on by the firm's main competitor, which took over its order book, or to look for another job before leaving the firm.
Because a detailed record of economic activity statuses was collected by the After Redundancy study, it was possible to compare the proportion of time spent by each person since being made redundant in different forms of employment status.
When older workers were compared on the basis of their proximity to pension age when the redundancies took place, the proportion of the three years between redundancy and interview spent in retirement increased dramatically, the closer they were to pension age.
Thus, the mean proportion of time spent retired by those within 4–6 years of pension age was 19 per cent, compared with 57 per cent of those within 3–4 years, and 84 per cent of those with 1–2 years to go before reaching pension age.
Second, we found that ill health was an important factor in the decision to retire early, although it was not possible to say whether or not it was the overriding factor.
Certainly, when asked directly why they had decided to take early retirement, it was the most frequently mentioned reason by those concerned.
This finding corresponds with research that has concentrated on early retirement (McGoldrick and Cooper 1980; Parker 1980; and in France, Cribier 1981; Gaullier 1982) and withdrawal from the labour market through the job release scheme (Makeham and Morgan 1980: 14), but we do not know how many of those older workers with poor health would have been fit enough to continue working if the plant had not closed.
Some had been finding work a strain and early retirement came as a relief.
Others were sick and disabled, yet still wanted paid employment (see Figure 4.1).
In fact, the dividing lines were often difficult to draw between those formally described as sick and those described as early-retired.
It appears that severity of illness or disability is likely to have been a critical variable, and in cases of severe disability, health would have been an overriding consideration.
More commonly, however, it was ill health in conjunction with other factors, such as proximity to retirement age, which determined propensity to retire early.
Ironically, there were some respondents who said that they would have preferred to have kept on working in order to remain healthy.
In the words of one 66 year-old man, ‘It keeps you fit and healthy, gives you something to occupy your mind, and you don't get bored.‘
Third, our study confirmed the finding of previous research (Friedmann and Orbach 1974; McGoldrick and Cooper 1980; Parker 1980) that the individual's own or his or her income unit's financial resources had an important bearing on the decision to retire early.
Although those older workers in full-time employment were substantially  better off than other groups, the early retired were better off than the rest.
They were more than three times as likely as the unemployed to be part of an income unit with an income of more than £100 per week (14 per cent and 4 per cent) and half as likely to have an income of less than £50 a week (19 per cent and 41 per cent ).
Of course the redundancy payment was an important source of capital for many older workers and, therefore, contributed to the decision about early retirement.
More than two-thirds of those aged 60 or over when interviewed had received a redundancy payment of £3,000 or more.
Those with the longer periods received higher payments than those with shorter periods and were more likely to have retired early.
This was another way in which redundancy encouraged some older workers to take early retirement.
Some older workers feared that if they did not accept ‘voluntary’ redundancy they would not receive any redundancy pay.
When early retirement took place at the same time as redundancy, the fear of not getting financial compensation became a reason for taking early retirement.
Fourth, differences in financial status between the early retired and other workers were underpinned by social class (based on occupational group).
Thus, there was a clear distinction in the social-class distribution of early retirement between the semi-skilled and unskilled, who were most likely to wait until the statutory pension ages (64 per cent of those retired had retired early), and the supervisory and managerial group, most of whom (95 per cent) had retired early.
The proportion of retired skilled workers who did so prematurely fell between these two at 79 per cent.
The importance of social class membership in providing access to resources, including income, was demonstrated by the fact that differences between the propensity of those in different classes to retire early increased with distance from pension age.
Taking those within 1–2 years of the pension age first, non-manual workers had spent nearly one-third more of the intervening time between redundancy and interview in retirement than skilled manual workers (85.7 per cent and 66.8 per cent respectively).
For those within 2–4 years of the pension age, the comparative figures were 76.7 per cent and 59.3 per cent and for those with 4–6 years before pension age, 37.9 per cent compared with 7.7 per cent.
The differences suggest that those in the non-manual occupational groups were more likely to choose early retirement than skilled manual workers, presumably because they had greater resources and hence more freedom of choice.
Pressure on older workers to take early retirement
These then are the main characteristics which distinguish the early retired  from other older workers who remained actually or potentially in the labour market: the former were more likely to have been close to pension age, to report ill health, to be better off financially and to have non-manual occupations.
On their own, however, these supply-side characteristics do not explain fully why a significant proportion of older workers were early-retired.
In order to do so it is necessary also to consider demand-side factors.
Frequently, early retirement is discussed purely in individualistic terms — as if it were a matter simply of personal decision-making.
In some cases, certainly, it is the result of a free choice on the part of individuals, most of whom are concentrated in the higher social classes where financial security, other than through earned income, is common.
Research which has suggested that there has been an increase in voluntary early retirement has been based on the responses of financially secure early retirees (see, for example, Heidbreder 1972; McGoldrick and Cooper 1980).
More representative research, such as that conducted by Parker (1980) in this country and Schwab (1976) and her colleagues in the USA, found that voluntary early retirement was relatively rare.
However, even research which has concentrated on the decision to take voluntary early retirement by those who have been able to exercise choice relatively freely, while still in employment, has noted external pressures on the individuals concerned (see, for example, McGoldrick and Cooper 1980: 860).
The social-class differences in early retirement revealed by our study point to clear divisions in the degree of choice available to individuals.
health, for example, may be as much a demand-side as a supply-side factor through social pressures on those who suffer it to take early retirement at a time of general contraction.
In addition, there is the most important demand-side pressure — namely, changes in the demand for labour locally and nationally, the effects of which have been largely overlooked in previous research.
First, there is redundancy itself, which was undoubtedly the main spur to early retirement among those in the After Redundancy study.
If the steel plant had not closed down, most of the early-retired would have probably stayed in their jobs until the pension age.
Although it is impossible to be certain, this assumption is supported by the overall length of service of the majority, their attachment to the particular employer, as well as their answers to specific questions about redundancy and early retirement.
Thus, for example, when asked whether they had ever thought seriously about early retirement before the prospect of redundancy was raised, less than one-quarter had done so.
In fact, those who retired prematurely were less likely than those who waited until pension age to have said that they had ever thought seriously about early retirement (24 per cent compared with 44 per cent in the age-group 60 and over).
If the plant had not closed, there would undoubtedly have been some older workers who would have retired prematurely in any case.
However, for the majority of those that eventually retired early, redundancy appears to have been the deciding factor.
This is true even where respondents reported ill health or  dissatisfaction with work.
Our study did not find any evidence of widespread dissatisfaction among older workers with either their employment or their employer prior to plant closure.
Indeed, they were much more likely than their younger counterparts to have expressed satisfaction with the firm and its management.
Thus, older workers were more than twice as likely as those under 40 to say that they had a great deal of respect for the top management at the firm (72 per cent).
However, although only one in twenty of those over the age of 55 reported that they were pleased about the plant closure, those who did so were concentrated almost entirely in the group that was within three years of pension age when the redundancies took place.
Proximity to pension age therefore had a significant impact on attitudes towards redundancy and the end of working life it signalled.
Secondly, there is the level of demand for labour locally, and, particularly, the demand for older workers with specific skills.
High and rising unemployment in Sheffield and knowledge about the poor employment prospects of older workers already in the labour market contributed to the decisions made about early retirement in two ways.
On the one hand, the local situation and knowledge about it encouraged some people to retire at the same time as they were made redundant.
As soon as the redundancies were announced, just over half of those who retired before the pension age decided that they did not want to go through the process of trying to find work.
They did so in the face of widespread steel closures, rising unemployment, and knowledge about their poor prospects of re-employment, or they had had enough of work and felt they deserved a rest.
On the other hand, there was a slightly smaller group of people, ending up as early retired, who had at first decided to remain economically active and, for the most part, to try to find jobs.
This group was likely to be younger than the first.
Although a minority of the group succeeded in finding jobs, these did not last long, and, like the rest of this group, who remained unemployed, they became frustrated and disillusioned by the difficulties they experienced in finding employment and by the attitude of employers to older workers.
As a result, they decided to change their economic status from either unemployment or sickness to early retirement.
In early retirement older workers have a socially acceptable alternative to the stigma of unemployment, that is not available to younger people (Bruche and Casey 1982: 112); but first they must get close to pension age.
One critical aspect of the overall decline in the demand for labour was the discrimination that older workers believed employers exercised against them and in favour of younger ones.
Objective evidence of employers' bias in the recruitment was found by Jolly et al.
(1980).
Nearly all the unemployed men aged 60–64 in our study mentioned the bias towards younger people in recruitment.
Not surprisingly, job applications tended to be concentrated in the early stages of unemployment and to cease when older workers became discouraged from making further, fruitless efforts.
Thirdly, official labour market intermediaries in the job centres are an important source of information about employment prospects and a crucial part of the process of discouraging older workers from searching for work and, indirectly, of encouraging them to take early retirement.
For many older people in our study the process began as soon as they were registered as unemployed.
They were much less likely than younger people to be interviewed by job centre staff, and, if interviewed, they were more likely to be told their prospects of getting work were nil.
Finally, there is the economic and social policy context within which older workers come to a decision about whether or not to remain economically active.
Attitudes towards employment, retirement, and early retirement are not formed in a vacuum.
In addition to the long-term devaluation of the industrial worth of older people (Walker 1980; Phillipson 1982), the last eight years, including the periods leading up to and immediately after the redundancies under study took place, were marked by frequent references to the need for earlier retirement.
These were accompanied, more importantly, by social policies aimed at encouraging early retirement.
As unemployment began to rise rapidly in the late 1970s, early retirement was canvassed, more and more and by an increasingly diverse range of opinion, as a solution to the problem.
The Confederation of British Industry and Trades Union Congress have both given their support to a reduction in the male pension age, as have the House of Lords Select Committee on Unemployment (1982) and the House of Commons Select Committee on Social Services (1982).
The Labour Party's manifestos at the last two general elections contained proposals to lower the main retirement age.
At the same time, official and mass media attention has been concentrated on youth unemployment and the problems experienced by young people in the labour market.
Employment policy too has been directed overwhelmingly towards this group.
In contrast, the few policies aimed at older workers have been positively intended to encourage them to withdraw from the labour market.
Measures have been introduced recently in the spheres of employment and social security.
The most important policy in the field of employment is the Job Release Scheme, introduced in 1977 as a temporary measure  for men aged 64 and women aged 59 and extended in 1981 and 1982 to cover disabled men aged 60–63 and other men aged 62 and 63.
It is intended to ‘alleviate unemployment among younger workers’(DHSS 1981: 16) by replacing older workers with them.
Those taking up job-release allowances must not take a job or set up in business on their own, and their employer must undertake to recruit as soon as possible a registered unemployed worker.
The number taking part was expected to exceed 100,000.
In social security there is the retirement condition, which governs the receipt of the state retirement pension and which has been a major factor in the establishment of the pension ages as the customary retirement ages for men and women (Walker 1980).
Similarly, the introduction of age- and service-related redundancy payments in 1965 to some extent legitimated the use of age as a criterion for redundancy and successfully challenged the ‘first in last out’ principle (Mukherjee 1973: 107).
Between November 1981 and November 1983, encouragement was given to unemployed men over the age of 60 to withdraw from the labour force by offering to pay them the long-term rate of supplementary benefit if they agreed not to register as unemployed.
Although this change in policy meant that unemployed older workers could receive a one-fifth increase in their weekly benefit income, the majority in our study had chosen to retire early before November 1981.
In other words, there was no clear evidence that the level of social security benefits was a major factor in the early retirement decisions made by those in this study (Boskin 1977; Burkhauser and Tolley 1978; Haveman and Wolfe 1981).
Together, these policies and policy statements reflect an overwhelming official concern in the current period of high unemployment with the position of young people in the labour market and, conversely, a lack of interest in action to improve the employment prospects of older workers.
They reflect, in other words, an increasing tendency, directly or indirectly, to discriminate against older people in favour of younger ones, or ‘ageism’(Walker 1982b).
In turn, this strong bias affects the climate of opinion in society as a whole, but especially in the labour market, where it influences employers' personnel officers, job centre staff, and other officials and, of course, older workers themselves.
In December 1982 a Marplan public opinion poll found that four out of five of those questioned thought that early retirement was a desirable measure for alleviating unemployment.
In the After Redundancy study, support for compulsory retirement at an earlier age was nearly as widespread, with one-third saying it would be very effective and two-fifths saying it would be quite effective.
Moreover, it was those that were most likely to suffer long periods of unemployment and non-employment and for whom early retirement was a realistic option, i.e. those aged 60–64, who were most likely to say that it would be very effective in  dealing with unemployment: 46 per cent, compared  with 34 per cent of the 55–59 age-group and 30 per cent of those under 30.
Statements by individuals in response to questions about early retirement also often reflected the dominant official concern.
Not surprisingly, older workers themselves had apparently internalized the assumptions which underpin policy, including the priority to be given to young people.
The terms respondents used to describe the advantages of early retirement, or to rationalize it in retrospect, often showed concern for the position of young people in the labour market, although this was rarely cited as a reason for taking early retirement.
One man who took early retirement at 61 thought, at the time, that the advantage of early retirement was ‘The fact that there are so many young people out of work and I thought I'd done a lifetime's work and might as well leave it for the young ones.’
Similar comments were reported by McGoldrick and Cooper (1980: 860).
Thus, the policy context, within which the redundancies took place and which older workers experienced in the labour market, often for the first time in twenty or more years, was one of unconcern if not of antagonism to their special needs.
Official and public attitudes towards older workers — which to a large extent determine the extent of their inclusion in or exclusion from the labour force — rest primarily on the  demand for labour.
Thus, in contrast with current policies, in the period immediately after the Second World War people of retirement age were urged not to retire and to ‘sink into premature old age’, but to work a little longer and, therefore, have ‘a happier and healthier old age' (Phillipson 1982: 33).
At the same time, medical and social science research began to indicate that retirement itself had detrimental effects.
Today, a formal lowering of the male retirement age to 60 has been rejected on grounds of cost, but high rates of unemployment among the 60–64 age-group, together with official encouragement for unemployed men to leave the labour force, amounts to an informal de facto policy of increasing early retirement for men.
While such a policy may relieve the short-term burden of unemployment for the older men nearest retirement age, unfortunately our study showed that the majority of those in their mid- and late fifties, who did not have the option of becoming early retired, faced the prospect of very long-term unemployment, and found the experience very distressing (Walker et al.
1985).
Moreover, the possible long-term consequences of current policies, such as deeper poverty in advanced old age, have not yet been sufficiently considered publicly (Walker 1982b: 66–9).
Social exclusion, discouragement, and early retirement
Which of these demand- and supply-related factors exerted a dominant  influence on individual older workers in deciding whether or not to cease economic activity and become early retired?
The After Redundancy study suggests that it was those on the demand side and, in the first instance, the redundancy itself.
When presented with the alternative of long-term unemployment, with no prospect of a job, some semi-skilled and unskilled older workers had no effective choice about early retirement.
However, if demand-related factors were dominant, they were not overriding.
There were still those in the skilled, supervisory, and managerial groups, who might have sought alternative employment and stood a better chance than the majority of finding it, who chose instead to take early retirement.
In these cases, financial security, a reluctance to move to a new employer, and proximity to the statutory pension age, coupled with a desire to do other things with their time or simply to stop working, led them to opt for early retirement.
There were also others who felt that they had to stop work because of their own or their spouse's ill health.
For the vast majority of older workers in the After Redundancy study, therefore, it was likely to be the interaction of the two sets of influences — individual characteristics and knowledge about the demand for labour and their chances of securing further employment of a similar kind — that determined their response to redundancy.
However, in the absence of financial security, the option of early retirement rested primarily on proximity to pension age (see Figure 4.1).
All those who retired prematurely were forced by redundancy to make a decision about their future employment status.
Half of those who retired at that point or subsequently were effectively forced into early retirement by ill health or the lack of job opportunities.
Only three of the whole group had worked since redundancy, and only one of those did so for more than half of the time between redundancy and interview.
As a result, for the bulk of those who delayed a decision about early retirement, unemployment or sickness amounted to a similar economic status to early retirement: non-employment.
However, considerably more social stigma is attached to unemployment than to early retirement.
In addition, for those men aged 60–64 after November 1981, a simple change in the official label attached to their status would have resulted in an increase in their income by one-fifth.
Thus, the formal decision to retire prematurely, when it came, was not simply a rationalization of the individual's situation, but a considerable improvement in it both economically and socially.
In sum, two approaches to early retirement may be distinguished.
On the one hand, there were those who, once the prospect of redundancy had been raised, were reconciled to early retirement and to a greater or lesser extent relieved at leaving work, although they were attached to their employer and would not in all probability have left prematurely of their own volition.
On the other hand, there were those who gave  up work reluctantly and would have preferred to have kept on working, but for reasons of health or lack of alternative employment chose early retirement.
The early retirers in the After Redundancy study were split evenly between those who wanted to retire and those who would have preferred to work on.
(This compares, incidentally, with just over one-quarter of those who retired at the normal pension ages who would have preferred to keep on working.)
With the exception of a few of the non-manual workers, concentrated in the first group, early retirement cannot be said to have been chosen from a position of strength — namely, possessing financial security, good health, and the option of continued employment.
It was an alternative to secure employment for some who fit the popular image of the early retired, but for others it was a refuge from economic insecurity in the labour market.
Those in the latter group — the reluctant early retirers — conform directly to what have been described in the USA as ‘discouraged workers' (Sorrentino 1981: 168; and for a discussion of the discouraged worker effect based on British Labour Force survey data, see Laczko 1987).
They are people who would like to work but believe no work is available, lack the schooling, training, skills, or experience required by employers, are thought by employers to be too young or too old or who have other personal handicaps in finding a job.
The small number of older (and younger) women who gave up paid employment following redundancy to become housewives may also be included in this group of discouraged workers.
The discouraging effects of prolonged unemployment, experience in the labour market with employers and official intermediaries, public statements by political and economic commentators, politicians, and employers about the future of employment are all part of a social process of exclusion, which probably began to set the agenda in the minds of individual older workers in the After Redundancy study even before the redundancy itself took place.
The process of exclusion in operation currently is an important part of the social construction of the definition and redefinition of the labour force, of the economically active and inactive, of the unemployed and retired, of the productive and unproductive, and, therefore, of working age and old age (Walker 1980; Phillipson, 1982).
It is the process where-by the state encourages and legitimates certain forms of dependency, such as unemployment and early retirement among men aged 60–64, while subjecting others not only to substantially lower incomes, but also to control procedures intended to ensure that they continue searching for work (Sinfield 1981: 142).
Conclusion
Large-scale early retirement is a relatively new phenomenon in Britain.
It has become an important aspect of the response by both government and individual older workers to the current continuing economic recession in the labour market.
Yet surprisingly little research has been conducted into the subject, at least in Britain.
The results of the special analysis of the After Redundancy study reported here add to previous research by showing that early retirement must be seen, not only as an alternative to secure employment, but as economic insecurity as well.
Furthermore, they emphasise the point that, like redundancy (Lee and Harris 1985), early retirement must be considered as a process rather than an event.
This process includes demand factors, such as the demand for labour and employer discrimination, as well as redundancy itself, which may precipitate early retirement; and supply factors, such as the incomes and health of older workers.
Policy has developed on the basis not only of inadequate knowledge about the factors contributing to early retirement, but also without any information about the longer-term consequences for the older people involved.
The study was not concerned mainly with early retirement, and the information it did collect was directed primarily towards early retirement as a response to redundancy.
Further research is required if we are to understand better the process of early retirement in a variety of circumstances and thereby build a sounder basis for policy.
The longer experience of some other countries, such as France and Sweden, of both early retirement and labour market policies encouraging it, would be one potentially fruitful source of information (Walker and Laczko 1982:Laczko and Walker 1985).
This study has helped to pave the way for further work on early retirement by showing that, even among the same cohort of redundant workers, there is a clear social division based on economic security and insecurity.
Early retirement may be a release from employment for some and a refuge from the severe insecurity of the labour market for others.
Notes
References
Resources in Old Age:Mining National Statistical Sources
Chapter five
Resources in Old Age: Ageing and the Life Course
G. Nigel Gilbert, Angela Dale, Sara Arber, Maria Evandrou, Frank Laczko
Introduction
A number of recent reports have emphasized that ‘the elderly’ are far from a homogeneous group.
Taylor and Ford (1983), for example, examined age, sex, and social-class differences in a sample of elderly people in Aberdeen, finding substantial inequalities between subgroups in their income, social support, health, and psychological functioning.
Victor and Evandrou (1986) studied social-class differences using a nationally representative sample from the General Household Survey (GHS) and concluded that the income and health of old people are strongly related to their past employment experience.
This chapter explores the relationship between age and several measures of inequality, drawing for our data on a nationally representative sample of elderly people from the GHS.
We focus on the significance of ‘stage’ in life course in accounting for inequality amongst the elderly, and use the analysis to reflect on the likely consequences of current pension and health policies.
Taylor and Ford (1983: 183) note that ‘the distinction between the’ young’and the ‘old’elderly is now commonplace' and suggest that this is manifested in, among other factors, the greater likelihood that the old elderly live in poor housing and that they have incomes below or near the supplementary-benefit rate.
In the report of the Royal Commission on the Distribution of Incomes (Layard et al.
1978), it was shown that, in 1976, the proportion of elderly heads of household with net incomes at or below the supplementary-benefit rate increased from 25 per cent at age 65–69 to 47 per cent at age 80 and over.
Several quite different kinds of explanation might be suggested for these observations.
First, the increase in poverty may be a result of ageing itself: for example, reaching the statutory retirement age causes a marked drop in most elderly people's incomes.
However, it is harder to see why  age should be directly related to poverty in the years after retirement.
Second, the relationship between age and poverty may be the consequence of other causal factors.
In particular, as people move through their life course, they live in households of different composition, experience changing marital status, and have different sources of income.
Since stage in life course is roughly correlated with age, the effect could be to generate an apparent relationship between age and poverty.
If, for example, as one moves up the elderly age range, the proportion of married to non-married decreases, and if married couples are in general better off than the single or widowed elderly, one would expect to find that average income would decline with age.
A third kind of explanation for the relationship between income and age is that it is the result of a cohort effect: that is, older elderly people are poorer because they were born and spent their working lives during a different historical period from the ‘young’ elderly.
Thus, for example, one of the major sources of income of elderly people is the occupational pension.
The proportion of jobs with pension schemes has grown in the last twenty years, with the result that the ‘young’ elderly have a greater chance of benefiting from them than the older elderly.
These three kinds of explanation, each of which will be explored in this chapter, are not mutually exclusive, but they do have different theoretical and policy implications.
For many elderly people, a statutory retirement pension is their major, if not their only resource.
In addition, as they age, they are more likely to become disabled, and therefore to obtain more support from the state in the shape of free or subsidized health or social services.
At the same time, some forms of state support are provided, not only on grounds of age or disability alone, but contingent on whether or not informal carers are seen as able to give assistance.
The most likely potential informal carers are other members of the elderly person's household.
Hence, the extent of provision of state support services may vary by household composition.
The type of household in which the elderly person lives may, in its turn, be a function of the stage he or she has reached in the life course rather than of age per se .
Thus, several factors may interact to affect in a complex way the distribution of income and the extent of service receipt by elderly people, and these too are explored below.
Data
The GHS is a nationally representative continuous survey of those living in private households.
The data are drawn from the Surveys of 1979 and 1980 (OPCS 1981, 1982).
In 1980 the GHS asked people aged 65 and over detailed questions on their level of disability, the nature and  extent of help provided by informal carers, and their receipt of statutory services.
The quality of the data, the high response rate, and the large size and representative nature of the sample make the GHS an invaluable source for examining a wide range of issues.
However, because the sampling frame consists of private households only, the survey does not cover elderly people in institutional care — for example, those living in old people's homes and those who have been in hospital for more than six months.
Because the proportion in such care rises with increasing age, the survey is more representative of those in the late 60s and early 70s than it is of the over-75s.
The 1980 Survey's section on the elderly was asked only of those aged 65 and over, and therefore tables in this chapter which are based on the 1980 data include only the sub sample in this age band.
Except where otherwise stated, the tables derived from the 1979 Survey include all those aged over the statutory retirement age at the time, 60 for women and 65 for men.
Resources and ageing
In 1979 (Figure 5.1), the median net income of households which included elderly people declined sharply with the age of the oldest member, from £43 per week for the 65–69 age-group to £32 for the 80-years-and-older group.
‘Income’ for the purpose of this figure was  was calculated as the sum of the net (after tax) incomes from all sources for all the members of the household.
However, single-person households with, for example, an income consisting only of a single person's state pension are much more likely to be found in the older age groups than in the younger ones.
In other households there will be younger sons and daughters who are in paid work and this is more likely to be the case among those households in which the younger elderly live.
In the younger age range, there may also be spouses who have not yet reached retirement age and are still in paid employment.
It is possible that the steep age gradient observed in Figure 5.1 is mainly due to these factors.
The use of resources provided in kind by the state, such as health and welfare services, follows the reverse pattern, with usage increasing with age.
As an example, Figure 5.2 shows that the likelihood of receiving home-help support in the last month rises from under 3 per cent in the 65–69 age-group to over a quarter for those aged over 80.
A similar gradient is found for the receipt of district nurse visits, domiciliary chiropody, and general practitioner (GP) home visits.
However, the simple interpretation that state service-provision varies proportionately with age may also be misleading.
Factors such as degree of disability and whether the elderly person lives alone, with a spouse, or with younger household members may have a much stronger influence on service receipt than the age of the elderly person.
Figure 5.1 Net household income by age for all households containing at least one elderly member Source: General Household Survey, 1979.
Figure 5.2 Service receipt in the last month, by age
Table 5.1 shows that the kind of household in which elderly people live varies greatly by age.
In the youngest age group, 65–69 years, most elderly people are living with their spouse, 37 per cent as one of a married couple whose partner is over 65, and 20 per cent with a partner under 65.
In the next age range, 70–74, the most common arrangement is still living with an elderly spouses but one in three elderly people are living by themselves, often because their spouse has died.
The proportion of those living alone continues to climb until the 85-and-over age range, when the proportion living with others, either elderly people other than their spouse (11 per cent) or younger people, often their sons and daughters or other kin (29 per cent ), becomes important.
Table 5.1 Type of household in which elderly people live, by age (%)
The figures in Table 5.1 are from cross-sectional data, obtained in 1980, and could therefore be misleading as indicators of changes in households over time.
However, Grundy (1986), using data from the OPCS Longitudinal Study which is based on a 1 per cent sample of the 1971 Census linked to records from the 1981 Census, reports a similar pattern.
Her tables show that 16 per cent of the households containing a married couple with a partner aged 65–74 in 1971 and 23.5 per cent of married couple households with a partner aged 75 and over in 1971 had dissolved to a lone person household by 1981.
The fact that a relatively large number of elderly people, especially the ‘old’ elderly, live alone is a recent phenomenon (Table 5.2).
The table documents a growth in the proportion of those living by themselves from around 10 per cent in 1945 to over one-third in 1980.
The proportion living only with their spouse has also increased, from 30 per cent in 1945 to 44 per cent in 1980.
These increases have been matched by a major decrease in the proportion living with others, from 60 per cent to 22 per cent.
Similar changes are reported in the United States (Lee 1985).
These changes in proportion are the more dramatic when considered alongside the growth in the absolute number of elderly people.
In 1901 there were less than two million people over 65 in Britain, but by 1981 this had risen to about eight million (Henwood and Wicks 1985).
A variety of reasons have been put forward to explain these changes.
There has been an increase in life expectancy, with the result that not only are there more elderly people, but there is also a greater likelihood that children will have left home long before the parents' death.
In addition, children have tended to move out of the parental home at a younger age (Dale et al.
1987).
Henwood and Wicks (1985) also cite the effects of the rising divorce rate.
Lee (1985) argues from US data that many elderly people prefer independent living, but previously had to depend on the financial and other support of their children.
With the advent of social security and pensions, elderly people are choosing to remain independent as long as they are able.
Thompson and West (1984) also document the strong preference of many elderly to live alone compared with living with relatives or in an institution.
Table 5.2 Type of household of elderly people, 1945–80(%)
The great majority of the elderly living alone are women and this proportion increases with age from 79 per cent of those under 70 years of age to 86 per cent of those aged 80 or more (Table 5.3).
This sex imbalance is primarily due to the shorter life-expectancy of men.
In addition, however, women tend to marry men older than themselves.
For both these reasons, there is a high likelihood that with advancing years wives will be widowed and will find themselves living alone.
Table 5.3 Percentage of women in ‘elderly households’ by age and type of household
The income resources of the elderly
Comparisons between the incomes of age-groups, as in Figure 5.1, give only very rough indications of differences in disposable financial resources, for they do not fully take into account differences in household composition.
A widely used measure which does to some extent standardize for the number of people in the household is ‘Relative Net Resources’(RNR).
RNR is the current weekly net household income in proportion to the DHSS supplementary-benefit level and takes the form of a percentage.
This form of standardized income therefore controls for the size and composition of the household.
Thus, for example, a household with an RNR value of 200 per cent has an income equal to twice the amount of benefit that it would be entitled to under the regulations of the time.
Because households may include more than one of the ‘assessment units’ used by the DHSS to calculate rates of benefit, RNR is based on the sum of the entitlements of each assessment unit within the household.
It must be recognized, nevertheless, that RNR as a measure of relative resources has several defects.
First, although interest on savings and investments is included, there is no available information on the value, for example, of share holdings or investments such as paintings and jewellery.
Second, it sets arbitrary amounts on the income needs of people of different ages and may underestimate the needs of children by comparison with adults (Berthoud 1985).
It also fails to take into account regional differences in prices, and class-based spending customs (Kincaid 1979).
Other general problems associated with using measures based on income include the difficulty of taking into account fringe benefits and payment-in-kind, gifts, and personal services (Townsend 1974).
RNR indicates only the overall income resources of the whole household and does not assess their possibly unequal distribution within the household (Pahl 1983; Brannen and Wilson 1987).
Of particular relevance is the fact that it may not allow sufficiently for the diseconomies of a single-person household.
As measured by RNR, the elderly are one of the poorest sub-groups.
Figure 5.3 shows the level and distribution of RNR for a selection of household types which characterize stages of the life course (Dale 1987).
It can be seen that the lone elderly had the lowest median income levels and also the most restricted range of income.
This was because a substantial proportion were very heavily dependent upon the state for their income.
Two-thirds of this group got over three-quarters of their income from state benefits and only 7 percent had any earnings from employment.
By contrast, median RNR levels were highest and the dispersion greatest where all adult members were of working age and there were no dependent children present.
The lone elderly group as a whole had a median RNR level of 110 per cent but as Table 5.4 shows, there were clear differences between men and women in every age-group.
Men had a median value of 124 per cent, compared with 109 per cent for women.
There was little variation in RNR with age for women living alone, but among men the youngest age-group, 65–69, had a considerably higher RNR level, 139 per cent, than the older groups (118 to 121 per cent ).
This was partly because a substantial proportion of these younger men (21 per cent) were still in paid work (Table 5.5).
Although 15 per cent of the younger elderly women living alone were in paid work, this did not lift the income of the age-group to an appreciable extent, because of the poor wages they received.
Younger elderly married couples were also better off than older couples, with income levels similar to those for the youngest age-group of lone elderly men, for the same reason.
Among elderly couples where the oldest member was aged less than 70, as many as a third had at least one partner still doing some paid work.
Figure 5.3 Relative Net Resources by household type, for household types characteristic of stages in the life course (from Dale, forthcoming) Source: GHS 1979
A comparison of the characteristics of those in the highest and in the lowest income-quartile of each age category confirmed the central importance of the labour market in determining income in old age.
Among the most well-off quartile of elderly people living alone (those with an RNR greater than 130 per cent), 19 per cent have some earned income, compared with 2 per cent in the lowest quartile (those with RNR less than 100 per cent ).
A similar pattern was found for elderly couples.
Only 5 per cent of the lowest quartile had any income from paid employment compared with 45 per cent of the highest quartile.
In this connection, it should be noted that the proportion of elderly people in paid work has fallen very sharply since 1971.
This has been the result of both the recession, which has promoted early retirement and redundancy, and the increasingly sharply drawn age of retirement.
As Townsend (1981) noted, retirement at pensionable age is now much more rigidly enforced, and ‘old age pensioners’ are assumed to have an economic-activity status very different from those of ‘working age’, irrespective of their state of health or capacity for work.
The proportion of men aged 65–69 who are economically active has decreased particularly quickly, from 30 per cent in 1971 to only 11.4 per cent in 1986 (Table 5.6).
The proportion of men aged 70 and over in the labour force has more than halved from 11 per cent to 5 per cent in the same time period.
The shedding of older labour has also been a feature of the experience of the cohort just below the statutory retirement age, with male activity-rates in the 60–64 years age-group  falling from 83 per cent in 1971 to 60 per cent in 1986.
Table 5. 4 Median levels of RNR (relative net resources) by type of household and age of oldest member Net income of household as a percentage of supplementary-benefit rate
Table 5.5 Elderly households with someone in paid work by age of oldest member Percentage of households with at least one member in paid work
Table 5.6 Percentage labour force activity rates, 1971–86
Amongst elderly women, there has also been a decrease in activity rates, but it is much less pronounced.
The activity rate of women in the age-group just above the retirement age, 60–64, fell from 29 per cent in 1971 to 21 per cent in 1986.
Moreover, the activity rate just before retirement, 55–59, has fractionally increased over this time period, so that nearly as many women as men are working as they approach the age of retirement.
However, a much higher proportion of the women than the men are in part-time employment (Dale and Bamford 1987).
Current employment is one important factor affecting the disposable income of elderly people, but the influence of the labour market is still manifested, even in retirement, through the role of occupational pensions.
As with employment, there are significant differences between men and women, and between household types, in the receipt of occupational pensions.
In 1979 about 57 per cent of elderly married couples' incomes were supplemented by an occupational pension (usually arising from the husband's previous job) and the percentage for men living alone was much the same (Table 5.7).
By contrast, only about 27 per cent of women living alone had an occupational pension.
The difference is explained by the greater likelihood of men having held pensionable jobs, both because full-time jobs held by men were more likely to have pension rights than women's, and because, before the age of retirement, a majority of older women had either no paid job or a part-time job with no pension provision.
Overlaying these gender differences, there is a cohort effect.
The older age-groups were somewhat less likely than the younger ones to have an occupational pension.
Thus, for example, the proportion of men living alone who received a pension rose from 52 per cent at 80 years and over, to 61 per cent for those aged 65–69, reflecting the growth in provision of occupational pensions between the early sixties when the oldest age-group  left the labour force and the late seventies when the most recently retired left.
The growth in occupational pension provision for women was even more marked with more than double the proportion of 60–69 year olds having them (32 per cent) compared with the over-80s (15 per cent ).
Re-entry into the labour force after child-rearing was less usual for the older group than for the younger (Martin and Roberts 1984) and therefore fewer would have had pensionable paid employment in the years before retirement.
Table 5. 7 Percentage of elderly households with at least one member receiving an occupational pension, by age of oldest person
Among elderly people living alone, 63 per cent of the highest quartile of RNR had occupational pensions, compared with 10 per cent of those in the lowest quartile, underlining the importance of such pensions in determining income at this age.
In the highest quartile, the mean age was 72 and 30 per cent were men.
In the lowest quartile, the mean age was only slightly older, 74, and 16 per cent were men.
There was a similar lack of relationship between age and receipt of an occupational pension in the elderly married couple household group, where 74 per cent of those in the highest quartile had occupational pensions and the mean age of the older partner was 72, while only 27 per cent of those in the lowest quartile had occupational pensions and the mean age of the oldest partner was 73.
Although at first sight, therefore, it seems that there was a strong age-related gradient in the overall net income of elderly people, the effect was largely accounted for by the dissolution of married-couple households when husbands died, leaving widows significantly worse off not only than married couples, but also than men living on their own.
The higher income of married couples and men living alone was the combined result of the continued involvement of men in the labour market after the statutory retirement age, although this had decreased sharply over the previous few years, and of the receipt of occupational pensions.
Despite  the fact that the incomes of elderly married couples and of men living alone were considerably higher than that of elderly women living alone, both groups were near to the bottom of the distribution of income when compared with households not including elderly people.
The receipt of statutory services
State provision is important for many elderly people, not only because they have to rely on a retirement or supplementary pension in the absence of income from employment or from an occupational pension, but also because they need the health and social services provided by the welfare state.
However, state support varies in a complex way according to the age of the elderly person, the extent of his or her-disability, the type of household lived in, and the informal support available.
As we shall demonstrate, the effect of the interaction of these various factors is that for some kinds of service, the elderly living alone obtain more support from the state than those living in other types of household.
At the same time, in all households, the state provides little support compared with that forthcoming from other carers, particularly from other members of the elderly person's household.
Not unnaturally, the amount of statutory health and social services which individuals receive depends in part on the level of their need.
Elderly people's ‘need’ for support is difficult to measure directly, but a reasonable indicator can be obtained by asking them about their capacity to perform a range of daily living activities and self-care tasks, and about their mobility.
Their answers can be used to construct an index of functional disability (Townsend and Wedderburn 1965; Bebbington and Davies 1983; Arber et al.
1988).
When this was done with the GHS 1980 data, half the elderly people (49 per cent) had no disability and a quarter some slight disability (26 per cent ).
About 11 per cent were ‘severely disabled’, most of them having difficulty or requiring help in getting up stairs and around the house and in having a bath.
As might be expected, the prevalence of disability varied greatly with age.
Only 5 per cent of people under 70, but more than 40 per cent of those over 85, were classified as severely disabled (Table 5.8).
The proportion severely disabled also differed with gender, women living alone being considerably more likely to be disabled than men living alone, at all ages.
It also differed with the type of household in which elderly people lived, particularly among those aged 85 and over.
Within this oldest group, those living alone or with a spouse alone were considerably less likely to be severely disabled than those living with younger kin or with other elderly people.
These findings suggest that disability levels help to determine the type of household in which elderly people live.
If statutory support-services were channelled to those who were the  most disabled, one would expect from these results to find that the elderly living with others would obtain more of them than elderly married couples or the elderly living alone.
In fact, as Table 5.9 indicates, the situation in 1980 was very different in regard to two tasks for which older people often need assistance — shopping and cutting toe-nails.
The pattern of sources of help with shopping shown in the table was also typical of that for a range of other domestic and personal house-care tasks, including cooking, washing, and bathing (Evandrou et al.
1986).
Table 5.8 Percentage of ‘severely disabled’ elderly people (a score of 6 and above on an index of functional disability) a by age and type of household
Some 14 per cent of the 1980 GHS sample aged over 65 could not do their shopping themselves and 28 per cent could not cut their own toe-nails (OPCS 1982).
Table 5.9 demonstrates that the state provided minimal help with shopping except to those living alone.
Most of them (76 per cent) received help from relatives, friends, and neighbours.
The state services did, however, make a greater contribution than did informal carers to chiropody when that was needed, in all types of household.
These data suggest that the state's contribution of resources to elderly households through the provision of support services is, for most services, not substantial and that it varies with the type of household.
However, since the proportion who are disabled in different types of household also varies, it is necessary to see whether the differences in state provision remain after the level of disability has been controlled.
This is done  by using a logit analysis (Arber et al.
(forthcoming) discuss the analysis in more detail).
Table 5.10 shows odds ratios for the receipt of three statutory services, for different types of household, after controlling for disability, in each case comparing the level of service received with that for elderly married people.
An elderly man living alone, for example, was 5.74 times more likely to have had a home-help visit during the previous month than an elderly couple, after allowing for the different average disability levels of the two types of household.
Table 5.9 Usual source of help by those requiring some help with (a) shopping and (b) cutting toe-nails by type of household (percentage receiving help)
Elderly people living alone received very much more assistance from home helps than any other type of household.
The odds ratio shows that  this was the case even after taking into account the fact that those living alone tended to be more disabled than elderly married couples, and therefore in greater need of such help.
Elderly people living with other, younger people were much less likely to have had a home-help visit in the last month than households containing only elderly people.
Those who lived with a younger married couple were about five times less likely to receive a home-help visit than an elderly married couple.
It is fair to conclude, therefore, that statutory services were provided to a much greater extent to those who have no one else to call upon within the household than to those who live with others.
Table 5.10 Receipt of statutory services at home in the last month Odds ratios, compared with the level of receipt by the husband of elderly married couples, controlling for disability
The picture for home visits from a GP was very different, with a much smaller range of variation between types of household.
The situation for chiropody at home was mid-way between that for the receipt of home help and GP visits, with the ratio for elderly men living alone being 2.7 times higher than for elderly married men.
The three services differ in their ‘substitutability’— that is, the degree to which informal carers (other household members, relatives, and friends) are expected to be able to substitute for the services which might be provided by formal carers (paid professionals)(Arber et al.
1988).
Of the three, home helps are the  most and GP visits the least substitutable, and the pattern of receipt of statutory services varies accordingly.
In each case it is elderly people living alone who obtain the most support from the state, and among them men receive slightly more than women.
The conclusions which can be drawn from this examination of the use of state-funded welfare services by elderly people are that the ‘older’ among them obtain much more help than the ‘younger’, primarily because, on average, they are much more disabled.
However, there is also a strong, independent effect of the type of household in which the elderly person lives.
Hence, the overall use of state-support services depends on the combination of the effects of disability, the type of household, and the substitutability of the service.
Elderly people living alone are more likely to receive substitutable state-funded services than those living in other types of household with comparable levels of disability.
The latter — that is, those living with spouses and with younger people — are most likely to obtain support from those living with them and little from the state.
Resources and the life course
This analysis has shown that the relationship between resources and age is more complex than is immediately apparent.
After distinguishing different types of household in terms of their composition and structure, variation in income with age within each household type is not great.
On the other hand, different types of household have very different incomes, even after standardizing for the number of people in the household and including all sources of income: households of elderly women living alone are poorer than other types of household.
In short, the overall apparent relationship between income and age is accounted for primarily by the changing proportions of types of household with age.
While married couples are the most common type amongst the under 75s, women alone are the most common type of household among the over-75 age-group.
Those differences in income with age which remain after considering each type of household separately can mainly be explained in terms of two factors.
First, in households consisting of elderly married couples, one of the spouses may still be working and contributing to the household income.
Second, the recent increase in occupational pension schemes causes a ‘cohort’ effect.
The older groups are less likely to have contributed to such a scheme while they were in the labour force, and are therefore less likely to have an occupational pension.
In addition to income from benefits and pensions, elderly households also receive a considerable amount of services in kind, largely at no cost to themselves, mainly from relatives but also from the statutory health  and social services.
The amount of support obtained from statutory services depends on the elderly person's degree of disability but also on the type of household in which he or she lives.
Disability increases with age, and also varies between those living in different types of household: women living alone and those living with younger married couples are particularly likely to be severely disabled.
There are great differences in the contribution which statutory services make to supporting households which include elderly people: those living alone receive the most, and those in households with younger people the least.
While it is true, as Table 5.1 showed, that the distribution of elderly people between different types of household is strongly correlated to their age, the link between household type and age is not a simple causal one.
The type of household lived in is better considered a consequence of the stage they have reached in their life course than of their age per se (Dale 1987).
Similarly, the resources of elderly people are more clearly explained in terms of their stage of life than of their age.
Figure 5.4 summarizes some of the data presented in this chapter in these terms.
It represents all households which contain an elderly person.
One can distinguish a typical trajectory — shown moving down from the upper left of the figure — as married couples reach the statutory retirement-age.
Following the cessation of earnings, their income drops sharply, from a median value of 240 per cent RNR to about 130 per cent.
Some 31 per cent of elderly households consist of such married couples.
The trajectory continues in a downward direction with the death of a spouse, most likely the husband, and the formation of a single-person household.
Some 42 per cent of households containing an elderly person consist of a lone woman.
Income for this group is very low, but receipt of statutory support-services is relatively great; for example, those living alone receive five times more services than married couples.
A few elderly people, as they get older and more disabled, join the households of younger kin.
They are shown moving up the figure and their RNR increases.
Although his or her personal income will not increase, the elderly person's situation appears to be considerably improved because the standardized income of the household will be greater and the younger household members will provide much of the substitutable care which would otherwise have been obtained from the health and social services.
Whether this is truly an improvement will depend on factors such as the value the elderly person places on independence (Thompson and West 1984) and the distribution of resources within the household.
The slightly higher RNR levels for elderly married couples and for men living alone than for women living alone are because the women have less income from paid employment and from occupational pensions.
The importance of these sources of income has implications for the  income in old age of men and women who are now in their fifties and who are faced with long-term unemployment or early retirement.
The groups at the higher points on the diagram — that is, those with higher median levels of RNR — consist of households in which the elderly live with younger people and it is one or more of the younger members who own or rent the home.
These households have higher median levels of RNR mainly as a result of the income from paid employment of one or more of these younger household members.
Figure 5.4 Life course trajectory: type of household on axes of the age of the oldest member of the household and the median household RNR Source:GHS 1980.
The decline in labour market participation of men in particular from 55 years onwards (Laczko and Walker, 1985;.
Laczko et al.,
forthcoming) seems to imply that it will become increasingly difficult for those over retirement age to obtain any paid work with which to supplement their pension.
Unemployment levels amongst school-leavers are such that many of the casual and part-time jobs once filled by those of retirement  age are now being taken by young people.
Although occupational pension schemes are increasingly common, levels of payment are often linked to earnings in the most recent years of work.
Furthermore, women who work part-time are often ineligible to join an occupational-pension scheme.
For women, who make up the majority of the increasing proportion of lone elderly people, there seems little prospect of an improvement in their economic position unless there is a considerable rise in the basic statutory pension.
The current moves to encourage still further the provision of private occupational-pensions in preference to state schemes may serve only to emphasize the inequalities between some elderly people who are supported by one or even two occupational pensions, and those, particularly widows, who have only their state pension.
The ‘U'-shaped resources trajectory traced in Figure 5.4 through the later stages of life, first as a couple, then as a widow living alone, and then with other younger people is only one hypothetical trajectory.
During this trajectory, some move into institutional care and therefore out of the population we have been considering.
Furthermore, the detailed picture is much more complicated than the trajectory might suggest.
As Figure 5.4 shows, for example, 6 per cent of elderly households include an elderly married couple with another adult, often a son or daughter who has never left the parental home, and 3 per cent contain two or more elderly, non-married people.
Neither these, nor a variety of other types of household fit into the stereotypical trajectory through the life course.
Figure 5.4 does, however, show clearly the particular income disadvantage of elderly people living alone.
They receive relatively more health and social services but, under the current funding arrangements and level of provision, these services have great difficulty in meeting existing demands upon them.
If the number of elderly people living alone increases, as projections suggest (Henwood and Wicks 1985), and if the value of occupational pensions is reduced and jobs to supplement state benefits become rarer, the prospect for the standard of living of elderly people as a whole is not encouraging.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys (OPCS) for their support and for permission to use the General Household Survey, and the ESRC Data Archive for their continuing help.
The research was funded by the Economic and Social Research Council, Grant G0125003, as part of the Ageing Initiative.
The ESRC also provided support for the preparation of the GHS into SPSS and SIR files (Grant HR8360).
This chapter is the combined effort of all those involved in the Ageing Initiative project, ‘Employment and Ageing: the older worker, and the  impact of elderly relatives in the household’ at the University of Surrey.
Much of the background to the paper draws upon work by Maria Evandrou and Frank Laczko, research officers on the project.
The work on income and old age is by Angela Dale, while that on service provision has mainly been carried out by Sara Arber.
The paper was written by Nigel Gilbert in collaboration with the other main authors.
It was first presented at the ESRC Workshop on Ageing at the University of Surrey, September 1986.
This version has benefited greatly from the comments of Margot Jefferys.
References