

A MONASTIC VIEW IN A DEVELOPING WORLD, 1093–1109
A NEW ARCHBISHOP'S PROBLEMS OF OBEDIENCE
WHAT IS THE LAW?
Everything in Anselm's life during the past thirty years had predisposed him to regard obedience as a fundamental rule of conduct for himself and others.
But obedience to whom, and in what respect?
In the stormy sea of English affairs these were not easy questions to answer.
Of course, he had no doubt that all monks owed obedience to the Rule and to their abbot.
Further, all clergy owed obedience to their immediate superior, provided that he did not order anything contrary to the law of God.
This proviso was fundamental, and we can find it expressed in two letters of this period on the preference to be given to the claim of monastic life over every other demand — a theme of central importance in his thought.
These two letters were written in 1093 when Anselm was awaiting consecration as archbishop.
One was addressed to the bishop of Paris, the other to the precentor of Paris.
Their theme was simplicity itself: the precentor wished to become a monk; the bishop wished to retain him in the service of the cathedral.
Anselm had no doubt where justice lay: ‘No man having put his hand to the plough [that is to say, in this case, having committed himself to a monastic life]and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of Heaven.’
In writing to the precentor, Anselm enforced this theme with all his old ardour:
It follows from this that the test of legitimate episcopal authority is that the bishop should speak with the voice of Christ.
Any bishop who speaks otherwise loses his authority, at least on the issue on which he has spoken.
Anselm's advice to the precentor was that he should resist his bishop; to the bishop, that he should change his mind.
That was Anselm's message in this case.
But it has far-reaching consequences.
The pope's authority is superior to that of any other bishop, but the same rule applies also to him.
As abbot of Bec, Anselm had owed obedience to several superiors whose permission he had sought before accepting the archbishopric.
Now, his only ecclesiastical superior was the pope.
But the pope was far away, difficult of access, and when appealed to, he often spoke with an uncertain voice.
Besides, there was no acknowledged pope in England in 1093, and Anselm showed surprisingly little insistence in urging the king to recognize the pope whom he himself had recognized in Normandy.
He had no doubt that his own recognition of Urban II was irreversible; but he could not commit the kingdom of England to the choice which he had made in common with the rest of Normandy.
He seems to have recognized — at least he did not dissent from the view — that so far as England was concerned, the choice lay with the king.
If he made the wrong decision, Anselm would leave England and resign the archbishopric into the pope's hands.
Anselm never ceased to urge him to decide, but he issued no ultimatum, and made no threats: he insisted only on fulfilling his personal responsibilities.
His long reflection on the divine ordering of the universe did not extend to principles of political organization, and certainly not to opposition to the established order.
Then there was another problem.
Anselm sought papal advice with the ardour of one who desired to obey a father, but his knowledge of papal decisions and of the development of papal policy could scarcely have been more meagre.
Anselm's ignorance of the major decisions of papal councils in his own lifetime would be thought disgraceful in a modern candidate for historical honours.
Even the decrees of the Council of Clermont in 1095, to which he sent Boso as his envoy, and from which through illness Boso did not immediately return, remained unknown to him and went unheeded in practice for several years.
To a modern mind, accustomed to expect that important decisions will be communicated without delay to those whom they concern, such a lack of businesslike habits  is almost incredible.
But even the papal chancery, which alone had a system for preserving important letters, had no regular means of communicating decisions to those who were most affected by them.
As we have seen, the decisions of the Roman Council of 1059, which were more widely distributed than almost any others in the century, never mentioned the decision about the Eucharist.
So, in his lack of business-like habits, Anselm was only exhibiting a defect which ran through the whole system.
With his ignorance of decisions of the present went an even more comprehensive ignorance about decisions of the past.
Lanfranc, who had a practical mind, had foreseen this need when he was still prior of Bec, and had put together a collection of Canon Law, which stood him in good stead as archbishop.
He quoted from it frequently in his letters, and he was responsible for its wide dissemination in England.
Lanfranc's collection of Canon Law was in the library at Canterbury, but there is no evidence that Anselm ever used it while he was archbishop.
He had quoted from it once when he was prior of Bec, and the manuscript was still at Bec.
But even in this one instance, the way in which he introduced his quotation showed how little he was in the habit of being guided by it.
The question was a difficult one: he had been asked whether an unchaste priest should be allowed to resume his office after confessing his sin.
In his reply, Anselm argued from general principles that this was permissible.
But then, for the benefit, as he wrote, of those ‘who would not be persuaded by any other argument than authority’, he mentioned two texts of Popes Calixtus I and Gregory I, which supported the view which he had arrived at by reason.
He took these quotations from Lanfranc's manuscript.
But having in a somewhat cursory fashion quoted the authorities, he at once proceeded to the more congenial task of elaborating his argument, bringing forward considerations of individual psychology, the effect of various judgements on the penitent, and the necessity for prudence in the actions of confessors.
This letter belonged to a time long before he became archbishop, but promotion did not change his mind.
As archbishop, his only quotations from Lanfranc's collection of Canon Law seem to have  been taken at second hand from a treatise of his friend Gilbert Crispin; then too, as on the earlier occasion, his quotations were introduced only to reinforce a conclusion which he had already reached.
We may infer from these two cases that Anselm set no great store by an extensive knowledge of Canon Law, and that the test of valid authority was agreement with the voice of Christ.
So, in his practical advice and activity, as in his theology, he relied on a correct understanding of principles.
We can see him very clearly following this method in his only other surviving letter on a question involving a reference to Canon Law written in Rufus's reign.
It was written in reply to an inquiry from an abbot, probably the abbot of Fécamp, who was engaged in rebuilding his abbey church.
The question was one which must often have arisen in this period of extensive rebuilding: Did an altar require to be reconsecrated after it had been moved?
Anselm's reply shows that there was no authoritative answer available.
He told the abbot of Fécamp that he had heard that there was a letter of Pope Eugenius (obviously a corruption of Hyginus) which had settled the question, but he had been unable to get any information about this alleged source.
He had pursued the question when he was in Rome (in 1098 or 1100), and had spoken to Urban II on the subject.
The pope's opinion was that an altar once moved should never again be used as an altar.
Others who were present held that the altar could be used again without any reconsecration, after a simple ceremony of reconciliation.
Faced with this conflict of views, Anselm expressed his own view that, despite the pope's opinion, the altar could be brought back into use after simple reconsecration.
He recognized that this was contrary to the opinion of the pope and others at the papal court, but he put it forward as his  own: ‘others certainly may have thought of it, but I received it from no one’.
He thought it could serve until better advice was available.
Better advice, as it happened, was forthcoming without difficulty.
The abbot of Fécamp put the same question to Ivo of Chartres, who produced the text of Pope Hyginus, misquoted by Anselm but available in the Canon Law collection of Burchard of Worms.
It supported Anselm's conclusion.
So, after travelling half round Christendom, this small problem finally had an acceptable solution, and Anselm had been right after all, against the views of both pope and Curia.
The difficulty experienced by the abbot of Fécamp in getting a decision on this small point has both a general and a particular interest.
In general, it illustrates the amateurish state of government at this time: there were as yet no doctors of Canon Law, no schools in which the subject was studied, no lectures, no centres of expert knowledge.
It is indeed strange that Anselm never referred the question to Ivo, bishop of Chartres: he knew him as a friend, but not apparently as the greatest authority on Canon Law in northern Europe.
He looked on the question as one which every prelate had to solve as best he could.
This is what it was like to live in the pre-scholastic age.
Anselm thought out the problem for himself, and then sought the opinion of the best authorities known to him.
But these authorities raised as many problems as they solved.
The pope was wrong; the Curia was wrong; Anselm's judgement was right but had no authority; the authority quoted by Ivo was certainly spurious, but it produced an acceptable result.
A formal papal judgement on this point would have dispelled all doubts.
But the pope was in the same position as everyone else in having no clear procedure for reaching a decision.
Not only was a papal judgement difficult to get, but there were some points on which Anselm was not prepared to abide by a papal judgement unreservedly.
These were points concerning the rights and privileges of his own church of Canterbury.
They complicated the whole problem of obedience in a quite remarkable way, and they took up a great deal of Anselm's time as archbishop.
We shall have to consider some of the details of these matters later.
For the present, it must suffice simply to note the importance which Anselm attached to local rights.
He never explained his reasons; but  obedience to his consecration oath of fidelity to the church of Canterbury would have been one reason, and the desire for absolute stability in gifts to the saints another.
These were timeless things, and he would not acquiesce in their alteration.
In this same category, but with an even more urgent insistence, he placed the irreversibility of monastic commitment, even when it fell short of a formal vow.
It is easy now to see that the problem of papal authority was the one problem of outstanding importance among many minor questions raised in these letters.
But this was not clear to contemporaries.
For the abbot of Fécamp, the question of the use of old altars in his new church was a question of immediate concern for the life of his monastery.
For Anselm, the problems of the inviolability of monastic vows transcended all others in the care he was prepared to devote to it.
But on this and all other questions there were  enormous gaps in the knowledge necessary for coming to generally acceptable decisions.
This situation may best be illustrated, so far as Anselm is concerned, by examining his interventions on the subject of monastic vows.
PROBLEMS OF MONASTIC OBEDIENCE
I have already mentioned that sixteen of Anselm's forty-eight surviving letters of the period 1093–7 were about the problems of monks or nuns — a far higher proportion than on any other subject.
Of course, in one way, this comes as no surprise.
The monastic life was the subject on which Anselm could speak with widely recognized authority and with the power of deep personal experience.
Nevertheless, the contrast between his assurance on this subject, and the somewhat sketchy framework of his opinions on matters more central to his strictly archiepiscopal duties, reveals the continuity of his personal life in the midst of the upheavals of his new responsibilities.
Once more, the contrast with Lanfranc, who assumed command with easy confidence, is striking.
Even more remarkable is the contrast with Becket, whose new ecclesiastical persona provoked a personal conversion and a consistency of action of conspicuous grandeur.
Anselm was not unchanged by his new office, but the change was slow and never deep.
The evidence for these remarks is to be found in a series of letters which are among the most revealing of his later years.
As we have seen, ardent friendship and commitment to the monastic life were  the most frequently intertwining subjects of his years at Bec.
This combination is still to be found in his letters as archbishop, especially in his letters to small communities of nuns.
Among them there are two letters which show more intimately than any others the intricate web of monastic commitment, personal relationships, and politics, in which as archbishop he was required to work.
King Malcolm's daughter
One of these letters has already been mentioned.
It is his letter of March 1094 to the bishop of Salisbury, instructing him in the name of himself and the king to take action about the case of the daughter of the king of Scotland, who had left the nunnery at Wilton and who — as Anselm and King William had agreed — was to be forced to return.
This letter was only the beginning of a case with a long history, and by piecing together a number of disjointed fragments of information we can obtain an unusually clear picture of the sequence of events and of Anselm's reactions to them.
The subject of the letter was Matilda, the daughter of King Malcolm III of Scotland, who later became the wife of Henry I and queen of England.
In 1094 however such a future would have seemed unthinkable.
Matilda was then simply a runaway nun, and in Anselm's eyes, in danger of damnation.
A few facts about her will help to clarify the position.
We do not know at what date Matilda had gone to Wilton, but probably she had come from Scotland as a young girl with her aunt Christina in 1086 to be educated at Wilton.
By 1093, when the events I am about to describe took place, she was of marriageable age, about thirteen, and the question of her marriage had become a political issue of some importance.
It is clear, moreover, from facts which later became public, that her father King Malcolm had never intended her for a monastic vocation.
She was not exactly a refugee from the violence of invaders like many other Anglo-Saxon women, including one whose case we shall soon encounter: she was simply a woman of royal birth being educated in a monastery awaiting a suitable marriage.
The importance of the question of her marriage in 1093 arose from the policy of her father in seeking a general settlement of his relations with the new Norman kingdom of England.
The marriage which he contemplated for Matilda was with one of the most  powerful of the new barons of the Conqueror, Count Alan Rufus, lord of Richmond, who for twenty-five years had been the greatest man in the north of England and one of the most constant witnesses of English royal charters: a central character, therefore, in the government of England, but a potential menace in the semi-conquered North.
The projected match, therefore, opened up vistas of great political opportunity, and perhaps even greater danger.
The prospect of a marriage between his most important baron in the North and the daughter of the English king's most dangerous enemy across the still ambiguous northern border must have given Rufus considerable food for thought.
In the circumstances, it is not surprising that the marriage plan foundered.
We do not know precisely on what grounds, but it had already broken down by August 1093, the date which had been fixed for the final settlement of differences between the kings of England and Scotland.
Elaborate preparations had been made for a meeting between the two kings at Gloucester: King Malcolm was there at the appointed time, but Rufus refused to see him, and the two parted, in the Chronicler's words ‘in great enmity’.
One fact in the situation, which later emerged from the gossip of Baldwin, Anselm's man of business, was that on his way to the meeting at Gloucester, Rufus had visited Wilton.
If Baldwin is to be trusted, this visit had serious consequences, for it was on this occasion that the abbess placed a monastic veil on Matilda's head, and when Rufus saw the veil, he went away.
The details of Baldwin's story are confused, but one possibility is that the abbess's action was prompted by Rufus as a way of making Matilda unmarriageable.
This would account for Rufus's readiness to fall in with Anselm's demand that Matilda should be forced to return to her cloister, which (as we have seen) rather surprised Anselm.
It would also account for the immediate breach between Rufus and Matilda's father, King Malcolm.
At all events, King Malcolm's immediate reaction to Rufus's refusal to see him at Gloucester was to go straight to Wilton, tear the veil off Matilda's head, and take her back to Scotland.
Matilda later reported that as her father tore off her veil, he swore ‘that he  had destined me as a wife for Count Alan rather than for a community of nuns’.
But the marriage plan for Matilda was now dead, and within a few months her father was killed in a border skirmish, and we hear no more of her for the next seven years.
Whether Anselm in 1093 knew anything about these intricate political manoeuvres, we have no means of knowing.
But it would have made no difference to his attitude to Matilda: for him — whatever the circumstances in which she had been removed — she was a runaway nun who should be forced to return to her convent.
This is the grim side to his thought: the circumstances of her ‘taking’ the veil were, so far as we can see, irrelevant.
Of course Rufus's ready compliance with Anselm's wishes, for which Anselm gave him so much credit, can now be seen to have been wholly political.
So far as he was concerned, a great danger had been averted, and the matter was now closed, but it had a sequel which we may now follow.
King Harold's daughter
The projected marriage between Matilda and Count Alan Rufus was now a dead letter.
But it had a tragic consequence.
While visiting Wilton Abbey to see his prospective bride, Count Alan saw another lady who must have been about thirty years of age.
Unlike Matilda, she was a genuine refugee from the Norman invaders, for she was a daughter of Harold, the last Anglo-Saxon king, who had taken refuge in the monastery.
Her name was Gunhilda.
Like Matilda, she had worn the veil, probably for several years; but she too had never taken religious vows.
Her encounter with Count Alan led to a strange and passionate romance which is now known only from two of Anselm's letters.
The situation disclosed in these two letters is hard to disentangle.
The clear facts are that Gunhilda left the monastery with Count Alan Rufus, and lived with him very briefly as wife or mistress until his death, which followed almost immediately, probably on 4 August 1093.
Why did Gunhilda not then return to her monastery?
The answer which emerges from Anselm's second letter is that  Count Alan's brother and heir succeeded not only to his estates but also to Gunhilda.
Why these important barons, in the face of ecclesiastical censure, and as an alternative to the important political alliance with the king of Scotland, should have preferred Harold's daughter is a mystery.
All we know is that Gunhilda was a woman of great talent and charm, for — in addition to having fascinated two powerful barons — she had also established the closest friendship with Anselm of any woman known to us.
Anselm wrote to Gunhilda twice after she had left Wilton.
He recognized that, although she had worn the veil for several years, she had never made her monastic profession.
According to the rules established by Lanfranc for refugee inhabitants of nunneries who had fled from the Normans but had not taken monastic vows, Gunhilda was eligible for marriage.
But in Anselm's eyes, her wearing of the veil bound her irretrievably to the monastic life: to draw back now was to take the road to damnation.
The letters he wrote to her are more reminiscent of his earliest letters than anything else that he wrote as archbishop.
They are full of his early mannerisms of style, and the eloquent fervour of personal attachment.
It appears from them that at the time of their earlier meeting, presumably during his long visit to England in 1086, Gunhilda had been captivated by his talk, and he by her attachment:
Gunhilda was the last person to whom he wrote in such terms of intimacy.
Necessarily the letter makes painful reading.
In its imagery it recalls his own Deploratio virginitatis male amissae of long ago:
Whatever may be thought of this — I have softened it in translation — there can be no denying its intense urgency and power.
Anselm was here on ground which he understood.
He brushed aside all arguments of law, and concentrated on what was to him the central issue.
He did not care whether or not Gunhilda had ever made her profession: she had worn the habit; she had seemed to understand what Anselm had said about the religious life.
To turn back now from the monastic life, however it had been approached, was to turn back to a world of uncertainty and to face a future in which only damnation was assured.
Every step away from the cloister was a step further from salvation — bad enough in any case, worst of all when it meant a turning from the spiritual embrace of Christ to an impure love.
Anselm never felt as strongly on any political question as he did on this.
We know no more than his two letters tell us.
The second of the two brothers also died soon after the events I have described, and it is probable that Gunhilda then returned to Wilton, for she was later remembered there with honour.
Certainly by 1100 the whole episode had fallen into almost complete oblivion.
Only the two letters of Anselm remain as the record of an extraordinary conflict between contradictory passions, in their own way as poignant as those of Abelard and Heloise twenty years later.
These problems of monastic life and discipline, his two works on theology, the daily routine of monastic offices, together with ecclesiastical problems of all kinds on which his advice or judgement was required, were probably his main occupations during these years.
But they had no place in public life, and we hear nothing about them in the Historia Novorum , which is concerned with events to which we must now turn.
PROBLEMS OF DIVIDED OBEDIENCE
Anselm's early years as archbishop present two features of special note.
First, with regard to ecclesiastical policy, he shows no sign of familiarity with, or sympathy for, two of the most important aspects of Hildebrandine reform.
These may very briefly be described as the exclusion of lay influence from the Church at all levels from papal elections down to the investiture of bishops and the ownership of churches, and the centralization of government by frequent papal councils and synods, and by the appointment of papal legates with superior jurisdiction over wide areas.
Second, he shows an intense dislike of his new position, and a continuing desire  to resign.
As he wrote to Eulalia, abbess of Shaftesbury: ‘I am so harassed in the archbishopric that if it were possible to do so without guilt, I would rather die than continue in it’.
There is every reason to think that he meant this quite literally.
The main source of his harassment was that, instead of the simple and dedicated obedience which he had paid to his monastic vows for over thirty years, he now had a confusion of claims on his attention.
He had too many disputes on his hands which never produced the results that he desired.
He continued to hope that he and the king could work together and, strangely enough, he seems to have had a great deal of personal sympathy with the king.
But new barriers were built up at every step, so he continued to seek an opportunity to resign, if this could be done without disobedience to the will of God.
Should this prove to be impossible, he had three aims: to complete in due order the steps necessary for becoming archbishop, to maintain undiminished the possessions and privileges of his church, and to hold a Council for the correction of discipline in the Church.
All these aims raised a variety of difficulties.
Anselm met them as best he could as they arose, and we may trace them step by step, less to recall the stages in an archbishop's promotion, than to understand the state of mind in which Anselm progressed from one stage to the next.
Problems in becoming an archbishop
The necessary steps in becoming archbishop, after election and investiture, were homage, enthronement, consecration, and the receipt of the pallium from the pope.
Election and investiture had been accomplished in a confused way when the king nominated him and offered him the pastoral staff, round which the bishops pressed Anselm's resisting fingers.
This had happened at what was thought to be the king's deathbed on 6 March 1093.
The day left Anselm in possession of the pastoral staff, but there was still a long way to go before he was a fully consecrated archbishop.
Some would have said that he had not taken even the first step, since he had been invested irregularly with his pastoral staff by the king.
But he knew nothing about Gregory VII's comprehensive decree of 1078 against lay investiture.
In any case, Eadmer could claim that since it was the  bishops who had clasped his fingers round the staff, Anselm had not received investiture from the king.
This problem, however, did not arise: knowing nothing about the decree, he continued throughout Rufus's reign to consecrate bishops who had received investiture from the king.
Of course, on any theory, the ceremony by which he had been invested conformed to no canonical rules of election or investiture, and it is astonishing — or rather, it would be astonishing in anyone with even a rudimentary knowledge of Canon Law — that among all his other objections, Anselm never mentioned the defective procedure as a reason for refusing the office.
This itself is suggestive of his lack of interest in the formal rules of Canon Law: he thought of the essence, not the externals.
His reasons for wishing to avoid becoming archbishop were based, not on ceremonies whether correct or incorrect, still less on his own desires, strong though these were against acceptance.
His reasons were all based on his search for Rectitudo in mind and will, as he had sought it for the past thirty years.
Essentially, this meant maintaining his own personal renunciation of the world, cultivating the presence of God in meditation and prayer, and maintaining that liberty which is found only in rectitude.
He had formulated these principles on several occasions in the past, not least when monks had consulted him about accepting ecclesiastical promotion.
Although the rectitude which he sought was personal rather than public, this did not mean that public rectitude, which had required that the vacancy at Canterbury should be filled as soon as possible, was excluded from consideration.
But such rectitude could only come when the inner disposition was right.
What is essential in considering all these matters is to see beyond the weeping, struggling figure to the austere searcher who had devoted his life to reaching precise definitions of Truth, Rectitude and Justice, and to living accordingly.
He did not abandon the results of these strenuous efforts under the stress of emotion: through all the superficial symptoms of strong feeling, he was still seeking to follow the principle of life to which he was committed by his monastic vows.
His desire for monastic peace, his obligations to Bec, his fear  of the world, were all strong; but his intellectually formulated principles were stronger.
So, to revert to the events of 6 March 1093, his first step was to seek the approval of those to whom he was in varying ways subject as abbot of Bec — the archbishop of Rouen, the duke of Normandy, and the monks of Bec.
Only the last demurred, and rightly or wrongly Anselm overrode the objectors, told the monks of Bec to elect as abbot the man whom he believed to be most fitted, and finally accepted the archbishopric.
It only remained for him to make his departure from Bec as acceptable as possible to the monks and to himself, and to face the consequences.
It may easily be objected that if he had wished to avoid becoming archbishop he had simply to refuse.
This of course is true.
But it will be remembered that in Anselm's system only justice makes free, and in this case, justice meant giving Canterbury an archbishop.
If Anselm had refused, the chances of another appointment being made in the foreseeable future were remote.
But if he accepted, and then resigned the archbishopric into the hands of the pope, as he continued to wish to do, the responsibility for a new appointment would lie with the pope, and Anselm would ‘justly’ be free from a position which he hated.
This is what he more than once declared to be his aim.
In the end, since the pope refused to free him, he had no alternative but to continue in office.
He had been forced to make the move ‘from the safe haven of the monastery to the tumultuous and wreck-strewn storms of the world’, against which he had so often cautioned others; and there was no release in sight.
Anselm was now ready for the remaining stages of his promotion: in September he did homage to the king and was invested with the lands of the archbishopric; on 25 September he was enthroned at Canterbury, and on 4 December 1093 he was consecrated at Canterbury.
With regard to homage, it will suffice to say that there was as yet no papal decree against the homage of ecclesiastics to laymen; and Anselm certainly thought that there was no objection in principle.
After the papal decree of 1099, which will be discussed in the next chapter, Eadmer tried to suppress the fact of Anselm's homage.
But the evidence is incontrovertible, and Anselm based his later opposition to homage entirely on the decree of 1099.
Apart from this decree, his view of Church government was strongly in favour of a working partnership between the king and the archbishop.
With regard to his consecration, the only controversial question which it raised concerned his relationship with the archbishop of York who consecrated him, and this will be discussed below in the context of the Primacy.
Problems in choosing a pope
Among several other flaws in Anselm's election and investiture, there was one which neither Anselm nor anyone else mentioned at the time, but was later to be held against him by the papal legate: on a strict view, his election -in addition to all its other legal defects — had been schismatic, since the king and all the others who took part, with the sole exception of Anselm himself, were schismatics, for they had not recognized Urban II as the legitimate pope although he had now been pope for five years.
Moreover, apart from this defect, the election could not be regarded as complete until he had received his pallium from the pope, and he would be liable to deposition unless he received it within a year of his consecration.
But neither the king nor the bishops of England had recognized either of the rival candidates to the papacy.
Until this happened, Anselm could not receive his pallium, and the legal limit for its reception would expire in December 1094.
It did in fact run out, and still Anselm had not received the pallium which would give him full authority as archbishop.
The preliminary problem was that neither William I nor William Rufus had recognized any pope since the death of Gregory VII in 1085, and it was still doubtful whether England would follow Germany in recognizing Clement III, or France in recognizing Urban II.
Anselm himself, as abbot of Bec, along with the rest of the kingdom of France, had already recognized Urban II, and he would not change his obedience.
Nevertheless, he did not deny that so far as the kingdom of England was concerned, the decision between the two rivals lay with the king.
There was a right decision and a wrong decision, but it was for the king to make it, and if the wrong one were made Anselm would leave the kingdom.
Rufus delayed his decision, but there was never any chance that he would recognize Clement III.
The reason for this lay not in any assessment of the rival claims, but in his unwavering determination to bring Normandy under his rule.
It would have been a very unnecessary aggravation of his difficulties to have two different mutually excommunicated popes in lands which he intended to unite once more.
To drive the archbishop into exile for having recognized a pope accepted by all Normandy would have been an act of political folly.
This being so, the famous final and belated discussion of the problem at Rockingham in February 1095 was largely a display of shadow-boxing.
For various reasons the king would have preferred to keep his hands free, but as soon as he realized that Anselm would not move from his position and might leave the country, he decided to recognize Urban II.
He acted with his usual promptitude, and a papal legate had arrived in England with the pallium before Anselm even knew of the king's decision.
Not for the last time, he discovered, as some of his successors were later to discover, that king and pope could easily combine to ignore the archbishop.
So the pallium had arrived.
But this only brought new difficulties.
The legate, Walter Cardinal-Archbishop of Albano, who brought the pallium, was an eminent man at the papal court, and he clearly had doubts about Anselm's reliability.
For one thing, he made it a reproach that Anselm's ‘election’ had been the work of schismatics — a charge which Anselm coldly denied.
More important, the legate clearly hoped to use the occasion to bring England under closer papal control.
He suggested that he and Anselm should meet to confer about the measures needed to restore discipline in the English Church.
Anselm told him, in only formally polite language, that he knew as well as the legate what needed to be done.
Moreover — and this must indeed have given the legate food for reflection — Anselm said he was too busy with the defence of the part of the country which the king had committed to his care, to have a meeting with the legate.
To make things still worse, he added that it would in any case be quite useless for them to make plans without the king's approval, for nothing could be achieved without his collaboration.
He could scarcely have packed into a single letter more matter offensive to the ideals of the reformed papacy.
Problems in defending the Canterbury lands
On Sunday 27 May 1095 Anselm received the pallium from the papal legate at Canterbury.
Now at last, in addition to his own church and diocese, he was entitled to rule his province, which (as he believed) included the whole area of the British Isles.
For the past two years, although he lacked the metropolitan powers of an archbishop, he had been fully responsible for maintaining the possessions and privileges of Christ Church, Canterbury.
The question of his metropolitan privileges will require separate discussion, for they cast a long shadow over the whole of Anselm's life as archbishop.
But immediately, the burden of the territorial and other material possessions of his church weighed upon him in a way that had never been evident at Bec under the relaxed rule of Duke Robert of Normandy.
In England, everything was different.
Already in 1093 and 1094, before he received the pallium, he had had two acrimonious disputes about the services which he owed the king as one of the greatest territorial magnates of the kingdom, and it was a third territorial dispute in 1097 which finally made him resolve to leave England.
We shall not have his own view of his archiepiscopal obligations in proper perspective unless we realize that local territorial disputes were much more likely to precipitate a final crisis than any ecclesiastical issue.
Why was this?
Mainly because the defence of the territorial possessions of each individual church presented the clearest and most immediate duty of its head.
As archbishop, Anselm had many duties connected with the discipline, orthodoxy, organization, and peace of his whole diocese and province, and more broadly for the whole alter orbis of Britain.
He was intensely aware of the importance of these ecclesiastical duties, and he carried out consecrations, and gave advice or judgements on discipline as necessary.
On the all-important matter of holding a Council he was prepared to wait on the king's convenience for a long time: he was never one to underestimate the needs of secular government.
But the possessions of the church of Canterbury were a different matter.
They could be lost for ever by a single failure of vigilance.
Truth, justice, charity itself demanded the rigorous safeguarding of property dedicated to God and the saints.
Anselm had no doubts about this.
He had had similar, though  slighter, worries at Bec, not least during his first year as abbot, when he found himself immersed in lawsuits against those who claimed lands and tithes belonging to Bec for which no title deeds could be found.
At that time he had been able to write to Lanfranc to ask if he remembered anything about these transactions.
But now he was on his own, without a friend at court.
If he did not move promptly on all matters affecting the lands, dues, and privileges of his church, there was no Lanfranc to come to his aid.
The first crisis over the possessions of the church of Canterbury had occurred in August 1093.
At this date the king demanded that the archbishop should confirm some military tenancies which he had created on the archbishop's lands during the vacancy.
Probably Anselm would have been well advised to comply.
It is true that the archbishop's lands were already overstocked with knights in relation to the military service due from them.
But he had a very large estate, and in the administration of it he needed the support of the king and his courts.
Anselm was to learn too late that a landowner had more to fear from grasping tenants beneath him than from the king above.
But Anselm did not think in these terms.
He had a deeply rooted fear of being personally responsible for any diminution at all in the lands committed to his care.
As always, his thought was clear and decisive:
The argument was impeccable.
Nothing could be willingly given up, and nothing once given up could be expected to be restored.
The king had to acquiesce.
He did not even, as Anselm hoped, refuse to accept his homage.
Rufus's masterful power had, in practice, very severe limitations: but he did not forget an injury.
The next crisis followed almost immediately, and once more Anselm took a similarly personal view of his responsibilities.
In 1094 the king was preparing for war in Normandy, and he required an ‘aid’ from his tenants-in-chief.
It was an unjust war if ever there was one; but it is probably true to say that no one attempted to  discriminate morally between the wars of secular lords at this period unless they affected the interests of the Church.
Certainly Anselm was not troubled by doubts about Rufus's motives.
But he was troubled about a possible imputation of simony if he, as a very recently appointed prelate, paid money to the king.
In the event he made an offer of £500.
This was enough to show that he did not object to the aid in principle; but it was not enough to satisfy the king, who refused his offer and demanded £1000.
Anselm, glad to escape from the secular snares into a world he understood, refused the king's demand and gave his proffered £500 to the poor.
This was charity on a princely scale, but politically it further exasperated the king, who would rather have taken £500 with ill-will than nothing at all.
When the king next had to raise money for the duchy of Normandy in 1096, he seems to have been satisfied with Anselm's offer: at least we hear no complaint.
But this time it was the monks of Canterbury who were offended, for Anselm took their plate to help him pay.
He paid compensation to the monks by giving them ten years' revenue from an archiepiscopal estate worth £30 a year.
This was quite a good bargain for the monks, but it did not silence all their criticisms.
It was impossible to please everybody, but Anselm's conduct in these affairs must be judged to have caused the greatest amount of dissatisfaction to the largest number of people.
Nevertheless, it must also be said that the new revenue at the monks' disposal served to hasten the building of the new choir of the cathedral, which (as we shall see) was one of the major achievements of Anselm's archiepiscopate.
Problems in holding an ecclesiastical council
Leaving aside for the moment a final conflict over the estates of Canterbury, we may turn to Anselm's efforts to hold a council for the reform of morals and discipline throughout the land.
He had told the legate in 1095 that he knew very well what needed to be done, but that he had no power to do what was necessary without the king's aid and consent.
This was particularly true of the first essential step of holding a council.
He had very early broached the subject to the king.
Eadmer reports him in February 1094 as addressing the king in these terms:
There is independent evidence in Anselm's letters that these reported words correctly represent his idea of the relations between king and archbishop.
In this he was only following in Lanfranc's footsteps, and it is clear that he expected the king to exercise more authority in ecclesiastical affairs than the more ‘advanced’ ecclesiastical theorists of his time thought tolerable.
In the same vein he wrote to the papal legate in 1095:
We shall see that in writing this letter Anselm was concerned to safeguard the privileges of Canterbury against the claims of legatine authority; but he was also inspired by a traditional respect for royal authority, and the common-sense view that in fact nothing could be accomplished without help from the king and his officials.
In 1095, Anselm had not yet given up hope of working amicably with the king.
He was prepared to wait a long time to gain the king's good will, and meanwhile to support the king in his enterprises.
We have seen that he personally undertook the defences of the south coast when the king campaigned in the North, and that he wrote in warm praise of the king's energy and practical wisdom, and ordered prayers for his protection against the malice of evil men who hated the king s good qualities.
Clearly he was not an opponent of royal authority, or of secular policies, or of the warlike activities that these policies required, or even of Rufus himself.
Despite his severe view of the temptations of the world, his spirituality allowed a very large place for the physical world and for the rights of those to whom the administration of this world had been committed.
It was against self-will and worldly desires that he set his face; and these could only be overcome by personal conversion.
They could not be overcome by altering the organization of the world.
That seems to have been his view in his first years as archbishop.
Whether, and how far, he changed in his later years must be examined in the next chapter.
Meanwhile, it will suffice to say that the next two years, from 1095 to 1097, were passed in peace and frustration.
We know almost nothing of Anselm's activity during this period except that he consecrated two Irish and two English bishops.
Only a handful of letters for these years have been preserved; fewer than for any similar period of his later life.
The vacant abbacies remained vacant, and he could do nothing about them.
He could hold no Council.
The reason given by the king was the disturbed state of the kingdom which prevented his attending to ecclesiastical business.
Anselm acquiesced in this explanation and waited for peace, but then, long after it had been apparent to others, it dawned on him that he must either do the job or give it up — preferably, so far as he was concerned, the latter.
But first, he needed the advice of his only ecclesiastical superior, the pope.
Problems in consulting the pope
According to Eadmer, it was a small incident which opened Anselm's eyes to the true state of affairs, and made him realize that the king would in no circumstances allow him to take any action beyond the routine of his episcopal duties.
Anselm had waited patiently — too patiently perhaps — for the king to complete his complicated military operations in northern England, in Wales, in Normandy, and finally in the summer of 1097 in Wales again.
At the end of this campaign it looked at last as if the time of peace had come, when the Council for which Anselm had been pressing for the past four years could be held with royal support.
But instead of giving his long-delayed consent, the king raised a new complaint about the quality of the knights Anselm had sent on the recent Welsh expedition.
It was this that gave Anselm the hint that peace would not bring him freedom to exercise his episcopal functions.
Anselm's conclusion was undoubtedly correct.
Eadmer noticed Anselm's habit of trusting men long after others had seen their deceptions: but then at last he would recognize them for what they were.
Even now, his reaction was very moderate.
He did not threaten or storm.
He simply asked permission to visit the pope to consult him about his troubles.
The unexpectedness of this request seems to have taken the king by surprise.
There was some reason for his bewilderment, for Anselm does not seem to have desired or expected any practical result from this consultation except a possible release from his  archbishopric.
Once more, his lack of desire, his lack of policy in any ordinary sense of the word threw the king's counsels into confusion.
But Anselm's request, like everything else in his life, was quite simple and direct: he needed advice from his only ecclesiastical superior.
It was also entirely uncompromising.
Having seen what he needed, nothing on earth would stop him until he got it.
As a matter of course, the king refused permission; Anselm acquiesced, but he went on asking:
To keep asking is not a very refined form of political action, but it is very wearing.
Rufus was never to see Anselm again without the question being raised.
In the end the reiteration became intolerable, and in October 1097 he let him go.
He could, he thought, safely do so: Anselm was not an active enemy, and even if he had been, he could scarcely harm him now.
Normandy was safely under his control until Duke Robert's return from the Crusade, should he ever return.
Anselm's departure contributed nothing to the solution of his own problems; it only benefited the royal treasury, to which the archiepiscopal revenues were now added.
To Anselm it meant freedom from an intolerable position.
Reviewing the contents of these letters, the reader will be prompted to exclaim: What a miscellany of fragments without a theme!
And yet, on a mature view, do not all these fragments suggest the pressures of real life?
And through them all does there not run a consistency of effort to strengthen the ties of monastic life, to bring back those in error, to wait patiently for better times, while occupying his time with theological work, with preaching and counselling the erring, for whom he displays an affectionate concern — even for the king.
What is lacking, and what some at least of Anselm's contemporaries would have thought highly blameworthy, is the complete absence of awareness of the Hildebrandine programme of the liberty of the Church — that is to say, its freedom from lay interference under a centralized papal authority.
It is true that right at the end, in October 1097, when Anselm was on the point of leaving England, Eadmer reports him as saying to the Canterbury monks: ‘I go willingly, trusting in God's mercy that my journey will do something for the liberty of the Church in future  times.’
This is the first appearance of the phrase libertas ecclesiae in any written or reported words of Anselm.
Its appearance in Anselm's later letters will require further discussion when we come to the next phase in Anselm's life.
For the present, it must suffice to say that Eadmer's report brings into Rufus's reign a theme which is wholly lacking in Anselm's letters, and we must ask whether Eadmer is not, here as elsewhere, reading back into Rufus's reign the lessons which he and Anselm were to learn in the course of their joint exile.
THE LIBERTY OF THE CHURCH
TWO VIEWS OF LIBERTY
As we have seen, during the years from about 1080 to 1095, Anselm had given much thought to the problem of liberty, and had reached a definition of free will which left no room for that freedom of choice which is commonly regarded as its essential feature.
He defined freedom of the will as the power of making, only and always, the right choice in accordance with the will of God.
The foundation of this freedom is a loving acceptance of the creature's limitations within the created universe.
But while Anselm was engaged in these researches, another definition of liberty was emerging, chiefly in the circle of Gregory VII, which was destined to have growing influence during the next hundred years and beyond.
This definition was summed up in the formula libertas ecclesiae , by which was understood the independence of the Church from all lay interference in ecclesiastical appointments, in the exercise of the Church's spiritual functions, in the administration of its temporal rights and properties, and in the immunity of clerical persons from secular jurisdiction.
These contrasting forms of liberty of the individual will and the corporate body, which we may call Anselmian and Gregorian, were of course not mutually exclusive.
Nevertheless, they belonged to two different modes of thought.
The Anselmian concept of liberty was concerned with the willing subordination of the individual to God; the Gregorian concept of liberty was concerned with giving a centrally organized clerical Church complete independence from secular control under papal direction.
Its chief purpose was to ensure corporate independence for the entire ecclesiastical organization in relation to all other social organizations, such as the Empire, and all the kingdoms, baronies, fiefs, and urban communities, which were beginning to proliferate in western Europe.
Understood in this sense,libertas ecclesiae expressed a concept which could be, and was, in varying degrees adopted by the other  groups within the whole complex of social organizations.
Indeed, the future of European liberty is largely a development of this concept of liberty applied to many kinds of corporate body.
For our present purpose.
however, it will suffice to note that this organizational liberty was being developed by Gregory VII and his most active supporters at the same time as Anselm, in relative isolation from ecclesiastical politics during his time at Bec, was developing his own contrasting other-worldly view of the real nature of individual liberty.
The most enthusiastic advocate of ‘Gregorian’ liberty during these years was Hugh, bishop of Die and later archbishop of Lyons, whom Anselm first met on his way to Rome in 1097, and with whom he spent the last eighteen months of his exile from May 1099 to August 1100.
Before this visit, Anselm shows no signs of being influenced by the Gregorian concept of the libertas ecclesiae ; after his visit, he both used the phrase and supported the policy which the phrase summed up — at least to some extent.
We have, therefore, a problem on our hands.
Before his exile, Anselm's whole emphasis was on a strict adherence to that other-worldly freedom which comes from subjecting all individual desires to the eternal order of the divine plan.
In political matters, he had acquiesced in the practices which he found established in England, notably antagonistic though they were to the libertas ecclesiae in the Gregorian sense of this phrase.
Then, during his three years in exile he came for the first time into close contact with the main exponents of the Gregorian ideal, and we must ask how far and in what circumstances he adopted the phraseology of the Gregorian reformers; then, whether he adopted the theoretical structure which their favourite phrase libertas ecclesiae expressed, or adopted the phrase for use only in exceptional circumstances and for special reasons.
It may be said at once that these questions cannot be answered with complete certainty.
There remains, and probably will always remain, an area of ambiguity, which itself is disturbing in someone of Anselm's normal lucidity and precision.
But so far as an answer can be found, it must be sought in the influences to which he was exposed during his exile.
THE FRUITS OF EXILE
Anselm left England in October 1097 and reached Cluny in time for Christmas.
While he was there, he got an invitation from  Archbishop Hugh to go to Lyons, and from Lyons he wrote to the pope explaining his reasons for leaving England.
In this letter, he briefly recorded Rufus's harassments of the lands and knights of Canterbury, his overturning of all good customs, and the absolute impossibility which he himself had found of doing anything useful for the Church, concluding with this plea:
In this letter, we hear only of the liberty of his soul and what his soul's health required, which was nothing else than being freed from his office as archbishop.
On receiving this letter, the pope summoned Anselm to Rome.
He would have preferred to stay at Lyons, but he set out at once in mid-March, and arrived in Rome about the end of April 1098.
Here he learnt that the pope would not release him from the archbishopric, but wished him to expound the Latin doctrine of the Procession of the Holy Spirit at a meeting with representatives of the Greek Church at Bari in October.
Thereupon, Anselm went off to spend the summer months in the hill village of Liberi above Capua, and here he found a renewed peace of mind and spirit which he had not known since his days as prior of Bec.
He put the finishing touches to his long-interrupted Cur Deus Homo , and he prepared his defence of the Latin doctrine of the Procession of the Holy Spirit.
At the request of the inhabitants, he also opened up a well from which they draw water to this day, and his name is still commemorated in the village.
He was in his element.
Meanwhile the affairs of the English Church stood still.
At the Council of Bari in October 1098, Anselm delivered the main speech, and — according to Eadmer — Urban II would have excommunicated the king at the Council, but Anselm pleaded for him.
Anselm then returned to Rome with the pope and stayed with  him until Easter 1099, when he took part in another Council.
At this Council, on the last day and perhaps without premeditation, Urban pronounced two anathemas which were to have a delayed but decisive influence on Anselm's later years.
At the time, Anselm seems not to have been aware of the importance of the words which he heard, for he left Rome the next day without further discussion and returned to Lyons.
Here, as at Liberi, he was happy, and we hear nothing of any initiative on his part to bring his exile to an end or to settle the issue — chiefly his frustrated desire to hold a council — which had precipitated his exile.
He preached, visited Cluny, went to Vienne, and in both places he had talks with the abbot or archbishop, of which records have survived.
He was indefatigable in confirming all who came to him as he moved around the countryside, and in his moments of leisure he wrote the longest of his Meditations on the theme of Cur Deus Homo , and his De Conceptu Virginali as a sequel to this work.
But what were his thoughts about his duties as archbishop?
Did his view of these duties change?
To answer these questions, we must consider first the papal anathemas at the Easter Council of 1099, and then the character of his host at Lyons, Archbishop Hugh.
The anathemas of 1099
Eadmer has left an exceptionally full account of the Easter Council at St Peter's in April 1099; and for reasons which will become apparent later, this was his last full-scale account of any great event in Anselm's life.
He used the occasion to display to the full his talent for description.
He describes how Anselm had returned with the pope from the Council of Bari, and had stayed with him until the end of April.
Then he gives a detailed description of the great Council in St Peter's with which Anselm's visit ended.
The Council, as Eadmer describes it, was arranged round the tomb of St Peter, with Urban II and the cardinals (among whom Anselm had been placed in a seat of honour) sitting in the apse behind the altar, and the remainder of the Council spread out in front of them.
It seems that, despite the Council, pilgrims continued to come and go to the tomb of St Peter, and this was not irrelevant, for the noise and disturbance prevented many from hearing what was said.
This led the pope to commission the bishop of Lucca, who was endowed with a stentorian voice, to read out the decrees of the Council.
This he did.
But he was evidently a man of  powerful passions, and in the middle of his reading he broke out into an angry protest at the Council's acquiescence in secular tyrannies in general, and at the lack of action in the case of Anselm in particular .
He went on at great length on this subject, banging his pastoral staff on the floor and haranguing the assembly until the pope cried ‘Enough’, and the reading of the decrees was resumed.
But before he finished, the bishop of Lucca — to Anselm's intense surprise — once more warned the pope that God would not forgive him if he forgot Anselm.
Various matters of detail were dealt with, and then the pope rose to pronounce his final excommunications.
Perhaps he had been moved by the bishop of Lucca's protest, for among these anathemas he included two which seem not to have been discussed, but which were relevant to his protest.
The first declared excommunicate all laymen who gave, and all clergy who received, lay investiture of churches or ecclesiastical offices, and any bishop who consecrated a clerk who had been thus invested.
The second excommunicated all clergy who did homage to laymen for ecclesiastical possessions, as well as those who associated with them afterwards.
The pope laid special and dramatic emphasis on the second of these anathemas, saying that it was intolerable that hands which touched the flesh of Christ in the Eucharist, should suffer the indignity and contamination of being subordinated to hands made bloody by daily violence and bloodshed.
On this note the Council broke up, and Anselm left Rome the next day to return to Lyons.
The abruptness of this conclusion to the proceedings suggests a way of doing business which must seem strange to any modern mind.
Consider the circumstances: the pope had ended the Council with two final anathemas which were intimately connected with Anselm's situation.
One of these anathemas was already fairly old: Gregory VII had already condemned lay investiture of clergy to spiritual offices in 1078.
Anselm had known nothing about it when he became archbishop, and still apparently knew nothing about it when he left England in 1097.
It seems a reasonable conjecture that, if he had known about the decree, he would have acted on it, or at least given reasons for not acting on it.
But it must not be thought that papal conciliar decrees which seem so clear-cut to the modern scholar, who sees them in all  the clarity of the printed page, had a similar force and clarity for contemporaries.
It is clear, for instance, that the best canonist of northern Europe, Bishop Ivo of Chartres, knew the decree, yet thought that it was open to a broad tolerance in practice.
These considerations will suffice to save Anselm from the charge of contumacious neglect of recent papal policy.
But they will not save him from the charge of indifference to ecclesiastical politics.
After hearing a terrible denunciation of practices in which he had willingly taken part in the past, we might have expected that he would have wished to have further clarifications before he left Rome, or that some plan of action would have been agreed.
But not at all.
Without time for more discussion, Anselm simply left Rome the next day, to spend the next fifteen months in total inactivity so far as his archbishopric was concerned.
Nor is the subject referred to again until nearly two years later, when he surprised everyone by suddenly disclosing what he had heard at the Council and proposed to carry out fully in future.
From this whole picture of ignorance and inactivity, and of continuing dissent even where there was knowledge, we can only conclude that legislative acts were commonly accepted, even by those responsible for them, as expressions of hope or at best long-term intention, rather than as strictly enforceable legislative acts.
Indeed, as we shall see, Gregory VII rebuked his too active agent Hugh, now archbishop of Lyons, for his officious energy in harrying the king of England to carry out papal decrees, without regard to the king's virtues which earned him a claim to forbearance.
Finally, there is a third feature of these two anathemas of 1099, which needs to be mentioned: they have a semblance of coherence which is illusory.
The anti-investiture decree, however great its symbolic importance, did little to diminish the power of lay rulers over ecclesiastical appointments.
Lay investiture was symbolically objectionable as representing the quasi-sacerdotal position which had long been claimed by kings and emperors.
But this quasi-sacerdotal character was no longer an important aid to the power of  secular rulers.
Everyone agreed that investiture by lay rulers conferred no spiritual power: it did no more than put a prelate in possession of the rights, lands, and secular dignities of his new office.
The newly elected prelate still needed ecclesiastical consecration before he could exercise his pastoral functions.
In these circumstances, Gregory's decree against lay investiture could be left to make its way forward by the momentum of events.
But the prohibition of homage by ecclesiastical tenants to lay rulers was quite another matter.
Homage was not concerned with spiritual functions: it was concerned only with the tenure of land, and the act of homage was one of the main foundations of social organization.
The abrupt cessation of homage without some alternative ceremony would have divided a kingdom into two distinct parts: those parts held by laymen, for which homage was owed to the king, and those parts held by clergy, for which homage was forbidden.
This would have excluded the whole ecclesiastical section of landholding society from the ordinary complex of feudal relationships, and in doing this, it would have threatened the cohesion of a kingdom in a way that no earlier reforming decree had done.
No doubt there had long been extreme Gregorians who would have liked to abolish the homage of ecclesiastical landholders for ecclesiastical lands.
But such enthusiasts were not numerous, and there were not many of them in the papal Curia.
It soon became clear that almost everyone in the Curia was in favour of making a distinction between investiture and homage, forbidding that which no one strongly supported, and gradually abandoning that to which almost no one strongly objected.
As we shall find, this distinction lies at the root of Anselm's movements in his last years as archbishop.
It was a distinction which he found extremely disturbing, not because of its political consequences, but because the introduction of such a distinction cut at the root of his ideal of obedience.
We shall not understand Anselm's last years unless his fundamentally unpolitical attitude to his duties is borne in mind.
Hitherto, he himself had been involved without protest in both the ‘intolerable’ evils condemned by the pope in his presence in 1099.
He had himself — however ambiguously — received investiture with his archbishopric from the king, and he had certainly consecrated bishops who had been thus invested.
He had also done homage for  his ecclesiastical lands.
But after hearing their condemnation in 1099 he conformed rigidly to both parts of the condemnation, and nowhere expressed an opinion about their substance.
He never discussed their principle.
Before 1099 he had made no difficulty about acting in a contrary sense.
Afterwards, he treated both prohibitions as absolute commands, leaving no room for discussion or negotiation: he embarrassed his friends, and even the pope, by the stiffness of his obedience.
When the pope finally retreated, Anselm saw a possible injustice in forcing others to a similar retreat.
The situation illustrates Anselm's indifference to the compromises of practical affairs.
Obedience to lawful authority and to religious vows had the highest place in his whole system of theology and in his personal, as well as corporate, religion.
First and last he sought only the strictest fidelity to justice, rectitude and truth.
This led him to insist that those who had, however tenuously, dedicated their lives to God in religious vows were bound by them beyond recall.
This was a principle based on unshakeable authority.
He had no such rigid views about any matters of political policy.
But when the word was spoken by one who had the authority to speak, and especially when spoken in his presence and with his implied assent, he obeyed without discussion or reservation.
Unlike almost everyone in the papal Curia, unlike the pope himself, he did not understand the need for compromise; he saw no grounds for withdrawal or discussion; he took pleasure in obedience.
At this point, we return to Anselm's definition of liberty: its characteristic expression is obedience to the will of God, and, by extension, to God's representative on earth.
In this sense, Anselm is an extreme papalist; but, like many other extreme papalists, he draws unwelcome boundaries when he sees papal initiatives overstepping boundaries of God's will — for instance, in overruling local rights, which have a heavenly sanction as gifts to the saints.
This double obedience needs to be remembered throughout these years, for a double obedience is never free from the possibility of conflict.
With this warning note, we return to Anselm's association with Archbishop Hugh of Lyons, the chief agent of the Gregorian policy of Libertas Ecclesiae .
The influence of Hugh, archbishop of Lyons
It is just a hundred years since Felix Liebermann first propounded the theory that Anselm's friendship with Archbishop Hugh of Lyons brought a new element into his life.
It was not a friendship of the kind that had been so frequent in Anselm's early life.
Quite the opposite, it was an association of two men wholly different in character and outlook, brought together by the circumstances of Anselm's exile.
For a long time, I was inclined to think that the contrast was too great for any important exchange of ideas, and that Liebermann's suggestion, despite its attraction, could not be taken very seriously.
But a closer examination has convinced me that, alien though Hugh's thought was to the main stream of Anselm's, an influence of some importance can be traced.
Anselm had known Hugh as papal legate in France when he was abbot of Bec, but his close association with him came at a moment when he was in a very perplexing situation.
He had just left the Council at which the new decrees had been pronounced.
He was conscientiously obliged to obey them, despite his lack of sympathy with, or knowledge of, the principle behind them.
Hugh was the most forceful advocate of the principle which the new papal decree embodied.
What Anselm needed was not an intimate friendship, but an understanding of an external aim which he was bound to support.
This is precisely what Hugh could provide, and we must examine both the contribution he could make, and the evidence for his having made it.
By his nature, Hugh was one of those able, intensely loyal, dedicated men whom great movements are apt to attract.
He had implicit trust in the righteousness of the ‘movement’, and was eager to carry out the orders of its leader.
As papal legate in France during the last quarter of the eleventh century, he was the most energetic agent of the new policy of active centralized papal control of the Church.
It had been one of Gregory's first acts as pope to invest and consecrate him as bishop of Die, and to follow this up with a letter to the count of Die which contains a first draft of his later decree prohibiting the investiture of bishops by secular rulers.
In an important sense, Hugh may almost be looked on as the instigator of the Investiture decree of 1078, for he had gone to Rome for his episcopal consecration four years earlier in order to avoid contact with a secular ruler, who claimed the right both to nominate and to invest his nominee in his episcopal office.
Hugh, therefore, had been an initiator of the new policy even before its official promulgation.
Then, as papal legate during the years when Anselm was abbot of Bec, he had shown endless energy storming through France on visitations, and sending offenders scurrying to Rome.
Anselm himself, together with the other abbots of Normandy, had earned one of Hugh's censures: in 1081, Hugh had summoned all the bishops and abbots of Normandy to a council at Saintes in Aquitaine.
It was a vexatious summons, and none of them turned up.
By way of retaliation, Hugh threatened them all with deposition, and received a severe rebuke from Gregory VII for his pains.
Not for the first time, the legate had shown more enthusiasm for papal power than the pope.
The battle-cry of Hugh, probably borrowed from Gregory VII's letters and applied with the zeal of an enthusiast, was Libertas Ecclesiae .
It was a phrase with many shades of meaning, but essentially in these years it came to refer to that freedom from lay intervention in ecclesiastical appointments and operations which it was Hugh's special mission to promote.
At about the same time as he issued his threat of deposition to all the abbots of Normandy, he ordered Anselm to send him his Monologion and Proslogion , perhaps initially for censure, and it may have been through Hugh that Gregory VII knew Anselm's works.
In various ways, therefore, Anselm knew Hugh well enough by 1093 to reckon him among his friends.
But there is no sign that Hugh had any influence on his thought before his long sojourn in Lyons from May 1099 to August 1100.
At the time of his arrival, the prohibitions of lay investiture and clerical homage must have been fresh in Anselm's mind, and it is unimaginable that he should not have discussed the whole question with one of the main agents of the new policy.
We have no means of measuring the extent to which Anselm's outlook may already have been changed by his experiences at the papal Curia, but there are  two points at which we can observe an alteration in his language during and after his stay at Lyons.
The first is this: Urban died in August 1099, and Paschal II was elected in his place.
By the time the news reached Lyons, Anselm would have been Hugh's guest for about six months, and the letter which he wrote to the new pope shows a remarkable advance on the letter he had written to Urban II two years earlier.
He no longer asked to be relieved of his archbishopric.
He still shrank from returning to England, but for a reason quite different from his earlier fear of loss of tranquillity:
In this statement of his position there is a new note.
He seems to fear a compromise with the king, which will require his return under conditions which he would now find unacceptable.
For the first time, too, he writes with some bitterness about the customs of William I and Lanfranc which he had hitherto accepted without demur:
Here too Anselm is adopting some part at least of the vocabulary of the new ecclesiastical theorists in describing the situation which Rufus had taken over from his father.
Seven years earlier Anselm had not seen the king's responsibility for order in the Church as an expression of self-will fighting against Rectitudo .
Like Lanfranc he had welcomed royal co-operation, and had been prepared to wait a long time for it.
All his actions — still more his inactivity — during the first years of his archiepiscopate were based on this idea of partnership.
But he was now, and only now, moving towards the rejection of those mutual accommodations between king and Church, which the Hildebrandine party in the Church had been denouncing for twenty years.
It is hard to resist the conclusion that this new attitude was the result of the company in which the exiles had found themselves  from 1097 to 1100.
How far Anselm had travelled along this road, and how much further he would still travel, are questions to which an answer must be sought in the reign of Henry I. But it is clear that Anselm in exile was beginning to see events, if not through Hildebrandine eyes, at least with shades of Hildebrandine colour.
The second symptom of change following his long residence at Lyons is this: in later years, but never earlier, Anselm occasionally used the phrase Libertas Ecclesiae , of which Hugh and Gregory VII had been the chief advocates for the last twenty years.
Overall he used the phrase in nine letters between 1101 and 1106, always in relation to papal policy: they were written to the pope and cardinals, to Hugh of Lyons, to the count of Flanders, to the king of Jerusalem, to Henry I, and to the prior of Canterbury in describing the condition on which the pope had agreed to give absolution to the count of Meulan.
All of them were either accounts of measures taken by the pope, or — in the letters to the king of Jerusalem and the count of Flanders — recommendations of obedience to the papal policy.
The circumstances in which Anselm used the phrase Libertas Ecclesiae in these nine letters from 1101 to 1106 show that he knew that this phrase embodied the papal policy with which Hugh of Lyons had probably made him familiar, and which he was in duty bound to carry out in the matter of homage and investiture.
But there are no signs that either the phrase or the policy which it expressed ever became part of his own thinking either about the Church as a whole or about his own duties as archbishop.
The phrase represented a manner of thinking about the world very different from that which he had worked out in his own thinking about liberty as perfect obedience to the will of God: an obedience of a will so attuned to the source of order in the universe that there has ceased to be any constraint in obeying.
This was the obedience  which remained the foundation of his spiritual experience and of his admonitions to others.
There was only one  narrow channel in which these two rival concepts of liberty could be reconciled: the two papal decrees about homage and investitures, which he had himself heard, required his own complete obedience.
He seems to have had no interest in the larger plans for the liberty of the Church from lay influence, of which these two matters were only a small instalment.
But on the two matters on which his own personal obedience was required there was no room for compromise.
Corporate liberty, even of the most exalted kind, could never be for Anselm, as it was for Hugh of Lyons, the mainspring of his whole life.
In all the most important affairs of life, liberty remained for him what it had been for the last thirty years, a state of will which could not depart from rectitude.
It was an essential characteristic of the state of will which Anselm called ‘free’ that it was  intransigent in the pursuit of rectitude.
But contrariwise it was an essential part of corporate liberty that it was open to negotiation.
So here a paradoxical situation arose.
The two items in the struggle for the liberty of the Church to which Anselm was committed were for him not negotiable either by himself or the successor of the pope who had declared lay investiture and clerical homage to be irreconcilable with the law of the Church.
If this was the case, there could be no going back.
More realistically, the papal Curia thought that when the full ideal was unattainable, it was better to be content with what could be salvaged than to be left empty-handed: the precise opposite of Anselm, who (as he told Queen Matilda) would as soon be deprived of everything as of a little —‘and I say this not for love of property, but for love of God's justice’.
God's justice — if it was really God's — could not be changed.
For Anselm, this was a stumbling block in any negotiation.
ANSELM, HENRY I, AND THE LIBERTY OF THE CHURCH
The news of Rufus's death reached Anselm about the end of August 1100, while he was paying a visit to the monastery of La Chaise-Dieu in Auvergne.
It was soon followed by a pressing invitation from the new king to return to England, and Anselm set off without delay.
Rufus had been killed on 2 August, whether by conspiracy or accident will never be resolved.
His younger brother Henry had  been crowned king in London on 5 August by the archbishop of York, amid a flurry of promises of liberties and grants of lands designed to stabilize his position.
Anselm reached Dover on 23 September and met Henry I at Salisbury a few days later.
The scene to which he returned was very different from the one he had left.
In the first place, the personality of the new king made it quite certain that any dispute would be conducted in a new way.
Despite the more favourable opinion of chroniclers, Henry's personality makes a more unpleasing impression than that of Rufus.
He was equally licentious and avaricious; and in his early days, at least until family misfortune brought a pronounced strain of piety, his aims were equally secular.
But he had more craft and policy, more capacity to wait, to present a good face to the world, and to advance step by step towards his goal.
He was a man of great political sagacity and formidable resolution.
As a younger son he had learnt to be content with small advantages when greater ones were not to be had; yet he had not lost the capacity for large designs or for rapid action when need arose.
He was too much of a politician ever to outrage religious feelings as Rufus did, but his smooth words concealed a purpose very little different from that of Rufus.
Indeed, in his immediate aim of regaining Normandy in order to retain England he had little choice: his survival depended on it.
At Rome too, the temper of papal government altered under Paschal II's indecisive leadership.
We are only at the beginning of a change which became more conspicuous later.
But already the symptoms which are inseparable from the growth of bureaucracy are there: the importance of the permanent officials grows, rules become more numerous, violent pronouncements rarer, negotiation more frequent, and power is gradually drawn away from the regions to the central government.
Anselm was to experience the effects of these changes: they tended consistently to weaken the position of local bishops and archbishops, especially those superior archbishops who claimed to rule an area larger than their province.
Canterbury was one of the chief sufferers from this development, but at the moment of Anselm's return to England, his position could scarcely have been stronger.
It was very uncertain whether Henry would be able to retain the crown he had seized.
To consolidate his position he had given the baronage their first general charter of liberties, and he had promised generous payments to the count of Flanders for mercenaries.
But his position was extremely weak.
Only a few families  supported him, the rest were either wavering or hostile.
At best, it looked as though a period of baronial bargaining between the two rival candidates, such as we find in Stephen's reign, would develop; but it was more likely that Henry would disappear in the coming struggle.
His elder brother Robert had returned from the Crusade almost at the moment when Anselm reached England: he was newly married, and therefore, for the moment, rich.
He had a European reputation, military experience, and the means for commanding the service of knights.
He alone could at once restore the unity of England and Normandy, which was important for many great families.
Yet Anselm decided against him, and his decision, as was recognized at the time, turned the scale in Henry's favour.
Why did Anselm not support Robert?
One can only suppose that he preferred an effective ruler, however unpleasant, to an ineffective one, however much recommended by his personal qualities.
Why then did Anselm not make his support of Henry conditional on concessions for the liberty of the Church comparable to the charter of liberties which the baronage had obtained?
The only possible answer is that Anselm was not a bargainer chaffering the half-acceptance of one set of principles against the half-acceptance of another.
In worldly terms, he missed his opportunity, for he could almost certainly have obtained Henry's acceptance of the new papal decrees on investiture and homage if he had insisted, for at that moment Henry would have had to agree to anything to get his support.
But he missed his chance, and spent the next seven years trying to catch up on his lost opportunity.
But here we must beware: to speak of lost opportunities and clear objectives introduces an element of political calculation into Anselm's motives which is quite foreign to him.
He did not return to England as the advocate of a new political ideal, but as a man who was himself under a new obligation of obedience.
Anselm misses a political opportunity
Henry knew nothing about the new papal anathemas of which Anselm was the bearer, and he immediately required him first to renew the homage which he had done to Rufus, and then to consecrate his chancellor William Giffard to the bishopric of Winchester, with which he had invested him on his coronation day.
Henry can have expected no difficulty.
On that day he had also invested two new abbots, both sons of important magnates, who as  it happened were friends of Anselm.
To Robert, son of Hugh earl of Chester, he had given the abbey of Bury St Edmunds; and to Richard, son of Richard of Clare, the abbey of Ely.
These were mere fragments of the complex arrangements which he had made in order to secure his throne, and they were entirely necessary to Henry if he was to have sufficient support among those families — perilously few and divided in their allegiance — who alone could ensure his survival as king of England.
Anselm supported Henry, and he did not make his support conditional on Henry's acceptance of the new papal decrees.
For those who credit Anselm with political perspicacity and a clear adhesion to the principles of Hildebrandine organization of the Church, this is very difficult to explain.
He had before him the example of the barons of the kingdom who had taken the opportunity to extract from Henry far-reaching legal and financial concessions at the time of his coronation.
These concessions, sealed and set out in a formal document, were notified to all bishops and sheriffs throughout the kingdom.
They are a model of administrative efficiency in making known the terms on which Henry had received the support which allowed him to be crowned.
Anselm arrived too late to make similar terms for the Church before the king's coronation; but Henry's position was still extremely insecure, and it was only Anselm's support which tipped the balance in his favour.
Besides having this example of baronial efficiency before his eyes, common sense might have suggested the importance of revealing at once the new conditions for ecclesiastical support which he had brought back from the Roman Council of 1099.
Anselm did indeed refuse to renew the homage which he had done to Rufus; he further refused to consecrate the bishops whom Henry had invested with bishoprics.
But he did not, like the barons, insist on the general principle of abandoning all lay investitures and all clerical homage.
He refused only to renew his own homage or to recognize or consecrate bishops whom the king had invested.
From this it would seem that that he had no objection to these practices in principle; his refusal was an act of personal obedience to decrees which he had heard, and by implication promised to obey.
Even this degree of recalcitrance put Henry in a difficulty.
He could not afford to antagonize Anselm, but — with motives very similar to those which led Anselm to maintain the rights of his see as he had received them from his predecessors — he had no intention of abandoning any rights enjoyed by his father and brother.
Henry's only plan at this moment was to play for time.
He did not press for an immediate renewal of Anselm's homage; and William Giffard stopped calling himself bishop of Winchester.
It was agreed, with Anselm's consent, to send messengers to Rome to discover whether the pope was inflexible: meanwhile Anselm was restored to his lands.
In the summer of 1101, faced with Robert's landing in England and the immediate prospect of widespread desertion, Henry went so far as to promise a general obedience to the papal decrees, and it seems likely that Anselm's activity on his behalf, secured by this promise, turned the tide in his favour, and brought Duke Robert's invasion to a halt.
Meanwhile the king's messengers went to Rome to see if any compromise was possible.
They were  due to return by Easter 1101, but they were conveniently delayed, and it was not until September that the result of their mission became known.
The papal letter which they brought was uncompromising in principle, though noticeably vague in its terms.
By this time, however, the military crisis was over, and Henry abruptly demanded that Anselm should either comply with his wishes or leave the country.
Ironically, it was his brother Robert, angered by Anselm's lack of support for his evidently just case, who counselled this truculent attitude.
But it was not now so easy to get rid of Anselm: he refused either to comply with Henry's demand or leave the country, and for the next few weeks he lived quietly on his manors.
The archbishop of 1101, with a clear command which required his obedience, was a different man from the Anselm of 1097 who asked for nothing better than an opportunity for escape.
But although Anselm was different in some ways, in most ways he was unaltered.
He looked upon himself as absolutely bound to obey the papal decree; but he was no crusader for the principle which it enshrined.
During the first year after his return, when the royal position was in the balance, Henry would have had to give way  if Anselm had insisted on his renouncing homage and investiture.
Whether he would have kept any such agreement is another question, but his capacity for resistance would have been much reduced.
But Anselm did not look on himself as an agent of papal policy: he was no Hugh of Lyons.
He always understood that the papal decree imposed on himself an absolute personal obligation of obedience, but it did not give him a general responsibility for promoting the principle, or for enforcing the obedience of others.
That was a matter for the pope.
There was, however, always one matter for which he had a personal responsibility which he could share with no one else.
This was his responsibility for protecting the rights, lands, and privileges of the church of Canterbury.
At his consecration, he had promised to maintain Canterbury's rights of every kind, from the primacy down to the smallest knight's fee, and we have seen that in Rufus's reign he allowed many, as we might think, greater matters to lie dormant while he fought for Canterbury's rights.
In such matters, size was of no importance: obligation was everything.
It is impossible to understand the events of Anselm's years as archbishop — and more particularly the events of the next few years — unless this distinction between his public duty of preserving rights for which his office made him responsible, and his personal duty of obeying commands which he had heard and by implication assented to, is borne in mind.
The problem unfolds
The initial crisis of the reign was succeeded by a period of prolonged negotiations.
Despite their complexity, the main development can easily be summarized.
It is clear that until April 1102 the pope was still insisting on the full observance of his predecessor's decrees.
Paschal II's letters of this date, which reached England in August, contain an exact restatement of the papal position, forbidding both homage and investiture.
To this statement Paschal added a series of directions to Anselm showing in detail how the decrees were to be applied to parochial churches and to ecclesiastical land held by lay service.
These papal letters represent the high point in the campaign for a Church both spiritually and temporally independent of the lay ruler.
Never  again in Anselm's lifetime was the papal position to be stated so clearly and uncompromisingly.
But the logic of the situation now began to assert itself.
From this moment the idea of compromise began to gain ground, not with Anselm, but with those around him on all sides, and in the papal Curia itself.
The admission that compromise was possible is the first sign that the confident period of Hildebrandine reform — the period of intense conviction and hope of complete success — was coming to an end, and was being replaced by the age of negotiation, undertaken by lawyers and administrators, differing in their briefs, but alike in their methods, and understanding each other very well.
In April 1102 the pope still spoke of homage and investiture in equally uncompromising terms, but by the end of the year a change of emphasis is observable.
In December his reply to a new mission from the king and archbishop contained no mention of homage, and this omission was balanced by unusual violence in the condemnation of lay investiture:
Significantly, this is the very language which Urban II had used three years earlier with regard to homage by priests to laymen: the hands, he had declared, in which Christ's Body was made in the Eucharist were defiled by having been enclosed in the bloody hands of laymen.
Paschal II now used similar terms about lay investiture, and the absence of any mention of homage in this letter is significant.
The change of emphasis which is implied in this silence  is confirmed by the negotiations of the next few years: Pascal was clearly already preparing a withdrawal from the extreme position adopted by his predecessor.
In the event, the letter to Anselm containing the passionate phrases condemning lay investiture which have just been quoted, had no effect on the subsequent negotiations.
He had a premonition that if he read it, he would find himself committed to an ever-widening circle of excommunications.
As a pastor, he had no desire to reduce England to a spiritual wilderness.
So he adopted the simple expedient of not opening it until it was beyond his power to act on it.
He agreed to go to Rome himself to try to obtain an acceptable solution.
Eadmer gives a curiously confused account of Anselm's motives at this time, but one thing stands out clearly: Anselm would not bring about the chaos in personal relationships and conflict of obligations which he might find himself obliged to precipitate if he read the letter.
He left England on 27 April 1103; and when the opportunity for practical action had passed, he opened it.
There was now no need to hurry.
He passed the summer at Bec, and reached Rome in October to find that messengers from the king had also recently arrived.
Anselm and the king's envoy had an inconclusive meeting with the pope, Anselm remaining silent while members of the Curia openly took the king's side.
The pope seems to have confined himself to insisting on the prohibition of lay investiture.
After the meeting, Anselm left to return (as he thought) to England, carrying with him a letter from the pope to the king and queen.
The king's messenger stayed in Rome for further talks.
The seeds of compromise were beginning to take root.
Eadmer noticed the change and the presence in the Curia of those who now openly supported the royal cause.
The king's messenger in Rome, William of Warelwast, was well equipped to encourage this movement.
He may with good reason be regarded as the first of that long line of professional civil servants who did more than any others to make and destroy the medieval Church: they were professional administrators, equipped to forward the interests of government  not by main force but by negotiation amidst the intricate issues of law and theology; men of international standing, retaining the respect of their opponents, and not too hatefully or too personally involved in the cause which they were required to maintain.
They expected to become bishops in due course, and they performed their episcopal duties with equal ability.
William of Warelwast was such a man.
He stayed on in Rome after Anselm left, and managed to procure letters from the pope to the king of a different tenor from those entrusted to Anselm.
To Eadmer, and to William of Malmesbury who enlarged and exaggerated Eadmer's words, the secret of his success was simple bribery, the common charge of disappointed litigants.
But we can see that he had something more to work on than the Roman thirst for gold.
It was by now becoming clear that the papal Curia was not solidly behind the more extreme form of papal policy inaugurated by Urban II.
The pope himself was beginning to waver, and there are signs that he felt some embarrassment at abandoning the position of his predecessor and leaving Anselm isolated.
One symptom of the pope's embarrassment is that for the first and last time he made a concession to Anselm on the subject of the primacy of Canterbury, which we must deal with later.
Anselm left Rome in November 1103.
The king's messenger caught up with him at Piacenza and they went together as far as Lyons.
Here he showed Anselm the pope's letter to the king which he had obtained after Anselm's departure.
In it the pope said nothing about homage, and argued temperately against lay investitures, minimizing their importance, and denying that he sought for himself any increase of authority or any diminution of the king's due power.
The violent metaphors which formerly had been freely used were absent, and the letter contained a suggestion that it was Anselm himself who had been going too far:
Clearly the pope was prepared for compromise.
When Anselm was shown this letter by the king's messenger, he quietly suppressed the papal letters to the king and queen which had been entrusted to him.
As he told the pope, they would either not be read or be read  with derision after the arrival of the later letter brought by William of Warelwast:
Anselm reverts to essentials
Anselm was now in a very vexatious position.
The papal letter which he was carrying to the king had been superseded by another, which spoke more mildly and suggested that Anselm himself had been a mischief-maker, and that a compromise agreement could be reached with good will on both sides.
But in addition, when they reached Lyons, the king's messenger told Anselm that the king would not allow him to return to England unless he promised to observe the customs of the kingdom as they had been in the time of Rufus.
This was a clear breach of the understanding on which he had come on a joint mission to the pope.
It is likely that William of Warelwast revealed an even more outrageous decision: if Anselm did not return to England on the king's terms, the king would seize his lands and revenues.
It was this last, clearly tyrannical, action which stirred Anselm to take the only countervailing measure open to him.
His position was now exactly what it had been during his exile in Rufus's reign: he was without an income and reduced to dependence on the hospitality of Hugh of Lyons.
He stayed on in Lyons — what else could he do?— and took the first step to excommunicate Henry if his lands and revenues were not restored.
This was the most positive action he had yet taken in his conflicts with the king: even with Rufus he had not gone so far.
But he was now acting in defence of the properties of Canterbury, a matter for which he alone was responsible.
Nevertheless, excommunication required a lengthy procedure of three summonses and three refusals before being finally imposed.
So for the moment nothing could be done beyond issuing a warning.
Meanwhile he settled down to another period of peace and exile.
To his friends in England he seemed to be inactive.
They thought  that he reconciled himself too easily to his position, and that he had developed a taste for exile as an escape from business.
There was perhaps some truth in this.
He would gladly have died or suffered hardship or privation for the truth; but endless wrangling and prevarication on both sides made him ill, and distracted him from the ends to which he had dedicated himself.
To all complaints about his conduct he made the same answer: he was bound by the decree of 1099, which obliged him to withdraw from the communion of all who had taken part in ceremonies of investiture or homage.
Therefore, he could not return to England, where his duties would force him into communion with those whose company he was forbidden to frequent:
He could do nothing but wait while the procedure which he had initiated for excommunicating the king if he refused to restore his rights and revenues crawled towards its conclusion.
This was a lengthy business, and from December 1103 to April 1105 he contented himself with justifying his exile in the face of criticisms from his English friends.
The king continued to send messengers and letters to Rome, with the purpose, as Anselm soon perceived, of ensuring still further delay.
The king's letters to the pope during this period are all missing, but we have two from the pope to the king.
They are conspicuous for their conciliatory terms: although they insist as firmly as ever on the prohibition of lay investiture, they make no mention of homage.
Then in the spring of 1105 Anselm received a letter from the pope telling him that sentence of excommunication had been passed on Robert of Meulan and other royal counsellors, but that sentence on the king was delayed because the messengers whom the king ought to have sent to Rome before Easter had not arrived.
To one who had waited so long, this letter would scarcely have  indicated that the time had come for him to take vigorous action on his own.
But Anselm had another reason for action: the procedure he had started eighteen months earlier for excommunicating the king if he did not return the lands and revenues of the archbishopric was drawing to its end.
He had hoped that the pope himself would have excommunicated Henry at the same time as his chief accomplice; but since this was not to be, Anselm consulted Archbishop Hugh and decided to go ahead with his own excommunication.
Eadmer's evidence is decisive on this point:
The purpose of his journey, which he revealed to the king's sister, Adela, countess of Blois, was to excommunicate the king, ‘for the injury which he had done to God and himself for the last two years and more.’
Evidently Anselm judged that he could not make his excommunication of the king effective if he stayed in Lyons, and he must move nearer to the scene of action.
The threat was sufficient to alarm the king's sister Adela, and she warned the king, who was now in the last stages of planning his final great attack on his brother's duchy of Normandy.
To have added excommunication to his other problems would have been folly, and his reaction showed that, when speed was needed, he could act quickly.
Adela fixed up a meeting between the king and archbishop, and in a few days everything was arranged.
Anselm and the king met at Laigle on the frontier of Normandy on 22 July, and agreed that Anselm's revenues would be restored.
The agreement went no further than this.
It was  sufficient for the king's purpose to avoid excommunication, but Anselm could  not yet return to England because ‘not being willing [as Eadmer reports]in any way to violate his obedience to the pope’ he could have no dealings with the king's excommunicated ministers.
So he retired to Bec.
Meanwhile, it was agreed that he and the king should send another joint mission to Rome to attempt to reach a final conclusion.
Nothing could define more clearly the limits of what Anselm regarded as his personal responsibility than this agreement.
It said nothing about investiture or homage: these were matters for the pope.
As in 1100, Anselm was content with the return of his lands and revenues, and he withdrew his threat of excommunication  as soon as they were restored to him.
Henry was in no hurry to go further.
He was able to complete his conquest of his brother's duchy without interruption, and to imprison for life — perhaps to blind — the only member of his family who deserved the protection of the Church.
Nothing is more unsavoury in all these transactions than the total abandonment of Duke Robert to his fate.
It is one of many indications of the limits, not only of Anselm's notion of his own responsibility as archbishop, but of the concerns of the Church as a whole.
All that Anselm demanded was that the essential basis for carrying out his duties as archbishop should remain inviolate.
It is quite likely that to have attempted more would have done more harm than good: at all events, nothing more was attempted.
Modern scholars, conscious of the large issues involved in this struggle, have generally found this intrusion of the local and material interests of the church of Canterbury at a critical moment incomprehensible, and having their eyes fixed on the historically more important matters of investiture and homage, they have supposed that Anselm's eyes must also have been similarly directed.
Hence they have linked Anselm's only positive action in the whole sequence of events with the progress of negotiations between the king and the pope.
To fit Anselm's action into this context it has been necessary to suppose that he was outraged by the slow progress of papal action against the king, and was determined to do something to strengthen the pope's resolve.
This theory does indeed get some support from the way in which Eadmer concentrates his attention on the Investiture dispute during these years.
But there are three considerations which tell decisively against it:
1
Anselm immediately dropped the threat of excommunication when the king returned his lands and revenues, and he made no conditions about the issue of homage or investiture beyond agreeing that he and the king should make a joint approach to the pope to hasten a settlement.
Having reached this agreement, he allowed the king to take his time, and he did not even insist on returning to England, but renamed at Bec until a settlement had been reached.
2
Although Anselm made it clear that he personally was bound to observe the papal decrees of 1099 until released by proper  authority, he remained neutral in all the negotiations between the king and pope.
He seems to have thought that the pope ought to have maintained the decrees of his predecessor, but this was not a matter for him to decide.
3
With regard to Eadmer's emphasis on the negotiations between the king and the pope, it is important to remember that, although the material for the Historia Novorum down to 1100 was collected in Anselm's lifetime, the final text belongs to the years after Anselm's death.
The inevitable compromise
Part of the understanding between Anselm and the king at Laigle in July 1105 was that a new joint mission should be sent to Rome to effect a settlement by Christmas.
But Henry was in no hurry.
His hands were very full with arrangements for his attack on Normandy, and there must also have been many discussions about the terms on which he would be willing to make peace with the papacy.
Meanwhile he made every possible excuse for delay until Anselm's patience was almost exhausted.
After all, although in possession of his revenues, he was still excluded from his archbishopric, and it is remarkable that he waited so patiently.
It was not until early in 1106 that his and the king's messengers finally left for Rome.
By this time the king had decided that he would be prepared to abandon investiture if he could keep the homage of prelates for their lay fees.
He lost little or nothing by the concession and, as we have seen, the papal letters had for some time indicated the likelihood of such a solution being acceptable at Rome.
Once this decision was taken there was no further need for delay.
On 23 March 1106 Paschal II wrote to Anselm to announce in veiled words that a compromise had been reached:
Such words as these prepare the reader for a retreat.
It is nowhere stated that the ground which had been occupied was to be  abandoned, but that was the result.
Anselm was made to appear to have been too rigid in his interpretation of the decree of 1099.
The pope's letter continued:
It is hard to think that Anselm did not feel some indignation on reading these words, which implied that he had read too much into Urban II's decree, and that Paschal had not himself been present when those words were spoken.
But, however this may be, the pope proceeded to the practical consequences of the new state of affairs: those who had already received lay investiture, or done homage, or consecrated others who had received lay investiture, were absolved; for the future, those who received ecclesiastical preferment and did homage to the king could be consecrated, provided that they had not received investiture at the king's hands; and this was to continue until the heart of the king was softened by the rain of Anselm's preaching.
Predictably, this last consequence never followed, so homage succeeded by consecration continued to be the rule, and the practical diminution of royal control over the episcopate was negligible.
Anselm found this retreat difficult to accept; after his own loyalty to the terms of the papal decree, the pope's vacillation and suggestion of over-reaction on Anselm's part must have been hard to swallow.
But Hugh of Lyons counselled acceptance, and indeed there was little else to be done.
The compromise brought a clearer distinction between the spiritual and temporal aspects of ecclesiastical office than ever before: it abolished lay intervention in conferring the symbols of ecclesiastical office, while conceding that the temporalities remained within the secular domain.
Altogether, this was the conclusion which best corresponded to the practical realities of the day.
Nothing remained but to tie up the loose ends of the dispute.
The pope's letter reached Anselm late in April 1106.
All obstacles in the way of his return to England were now removed, and he set out in May.
Illness overtook him and delayed him until August, but he was in England in September.
The king's continued absence in Normandy prevented the public promulgation of the settlement for another year till August 1107, but the final settlement contained no  surprises: it followed the terms of the papal letter of fifteen months earlier.
Anselm was now, for the first time since his election as archbishop in 1093, free from any cause of dispute with the king, and the last year and a half of his life were spent in the peaceful routine of episcopal duties, disturbed only by the growing problem of the relations of Canterbury with York.
FINAL REFLECTIONS
It is natural that these political events should have received most attention from historians: they concern the principles of social organization, the relations between the two chief governmental powers in society, and the materials are comparatively abundant.
Indeed, largely owing to Eadmer, it is the only aspect of Anselm's work as archbishop for which the materials allow a consecutive story to be told.
Further still, despite their gaps, Eadmer's History and Anselm's letters together allow a remarkably complete account of royal and papal negotiations and political vicissitudes to be given for these few years.
Yet it was the least characteristic and least congenial part of Anselm's work, the area of life on which he had least to say.
He felt no call to entangle himself in the ecclesiastical-political questions of his day.
Indeed there is a sense in which the clarity of his spiritual and theological doctrines inhibited clarity on political issues by relegating them to a position of relative unimportance: they led Anselm to believe that the system of joint secular and ecclesiastical responsibility for the functioning of the Church was as acceptable as any other.
He had long ago accepted the feudal organization of Church and baronage as an adequate way of organizing the world: the real questions of salvation lay in a quite different area of experience, and on these he spoke with the simple and clear authority of a personal vision and prolonged thought.
On political questions it is remarkable how little he has to say.
Eadmer has provided a striking picture of him at the meeting between the pope and William of Warelwast in 1103, sitting silent while the royal messenger held forth and the pope replied with words which were received with enthusiasm by the bystanders as a declaration that no layman could ever be a doorway into the Lord's sheepfold.
Eadmer's explanation of Anselm's silence is interesting — indeed, he may have had it from Anselm himself:
There is a range of possible meanings that might be attached to these rather ambiguous words; but, if no mortal man could be the doorway into the Lord's sheepfold, it would scarcely matter from whom the bishop received the emblems of his office: the reality could come only from Christ.
This in fact seems to have been at least very close to Anselm's view in all these matters.
He would obey the papal command, but for himself the question in dispute was a matter of indifference.
Did it really matter from whom a bishop had received the lands and symbols of his office so long as he was the representative of Christ to his flock?
There must always be a danger in interpreting an ambiguous text.
But all Anselm's actions, both under Rufus and Henry I, suggest that he thought that too much importance was being attached to the disputed ceremonies, and that the real problems of religious life were at the level of personal attitudes and motives known in the last resort only to God.
So far as the ceremonies of investiture were concerned, he himself had lived, and could live, with either the old or the new.
His only concern was with the integrity of souls in obedience to the laws of God.
His scale of values was that of few men, and it is hard to point to any of his successors who carried on his work.
Thomas Becket modelled himself on Anselm — in his exile, his inflexibility, his austerities.
But Becket fought for a principle of his own choosing, the ‘liberties’ of the clerical order in the realm of law, organization, privileges, immunities and so forth.
These were not Anselm's principles.
The centre of his world, conceptually as well as in his personal life, was the monastic life.
It alone provided him with an ideal of peace.
Recent historians of institutions have seen Anselm's period as archbishop as a turning point in the relations between England and the papacy.
To a very limited extent, this is correct: the papal legislation, and above all the determination to enforce it, became a permanent part of papal policy during these years.
But it is a mistake to see Anselm as an instigator of this process.
Apart from his personal duty to observe the papal decrees of 1099, his responsibility was limited to his duty to defend the rights and properties of the church of Canterbury.
These rights were very  extensive, but they were threatened by, rather than dependent on, recent papal legislation.
It was not until thirty years after Anselm that Archbishop Theobald began to build up an administrative staff necessary for the dual organization of ecclesiastical and secular affairs along the lines which became familiar in the later Middle Ages.
More seriously, it is quite unlikely that the actions of any single archbishop could greatly alter the course or speed of the realignment of secular and ecclesiastical power which was taking place at this time.
Anselm was certainly not a policy-maker.
To the community at Canterbury he was a saintly but somewhat ineffective archbishop, who had let them down in the matter of the primacy of their church.
How little reason they had for this view we shall soon discover.
But Anselm may have shared their disappointment: the tasks for which he felt the full weight of personal responsibility were very harassing, and his success in performing them was open to serious doubt.
In the first place it was his duty to preserve intact the lands and rights entrusted to his care.
As to this, Eadmer gives strong hints that he failed to prevent the encroachments of powerful tenants, but the details of these aggressions are lost: they seem to have had no important effect on the general prosperity of the Church of Canterbury.
His second task was to preserve and exercise the metropolitan authority of his see.
He tried hard to do this, but he was fighting a losing battle here against the rising tide of papal authority.
Indeed, Anselm's greatness as an influence in the Christian world must rest almost entirely on his Prayers and Meditations , on his Monologion, Proslogion , and Cur Deus Homo , and on the sanctity which pervaded his whole life after his conversion in 1059–1063.
He was not wise in the affairs of the world, nor did he wish to be: he simply challenged the normal assumptions of the world and gave his attention to eternal truths and individual souls.
Anselm seems to have treated Rufus with more generosity and trustfulness than he showed to Henry I. This can probably be explained by his greater experience of the unreliability of kings; perhaps also by a certain attractive openness in Rufus which the prudent and wily Henry lacked.
But this contrast should not blind us to the fact that he could work with Henry to an extent that was impossible with Rufus.
This difference is most noticeable in his ability to hold ecclesiastical Councils.
From his earliest days as archbishop, his desire to hold a Council had been his most frequently expressed aim — expressed in vain while Rufus reigned, but almost at once realized under Henry.
Henry after all wished to collaborate in the work of the Church; Rufus wished only to make money from it.
In the years 1100 to 1102, Henry was in a much weaker position than Rufus to refuse any reasonable request of Anselm which did not infringe the royal rights, and Anselm, newly returned from contact with Hugh of Lyons, was equipped with knowledge of papal theory and practice to a much greater extent than in the years before his exile.
But even without this greater leverage, it is highly unlikely that Henry would have made difficulties over Anselm's desire to revert to Lanfranc's policy of holding ecclesiastical Councils.
In the main, Henry's personal objectives were not very different from Anselm's: he too wanted a well organized church, clergy who obeyed the rules of clerical life, and monasteries which met the needs of a feudal kingdom and baronage.
Moreover, the vice of sodomy, which Anselm was especially harsh in denouncing in his conciliar decrees, was not one to which Henry's court, unlike Rufus's, was especially addicted.
He had nothing to fear from a Council, and Anselm was able to hold two Councils in the last years of his life; the first of these in 1102 was certainly the high point in his activity as archbishop.
It brought into play all his practical abilities; in planning the event, articulating a programme of reform, and in directing its implementation he showed qualities of mind and will which had no other outlet.
Besides giving Anselm his only opportunity for showing his abilities in action, the Council of 1102 also gave him an opportunity for displaying his primatial ideal in practice.
In so far as Anselm had a policy as archbishop beyond the pastoral duties outlined in Gregory the Great's Regula Pastoralis , the defence of the Canterbury primacy formed its foundation and the legislation of his two primatial Councils were its crowning achievement.
It was a policy with deep roots in the history of the monastic community at Canterbury, and to understand it we must first examine the development of this community, and then the ideal which it considered its chief adornment and obligation.
THE LIBERTY OF A MONASTIC COMMUNITY
ORGANIZATION UNDER LANFRANC
No part of Anselm's position as archbishop was more distinctly Lanfranc's creation than the monastic community at Canterbury, of which the archbishop was also, in fact if not in name, the abbot.
Of course, Lanfranc did not create this situation.
The combination of bishopric and monastery was one of the main results of the tenth-century monastic revival, and it had tenuous threads going back to the seventh century.
Lanfranc seems to have had no interest in the achievements of his tenth-century predecessors who had given the monks their rule of life.
Still less was he interested in what he considered the barbarous traditions of the Anglo-Saxon Church which he found on his arrival.
Nevertheless, though he deplored what he found, he maintained the monastic connection.
There is an initial paradox here of some importance for the future: the monastic life which he found at Canterbury appeared to him so decayed that it needed a new beginning, yet he did not sweep it away and establish an up-to-date archiepiscopal church served by a community of secular clerks, on the pattern of Rouen or Lyons or most other cathedral churches in Europe.
By this date, the monastic organization of English bishoprics was becoming an anomaly, and in an increasingly active administrative Church it was often a nuisance.
It is clear that many others — perhaps Lanfranc too — saw this.
Whether he ever contemplated replacing the monks by secular canons, we do not know.
But it seems clear that some people, perhaps the members of the monastery themselves, thought it was a serious possibility, and they took steps to ensure that neither Lanfranc nor anyone else would be able to carry out this sweeping measure of reform.
The evidence that this fear existed is to be found in a letter which Pope Alexander II sent to Lanfranc not long after his arrival in England.
It begins as follows:
At this point, Alexander II quoted from Gregory's replies to the questions of the first archbishop, Augustine, of which the full text is in Bede.
This text gave mild, but not authoritative, support to the existence of some kind of monastic establishment in the cathedral church.
But then, much more to the point, the pope went on to say that there was also a letter from Pope Boniface IV to King Ethelbert, from which he quoted a passage laying down that the monastic community of the cathedral church was to be continued by all Augustine's successors.
He therefore confirmed this constitution, and anathematized anyone who sought to destroy it.
All scholars agree that the text of Boniface IV's letter which is quoted here was a forgery of the eleventh century, and something must be said about this later.
For the present, all that need be noticed is that the purpose of Alexander's letter was to convey a distinct papal command to Lanfranc that the monastic community in his cathedral church was to be preserved.
The pope's letter to Lanfranc is preserved in Eadmer's Historia Novorum , and, according to Eadmer, it was Lanfranc himself who had sent to Rome to ask for a confirmation of Boniface IV's privilege.
But this is certainly not what Alexander's letter says.
Without implying that Lanfranc was an enemy of the monks of the cathedral church, the whole drift of the pope's account of the incident suggests that the request for a confirmation of the monastic status of the cathedral had come from someone other than Lanfranc: from whom the request came he left entirely unclear.
But he emphasized the trouble he had taken to go into the matter personally, even to the extent of ordering a search in the papal archives.
So Lanfranc was left no choice: he had to retain the monastic community in his cathedral church, and we may ask what he found on his arrival, and what impression it made on him.
On these points we are left in no doubt: he found mainly ruins, and what was not ruined, was in his eyes so corrupt that it needed a completely new start.
It was on this basis that he set about creating a new monastic life with all the force and organizational ability which he possessed.
What he had already done at Bec and Caen, he would do at Canterbury: he rebuilt the cathedral church and monastic buildings; he fought pertinaciously and successfully to defend the ancient properties of the cathedral church against the rapacious invading nobility, who scoured the land for what they could pick up; he drew up a new code of monastic practice, and he introduced new men who would know how to implement it.
No one else could have done this as well as Lanfranc with his orderly mind and power of decisive action.
But, as for the monastic life which he found, he never learnt to love or even tolerate the mental, spiritual, and historical traditions which, in the midst of the ruins, the surviving community of monks treasured with the utmost tenacity.
Indeed, to a superficial eye, not much had survived which could be salvaged.
At the end of 1067 there had been a great fire which had made nearly all the buildings unusable except the dormitory, the refectory, and enough of the cloister to make it possible for the monks to walk from one building to another without getting wet.
The church was in ruins, and the monks had put up a temporary building over the main altar, where they gathered round the body of St Dunstan for their daily offices.
As for the library, the surviving books without a proper building to house them must have made a dismal appearance.
A more imaginative eye might have found, both in the surviving monastic customs and in the books, much of great interest and perhaps even of value for the monastic life.
But Lanfranc seems not even to have noticed that the community still followed, however imperfectly, the order of monastic life which had been laid down for all English monasteries a hundred years earlier, of which two copies from the pre-Conquest library at Christ Church, Canterbury, still survive.
During the next few years he drew up a similar body of monastic observances for use in his cathedral church.
In its own way, it too is a masterpiece of coherent legislation.
But it is an  astonishing fact, a revelation both of his independent power of creating an ordered system and of his limitations of vision, that in this work he never once referred to the work of his predecessor.
He borrowed nothing from it or any other local text, but introduced a new routine of life almost exclusively dependent on the latest developments at Cluny.
Lanfranc's silence about existing practices has sometimes been interpreted as a sign that the old order had fallen into complete neglect by the time he arrived at Canterbury.
Indeed in the circumstances in which he found the community there is likely to have been a good deal of disorder.
But the chance survival of a record of a miracle on Easter Day not long before Lanfranc's arrival shows that the monks were still giving a dramatic representation of the three women at the tomb searching for the risen Lord as laid down in the Regularis Concordia .
So something was surviving among the ruins.s And there were several other signs of life.
For instance, the monastic school was still in existence, with quite a large body of masters and children in the choir.6 Also, the members of the community preserved a considerable sense of grandeur, however misplaced, and an implacable devotion to their local saints.
Even the ruined library still contained many texts which were witnesses to a local tradition of artistic skill, showing a consuming interest in miraculous happenings and that curious mixture of vernacular and Latin literacy which were all characteristic of late Anglo-Saxon culture.
It is perhaps in the surviving pre-Conquest books more than anywhere that we can find a clue to Lanfranc's impatient determination to make a completely new start with the monastic life at Canterbury.
Among all the books which have survived — and nearly seventy have now been identified — there is not a single volume of the basic works of Patristic theology or of recent scholastic learning, which (as we have seen) were conspicuous in the library at Bec, and were to be equally conspicuous at Canterbury after Lanfranc had restored the library.
Moreover, in none of these surviving volumes is there any sign of interest or skill in the rapidly developing scholastic disciplines of northern France and Lorraine at this time.
Some of the gaps must be due to chance, but there is no mistaking  the insularity of interest which these volumes display.
A high proportion of the oldest books are Gospel books or Psalters, several of them with vernacular glosses and translations testifying to a low level of Latinity; testifying too to their close connection with the Anglo-Saxon dynasty in the gifts of such benefactors as King Athelstan.
The whole scene represented by these extensive remains is determinedly backward-looking and insular.
The hand of the past lies heavily on everything.
It was a past that had almost nothing in common with the learned past which Lanfranc had made abundantly available at Bec, and which pointed the way to the future.
Indeed, it is not difficult to understand Lanfranc's impatience with all that he found at Canterbury.
The interest which the remains of the Anglo-Saxon past arouse in a modern scholar is an interest in strange and beautiful survivals, in which Lanfranc could see nothing but corruption and lack of learning.
And the passion with which the surviving English monks defended their past and resisted change must have seemed to him simply a final proof of mental and spiritual decay.
Our knowledge of all these sides of religious life at Canterbury at the time of the Conquest has had to be reconstructed by laborious scholarship, largely because Lanfranc turned a blind eye to every aspect of a native religious tradition.
That so much has survived, despite Lanfranc's hostility, is due first to the tenacity of the surviving monks, and then to the encouragement given to them by Anselm.
The contrast between the two men in this matter points to one last difference of outlook between them, to add to those already discussed.
For Lanfranc, all the signs of life which he saw around him when he arrived at Canterbury were in one way or another manifestations of deviation from the norms of contemporary learning and religious observance, and his main aim in all his activities, whether at Bec or at Canterbury, was to strengthen the central normality of any church for which he was responsible.
He had achieved this at Bec in his teaching, in the books which he collected, and — in the larger world — in his Eucharistic argument.
He saw it now as his mission to establish similar normality in a barbarous land.
Among the local peculiarities which needed to be swept away, the most important was the array of outlandish local saints' days and festivals in the Canterbury calendar.
Here he touched one of the most sensitive spots in the religious life of the surviving Canterbury community.
As Eadmer reported, there was nothing more precious to the older monks than the recollection of the saints and their miracles.
Indeed, his account of their interests gives the impression — and perhaps gave the same impression to Lanfranc — that they were a lot of old gossips chattering about wonders and miracles and gifts of relics, when they should have been engaged on more serious religious observances, or on the studies laid down in the Rule.
No doubt it was very vexatious to Lanfranc, especially since he doubted whether their so-called saints deserved this title at all.
Into this scene of gossip and legend, of curious artistry and strange wonders, Lanfranc brought a more modern mind, great administrative ability, and a clear, constructive, expert knowledge of the up-to-date learning of the schools and of the monastic life in its contemporary forms.
He set about reshaping the Canterbury community with great vigour and clarity of aim.
He made plans for, and carried out, a complete rebuilding of the cathedral church on the model of the church he had built at Caen.
He rebuilt the library and began stocking it with the central texts of secular and religious learning which he had made available at Bec.
His new body of monastic regulations brought the up-to-date practices of Cluny not only to Canterbury, but also to monasteries in all parts of England.
Similarly the texts which he introduced into the Canterbury library are soon also found at Durham, Rochester, Exeter, and in other English libraries.
There can be no doubt that he planned on a great scale.
All this could not be done single-handed, and Lanfranc's most important innovation was to bring new men from Bec and Caen to occupy all the main offices in the monastery at Canterbury, and to be ready for promotion wherever they were needed.
The new men whom he introduced were central to Lanfranc's plans.
We have already encountered several of them in Anselm's letters.
Henry, Arnost, and Gundulf were among the earliest of his correspondents.
Of these, the first became prior of Canterbury and the other two became successive bishops of Rochester.
Then, in addition, there were Maurice and Herluin from Bec; Vitalis, Roger, and  Samuel from Caen; and, briefly, Gilbert Crispin, who became abbot of Westminster.
Probably there were never more than eight or ten newcomers at Canterbury among a native community of perhaps thirty or forty Englishmen; but it was the privilege of the newcomers to command, and of the native monks to exercise their monastic vocation of obedience.
The English monks seem for some years to have been able to resist the discipline of Lanfranc.
A few years after Lanfranc's arrival, Eadmer described the English monks as living the lives of earls rather than monks, ‘in all worldly glory, with gold and silver, with changes of fine clothes and delicate food, not to speak of the various kinds of musical instruments in which they delighted, and the horses, dogs and hawks with which they sometimes took exercise’.
It is hard to know what to make of this.
But, even when we have made allowance for the exaggerated impressions of a boy of fifteen, recollected many years later, it may be taken as evidence that Lanfranc and his handful of monks from Bec and Caen met not only with hostility, but also with a good deal of successful resistance.
What is certain is that the two parts of the community continued to the time of Lanfranc's death and beyond to face each other with unconcealed hostility.
This was not an uncommon state of affairs: less than a quarter of a mile away, at St Augustine's, a similarly tense situation was working towards a violent conclusion.
But at Christ Church the antipathies of the early years of Lanfranc's rule were ultimately, with whatever resentment and secret insubordination, reduced to more or less furtive disobedience.
As Eadmer saw it, the turning point came in 1076, when Lanfranc was pressing on with the building of the new church, and had recently appointed Henry, his Italian fellow-countryman from Bec, as prior.
At this moment an English member of the community went mad.
The horrible sufferings and uproar which resulted are fully described by two independent observers, Osbern and Eadmer.
But it was Eadmer, with his keen eye for significant detail, who noted two points omitted by Osbern: he observed that, as the monks stood round the sufferer, each of the two groups spoke a language which the other could not understand; and also he remarked that things went more smoothly after this event.
The new church was finished in the following year, and the completion of the conventual  buildings must have brought a more stable and orderly life.
But in addition to his constructive plans, Lanfranc also took steps to cut down the force of opposition to his changes by sending away ‘for correction’ one of the chief trouble-makers, a monk called Osbern.
He sent him to Bec to learn obedience from Anselm.
ANSELM'S LIBERATING INFLUENCE
Whatever Lanfranc's intentions may have been, the result was different from anything that he can have anticipated.
Osbern, besides being filled with anger and resentment at Lanfranc's destruction of the native tradition, was an exceptionally talented man with a gift for music, liturgical composition and writing.
When he got to Bec, Anselm at once spotted his quality, and he was soon sending back to Lanfranc a glowing account of Osbern's progress: he was ‘growing daily in knowledge and serenity’; and the friendship between him and Anselm had become so close that they could not be separated without tearing their two souls apart.
Here at once we recognize the language of Anselm's warmest and most demanding friendship.
Perhaps even more significant for the future, Anselm also told Lanfranc that he had heard about Dunstan's rule of life for monks: would Lanfranc please send it to him?
Would he also send a Life of Dunstan?
So it would seem that an essential fact which had escaped Lanfranc's notice had come out in Anselm's talks with Osbern.
Anselm had not yet visited Canterbury, but he had got hold of the one thing necessary for understanding the members of the old monastic community: they wanted recognition of their saints and understanding of their tradition.
Two other letters of Anselm during Osbern's disciplinary exile at Bec complete the story of their first meeting.
In one, he told Lanfranc that Osbern was now at peace with the new masters at Canterbury; in another, he told the Italian prior Henry, in somewhat guarded language, that Osbern now recognized and repented of his fault, which Anselm ascribed to imprudence rather than pride.
Finally he sent him back to Canterbury with warm commendations.
The friendship thus established between the most talented of the leaders of the rebellious English and the future archbishop of  Canterbury had wide ramifications.
Osbern returned to Canterbury, not to make peace by abandoning his efforts to get recognition for the despised saints, but to gain recognition for them by writing their biographies.
He was the first of a new generation of writers who sought to repair the post-Conquest destruction of earlier pieties and observances by steady persistence in re-creating the past.
The next step in this development was Anselm's own visit to Canterbury in 1079.
I have already mentioned the argument on this occasion which convinced Lanfranc that he had made a mistake in sweeping the former archbishop Elphege out of the ecclesiastical calendar.
This incident, besides its theological interest, was also a landmark in the restoration of the Old English saints to the ecclesiastical calendar.
It may be recalled that Lanfranc's doubt about the sanctity of Elphege arose from lack of information about the circumstances of his death.
It was known that he had been archbishop of Canterbury between 1006 and 1012, and that he had been killed by the Danes for refusing to pay Danegeld.
But there was no written record of his life or death, or of the reasons for his resistance; and there was no one in the community who still remembered him.
Like so much that was sacred at Canterbury, it was all hearsay, and all the more violently adhered to on that account.
In 1079, Lanfranc asked Anselm to give his opinion, and (as we know) he argued that since Elphege had certainly died in the effort to save his tenants from an unjust exaction, he had died for justice; and, if for justice, then also for truth, which is only justice in another mode.
And, since he had died for truth, he was a martyr, for this was what martyrdom meant.
To say that Lanfranc was convinced by this argument would be an understatement: he seems to have been simply overwhelmed by it.
Perhaps he was moved by the recollection that the argument propounded by Anselm had its origin in his own comment on an intricate saying of St Paul about truth and justice being the same thing in different modes; perhaps too he felt some remorse at his impatient dismissal of so many of the saints venerated at Canterbury, when so clever a man as Anselm could take Elphege seriously.
Whatever the reason, he reacted to Anselm's demonstration with almost extravagant zeal.
The proof of this is to be found in the calendar of saints' days for the Canterbury community which he had so offensively purged.
He now not only re-introduced Elphege: he brought him back into his carefully limited and graded sequence of holy days at a very high level indeed, placing him among the Festivitates quae magnifice celebrantur , on a level with the Epiphany, the Purification and Annunciation, the Ascension, the Feast of St Gregory, and about half a dozen other main feasts of the Church year.
This was of course extremely generous, but he extended his generosity to no other local saint after the first archbishop St Augustine, whom he could never have excluded.
Dunstan, the greatest of his predecessors after Augustine, was still omitted.
To maintain the dignity of his new position, Elphege needed to have a biography and a complement of musical compositions for his feast-day.
For these Lanfranc turned to Osbern.
The musical composition is lost; and this is a great loss, for according to William of Malmesbury, Osbern was the best musician of his day.
But the biography which he wrote still survives.
It marks the beginning of the post-Conquest revival of Canterbury's past; more generally, Anselm's intervention in Osbern's career marked a turning point in saving the monastic and cultural tradition of pre-Conquest England, and the movement gathered impetus during the next half century.
Osbern's next service to the revival of the old observances after his return from Bec was to write the first coherent Life of Dunstan.
Here, he was much better supplied with materials than for Elphege.
He had two almost contemporary biographies and a wealth of oral tradition to draw on, and out of these materials he made a lively and dramatic portrait, full of sentiment and warmth, which easily outdistanced in popularity the biographies written by later writers who tried to do better.
In the end Lanfranc made Osbern precentor of the cathedral, the first Englishman in the community after the Conquest to hold a position of responsibility.
But Osbern never ceased to be a rebel in the cause of the past, and the battle for Anglo-Saxon antiquity was only half won at Lanfranc's death.
Lanfranc himself was only partly converted, and, even in his last days, he was still giving quantities of the bodies of his predecessors, which had filled the old church before the fire of 1067, to his new foundation of canons outside the walls of the city.
Moreover the prior, who was the effective day-to-day head of the community, was still Henry, who shared Lanfranc's doubts about the native saints.
This last statement is no more than an inference, but it is based on an event recorded by Eadmer, which illustrates the state of affairs after Lanfranc's death, when Prior Henry was in full control of the community:
Clearly Osbern thought there was still much to do; he must have seen Anselm's succession to the archbishopric as a new hope for the Anglo-Saxon past, and he was greatly alarmed by Anselm's delay in accepting.
He wrote twice to Anselm urging him to come quickly.
Among all the letters in Anselm's letter collection written by others than himself, there are no others which display so much of the heightened emotion of friendship characteristic of Anselm's own letters, and they show Osbern's state of near despair at Anselm's long delay.
After these two letters, we hear no more of Osbern, and we can only conclude that he died soon after Anselm's consecration.
Meanwhile, however, Anselm had chosen a permanent companion from among the English monks, who could more than fill the gap left by Osbern.
This was Eadmer, about whom much more will  need to be said later.
Meanwhile, it will suffice to notice the strangeness of Anselm's choice.
Even before he was consecrated, and perhaps as soon as he was elected, at a moment when, by ordinary rules of prudence, he should have been thinking of equipping himself with all the forms of expert knowledge required by his new position, he chose one of the group of English monks to be his closest and most constant companion.
His choice fell on Eadmer, a man indeed of unusual talent, but no practical ability.
From this moment Eadmer was constantly with him.
So far as we know they had met only in 1079, when Eadmer was one of the young monks to whom Anselm talked during his first visit to Canterbury.
Of all the monks of Canterbury, apart from Osbern, Eadmer most markedly represented all that Lanfranc had scrupled to authorize.
His mind was the richest repository of the past: he had been a child oblate at Canterbury before the Conquest; he had heard all the gossip of the older monks as a child, and he remembered as an adult all that he had heard.
The inspiration of his reports always moves in the narrow circle of subjects dear to the ecclesiastically minded Englishman of the eleventh century.
They told of the movements of relics: the bringing of the relics of St Ouen to the court of King Edgar; of the king's gift of them to the monastery; of Queen Emma's gift of the arm of St Bartholomew; of the translation of the body of St Elphege; and so on.
Such stories as these must have been common in all religious communities, but the constant recurrence of these themes in Eadmer's recollections leaves the impression that his thoughts, and those of the monks with whom he had lived since his infancy, were centred almost exclusively on their relics, and on the stories of the gifts, purchases, translations, and miracles associated with them.
The air which he breathed was that of the famous treatise on the resting places of the old English saints, and of the days when, in Eadmer's words, ‘it was the custom of the English to prefer the patronage of the saints to every worldly aid’.
He remembered the old church, and from the description of it which he wrote in old age, it is possible to form a more complete picture of its internal arrangements than of any other pre-Conquest  church.
He remembered where the saints had lain, and where the altars had stood; he remembered the old confusion of secular and ecclesiastical affairs, and the use of the south porch as the place where pleas were settled which could get no solution in hundred or shire or royal court.
He recalled the ancient baptistery which stood at the east end of the church, where the bodies of the archbishops had lain, and where the trials by ordeal had taken place.
It was not until fifty years after the great fire which had swept it all away that Eadmer wrote this description of what he had seen as a small boy of about seven.
In appearance everything had been altered since then, and — so far as looks went — much for the better, but nearly everything he cared about most was enshrined in these earliest recollections.
This was the man whom Anselm chose as his closest companion on the strength of a meeting thirteen years earlier.
It is useless to speculate why he chose him, rather than one of the monks of Bec or Caen who had been at Canterbury  throughout Lanfranc's tenure of the archbishopric.
But the choice emphasizes three important features of Anselm's mind at the moment when he became archbishop.
First, the rapidity and certainty with which he chose those with whom he shared his thoughts.
We have seen this rapidity on other occasions also in his earliest letters of friendship, but never before in circumstances where so much depended on the quality of those around him.
Second, his indifference to business proficiency as a qualification for his closest companions.
This too has been conspicuous in all the areas of business which we have examined; but never before when when he was likely to be confronted with so much debate and such a variety of decisions.
Third, his sympathy for the traditions of the old Canterbury monks.
This has already been illustrated from his dealings with Osbern, but never before when he himself was responsible for everything that happened.
As often with Anselm, what may seem to be a merely personal, or even sentimental sympathy, also illustrates a deep-seated belief in the power of growth within a monastic community.
ANSELMIAN LIBERTY
In Anselm's choice of Eadmer as his constant companion, Osbern may have seen an assurance that his hopes for the revival of Canterbury's past might yet be fulfilled.
But whatever Osbern may have hoped, Anselm's first letter to the community brought no promise of unbridled liberty:
The prior to whom this was written was still the Italian, Henry, who had been appointed by Lanfranc almost thirty years earlier.
Osbern as precentor also appears in the list of those to whom the letter was addressed.
Moreover, it seems very likely that Anselm was referring to the search for relics conducted in secret by Osbern and Eadmer; and it is also likely that Anselm had heard of the search from Eadmer himself.
What is quite clear is that after the death of Lanfranc the English monks felt free to assert themselves in ways that would have been impossible while Lanfranc lived.
From their point of view they still had a long way to go in rescuing their past.
Anselm's sophisticated reasoning had saved St Elphege.
But behind him there was a large array of saints, customs, observances, and claims of one kind or another going back to a remote past.
Even after Anselm's visit in 1079, Lanfranc had been prepared to consign the greater part of these local saints and customs to oblivion.
Nevertheless, the English monks of the community went on hoping to see the process reversed.
They had grounds for thinking that they would have Anselm's support, and despite Anselm's strong words about insubordination in 1094, they were not disappointed.
The local tradition of devotion which Lanfranc had found deeply embedded in their corporate memory, and which the native-born monks had struggled — at first so unsuccessfully — to preserve, showed no sign of withering away.
Rather the contrary, it was spreading to members of the community with no pre-Conquest memories.
It lived in their minds, their thoughts, and their daily talk, and it was contagious.
But liberty to take action contrary to authority was not the kind of liberty that Anselm had come to Canterbury to promote.
Liberty for Anselm never meant freedom of individual choice; in the monastic life it meant only freedom to follow the Rule within a local framework authoritatively laid down.
This is apparent in all the advice he gave to discontented monks.
He would allow no exceptions to this fundamental rule; but he did not exclude growth within a framework authoritatively established, and he could help to reshape the future through the men whom he chose as prior.
His opportunity came in 1096.
In this year, the Conqueror's memorial abbey of Battle had no abbot, and Anselm advised the king to appoint Prior Henry.
A rigorist for ecclesiastical law would have found much to object to in this procedure.
But, for Canterbury, it made possible the appointment of a new prior, and Anselm appointed Ernulf, who was one of Lanfranc's men, but of a very different stamp from his predecessor.
Wherever he went, first as prior at Canterbury, then as abbot of Peterborough, and finally as bishop of Rochester, Ernulf was associated with the revival of an interest in pre-Conquest traditions — with the revival of Anglo-Saxon liturgical practices at Canterbury, with the collection of Old English laws at Rochester, and perhaps with the renewed interest in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle at Peterborough.
Having chosen Ernulf, Anselm allowed him to work in his own way.
Perhaps he could do little else, but there is no mistaking the magnanimity of the spirit in which he wrote the following reply to one question which had been sent to him during his exile.
He wrote:
With this freedom, much could happen which would have been impossible under Lanfranc.
We are here at the beginning of a new phase in the restoration of old customs and the addition of new ones, which in a brief space of time greatly altered the liturgical arrangements laid down by Lanfranc.
Meanwhile, Anselm played the part of a benevolent but distant superior dealing with complaints about the negligence of monastic officials, restraining the over-officious severity of the sub-prior, remonstrating with monks who wished to leave the monastery for something vaguely better, defending his own absence, and dealing in a casual way with a variety of business.
But his main contribution to the development of the community came from his choice of priors, Ernulf first and then Conrad, both men with a sympathetic interest in the past, and leaving them to do their work without interference.
He also — as a by-product of the grant he made to repay the monks for the loss of their plate following his aid to Rufus in 1095 — provided money for the rebuilding of the cathedral choir on a greatly enlarged scale.
Ten years after Anselm's death, when the tide of criticism was running strongly against Anselm at Canterbury for his failure to obtain a secure basis for the primatial claims, Eadmer thought it his best praise that he had allowed the monks to manage their own affairs.
We can see the results of this in both the internal and external affairs of the house.
For instance, the single entry in the English annals of the monastery between 1100 and 1109 records the inspection of the body of St Elphege in 1105, and the discovery that it was incorrupt.
Anselm was at this time in exile, so it is clear that the monks, who now had a prior whom Anselm had appointed, were able to do publicly what the Anglo-Saxon enthusiasts had had to do surreptitiously before Anselm's arrival.
As the community increasingly took charge of its own affairs, and felt its corporate strength, Anselm's political struggles, like those of Archbishop Thomas Becket after him, only remotely affected it.
The monastery was borne along on a buoyant prosperity which, while it may have contributed to the dissatisfactions and distractions felt by the few, drew most of its members together in a sense of their importance and independence, and hastened the disappearance of earlier divisions.
The number of monks increased.
According to Eadmer there were over sixty in about 1080, and a high proportion of them must have been Englishmen of the old foundation.
By the end of Lanfranc's life the number is given by a later domestic chronicler as a hundred, and it was still rising.
Probably it had reached its maximum of some 120 by about 1120.
In this large body, very few would have known the pre-Conquest church; and most of them would probably have been children of the new gentry in the neighbourhood of Canterbury, perhaps with parents of mixed Anglo-Norman origin.
This was the stratum of society from which Eadmer had come before the arrival of the Normans, and it almost certainly continued to provide most of the monks after the Conquest also.
During Anselm's time as archbishop, a new spaciousness of life developed in the monastery.
This is shown in several ways: in growing income, in the great new choir of the cathedral which was begun in Anselm's lifetime, in the proliferation of precious ornaments, the growth of the library, and the freedom with which the Anglo-Saxon past was incorporated into the liturgical and devotional life of the community.
In every way the past, of which Anselm had been quite ignorant until Osbern was exiled to Bec in about 1076, was coming into its own.
One immediate result of growing numbers and growing prosperity was that Lanfranc's church very soon needed to be enlarged.
Lanfranc had modelled his church on the one which he had built at Caen with its notably short and stubby choir.
With the growing numbers of monks, this soon became inconveniently small.
In a new burst of corporate energy, the choir was demolished in Anselm's day, and replaced by a structure in proportions and plan unlike any other in England at the time.
It seems almost certain that the model for the new building was the recently completed church at Cluny, which Urban II had dedicated in 1095, and which Anselm and Eadmer had visited in 1099.
The building which they saw then was a landmark in the development of monastic architecture in Europe in size, architectural design, and decoration; and the new building at Canterbury, begun under Anselm and  completed in 1130, incorporated several important details from the design of the new church at Cluny.
‘The like of it [according to William of Malmesbury]was not to be seen in England in its windows, the splendour of its marble pavements or the diversity of its paintings.’
This too may be reckoned one of the results of Anselm's exile.
But, above all, this enlargement made provision for the revival of the local past which Lanfranc's building had rigorously excluded: on either side of the high altar were the altars of Dunstan and Elphege, and over the altar was a beam on which they stood flanking the figure of Christ in Majesty.
Canterbury was certainly not moving in the direction of Cistercian austerity in Anselm's time.
It is difficult now to imagine the splendour which the vast incrustation of ornaments must have presented to the eye by the time the church was complete.
In this, as in his support for the elaboration of monastic customs, Anselm's expansiveness stands in striking contrast both to the intimacy and austerity of his personal devotion, and to the new trend towards simplicity and severity which this type of devotion stimulated among the Cistercians.
There is of course no formal contradiction  in combining austerity of devotion with ebullience of architectural and internal decoration, but the combination illustrates the contrasts which we find in almost every area of Anselm's life.
In the contrast between the austerity of his life and the emotional warmth of his friendships, between the rigour of his Prayers and the mildness of his disposition, between the eremitical strain in his own piety and his acceptance of the increasing wealth of ornament in his cathedral church, this most uncompromising of men stands where extremes meet, and embraces both.
The community as Anselm left it when he died was rich, prosperous, and assured of its position in the world.
The annoyances, injustices, and setbacks from which it suffered seem small in retrospect, but they preyed on the minds of its members at the time.
In one area especially the monks felt unjustly thwarted, and attributed a large part of their woes to Anselm.
Oddly enough, it was an area about which he felt quite as strongly as the members of the monastic community.
It concerned Canterbury's claim to primacy over the whole of the British Isles.
Anselm fought for it with a tenacity which is only explicable if the whole scene which we have briefly surveyed is borne in mind: the primacy was the brightest of the dreams which the monks of Canterbury had inherited from their largely silent, ever-beckoning past, and on this question Anselm fell under the spell of the awe-inspiring tradition which he had helped to preserve.
His violent defence of the primacy, though it was contrary to all the forward-looking governmental ideals and interests of the Church as a whole during his later years, is his nearest approach to a consistent political policy as archbishop.
In several ways his advocacy of the primacy reflects the tensions which run through Anselm's later career.
He had come to Canterbury with a firmly established and clearly defined view of liberty as a state of the will wholly integrated with the will of God, seeking no escape from obedience, but finding freedom for the development of the soul in ever-deepening understanding of the divine nature, and ever-broadening assent to God's will.
This had been his message to those in the world who thought that their duty might lie in saving a brother in the world, or a cause from destruction at the hands of the infidel.
Even more decisively, it had been his message to monks or incipient monks who saw a duty in saving, as it might be, a sister from enslavement, or a call to take action in the world to prevent some evil.
‘Seek the cloister’; ‘stay  safe in port’: these were the precepts which he gave to those who desired true freedom.
But this freedom of the cloister was not static.
In the company of like-minded friends in the community, advance was possible towards an increasing understanding of the substance of faith and of advance towards the vision of God.
This freedom to advance was not a private matter.
Its influence would be experienced throughout the whole monastic community, and beyond the cloister in the world.
Intimate and inward looking though the Anselmian programme was in its origin, it was also a programme of growth for the whole community.
Like a forest fire, it started from the individual and grew outwards until it enveloped the whole area of monastic patrons and friends and dependants.
More than that: the web of monasteries provided an organizing principle for the whole society of Christendom.
This had been the message of the monastic reform of the tenth century, which was being rapidly replaced by a new message of organization under papal direction, extending through dioceses and parishes until it finally reached the individual.
There can be no doubt that this new ideal was much better adapted to the intellectual and material developments in western Europe after 1050 than the old monastically oriented society of the earlier period.
But in this respect Anselm belonged to the past, and one of the chief symptoms of this in his later years is the determination with which, against all the interests and policy of successive popes after Gregory VII, he argued the case, and fought for the principle of the primatial authority of Canterbury throughout the whole of the British Isles.
The essential characteristics of this primacy which distinguished it from such primacies as that of Hamburg or Lyons were, first, that it was centred in a monastic community, and second, that its roots and its authorization went back (as Anselm was persuaded) to its original constitution in the seventh century.
Its defence and enlargement in the new political circumstances of post-Conquest England represented a return to the aim of spreading Christian doctrine and discipline from a central monastic community.
It claimed to have the authority of the past and the patronage of the saints in bringing to the world the fruits of monastic discipline and devotion.
Anselm's struggle for this ideal had a central place in his pastoral conception of his archiepiscopal duties, and it requires a somewhat lengthy treatment if its place in his world-view is to be understood.
AN OLD LIBERTY: THE PRIMACY OF CANTERBURY
PRINCIPLES OF PRIMACY
Anselm's general habits of thought, which were essentially unitary, would lead us to expect him to be opposed, or at least indifferent, to local privileges.
But this general expectation has already been shown to be misleading in his approach to the monastic life of the community at Canterbury.
Unlike Lanfranc who aimed at creating a model community in accordance with the latest monastic thought without regard to local traditions, Anselm not only permitted, but welcomed, local habits of worship and models of sanctity, which Lanfranc had driven out with a strong arm.
In approaching the question of the primacy of Canterbury, we need once more to examine the roots of Anselm's support for a local claim which ran counter to one of the most powerful principles of papal policy at this time.
As a starting point, it is worth remembering that on the question of the sanctity of St Elphege, Anselm — unlike Lanfranc — was prepared to accept the testimony of the community with regard to the facts on which their veneration of the saint were based.
What he provided were the principles.
He reminded Lanfranc of their early agreement that justice and truth were the same thing in different modes.
Consequently, if Elphege died for justice, even only in refusing to pay money demanded by Viking invaders, he died also for truth.
In so doing, he earned all the privileges due to a martyr.
Anselm's procedure in this case reflects the principle on which his theology was built: he accepted the statements of faith of the whole Christian community, and set about finding explanations which satisfied the demands of reason.
If his explanations were wrong, it made no difference to his faith; if they were right, they strengthened the community of believers against the attacks of critics, and added the pleasure of understanding to the duty of believing.
In the greatest matters, the universal testimony of the Church was the guarantee of truth.
But in matters of local importance, he was prepared to accept the testimony of the local community: in this he was following the ancient practice of the Church with regard to canonization, which was replaced by a formal centralized procedure in the course of the next hundred years.
Equally, Anselm accepted local monastic testimony as a sufficient basis for defending the possession of lands and privileges; and here he followed in Lanfranc's footsteps.
In brief, both Lanfranc and Anselm were living in a time when the ancient consensus of local testimony, which had sufficed in the past for most matters of faith and practice, was being subordinated to more formal legal and rational procedures.
In the main, both of them belonged to the past, but Anselm was more conservative than Lanfranc.
For Anselm, the voice of a local church, especially of a local monastic community, sufficed in most matters.
Unlike the new Cistercian seekers for a simpler form of monastic life, Anselm — however much he shared a personal preference for simplicity — disapproved of a discontented search for something better than the present community provided.
Indeed, his only idea of historical development was the process of adding to the number of the elect, which at a certain fixed target would bring history to an end.
He does not seem to have thought that improvements in the world would hasten this process.
His main principle with regard to the past was that nothing once given to God or the saints could be restored to the kingdom of this world without injustice.
This principle operated absolutely with regard to monastic vows, even in their most inchoate state.
It operated also with regard to lands and rights that had once been given to God or the saints: the gift could never be withdrawn or diminished without sin.
So far as Canterbury was concerned, the right of primacy over the whole of the British Isles was the greatest of all such gifts.
It was not a right to be enjoyed as a source of revenue or worldly glory: it was to be guarded as a gift from the past, representing an eternal principle of order.
To descend from these heights to the commonplace, we have already seen that at the beginning of his time as abbot of Bec, Anselm had a problem about the rights of the abbey of Bec.
Rival churches had claimed tithes and privileges which belonged to Bec.
Unluckily, whether through carelessness or incompetence, no title deeds could be found, and he had to write to Lanfranc to beg his  help.
The same happened at Canterbury, but on a much greater scale.
Instead of contested tithes, he found himself the guardian of a rich, varied, and passionately cultivated tradition for which the documentary evidence was fragmentary, but the local testimony entirely firm.
Despite the imperfections of the documents, he felt to the full his  responsibility to preserve and hand over intact to his successor all the rights, privileges, and possessions of which he was the divinely constituted guardian.
There was nothing merely theoretical in his duty to preserve these rights.
Like every abbot or bishop, he was clothed in the persona of the saint to whom his church was dedicated or by whom it was founded.
When the pope wrote to Anselm that ‘we behold in you the venerable persona of St Augustine the Apostle of the English’ this was more than a complimentary politeness.
It was — or was taken to be — a recognition of the important truth that the temporary holder of the office of archbishop stood in the place of, and was answerable to, St Augustine and the other saints of his church, and through them to God.
From this it followed that whoever was archbishop of Canterbury inherited all the powers that Gregory had given to Augustine, just as the pope inherited all the powers that Christ had given to St Peter.
Anselm himself never quoted this analogy, but he went so far as to warn the pope that if he gave an adverse judgement in the dispute between Canterbury and York ‘I would on no account remain in England; for I neither ought to, nor can allow the primacy of our church to be destroyed while I am alive.’
In making this statement, Anselm was speaking both on his own behalf and on behalf of the monastic community.
The sense of solidarity within the community was always the driving force  behind the primatial claims of Canterbury — indeed, behind all the claims to special rights and privileges which dogged the history of the Church for the next hundred years and more.
It was the duty of the community to prod their prelate into action if necessary; it was his duty to share their determination.
Anselm associated himself with their point of view whole-heartedly, though the community felt that he never did quite enough.
The primatial claim was the richest and rarest of the gifts of which the monks of Canterbury believed themselves to be the custodians.
As befitted such a gift it represented a rich accumulation of the past from several sources.
In the first place, the church of Canterbury inherited the pretensions of the Anglo-Saxon kings to a quasi-imperial authority over Britain and the adjacent islands.
At the level of secular government, the Normans abandoned these grandiose pretensions, and relied simply on military conquest and settlement for the extension of the English kingdom.
But the church of Canterbury had deeper roots, both in the kingdom of God and in the kingdom of England.
It did not imitate the variability of the secular rulers who thought only of temporal gain.
The claims of the monastic community were rooted in the kingdom of God.
They were also rooted in the past and in the nature of things — in the past, through the gifts of land, relics, and rights which they had received at various times; in the nature of things through the physical separation of the British Isles from the rest of the world as an alter orbis .
Urban II himself paid homage to this point of view when he introduced Anselm to the Curia as ‘one who is almost our equal, being as it were Pope and Patriarch of the alter orbis' .
The tradition of an imperial unity of the British Isles was supported by statements in charters of pre-Conquest kings, in which the kings called themselves with varying degrees of circumlocution ‘emperors of this British world’.
There were ancient papal letters too, preserved by Bede, which granted the archbishop (in language less clear than later ages thought desirable, but still in words sufficient for men of good will) an ecclesiastical authority over the wide territories of the British Isles.
There were several contemporary examples of similar patriarchal claims by the archbishops of Hamburg, Lyons, and Milan; Lanfranc may have been inspired by these examples when he  vigorously supported the Canterbury claim to patriarchal authority over the whole of the British Isles.
Such patriarchates represented a great design of Church government, which the Hildebrandine popes aimed at replacing with a centralized authority.
But whatever else Anselm may have learnt from Hugh of Lyons, he did not learn to accept this extension of papal sovereignty at the expense of the church for which he was himself responsible.
As archbishop, he accepted responsibility for spreading and enforcing Latin doctrine and Benedictine monastic discipline throughout the alter orbis of Britain.
Lanfranc had seen this as his office, and Anselm saw it with even greater intensity.
For both of them, the ecclesiastical primacy of Canterbury, in association with the extension of the kingdom of England, offered the hope of a permanent and disciplined future for the whole area of England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland.
In 1070, and even in 1093, the threat of an independent Scandinavian pagan kingdom in northern England was by no means dead.
Fifty years later, everything looked different, but this was the situation which Lanfranc faced, and which Anselm inherited, and it is important to recognize that in these circumstances the primacy represented a practical instrument of unity.
We shall later examine the documentary basis of their primatial claim.
But for the present it will suffice to say that on this matter Lanfranc, no less than Anselm, would seem to have been content to rely on the tradition of the Canterbury monks, supported by documents which gave historical support to the testimony of the living word.
On this basis, it was Anselm's most consistent aim as archbishop to preserve and extend the primatial authority of Canterbury.
In this matter, as on others where truth and justice  were concerned, he knew no moderation.
In such matters, moderation was only another name for sin.
It may seem to modern eyes a very lop-sided assessment of his position that the primacy, together with the lands and other rights of Canterbury, should occupy so prominent place in his thoughts.
But the eternal and temporal worlds met in the maintenance of rights given to the saints and committed to his guardianship.
In this matter, as in that of monastic vows, there could be no compromise; and we must first understand what he wanted before we can judge the importance and practicability of his primatial claim.
THE PRIVILEGES OF PRIMACY
The privileges of primacy were three: first, the possession of permanent papal legatine authority in England; second, ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the whole of the British Isles; and third, the right to hold Councils and summon to meetings participants from this whole area.
Anselm was concerned with all these aspects of primacy from the very beginning, and he held on tenaciously to them all so long as he lived.
Indeed, if the test of statesmanship is the pursuit of a grand design for government, the primacy provides his only claim to this title.
His activity on all three areas of primacy never faltered: we shall consider each of them in turn.
Legatine authority
As archbishop, Anselm claimed to be the pope's permanent legate in Britain.
The claim seems to have been of recent origin, and it is not quite clear on what it was based apart from the general principle of primacy.
Nevertheless, Anselm believed it to be well founded, and he certainly went further than Lanfranc, and was stiffer than Rufus and Henry I, in refusing to acknowledge any papal legate other than himself in England.
I have already mentioned Anselm's firm refusal to confer about the discipline of the English Church with the papal legate who brought his pallium.
On that occasion he had a special reason — though an odd one — for his refusal: he was fully occupied with the duty of defence which had been entrusted to him by the king.
Nevertheless, he also clearly implied that it was none of the legate's business.
Beyond the immediate circumstances of this case, Anselm rejected, so far as England was concerned, the recent papal  practice of entrusting to specially appointed legates large areas within which they had authority over all archbishops and bishops.
Archbishop Hugh of Lyons was the outstanding advocate and example of this policy in the last quarter of the eleventh century, and whatever influence he may have had on Anselm's later political vocabulary, he had none at all in this matter.
Anselm continued to the end to be immovable in his opposition to papal legates in England.
He had not come to Canterbury to dissipate the rights of his church.
He made this clear in 1099, when he explained to the pope his objection to the sending of papal legates to any part of the kingdom of England:
In speaking of something being necessarily so and not otherwise, Anselm was using the language of his theological speculations, and he did not use the phrase lightly.
In a practical context, there can be no doubt what it meant: it meant that the matter was not open to negotiation or alteration by any authority on earth.
This view did not commend itself to the pope.
Following the model of the appointment of Hugh of Lyons as permanent papal legate in France, one of Paschal II's first acts as pope was to appoint Guy, archbishop of Vienne, as permanent papal legate in England.
Eadmer reports that he visited England in this capacity in 1100 or 1101, but that no one received him.
Whether this visit took place after Anselm's return to England in September 1100 is unclear, but Anselm left the pope in no doubt about his view of the matter, and the pope promised to send no legate with authority over Canterbury during Anselm's life time ; but it is clear that he did not, and could not, accept the Canterbury claim made by Anselm, that he should never appoint a legate in England other than the archbishop himself.
Yet this remained Anselm's claim to the end, though it is clear that Anselm based his case, not on any documentary evidence, but on the consensus of the community of which he was the head.
Territorial extension
It was not only on the question of legatine authority that Anselm went further, and was more explicit, than Lanfranc.
In extending the territorial limits of Canterbury's jurisdiction, he also made a notable advance.
This was partly accidental: he became archbishop at a time when the expansive energies of the Norman conquerors were beginning to make an impression in Scotland, in Wales, and — very tentatively — in Ireland.
The way for ecclesiastical expansion was prepared by conquest or marriage, and we must admire the consistency of effort with which, despite his other distractions, Anselm took advantage of the situation to press forward the authority of Canterbury in all areas.
We shall consider each of them in the chronological order in which they came to Anselm's attention.
WALES
The first opportunity for exercising primatial authority in Wales had arisen during the vacancy at Canterbury shortly before Anselm became archbishop.
It arose from the recent conquest of the northern coastal area as far as Anglesey by his friend Hugh, earl of Chester.
To give ecclesiastical expression to this conquest, a bishopric was established at Bangor in 1092.
Hervey, a Breton, was appointed bishop, the first of a long series of members of the English royal court to be provided with a Welsh see: he was also the first bishop in Wales to come under the authority of an English archbishop.
Since Canterbury was still vacant, he was consecrated by the archbishop of York, but this was an accident: all his successors came under Canterbury.
There were two other bishops in Wales at this time, at Llandaff and St Davids: both of them were Welshmen, and both adhered to the customs of the Celtic Church.
One of Anselm's first actions during his first year as archbishop was to suspend them both.
This was the first time that an archbishop of Canterbury had taken disciplinary action against a Welsh bishop.
The bishop of St Davids quickly made peace with Anselm and was restored.
Thereafter Anselm gave him such aid as he could against the despoilers of his see among the Norman barons who had recently penetrated into southern Wales as far as Pembroke.
Chief among  these was Arnulf of Montgomery, another friend of Anselm, and one of his earliest devotees after his death.
He may have been prepared to accept from Anselm a call for restraint which he would have taken from no one else.
The Welsh bishop of Llandaff seems never to have submitted, and it was not until 1107 that Anselm was able to consecrate a bishop thoroughly devoted to the interests of Canterbury.
By the time of Anselm's death, therefore, the whole Church of Wales, which had never before been subject to Canterbury, was completely subordinated to the English primate.
This was the most lasting expansion of the authority of Canterbury before the seventeenth century.
Essentially, the position which Anselm established lasted till 1920, despite the heroic struggle of Gerald of Wales in the early thirteenth century to establish an archbishopric at St Davids.
IRELAND
Ireland was the next area in which Anselm took steps to establish the authority of Canterbury.
Here he was following a precedent created by Lanfranc, who had already consecrated bishops of Dublin in 1074 and 1085.
Anselm had no difficulty in consecrating their successor in 1096.
What is remarkable about Ireland at this time is the lack of resistance to the authority of Canterbury: as a result, Anselm was able without controversy to extend the area within which the authority of Canterbury was effective.
He was no less prompt here than he had been in Wales.
Lanfranc's authority over the Irish Church had been confined to Dublin, but shortly after his consecration Anselm wrote generally to all the bishops in Ireland urging them to establish canonical discipline, concluding with the words:
This is the gentlest of expressions of authority, but it could scarcely be firmer; and it fell on willing ears.
Anselm had powerful friends in Ireland, and during his lifetime the ecclesiastical future of the country seemed to lie in his hands.
In 1096, when everything in England was going badly with him, he consecrated two bishops, for  Dublin and Waterford.
The latter was the first Irish bishop outside Dublin to make profession of obedience to Canterbury; and Murchertach, the High King whose daughter married Anselm's friend Arnulf of Montgomery, promoted the extension of Canterbury's authority.
To the bishops of Dublin and Waterford (and later of Limerick), Anselm wrote as a superior who could, when circumstances required, enforce his authority with discipline.
For the moment everything seemed calm, but under the surface the whole situation was very unstable.
Norse, Irish, and Norman elements were all competing for an advantage, and the future of the Canterbury claims, which seemed so bright in Anselm's lifetime, depended too much on obscure cross-currents of political ambition to be assured.
Within half a century of Anselm's death the only traces of the once-active policy were to be found in the ecclesiastical calendar used by the church of Dublin, which had many peculiarities of Canterbury origin.
The primacy had vanished with the setting up of four archbishoprics directly dependent on the pope.
This development is one of many indications that the main obstacle to the Canterbury primacy was the growth of a unified legal and administrative system centred on Rome.
All the evidence shows that Anselm would have resisted this development with all his power as an attack on the rights of Canterbury.
NORTHERN ENGLAND AND SCOTLAND
In Wales and Ireland, Anselm's claims met with no real opposition because there was, as yet, no rival organization to challenge them.
The situation was very different on the northern frontier.
Scotland, which he also claimed as part of his sphere of primatial authority, was cut off by the barrier of the province of York.
The Scottish bishops of this period were normally consecrated by the archbishop of York, and there was no protest against this practice until 1120, when Anselm's disciple Eadmer, having received the bishopric of St Andrews, attempted to insist that he should be consecrated at  Canterbury.
That this was an ill-advised step is very clear to us, but Eadmer was only pressing a claim which he believed to be inherent in the original jurisdiction of Canterbury.
Indeed, if the Canterbury claims were as well founded as Anselm believed, anything less than a general authority over the whole British Isles would have done a violence to the early history of the see as it was understood at Canterbury, and to the large geographical and historical conceptions which lay behind these claims.
THE STRUGGLE WITH YORK
In order to exercise this authority, however, it was first necessary to settle the dispute with York, and it was on his handling of this issue that Anselm's reputation with the monks of Canterbury chiefly depended: they later compared him with Lanfranc to his disadvantage.
The conventional view, then as now, was that Lanfranc had carried all before him in asserting the rights of Canterbury.
Above all, in 1072 he had publicly defeated the archbishop of York, and obliged him to make a profession of obedience to Canterbury.
By contrast Anselm appeared to have achieved nothing.
This judgement was, and is, mistaken.
It exaggerated the extent of Lanfranc's victory, and blamed Anselm for a failure which was inherent in the situation which he inherited.
Lanfranc's personal success in 1072 contained and concealed the roots of a permanent failure.
In the first place, although he succeeded in getting an oath of obedience from Archbishop Thomas of York, Thomas could not bind his successors.
Only a papal confirmation of the position as established in 1072 could have provided the basis for a permanent primatial authority.
The limits of Lanfranc's success became apparent as soon as Anselm became archbishop.
At his consecration by the archbishop of York, a dispute broke out about his title: was he to be consecrated as Metropolitan or as Primate ?
For the moment it was immaterial; but it was symptomatic of the difficulties which would face the claims of Canterbury when they were opposed, not only by the canons and archbishops of York, but by the papal Curia, and — during Anselm's lifetime — also by the king.
Several years passed before the claim to authority over the archbishop of York was put to the test.
Even when Archbishop Thomas died, he was succeeded by a new archbishop, Gerard, who was already bishop of Hereford, and as such had taken an oath of obedience to Anselm.
So, while Gerard lived — and he did not die till 1108 — Anselm could believe that Gerard as archbishop was still bound by his oath of obedience as bishop.
In these circumstances, a less dedicated man than Anselm would have let the matter rest, and hoped to end his days in peace.
But Anselm never stopped trying to get an explicit recognition of Canterbury's claim from the pope.
No messenger of his ever went to Rome in the early years of Henry I's reign without pressing for a papal confirmation of Canterbury's primacy.
If the main business was investiture and homage, a subsidiary theme was the primacy.
Indeed, in making this distinction between major and minor issues, we are conceding too much to the modern point of view.
The issues appeared in different proportions at Rome and at Canterbury, but no one was inclined to minimize the importance of the Canterbury claim — and rightly, for the concession of a primacy such as Lanfranc and Anselm desired would have altered the future government of the medieval Church more than any concessions in the matter of investitures.
With every inducement to satisfy Anselm — and Anselm did not hesitate to urge his sufferings on behalf of the papacy as a reason for conceding the claims of Canterbury — Paschal II was careful to concede nothing of lasting importance.
Anselm never stopped trying.
Paschal II, who was slowly giving way on the question of homage, which Anselm looked on as settled, sweetened the pill by piecemeal concessions on the primacy.
In April 1102, he confirmed the primacy personally to Anselm as his predecessors had held it.
In November 1102, he explicitly ordered Gerard of York to swear obedience to Anselm.
In November 1103, he extended this obedience to all future archbishops.
Here at last, as Anselm thought, was the long-desired breakthrough into an assured future.
Anselm sent the letter to Canterbury at once for safe-keeping.
But, alas, it was a chimera.
Paschal's grant of 1103 certainly extended the primacy to Anselm's successors, but only so far as it had been ‘enjoyed by Anselm's predecessors’.
And, since the whole dispute was about what primacy, if any, these predecessors had enjoyed, the real issue was left — and was certainly intended by the pope to be left — wide open.
If Anselm with so many claims to respect could not do better than this, there could be no hope except in forgery: this was to be the next step.
But not in Anselm's lifetime.
The privilege which Anselm had extracted from the pope in 1103, despite its inadequacy, was the high watermark in the Canterbury claim to primacy.
It represented the only advance ever made towards perpetuity.
In this it surpassed all that Lanfranc had been able to achieve even at the height of his influence in 1072.
No other genuine document exists, nor (so far as the Canterbury monks could establish) ever had existed, which granted the primacy to the whole succession of archbishops.
But it still remained to be determined what, if anything, it meant.
The current of informed opinion was now running ever more strongly against Lanfranc's conception of a British patriarchate.
Anselm however never ceased to express himself in word and deed increasingly strongly in its favour: he persisted also in the Canterbury claim that the archbishop should be the pope's legate in England in perpetuity.
In this too he failed: all he could get was a promise that no legate should come to England during his own lifetime.
He continued to urge Canterbury's supremacy over York, and in the general settlement of 1107, Archbishop Gerard promised at last to show him the same obedience as archbishop as he had owed as bishop of Hereford.
This promise, however, was expressed in no document; it had the character of an informal arrangement which had no binding force on the future; it was useless.
In all these arrangements, it is clear that the aim of everyone from the pope downwards was to keep Anselm happy during his lifetime, while retaining the power to make new arrangements for the more distant future after his death.
The pope, the chapter at York, and (more reluctantly) the archbishop of York, were determined to defeat the Canterbury claim to which Anselm was committed.
The king, anxious to pay Anselm back for disobliging him on investitures, was also determined to frustrate him.
But Anselm still persisted, and the real test was bound to come when Archbishop Gerard died.
Gerard died on 21 May 1108.
Within a week the king had nominated as his successor a member of one of the greatest royal administrative families in England, Thomas II, a nephew of the Thomas who had consecrated Anselm.
Anselm made no objection either to the person appointed or to the manner of his appointment.
But he exerted all his powers to bring Thomas to submit to Canterbury's primatial authority.
The correspondence of Anselm's last year is filled with the subject, and no one can mistake the intensity of his feeling on the matter.
He wrote to the pope, begging him not to send Thomas his pallium until he had sworn obedience to Canterbury, for if he once possessed his pallium, he would never make his submission.
Foreseeing this, Anselm wrote in great agitation:
This shows that Anselm was quite as ready to face exile for the primacy as he had been for obedience to the pope.
Indeed, they were both part of the same system, and they could not be separated.
He saw the primacy as an essential part of ‘apostolic discipline’, that is to say, of the papal government of the Church.
In method at least, there is here a complete identity between his theology and practical thinking: the supremacy of the ruler, whether of God in the universe, or the pope in the Church, implied the existence of order in all the details of the system.
Strange as it may now seem, the primacy of Canterbury seemed to him an immovable feature which  guaranteed the firmness of the whole structure.
He maintained this attitude to the end.
In his last letter before his death, writing as Anselmus archiepiscopus Cantuariensis et totius Britanniae primas , with the full dignity of the primacy of all Britain, speaking on behalf of God himself (loquens ex parte ipsius Dei), he suspended Thomas from his priestly office until he renounced his rebellion against the church of Canterbury.
A copy of this was sent to every bishop in England.
Anselm died before Thomas's obedience was secured.
After Anselm's death, this obedience was easily secured by the traditional combination of king and bishops.
It must, indeed, have been clear to everyone that the claims of Canterbury could only be successful if they had the support of the king and the English bishops.
This combination had been irresistible in 1072; it again proved its value in 1109 after Anselm's death.
Under Rufus, the alliance of king and archbishop had been broken because the king was unmanageable; under Henry, it broke down because of Anselm's loyalty to the papal decree of 1099.
As the York writer noted, the king did not love Anselm after he had thwarted him in the matter of investitures.
Henceforth he supported York until Anselm's death brought him back to his father's policy of supporting the unity of the Church under the southern see, By this time, however, it was too late to alter the general swing away from overlordships such as that claimed by Canterbury.
If anything permanent were to be achieved, it should have been done under Rufus.
Probably even by that time the whole policy was out of date; but it did not seem so to the monks of Canterbury, nor to Anselm himself.
The vision of a monastic cathedral of Canterbury with primatial authority over the whole of the British Isles, which had inspired Lanfranc, Anselm, and the community of Christ Church during these years, came to nothing.
It broke up within a few years of Anselm's death under the impact of forces which were too strong for it.
It is therefore easy to ignore Anselm's passionate fight for its success: but it is important for understanding the things he cared about.
He believed in a monastically orientated Church, in which monastic communities served as centres of devotion and offered the hope of Redemption to a surrounding population of benefactors, friends and well-wishers of all ranks of society.
He believed also that the monastic community at Canterbury with a primatial archbishop at its head was the source of order throughout the whole huge area of the archbishop's primatial authority; he thought too that this was part of an unchanging order of things, which should not be made the subject of political bargaining either with the pope or the king.
In its way, it was a very practical ideal; but it was not an ideal with a future in western Europe.
The future lay with minds of a different type — minds which saw that government was a matter of administration, and not an attempt to reproduce on earth a pattern of things laid up in Heaven.
Anselm aimed at the latter.
Among Anselm's contemporary bishops, Samson, the aged bishop of Worcester, represented the former.
He was of noble Norman birth, had studied at the school of Liège, and had been a clerk of William I in Lanfranc's time.
He had seen the whole dispute between Canterbury and York from the beginning.
Thomas I, archbishop of York from 1070 to 1100, was his brother; Thomas II, who became archbishop of York in 1108, was his son; and another son was bishop of Bayeux.
Altogether, in his connections and his habits of thought, he was a bishop of the old school, of the time when secular and ecclesiastical affairs were totally intertwined.
But he had the mind of an administrator.
Anselm evidently trusted him, and shortly before his death, he asked Samson's advice about the rights of Canterbury.
Samson replied: ‘If I truly knew what would be best both for you and us, I should not hesitate to tell you.
But this I may say, that it seems unworthy of you that you should be too angry over this affair.’
These few words of Bishop Samson make the whole affair a matter of business-like common sense, more in keeping with the way in which government was developing than with Anselm's grand and simple principles.
Samson was the loyal suffragan of Canterbury, but he also expressed the views of the more secularly minded towards the dispute as a whole: it were well that York should submit, but it was undignified for the archbishop of Canterbury to urge his case with such unlimited fervour.
Samson was a man of worldly tastes and habits: he was well connected, well educated, generous and rich.
He was everything that the Hildebrandine Church abhorred, but he had virtues which won him the  warm friendship of Marbod, the talented bishop of Rennes, and of the greatest canonist of his day, Ivo of Chartres.
His principles may have been those of the past, but his virtues were those of the new governments of Europe: common sense, ability, efficiency.
They were not the virtues of the cloister.
He probably had little understanding of the intensity of feeling about their rights and dignity which the communal life of the ancient monasteries engendered, and which Anselm shared.
Indeed it requires a strong effort of historical imagination to understand this intensity.
Anselm carried into politics his search for an eternal order of truth and justice, unshakeable and subject to no alteration.
Rights and properties going back to a remote and undocumented past appeared to him to have a sanction which no later enactment — not even by the pope — could alter.
The eternal order which reflected the unchanging nature of God, and which found expression in the manner of God's Redemption of the world, was also expressed in the traditions of individual churches down to the smallest details.
This is the lesson of the primatial dispute; and this is why Anselm was as  intransigent on this issue as on issues involving monastic vows: they were all reflections of an eternal order, unalterable.
Not far behind this overall vision of justice came his anxious consideration that the particular saints of each church, for whom the present community was only the trustee, would demand from their trustees a full account of their stewardship down to the most minute particulars.
That which had once been given could never, without injustice and danger to souls, be alienated.
Anselm himself remembered from his youth, and in old age told his companions, a story of a Roman judge in the time of Pope Leo IX, who was condemned to eternal punishment because he had incurred the hostility of saints Agnes and Laurence by depriving their churches in Rome of a garden and three houses respectively.
The judge was only saved from this punishment by the intervention of St Praeiectus, whom he had honoured in his lifetime.
Anselm and his companions took the story quite literally.
With all his theological subtlety and insight into human behaviour he accepted the common views of the time in attributing to the saints in Heaven a concern for their worldly rights which, if they had not been part of an eternal order of the universe, would have disgraced a schoolboy.
The grand vision of the position of Canterbury was reinforced by anxieties such as these.
It was remembered long after Anselm's death that he had professed himself afraid to die, and to appear in the sight of God, until he had punished the archbishop of York for infringement of the jurisdiction of Canterbury.
This attitude was kept alive by the strong sense of the permanence of human arrangements in the matter of property, which seems to us of all things the least permanent: gifts to the Church were made to last till the Day of Judgement, and many of the documents in the Canterbury archives invoked God and all his saints on the Day of Judgement to destroy those who violated their provisions.
Such phrases were taken seriously.
No clear distinction was made between the temporal and spiritual privileges of the Church; they all stood on the same level, enforced by the same sanctions, guaranteed by the same authority, reflecting the same divine ordering of the world.
It was a world in which individual freedom in this world's affairs meant little; corporate continuance came before everything else.
The ancient communities, at every level of their being, and in their virtues as well as their vices, were implacable custodians of what they imagined to be their rights.
They remained so throughout their existence — the force of history and tradition was too strong to be resisted — but they gradually lost the sympathy of the world, which placed a higher value on convenience and common sense than on permanence and impossible loyalties.
It is this new spirit that Samson represents, while Anselm in this matter represents the old with an unparalleled intensity of conviction.
PRIMACY IN ACTION
So far we have considered primacy either as a manifestation of corporate tradition, or as a factor in Anselm's relations with the pope, the archbishop of York, and other interested parties who might for one reason or another support or oppose Anselm's claims.
But there is another aspect of the primacy which has so far been only briefly mentioned.
This is its function as part of the pastoral care attached to Anselm's office.
Gregory's Pastoral Care said nothing about this aspect of a bishop's work for the good reason that jurisdictions such as that claimed by Canterbury did not exist in his  day.
But Anselm would have found much in Lanfranc's letters and practice to guide him.
Quite apart from Lanfranc's example, the commonest of all images of authority, whether of the abbot with his monks, or the master with his pupils, or the king with his witan or barons, displayed the seated ruler presiding over them, dispensing justice and declaring doctrine.
There is no reason to think that Anselm would have thought there was any contradiction between personal humility and the display of the greatness of his office: quite the contrary, humility and grandeur met in the exercise of his function as a ruler.
As we have seen, it was not until 1102 that he had the possibility of holding a council; but when the opportunity at last arrived, he applied all his talents and energies to the task.
Acting in conjunction with the king so far as the details of the meeting were concerned, he prepared everything with great care.
He made sure that lay magnates would be present, ‘so that[as he wrote]whatever is decreed by the authority of the Council, shall be firmly supported by the joint care and solicitude of both clergy and laity’.
But with regard to the substance of the decrees, he had no doubt that this was his responsibility.
He wrote the decrees himself in advance, it would seem, of any discussion.
Discussion might modify the details, or at most suggest new items, but the leadership was his.
His letters contain the clearest indication of his procedure and intentions.
Writing to the archbishop of York after the Council, he told him he could send only the ‘headings’(the Capitula ) of the decrees because he did not wish to circulate the fuller texts until they had been approved by those who were present.
Then, as a final step, he sent them to the pope for confirmation.
Deliberation and determination are apparent in every step, and not least in his letters to bishops who wished to have discretion in relaxing some of the severity of the decrees.
To those who wished to have this discretion, his message was always the same: It is quite clear from several sources that general opinion among the bishops was in favour of relaxations for ‘reasonable’ causes, but Anselm resisted every appeal for moderation: for him no relaxation could be ‘reasonable’.
So far as determination, careful preparation and foresight, as well as confidence of success and leadership, could go, Anselm provided all that was possible.
Yet we can scarcely doubt that, in its practical effect, the Council of 1102 was a complete failure.
Its decrees sank immediately into oblivion.
There were several reasons for this lack of success.
In the first place, the decrees were both numerous and varied in content, and it would have been extraordinarily difficult to supervise their implementation.
But, more important, it is clear that on the most important matter of clerical celibacy, there was no body of support to justify Anselm's optimism about a rapid victory.
Anselm was determined to make the clearest possible break with past practice: henceforth no priest or deacon was to be allowed, on any pretext whatsoever, to have a wife and continue to carry out his duties, and he had prepared an elaborate series of provisional arrangements to cope with the shortage of qualified priests under the new regulations.
But when we remember that at least one bishop, Roger, bishop of Salisbury, was a married man, we can judge the likelihood of support in that diocese.
Anselm was prepared to insist on enforcement without qualification; but quite apart from Bishop Roger's case, it was most unlikely that he would have, or could have, the co-operation of the bishops in this.
In the face of this major obstacle, the miscellany of other decrees — no archdeaconries to be farmed out, no priests to attend drinking-parties, no benefices to be sold, no monks to be godfathers, male hair-cuts to leave ears visible, sodomites to be excommunicated, etc. — could not have had much attention paid to them.
In brief, it would seem that Anselm, like many reformers, had not reckoned with the solid weight of inertia on most matters, and positive dissent on others.
He thought that by involving as many as possible in the formal decision-making, he was ensuring their support; but he forgot that his pleasure in obedience had been  learnt the hard way of monastic conversion, and it was not shared by many — not even, when it came to the push, at Bec — much less in the world.
Anselm can scarcely have digested the lessons of this failure when he once more found himself unexpectedly in exile.
His great Council had been held at Michaelmas 1102; by April of the following year he was once more abroad expecting a speedy return, but, as we have seen, he did not return until the end of 1106.
By that date, he was an ailing man, and apart from his routine duties, his first tasks were to clear up the muddles of the last few years and re-establish an acceptable procedure for future episcopal elections, investitures, and acts of homage.
There were no longer any grave differences of principle between him and the king, but there must have been many routine tasks after so long an absence, and these seem to have occupied the greater part of 1107.
When at last he could return to the plans he had left incomplete in 1102, he seems to have recognized that he had attempted too much.
He held another Council in May 1108 on the same model as the last, with a similar representation of lay magnates, but on this occasion he concentrated entirely on the administrative problems arising from his earlier decree against clerical marriage.
To judge from the very wide circulation of the decisions on these details, in contrast to the almost total lack of circulation of the earlier decrees, this concentration of effort was the right policy; but it took at least another two generations before the aim, which Anselm in 1102 had been confident could quickly be reached, was achieved.
It is no part of the intention of this survey to write the history of clerical celibacy.
We are concerned only with the additional light which this part of Anselm's thought and action throws on the man himself, and here a number of features deserve attention.
In the first place it is noticeable that the great theme of his two Councils was the same as that of the Roman Council of 1059, when the first effective legislation on clerical celibacy was initiated: it almost seems as if this subject had matured in his mind since that date; certainly his early Deploratio virginitatis male amissae suggests that he may have had cause for thought on this subject.
Secondly, we see the noble simplicity of his mind in supposing that what the bishops and lay magnates had by their presence and silent consent accepted would at once be put into operation.
Had he not himself acted thus after hearing the papal decree against lay investiture and clerical  homage?
And thirdly, with all his sympathy with people of every kind, uppermost in all his plans in 1102 was the simple thought that there could be no moderation in obeying God's law, and it would all be easy if people would only believe, and act accordingly.
If there was a failure here, it lay in his inability to understand the position of those who, unlike himself and despite their faith, had no clear vision.
He thought everything was easy to those who believed; and nothing would persuade him that it was not so.
Hence, great pastor, preacher, and luminous expounder of the faith though he was, and moderate though his views were on most matters concerning the relations between the Church and secular society, his most cherished views were all doomed to failure from the start: they neither moved with the times, nor stood firm in the practical conveniences of the past.
They reflected an ideal world to which he alone had the key.
I have dealt at length with these tedious and superficially unimportant details because they are the only area of activity in Anselm's years as archbishop in which a clear, persistent, and deeply felt course of action — such as can properly be described as a ‘policy’— can be detected; and if we are to understand his mind, we must understand the importance which he attached to this issue.
Further, it is necessary to understand the foundation on which he based his belief that the cause was a just one.
With regard to the foundation on which his advocacy of the primacy was based, it can be summed up by saying that he thought it was an integral part of the rights of the church committed to his care, testified to by the living members of the community and the tradition which they inherited.
If we ask whether there were ancient documents which showed that the primacy went back to authoritative sources, the answer (as I shall argue later) is that there were documents which gave general support to the claim, sufficient to authenticate the living tradition of the community, but insufficient for use in a court of law.
For their authentication, they required the experience of being in the situation in which they were part of the ordered life.
This, it may be added, would be true of the Christian faith itself: it had to be accepted in life and faith before it could be argued about.
Vast though the distance is which separates such a question as the primacy from the central truths of Christianity, there is a similarity in Anselm's approach to the greater and lesser questions.
WAS CANTERBURY'S CLAIM TO PRIMACY FOUNDED ON FORGERY?
The question of the ‘Lanfranc forgeries’— that is, of the additions made to nine papal letters addressed to archbishops of Canterbury in order to provide clear papal authority for Canterbury's primacy — hangs like a cloud over the primatial disputes of the years from 1072 to 1123; and it is important to seek such certainty as is to be obtained on this question.
In particular, it is important to know as precisely as possible what evidence satisfied Lanfranc and Anselm in pursuing a policy which was opposed to papal policy, and to the most forward-looking thinking on ecclesiastical government of their time.
Lanfranc and Anselm are to be distinguished here.
Lanfranc was an upright and able man, but perhaps not wholly averse to the manipulations of worldly policy.
But Anselm was something more than this: he was the most rigorous thinker, and the most severe appraiser of motives of his day; he abominated worldly power, and — unless we believe his contemporary critics or modern friends — he sought every excuse to avoid having to exercise power himself.
Yet in the matter of the primacy, which entailed the most extensive ecclesiastical power in western Europe apart from that of the papacy, he fought stubbornly from the beginning to the end of his archiepiscopate against every papal or local obstacle to the exercise of this power.
It was an issue which was never absent: it marred his day of consecration, and it was the subject of his last letter.
So the simple question whether the primatial claim depended in any degree on forgery, is important for our assessment of Lanfranc, but crucial for our assessment of Anselm.
The texts, which are generally agreed to have forged elements in them, have been examined in detail by several scholars, and there are only two preliminary remarks which need to be made.
First, no one doubts that papal letters from all the popes to whom the forgeries are attributed existed at Canterbury in 1070 and much  earlier: they formed part of the quite substantial archival and literary remains which survived the fire of 1067.
The only question is whether they existed in 1072 in their original form or in the contaminated form which they had in 1120, when their texts, as we know them, first come to light and are preserved in several copies.
Second, since any forger who makes additions to a genuine document will destroy the original to avoid detection, it must generally be impossible to know precisely the extent of forged elements in otherwise genuine documents.
But here we have an unexpected aid: one of the forged Canterbury documents — a letter from Pope John XII to Archbishop Dunstan sending him his pallium — had been copied and had left Canterbury before the illicit addition was made.
Consequently, in this one case, we know precisely the extent and aim of the addition, which reads thus:
Here then we have in a nutshell the substance of the whole primatial claim succinctly summarized; and when we find similar phrases in the documents of Popes Boniface V, Honorius I, Sergius I, and Gregory III, which came to light in 1120, we can say with a very high degree of probability that these sentences contain the main substance of the additions made to the documents in which they appear.
The question which remains to be solved is: were these phrases added to existing documents in 1070–72 to support Lanfranc's claim to primacy over the whole area of the British Isles, or were they added as a last resort in 1120, when the claim which Lanfranc, Anselm and Archbishop Ralph had all supported was facing final and irrevocable defeat?
Since this is a controversial subject, on which the weight of scholarly opinion probably still supports Böhmer's thesis that the documents already existed in their contaminated form in 1072, and were used by Lanfranc in this form, it will perhaps help to clarify a complicated issue if I set out as bluntly as possible the reasons which seem to me to point decisively to 1120 as the date at which the forged additions were inserted into the texts.
We must begin by excluding from consideration the falsified privilege of Pope Boniface IV confirming the continuance of the monastic community in the cathedral church of Canterbury, which  Alexander II quoted in his letter to Lanfranc in 1070.
This has been dealt with above, and it stands on a quite different footing from the other forgeries in three important respects: first, it was never mentioned by Lanfranc; second, it was not concerned with the claim to primacy but solely with the survival of the monastic community at Canterbury, and this was never an issue after 1070; and, third, unlike the forgeries with which we are now concerned, it was actually submitted to Rome and approved.
So it was a striking example of what was possible.
We are, therefore, solely concerned with nine papal letters contaminated to a greater or lesser extent, predominantly with a view to providing explicit papal authority for the primacy of Canterbury over the whole area of Britain.
The essential insertions will be found below, and we shall come to them in due course.
Meanwhile, we may go back to the situation in 1072, and begin with some words of Lanfranc which provide the main evidence for the documents which existed at this date.
Lanfranc's words in 1072
In 1071, Lanfranc had gone to Rome for his archiepiscopal pallium.
He took no documents with him, but he hoped to persuade Pope Alexander II to confirm Canterbury's primacy on general grounds of tradition.
But the pope, who two years earlier had confirmed the forged privilege guaranteeing the existence of the monastic community at Canterbury, warily told him to have the matter of the primacy discussed in a provincial council in the presence of a papal legate.
This was duly done, and in 1072 Lanfranc wrote an account of the proceedings to the pope, telling him that the whole question of Canterbury's primacy had been ventilated at two Councils, at Windsor and Winchester.
He gave the pope an account of the evidence that had been brought forward, giving first place, and by far the greatest amount of space, to the testimony of Bede's Ecclesiastical History , which showed that the archbishops of Canterbury, acting on the authority of Pope Gregory I and his successors, had exercised general authority over the whole of the  British Isles during the first hundred and forty years of its existence: they had consecrated bishops for all parts of the country, summoned councils, deposed unworthy bishops, and had been generally responsible for spreading Catholic discipline into Wales and Scotland.
Having recounted this history, Lanfranc mentioned that there were professions of obedience to Canterbury, all testifying to its primatial position.
And lastly:
Here, then, at the end of Lanfranc's account of the proceedings which ratified the Canterbury primacy, is the sentence round which the whole controversy turns.
The documents he mentions are those which now have in them the forged primatial passages, and the only question which arises is: were these passages already in them when Lanfranc wrote these words, or were they added later?
The main reason why scholars have thought that the forged passages conferring the primacy were already in the documents in 1072 is that, if they were not there, Lanfranc could not have said that these papal letters were the ultimum robur of his whole case.
But, in fact, he does not quite say this.
He says they are ultimum quasi robur .
The word quasi here can mean anything or nothing.
Dr Gibson ignores it and translates: ‘as the corner stone of our entire case,; more cautiously, I translate: ‘as a final strength’.
The ambiguity, as I think, was what Lanfranc intended.
We must remember that he had started his active life as a lawyer and as a student of rhetoric, and he is using a common figure of rhetoric,hyperbole , within carefully controlled limits.
In plain English, he exaggerated a little— but not much.
After all, even if the papal documents which he mentioned contained no statements about the primacy, the whole history of the archbishops' powers as described in Bede's Ecclesiastical History , which Lanfranc had recalled at length, rested on papal letters conferring the care of the whole  country on Archbishop Augustine.
Even if the surviving letters contained no explicit grant of perpetual primatial power, they were all written in general approval of this situation.
Implicitly, if not explicitly, papal letters could with some truth be said to be ultimum quasi robur and firmamentum of the whole case.
We may agree that this is not wholly satisfactory.
But now, look at the matter from the other side, and see how much less satisfactory the alternative explanation is.
Supposing that the essential words conferring the primacy on all successive archbishops of Canterbury were in fact in the letters which Lanfranc mentioned, why did he go on at such length about the facts drawn from Bede, when a single quotation from one of the passages granting the primacy in perpetuity to the archbishops of Canterbury would have been worth all the rest of his argument put together?
Why did he not quote the decisive passages which they contained?
And why, having quoted one or more of these primatial passages, did he not produce them at Rome for confirmation?
For this was what he needed, and knew he needed, more than anything.
To this question, the common answer is that he neither quoted the forged additions nor produced them at Rome, because he knew they were forgeries, and knew also that the forgery would be detected at once by a competent critic.
But, in this case, we must suppose that he was both immoral and stupid: immoral in producing evidence which he knew to be forged, and stupid in not going further and producing the letters with their forged additions, for he would have known that a similar forgery supporting the monastic community at Canterbury had recently been submitted at Rome, and that it had been accepted and solemnly quoted to him by the pope as genuine.
If therefore the forgeries were in his hands, and he referred to them in his account to the pope without going further and quoting their contents and producing their texts, his conduct shows (to say the least) very muddled thinking on his part.
By contrast, if the forged words were not in the documents, he could with pardonable exaggeration use the words ultimum quasi robur .
But it would have been useless to produce the documents in Rome, for they contained no decisive evidence in favour of the primacy.
Lanfranc could only hope that the papal Curia would come to recognize the substantial strength of this papally inspired practice of primacy going back to the seventh century.
This hope turned out to be mistaken, but this was because of a new feature of the situation which was barely  visible in 1072: the Hildebrandine vision of a unified administrative system of government under papal direction was the real enemy of the primacy, as we can see from the history of the next fifty years.
The situation between 1072 and 1120
These considerations apply equally to Lanfranc's two successors, Anselm and Ralph.
They both spent a great deal of their time and energy maintaining the primatial claims of Canterbury, and neither ever mentioned the papal privileges in support of their claim.
So either they knew only the uncontaminated documents, which did nothing to strengthen what they believed to be an already strong case, or they knew the documents in their contaminated form, but knew also that they were forged, and kept quiet about them.
In whatever form they existed the documents continued to be known, for they were mentioned to Anselm by Osbern in 1093, and examined in the royal court in 1109 in the presence of at least one bishop who had been present also in 1072.
There is no need to say more here about Anselm's primatial activity: he certainly thought that the evidence was sufficiently strong for him to make a most uncompromising claim to primatial authority over the whole of the British Isles, and it is quite clear that he did not think that the Canterbury claim to this position rested on a series of specific grants by popes after Gregory the Great.
It rested on a grant of authority over the whole country by Gregory to the first archbishop, followed by a long history of the exercise of this authority from the seventh century onwards.
This situation emerges even more clearly when we come to Anselm's successor, Archbishop Ralph.
He was abroad from 11 1 5 to 1120, always with Eadmer as his constant companion, bitterly upholding, but with ever-diminishing hope of success, his claim to primatial authority over the archbishopric of York.
Finally, in October 1119, the pope had taken the decisive step of consecrating the archbishop of York himself, without any reference to Canterbury's claim, and it was at last clear that unless some quite new influence could be brought to bear on the question, the primatial position of Canterbury as an active instrument of organization was finished.
In these desperate circumstances in 1120, Archbishop Ralph wrote the most detailed account ever written on the subject of the primacy, explaining fully to the pope the basis of the Canterbury claim.
He went over the whole ground of Canterbury's history from the beginning, enforcing the one simple message that Gregory the Great and his successors had committed to Canterbury the task of introducing and upholding the Christian faith throughout the whole of the British Isles.
He proved and illustrated from Bede that for the first hundred and forty years after its foundation as an archbishopric, Canterbury had held primatial authority over the whole country; then he went on to prove, though more sketchily, that this state of affairs had lasted without intermission until the Norman Conquest.
It was only then that evil men had begun to disturb the ancient arrangements which had the stamp of Gregory's authority.
The story he told was precisely the story that Lanfranc had told in 1072, with the single exception that he says nothing about the ultimum quasi robur of the whole case in the series of documents mentioned by Lanfranc.
With this one exception, he said in many pages what Lanfranc had said in a few sentences.
The central figure in his story is always Pope Gregory I. Ralph insisted that the Canterbury case was based on Gregory's actions and intentions, and on the weight that Gregory had attached to continuity of tradition.
His recital of the history of the archbishops' exercise of authority over the whole of Britain over the centuries is punctuated by quotations from Gregory, proclaiming the claims of antiquity as a model for future conduct.
In considering Lanfranc's letter of 1072, we were faced with the question: Why did he not produce them at the papal court?
Here the question is: why did not Ralph even mention them?
It may be argued that they existed but had been forgotten.
This was the explanation later given by the monks of Canterbury.
But besides being improbable in itself, it can scarcely be true, for Eadmer had mentioned that they had been produced in the royal court after Anselm's death in 1109.
Or it may be argued that the documents contained the forged additions, but Ralph was silent because he knew they were forgeries.
But this will scarcely work, for it was precisely in this year, and perhaps as a result of the failure of Archbishop Ralph's letter to produce any effect at the papal court, that the Canterbury monks claimed that they had ‘discovered’ the  long lost documents with all the essential primatial clauses in them.
So we come back to the one explanation which resolves every difficulty: the ‘discovery’ made by the monks of Canterbury in 1120–21, as the canons of York at once realized, was the moment of their enlargement.
The last resort: forgery
To return to Archbishop Ralph's letter to Calixtus II.
It must have been written after his return to England in January 1120, and probably not long after this date.
The need for a final effort to arrest the decline of Canterbury's fortunes was urgent.
In addition to the papal disregard of Canterbury's primatial claim over York, the monastic community suffered another grievous blow.
There had long been bickerings between the monks of the cathedral church at Canterbury and the neighbouring monastery of St Augustine's just outside the city wall.
As a general rule, the archbishop had sufficient political leverage to ensure success for his own monks in these disputes.
But, in March 1120, the monks of St Augustine's obtained a papal privilege allowing them to ring their bells to their hearts' content, however much they annoyed their neighbours over the wall; more to the point, this privilege quoted four papal privileges of the seventh to tenth centuries, all of them forgeries and one of them a forgery either derived from, or the source of, the very privilege of Pope Boniface IV which Alexander II had quoted to Lanfranc in 1070.
This was a combination of evils grievous to bear; and in these circumstances it is scarcely surprising that the monastic community of the cathedral church themselves took action, and instituted a search for papal privileges to uphold their failing fortunes.
Archbishop Ralph's eloquent letter to the pope had had no effect; St Augustine's was throwing off the restraints that their neighbours had succeeded in imposing on them in the past; and York was poised for a final victory in the matter of the primacy.
This is Eadmer's account of the steps they took in this emergency.:
What the searchers ‘found’ were the papal letters mentioned by Lanfranc in 1072, fortified with forged additions granting the primacy in perpetuity to the successors of the first archbishop of Canterbury.
Nothing could have been more timely.
They were just what their case needed, and for a few years these texts became the foundation of the Canterbury case.
Eadmer inserted them at this point into his Historia Novorum .
William of Malmesbury, who was collecting material for his histories at Canterbury at this time, put the news of their discovery into his Gesta Regum , and inserted the complete texts under the year 1072 into his slightly later Gesta Pontificum .
He is the first historian who purports to give us the texts which Lanfranc had quoted in 1072- and, of course, they now contain the forged additions.
Both he and Eadmer had written their Histories down to 1120 without mentioning these texts, and it was only from the Canterbury monks that William of Malmesbury now learnt that these were the texts quoted by Lanfranc fifty years earlier.
In the next two or three years several copies of them were made; then they disappeared.
But not before they had been used.
Indeed they were used almost at once.
I have mentioned that it was the pope's consecration of Thurstan as archbishop of York without submission to Canterbury in October 1119, followed by the failure of Archbishop Ralph's letter to the pope stating the Canterbury case, which made stronger measures  necessary .
This led to the ‘search’ for documents which produced the forgeries.
So, when Thurstan arrived in England in 1121 with papal letters threatening with excommunication any who resisted his admission into England, the monks of Canterbury recited the primatial phrases from the newly enlarged documents and refrained from taking further action for the time being.
Eadmer had good reason for not telling us what happened to the forgeries after this.
It was left to the York writer, Hugh the Chanter, to tell us that after Ralph died in 1122, his successor, William of Corbeil, took them to Rome in 1123 when he went to get his pallium.
The canons of York, however, had known since 1121  that, in the words of their chronicler, ‘the monks of Canterbury, like blacksmiths blowing up a nearly extinct fire, recently found, or invented, certain papal privileges about the dignity and primacy of the church of Canterbury’.
So they too were at the papal Curia ready with their reply when the monks of Canterbury arrived.
When the archbishop of Canterbury came before the pope for his pallium, the canons of York entangled the Canterbury monks in questions about the precise state in which they had found the privileges — whether they had seals attached to them, and so on.
The Canterbury monks were unprepared for these questions, stumbled in their answers, and were laughed out of court.
For practical purposes, the forgeries were never heard of again.
It only remains to add that although I have no doubt that Hugh correctly identified the ‘search’ of the Canterbury monks with the process of forgery, it is quite possible, indeed probable, that at various times during the previous fifty years individual members of the community had made experiments in altering the documents to make them more effective.
There may have been secret conclaves for this purpose.
But it was only as a last resort in 1120 that the community committed itself to, and based its case upon, the expedient of introducing into existing documents the necessary phrases, which — if they had been there in the days of Lanfranc or Anselm — would have given their case a firm basis in papal documents.
A brief list of these phrases which were in the documents in 1121 will show their relevance:
The men who inserted these phrases knew what they were doing, and they knew also that it was important not to overdo the subject of  the primacy.
We shall probably never know what went on behind the scenes when these phrases were added to the documents.
But it so happens that we can compare the situation during the years 1070 to 1123 with a similar train of events at Canterbury just a hundred years later.
A comparison of the two will throw light on the crisis of conscience on both occasions.
The next great archbishop after Anselm was Thomas Becket, The monks of his day, like those of Anselm's, believed that their archbishop had not tried hard enough to defend their rights.
But the monks of the later date believed that Archbishop Becket had intended to confirm, but had been prevented by his death from confirming, their monastic privileges with regard to many matters such as their rights in the consecration of bishops, in the appointment and dismissal of monastic officers, in the distribution of chrism and holy oil for the whole province, in the receipt of various revenues from the Canterbury manors, and the prohibition of any future move of the archbishopric from Canterbury.
All these matters are indeed of a lower order of magnitude than those which had been fought for under Lanfranc and Anselm.
But they too were in danger of meeting the same fate, and for the same reason: the document safeguarding the rights of the monastic community, which St Thomas had intended to make, did not exist.
Probably his supposed intention was a pure fiction of the monks' imagination, but the remembrance of a lost opportunity was a heavy burden for them as they watched their rights being pared away under successive kings and archbishops.
It would seem that they often thought of ‘creating’ the document which St Thomas, as they believed, had promised them.
And in the end, the temptation was too great: at some date between 1232 and 1235, the prior and others conspired to make the document in the name of Archbishop Thomas Becket, which they believed was theirs by right.
They persuaded one sympathetic new bishop, Robert Grosseteste, that one of their claims (that all new bishops in the province should be consecrated at Canterbury) was genuine, and that it had been confirmed by Gregory IX.
But when the doctored document emerged into the public arena, the fraud was almost at once uncovered in a welter of confessions, counter-accusations, and scandal.
By 1235, the whole question of forgery stood on a new moral and legal footing, and the corporate ambitions of the monks fell to the  ground in a blaze of scandal.
Nevertheless, the case throws some light on the earlier situation.
Here, as before, we see how claims which were thought to be just and well-attested in practice, were in danger of extinction from the lack of the documents which met the requirements of a new age.
We see also how forgery was long resisted, then finally and fatally adopted as a last resort.
This, I believe, is what had happened at Canterbury between 1070 and 1122, and more pathetically between 1170 and 1235.
The two sequences testify to the importance which a monastic community attached to its corporate ideal, and the steps by which a final and fatal resort to forgery came to appear the only path to a just solution.
The events of 1120 to 1123 marked the end of the primacy as Lanfranc and Anselm had conceived it.
Thereafter, primacy sank into insignificant arguments about precedence.
As a practical instrument of Church government, it had briefly revived a vision of a federated Church under papal leadership.
Now it was replaced by an administrative, legal, and organizational unity, which first became possible in the twelfth century as a result of the development of the administrative, legal and scholastic instruments of government.
More than anyone, Hildebrand had been the visionary force behind the new ideal.
During the years from 1070 to 1109, when Lanfranc and Anselm were at Canterbury, the issue was still alive.
By the time of Anselm's death the question was essentially settled and Anselm's successor Ralph was fighting in a hopeless cause: by the time of Ralph's death, the instruments of universal government had become sufficiently highly developed to make all that Lanfranc and Anselm had stood for in this aspect of their work a thing of the past.
The forged additions to the papal letters were a short-lived and totally irrelevant instrument, a last-ditch measure for the defence of the primacy, which was already a lost cause.
It may seem a depressing conclusion to Anselm's struggle for the primacy that it should have ended in a futile resort to forgery.
But this last resort of defeated men marks the transition from a system based on the traditions of the local community to reliance on legal  and administrative procedures based on written records.
In his manner of thought and sympathies, Anselm belonged to the first of these two periods, both with regard to the organization of the Church and the supremacy of the monastic foundations which had maintained the spiritual life of Europe for three or four hundred years.
For the immediate future his influence contracted and was conspicuous only among the small group of monks who were his heirs in following his manner of prayer and meditation, and in collecting his works and his words.
To them we now turn.