

On knowing where to tap
This book is about how to be a successful schoolteacher in a time of uncertainty, change, increased pressures and conflicting demands.
The majority — I would conjecture the vast majority — of teachers, particularly in secondary schools, are feeling overloaded, pushed around, confused, fed up and unappreciated.
They would like to be feeling more cheerful, enthusiastic and powerful, but don't know how.
I want to explore what room for manoeuvre individual teachers have, in the middle of all the very real difficulties, for staying positive, and for dealing with the pressures in the most effective way possible.
I believe that this is absolutely vital, not only for teachers' sanity, but also for the health of the education system as a whole.
Of course there do exist many positive individuals, schools and authorities.
Perhaps the most obvious characteristic of the school system at the moment is how different schools can be.
Some of these differences are in the structure and organization of the school — differences that will persist despite the National Curriculum.
But more striking (and more important) are the differences in ethos and atmosphere.
When teachers from different schools get together and chat, they are often stunned by how different the working lives of others — even those who work close by and in similar schools — can be.
Teachers who enjoy their work, feel supported by colleagues and can speak frankly about their ideas and difficulties in the staffroom and in meetings may find it hard to believe (unless they have recently worked in such a school themselves) the stories that other teachers tell about suspicion, isolation and backbiting in the school down the road.
While to the latter the former seem to be living either in paradise or cloud-cuckoo-land.
The question that this variability raises is whether the decline in morale is an inevitable consequence of the increase in pressure and uncertainty.
The evidence suggests not.
If this diversity in ethos cuts across any diversity in the objective conditions in which teachers find themselves, as it seems to, then there is reason to doubt the idea that decline in these conditions is the cause of teacher demoralization.
It may be harder to keep seeing change as ‘challenge’ rather than‘threat’when the going gets tough, but whether you can or not may say more about the way difficulties are met and the emotional repercussions they generate than about their very existence.
There is a story about an old man who was called in by a factory to fix their ancient boiler, which had ground to a halt.
He wandered around for fifteen minutes examining the piping, whistling quietly to himself, stopping occasionally to put his ear to a joint, and then pulled a hammer out of his tool-bag and tapped smartly on one particular valve.
Slowly the boiler began to rattle and, sure enough, it lumbered into life.
Two days later the company received a bill for £500.
They thought that was a bit steep for a quarter of an hour's work and sent back the bill with a request to itemize it.
Two days later, back it came itemized.
For tapping with hammer: 50p
For knowing where to tap: £499.50
For all those who think that we are still stuck with a form of schooling that is frustrating to teachers and that fails to deliver a satisfactory start in life to at least a sizeable proportion of its clientele, the question is: Where to tap?
Legislation?
Curriculum development?
In-service training?
Selection?
Teacher training?
Better management?
Better salaries for teachers?
Revised forms of assessment?
They all have their proponents.
But my guess is that the place to tap is the state of mind of teachers themselves.
The success of any reform, whether to curriculum, teaching method, school organization or administration depends upon teachers being ‘in-play’, willing to participate in the search for a more powerful and enabling form of schooling, and to give proposed reforms (to quote the Americans)‘their best shot’.
In  sufficient numbers innovation-weary teachers can make any change a change for the worse if they implement it in a resentful, half-hearted or half-baked fashion, and under these conditions even the brightest and the best schemes are going to flop.
The recent history of educational innovation, from Nuffield and mixed ability onwards, shows that unless change is generated and/or wholeheartedly appropriated by teachers it will end up on the mounting scrap-heap of ‘good ideas that never quite took off’.
And the cumulative effect on teachers — as we are seeing now — is to fill them with a sense of weary déjà vu when another good idea comes along, so that resistance to change becomes a reflex action, even when the teachers themselves, in their own quiet moments, know that some non-tinkering kind of change is needed, and, if they were in a different, less harassed, state, would likely welcome it.
In such a mood it is inevitable that the Government's attempts to bring about change through legislation and increased prescription will be generally felt to be yet another attack on autonomy and yet another indication of a lack of trust in teachers' judgement and their ability to do a good job.
These signals from above, coupled with the day-to-day lack of respect that many experience in the classroom, combine to produce an atmosphere of personal stress and institutional cynicism that serves further to undermine teachers' confidence and competence.
From a position of stress, change —any change — feels like more ‘problem’, not like possible ‘solution’.
It follows that a critical mass of teachers who see their job as not just delivering education but as re-creating it, in however small a way, is the absolute pre-condition for change that is purposeful and cumulative.
It is my contention that entrenchment and cynicism both reflect and serve to heighten an atmosphere of demoralization; that they arise as a result of a semi-conscious decision by teachers about how to cope with doubts and demands; that while this stance often seems the only possible option it is a mistake to adopt it; and that through insight into the dynamics of the decision-making process, a better stance can be found, even in very trying circumstances, that offers a greater opportunity for personal satisfaction and institutional success.
This, in a nutshell, is the argument of this book.
In the present climate it is not just a matter of professional duty to stay engaged with the possibility of change: it makes better sense.
And this applies particularly when the actual freedom for  manoeuvre that a teacher has is limited.
Let me repeat Edmund Burke's remark: ‘Nobody made a greater mistake than he who did nothing because he could only do a little.’
In this book I want to explain why this is such a big mistake, and how one can avoid making it, or rectify the situation if one has already opted out.
About three years ago I was running a workshop for students training to be secondary teachers at the Institute of Education in London, something I and colleagues have been doing annually for the last ten years or so.
These so-called ‘Less Stress Workshops’ are designed to allow students who choose to do so to explore the coping strategies that they use to deal with the emotional issues that arise in school.
For obvious reasons this workshop is usually scheduled for just before their second block of full-time teaching practice.
(The first block has given them enough experience to pinpoint their anxieties more accurately, but not enough to overcome them.)
This particular year, however, due to popular demand, we had to run a ‘second sitting’ during the summer term, after teaching practice had been completed.
As usual, after some warm-up exercises, we got to the point in the workshop when we ask participants to help us create an agenda for the rest of the day by sharing the particular concerns that were on their minds.
We had come to know what to expect: worries about keeping control, not being liked, being judged and evaluated, feeling lonely in the staffroom, being caught between the conflicting advice of Institute and school tutors.
But we wondered what we would get from the students at this later stage in their training year.
All of them were now looking forward to starting their careers as ‘real’ teachers — but with a particular, and strong, shared anxiety.
For more than thirty out of the forty students, the biggest fear was that they might, as one of them put it, ‘end up like that’.
They all knew without much discussion what ‘like that’ meant: cynical, bored, boring, burnt-out.
They had all met teachers ‘like that’ on teaching practice: the ones who told them they needed their heads looking at for wanting to go into teaching, who were sarcastic to the pupils and disparaging about almost everything.
We were surprised by the degree of unanimity in this concern, but also in a way by its maturity.
For the worry that they themselves might go down the same road meant that they could see that teachers who were now ‘like that’ had once been  enthusiastic, committed students like themselves.
Whether it is true or not that good teachers are born, not made, they accurately perceived that bad teachers, at least in many cases, are made, not born.
And they wanted to know how they could immunize themselves, so that they would not succumb in their turn.
One of the answers which this book suggests is that it pays to keep taking stock of how you are coping.
Time spent reflecting on the predicament is time well spent.
For example, in the workshop we asked the students to compile a list of the benefits of becoming ‘like that’.
It was easy.
You don't have to think or worry so much.
You don't have to update your lesson notes.
You don't get so tired.
You don't have to try out new, risky things in the classroom.
You don't have to stick your neck out in meetings.
You don't have to jeopardize your standing in the staffroom.
Then we asked the students to sit quietly with their eyes closed and think about the costs .
When they gave their replies there was a powerful feeling in the room.
The costs they came up with included satisfaction (other than simply getting by without trouble); real communication with colleagues; idealism; and self-respect (can you really like yourself?).
On reflection the students agreed that, however attractive the benefits might become, the costs would always be too high.
The only problem was to keep remembering that.
There are two types of innovation that we shall look at.
The first is change that individuals would like to see, whether in their own teaching or in the running of their school.
To attempt such change you need an accurate sense of what opportunities and risks are involved.
The second type of demand is that which originates elsewhere.
There are two positive ways to respond to changes that are being pushed your way: to implement them whole-heartedly, and to resist them intelligently.
Whatever type of change you are dealing with, you need your wits about you.
You need to see the situation clearly, evaluate the pros and cons of possible courses of action accurately, and to behave firmly and astutely.
But it is these very qualities of perception and judgement that are reduced by stress.
In a stressed frame of mind, things look blacker, opportunities smaller, risks greater and burdens heavier, than they really are.
As demands crowd in on you it becomes increasingly difficult to keep things in perspective.
In Hemingway's famous expression, what teachers need at the present time is  ‘grace under pressure’, and my intention is that the discussions in this book should be very practical aids to the development of this valuable commodity.
I need to state clearly what the book is not .
First, it should be clear, from what I have said already, that Grace Under Pressure does not mean accepting the situation with ‘good grace’.
My message is not that teachers ought to quit complaining and make the best of a bad job.
I am not going to give you a list of Reasons to Be Cheerful.
I hope to show you that there are things you can do to improve your frame of mind; and that this is a necessary preliminary to engaging with change, whether by promoting, implementing or opposing it, in an intelligent and powerful way.
Second, the book is not primarily a programme for change.
At the end I will lay out some rough ideas about the direction in which I, and a whole lot of other people, would like to see schools move; and some suggestions about how to get started.
But my principal aim is to help to create a mood in which individual teachers are more keen to push for their own changes, and to become more effective in doing so.
Third, the book does not contain a compendium of specific advice about how to deal with the realities of classroom life.
It is not about how to achieve better discipline, or make maths more interesting, or organize the filing cabinet in which you try to keep track of the GCSE coursework.
There are many other books that offer that useful kind of advice and information, and I don't intend to duplicate it.
Of course the attempt to overcome problems by changing the way you do things — by altering the curriculum, the timetabling, the provision for special educational needs, the conduct of meetings, the school rules — is sensible and vital.
My aim is to start further ‘up-stream’ than that, by helping teachers who wish it, to get in a frame of mind where they can be interested in that kind of advice.
Being ‘moralized’(as opposed to demoralized) is a necessary condition for being ingenious, committed and enthusiastic.
And fourth, this is not going to be a close scrutiny of the current wave of educational issues and innovations.
We will talk about the National Curriculum, appraisal, opting out and the 7, 11 and 14 tests, as well as GCSE, TVEI, Records of Achievement, Personal and Social Education and the rest.
But I will do no more than offer a few remarks about their rights and wrongs, focusing  instead on the most productive ways in which teachers can develop and promote their own positions.
I believe that what is needed today is the creation of a climate in which teachers themselves feel interested and able to contribute, through their own practice as well as through discussion, to the crucial deep debate about where education should be going.
The most damaging effect of the Education Reform Act would be if it snuffed out teachers' belief that it is worthwhile thinking and talking about what they are doing.
Teachers do not have a monopoly on educational debate.
They are not the only people who know what they are talking about when it comes to children and education.
Everyone, even the much maligned administrators, politicians and academics, have a right to throw their views into this most important of melting-pots.
But teachers (or most of them) clearly care about education because they have decided to earn their living at it.
They know about it, not just in rhetoric but in reality, and they have the opportunity to get to know a wider range of young people than parents or any other professional group.
My own opinion is that the terms of reference of the public debate about education that have been established on the one hand by the political parties, and on the other by the teaching unions, are stupefyingly narrow.
If teachers in substantial numbers are not going to be ready, willing and able to speak their minds, complete with all their doubts and uncertainties, who else is going to give the debate the greater depth and breadth that it so urgently needs?
But more than that, as I have said already, a demoralized teaching force that feels disenfranchised from the process of educational change will be resistant to the changes that are thrown at them by outsiders.
When teachers feel put upon and pushed around, hectored, lectured and badgered, their confidence and enthusiasm are undermined and their willingness and ability to contribute to the development of young people, as well as each other, suffers.
Who exactly is the book for?
Clearly not all teachers are in a position to make significant contributions to national debate.
Nor, for that matter, are they all able to make first-hand experiments with teaching style, some of them having been promoted out of contact with the pupils.
But all teachers are concerned about their own level of stress, and how to lead a satisfying working life.
And all of them are having to deal with innovation in some way or  other.
So I imagine the theme of the book will be of relevance to everyone in schools.
And there will be specific discussions in later chapters concerning the different kinds of change that teachers are commonly involved with: change in classroom practice, change in school policy and change that is being imposed from outside the school.
If however I had to single out one particular group of teachers to whom I hope the book will appeal, it is those who have been in the profession for about five to ten years.
They are the ones who — as one such teacher put it to me — are over the hump but not over the hill.
They have got the platform of competence and confidence to look beyond the day-to-day realities of school and classroom life and ask themselves hard questions about it.
They can do it, and they are wondering why they are doing it.
It is this group who will be the senior teachers, heads and inspectors at the beginning of the second millennium, and it will be they who will therefore have the opportunity, if they choose to take it, to play a crucial role in educational reform.
I hope, in addition, that the book will be of interest to people who are concerned with education, or about it: administrators, educationalists, journalists, politicians in local and central government, and of course parents.
It might appeal to such people for two reasons.
First, some of the analyses of the interrelation of stress, change and power, and some of the practical guidance, might be relevant to them personally, Second, they may be interested to get a more accurate and detailed view of the teachers' world than is commonly provided by the media and the various pundits, each with some axe or other to grind.
Anyone who is interested in the human side of innovation, and who suspects that the management of change is a subtle business, about which there is always more to be learned, might find something useful here.
People who are concerned to preserve their own well-being, and also to strive to do a better job, need to look in two directions for help: they must look inwards, to gain insight into the dynamics of their own stress; and they must look outwards, to understand better the social forces that surround them.
Self-awareness, as I am going to show, enables people to handle their emotions more skilfully.
And social awareness enables them to create opportunities and neutralize opposition more skilfully.
So we need both a psychological and a sociological perspective.
The book starts with the personal, and then shifts as it progresses to more interpersonal  and organizational perspectives.
Chapter 2 reviews the predicament in which teachers currently find themselves, and gives a feel for their working lives.
In Chapter 3 we will lift up the stone, so to speak, and look at the private anxieties and insecurities that are triggered, for many teachers, by their situations.
We shall see how stress arises as people attempt to cope with the undermining of self-confidence and self-esteem that ensues.
Perfectly normal, kind, well-intentioned people will behave oddly, becoming upset, withdrawn or even vicious, if you put them in certain kinds of unusual situations.
There is much research which shows how ordinary people are prone to behave ‘out of character’ when they are subjected to extreme conditions.
Being a teacher today constitutes for many just such an intense set of pressures, stresses, conflicts and uncertainties which often leads people to behave in ways which they do not like, but seem powerless to control.
One of the most troublesome symptoms of ‘stress’ that teachers report, for example, is an increasing punitiveness towards both pupils, colleagues and family.
They feel guilty about getting so ratty, can see that it only serves to make things worse by souring relationships, yet they are unable to stop themselves.
What I shall be arguing is that this is not simply because the kids are so difficult, nor because teachers are intrinsically powder-kegs of suppressed rage, but because the way most decent people view the world — their implicit personal philosophy if you like — breaks down when pushed to the limit and delivers misguided answers to difficult questions.
Chapter 4 gives a review of things which teachers can do, in the face of difficult circumstances, to preserve their equanimity, and to try to keep on good form.
Chapter 5 focuses particularly on the thorny question of idealism.
In the present climate it appears that for teachers to be thinking about their own educational ideals is at the very least a waste of time, and more than likely an additional source of upset.
With such a mass of demands something has got to go, and it seems as if ‘vision’ is expendable.
I shall argue that this reasonable conclusion is actually a big mistake, and that loss of vision makes things even worse.
However, it is also a big mistake to underestimate the strength of opposition that enthusiasm for, and participation in, change may encounter — and it is in Chapters 6 and 7 that we begin to turn our attention outwards to the social context.
Many of the  dynamics that attend times of doubt and change are collective ones: they are sociological rather than psychological.
There are in staffrooms (as there are in every institution) tacit rules that define what is collectively thought of as normal, acceptable, odd or inept and which therefore influence the kind of reputation and influence an individual has.
Those social pressures are real, and transgression or rejection of them will be accompanied by transient or even permanent loss of respect, status or goodwill.
But forewarned is forearmed, and we shall explore the power that is wielded especially by two important groups: the ‘management’ and the cynics.
Let me say a preliminary word about each of these now.
Senior staff are strong influences on the implicit staffroom rules.
But they also possess much more obvious power.
If ‘higher authorities’ are prohibiting the changes you want, or starving you of resources to carry them out, then life is made even more difficult and frustrating, and energy has to be put into challenging these constraints and/or finding ways round them.
Being smart and persistent are vital qualities in pursuing change, because whatever you want, you can be sure that someone, usually someone higher up the tree, is going to be against it, and is going to try to force their solution on you instead.
This is as true for headteachers as anyone else, by the way.
It was, ironically enough, at a conference of headteachers about five years ago that I first heard this now familiar piece of Machiavellian wisdom quoted by an HMI.
There is nothing more difficult to take in hand, more perilous to conduct, or more uncertain in its success, than to take the lead in the introduction of a new order of things.
Because the innovator has for enemies all those who have done well under the old conditions…and lukewarm defenders in those who may do well under the new.
This coolness arises in part from fear of the opponents, who have the laws on their side, and partly from the incredulity of men, who do not readily believe in new things until they have had a long experience of them.
And what of the cynics?
From their point of view talk of enthusiasm is merely symptomatic of naivety and talk of possibility and individual responsibility merely shows how out of touch with the harsh realities one is.
(They will already have curled their lip at a book such as this and moved on.)
They use their criticism not to refine plans for change but to block them.
Cynicism achieves  some of its power by masquerading as maturity.
At a recent conference of educational psychologists in Scotland I was foolish enough (again) to be arguing for the practical importance of such grand-sounding notions as idealism and commitment.
I quoted examples showing that significant changes in organizations can be catalysed by the presence of even a single individual who is willing to engage with the problem deeply, persistently and openly.
And I instanced Bob Geldof as someone whose commitment to the problem of hunger had certainly got things done, and inspired millions of people to see (even if only transiently) that they could make a contribution to a problem that they had previously held in their minds, albeit not very consciously, as ‘not mine’ and ‘hopeless’.
I was followed on the platform by a self-confessed cynic who poked clever fun at my talk and finished by saying ‘…and anyway, Bob Geldof is naff’, as if the only relevant criterion for judging his contribution was one of personal taste and style.
The speaker got his laugh.
And it is the same attitude of world-weariness and sophistication that socializes each generation of students and new teachers into believing that their own blends of ill-formed idealism, intermittent enthusiasm and nagging doubt about the true value of what they are doing are merely the embarrassing stigmata of the beginner, to be covered up as much as possible, and grown out of as soon as possible.
Chapter 7 gives some advice about creating a school climate within which it is the people who are bitter and negative who are on the back foot, and where ideas and adventures can prosper.
It talks about the role of the headteacher, and how to mount effective campaigns for changes in school policy.
In fact I have not met a single teacher who does not want to be their best and do their best for young people, even though what this means in practice is very different for different teachers.
I have come to suspect that the underlying motive to help younger people grow up to be confident, competent adults, and to derive pleasure from doing so, is something that a person can bury, ignore or conceal, but not amputate.
And I think this is true of the cynics too.
Caught off guard, in a mellow mood, away-from the pressures that the stance has been developed to shield them from, they too will admit to being disappointed and confused, not as hard-bitten as they make out, and as having found only a very  inadequate solution to what seems to be an insoluble problem: how to do a good enough job.
Very few teachers are irredeemable, however hard-bitten they may appear.
One of the major pitfalls that people face if they are willingly embarking on change — in their teaching, for example— is their own unrealistic or inaccurate expectations.
In Chapter 6 we shall look at what some of these common misapprehensions are, so that people can avoid creating unnecessary disappointment and frustration for themselves.
Again insight is an invaluable accompaniment to effective action.
In the last two chapters, Chapters 8 and 9, we will finally come to the question of the directions in which teacher-supported change to schools might proceed.
First, in Chapter 8, we will review the most fundamental misgivings that teachers, and many others, have about education.
It emerges that one of the foci around which these criticisms gather is that schools do not reliably, nor for all pupils, inculcate the habits and attitudes of ‘good learning’.
What this means, and what schools would look like if they were truly dedicated to helping young people become good learners, is explored in Chapter 9.
I am going to offer, more as a case-study than a prescription, my own thoughts about what education ought to be, and what kind of ‘schooling’ would be an appropriate channel for its delivery.
The argument is simple and reflexive: if the body of this book has been about helping teachers to be more able to deal with uncertainty, conflict and change — in a word, to become better learners — then the tail asserts that the core of their job should be to help young people to become good learners in their turn.
I believe this must be the heart of education, not just because every human being will have to cope with the unexpected, with disruption to routine and the loss of what is dear, but because it is singularly appropriate to the current generation of young people who find themselves growing up in a world that is characterized by instability.
They are born under the ancient Chinese curse, ‘May you live in an interesting time’, a time in which values, lifestyles, relationships, employment are up for grabs, and in which traditional answers to the question ‘How to live?’ are weak and conflicting.
In such a time anyone who lacks the courage to be curious and questioning, the capacity to grow into new competencies, and the confidence to communicate and collaborate with others, is severely handicapped, and his or her  educators are guilty of gross dereliction of duty.
(I am reminded of a passage in a book by Doris Lessing, where she says: ‘I want this court to condemn Volyen utterly, root and branch, for failing to instruct its young in the rules that its own psychologists and anthropologists have extracted from research and study: for failing to arm its youth with information that would enable it — the youth — to resist being swept away with any system of ideas that happens to be available’.)
I dare to present this point of view because I believe it is not just my little pipe-dream.
Whenever I talk to groups of teachers who are willing for a moment to lay aside the grim realities and talk and think big, I hear them saying exactly the same.
They want young people to be empowered and enabled, confident and resourceful, articulate and sociable, with self-respect and self-esteem.
My hope is that with the aid of a little psychology, I might be able (without becoming abstruse) to clarify what these fine ideals mean, and thus to contribute to the debate about how they might be best promoted.
If you find such dreaming unacceptably romantic, just skip it.
I have no illusions about the likelihood of its transforming schools in the next ten years.
Nevertheless, I find it useful to play at imagining what kind of school system could provide a congenial conduit for my educational ideals.
It helps to refine the vision, to keep me in touch with the eventual need to ‘realize’ any ideals, to sort the conceivable from the fantastic, and to have some interesting conversations.
I should perhaps say a little about how I came to think this way: that the key to educational change is in the stance that teachers individually and collectively adopt towards change.
The argument does not rely on research in the conventional sense, certainly not my own and only occasionally other people's, which I shall mention in any case more to illustrate points than to prove them.
Nor does it rely principally on my experience in classrooms, though I have been, briefly, a secondary schoolteacher and have been visiting schools and working with young people in a variety of ways on and off for the last sixteen years.
My research, if I can call it that, has involved (over the same period) a cyclical process of listening to teachers, tidying up what I think I've heard into some more-or-less coherent story, and then telling it to other teachers to see if it makes sense to them, and captures in an interesting, plausible and fruitful way something significant of their experience.
Their comments and suggestions are incorporated into the next version, and so the process goes on.
To the extent that they are spontaneously enthusiastic about the story, can easily make it their own and see implications for their own practice, and ask me back, I reckon I have been successful.
I see this book as another stage in the process.
If you are a teacher I do not ask you to believe or take on trust anything I say.
The questions to ask yourself are: Does this ring any bells?
Does it ring true?
Is my school like that?
Am I ever like that?
Do I know any people who are like that?
Is he talking about my life or not?
And if he is, does he add anything to my understanding?
Does it help me to make sense of the atmosphere in my school, or my own feelings?
Especially: Can I see any possibilities that I could not see before?
If you make it to the end of Chapter 7 and have registered a significant number of Yeses, I shall have done pretty well.
Most of the listening has been done in workshops of one sort or another.
For more than a decade I have been running workshops for Postgraduate Certificate in Education (PGCE) students at the University of London, first at the Institute of Education and later at Chelsea College and King's College.
Over the last five years I have moved into working with practising teachers and other members of the education service.
These, mostly one-day, workshops have occasionally been with a whole school staff (primary, secondary and special schools) and more often with teachers of particular types — probationers, English teachers, science teachers, senior teachers in charge of probationers, deputies and heads on DES management courses, primary heads in one county and one LEA's entire Inspectorate.
In addition I have learnt an enormous amount from the monthly meetings of the Education Network in London, of which I was Coordinator from 1983 to 1987.
This diverse group of teachers at all levels of education from primary to university was unusual in one particular way: all its members tried their best to be open.
Time and again their commitment to doing a good job proved stronger than their commitment to looking good and it was out of this honesty that many of the insights (if such they be) in this book arose.
It was also through the Education Network that I was able to develop and mount a freelance course called The  Education Workshop which has attracted teachers from throughout England, in numbers ranging from thirty to eighty, during the last three years.
Experiences seem to be much the same in New Zealand and Australia, where teachers will be reaching the same point of uncertainty that we have reached in England in, I estimate, about ten and five years respectively.
Much of the talking and checking-out has been achieved through seminars and lectures, principally at the Chelsea College Centre for Science and Mathematics Education and its more multi-faceted successor, the King's College London Centre for Educational Studies.
This chapter has been a ‘trailer’ for the rest of the book, introducing the general point of view and some of the key ideas, and indicating the scope and priorities.
I have also disclosed my intention for the effect that the book will have.
I want it to be teacher-friendly enough so that something of their own experience will be reflected accurately to them.
This does not mean that I am not going to suggest some home truths: only that I think they are truths, and not another uncomprehending outsider's attempt to cajole, belittle or malign people who are struggling to do their best in a complex and stressful situation, and who know better than anyone else that their best sometimes isn't very good.
And then, if I have achieved the aim of helping teachers understand their predicament, I hope that they may feel more purposeful, both individually and collectively, and thereby become a more powerful source of ideas and projects for the improvement of schooling, which are grounded simultaneously in a clear sense of educational values and an equally clear-sighted, hard-headed sense of what is possible and appropriate.
The short-sighted, narrow-minded Education Reform Act should not be seen as ringing the death-knell of teacher reflection and autonomy, but rather as signalling its increasing urgency.
So what's it like, then, being a teacher?
…neglect of the occupational culture of teachers…has led us to underestimate the significance of the teachers' culture as a medium through which many innovations and reforms must pass; yet in that passage they frequently become shaped, transformed or resisted in ways that were unintended and unanticipated.
David Hargreaves
We need to start with the question: what is it like being a schoolteacher today?
If we can get a clear idea about the situation in which teachers find themselves at present, and how they experience it, then we shall be in a better position to see what the most productive way forward is.
I shall base my account largely on what secondary schoolteachers have to say, though I have found that the picture is easily recognizable, with some modification to the details, by those working in both primary and further and higher education as well.
Indeed I have found that the emotional heart of the matter makes equal sense to school pupils, nurses, people in business, and to other professional groups.
Of course not all teachers will recognize themselves, and probably no one person's experience will match point for point with the sketch that I shall give.
I shall describe what seems to be common, though in the knowledge that any picture of such a complex and varied profession must necessarily be somewhat of a caricature.
If the description seems an overly gloomy one, it is perhaps because teachers themselves often tend to focus on aspects of the job that they would wish to minimize or remove.
In fact it is a characteristic of teachers that their spirits vary quite markedly.
They have good days and bad days: days when things seem relatively easy, they are on the ball, and a lot gets done, and days when they just can't face it and phone in sick — only to feel much perkier half-an-hour after putting down the phone, and  a little guilty that ‘I could have gone in if I'd really had to’.
Resilience is highest at the beginning of the new school year and hits rock bottom in February.
A good lesson or a little breakthrough with an awkward pupil can light up the rest of the day, while an unresolved clash with a colleague during morning break can equally knock the stuffing out of you.
And the available reservoirs of good sense and good humour vary too with the class to be taught, and the short-term or long-term history the teacher has had with it.
When teachers are ‘at their best’ or ‘on good form’they not only feel better but are better teachers and better colleagues: more straightforward, trustworthy, capable and with greater equanimity.
Thus the question, to sharpen up the one we posed in the first chapter, is not: ‘How can I stop myself getting ‘like that’?’, as if ‘like that’ were a chronic condition into which one slowly but permanently sank.
Rather it should be: ‘How can I help myself to be as little ‘like that’’ as much of the time as possible?’
This chapter is divided into three sections.
First we need to review the national predicament in which teachers find themselves.
Although the main emphasis of the book is, as I have said, on the process of coping, rather than on the content of what needs to be coped with, nonetheless the discussion will look somewhat abstract if we do not place it within the context of the Education Reform Act and the other present or imminent changes that are around.
Second I shall venture to sketch a picture of how teachers are feeling.
And third, because this picture will necessarily have to be very general, I shall consider some particular groups of teachers, and the way things look to them.
THE SITUATION
Teaching has always been a demanding and shifting job.
Periods of relative stability have alternated regularly with periods of change — and quite rightly, for the business of equipping young people for successful adult life must track the changing demands that adults face.
In addition education is as subject as anything else to changes in intellectual or political fashion.
But at the present time the pressures seem to be particularly intense.
The rate of change is very fast.
New skills and awarenesses — of assessment, management, counselling, computing, pedagogy and the rest — are being defined and promulgated at high speed.
At the same time teachers are being treated more and more like workers and less and less like professionals, so that their sense of power and freedom to evaluate and select among these opportunities feels diminished.
Most of the legislative changes over the last twenty years, for example, have had the effect of increasingly making teachers the implementors of a job description that has been concocted elsewhere.
The recently created Conditions of Service, and the enforcement of compulsory redeployment in some parts of the country, let alone the National Curriculum, illustrate this trend.
Even if teachers were given the time and opportunity to develop their professional lives in the ways they felt most suitable, the questions and dilemmas that face them are so many and so deep that it is indeed a daunting task.
Within each teacher's subject area there are competing approaches that conflict in educational philosophy as well as in teaching style.
Each approach seems to have its merits, yet to be irreconcilable with others.
Within science, mathematics, languages and every other subject the ‘experts’ disagree about what we are trying to achieve and how best to achieve it; so how can we harassed classroom teachers hope to sort it out?
We want people to be able to follow their own interests — but the syllabus doesn't allow us enough time.
We still have doubts about the effects of GCSE — but if we didn't teach for it we would be handicapping unforgivably the pupils in our charge.
We don't like the orthodox approach — but what right do we have to try out our home-grown experiments on other people's children?
We cannot tell in advance in what directions a specific lesson or block of work might lead — but we have to act as if we can.
We like mixed-ability teaching in principle — but it's such hard work (if you're not going to cop out and use worksheets all the time) that we find ourselves longing for the good old days of streaming.
We hate the constant struggle to keep order — but the alternative is worse.
We have to persuade the pupils that what they are doing is worthwhile — even when we doubt it ourselves.
We want to settle in one school for a good period of time, because we have discovered how important are relationships, with both colleagues and classes, that have been built up and stood the test of time.
Yet we hanker after wider experience and a fresh start.
And perhaps most fundamental of all, we have to try to live and teach according to our ideals, and to promote them, whilst at the same time trying to make a good career within a system that seems at many points to be based on quite antagonistic values.
The problem is compounded by the lack of clear consensus about the purpose or even the nature of education.
Back in the bad old days of the ‘tripartite system’ and the 11-plus, when it was more acceptable to know your place, and upward mobility was not such an unquestionably good idea, life was easier and less personal for teachers because to a much greater extent their values were stably enshrined in the organization and structures of the schools for which they worked.
To the extent that these values were questioned, by young people, their parents, or society at large, teachers could see themselves as representatives or custodians of what was in effect ‘company policy’.
They were not themselves in the dock.
Today the questioning from all sides is much fiercer, whilst company policy has got thinner and more nebulous, retreating into the traditional notions of ‘standards’ and ‘testing’, technocratic concern with ‘vocationalism’, or humanistic waffle about fostering the development of the whole person'.
The combined effect is to leave individual teachers feeling more accountable, but more confused and less supported.
Even to the now routine enquiries from pupils about ‘What's the point?’ most teachers I know feel both that they ought to have a good answer, and that they all too frequently don't.
‘Because it's on the syllabus’ may keep the kids quiet, but it no longer satisfies the teachers.
For them the twin notions of ‘education’ and ‘schooling’, which are still locked together in everyday parlance, are beginning to tear apart, and there is an uncomfortable sense that the latter may no longer be the best vehicle for the delivery of the former.
Thus the pressure, both inner and outer, on teachers to have a clear, articulate rationale for what they are doing is high at the same time as the exploration of the values from which such a rationale must derive is conspicuously out of style.
So what are some of the particular issues and demands that teachers today are facing?
First and foremost there are all the uncertainties of the Education Reform Act.
Exactly how, and how much, the new legislation in England and Wales will cramp teachers' style remains to be seen.
Certainly the intention of the Education Reform Act is to increase uniformity, particularly in  secondary schools, by reducing the scope that teachers have to decide what they shall teach.
The syllabuses for GCE and CSE always prescribed quite clearly what was to be taught to pupils from the age of fourteen upwards.
Even when there was freedom to choose between various options, set books and so on, the menu itself was not open to negotiation, except in the special case of ‘Mode 3’, or through the protracted process of making representations to the Examination Boards.
Now we have GCSE, which devolves somewhat the choice of topics and the manner and timing of assessment to individual schools, and shifts the balance of that assessment from the retention of content to the mastery of certain identifiable skills — though in practice how extensive a shift this has been remains open to question.
Teachers are still testing out what the change to GCSE means in practice.
but testing at 7, 11 and 14, together with the National Curriculum, seems to many teachers to be taking a significant step in the wrong direction, imposing on younger and younger children a model of education about which they, the teachers, have increasing misgivings.
It seems to inhibit the attention that can be paid to the needs and natures of different young people living in different communities.
It reinforces the ascendancy that the traditional academic subjects have, in both time and status, over the expressive arts and crafts, physical skill, and the concern with personal well-being that is shared between personal and social, religious and health education.
The clock has been turned back, a tide of educational change stemmed, and it is hard for many teachers not to feel despondent.
And while one would like to think that opting out might allow schools greater freedom to develop their own distinctive philosophy, it seems probable that the vetting of proposals for opting-out will allow only those schools that are choosing to be more, not less, traditional, to do so.
Nevertheless, all hangs on how those educational reforms are actually implemented: how tightly the National Curriculum is specified, what exactly the 7, 11 and 14 tests are going to look like, the way opting-out proposals are evaluated and precisely how opted-out schools are to be financed, and what their relationship to central Government and local authorities is to be.
The most pessimistic view is that the process of ‘deprofessionalization’ of teachers will become almost complete, leaving them with virtually no autonomy, no scope for exercising their judgement and  expressing their interests through their teaching.
Their status will be reduced to that of assembly-line workers, required to bolt their prescribed parts on to the pupils that pass before them on the conveyor belt.
There is an alternative, more optimistic view that some people in education are expressing, which sees the current changes as somewhere between an irrelevance and a minor irritation in terms of their own aims and practices.
The learning that can be prescribed, they say, can only at the most be a framework within which a vast amount of day-to-day scope for creativity and choice must remain.
Peter Mann, principal educational adviser to Dorset County Council, is clearly one of the optimists.
The Times for 24 September 1988 quotes him as saying that the Education Reform Act, far from signalling a return to traditional teaching, offers plenty of opportunities for continuing experimentation.
He claimed that under the National Curriculum there would be sufficient flexibility, for example, for schools to merge the teaching of traditional subjects, or to abolish classes based primarily on age.
Schools which were not thinking in such adventurous terms should easily be able to avoid ‘a narrow and unproductive concentration’ on the three core subjects of English, maths and science.
Other people are hoping that the standards that can be set for the 7, 11 and 14 tests must necessarily be so low that they need hardly be attended to.
For the optimists, anything that can be insisted upon will be so basic that it will almost inevitably be mastered incidentally, while the class is actually engaged in pursuits that are far more demanding, interesting, varied and relevant.
Depending on the procedural details, as they emerge, I suspect of course that the truth for most teachers will be somewhere between these two extremes.
The tests may indeed produce something of a learning-for-the-test mentality, and the extent to which the tests pose a problem will depend a lot on the kinds of pupils: how well the values implicit in the school ethos match and are supported by those of their home, and how far advanced is their disaffection with school.
But much will hang also on the extent to which teachers succumb to the temptation to teach for the test, and thereby create a classroom atmosphere that focuses narrowly on learning the content and the skills that will be tested, and is  therefore less lively, less varied, more repetitive and more anxiety-provoking for the pupils.
I can remember once being told by a karate teacher that the trick of breaking planks of wood with the edge of your hand was to aim your blow not at the planks but about six inches below them.
You hit through them, not at them.
I never got good enough (or brave enough) to test her advice out, but, being by inclination an optimist, I would like to think that something of the same logic would apply to the National Curriculum and its tests.
The extent to which they are felt to be a big deal for the pupils will mirror the extent to which they are felt to be a big deal by their teachers.
Just because ‘levering up standards’ appears to be the be-all and end-all of the government's educational philosophy there is no reason why teachers, in their daily interactions with pupils should fall for the poverty and rigidity of this tunnel vision.
There are not going to be agents of the DES disguised as pupils planted in every classroom, and teachers, renowned for their creativity, can exercise some of it on discovering creative interpretations of the law.
It is after all axiomatic of legislation that the more tightly you try to define and prescribe, the more points of ambiguity, the more potential loopholes you bring into being.
Provided the pupils are passing the tests, who is going to care, or even know, what else teachers are getting up to?
For headteachers there are opportunities, but also considerable anxieties, involved in taking on greater financial control of the school budget, and these are bound to radiate throughout the school.
Likewise the increased accountability of heads to governors, created by the 1986 Education Act and expanded again in the Reform Act, means not only extra work but extra tensions both for the heads themselves and for their staffs.
To have a clear philosophy, and a staff who back it, is not enough: it has to be sold to representatives of the community who have considerable power to make life difficult if they are not convinced.
The operation of Market Forces in a time of falling roles, coupled with the possibility of opting-out, and competition from, for example, the City Technology Colleges (if they finally take off) means that schools may face hard choices between promoting a philosophy to which they are committed, and pulling in the punters.
Relations with the LEAs are also a fruitful source of tensions and confusions at the moment.
Some LEAs are in the process of  major reorganization themselves, so that heads can be on the receiving end of a stream of directives and initiatives that contradict and countermand each other quicker than they can be assimilated.
While the Government's campaign to depower, or prescribe the activities of, the LEAs also creates friction in their relationships with individual schools.
What, for example, will be the exact financial status of opted-out schools with respect to the LEA?
We are told that such schools will be given funds with which to buy back LEA services — if they choose.
But will LEAs be able to refuse to be used in this support role?
And will we see a booming demand for private-practice educational psychologists and the like?
On the level of fact rather than speculation, many schools have experienced or are experiencing the stresses of amalgamations of various sorts, both whole school and for instance in the creation of sixth form consortia.
Staff have to go through the undignified and anxiety-provoking process of applying for their own jobs.
And schools are required to co-operate with each other in some respects, whilst below the surface competing like mad for pupils.
Within the school, demands arise from a number of sources.
In a number of schools there remain underlying — and sometimes still overt — conflicts that were provoked by the Teachers' Action of 1986–7.
Resentments may persist between members of staff who belonged to different unions, and in particular the goodwill between headteacher and staff seems in some places to have been almost irreparably damaged.
The question of covering the lessons for absent colleagues, for instance, remains in some staffrooms a contentious one.
This relationship has also been inevitably altered by the introduction of the Conditions of Service, which require heads to play, whether they like it or not, a much more managerial role, and by the impending introduction of teacher appraisal.
These issues will create more or less tension depending on the attitude and skill of the head, and on the existing ethos of the staff.
But some degree of uncertainty must ensue.
In addition to the changes in teaching required by the introduction of GCSE there are many other changes in the air that impinge directly on the working lives of all teachers.
There are those that relate directly to particular teaching subjects — new teaching packages and teaching methods in history or French or integrated science.
Not to mention the ingenuity required to teach chemistry  without chemicals, CDT without steel sheet and French without tapes when the consumables budget runs out half-way through the year.
More problematic for the school as a whole are those initiatives that are designed to be cross-curricular and pervasive: language across the curriculum, maths across the curriculum, computing across the curriculum.
And more broadly still, dealing with pupils with ‘special educational needs’ in the ordinary classroom; doing one's best to combat racism and sexism in pupils' attitudes; taking account of personal and social education in one's teaching style; paying attention to the deliberate coaching of study skills; providing worthwhile vocational courses for the greatly increased cohort of non-academic pupils who stay on at school beyond the age of sixteen.
It requires considerable commitment by already hard-pressed teachers, and considerable organizational skill by the management team, to ensure that such issues are truly taken on board, and do not somehow fall down the cracks between more clearly defined and familiar roles.
There are the demands created by GCSE and by other actual or projected changes in the area of assessment.
It takes a lot of time, space and organization to keep track of pupils' GCSE coursework.
And more extensive forms of record-keeping are required in order to build up fashionable supplements to GCSE such as profiles, and records or certificates of achievement.
Not only are these changes demanding to implement, they are sources of doubt and concern in teachers' minds.
However well intentioned, are records of achievement such a good idea?
Should we really be making judgements about pupils' ability to relate to each other, and to adults, or even about their skill on the telephone?
Can we honestly assume that the way they are in school will be the way they relate to an employer, or to younger children in an adventure playground?
We shall return to the issue of assessment in Chapter 8.
Finally in this short resumé of the teachers' predicament, we should mention the more personal factors to which we shall return later in the book: their aspirations, ambitions, values and concerns.
Teachers have family pressures, young children of their own to cope with — about whose education they worry at least as much as other parents.
They have financial problems, like many people — and more than most if they are trying to bring up a family in London without ‘private means’.
They are attempting  to chart a career path through the foggy waters of appraisal, Special Responsibilities and the radically changed scenario of personal and school-based staff development.
And so on.
WHAT WOULD TEACHERS LIKE?
Leaving aside for the moment the nature of teachers' particular educational philosophy, I now wish to move from describing the predicament from the outside, so to speak, to looking at it through the eyes and feelings of teachers themselves.
The first important facet of this inside story is teachers' own view of what they would wish the job to be like.
Understandably they have high hopes.
They want to be effective in helping children to learn and develop, and they want to be able to feel pleasure in doing so, and pleased with themselves (though often they find this a not-quite-nice thing to admit to) for having done a good job.
They don't want to be praised and stroked for every little thing, but they do want their work to be noticed and acknowledged every so often— and not just when they screwed something up or forgot it.
They know the job is challenging and from time to time frustrating: they probably wouldn't have it any other way.
But they want the ratio of satisfaction to frustration to balance out in their favour.
They want most of the time to feel confident about what they are tackling, even if they make a few mistakes, and basically optimistic about their own future and the future of education.
They want to be relaxed and businesslike in the classroom and above all for the pupils to be willingly engaged in the process of learning .
They love it when the pupils spontaneously show affection or appreciation.
They would like to be able to be caring within limits, and without the fear that they might get overwhelmed or taken for a ride.
They want to feel that they are making a reasonable living , though they wouldn't be teachers if they wanted to be rich.
They want to feel responsible so that they are given jobs to do by seniors that are appropriate to their status and skills — and trusted to get on with them.
But they also want to feel that they can ask for support or advice if they need it without feeling that they are being judged badly for doing so.
They want to be consulted and their views listened to in meetings even if the decision doesn't go their way.
When that happens they will tend to  implement the decision without rancour or subversion.
They want an atmosphere of goodwill amongst colleagues and to have harmonious working relationships even with people with whom they disagree.
They want to be able to discuss and collaborate, and to feel part of a team.
In both classroom and staffroom they want to be authentic and energetic : to be able to display their enthusiasm and true beliefs without being disparaged.
They want scope for their own professional development and personal growth.
Some of these hopes are illustrated in this letter, which was written by an English teacher in one of the Education Workshops.
Participants were asked to write a letter to themselves as if from an imaginary — or real — ex-pupil, expressing their appreciation for the contribution that they, the teachers, had made to the pupil's life.
Participants were asked to write the letter so that, if they had really received it, they would have been delighted at how many of their own aspirations as a teacher had been fulfilled — at least for this one pupil.
Peter's letter went:
Dear Mr White,
I don't know if you remember me, but I was in your English class many years ago.
I have thought from time to time that I would like to write and let you know how much those lessons meant to me — and now I am!
I found your lessons lively and humorous.
I was aware of your love of language and literature and the involvement which you obviously felt was contagious, and came over to me as being very real.
You aroused an interest for me in literature which has been a resource to me for the rest of my life and a source of real enjoyment.
I feel that, apart from this, you showed an interest in me and my development which enabled me to grow both in the exercise of my talents and in the confidence that I had such talents.
This whole process gave my life an additional fullness which has gone on gathering momentum since I left school.
I don't think I would have gone on with my own writing if you hadn't shown such interest and liking for my work (which I must admit I was a bit suspicious at first!).
I liked the way you did not conceal your feelings but revealed yourself to us as a real and vulnerable person who had feelings you were not ashamed to share with us.
This openness was a terrific lesson to me, and something I have emulated (often with electrifying effect!) on those around me.
You encouraged me to think for myself — not just to absorb your opinions but to consider those of others and develop my own.
This on reflection is what I think education is all about: not the mere acquisition of knowledge and passing of exams — though I thank you for your help in that area too — but the ability to stand on my own two feet intellectually.
With best wishes Sylvester Alleyne
It is an interesting reflection of the diversity of views and values in school that one of the readers of the first draft of this book commented on this letter: ‘How sentimental!
This will confirm all maths teachers’ worst fears about English teachers!’
If it strikes you this way, let me remind you that Peter's particular values are not the point at issue, and invite you to sit down quietly and compose your own, very different equivalent.
What I am trying to illustrate is the fact that teachers will mostly admit, if they are feeling bold enough, that they want to feel that they are doing something important, that other people think so too, that a fair bit of the time they are doing it well, and that they are getting better at it.
WHAT'S THE REALITY?
The reality is now, as it has always been, that teaching is a demanding, and at times frustrating profession.
What is new is the intensity of demand and the degree of frustration.
As we review the way teachers are feeling about their job at the present time, many of the experiences will be common enough.
But it is their cumulative weight that has brought about an unprecedented, and critical, situation.
Glimmers
The reality is that teachers do feel good about what they are doing, but that the occasions on which they do so are often conspicuous more by their rarity than their regularity.
In a taped interview with Jill Jones, Head of Science in a comprehensive, which I shall quote from several times, I asked her, after she had been talking for a while about the frustrations, what made it all worthwhile.
She replied:
A couple of things.
When a kid really learns something.
It may not be very much but for him or her it's a remarkable achievement.
And when they are really involved in finding things out — even though they aren't doing it right, or getting the right answer.
And when I've done a good lesson — whatever that means — when it's gone down well.
Something just happens…it's not very often…once in every three weeks about…
At times like that I feel I'm doing a good job.
I feel happy, I suppose.
It's worthwhile after all!
What keeps most teachers going are these intermittent flashes of light, which they often hoard, like interesting shells found on a beach, and can proudly display if asked.
This is the complement of many people's memories of being in school as a pupil: one or two teachers, and a handful of ‘high spots’, stand out against a background that was, for many, at best unmemorable and at worst something to be deliberately forgotten.
Hard work
Teachers work very hard, most of them.
Their working day is a succession of lessons for which they have either prepared something interesting, dug out last year's notes, decided to just do the next bit in ‘the book’, or are unprepared.
Whatever their state of readiness and interest, each lesson is a constant stream of decision-making, and of matters of judgement, both large and small, about situations that are unprecedented, and for which there is insufficient time and usually not enough available information to be sure of getting it right.
Shall I let Robert go to the toilet this time?
What am I going to do with Balwinder, who has finished already?
Have I got time to fit this next chunk in before the bell?
Should I try to split Mark and Kevin up and risk the confrontation that might result?
How can I carry on when the bulb in the overhead projector has blown?
And so on and so on.
However well prepared teachers are, their lives are ones of constantly living on their wits.
And in between the lessons, and before and after school, in discussions with colleagues and with pupils, the content may change, but the endless round of what the psychologists call ‘decision-making under uncertainty’ is likely at any moment to disrupt the cup of coffee and the quick look at the newspaper.
Teachers have constantly to buttonhole each other as they pass in the staffroom and tack extra things to do on to the bottom of each other 's already overlong agendas.
‘You won't forget to let me have that note about Artemis Kostika, will you?’
‘Did you  know there is an extra Language Group meeting tomorrow?’
‘Has anyone heard anything about Tracey Griffiths?’
Rush
Teachers do not have enough time to do the job that they feel they ought to do and want to do.
There is not enough time to meet even short-term demands for preparation, marking, report-writing, sorting out pupils' disputes and clearing up heat-of-the-moment misunderstandings with colleagues, let alone to invest in the longer-term necessities of clearing the backlog of paperwork, replying to letters, ordering supplies, planning schemes of work, reorganizing last year's course, thinking about what your tutor group can contribute to the fourth year assembly, setting up a meeting with the educational psychologist about Jessica, and spending some time with the word processor manual.
Miraculously much of this does get done, but there are few teachers, if any, who can walk out the gates at four o'clock, knowing they are up-to-date,
Stopgaps
When there isn't enough time to do what must be done, you find yourself papering over the cracks and making stopgap decisions.
Issues that should take at least an hour of discussion with colleagues, as well as with the pupil concerned, have to be dealt with in two minutes at the staffroom door during break.
You were late getting in your order for the film (though you swear the office forgot to send it on) so on the appointed day, when it isn't there, you have to cobble something else together — and then show the film, when it arrives four weeks later, in the middle of a block of work to which it does not relate.
Priority decisions
As well as making quick botch jobs of things that need careful repair if they are not to fall apart again next week, teachers, when  they confront the impossibility of doing everything they ought to do head on, are faced with making some very tough priority decisions.
If I can't do it all, which of those things that I really need or want to do am I going to have to leave undone?
The working party on Equal Opportunities that I said I would convene?
The meeting I ought to set up with Samuel's parents?
Getting my brains round that new, interesting-looking book on personal, social and health education?
Or (how many years have I been promising myself this?) sorting out the stock cupboard/prep room?
When they don't have enough time, teachers know, even if they are fairly successful at not thinking about it, that in some way or other they are letting down their pupils, their colleagues or themselves.
Pragmatism
Teachers do not, as a breed, read or talk much about education and this presumably reflects the general feeling that ‘something's got to go’, and that concern with ideas and ideals seems to be one of the areas that is dispensable.
They are often distrustful of any kind of technical or academic thinking about education, and for the most part their experience of the social sciences during their teacher training has compounded the problem.
As David Hargreaves notes,
The social sciences studied during training have entirely failed to provide teachers with a new working vocabulary.
Because it is seen to be of little direct help to teaching, that knowledge and vocabulary is abandoned and left at the college gates as soon as the BEd exams are over.
I sometimes think that the principal function of professional training in education is to inoculate teachers against books on education.
Jill Jones is slightly less hard on her college days, but the message is similar.
I asked her if her work at college had forced or stimulated her to think about school in general, and what it is for.
She said:
Not much.
Not much it I'm honest.
What I really learnt about teaching was when I actually started the stuff.
When I look back at what I learnt in college I'm disappointed to think that they didn't teach me more.
What we had was basically method things where we  were given lots of experimental things we would do in the laboratory, but no real philosophy behind it, no sod of follow through.
It was just all snippets of things.
John Holt (one of the few authors whose books still seem able to appeal to students despite their inoculation) writes of a common experience that mirrors mine with the Scottish educational psychologists.
In 1965, soon after How Children Fail appeared, a teacher wrote me saying, in effect, ‘I have just read your book, and like it.
But there is something you don't know that you should know.
For over thirty years I have been teaching in the public schools of New York City.
For over thirty years, along with my fellow teachers, I have been going to educational conferences, and training sessions, and workshops, to hear countless leaders in education talk, as you do, about the dignity of the child, and the importance of individual differences, and of fostering positive self-concepts, and building on the interests of the child, and letting the child learn from curiosity rather than fear.
And for thirty years I and my fellow teachers, as we went back to our classrooms, have said to ourselves, ‘Well, back to reality’’, and had gone on doing just what we had been doing all along, which was to try to bribe, scare or shame children into learning what someone else had decided they ought to know.
What makes you think you can change all this?’
A few years later, while I was talking at a meeting on educational reform, a local superintendent of schools rose from his seat in the back of the room and, moving to the door, said scornfully, so that many could hear, ‘Well, back to reality’.
Given their experience of the remote jargon of their teacher training, and of the demonstrable lack of impact of the pundits on education, as well as their weariness and preoccupation, it is entirely understandable that teachers should be turned off ideas at least as much in 1989 as they were twenty-five years ago: understandable but a mistake, as I am trying to argue.
What we and they have witnessed is certain types of ideas mishandled in certain characteristic ways, not the impotence of reflection and cognition themselves.
On the contrary, for teachers to be grappling individually and collectively with the deepest and knottiest problems in education provides the only hope they have of recapturing their equanimity and satisfaction.
Dissatisfaction
I do not know any (secondary) school teachers who, in private, are not willing to say that they are substantially dissatisfied with the job that schools are doing, for at least a substantial proportion of pupils.Even student teachers, who might reasonably be expected to be the least jaundiced and most optimistic informants, aren't happy.
On the spur of the moment the other day I asked a seminar group of sixteen PGCE students (a third of whom were over the age of thirty) after a three-week preliminary block of school experience, whether they thought that schools were (a) fine as they were;(b) in need of some modifications;(c) failing a sizeable proportion of young people;(d) seriously failing all young people.
I was shocked when the voting was nine for (c) and seven for (d).
What it is that teachers are dissatisfied about we will return to later.
Unappreciated
Time , when I ask people in workshops what it is like being a teacher, they say they feel unappreciated: unappreciated within the school by seniors, colleagues and pupils, and unappreciated by the world at large— parents, politicians, pundits, the media.At parents' meetings they must be prepared to be blamed by mothers and fathers with unrealistic expectations of their, the teachers', and the children's abilities.
(One teacher, Karen Armstrong, writing recently in The Guardian quoted the following encounter.
‘What do you mean, she finds modern poetry difficult?’, one father bellowed after I had tried to explain why his not very able daughter had failed her mock exams.
‘She is a modern poet!’’
While from the Secretary of State for Education downwards, they feel themselves to be on the receiving end of all kinds of unfair accusations.
Within the classroom too teachers have to live with an active or passive resistance to their best efforts.
Subjects that they care about are fended off by the pupils with the familiar complaints that they are ‘boring’ or ‘stupid’.
And frequently decent adults and pleasant youngsters seem to forget that others have normal human feelings.
A kind of casual cruelty abounds in which, almost  as a matter of routine, teachers say to pupils, and pupils to teachers, things that are wounding or upsetting.
But because it is part of the school ethos (for teachers and pupils alike) that it is embarrassing to show that you have been hurt, people remain mostly unaware of the pain that these mundane disparagements cause.
Many teachers, I have found, can remember from their own schooldays the shock and guilt they felt when a teacher finally broke down in the face of what, to the class, had seemed to be ‘just having a bit of fun’.
And equally they can recall the lasting resentment caused by a teacher's blatant unfairness, or by a public humiliation.
Acting
It is a prevalent source of distress to teachers that they are unable to ‘be themselves’ in school, and this is the reason that they often give for leaving, or wanting to leave, the profession.
It is as if they can find no other way of being in school than one which feels phoney and uncongenial.
They feel they are being sucked inexorably and against their will into the adoption of a rather ugly or artificial persona, though there are various expressions that this mask can take.
An anonymous teacher writing in Time Out said: ‘I decided that I had to get out of teaching when, walking down the corridor, I heard myself screaming ‘Tie!’’ at some kid I didn't even know.
I suddenly realized that I wasn't myself any more:I didn't give a damn whether he was wearing a tie or not.’
And Karen Armstrong, in the article from which I have just quoted, explained why she left teaching.
As the years passed I discovered that I had developed a special school ‘personality’ which was a distortion of myself.
I had built it up, at first quite unconsciously, but later it became a deliberately assumed mask.
The ‘personality’ had to conceal my natural impatience, my moods, my fatigue and make me appear endlessly dynamic and reassuring.
With it I wooed the children to learn by setting out to entertain them.
It became increasingly difficult to switch off, without my crumbling into a disintegrated heap.
I discovered that I had become a ‘character’ and was fast becoming a caricature of myself.
Here is a third example:
I was talking recently with a group of fourth-year boys — the girls were at a talk on sex education.
The boys were bemoaning that they were not there, too.
‘Trouble is, Miss,’ said one of the boys, ‘school doesn't teach us anything we really want to know.’
Pursuing the notion of building sex education into the curriculum, I asked whether they would not be embarrassed to talk about sex with a teacher they saw around all the time.
‘Well, yes, maybe,’ said the same boy, ‘but perhaps we need not have a teacher — perhaps we could have a proper person.’
I am beginning to believe that it is almost impossible to be both teacher and ‘a proper person’.
It has taken me twelve years to be as sure as I am now, and it might take a few more to be absolutely sure.
However, given the choice, if that is a choice, there is no question as to which I would rather be.
What is why I think I shall probably give up teaching in two or three years.
I shall not really want to.
Isolated
It is still much more common than not for teachers to do their teaching behind closed doors, unobserved by another adult, and to feel somewhat threatened on the odd occasion when they are being watched.
Perhaps as a result of their experiences during teaching practice and their probationary year, observation has come to connote judgement rather than support.
This tends to leave their perception of their own teaching — both how they do it and how well they are doing — in a rather uncomfortable vacuum, especially if the staffroom ethos prohibits any kind of discussion other than crisis-management and grumbles about individual or whole-class ‘personalities’.
Even if the ethos does permit them to check out how they are doing, it remains unlikely that it will encourage anything more than a superficial sharing of doubts about what they are doing: about the disparity between their hopes for teaching and the effects, or lack of them, that they and their colleagues seem to be achieving.
These are some of the characterizations that one will find both on and below the surface of teachers' lives.
They are, in brief, hard-working and somewhat stressed; feel dissatisfied with the job they are doing (or at least bits of it); confused about what they should be doing but wanting to change in the direction of greater impact and relevance of what they do; have no clear idea how to go about it; do not feel optimistic about things getting better; are  worried about the amount of emotional energy the job takes up; and mostly do the best they can, try not to think about it all too much, and hang on till the holidays.
SUB-SPECIES
Within the teaching profession there are obviously subgroups which have their own particular concerns, and their own preferred strategies for coping.
At the most junior level there are the students, about whom we have spoken already.
They have the problem of learning the basic skills of teaching, of keeping order, of creating varied and interesting lessons, of the kind of language that is suitable to different ages and levels of achievement, of pacing and of developing the vital intuitive sense of how much you can get done in forty or seventy minutes.
On top of this, inevitably but it seems rather unfairly, they have to deal with the problem that faces every teacher in a new school: the fact that they do not know its geography, its structure and its rules, both explicit and unwritten, nor do they have a chance to get to know the personalities and quirks of more than a handful of either pupils or teachers.
And they may be torn three ways, between the practical direction they are getting in the school, the advice they are being given in college and by their teaching practice tutor, and their own developing sense of the kind of teacher they would or would not like to become.
The unlucky ones find themselves pig-in-the-middle between college and school tutors, each of whom is convinced of the rightness of their own particular way of teaching and the wrongness (hopelessly impractical, hopelessly out-of-date) of the other.
Students are more than likely having to cope, perhaps for the first time in their lives, with a threateningly high level of conspicuous and recurrent failure, and the way they cope with anxiety will play a large part in determining what kind of a fist they make of it.
And buying into this self-doubt will be the old lags in the staffroom who are telling them they must be daft.
As one teacher trainer put it not long ago, ‘I have been in education for 25 years and I have never known morale so low.
Many, many of our students are coming back from teaching practice reporting that teachers are urging them not to enter the profession’.
Secondary teacher trainees, being graduates, are uniquely ill-equipped to understand the vast majority of the school population who are not like them, and have no intention of becoming so.
Only a few of them have any idea what it is like for school to be a persistent diet of boredom, incomprehension and failure.
Only a few will have had, as close schoolfriends, those for whom this is the reality.
Instead they enter college wedded through their own experience to an implicit theory of schooling and teaching that will serve as a working template for some groups of pupils they teach, but which will be wildly inappropriate for others.
They go into school wearing comfortable old clothes and rapidly discover they need to tailor for themselves, and quickly, a substantial wardrobe, not only of ways of operating but of ways of thinking, feeling and perceiving as well.
It is the skills of tailoring they will need throughout their careers (until promoted out of the classroom) to fabricate and negotiate again and again, with each new class, an effective and hardwearing working habit.
The process of supplanting their initial unconscious caricature of school with a kaleidoscope of skills and attitudes that can be shaken into a host of new shapes to meet new needs is an unprecedented and, for most students, a painful one.
New teachers in their first year or so are still very much in the process of finding their feet.
Most of the problems of the student will also be theirs: they are still on trial.
Depending on their flair and the quality of their training they will need differing degrees of support, and depending on the school and the LEA they will either get it or not.
Their main priority during the year will be to learn enough and develop good enough relationships in both staffroom and classroom to survive.
For most of them it will be without doubt the most taxing year they can remember.
And as well as learning the job of teaching, they are learning its culture as well: how it is ‘acceptable’ and ‘normal’to act, think, feel and talk as a teacher.
They will observe in the staffroom an array of different stances to the business of teaching, and, measuring these against their own developing and conflicting set of aspirations, begin to make some intuitive decisions about the track they are going to follow.
Can I find a way of being a teacher — can I see any role models — which allows a satisfactory compromise between my career ambitions, my wish to be a good subject teacher, my desire to promote my broader educational ideals, my intention to  be a ‘real person’ as much as I can, and my commitment to improving the status and conditions of teaching as a profession?
And if I can't, can I begin to entertain the thought that teaching may not be for me (as a substantial number of new teachers do) without feeling guilty or a failure?
As Colin Lacey says:
The new teacher is preoccupied with the basic problems of survival and acceptance.
The strain of being ‘new’ is in itself considerable.
As the newness wears off, that is, as many of the appropriate behaviour patterns are learnt and habitualized, these strains are reduced.
The energies released enable the young teacher to ‘try again' on some of the preferred but unsuccessful teaching strategies of the first year.
But once again there are competing pressures and choices to be made.
As the pattern of career advancement becomes clearer and the expectations of the established senior staff are communicated, these expectations become pressures that must be taken into account…
The school now appears as an arena in which teachers strive for two goals.
The first is…acceptance into and promotion within the existing structure of the school…
The second goal is to make the school resemble more closely the sod of place within which the teacher would like to teach…this second goal can become of considerable importance, and in some situations of conflict it can become more important than the first.
That is, teachers will take a stance that they know will damage their careers in order to uphold a principle about how the school should run.
Many teachers would like to be more adventurous, creative and experimental than they feel it is possible or safe to be.
To make a gross oversimplification, the younger teachers are the most inclined to be adventurous, but are the most at risk if they try it.
Their ability to control and to recover control of a class is more tenuous, and their reputations are more vulnerable.
The more experienced teachers, on the other hand, are generally more secure both in their competence and their status, but may have lost their fire.
Perhaps one of the most important groups for the stimulation of change is that which falls between these two poles: those teachers who I would see as belonging to the 25 to 35 year-old age group, or perhaps those who have not been teaching for more than six, or less than three, years.
They are the ones who have been long enough in the profession to have lost some of their naivety and to have mastered the art of teaching, whilst they  have not been teachers long enough to have become demoralized and cynical.
Jill Jones seems to fall into that category (she has been teaching for seven years).
She says:
I'm prepared to give things more of a go now, and I don't mind if they fail.
I don't care if someone comes into my room and it's a mess.
I can say ‘It was a failure but it was worth a go’.
Whereas before the insecurity would have been there, I suppose, that might have stopped me trying things.
Of course sometimes when it doesn't work that depresses me because it's not because it doesn't work, it's because of the constraints of the system that you cannot make it work.
That gets me down.
I sometimes wish I didn't think so much about what I do, and just pottered along doing it the way it's always been done (like the bloke in the next-door room does!).
I asked her, ‘What is it that gives you the confidence to try things out?’.
She said:
It's partly the status I have within the department.
I know there are people around who think I'm an OK teacher, so if I screw up occasionally that's not going to sink my reputation.
If the Headmaster walks in and there's a bit of chaos I can tell him why it's a mess and it doesn't bother me.
I know he could walk in the next lesson and things would be perfectly OK.
It would have bothered me though a few years ago.
I'd probably been teaching for about four years before I began to have that confidence.
If it doesn't work I know now I can re-establish things with myself and with the kids.
I think it's more difficult now to get that basis of status and confidence for new teachers coming in to the profession, it only because there aren't the promotions or the movement of new jobs.
And the status is important.
You need to have someone to say ‘You're good…you're worth this’.
But if you're stuck on Scale 1 for years you don't feel in a position to try anything new.
As I said in Chapter 1, if this book is directed at any particular group of teachers it is probably these.
From their ranks today will come the senior teachers of AD 2000, so it is crucial for education, as well as for their own well-being, that this group is preserved from the fates of burn-out and cynicism.
It is also members of this group who have the strongest personal motivation for thinking about and working on the educational system, for they in the main are the teachers with young children of their own, at the beginning of their school careers.
They are engaged with the issues not only as professionals, but as parents as well.
As the student or the new teacher scans the staffroom, he or  she will find some of the more senior teachers who have kept their sparkle, who have a developing educational philosophy of their own, and who enjoy educational debate.
But unless she is lucky she will also meet others who have opted for different solutions to the problem of how to be a teacher.
There are the careerists amongst the senior management of the school, some of whom will seem to have ‘sold out to the system’: to affect a philosophy in so far as it looks in their own interests to do so, to have become executives and to have lost touch with the pupils.
They may have their private regrets that they could not find a way of solving the equation of conflicting interests that offered deeper satisfaction as well as personal advancement, but it is unlikely that they will reveal these.
She will see those who have committed themselves to the traditional model of education, some as a matter of principle, but others because to question it opens up too big a can of worms.
They like their subject, and want nothing more than to be left alone to teach it to groups of pupils who want to learn it.
For some of these people the time is past when they could reappraise their stance.
The kind of teaching that they enjoy, value, and entered the teaching profession to do may no longer be appropriate for many of the classes that they have to take.
For good or ill, they may not agree with the way things have turned out, or are developing at the moment.
Rightly or wrongly they may feel unwilling or unable to adapt.
Because education has become more and more of a depersonalized commodity that can be delivered in principle by anyone, their technique as teachers is thought of as paramount and their preferences as incidental.
This ‘technological’ view of education and teaching also prevents teachers from deliberately gravitating to schools whose ideology they like, and in which they will feel comfortable.
Schools where the staff are aligned with a practical philosophy which is more than the usual ‘whole person’ rhetoric do exist, but to find your way, as a teacher, to the one that suits is, in these egalitarian and bureaucratic days, often a hit and miss affair.
It is also hard to move without being promoted, so if you do not want more administrative responsibility, or are not promotion material, again you are inhibited from searching for a more congenial workplace.
Many of the teachers who fall into this category are those who have given up hoping that there will be any room for their beliefs  in debate or in classroom practice.
Unable to reconcile their view of education with the form of schooling they are now required to deliver, they have regretfully had to turn off the tap, and substitute instead a tape-loop of the sound of running water.
Teachers who find themselves in this position are of course free in principle to leave.
Many of the younger ones do, and many of the older ones would like to, but are trapped by financial commitments, pension prospects and the fear, accurate or not, of being unqualified for or unable to find an alternative job.
It may indeed be that for some teachers there really is no possibility of working with real integrity, and consequently no possibility of deriving any deep satisfaction from what they do.
If they stay they must deliver an emasculated version of their own educational vision, and in such a position it is easier to deny the ideals than to stay open, day after day, to the disappointment and the sense of inauthenticity.
The choice that is left is to go through the motions either with counterfeit conviction, or with subversion and disdain.
There are, to point to two easily identifiable groups, the old grammar school teachers who do not like and have not mastered mixed-ability teaching; and the old secondary modern teachers who still feel second-class citizens in the staffroom.
Somewhat in the same boat may be groups of younger teachers who see education in personal/emotional, or in political terms, and who are feeling their values particularly heavily trodden on by the current educational reforms.
The commitment of such teachers is to the emotional and personal well-being of the pupils, and they may be openly critical of the content-based, exam-passing philosophy of more traditional colleagues.
But despite the current popularity of Personal, Social and Health Education, Active Tutorial Work, and so on, and whatever the rhetoric of the school, they can see that their prime concern is only incidental to the formal scheme of things, and they know that the national tide is not running in their direction.
Nevertheless in many schools their lobby is a strong one, and even those who have no real sympathy with their priorities find it unfashionable to say so.
Then there are the ‘activists’.
Some people go into teaching with the intention of becoming active in the union, either out of genuine commitment to teaching as a profession, or because it offers a political platform.
Many others join the unions, but with considerable misgivings.
They find them overly concerned to  engage with ‘management’ in an adversarial relationship, in ways that seem harsh, legalistic and materialistic.
Of course teachers want a reasonable salary and decent career prospects.
But more than that most want the satisfaction of feeling they are doing a worthwhile job well — and here the unions don't seem to offer much help.
They are as traditional, narrow-minded and uncreative in their approach to educational debate as the Government.
They seem only capable of being negatively reactive to other people's suggestions, and disappointingly preoccupied with status and regard, to the almost total exclusion of serious educational debate.
Yet despite these misgivings in teachers' minds, the unions offer (witness the strength of feeling in the ‘action’ of 1986–7) a channel of expression for the frustration and confusion that they feel.
The agenda of that action was reasonable, but its impetus was provided, in considerable measure, by the need to channel private doubt and uncertainty into some form of public declaration.
Given that nobody (except the academics, who don't count) was talking education , the dispute about pay and conditions provided an alternative hoarding on which to display their disquiet.
This chapter has offered a summary of what is more or less evident when one looks at teachers' lives today.
Despite some simplification and the occasional caricature, I doubt there is much in what I have said so far with which to argue.
But in order to see the seriousness and urgency of things, we need now to invade teachers' privacy, and to explore the effects that these trying conditions are having on their emotional lives.
In doing so we shall begin to explore the ways people respond to and cope with high levels of uncertainty and demand, and to open up the question of whether some of these ways are misguided.
Getting like that
The educational system has always displayed great inertia, a built-in resistance to change, which is contributed to by both teachers and parents alike.
Teachers, enjoying tenure, will resist any radical departure from the attitudes and practices they acquired in initial training and, more particularly, during probation: nobody wants their own established expertise threatened.
Parents, on the other hand, however much they have suffered at school, or even if they left it with a sense of failure, usually attribute the shortcomings to themselves rather than to the system, and thus find it difficult to envisage school in any form other than the one that they themselves experienced.
John Watts
The last chapter attempted to paint a recognizable picture of teachers' current predicament and how they are feeling.
We watched a new entrant to the profession looking around at her colleagues for clues as to how to resolve the tensions, whilst doing as little damage to her integrity (and her career prospects) as possible.
What we offered her was a range of ‘types’ to choose from, ranging from the idealistic and dynamic to the cynical and incompetent.
But these caricatures do not tell us much about what is going on with real, complex individuals behind the scenes.
Now I want to look at teachers' lives from a particular point of view.: that what our hypothetical observer is actually witnessing is people coping, in a great variety of ways, with stress.
This chapter is about the way in which the existing predicament of teachers leads them to become stressed, and it is also about whether stress is inevitable in such circumstances or not.
The concern with stress reduction is valid in its own right, but it is also a vital prerequisite for successful engagement with educational innovation.
Teachers need to be able to understand and manage their own stress, to be able to deal with it effectively and intelligently, before they are going to be able even to think about what changes they would like to make, and to form realistic appraisals of what is possible.
Preoccupied with clinging to the  remnants of their well-being, there is no time or energy left over for anything grander.
How could there be?
From a fatalistic point of view, the resigned response, to the expression of any educational idealism, of ‘Well, back to reality’ is the only sensible, rational reaction there is.
It is only from the vantage point of a better framework that previously unforeseen opportunities open up, and the previously unacknowledged costs of resignation and entrenchment become visible.
I wish now to set out such a framework.
WHAT IS STRESS?
People use the word ‘stress’ to refer to both the external pressures and demands they are subject to, and the effects that such stressful circumstances have on their performance, feelings and health.
The word typically conflates the causes of stress with the phenomenon of stress.
I want first to focus on the latter meaning, and to describe in some detail what teachers are talking about when they say they are stressed, or suffering from stress.
I have collected this catalogue from the dozens of workshops and courses I have run for teachers on the subject of stress.
So it (the catalogue) does not represent an objective description of a psycho-medical condition; it shows what teachers say when you ask what stress means to them.
First, stress affects people physically .
For every aspect of physical functioning you can name, there is some kind of aberration or alteration that some people will see as stress-related.
Stress affects the circulatory system: heart rate increases, people are aware of their heart pounding; blood pressure increases (some people claim it decreases); they suffer from nose bleeds; they may even have heart attacks, strokes or other serious circulatory problems.
Breathing can be affected: people suffer from shortness of breath or panic attacks in which they are unable to catch their breath at all; stress may bring on asthma attacks if people are prone to them.
Digestion can be upset: some people have bouts of diarrhoea or need to urinate a lot; others get constipated; people feel sick and sometimes are; more serious conditions like ulcers can develop.
Things happen to the skin: people sweat and go clammy; they may be flushed or alternatively may lose their  colour; spots, boils, rashes and other irritations can develop; and out.
People blame stress for changes to their hair: greying or balding are sometimes considered to be ‘premature’.
Stress affects posture: often people look slumped, their shoulders sag and they hunch their back; alternatively they hold themselves very rigid so that the muscles of the shoulders and neck especially are set; their face takes on a fixed expression with perhaps staring eyes or clenched jaw; muscular tics and involuntary twitches can arise; for some people cramp is stress-related.
Sleep is commonly disturbed in one way or another: some people nod off as soon as they get home and sit down; they wake up at midnight with the TV still on — and then can't get back to sleep again till 3am; some people find it impossible to wake up in the morning and getting out of bed is a real struggle; others are awake at half-past four in the morning with their brains buzzing and churning; some people find themselves getting very sleepy when difficult or anxiety-making things happen.
Strange things happen to eating: people lose their appetites and pick at their food; or they stuff themselves; cravings for sweets or junk food appear; and again these can develop into clinical obesity, anorexia or bulimia.
Consumption of drinks and drugs go up: alcohol consumption can increase — maybe to a second scotch before dinner, maybe to two Special Brews to get through the afternoon and a bottle of wine every evening; smoking can increase, as can the consumption of tea and coffee — even though these are physical stimulants (and can therefore mimic anxiety) rather than relaxants.
People may start using pills of various sorts: aspirin for the recurrent headaches, tranquillizers, anti-depressants and sleeping pills; and then there are the ‘non-prescription’ drugs such as marijuana, cocaine and even heroin.
Sex is a sensitive barometer of stress for many people: they lose interest, their bodies stop responding in the ways they are supposed to, or they find themselves feeling unusually (and perhaps embarrassingly) sexual.
Women's periods are often affected: they may become very heavy, lose their regularity, or even disappear for a while.
People's energy levels vary: they may feel persistently wiped out.
Even if there are little windows of time between jobs, teachers often feel that they simply don't have the energy to take advantage of them.
By half-term many teachers feel exhausted, and the last thing they feel able to do in their ‘free time’ is to undertake anything that smacks of yet more effort, uncertainty or challenge.
When you spend the days feeling stretched to the limit and end them emotionally drained, it is small wonder that you want to spend the evening dozing in front of the television and half-term skiing instead of preparing lessons.
It is as much as you can do to read the job advertisements in the Times Educational Supplement , let alone the leader.
Or people can feel hyped up, restless and agitated; or in a kind of listless, uninterested state that feels dead and dispirited.
Certain kinds of illness and illness-proneness are experienced: people are more likely to catch a cold or flu, for example, and be less able to shake it off; they feel generally run down and may suffer from mysterious but more debilitating viruses, such as ME or glandular fever, that are difficult to diagnose and take a long time to clear up.
Finally, in the physical list there are various kinds of aches and pains: headaches, migraines, neck and shoulder pains, back aches, perhaps the recurrence of old injuries.
Then there are behavioural and social aspects of ‘The Stress Syndrome’.
There may be an element of self-neglect: normal standards of personal hygiene are lowered — showers are taken less frequently, clothes unwashed, things not tidied up, meals thrown together.
Physical co-ordination can suffer: plates are dropped, and more serious accidents can happen, or nearly happen, as one steps off the kerb or pulls out without looking.
Procrastination sets in: jobs that ought to be done are left to pile up; weak excuses made to avoid doing anything difficult.
People are avoided if they are likely to be at all stressful; phone-calls go unreturned; even social events that would normally be pleasurable and fun may feel like yet more demands on a person's time.
Habits and patterns of work can become more disorganized: people may be unable to focus on one task because all the other things to be done keep crowding in; at the end of a very busy day little seems to have been accomplished.
Perhaps also under this heading might come an increase in complaining: people find themselves becoming self-centred and self-justifying in conversations and perhaps feeling that they are becoming boring (and often are).
Next there are the mental effects.
Below the surface there lies, for many teachers, a nagging sense of doubt and confusion about what they are doing, what they ought to be doing and what they  are doing it for.
As one teacher put it to me, ‘on a bad day I have the feeling that I am struggling hard to do something that may not be worth doing at all’.
Their position, one might conjecture, is characterized by what in psychiatric circles would be called a ‘double-bind’, woven out of these underlying beliefs:
What I'm doing isn't good enough.
I don't know (at all clearly) what else to do.
I don't feel able to do anything significantly different.
There doesn't seem to be much support for trying or even thinking about it.
Trapped within such propositions there is no satisfying solution to be found, nor even avenues to be explored.
Yet at the same time thinking can become obsessional and repetitive for some people.
Some teachers have responded to the confusion by simplifying, and therefore being able to live with, the conflicts and demands of the teacher's predicament.
Single-minded devotion to one s own advancement, or to better pay, or to just one cause, strengthens one legitimate ingredient of the complex personal equation — but sometimes to the point where it eclipses and pre-empts the others.
Confusion is certainly reduced.
But if the tentative claims for attention of deep, albeit hazy, personal beliefs are consistently ignored, clarity has been bought at a high price: damage to integrity and the loss of real satisfaction.
The discomfort of uncertainty and change is high, so the drive to avoid or resolve it is high too.
But any solution that involves disconnecting activity from true values may in the long term take an even greater toll.
It is with this fact, semi-consciously, that the new teacher in particular struggles.
Reasoning powers can deteriorate: people may begin to think irrationally (and do so even though they know they are doing so); they may begin to get paranoid, feeling that others are slyly poking fun at them, excluding them from discussions, or being condescending or patronizing.
They jump to unwarranted conclusions without realizing they have done so, so that‘crossed-wires’ and other misunderstandings arise.
A sense of balance is lost: one can't tell what is important or what really matters.
For many people a prime symptom of stress is loss of their sense of humour: playfulness is replaced by earnestness or snappiness; casual jokes that one would normally return in good spirit are felt  to be wounding and hurtful.
People say they become imperceptive; they spend hours looking for the car keys that were on the table in front of them all the time; they become preoccupied and inattentive to what other people are saying to them (‘But I told you the Smiths were coming over yesterday .
Three times…’).
And memory seems to deteriorate: people forget promises and appointments and become absent-minded.
And finally there are the emotional aspects of stress.
As we have noted already, anger and all its varying intensities and hues are a common part of the stress syndrome.
One of my friends on an off-day defined school as ‘the place where everybody is always cross!’.
While ‘everybody’ and ‘always’are exaggerations, there is some truth in this.
When you are being spat at for doing your best in difficult circumstances, it is hard not to become spiky and defensive.
When your own resources are low, you've forgotten to set homework and you are getting a cold, it requires the forbearance of a saint to keep making allowances for other people's fallibility and forgetfulness.
When people are feeling wound up, there are different things that can unleash the barbed remark: another small demand for their attention, a lost key, not being taken seriously enough by the person to whom they are cataloguing the disasters of the day, or TOO MUCH NOISE.
Noise is a potent trigger and its constant presence is for many teachers very wearing.
Through parental rows, war movies, barking dogs and football crowds, noise comes to be an automatic, unconscious signal of loss of control and of aggression, and there are teachers whose daily lives are an eternal battle to contain the unease that noise calls forth in them.
Teachers report themselves becoming punitive and stroppy with pupils, colleagues and their own families.
The fact that they can see how counterproductive it is not only doesn't seem to stop them, it makes matters worse.
They feel bad about themselves for being so irritable, and bad about themselves for not being able to control it.
People may become violent in thought if not in deed.
But not all the feelings of stress are so public.
On the contrary, anger is often the external tip of a self-destructive internal iceberg.
People become vulnerable: they feel very thin-skinned; over-sensitive and self-pitying; moody and unpredictable, with a cheerfulness that is transparent and brittle; they may become tearful, perhaps breaking down over an item of television news or for  no apparent reason at all.
Partly as a result of the potent and embarrassing mixture of irritability and vulnerability, people commonly experience feelings of withdrawal: they may feel lonely, hopeless and depressed.
Allied to this comes guilt: guilt about being such a wimp; guilt about being so secretive; guilt about having been such a bitch or a bastard; guilt about all the things not done; guilt about mistakes and errors of judgement; guilt, in other words, about Not Being Good Enough.
To complete this bitter emotional brew there is anxiety : that feeling of dread or agitation on waking up in the mornings; stammering and blushing; fear of making another fool of yourself, or of your last mistake being uncovered.
In conditions of uncertainty and overload anxiety is inevitable, though it may, with some effort, be transmuted into something else, or denied.
The ‘something else’ is often more irritation and anger, as when a driver who has almost had an accident transforms his fear into a prolonged tirade against the other driver.
Teachers may be apprehensive about any number of things.
The fear of losing control of a class lurks just below the surface even for teachers with ‘good discipline’, and for many this puts the brake on changes to their own way of teaching that they might otherwise like to try.
And allied to this are concerns about ‘not getting the results’ and about one's reputation with colleagues in general, and especially with the senior staff whose opinion can make or break a career.
This is what teachers call ‘stress’.
Of course this is a cumulative list and no one teacher (I hope) can put a mental tick against all of these elements.
Nevertheless, if you think this catalogue paints an unnecessarily bleak picture of how teachers are feeling, then I can tell you with some confidence that you have been deceived by the cover-up.
The moment teachers feel safe enough to tell the truth (which is often anywhere but in their own staffrooms), they rush to unburden themselves of feelings and symptoms such as those which I have described, and are surprised and relieved that other people are feeling the same way.
The feelings are no less intense for inspectors and headteachers than they are for students and teachers in their first appointment.
Before we go on to explore in some detail how the Stress Syndrome comes about I want to make a couple of general points.
Many of the aspects of stress, especially the physical ones, are  examples of psychosomatic disorders.
Some years ago the word ‘psychosomatic’ was often prefaced by the word ‘merely’and was used to suggest that an illness was in some way unreal or made up.
People who had psychosomatic complaints were probably malingering (if male) and hysterical (if female), and the appropriate treatment was a stiff talking-to, designed to exhort or scare them into ‘stopping all this nonsense’ and ‘pulling themselves together’.
It should go without saying these days that to be suffering from something psychosomatic is not to be guilty of lack of moral fibre, but to be exhibiting a condition the cause of which is, at least in part, psychological.
As it is now hard to think of any disorder, physical or mental, that does not have some element of the psychological in its origin, we can, I hope, reject the pejorative meaning.
The second point to note is that there is a positive sense of the word ‘stress’, which refers to a certain level of challenge which is bracing, energizing and focusing.
This is how most teachers imagined the job would be: demanding, tiring and requiring a lot of commitment and resourcefulness.
But that is mostly not what they mean when they use the word stress.
To them stress occurs when that point has been well passed, and tiredness becomes exhaustion, commitment becomes slog, resourcefulness becomes desperation and challenge becomes threat.
When they complain about ‘stress’ they are not saying they want to spend the rest of their lives lazing about in the sun being brought rum bamboozles on a silver tray (though the idea has its appeal).
They are saying they want to get back to the point where their hard work brought frequent, real, deep satisfaction.
Many other jobs involve ‘hard stress’ of this latter kind — foreign exchange dealers and nurses work intensely for long hours.
But they know what the game is, and they know when they have done a good job: the rewards are tangible and clear.
Teachers' stress is different: it is ‘fuzzy stress’, where the rules and the returns are shadowy and ambiguous, and where debilitation is not regularly punctuated with bursts of exhilaration and satisfaction.
HOW DOES STRESS COME ABOUT?
The fact that the word ‘stress’ is commonly used to refer both to the situation in which teachers are working and the way they are feeling and reacting suggests that many of them subscribe to the ‘Hay Fever Theory’as an explanation for how stress comes about.
The Hay Fever Theory sees stress as an objective feature of situations.
They can be more or less stress-ful.
If you are unlucky enough to find yourself working in a heavily stress-laden environment (which schools are) then, inevitably, you will ‘catch it’ and ‘come down with it’.
If we were all hay fever prone, then whenever we happened to be in a place where the pollen count was high, our eyes would start streaming and our noses running.
There would be no choice in the matter.
Likewise, according to this theory, as we are all stress-prone, we are bound to get stressed when we find ourselves working somewhere where there is a high stress-count.
We therefore have only three options open to us when we are stressed: move, ameliorate or suffer.
Leave teaching, have a good moan and another drink, or shut up and get on with it.
(‘If you can't stand the heat, get out of the kitchen’ versus ‘When the going gets tough the tough get going’.)
These are in fact the only options that many teachers feel are open to them.
The fact that the position is more complicated, however, should be obvious if we remind ourselves of the point I made at the beginning of Chapter 2: how variable teachers are.
This variability applies in the arena of stress as much as anywhere else.
Most people vary enormously in the reserves that they have available, so that the things that floor them at the end of term may be the same small irritations that they sailed through at the beginning.
And people are sometimes aware that the kind of stress they feel is different depending on what the stressful circumstances are.
I have discovered for example that the acute stress of being interviewed makes me sweat a lot, an afternoon of difficult telephone calls leaves me with lower back pain, while the run-down-at-the-end-of-a-long-hard-term kind of stress makes me irritable and forgetful.
We may show the same kind of symptom but with different degrees of severity or persistence.
You can imagine, for most types of stress reaction, a scale running from mild/everyday/once-in-a-while/not-much-to-bother-about through to severe/  debilitating/chronic/better-do-something-quick.
Occasional raised blood pressure is normal; long-term high blood pressure is a killer.
A drink or two extra on a Friday night may be OK; a glass of vodka before you can face school in the morning is more worrying.
There are big differences between individuals as well, not only in the amount of pressure they can handle before something begins to crack, but in the way they become stressed and the kinds of things that stress them.
Some people get back pain, some get irritable, some withdraw, some become frantic and panicky, some assume a calm, out-of-touch-with-reality veneer, some spend all their time moaning about what's wrong…
Everyone has their own variable limits and their own characteristic ‘stress portfolio’.
All this variability both within and between people suggests that the story of how the Stress Syndrome comes about cannot be as simple as the Hay Fever Theory would have us believe.
Specifically it suggests that something about how we respond, react to or construe the stressful situation has a lot to do with how stressed we feel, and how we feel stressed.
It is this ‘something’ that we need to investigate, because the more we can understand what turns stress on, the more we may be able to devise new and effective ways of turning it off.
HOW DOES STRESS REALLY COME ABOUT?
It will help to see what the personal ingredients are, and at what point in the arising of stress they are added in, if we take the story ‘from the top’, and look at it as we might the development of a complicated chemical reaction.
First we need to start with the ‘givens’ of the situation — the objective features of the predicament which we reviewed in the first part of the last chapter.
We might say roughly that there are two sorts of givens which we could call duties and wishes .
By duties I mean the responsibilities of which teachers' work is composed.
It is these duties that are approximately laid down in their conditions of service: to work for so many hours, to teach those classes, to attend these meetings, to undertake these extras.
In addition there are the more general, personal responsibilities to pupils and to colleagues, and the  implicit expectations that they will keep up with their subject and methods of teaching it.
By wishes I am referring to the internal directions and aspirations that people have for their own professional lives and development: their preferences, their ambitions, their chosen career path, their enthusiasms and above all their values.
If duties are what you must or should do, wishes are what you want to do.
Duties are specific to each profession or kind of work, whereas wishes are in general a reflection in the working context of the kinds of personal values that people hold.
One of the things that distinguish teaching as a profession is the extent to which people's implicit personal philosophies are constantly and necessarily relevant to their professional impact.
In most jobs, even, to an extent, in medicine and law, one's professional performance can be divorced from one's values.
But in teaching, where the qualities of relationship and self-presentation are vital determinants of how and how well people do their jobs, one's entire professional life is illuminated and coloured by what one, wittingly or unwittingly, believes and values.
Furthermore, at a time of indeterminacy and change like the present, where there is frequently no strong institutional ideology to subscribe to, individual values matter all the more.
There is no escape for teachers from showing their values.
Even the mouse and the cynic are constantly making an exhibition of themselves.
Next into the ‘reaction’ must go limitations , of which there are several kinds.
There are limitations of personal resources .
Every teacher at whatever level of the hierarchy has a certain reservoir of skill, experience, aptitude and common sense, sufficient to enable some jobs to be accomplished swiftly, easily and confidently, but not others.
It is not of course an attack to refer to someone's limitations, nor is the acknowledgment of limitations to oneself a cause for shame.
New teachers have limitations on their ability to keep classes orderly and interested.
New headteachers have limitations on their ability to manipulate the administration in County Hall, or to conduct a delicate personal conversation with a depressed and withdrawn head of department.
In any non-routine form of work, professional responsibilities and personal goals will be continually pushing people up against their limitations of personal resource.
Equally importantly there are very real, sometimes crippling  limitations of external resources , from not enough books and pencils to go round, through a drying up of goodwill between colleagues, to a general reduction in financial and material support for schools as a whole.
Limitations are imposed by the fact that you have to wait two months for the educational psychologist, you have to close the biology lab when it rains because it leaks and they haven't sent anyone to repair it yet, you have to apply for a short in-service course rather than the full-time MA that you really wanted to do because there aren't any secondments any more.
Not to mention the classes of thirty or more, and all the other sources of frustration that prevent you from delivering the service you should, and doing the job as you would like.
Many of the limitations appear not as abrupt cut-off points, distinguishing what we can do from what we can't, but as limitations of rate .
Things people have not yet mastered they may nevertheless be able to accomplish given sufficient time, material and support.
You may need to ask for advice, or even have one or two dummy runs, but given time you can get there in the end.
The trouble is, as we saw in Chapter 2, that time is the one resource par excellence that teachers feel short of.
Duties are changing and accumulating at a faster rate than they can be successfully discharged.
The extra time and support that are necessary (a) to perform jobs that are pressing at the limits of personal and material resources, and (b) to invest in learning how to do them better, or to assemble additional resources, so that the time taken to perform them is reduced, are not available.
Opportunities to take seriously such issues as girls and science or the merits of negotiated assessment, or to acquire skills in the areas of active tutorial work or special educational needs are few and far between, and often have to be carved out of evenings and weekends.
In addition to rate and resource limitations there are contradictions and conflicts within the set of jobs and goals that form a teacher's working agenda.
Teachers who listen to all the conflicting noises that are made about education by the pundits will inevitably feel (quite apart from their own ideals) that there is no pleasing all of the people all of the time.
‘More care and concern, especially for disadvantaged pupils’ runs headlong into ‘Teachers are not social workers: school is for learning, not for trying to rectify social injustice’.
Thinking they were doing the right thing, some schools set out to understand and respond to the particular problems faced by children of West Indian origin — only to discover that their parents, dissatisfied with ‘low expectations’ and ‘lack of discipline’, were setting up their own alternative, strict, traditional schools that their children were being sent to on Saturdays.
Or schools get very excited by computer-assisted learning, ordering equipment and retraining teachers — only to find that the pupils, so full of enthusiasm three years ago, have totally lost interest, while the ‘experts’ are once again suggesting that it wasn't such a good idea after all.
Any teacher could write their own long list of countermanding pieces of advice that have come their way.
These factors are conflicts and contradictions within the set of duties.
As intense are those between duties and wishes, and even within the set of self-selected, personally appropriated goals and ideals.
Not all the good ideas that curriculum developers and academics come up with are daft or unrealistic.
Some of them align quite well with teachers' own hopes and principles.
‘By all means’, they may say.
‘Just take these other duties off my shoulders and give me a day a week for the next year to attend a decent training course so that I can master it, and I'm yours.’
What they often get instead is a pat on the back, a stack of reading matter, an order form and a two-day pep talk.
It is hard to know which is more frustrating: having to do what you don't want, don't agree with and haven't been consulted about; or not being able, through lack of time, energy and support, actually to do what you do want.
Teachers are very familiar with both, and I do not intend to go any further into a detailed discussion of difference in educational opinions.
It would not be difficult for any reader to jot down, at this point, lists of their own frustrated wishes and unwanted duties, and it might indeed be useful to do so, so that you can keep the argument grounded in the realities of your own life.
But because I do not want to get led off into a critical discussion of the issues, I want to keep this part of the book as clear as possible of content, and keep focusing on process.
Suffice it to say here that teachers today feel themselves to be pulled, both by external forces and by their own internal beliefs, in several incompatible directions.
Many of these boil down to the simultaneous call to go back to doing it the way it was, to keep on doing it the way it is, and to move forward to doing it differently.
When the requirements of duties and wishes exceed the  limitations that people are working within, we may say that they come to constitute demands .
The greater the disparity between what teachers want to do, what they are being asked to do, and what they can do, the greater the demands, and the more demanding the situation.
Resources are being mobilized to the best of their ability, and that is not enough.
We might say:
In a demanding situation, as thus defined, people inevitably begin to experience overload and to feel under pressure .
By overload I mean that their performance of the job begins to break down as their current level of competence is pushed to the limit and beyond.
We described overload in Chapter 2.
It is part of teachers' daily experience.
They begin to make mistakes and errors of judgement.
They have to fly increasingly by the seat of their pants, knowing that their trouser-material is sometimes not going to be strong enough to hold them up.
They find a backlog of work building up, in which important but less urgent planning and discussing never get to the top of the pile, being submerged by the constant stream of things that have to be dealt with immediately.
They find themselves indulging in crisis management and employing stopgap solutions and holding operations.
They have increasingly uncomfortable decisions to make, sometimes consciously but frequently by default, about priorities.
And, working beyond the limits of confidence and competence, responses to situations have to be produced that are experimental, and the effect of which is uncertain.
Overload describes the inevitable objective consequences of demand.
Pressure refers to the subjective corollaries that we have met before: rush, confusion, uncertainty and anxiety.
This is the way overload feels .
Notice that, although I have just summarized some of the teacher's predicament that I described in Chapter 2, we have arrived at the summary by a different route: not by reporting what people say, but by looking at the inevitable consequences of working in a demanding situation .
When demand and conflict are running high, therefore, the phenomena of overload and pressure are not optional.
Given the conditions in which most teachers are working, and given that they are human beings — that is, they have limitations on what they can do, and how well and  how fast they can do it — they could not be feeling otherwise than rushed and confused, nor acting otherwise than fallibly.
Up to the point of overload and pressure, you might say that the inexorable logic of the Hay Fever Theory does hold.
There is an additional complication to this picture which is the increasing effect of demand over time.
So far I have described the situation in ‘steady state’ as if constant demand produced constant overload and pressure.
But research into the biology of stress suggests there are three phases.
If a new demand is short-lived, it may be possible to find a way of meeting it without any overall loss of performance.
You can find some extra energy or resources from somewhere.
You can stay up late for a few nights to finish that urgent report without getting irritable or asking too much of the people you live with.
But if the demand remains intense and protracted, or if new demands keep arriving, then the reserves begin to get drained and overload and pressure start to increase.
If continued, you may enter the third phase in which you are having to draw on resources that are actually necessary to support the level of competence that you normally can display.
So not only are your jobs consistently exceeding your limitations, but the limitations themselves are getting greater.
When time and energy are spread too thinly, even those things that you could do with ease when you were ‘on good form’ become more troublesome.
Thus if you are in a state of continuous high demand, there may be an inevitable tendency for the situation to deteriorate, and for overload and pressure to build still further.
But notice that stress, as described at the beginning of this chapter, has not yet appeared in the equation.
The mysterious ingredient X has not yet been added.
It is possible to imagine a teacher — and there are a few rare ones — who reacts to this predicament with complete equanimity.
‘OK’, they say ‘I'm not doing a good enough job at the moment.
I forgot the departmental meeting and I bawled out the wrong kid yesterday, there's a stack of mail that I haven't even opened in my pigeon-hole, my marking is getting pretty cursory, and I have decided regretfully that I don't have the energy to organize the third-year science field trip this year, nor the time to prepare properly for my A-level group.
But’,(said completely non-defensively)‘there's only so many hours in the day and some of them I need to listen to music and to be with my family.
If you find me more time, or get an extra teacher in the department, I'd love to be doing better.
As it is I just can't.
And yes, thank you, I'm sleeping fine.’
To take a different example you might imagine an adviser who has left herself just enough time to get to a school for a meeting, bombing down the motorway and getting a puncture.
She pulls over on to the hard shoulder, gets out, opens the boot, gets out the spare tyre and the jack, jacks up the car, takes off the old wheel, puts on the new one, lets the jack down, puts it and the wheel back in the boot, closes it, gets back in the car and drives on, knowing that she will be fifteen minutes late.
Most of us, however, would stir into the incident rather more than this.
We get out of the car, stomp round to the wheel, look at it, kick it, swear, look at our watch, feel guilty about not having left enough time to cope with the unexpected, open the boot, bang our head on it, swear again, wonder whether it wouldn't be better to walk to the phone, decide to change the wheel ourselves, lose one of the nuts and eventually arrive at the meeting half an hour late in a filthy temper, and take up the next five minutes explaining that it must have been a sharp chipping off one of those construction lorries and they overload them to save money and they ought to do something about it…
Now I want to suggest that what makes the difference — what transmutes overload and pressure into full-blown stress — are what I shall call injunctions .
Injunctions are Ingredient X. They are beliefs, buried in people's personal philosophies, about personal worth.
They specify what makes a good person and a good teacher.
Despite the fact that these injunctions are buried, and people are often not able to articulate them spontaneously, we are nevertheless very sensitive to occasions on which the injunctions are breached.
The injunctions set the standards that we ought to live up to, and their effect is to make people's self-esteem contingent on living up to them.
They say, in effect, ‘If thou wishest to feel good about thyself, thou shalt be X and Y and Z. And conversely when thou findest thyself being not-X or not-Y or not-Z, thou shalt pay for thy transgression with a loss of self-esteem.’
When people fall short of their standards, and are thereby in breach of their injunctions, somewhere inside they start  to feel badly about themselves, and to begin to doubt their worth and acceptability.
They get rattled.
This crude summary of a wealth of understanding is commonplace in the worlds of counselling and psychotherapy.
Many of the people who seek these kinds of help are those who, while living and working in (apparently) normal circumstances, find themselves crippled by unusually strong injunctions.
Whilst most of us, for example, can cope with having the occasional murderous thought about people we love, or work with, there are other people for whom such thoughts constitute a profound assault on their self-worth, and who must, therefore, either suffer that sense of worthlessness or involve themselves in an intense effort to deny or rationalize the thought.
To take a specific and vivid example, it is very common for mothers (and fathers) to feel a violent impulse towards babies who cannot be pacified.
For some of these parents the injunction against such feelings is not too strong and they can accept their falls from grace with a certain amount of equanimity.
(It is easier to do so if you have friends who can own up to feeling the same way.)
But for others such an impulse provides the clearest evidence of their unsuitability for parenthood and their inadequacy as a person.
Paradoxically it is the pressure created by the enormous guilt, and by the doomed attempt to deal with it, that builds tension to the point where it is more likely to explode into real physical abuse.
What is less well documented, however, is the effect that injunctions have on people who are normally functioning well, when they find themselves in situations that are abnormally intense or challenging — like teachers in school.
If someone's performance is not up to the standards set by the injunctions,no allowances are made , even if they are doing their best to cope with severe or even impossible demands.
Injunctions do not listen to excuses, no matter how reasonable.
They insist that the forfeit of self-esteem must be paid.
Unless one is aware of the injunctions and the effect they are having, the penalty is automatically exacted, like a direct debit, and self-worth is threatened.
The phenomena of overload and pressure constitute, for many teachers, just such a breach of some basic injunctions so that the situation of working under  heavy demands itself leads, via the activation of these injunctions, to an assault on self-esteem.
The nature of these pernicious and self-punitive injunctions is probably already obvious.
For X, Y and Z in the basic formula we can substitute competent, clear, confident, comfortable, in control , consistent and coherent .
A worthwhile person is always competent: he never makes mistakes, slips of the tongue, errors of judgement or loses his thread halfway through a lesson or a meeting.
If he does, that means he is not good enough, and ought to feel badly.
A worthwhile person is always clear: she never loses her grasp on what is going on, gets confused, or is at a loss for an explanation, or at the very least a coherent understanding of what is going on.
If she does, that means she is not good enough or bright enough, and ought to feel guilty.
A worthwhile person is always confident: he does not feel uncertain about the effects of his actions or doubt his ability to do the right thing.
If he does, that means he is not good enough or strong enough, and ought to feel inadequate.
A worthwhile person always feels comfortable: she never gets agitated, apprehensive, shy, embarrassed, tongue-tied, scared or anxious.
If she does, it means she is weak and feeble, and ought to feel ashamed.
A worthwhile person is always in control, not only of his classes but of events and feelings.
He should not get too emotional, moody, tearful or truculent, especially if he can't explain why to his own and other people's satisfaction, and if he does he should feel concerned.
A worthwhile person is always consistent: she acts within her normal personality and does not surprise herself or other people by behaving oddly or ‘out of character’.
Everyone has a right to expect her to be predictable (however trying things are) and she ought to be worried and apologetic if she behaves strangely.
Finally, a worthwhile person is always coherent, in the sense of being all of a piece.
He never appears wildly different in different contexts — regardless of what those contexts are.
So if he finds himself behaving very differently in school to how he behaves at home, one of them has to be ‘real’ and the other ‘phoney’.
People should feel as if there is something wrong with this and be upset about what is happening to them.
The net effect of these injunctions (as well as others we shall meet later) is to ensure that the natural inability of human beings to respond ‘perfectly’ to all situations, however demanding or paradoxical, is construed by those human beings as clear evidence of personal inadequacy: they lack the ability, resilience or ready-made savoir-faire that they somehow ought to have, in limitless supply, if they are to be able to look themselves in the eye in the bathroom mirror each morning.
Injunctions make the effects of demand personal .
What started out as an objective assessment like ‘That lesson didn't go as well as I had expected’ gets recast as ‘I made a mistake’which leads to ‘I'm a poor teacher’and even ‘I'm a failure (as a person)’.
At each stage the judgement becomes more general, more negative and more personal.
After a series of experiences that are construed in those terms, the cumulative effect may be an assault on the core of a person's self-image and self-respect that is lasting and pervasive.
Identity itself is damaged and the negative effects of stress in school begin to leak out and contaminate people's confidence and competence in other, perhaps all, aspects of their lives.
When the injunctions are triggered, and their verdicts are accepted without appeal, another crucial demand is added to the already overlong list.
It is a demand that begins to override the others, and to require immediate attention.
It is the demand to feel better, for one of the most basic injunctions of all is the one that tells us tautologically, that worthwhile people do not feel worthless.
The dis-ease that people feel when things begin to go wrong, and their ability to stay calm and competent frays at the edges, is itself a feeling that OK people do not have, and it becomes yet another cause for concern and an occasion for self-doubt.
Thus do the injunctions feed into and exacerbate each other 's effects.
So how are people to satisfy the demand to feel better, especially if they are unable or unwilling to ‘get out of the kitchen’?
While the jobs and goals continue to exceed people's limitations, overload and pressure will persist.
In the heat of the moment it does not usually look as if there is anything to be done  about the heat.
And while the injunctions are subject to unwitting acceptance, it is impossible to call them into question.
Because they are hidden, it looks to people, if they try to analyse why they are getting upset and uptight, as if the cause for the bad feeling is the overload and the pressure.
‘It's the job that's making me feel bad.’
But, as we have just said, it usually doesn't seem possible to do anything about the job.
The situation begins to feel like a trap, reminiscent of the song ‘There's a Hole in My Bucket’.
Defensiveness
There is one strategy left, and that is to hide .
First people have to start hiding from themselves, because that is where the hardest and most persistent voice of criticism is coming from.
So what is required is a constriction of awareness which will remove some of the bad feeling and/or make the predicament look less severe or less intractable.
One common kind of strategy, which we have met already, is to hide the complexity .
This involves reconstruing the situation so that it looks more straightforward and easy to handle, thus allowing sides to be taken or a stance adopted which reduces the confusion and allows at least some action to be taken — a villain to be defeated, a wrong to be righted, a battle to be fought.
Doubt and ambivalence are transmuted into clarity and certainty, and any attempt to reintroduce complexity into the debate is rejected as ‘mere nitpicking’ or ‘a deliberate attempt to muddy the issue’.
Reflection is pooh-poohed, and understanding is put into a state of suspended animation, so that it has no chance to develop in its complexity, realism or power.
Instead the need to do something is channelled into a single stark campaign.
This might be something that has a legitimate place in the original complex equation — it might be peace education, anti-racism or teachers' rights — but which is inflated to fill the whole screen.
Or it could be something pretty trivial like who smokes where in the staffroom, or colleagues' standards of dress.
As strategies go this is not a bad one at all, for at least it leaves the people involved  feeling that they have some power, purpose and (usually) some solidarity with others.
But it runs the risk of becoming polarizing and divisive.
Thoughtful people who are not able to buy the simplistic analysis are written off with contemptuous slogans like ‘If you aren't part of the solution you are part of the problem’.
The second way of hiding from oneself is to hide the feelings .
This is most effectively done using some variant of the ‘whistle-a-happy-tune’ strategy.
Here the skilled operator establishes in her own consciousness a network of alarm signals which go off when the train of thought starts chugging along in a dangerous direction.
Immediately the points are switched, so that the specific signals for feeling bad are never actually encountered.
This may also involve physically not going to places (e.g. the staffroom) or meeting people (your head of department) who might set off the alarm by mistake.
And a collection of routine thoughts and physical distractions are useful for filling up the spaces created by the avoidance.
Lots of time spent reading light novels, listening to music, watching the television or talking are helpful, as is the ability (perhaps aided by a drink or a pill) to fall asleep when these more active anodyne activities come to a halt.
The ploy of inflating some molehills in order to provide manageable substitutes for the mountains you are busily ignoring also serves as an effective distraction.
The third common way of hiding from oneself is to hide the responsibility .
This has the advantage over the previous two strategies of allowing people to leave relatively undistorted their awareness of the complexity of the situation and of their own fallibility, but at the expense of construing themselves as partially or completely powerless.
There are a number of specific methods of achieving this.
Rationalization refers to people's efforts to construct an explanation for their fallibility which allows them to own it without feeling bad about it.
This explanation is then offered to others with the intention of getting them to agree that circumstances conspired to prevent you from performing with the excellence and flair that you would, in the normal course of events, have displayed.
It is helpful in this context if one's account of the circumstances can be exaggerated in some way, until it becomes clear that nobody, however marvellous, could have coped any better than you did.
The teachers' vocabulary for describing individual pupils, colleagues, classes and lessons, as well as events  such as meetings, is full of such inflationary terms: awful, dreadful, terrible, animals, bastard.
‘I'll die if I have to take 3Y on a Friday afternoon again’, ‘It was an utter disaster' , and so on.
‘I didn't control them’ becomes ‘They were completely uncontrollable’.
(The jargon expression for this ploy is ‘awfulizing’.)
There is a rather more dangerous kind of exaggerating, described by Eric Berne in his pop psychology book Games People Play as the game of ‘Harassed’, which involves making things really dreadful for yourself.
If a person has, say, five jobs to do as part of his professional responsibility, and is beginning to feel inadequate because he isn't doing them all perfectly…take on ten more.
This guarantees total inadequacy, but the pay-off is (a) the knowledge that nobody could cope with all fifteen, and that therefore the failure does not reflect badly on him personally, and (b) some self-righteousness at how hard he is trying to contribute, and resentment at those who are not ‘pulling their weight.
This strategy is reminiscent of the poster (visible, interestingly enough, in quite a few staffrooms and offices) saying ‘I'm going to have my nervous breakdown.
I've worked for it.
I've earned it.
I deserve it.
Now I'm damn well going to have it’.
The last kind of strategy for denying responsibility is to give it away to someone else.
If you can find someone else whose fault it is, then you can give up worrying that it is your own.
It is here that the anger begins, in the form of blame, resentment and self-righteousness.
‘If she had done her job properly, I would never have been in this mess in the first place.’
‘The head's so out of touch with reality that it's not surprising things are going wrong.’
‘My tutor hasn't a clue: he hasn't taught since before the war I don't expect.’
And again it helps if one can get a group of other people to agree with you.
The recognition of these strategies, the ones which preserve self-respect by denying opportunity or responsibility, is absolutely vital in the process of moving away from hostility and resignation, and towards a more powerful stance as a teacher.
For their side-effect is to confuse us about what is truly possible.
It is a fact that many teachers have precious little elbow room, and that often this confinement is created, or exacerbated, by other people's actions.
There are real limits, and some people really are to blame.
But in a stressed state, and especially if one is playing helpless, one cannot see clearly what the opportunities and risks  actually are, and one therefore cannot act with discernment and intelligence.
While anger may stimulate the courage to do something, it may at the same time cloud the perception of what to be courageous about.
If one cannot feel accurately what the scope and limits of one's own responsibility are, there is an increased chance of behaving either fatalistically or recklessly.
Clearsightedness is a prerequisite of effective action.
It is important to emphasize this because some people tend to polarize the ‘personal’ and the ‘political’, and to confuse the willingness to explore one's responsibility with the oppressive tactic of ‘victim-blaming’.
To point out that complaining often functions as a self-defence is not to say that the complaint is invalid.
Accusations that have some truth to them make the most watertight defences of all.
But the purpose of making such an accusation is, if it is made defensively, to cement oneself into a position of self-righteous stasis, and not to bring about change.
This state is easily distinguished from the rational and purposeful promotion of a particular philosophy, or the rejection of a demand, by its resistance not only to ‘impositions’ but to the offer of responsibility and choice.
If the ‘authorities’ which have been ‘pushing us around’change their tack and say: ‘OK, what would you like?
Tell us and we'll try to provide or support it’, they will suddenly find themselves being attacked for ‘not doing their job’ and ‘abdicating their responsibilities’.
They cannot win, for the aim of the stressed work-force is to avoid having to embrace the discomfiting uncertainty by construing itself as victimized and manipulated.
Thus real and objective limitations and risks (of which there are many) may be magnified still further by teachers' projections.
Instead of seeking to have what little impact they can, they come to feel completely surrounded by impasses which seal up the potential gaps between the proliferating demands.
Compounded by their own unconscious survival strategy, their room for manoeuvre appears to shrink until it vanishes.
In the good old days, when we were respected and trusted (so the train of thought might go), we had the freedom to explore opportunities to contribute to education.
As the net tightened, though, and those were taken away, so the only possible freedom became to protect ourselves and to try to consolidate our position.
Then, as things got worse, and our professional rights and status were further eroded, it seemed as if the only freedom left was to resist .
Given no  avenues to think for ourselves, we could at least say ‘No’ to what others were seeking to foist upon us.
And when even this right is removed, and overt opposition becomes too difficult or too risky, we can, as a last resort, lapse into the passive, covert stance of lethargy and resignation.
There are many teachers who feel that things are that bad, and for whom, at some tacit level of decision-making, becoming ‘like that’ has presented itself as the only sensible, or the only possible modus operandi that is left.
It may indeed be.
The only freedoms of the truly enslaved are subtle subversion and private dissent.
But it is no disrespect to enquire into the possibility that some teachers may, through no fault of their own, have reached this position prematurely, and that other, more positive options still remain open.
We have so far said little about the way the Stress Syndrome spills over into teachers' personal relationships out of school.
One is an increasing conflict about the use of time.
A conscientious teacher may feel inclined to take work home (both mentally and physically), yet also feel — perhaps guiltily — that they wish to prevent work from encroaching on their private life.
Jill Jones, for example, said:
I overwork, I know that, and I try to do too much sometimes.
One bit of me says well you've got to, you've got to do it like that.
And the other bit says, ‘You've got a life to lead!’
But it's important to me: I want to do it right, even though I'm not sure what doing it right means!
I feel as though if I didn't have that drive I would have opted out of teaching long ago.
It's that that keeps me going.
A second way in which stress begins to subvert home life is through the displacement of feelings of anger.
Although these feelings may originally be focused, whether appropriately or not, on colleagues or superiors within education, the targets may be inaccessible or it may be, or seem to be, too dangerous to tackle them directly.
Particularly when the ability to be rational about specific issues becomes diverted into a petulant or punitive attitude, and one cannot trust oneself to ‘keep one's cool’, yet the feelings demand expression, it may be easier to ‘blow up’ with those who seem less able to hit back effectively.
Sometimes this may be unfortunate pupils who happen to be in the wrong place at the wrong time; but often it is the teachers' families who begin to bear the brunt, and whose reserves of tolerance and goodwill may also, after a while, begin to dry up in turn.
In addition to hiding from themselves, teachers also begin to feel the need to hide from each other .
For the assaults on self.
esteem that arise from unwitting acceptance of the injunctions may be mirrored and compounded by assaults on public esteem, if the community in which people work gives its collective assent to the same injunctions.
If everyone (or at least those who can mould opinion and wield sanctions) implicitly agrees that it is weak to get upset, and a sign of personal incompetence to make mistakes, then openness entails real risks to staffroom status and even to promotion and other career prospects.
(The fear looms that the all-important reference might then contain sentences like ‘However Miss Smith is prone to emotional displays, and to occasional lapses of judgement’— as if there were people who weren't.)
Thus the overload and pressure that teachers are experiencing must be concealed.
Many teachers know of their own cover-up operations, and fear lest a personal Watergate scandal be revealed.
Guilty secrets begin to pile up that may be disclosed to no one else at all, not even friends or family.
Although many teachers are genuinely on good form, at least from time to time, others adopt a cheerful and casual manner in the staffroom as a front that bears no relation to how they feel as they drive home, exhausted and depressed, at the end of the day.
Putting on a brave face for colleagues may also compound the feeling of inauthenticity or emptiness which they are experiencing in the classroom.
There are a lot of people who know of a colleague who appeared to be the last person to go under —‘Jim always seemed such a jolly, easygoing chap’— until his absence one day was followed by news of his nervous breakdown, or heart attack, or suicide.
The kinds of conversations that can be held with colleagues may become restricted to those that are safely superficial and impersonal, and the developing staffroom ambience may bind such social conventions ever more tightly.
It may become increasingly necessary to avoid contact with certain people as much as possible.
These threatening contacts are of two kinds: the difficult and the sympathetic.
People with whom one has had personal or professional differences — a row or a clash of principle — are best avoided (albeit sometimes with real regret) because meeting them might demand emotional resources that aren't there, open old wounds, or challenge one's public certainties that in fact feel all  too precarious.
While people may even find themselves avoiding others who would be understanding, precisely because their concern may threaten to breach fragile defences and bring on the ‘crack-up’ that feels as if it is only just being fended off, as it is.
The other way of hiding from others is to be absent.
Some teachers are continually ill.
Some apply for every in-service training course that is going.
And senior teachers, especially heads, have the additional option of the flight into bureaucracy, or into the development of a national reputation for something or other, that enables them to spend considerable time away from school at important meetings.
Hiding from self and hiding from others interact in a particularly unfortunate way.
The undermining of self-esteem may lead to assumptions about the reactions of others that are unjustified.
It is common for us to imagine that others are going to be as critical of us as we are of ourselves.
Just as the injunctions may serve to exaggerate the feeling of powerlessness, in the face of a limited (even if substantial) loss of power, so they lead people to exaggerate the imagined risks of being honest.
Instead of seeking opportunities to come clean, being realistic and perceptive about when and to whom to make an ‘advance’, and taking risks that can be recouped, self-doubt floods the whole question with anxiety, and replaces a balanced point of view with crude prejudices and images of disaster.
What people have done once (perhaps in a moment of stress themselves) becomes set in cement, evidence of a chronic inability to be understanding or kind.
‘I could never talk to Jennifer.
Do you remember the time she reduced that poor student to tears in the staffroom?’
The fact that there may indeed be real risks attached to opening up and talking from the heart is not in dispute, just as the limitations on teachers' freedom are very real.
The point is that when the injunctions are triggered, they serve to increase apparent levels of risk or constraint and to damage people's ability to perceive the facts of the matter in an accurate and differentiated way.
They lose their nous (and, as they say in some quarters, their ‘bottle’).
The situation comes to seem increasingly hopeless.
In several ways this loss of hope acts as a self-fulfilling prophecy.
If there is nothing one can do, then there is clearly no point in thinking about what one might do — so the effort to formulate what might be desirable becomes merely wasted and frustrating  effort.
But on the other hand if one has no vision, no sense of what it might be worthwhile to do, then there is equally clearly no point in trying to do anything.
‘Can't do’ reinforces ‘Don't know’and vice versa.
Powerlessness undermines perspicacity.
Lack of opportunity breeds indifference to vision.
Routine thinking throws up no ideas about how to work on or round or against a seemingly impossible situation — which reaffirms powerlessness.
Toxic waste
Hiding in one or other of these ways may ‘work’, in that the self-recriminations that the injunctions breed, or rather the awareness of them, is reduced to manageable levels.
Many teachers are able to function pretty well and to keep their doubts and feelings under reasonable control.
In fact it is hard to imagine anyone working under demanding conditions who does not need to use some such strategies of damage-limitation.
The peace of mind that they produce however is won not without some costs.
The hiding strategies themselves produce additional effects that are unwanted and unpleasant, and which may add to the net level of discomfort rather than reducing it.
Hiding from others may save face, but at the cost of an increased weight of private guilt and doubt.
If people cannot speak openly to others about their errors and anxieties, it is easy to feel more and more isolated and inadequate.
The disparity between private truth and public convention leaves them feeling that they are the only person having trouble.
Spurious comparisons with the overt confidence of colleagues make the inability to cope seem an ever more clear indication of personal inadequacy — which in its turn makes openness about problems appear yet more risky and impossible.
Alternatively people whose predominant coping strategy is to blame, project and rationalize may find themselves drifting towards isolation as well, as other people's patience and tolerance wear thin.
Friends may start making excuses: after all who wants to spend the evening with someone who is becoming so surly and boring?
In addition it is hard for people who are becoming bitter and negative to see what is happening to themselves without incurring further guilt or self-dislike.
So they either have to accept this noxious side-effect of their coping strategy, or to project  it outwards with increasingly strident, dogmatic and simplistic vigour.
At some point, if the side-effects cannot be contained, and bad feeling continues to mount, people begin to resort to another mechanism of self-defence.
Instead of working psychologically on their own awareness, they may now, involuntarily, try to hold down their discomfort by physical means.
By exercising muscular control, certain kinds of feeling can be inhibited.
The impulse to cry can be controlled by setting the muscles of the face firmly (adopting literally a stiff upper lip).
The impulse to shout can be inhibited by clamping the upper chest so that breathing becomes shallow and energy is dampened.
The impulse to hit is curbed by hunching the shoulders.
The feeling of fear is restrained by tensing the muscles that surround the stomach and the anus.
And so on.
One might protest that such primitive devices would not be relevant to the civilized conduct of staffroom and classroom, but it is surprising how thin the veneer of civilization turns out to be.
And adults do not need to be on the verge of shouting or crying for these mechanisms to be involved.
For many people, particularly those brought up under the sway of the Judeo-Christian religions, physical control of emotional expression is learnt at an early age, and by adulthood can be practised to a high level of subtlety and skill.
(Children who are beginners in the art can sometimes be seen ‘overdoing it’ when they go completely rigid, stop breathing, and rapidly turn a variety of interesting colours.)
By becoming ‘tense’, ‘wound up’ and ‘uptight’, a measure of emotional control can be established — but again at the price of creating further toxic waste.
To the unwanted social and psychological fall-out produced by the earlier hiding strategies are now added various kinds of physical discomfort: the ‘psychosomatic’ conditions we reviewed at the start of this chapter.
Depending on which muscles are involuntarily clenched to suppress which feeling, for how long, and with what force, so people lay themselves open to the range of stress symptoms, from staring eyes to constipation; from tics to migraines; from vomiting to lower back pain; from insomnia to nosebleeds.
If the tension is sufficient it will contain some part of the problem, whilst also ensuring that it will balloon out somewhere else.
A chronic illness increases isolation.
Soldiering on with lower back pain makes it hard not to be preoccupied.
Inability to sleep drains resources.
Turning to pills  and/or alcohol can take its toll in hangovers, reduced awareness and the risk of growing dependency.
In whichever direction the Stress Syndrome develops, if it does, one can be sure that two effects will occur.
The first is the breaching of further injunctions, such as‘Worthwhile people don't get so tired, need a drink before school, smoke so much, eat so much, behave so badly to their friends, feel so bottled up, become so forgetful’ or whatever.
As people adopt wilder and wilder attempts to keep the bad feelings down, so it is ever more likely that these feelings will bounce up and hit them even harder in return.
And the second effect is a further reduction in real competence, so that jobs take longer to do, require more resources to do them, and are done increasingly shoddily.
Thus limitations   grow, the weight of demand goes up, and overload and pressure expand still further: which is where we came in.
A simplified version of the vicious cycle — at its worst — is shown in Figure 1.
This is the story of the Stress Syndrome.
It is the condition in which the attempts to avoid, cover up or evade responsibility for bad feeling — bad feeling generated by the impossible need to live up to inflexible standards — themselves create yet more bad feeling.
Coping strategies are unthinkingly deployed which tend at the least to be ineffective, and which often produce unintended, unwanted side-effects that breach the same or other injunctions.
If the process persists too intensely and for too long, ever more desperate and damaging controls need to be applied, controls which may involve abuses of the body, of food, drink and drugs, and of other people.
All of these controls are, however misguided, attempts to cope and to preserve self-respect that make sense within the person's framework of assumptions and values.
From inside that belief system the responses that are made to overload and pressure will seem, in so far as they are considered consciously, to be sensible, vital or even inevitable.
Back into shape
Here's a two-step formula for handling stress.
Step 1: Don't sweat the small stuff.
Step 2: Remember, it's all small stuff.
Anthony Robbins
When people are within the vicious cycle of stress, their top priority becomes limiting the damage that is being done to their self-esteem.
Some of the ways of doing this are more effective, and create less toxic waste, than others, but many of them share a concern with maintenance at the cost of growth.
The conclusion therefore is that the recapturing of a sense of well-being is a necessary pre-condition for creating a climate within which teachers are willing to think about, and to become involved in, the development of schooling and teaching.
If we are to move towards transforming schools so that they deliver to young people a more appropriate and empowering kind of education than many of them currently receive, and if, as I have argued, this must happen with the committed participation of substantial numbers of teachers, then it follows that the promotion of integrity and self-respect amongst teachers is the most urgent challenge that education currently faces.
The concern with personal well-being is not, as we have said before, an individualistic alternative to practical action, but its sine qua non .
There is all the difference in the world between encouraging people to feel good, and encouraging them to feel good about the situation .
The challenge is to help create a climate within which it is not just acceptable but normal for teachers to talk openly about their feelings, their perceptions, their misgivings, their ideals and their experiments, whether large or small, successful or unsuccessful.
The only possible form that climate can take is one which acknowledges as legitimate and appropriate expressions of doubt, uncertainty, confusion and anxiety.
Unless people are free to say ‘I don't think it's good enough’, ‘I don't feel as if I'm doing a good enough job’, and ‘I don't have a clear idea of how to do it better’, teacher-generated and teacher-appropriated change will not happen.
If you have to be sure before you dare open your mouth, most people are going to stay quiet.
This type of open learning environment is after all standard for social workers and counsellors, and there is no reason why it should not be equally standard for teachers.
The first step is to start talking about stress, not as something shameful but as an interesting, understandable and, up to a point, an inevitable accompaniment to high levels of demand and uncertainty.
Stress needs to be dealt with not just through one-day workshops that some teachers are brave enough or desperate enough to attend.
(I have been told many times by participants in such workshops that they have felt it necessary to conceal from their colleagues where they were going!)
It needs to be on the agenda, both formal and informal, of most if not all staffrooms.
We need to build an atmosphere which reverses the dominant value systems of those staffrooms in which it is seen as silly to be open, to want to have real conversations about education, and mature to be flip and dismissive.
It should be the people who are ‘like that’(and also ‘beyond hope’) who are on the defensive: those who stamp on students' enthusiasm (however naive it may be) who get the funny looks — not the students.
Some schools have such an ethos already.
Some have it sporadically or partially.
And some are in disarray.
We need to encourage as many schools as possible to shift from the third to the second, and from the second to the first category.
That shift will take place as a result of three forces.
The first is ordinary teachers, in increasing numbers, becoming more perceptive about their own predicament and more effective at dealing with their own stress.
The second, smaller but also growing band, will be teachers who are strong enough and courageous enough to stick their necks out publicly.
They will be secure enough about their own capabilities and limitations to take the lead in talking in ways which the old lags will continue to denigrate for a while as ‘weak’ or ‘idealistic’.
They will not be martyrs, for most of them will be astute as well as honest.
And their effect will be considerable, for they will merely be modelling the kind of attitude and commitment that  most teachers have buried but not lost.
They will at first be assailed after meetings by colleagues saying ‘Good for you’ and ‘I wish I'd had the courage to say that’and ‘That's just what I think.
I'm glad someone else thinks the same way’.
Rapidly they will find themselves supported in the meetings as well.
The third force is the headteachers, for it is they who have the most decisive influence on what it is or is not safe to do or say in a school.
Some teachers will have been saying, as they have followed the argument up to this point: ‘All very well.
But you come and try saying how stressed you are in my school and see how long you last.
Nobody participates in meetings for a very good reason: anything at all important is all sewn up before it ever gets on the agenda’.
I shall focus on the role of headteachers and how to deal with them in Chapter 7.
First though I want to see what help and advice it is possible to give to teachers in the first two groups: we will focus on the ‘destressers’ in this chapter, and on the ‘change agents’in the next.
COPING WITH STRESS
There are some common pieces of advice that people swap when they are asked how to deal with stress.
They include the exhortations to Stay Calm, Keep Things in Proportion, Don't Think About It, and Don't Let It/Them Get To You (the last one of which includes the more specific Avoid Confrontations).
These are extremely sensible.
The only problem with them is that they do not tell you how .
They describe desired states, not how to achieve them.
What seems to be of more use to people are specific things they can do to help them achieve these states.
Fortunately teachers know of a great many such techniques.
In this section I shall describe some of these, again culled from the wide range of suggestions that have been offered during the course of workshops.
I will indicate, as I go through them, the way in which they work: that is, how they fit into the diagnostic story that we developed in the last chapter.
Relax
As we saw, a large part of the Stress Syndrome, once it is in full swing, arises from sustained physical tension.
People may tense their bodies in a variety of ways to cope with the threat of strong feelings, but then as it were forget to relax the muscles after the immediate threat has passed.
To start unravelling stress ‘from the bottom’ they may invent or seek a range of tension-reducing activities, which we might group into two categories, those that relax softly and gently, and those that involve a more vigorous release.
Into the first category fall the following.
Resting, sleeping and generally vegetating are obvious ways of unwinding.
Teachers often report that they completely switch off at the beginning of the holidays, or sleep for abnormally long periods of time for several days.
If there remains an insistent voice that keeps telling you there is something ‘wrong’ with sleeping twelve hours a day, or reminding you of how much there is to do, turning into a vegetable may not be an effective technique, and something more explosive or cathartic may be required.
Any kind of physical stroking can aid relaxation.
Having your neck and shoulders rubbed, or better still a full body massage, is a good investment.
And people report that time spent stroking pets, particularly cats, is very therapeutic.
Cuddles and hugs, the longer the better, and preferably accompanied by deep sighs, are highly recommended — although they can be risky in staffrooms.
(Trying to promote hugging in the staffroom would be a suitable project for the more courageous change-agent.)
Some people learn particular techniques such as meditation or relaxation exercises .
Most of these are basically simple, involving sitting or lying down comfortably and focusing awareness on a pleasing thought (‘Still and calm…still and calm’ or whatever; or invent your own); a soft ‘nonsense sound’(a mantra ) that you repeat under your breath; on the rise and fall of your chest as you breath; or successively on different parts of the body, starting at the toes and working upwards.
For the latter it is better to buy a tape, or to make your own, and listen to that, rather than to try to do it yourself as you go along.
(The Appendix to this book gives you the basis for making a tape.
It is adapted from Jack Dunham's book Stress in Teaching : you can adapt it further as you like.)
Either way you are bound to drift off into unconnected chains of thought, which doesn't matter  a bit.
But this can be irritating, and the opposite of relaxing, if you are trying to keep track of the sequence yourself.
If you still find that you are getting more tense with the effort to concentrate (which is possible: some people find relaxation exercises absolute torture) stop doing it.
An effective stress-reduction technique is one that works, not one that someone else says ought to work.
Incidentally a trap here is to feel guilty when you find that you have given up doing the exercises that you so fervently swore you were going to do every day.
Many people find that they drop their meditation practice or whatever it is at precisely the time when they think they need it most — i.e. when they are feeling most stressed.
This is entirely normal and may even in the long run be healthy: who knows?
The important thing is to view these lapses with indulgence.
If you make it a chore or a conflict you are already back on the vicious cycle.
Release
As well as, or instead of , relaxing gently, people find ways of exploding the tension.
Physical exercise is good if you enjoy it — jogging, playing squash, working out or whatever.
The trap to be avoided here is to turn the exercise into another source of demand by forcing yourself to go faster every day, swearing that you are going to beat your partner next time, or overdoing it with the weights.
Many techniques for stress reduction can be appropriated by the same injunctions to succeed that got you stressed in the first place, and should be discontinued if you spot that they have been subverted in this way (unless your goal has also changed along the way from stress reduction to record-breaking).
Provided sexual energies have not been drained by the stress itself orgasm is a great form of tension release, whether achieved through making love or masturbation.
(Far from diminishing, some people find that their libido during periods of stress reaches embarrassingly high levels.)
And there are various forms of emotional release.
‘Having a good cry’, especially while being held by someone who is not trying to talk you out of it, is good, provided doing so does not seriously breach further injunctions about being ‘feeble’ and ‘out of control’.
It is often startling how people's faces soften and their bodies relax after crying.
Screaming  and shouting are a help, though stress may be transferred to neighbours or family unless they are prepared for it.
Finding lonely bits of countryside or the middle of a large field to do your shouting is a way out of this problem, as is going to a football match or a rock concert.
Beating up cushions releases the feelings pent up in the shoulders — but such forms of catharsis are sometimes thought to be all right for Californians but not for the rest of us.
Something a little milder like ranting and raving about colleagues and pupils, preferably in a self-consciously irrational and exaggerated way, can release feelings and help to restore balance and humour.
Some teachers say it is useful to have a pact with someone else, preferably another teacher, which allows you to complain in the most dreadful and unreasonable way to each other, in turn, for a fixed period of time like ten minutes.
During your turn you can be as bitchy, whiny or self-righteous as you like — but when time's up, that's it.
It is surprising how therapeutic, as well as creative and entertaining, such sessions can be.
In the course of such a process you may find either that the resentment or anger goes away (and you realize that you had ‘got all steamed up over nothing’), or it doesn't, and remains as a clear, persistent and legitimate grievance.
We will come back to dealing with.
these in a moment.
Relax the rules
Part of the Stress Syndrome is the likelihood that whatever you do to cope will only result in yet more self-criticism.
Typical of stress is this feeling of being for ever‘on the run’, unable to stop and be at peace with yourself.
Yet being able to step off the treadmill and stop judging yourself for a while is the only way to begin to take stock and to start to unwind from the stress spiral.
It is useful, therefore, to be able to adopt an attitude of temporary self-indulgence towards habits or feelings that, in the normal course of events, you may struggle with or be trying to change.
Teachers report a common range of such self-indulgences: allowing yourself (in the middle of a bad patch) to give in to temptations like cream cakes, cigarettes, a bottle of your favourite booze or a spending spree.
As with the other strategies, though, there will  be some people for whom this advice is inappropriate: for example if they are unable to avoid feeling guilty, or if the risks involved feel just too great.
People with members of their family who are or have been alcoholic may, very understandably, be too scared of ‘hitting the bottle’ themselves to allow even a temporary licence in that area.
People who are under medical direction to lose weight or quit smoking may likewise be quite rightly unwilling to give in to their impulses.
But it is a matter of realistically weighing up the pros and cons.
At some times, for some people, a binge may be just what is required to break through the wall of Dos and Don'ts within which one has become imprisoned.
There is also some satisfaction to be gained from being deliberately rebellious or doing something outrageous and saying ‘F*** you!’ to your own conventions for a night.
In some cultures such safety valves are explicitly provided.
In Japan, for example, you can get away with saying and doing things when you are drunk that would be unthinkable when sober.
The key to the success of such releases, though, is always that you do not have to pay for them with significant amounts of guilt or regret the next morning.
Re-create
In stress the undermining of self-confidence and self-esteem begins to overflow from its original forum and adulterate other areas of life.
One's sense of oneself as a worthwhile person is in jeopardy.
To counteract the spread of this blight, and to keep it contained, people often report on the importance of having another life outside school.
If school is becoming a place that you do not enjoy, where you doubt your competence, and whose value you are questioning — then find an alternative activity that you enjoy, value and are good at.
Through this ‘recreation’ people can re-create their self-esteem.
Some people literally develop another life in which they display a side of themselves that would shock their pupils as much as their colleagues if they were to find out.
An ex-student of mine, a white woman who looked pretty ‘straight’ in her school clothes, used to frizz her hair and play bass in an otherwise all-black, all-male band in the evenings.
A primary headteacher in Kent is an enthusiastic hang-glider at weekends.
In quite a different vein, one teacher in a workshop described how she spent part of each weekend visiting old people in her community.
And of course teachers' own families, and having fun with their own children, can be an enormous source of satisfaction.
For these teachers the time taken up by their extra activities more than repays itself in renewed zest and self-confidence in school.
There is a general point here of some importance.
Teachers commonly believe that the reason they are so tired is that they have so much to do.
Yet they equally commonly affirm the observation that by taking on additional ‘jobs’ from which they derive real enjoyment and satisfaction, their energy and resources seem, paradoxically, to be replenished rather than further drained.
It begins to look as if what is exhausting is not the amount of work per se, but the lack of clear values to underpin it and the consequent lack of regular enjoyment and true satisfaction that arise from it.
Doing extra things that help you get back to feeling good about yourself tends to recharge the batteries for school itself.
‘Hobbies’, doing crossword puzzles, gardening or whatever can have this restorative effect if the challenge they present is self-chosen, and enjoyable.
Communicate
One of the linchpins that holds the Stress Syndrome in place is isolation.
Isolation creates a social vacuum, an absence of intimacy which removes both comfort and knowledge.
One is deprived of information about how others are feeling and managing, and of feedback about one's own coping strategies and their public face.
And this vacuum is the perfect breeding ground for the inflation of self-doubt and self-criticism, and increasingly unfounded imaginings about other people's competence, or about their disdain towards oneself.
Ungrounded in social realities, fuzzy anxieties become magnified and fixed into unpleasant certainties.
To begin to decrease this isolation is therefore a vital part of the stress-reduction programme.
To take the initiative yourself, however is often too difficult: your mind may have convinced you that your confusion is so much greater than other people's, your backlog of work so much longer, your reputation so much lower, that to open yourself to the social confirmation of these frightful facts would be a pointless and self-sacrificing thing to do.
The likelihood of social disconfirmation seems too slim and too implausible to make the risk worthwhile.
Alongside this there may be another internal voice that is piling on further self-criticism for being so feeble, for having lost touch with friends, for being an outcast, or whatever.
Within this frame of mind exhortations from well-intentioned others to ‘tell me what's wrong’ or ‘to seek some help’may be heard as another confirmation of one's own inadequacy.
It is important to remember that there are risks attached to being kind to people in this state, and important also not to underestimate how difficult it may be for such people to reach out on their own.
But that said, the efforts to peck oneself out of the shell of isolation, and to knock politely on other people's, are perhaps the two most essential strategies for the general reduction of stress.
For one's frailties to be known by someone else, someone who does not add their voice to the clamour of internal judgement, is the first step back towards being able to view one's predicament simultaneously with accuracy and equanimity.
The most vital resource for stressed professionals is at least one other person, preferably but not necessarily a colleague, to whom they can tell the truth.
This kind of heart-to-heart conversation is quite different from a form of interaction where solidarity is established around common causes, or against common enemies or threats.
These are not without value: they do give a sense of belonging which combats superficial isolation.
But they do not bring air to the underlying issues.
They do not provide the safety within which individuals can clarify and express their own feelings, perceptions and inchoate beliefs, for the staffroom cliques are based on certainty, and function to hold at bay doubt and anxiety.
My experience in workshops is that people are dying for more honest forms of communication.
When they are asked to share their true thoughts or feelings with an unfamiliar partner or in a small group, I have never known anyone to object, or complain that the exercise is an invasion of privacy.
Teachers want to have their privacy invaded, provided they are given a little nudge and they feel sure that there isn't going to be any ‘comeback’ in their school.
(It is not surprising that workshops with large numbers of  staff from a single school are much more ticklish in this respect, though the long-term gains can also be more dramatic.)
Teacher support groups are increasingly being set up to provide the opportunity for greater honesty, and it can be less threatening for people who feel isolated to join one of these than it is to make individual overtures within their own staffroom.
Such support may be available for groups of teachers who share a common predicament — such as women, ethnic minority teachers, new teachers or headteachers.
But when their focus is on personal experience rather than the discussion of issues, the parallels between the emerging agendas will often be striking.
There will be more practical advice about how to run a successful support group in Chapter 7.
For teachers who feel more comfortable with one-to-one meetings than with groups, various kinds of counselling can be sought, and again it may be possible to organize this so that unsympathetic colleagues or superiors do not find out.
Unfortunately people who could benefit from some counselling are often prevented from doing so by their own injunctions.
‘I ought to be able to sort this out on my own.’
‘It is a sign of weakness to ask for help.’
‘You must have to be pretty sick to see a shrink.’
And so on.
There is still a lingering feeling around that if you need this sort of help there has to be something ‘wrong’ with you, and this admission may further attack self-esteem and seem therefore to exact too high a price.
Wake up
The injunctions that are undermining self-esteem can only do so when they are unobserved and unquestioned.
They derive their power from being taken for granted, so that they can do their destructive work without themselves being checked for validity or reality.
A worthwhile longer-term project, which gets closer to the heart of the matter, is therefore to begin to unearth these injunctions, to bring them to light, and to put them to the test of rational and empirical scrutiny.
This can form part of the deeper work of a support group or a counselling relationship.
To the extent that these arenas support and acknowledge people's feelings and their search for greater clarity, they must presuppose a  set of values that is different from the one which underlies the common staffroom ethos; and after a while this clash of values may become explicit.
As it does so, individuals are able to become more conscious of the assumptions about personal worth and ‘correct conduct’ that they themselves had been tacitly making, and to see that an alternative personal philosophy could generate greater inner strength, and decrease their dependency on other people's approval.
This is a long-term project because the injunctions, though often easy to describe, are buried deeply inside the way people spontaneously think and act.
Detecting them is just the beginning of a process in which only slowly, and with considerable backsliding, one becomes aware of the multiple ways in which they manifest themselves as evasiveness, defensiveness, spikiness, apprehensiveness and so on.
Support and feedback from others is very helpful.
One way in which other people can help in daily life is by giving us feedback when we have unconsciously lapsed into our familiar stressed pattern.
Such alarm calls can help us to wake up sooner, before we have been swept too far into the groove of sulkiness, paranoia or self-pity.
However, it is important that alarm calls have been requested from and agreed with the other person when we are in our right minds.
If others offer us alarm calls without their having been previously ordered, they usually feel like an intrusion and a criticism, and will be fended off.
When someone says ‘Hey, you're whining again', you have to be able to say ‘Thank you’, rather than‘Who the hell are you to talk?’
Alarm calls are best requested from people who you like and trust — such as family and good friends — because they can place some strain on a relationship.
And it is better if you have something you are allowed to wake them up about as well, so that you are not always on the receiving end.
What people can do for themselves is to set up the equivalent of alarm calls:trio wires .
For most teachers I have worked with, their particular stress portfolio unfolds unconsciously up to a certain point, after which they become aware of the fact that they are getting seriously stressed and need to take care of themselves.
in some way.
The things that act as signals are their intuitively created trip wires.
They include, to give just a few examples, realizing that they have re-read the same page of a book three  times without taking any of it in; nearly getting knocked over crossing the road; yelling ‘Tie!’ at a pupil they don't know; noticing that they are both reading a magazine and watching the television while having their evening meal; spotting the line of empty wine bottles that has accrued since the weekend.
It is a useful (though again slow and very fallible) personal project to try to identify the symptoms of one's personal stress earlier and earlier in its course, so that remedial action can be taken before things have got too bad.
Affirmations are an additional technique for decreasing the power that the injunctions wield in making people's lives a misery.
They are deliberate attempts which people can make to counteract their injunctions by asserting their opposites.
Such affirmations can be written down and left in places where a person knows he or she will regularly come across them.
They can be as immodest and as positive as you like — although the risk of being embarrassed if other people find them has to be taken into account.
It would be a brave character who pinned a large notice with the words ‘Here sits a wonderful teacher’ above her chair in the staffroom, for example.
Among the affirming reminders that people have generated for themselves in workshops are:
I do a good job and I make mistakes.
(Note the crucial word here is the and rather than a but in the middle.)
Relax!
You deserve it.
To be not good enough is good enough.
To feel good about myself is my top professional responsibility.
What's wrong with being ‘only human’?
The point behind many of these affirmations is to keep reminding oneself of the obvious fact that in a situation where it is clearly impossible to be perfect, to be less than perfect is the best one can be.
Organize
Stress undermines efficiency and increases the level of demand by making people disorganized.
Time spent in taking stock is time well spent, even in the middle of a hectic day.
One very common  technique that people use is making lists of things to be done, and physically crossing them off as and when they are completed.
One embellishment to list-making which I have found keeps my spirits up is to include in the list (a) one or two things I have done already;(b) a few things that are easy and unproblematic;(c) the item ‘Make List’.
As soon as the list is complete, therefore, there are already several items that you can cross off, which gives you a flying start with the rest.
The fact that I am conning myself, and know it, does not, strange to say, seem to render the technique ineffective.
Another trick that I have learnt is for increasing the likelihood that I will actually get down to a job which is becoming urgent but which I don't want to do.
Simply add to the To Do list other tasks that are less urgent, and which are even more unappealing.
I hate writing letters, for example, so if I lard my list with ‘Write to Eddy’, ‘Write to Mary’, ‘Write to Aidan’ and so on , the item ‘Do Psychology Booklists’becomes relatively more attractive.
(Of course, for my friends to stand a chance of receiving any correspondence from me means that I either have to wait for the guilt level to rise sufficiently (which is a slow process), or to unearth other things to put on my list like ‘Install central heating’ and ‘Decorate bathroom’.)
Other people, more strong-minded than me, use the reverse tactics of promising themselves a reward when they have done something difficult.
I suspect these are people who, as children, were able to make their sweets last longer than anyone else's and to keep the best bit till last.
Given these various personal ploys, it always seems to make sense to prioritize the list at the time of making it, and to number the items in the order in which you are going to do them.
Having done this coolly and rationally there is less chance of wasting time between each job on deciding which to do next.
It is also important to give yourself a realistic — even generous — and flexible budget of time, so that further self-punishment does not accrue if you fail to complete everything in a day.
Other aspects of taking stock include realistic goal-setting (jargon borrowed from behavioural psychologists for making sensible decisions about what, given your talents and your time, you can hope to get done) and delegating .
When people get into a stress-induced panic about their workload they may (a) begin to load more and more on to their own shoulders, and (b) feel so overwhelmed that they can't seem to get started.
The trick is to  give away what you reasonably can, to put straight into the waste-paper basket everything which it is not absolutely necessary to do anything about, or which it is now too late to do anything about, and then to begin to nibble away at the rest.
The remaining strategies are designed to decrease the overload and pressure themselves.
As you will have noticed, the strategies we have reviewed have been operating back along the stress cycle (as shown in Figure 1 on page 70) at points nearer and nearer the source.
If you imagine stress as being in ‘hot water’ then there are roughly three stages in its creation.
First the tap is turned on (demand rises); then the water gets hot (injunctions activated); finally stress occurs (withdrawal, anger and tension arise).
Our coping strategies have been listed in reverse order.
If you can't do anything better, keep mopping up.
The next thing is to reduce the heat so that the water doesn't get so hot.
And best of all is to turn the tap down so that the flow of demands decreases.
These are the last group of techniques we are going to consider.
Leave
The simplest solution to the problem of stress is to leave the demanding situation.
People take early retirement, move to a new school, get a job out of teaching, get seconded on to courses or research projects, or just wait for the holidays.
Many teachers, however, either feel trapped in the job or, like Jill Jones, actually want to stay in teaching, stresses and all, and do the best job they can.
What alternatives do they have for reducing the demands?
Learn
Remember that demand, leading to overload and pressure, is a function of the disparity between duties and wishes on the one hand and limitations on the other.
Recall too that limitations are of different kinds: internal resources, external resources, rate, and conflict.
Demand can thus be lessened either by reducing the number and variety of jobs or the importance of self-chosen goals; or by reducing the limitations that are being experienced.
We  shall look at the reduction of limitations first.
How can people increase their personal resources?
In a general sense that is what many of the strategies which we have already discussed are aiming to do.
Stress directs resources away from dealing with the job to dealing with the emotional discomfort and personal threat.
Reduce threat and discomfort, and resources of commons sense, energy and resilience become available again for doing the job.
The more permanent way to reduce limitation, however, is to increase capacity — that is to invest time and effort in learning the skills that the job requires so that it can be done more smoothly, more confidently and more speedily.
There are training days at teachers' centres for new teachers, LEATGS courses for in-service development, management courses for deputies and new headteachers, and of course the Baker days for whole-staff development.
All of these are useful, and collectively they offer nothing like enough.
Most of these courses are too short, merely providing the beginnings of a new competence or a new viewpoint that is often swept away when people return to their hectic routines.
As we noted before, one of the prime concerns of teachers is that they do not have enough time to carry out the day-to-day tasks and responsibilities of their jobs to their own satisfaction, let alone to invest in enhancing their own skills, or reflecting on their roles and priorities, to anything like the extent which they would like.
Learning is a strategy that is potentially available, but its use is often prohibited by lack of time and money.
And the informal learning that teachers could so usefully acquire from each other, through talking about their teaching and watching each other teach, is often prevented by overcrowded timetables (and, of course , the vexed issue of ‘cover’) and/or by a staff ethos that discourages such activities.
Assert
Unreasonable or excessive demands can sometimes be removed or reduced by a forceful and rational challenge, preferably one that commands widespread support and which can be backed up, if necessary, with an effective threat.
This is the main modus operandi of the teachers' professional associations (unions): to work to decrease demands by fending them off, whilst  campaigning for more (external) resources.
Recent years have made teachers familiar with this strategy, and with the costs that are associated with it, especially when one is trying to negotiate with a fairly implacable demander.
Much more can, has been and should be written about teachers' collective action, and I am not going to pursue it here.
The main point I want to make is that, looked at from the perspective of an individual teacher's working life, this kind of action constitutes one very important strategy within a whole repertoire of ways of improving their pleasure and satisfaction in the job.
As I said before, the risk of collective action of this sort, which is regretted by many teachers (as reflected in the rise and fall of the memberships of the different unions over the last few years), is that it tends to reduce to the lowest common denominators of more pay on the one hand and a narrow-minded, knee-jerk resistance to change on the other.
Within the more immediate sphere of a teacher's own school, there are also demands to be met, sought or resisted; resources of time, material, money and responsibility to be fought for.
I shall return to this when we look at staffroom ethos and the promotion of change in more detail in Chapter 7.
Clarify
As an adjunct to assertion and challenge it is vital for teachers, both individually and collectively, within the school and externally, to be able to clarify the whole structure of the demand/limitation framework within which they are working.
This involves a number of areas, such as costing jobs as accurately as possible in terms of time and resources, and identifying any inherent contradictions and incompatibilities within the set of demands.
For each member of staff a clear role specification is important if the grey areas of responsibility within which guilt and resentment breed are to be avoided.
Pastoral and other cross-curricular involvements can form domains of confusion where such stress-enhancing feelings are rife.
By combining these two exercises, teachers are in a much better position to be able to say to the demanders, whether parents, government or somewhere in between: ‘Given the resources of time, material, support and expertise, we are able to do A, B and C or C, D and E, but not A, B and E, let alone all five.
Which would you like us to do?’
Most teachers want to work hard, and they will not generally use this exercise to con people into giving them an easy life.
But they also know, through recent, extensive and bitter experience, the difference between a sane and an insane workload, or rate of change.
It is as stupid for a government to try to whip and cajole an entrenched profession into changing as it is to try to pull a fed-up donkey along the road by its ears.
It is not only more kind, but more intelligent, to give it a rest or let it slow down.
Likewise it is smarter of the donkey to explain calmly that it can only go so fast, than to keep trying to bite its owner.
Yet what we have heard more of, in the recent discussions of the Conditions of Service, the introduction of GCSE, or of the 7, 11 and 14 tests, is precisely this ineffective cacophony of haranguing and braying.
It also repays the effort to clarify one's own strengths and weaknesses, for an objective inventory of what one is good and bad at, finds easy and difficult, is attracted to and repelled by, helps in two ways.
It helps one bid rationally, and more coherently, for congenial responsibilities, and therefore to feel more powerful and less resigned about the way these are distributed.
At the very least a clear case is owed a clear explanation if it is rejected.
And secondly it helps to combat the unconscious drift from inevitable professional limitation to guilt-inducing personal inadequacy which the injunctions, like unseen magnets, are trying to bring about.
Lastly it is most important of all that teachers apply the process of clarification to their own values and their own vision of education, and it is to this issue that we will turn in the next chapter.
Before we move on, however, a few cautionary words are necessary regarding stress.
‘Coping with stress’ books often offer people a prescription: lots of techniques and good advice that are claimed to have been tried and tested and of proven value to all.
But the ways people can best deal with their own stress are as varied as the ways in which they express it.
What I have tried to do here, therefore, is to present a flexible and varied menu of approaches from which people can perhaps derive ideas that seem congenial, or at least find some support for their own home-made kit of idiosyncratic but effective methods.
As you will see from my strategies — all of  which, let me repeat, are derived not from my own beliefs but from what teachers say they actually do — what works for one person may seem quite bizarre to another, and serve only to increase the distress of a third.
Remember the not uncommon example of the person who gets progressively tense and more frantic as she struggles to relax bits of her body to order.
None of these methods will ease all of the people all of the time.
The most appropriate way to reverse the stress cycle depends not only on who you are but on how bad the stress is.
If people try to apply a ‘turning off the tap’ strategy when they are hopping up and down in scalding water they may merely make themselves feel worse.
For example, trying to get organized or to clarify your situation when you are at your wits' end may not work.
You are likely to make a mess of it, lose your To Do list or confront people in an attacking rather than a rational way.
What may be more appropriate in this case is to relax, release or have a heart-to-heart: getting drunk and crying on somebody's shoulder, perhaps.
Only when you have unwound somewhat and are back in balance are you able to progress to a more powerful strategy that involves insight, persistence or talking to the headteacher.
The recovery of a certain amount of poise, perspective and power has to come first.
The second theme I have tried to illustrate throughout this chapter is the distinction between good coping strategies and bad coping strategies.
Bad coping strategies are those that have hidden costs: they produce toxic waste which makes things worse, not better, in the long run.
Good strategies cope with the focal problem without exacerbating the overall problem.
Joining an effective support group is a good strategy.
Avoiding everybody in the staffroom is likely in the long term to be a bad strategy because its result is isolation.
Going for a long walk in the country on a Sunday afternoon when you've got a lot of marking still to do, or having an affair with a colleague — they could go either way.
The particular case which I want to develop in the next chapter is that those strategies that involve sustained denial of or inattention to personal ideas, values, philosophy and vision, are bad strategies.