

News
Stevens out
It is with regret that we join the chorus of voices calling for the resignation of Jocelyn Stevens as chairman of Britain's architectural and archaeological conservation body, English Heritage: any man so free of mealy-mouthed PR awareness as to tell a bothersome journalist to ‘go and pee out of the window’ is a true blue.
However, the buccaneering ways of the Eighties, when the former publisher brought Thatcherite reform to the Royal College of Art, now seem crude and destructive.
The Parliamentary Accounts committee has recently given English Heritage a roasting for having produced a slash-and-dash strategy document last autumn without having consulted any of the relevant professional bodies.
The Permanent Secretary of the Department of National Heritage sweated in the hot seat, but it should have been Stevens sitting there instead, as he was the man responsible, having assumed executive powers.
The appointment of Mr Stevens was a classic case of promoting a man beyond his level of competence and could not have happened if there had not been deep distrust in official circles of people who know what they are talking about.
In this issue (p.11) we publish an interview with Lord Rothschild, ex-Chairman of the Trustees of the National Gallery.
His tenure there is generally agreed to have been particularly successful, despite the fact that he used to have the reputation of being a difficult and wayward man.
He himself gives the reason: that he had faith in the specialists, that is the director and curators, and allowed their objectives to be his objectives.
Any arguments — and one knows that there were some — took place behind closed doors, while a united front was presented to the world.
But then Lord Rothschild comes from a peculiarly intelligent family with many a specialist within it.
English Heritage is a challenge of quite another order, being a vast multifarious organisation which probably needs to be disassembled, but all the more reason to entrust it to someone who understands at least some of its roles and can respect the quality of the people who work within it and who advise it.
Whoever succeeds Jocelyn Stevens, and let it be soon, should as a first symbolic act immediately declare the start of restoration to the Albert Memorial.
It is too poignant a metaphor of national uncertainty and demoralisation if that gorgeous landmark in Kensington Gardens remains under scaffolding, neither to be demolished, nor yet to be repaired.
Paris
Exit Lang, enter Toubon in a spirit ‘neither of competition nor revenge’
France's new Minister of Culture lives in Fernand Leger's atelier
Shortly after taking over one of the most sensitive posts in the recently formed conservative government of Edouard Balladur, France's new Minister of Culture, fifty-one year old RPR Gaullist Jacques Toubon said he intended keeping ‘cultural affairs’— a term he prefers to that of ‘culture’— separate from any philosophy of State or political or doctrinal message.
He also announced three priorities: making cultural affairs available to a wider public; promoting French culture abroad and breaking down the divide between privileged Paris on the one hand and France's provinces and deprived outer city suburbs on the other.
The Ministry is one for which Mr Toubon has long been prepared and in which he is determined to make a mark, despite the obvious difficulties of taking over from such an active and popular man as Jack Lang.
But Mr Toubon says he neither thinks of his work ‘in terms of competition nor revenge’.
Born in Nice the son of a civil servant, Mr Toubon attended the Ecole Nationale de l'Administration in Paris, the graduate school and traditional grooming ground for France's top politicians.
Deputy General Secretary of the RPR Gaullist Party (Rassemblement pour la République) from 1977 — shortly after its creation by Jacques Chirac — to 1981, and Secretary General from 1981–84, Mr Toubon has been a member of several ministerial cabinets including those of Agriculture, the Interior and the Prime Minister's office, Matignon.
A keen jurist — like Mr Lang — Mr Toubon forced the respect of the Socialist majority in National Assembly debates on legal matters and would happily have taken over the Ministry of Justice in the new Government.
Mr Toubon has been most noticed, however, for his frequent commentaries on cultural affairs in RPR meetings, in the media and in the National Assembly, where he became Mr Lang's major sparring partner, fiercely critical in particular of his predecessor's alleged preference for all things Parisian.
Mr Toubon was one of the few Right-Wing politicians not to criticise the pyjama-striped columns of Daniel Buren erected in the Palais Royal by Mr Lang — but he did tell the artist they were not his favourite work.
Mr Toubon has frequently attacked what he termed the ‘pharaonic’ ambition of President Mitterrand's ‘grand projet’building projects such as the Louvre pyramid and the new Bibliothèque Nationale.
Mr Toubon has denied the rumour which circulated in Paris after the March General Election that he was going to shut down the trouble-torn Bastille Opera to carry out a complete technical and financial inventory.
Mr Toubon's appointment as Minister of Culture, made public just before 8pm on 30 March, was announced a few minutes later over the public address system at the Salon de Mars art fair, which had just opened — to widespread applause.
Toubon and his wife live in a former atelier used by Fernand Leger in the 6th arrondissement in Montparnasse and are friendly with a number of leading Paris contemporary art dealers.
They are particularly close to Daniel Templon and have a collection comprising works by a wide range of leading contemporary French artists.
‘Creators express their desires, their anxieties and their happiness: but someone who is responsible for cultural affairs must be strong and calm’, Mr Toubon said after his appointment.
Government policy, Italy
Fling open the museums
Minister Ronchey decrees they are to stay open ten hours a day, 362 days a year
Italy is undergoing a peaceful but nonetheless dramatic revolution at the moment, of which the corruption trials are only the most startling and internationally reported aspect.
But elsewhere in public life, the breaking of the political stalemate is leading to many long overdue reforms, as of the formerly feather-bedded civil service.
Cultural life is also benefiting from this new governmental radicalism.
Last month, the Minister of Culture Alberto Ronchey simply decreed that, from a date as yet to be fixed, but in any case before the summer season, all State-run monuments, museums, galleries, gardens, villas, parks and archaeological sites are to be open from nine in the morning until seven in the evening instead of just from nine until two.
At the moment it is intended that they close only on New Year's Day, 1 May and Christmas Day, although this may be altered to include also two Mondays a month.
This is a real gift to the declining Italian tourist industry, which needs the country's cultural assets to be made more accessible if it is to compensate for the fact that mass tourism has migrated to cheaper, less developed shores.
Despite the masterpieces they contain, Italy's museums are so uninviting and so often closed that they have very few visitors: only the Uffizi is over the one million mark (1,048,185), with the Accademia in Venice at a mere 183,474 (compared with the London National Gallery's four million visitors).
That Ronchey's move has been made now is due not only to the changed political climate, but also to the fact that the Minister is not a career politician like his recent, ineffective predecessors, but an independent, educated man (he was a distinguished political journalist before being invited to join the government), who instead of getting tied up in his Ministry's bureaucratic shibboleths, has collected an enlightened group of advisors around him, including the independent scholar Federico Zeri, who enjoys star status in Italy, and Mirella Baracco, the energetic founder of the private ginger group, Napoli 99, which is managing to get long-closed monuments and churches in that city open to the public.
The unions representing the museum warders, which in the past wielded much power, have often been regarded as an insurmountable obstacle to such a reform of the museums, but the trades union movement in general is much enfeebled at present, and other recent government decrees enforcing the mobility of public sector workers are expected to favour Ronchey's policy.
Finally, Ronchey has obviously decided that the warding profession nationally needed smartening up, so he has taken the opportunity of his decree, which by Anglo-Saxon standards is astonishingly dirigiste in its detail, to order that from now onwards warders are to wear summer and winter uniforms ‘in conformity with suitable models’.
Discoveries
Caravaggio identified in Irish religious college
The ‘Christ taken into captivity’ of 1602 goes on display in Dublin this autumn
Art history as written by Italians can seem rather old fashioned, more a matter still of attributions than of ideas.
In fact, there is nowhere in the world where an art historian's ‘eye’ is as honoured as in Italy.
The expert capable of detecting a Raphael at ten paces is admired almost as though he partook of the genius of the artist himself, and can be guaranteed at least a modest fame in the mass media.
Sergio Benedetti, the Florentine chief restorer at the National Gallery in Dublin, has identified a ‘Christ taken into Captivity’ high on the walls of an Irish religious college as the missing original version (of some ten or so known) of ‘Christ taken into Captivity’by Caravaggio.
By a curious coincidence, the present Chairman of the Trustees of the National Gallery was a pupil at that college and used to walk past the painting every day.
In fact, Benedetti, himself a specialist in Caravaggio, did not recognise the hand of the master until the picture was taken down three years ago and he had an opportunity to examine it under a strong light.
Then, he says, the quality of the painting became obvious to him.
Sir Denis Mahon, one of the world's  foremost authorities on the artist, wholeheartedly agrees: ‘It's the hitherto untraced picture; there's no doubt about that, both on visual and documentary grounds’, he told The Art Newspaper.
In fact, underpinning this remarkable find is the coincidence of an almost simultaneous archival discovery which proves this painting's descent, right back to the man who commissioned it from Caravaggio himself.
This is fortunate, because in Italy there is a trio of Caravaggio experts who, in the past, have shown themselves only too ready to disagree with one other and anyone else over any potential new addition to the artist's oeuvre of around one hundred paintings: Mina Gregori, formidable custodian of the Longhi intellectual inheritance; Ferdinando Bologna and Maurizio Marini.
Three years ago, two art historians, Francesca Capelletti and Laura Testa, published an article which shows that Caravaggio was paid for this ‘Christ taken into Captivity’ in 1602 by one Ciriaco Mattei; that the painting descended in the same family until 1802, when it was bought, together with other pictures, by the Scottish Hamilton Nisbet family, who sold it again in Dodwell's rooms in Edinburgh in 1921.
There it was bought by an unidentified lady who lent it to the religious Society where it has been ever since.
She has since died, and the Society, which emphasises that there is no question of the painting being sold, has decided that the most correct course of action is to put it on permanent loan with the National Gallery, where it will go on display, newly restored, in an exhibition of comparative material this October.
An article by Benedetti is to appear in the Burlington Magazine around the same time.
Up till now, the best candidate to be the original of Caravaggio's ‘Christ taken into captivity’ of 1602, in Odessa Museum 
The Kramar Collection
Prague to lose its Cubists?
Long in the National Gallery, the family wants them back
A long-running restitution case which threatens to deprive the Czech National Gallery in Prague of an important collection of modern art continues to dominate the Czech art world and attract the attention of the wider art community.
At issue is the ownership of a collection of thirty early Cubist works — including sixteen Picassos, two Braques, two Derains and ten works by various Czech artists including Emil Filla — acquired before World War I by Vincenc Kramar, a Czech art historian, collector and former director of the National Gallery.
His descendants claim that he was forced by the Communist authorities to sign the collection over to the State shortly before his death in 1960.
They argue that the State acquired the collection illegally and that the paintings and sculpture should be returned.
The National Gallery asserts that it was always the intention of Kramar to donate the collection in its entirety to the Czechoslovak State.
‘We have in our hands the letter of donation signed by Dr Kramar and the testimonies of many people from Prague art circles of the 1940s and 1950s’, Dr Lubomir Slavicek told The Art Newspaper shortly before his dismissal as director of the National Gallery in February.
With each of the Picassos conservatively valued at some $10 million, there is a fear that if the family are successful in their claim, the works would no longer be accessible to the public and, worse still, that they might appear on the market.
As no one individual or institution in the Czech Republic has $10 million to spend on a painting, the collection would almost certainly be split and leave Bohemia if it ever does come under the hammer.
According to Dr Ladislav Daniel, newly appointed director of the Prague National Gallery, several galleries and museums have already been approached in the event of that happening.
Dr Daniel told The Art Newspaper that ‘someone, either working for the family or an independent speculative dealer, has already approached the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York offering the collection’, and that ‘a private Spanish gallery was offered the Kramar collection from someone in Japan’.
The National Gallery has received letters of support from several international museums and galleries, including Dominique Bozo, director of the Georges Pompidou Centre in Paris, Gerard Regnier, director of the Picasso Museum, Paris, and Thomas Messer, director emeritus of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation in New York and now chairman of the Board of Trustees of the National Gallery in Prague.
The family of Vincenc Kramar have consistently refused to make any public statement concerning their claim on the collection since his son first filed for the 1991 round of restitution claims in September of that year.
The son has since died and the daughter has handed over her interests in the case to lawyers.
The grandson, who lives in Germany, is widely believed to be the driving force behind the court case.
Franco-Japanese glass theft solved
On 16 March the tribunal correctional of Nancy sentenced Gerard Caffier, forty, to two years in prison.
A similar sentence was passed in his absence on Japanese collector Koichi Kato.
In 1985 Caffier took advantage of a quiet hour over lunch at the Musée de l'école de Nancy and stole five pieces of pate de verre by Daum and Galle valued at more than FFr30 million.
Having allowed a decent lapse of time, Caffier then located a buyer for the easily identifiable pieces.
Koichi Kato, the son of a Japanese industrialist, happily paid the ridiculously low price of FFr800,000 for the group and was, according to Caffier, fully aware of what he was buying.
While the French police eventually traced the pieces to Osaka, lack of cooperation on the part of the Japanese authorities meant that they were not returned to France until June 1990, and then only on the condition that they were returned to Japan by December of that year.
However, one month after this deadline Judge Gilbert Thiel in Nancy refused permission for the objects to leave the city.
As the French Ambassador in Japan had signed a written agreement guaranteeing their return this has caused considerable  embarrassment and a split between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Chancellory (who are backing the judge).
The objects are now in a safe, awaiting their reinstallation in the Nancy museum.
Pyramid of Cheops yet to yield up secrets
Although no pyramid has been found with its original contents present, the recent exploration of a narrow passageway within the Great Pyramid built for the pharaoh Cheops has led archaeologists to hope for an undisturbed chamber at the other end.
Although the 20 cm square shaft has been known about since 1882 it is only with developments in recent technology that it has been possible to explore it by means of a video camera mounted onto a mini robot.
Designed by a German scientific team led by Rudolf Gantenbrink, the robot climbed at 45° up the 65 metre long passageway to find a portcullis type slab at the other end with large copper handles.
Dr Ivan Edwards, former Keeper of Egyptian Antiquities at the British Museum, and the foremost expert on the pyramids, has suggested that if there is any chamber beyond the door it is likely to be the same size as the passageway.
If such shafts found within the pyramids do have any significance it is most probably as a passageway for the spirit of the deceased to mount up to the stars.
The shaft recently explored points up to Sirius, believed to be the incarnation of the goddess Isis.
Despite the efforts of a team of Alpine climbers in the past no exit for any shaft has been found on the exterior of the pyramid.
Readers' quiz: the winners
There were no completely correct answers to our challenging quiz published last month.
A worthy winning entry came from Christine Baltay and Filiz Burhan of the American University of Paris.
Runners-up were Tanya Barrett of London and P. Emison of the University of New Hampshire.
The answers are as follows:
1.
Maria Augustina Sarmiento, Isabel de Velasco, Jose Nieto, Nicolas Pertusato and Maribarbola
2.
Veronese's ‘Marriage at Cana’ in the Louvre
3.
Mrs Barbara Johnson
4.
The Marquess of Cholmondeley
5.
Mantegna
6.
Magritte on ‘The Dominion of Light’
7.
Yvette Guilbert.
Toulouse-Lautrec painted her gloves
8.
Max Klinger
9.
Robert Browning, ‘Old Pictures in Florence’
10.
Gainsborough to Reynolds
11.
Saint Teresa of Avila.
Bernini's sculpture in Santa Maria della Vittoria, Rome
12.
The Prado
13.
Mary Cassatt (by Degas)
14.
1906
15.
Furniture/cabinet-making
16.
Christo
17.
Rembrandt
18.
Manchester, a Madonna by Michelangelo.
The rest are by Raphael
19.
The novelist George Meredith posed as the model for Henry Wallis's ‘Death of Chatterton’
20.
Girolamo Ticciati
21.
The plates of ‘The Vollard Suite’
22.
The Pre-Raphaelites; Surrealism; Beardsley, Whistler; Hepworth, Gabo, Nicholson; Vorticism; German Expressionism
23.
Slate
24.
‘A Dance to the Music of Time’ by Anthony Powell
25.
Pavlovsk (St Petersburg)
26.
Printmaking
27.
Rubens.
Antwerp Cathedral
28.
The Lenin Peace Prize
29.
Malevich
30.
The opening of Tutankhamun's tomb
31.
The gardens at Chatsworth
32.
A smoked convex lens used for viewing landscapes in the eighteenth-century
33.
Andy Warhol; Wayne Thiebaud; Claes Oldenburg; James Rosenquist
34.
Claude, Rosa and Poussin
35.
Kithara, a musical instrument.
All the others are vases
Association of Art Historians' Conference
Ideas vs. objects: the ongoing identity-crisis of the art historian
The cutting edge of British art historical research was presented at the nineteenth annual Association of Art Historians' Conference, held from 2 to 4 April at the Tate Gallery.
Convened by Richard Humphreys of the Tate Gallery and David Bindman of University College, London, the theme was ‘Identity and Display’, which covered the range of interests from museum display to gender and issues of identity.
Attendance figures were 550, compared to 520 for last year's event in Leeds but the high cost of the daily sessions deterred members from staying the full three days and led one disgruntled art historian to dub the conference ‘pay and display’.
Inevitably, deconstructing the titles of individual papers was a challenging exercise in itself.
With titles such as‘T-shirts, masculinity and Abstract Expressionism’, ‘Matrixial space: aside from the phallus’, and ‘Men, women and herveys: constructions of ‘effeminacy’ in eighteenth-century England’, the grazing conference-goer was tempted to opt for the sensationalist subject over more traditional approaches.
This, however, would have been a mistake as there were many quieter rewards: Richard Haslam on ‘The patronage of repair: Palladio's Villa Saraceno in its twentieth-century context’ and Stephen Lloyd on ‘Richard Cosway and the Prince of Wales’to name two, while Emma Barker's ‘Illegitimacy and the rights of the unmarried mother in eighteenth-century France’quickly dispelled any notions the audience might have had of topicality, and offered a reasoned discussion of nature versus civilisation in eighteenth-century literature and painting.
Most disappointing non-appearance was undoubtedly Helen Hills, who had promised to speak on ‘Sicilian Nuns in seventeenth-century Palermo: identity and marginalization’; Ms Hills was, presumably, marginalised herself by the train and bus strike which hit London on the Friday.
One of the most appealing aspects of this year's event was its location in the Tate Gallery, the first time a national gallery has hosted the conference.
Apart from the pleasure of listening to papers delivered in rooms hung with nineteenth-century British pictures, the Tate's ‘Robert Ryman’ exhibition was thrown open to delegates, as was ‘French art from Lille’at the National Gallery and ‘A Nation's Desires’at the Imperial War Museum.
The plenary sessions on Friday and Saturday were less well received.
Sotheby's lecture by Helene Cixous of Paris was intended as a feminist apotheosis but was marred by her  shaky reading of Rembrandt's ‘Bathsheba’ in the Louvre.
The Saturday extravaganza.
‘Power and Display’, saw three uneven papers by John Brewer, Carol Duncan and Richard Sennett, followed by an unilluminating critique by Steven Lukes.
According to a survey of delegates, the majority were happy with the preponderance of ideas-related over object-related sessions.
Next year's conference will be in Birmingham, with plans underway to hold the 1995 sessions in the V&A.
Letters to the Editor
Due diligence is vital to prove bona fide purchase
Critical comments are frequently made in the press stating or implying that Swiss law lends itself particularly well to illegal trafficking in works of stolen art.
Not only is this implication unfair but often the comments on Swiss law are misleading.
For example in the February issue of The Art Newspaper (No.25 pp.1 and 2), in the article entitled ‘Yugoslavia covered-up over the Sevso treasure’, it is stated that ‘Mr Rikanovic almost certainly knew nothing about Swiss law, by which anyone holding an item publicly for three years without judgment against him acquires title…
‘. This remark on Swiss law is incorrect, as explained hereafter.
With regard to the transfer of title in stolen art work, I would like to point out that Swiss law cannot, in comparison with the majority of European legal systems, be considered especially to favour illegal transactions.
There are several reasons for this.
First, in the large majority of civil law systems a dispossessed owner is barred from claiming back a stolen work of art after a given number of years if the purchaser is in good faith.
The limitation period varies from three to ten years depending on the country.
In Switzerland the limitation period is five years, i.e. is neither more nor less favourable than the average for a dispossessed owner.
Moreover, Swiss law contains relatively strict rules relating to the proof of good faith.
According to article 3 of the Swiss civil code, ‘no person can plead bona fides in any case where he has failed to exercise the degree of care required by the circumstances’.
With respect to goods purchased from a non owner, this rule has been construed by the Swiss Supreme Court to mean that ‘whenever the circumstances raise doubts as to the quality of the seller, the purchaser may no longer content himself with the mere appearance constituted by possession; the purchaser must enquire into the seller's capacity to convey property right’.
Applied to the conditions of sale on today's art market (i.e. with much concern being voiced, and discussion in the media, regarding illegal trafficking in works of art of doubtful provenance and authenticity) the foregoing test of good faith becomes quite a severe one to meet.
It means that to be considered in good faith and acquire title the purchaser of a valuable stolen work of art needs to demonstrate that she/he made a very serious, detailed and diligent investigation into the seller's title.
With the development of computerised registers of stolen art work and specialised magazines reporting thefts, one of the conditions to be met is to have consulted such sources (of course the legal relevance of a register depends to a certain extent on the diligence of the dispossessed owner in reporting the theft).
A good example of how the foregoing Swiss rules operate was offered by the Goldberg case (held in Indiana in 1989 and involving Byzantine mosaics stolen from a church in Cyprus and purchased by an American dealer in Switzerland), where the American courts concluded that the dealer Goldberg would have been deemed a purchaser in bad faith under Swiss law if it had been applied.
(The courts finally decided that Indiana state law governed the purchase but examined Swiss law because important parts of the transaction had taken place in Switzerland).
Furthermore article 939 of the Swiss civil code provides that if the purchaser is in bad faith, based on the test summarised above, the dispossessed owner can claim back his  property without any limitation in time.
These comments do not intend to defend the idea that the existing rules cannot be improved (or that the Sevso case involved stolen goods), but merely that Swiss law should not be used as a ‘scapegoat’ in this field.
In practice the length of a statute of limitations is perhaps less significant than the content of the duty of diligence imposed upon purchasers of works of art.
In that respect, properly construed, the general rules which are relevant in Switzerland can be applied in a way which meets the needs of today's market.
Exhibitions
The Barnes Foundation
Cashing in on Matisse, ‘artist of hotness’
The first ever loan exhibition of paintings from the Barnes Collection opens in Washington this month and may raise up to $15 million for the Foundation
After two years of legal battles, on 2 May, the first exhibition ever of works from the Barnes Foundation of Merion, Pennsylvania, opens at the National Gallery of Art.
The pictures that curators tried for decades to coax or pry off the Barnes's walls will also travel to the Musée d'Orsay in Paris and then to the Museum of Western Art in Tokyo.
The National Gallery is promoting ‘Great French Paintings from the Barnes Collection’ as an unprecedented look at these pictures, for the first time in a conventional museum setting.
No effort has been made to reproduce Dr Albert C. Barnes's idiosyncratic wall arrangements, in which his Matisses, Cezannes, Picassos and Renoirs were clustered on burlap alongside ironwork and decorative arts.
The National Gallery expects huge crowds and strong sales of the Barnes's first colour catalogue, published by Knopf and printed handsomely by Pizzi.
Whether the tour (which overrides a ban on loans in Barnes's will and was shepherded through the courts by the National Gallery's director emeritus, J. Carter Brown, and the wealthy collector Walter Annenberg; see The Art Newspaper No. 15, February 1992, p.1) should be taking place at all remains a matter of debate.
The foundation still faces several lawsuits over its management of the collection.
The current trustees of the Barnes Foundation argue that the 1924 Merion villa on the edge of Philadelphia that housed the collection has become structurally unsafe and poses a threat to the pictures.
The tour is necessary, they say, to raise funds to create a safe environment for Barnes's art — funds they had originally sought by trying to sell up to $100 million in paintings.
Estimates for the cost of renovation have run as high as $18 million.
Barnes president Richard H. Glanton additionally maintained that, for logistical reasons, the tour had to begin as soon as possible.
Lois Forer, a former judge and prosecutor who has followed the Barnes's legal struggles for forty years, is alarmed at how such an important collection has been run singlehandedly by Richard Glanton, a lawyer with no art background.
‘I know of no art gallery in which the president of the board is the museum director, the curator and the person in charge of the renovations of building and the art school.
It's fantastic’, she said.
Concern remains over the risks travel poses to some of the Barnes paintings.
Last year, a Barnes conservator was fired after warning that two of the tour's centrepieces, Matisse's ‘Joy of Life’ and Seurat's ‘Poseuses’were too fragile to travel.
Artwatch, led by Professor James Beck, has called the tour hasty and sought unsuccessfully to keep it from happening.
Publicly, the National Gallery has declared that all precautions have been taken to protect the Barnes pictures.
Privately, the museum staff members have dismissed Beck as a troublemaker and crank.
Beck, however, is not alone in his concern.
Conservator Nathan Stolow, who contributed a chapter to the National Gallery's own guide to art transport, has called for public accounting of the way in which the paintings were prepared and restored for travel and attacked the National Gallery for creating an exhibition advisory committee composed of officials from the tour's participating institutions.
The Barnes's lawyers, he added, prevented him from testifying at hearings on whether the tour should be allowed.
‘It appears that the Barnes lawyers and, by inference, the National Gallery of Art did not want to hear from me any comments questioning the indecent and dangerous haste in the timetable for the exhibition’, Stolow wrote in a 29 March letter to a member of Congress.
The National Gallery has also been criticised for trying to insure the entire exhibition with the help of an indemnity reserved for foreign loans.
Only one work, a version of Matisse's mural ‘The Dance’, is coming from abroad.
These issues will be the subject of Congressional hearings this month, but are unlikely to threaten the tour schedule.
Glanton says the tour could raise as much as $15 million, thanks in part to first-time merchandising of Barnes images, even though Barnes's will bans any reproduction of works.
The collection is now part of a database compiled by an offshoot of the Microsoft Company, and another firm is now marketing posters, notepaper and greeting cards, with ‘The Joy of Life’ and ‘The Dance’the images of choice.
‘I think because of the show at MOMA, Matisse is the artist of hotness’, said the Barnes's licensing agent, Bob Robinson, of Emerald City Enterprise.
The exhibition opens at the National Gallery 2 May and continues until 15 August.
It will be at the Musée d'Orsay, Paris, 6 September to 2 January 1994; the National Museum of Western Art, Tokyo 21 January to 2 April; the Philadelphia Museum of Art, dates to be determined.
Queen's Gallery shows a king's purchase
The present monarch of Great Britain has recently been the subject of criticism for failure to all make her collection readily available to her subjects.
In 1762, when George III purchased the renowned collection of Consul Smith for the Royal collection for £20,000, tickets were issued for the nobility and gentry to view it.
The current exhibition at The Queen's Gallery entitled ‘A King's Purchase: King George III and the collection of Consul Smith’ is a selection of the 500 oil paintings which formed part of that original purchase.
As well as the pictures, the king acquired an entire library (given to the British Museum by George IV in 1823), albums of prints and drawings (now at Windsor) and a collection of gems and cameos.
In the same year he bought Buckingham Palace where many of the pictures were displayed.
The current exhibition includes one hundred paintings, drawings, prints, books and manuscript illuminations.
It is particularly representative of the work of Smith's artist friends in Venice and also includes paintings by Van Dyck, Vermeer and Bellini, and drawings by Raphael, Reni and Castiglione.
Until 23 December at the Queen's Gallery, Buckingham Palace.
‘American Art in the Twentieth Century’
An American view of the European view of America
As the new anthological show opens this month in Berlin, we asked the Curator of Paintings and Sculpture at MoMA to comment
Curated by Norman Rosenthal and Christos Joachimedes, ‘American Art in the Twentieth Century’ opens at the Martin-Gropius-Bau, Berlin, at the beginning of this month (8 May-25 July) and will be shown at the Royal Academy in the autumn (16 September-12 December).
In last month's issue, The Art Newspaper published the list of artists who have been included in this ambitious survey and identified a second list of candidates whom Rosenthal and Joachimedes had decided to ignore.
Based upon those lists, we invited Robert Storr, Curator of Painting and Sculpture at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, to comment upon their selection and the exhibition.
‘American Art in the Twentieth Century’ will feature sixty-four artists, with the leading figures represented by up to ten works apiece.
The exhibition will include a total of 250 works.
Can the history of modern and contemporary American art be told in this way?
Robert Storr.
In principle, I suppose that it could be done, but it is hard all the same to see how.
The exhibition ostensibly covers three-quarters of a century of art — from the Armory Show of 1913 to the present day.
The potential cast for telling that story is vast, and it strikes me that a large number of both major and important minor characters is absent from Rosenthal and Joachimedes's list.
As a result the creative rhythms and interchanges that explain the real history of modern American art will be impossible to discern.
Of course an exhibition is not just a list of names; a lot will depend on the particular works that are chosen and how they are installed.
Perhaps those artists mentioned who worked in several ways — like Hartley or Guston or Morris — will be shown in a manner that suggests some of the aesthetic connective tissue that is otherwise ignored, but if they are represented only by their signature work a great deal will be missing.
The exhibition includes Marcel Duchamp who has never previously been featured in an exhibition of American art.
On what grounds can his inclusion be justified?
Given Duchamp's long residence in America, and his contacts with and influence on American art, I can see why he might be included, although most of the time he was a presence on the scene here he wasn't working publicly.
If Duchamp's inclusion is accepted, should the exhibition have found room for other European artists who have worked in the United States, such as Mondrian or Max Ernst?
As far as those artists go you must ask in each case what proportion of their careers were actually spent here and did their stay in America fundamentally affect their work?
Mondrian's style was fully formed by the time he arrived in New York —‘Broadway Boogie Woogie’ doesn't have all that much to do with cruising Broadway.
Leger imagined America long before leaving France; and Ernst brought his wilderness with him so there's no reason to include them.
But Malcolm Morley, although born in England, is an American painter, and in many respects Hockney became one in the 1960s though he's now living with the French masters in a Côte d'Azur of his own imagining.
The most conspicuous exclusion in the show is Louise Bourgeois, whose career spans from 1947 to the present.
As she has often said, her inspiration is French but her realisation is American.
She never could have done in Europe what she did in New York; I cannot think of an artist who points up this issue more clearly and I cannot understand why she of all people was left out of the show.
Rosenthal promises a European perspective of American art.
Will a European perspective be interesting to an American audience, and would an American perspective be greatly different to his plan?
I fail to see how the show as described reflects a particularly European point of view.
More to the point, I wonder what the interpretative point of view really is, European or otherwise.
Overall, I am struck by how conservative Rosenthal and Joachimedes's list is, given all the available choices.
It seems to differ little if at all from the standard idea of the mainstream in force for the last twenty or thirty years.
The curators have apparently missed the most exciting development of art since the 1960s which is the break-up of that restrictive notion of the mainstream and the extraordinary diversity and cross-fertilisation that resulted.
Artists know that this has happened, but much of the art establishment hasn't caught up with events, or looked back at the past in the light of that.
So I don't think this selection  represents a particularly European view.
In fact, I would have hoped that an European interpretation might have presented us with a radically different perspective, something to argue about.
Perhaps the European audience is being spared more difficult or anomalous work on the grounds that it can't be understood out of context.
If that is the case then I think the capacity of both Europeans and Americans to ‘get it’ is being underestimated.
And it also becomes all the more important to provide the context.
‘American Art in the Twentieth Century’ is the fourth in a series of reassessments of national schools and follows Rosenthal's presentations of German, British and Italian art.
Do such surveys, taking place five or ten years before the century's close, have validity?
What are their limitations?
‘Thinking big’ is certainly a professional challenge, or temptation; that is to say trying to conceive an omnibus exhibition that will sort everything out and establish a record is an interesting proposition.
But I have not seen much evidence that it is really possible to do it on this scale.
Tackling the same project in smaller but more detailed and significant chapters is perhaps the better exercise.
Is ‘American Art in the Twentieth Century’ really two exhibitions: American art from the Armory Show to, say, 1945, and American art from 1945 to date?
If this exhibition means to report on the whole of twentieth-century American modernism then it has left out a great deal in the period between the two world wars; work that is historically important and good even though sometimes ‘provincial’ with respect to Europe.
With the exception of Ad Reinhardt there is no one who was involved in ‘pure’ or hard-edge abstraction in the Thirties; except for Hopper and Sheeler there is no realism before (or after) World War II; and there is no nod to Depression-era painting.
Massive chunks of history are missing and it is really not possible to understand the Abstract Expressionists without reference to how they incorporated or reacted against those earlier tendencies.
Can the history of contemporary American art be told in the form of a museum exhibition without reference to land art, film, performance and other less tangible art forms?
I would simply say that if you want to know what happened in America after Pop and Minimalism, you have to concentrate on art made in unconventional places and with unconventional materials: out of the studio art, land-art, body-art and video.
One of the key figures is Allan Kaprow who made explicit the transition from Pollock's ‘action painting’ to happenings, installations and action or process based art of all kinds.
He is omitted, as are many important conceptualists and post-conceptualists; there is no Robert Irwin, or Kosuth, or Christo (another Eurican), Matta-Clark, or Haacke, or Tuttle.
At a time when American art is preoccupied with a whole range of new issues, does Rosenthal's historical survey appear to be predictable, conventional and, perhaps in retrospect, wrong?
For the most part the artists Rosenthal and Joachimedes have chosen are fine; the problem is the narrowness of perspective this list imposes.
Up until the mid-1960s there is practically no sculpture: again no Bourgeois for example, or Nadelman or Noguchi or Roszak; nor any Tony Smith, who after all was a major influence on Minimalism.
Nor, by the way, is there any of the early work of two of the best and most minimal colour-field painters represented: Noland and Poons who are definitely ‘mainstream’.
Then, ironically, when you get to the 1980s, when painting flourished, there are only two painters — Schnabel and Basquiat.
It all seems to be about using one or two people to stand for a whole sensibility, but thereby creating the impression that they were somehow alone in the field.
It would have been much more interesting I think, and more useful to an European audience, to look more broadly and more closely.
It pays to concentrate not just on big names, but on the ‘artists’, who are every bit as important to the overall texture of art; on Lee Bontecou who was one of Leo Castelli's most visible artists in the early 1960s — the only woman whom he represented — and who was a major inspiration to Eva Hesse; on H. C. Westerman whom Donald Judd once described as ‘one of the most interesting artists around’.
Without Westerman or Bontecou, one completely loses sight of the strong current of grotesque pervasive in American art.
For that matter, if you're going to include Mike Kelley, where's Ed Kienholz?.
Rosenthal has selected just three artists to stand for new developments in the Nineties: Jeff Koons, Robert Gober and Mike Kelly.
Has he made the right choices, and can he suggest the current direction of American art with just these three candidates?
I am very interested by all three, but why not Charles Ray or Kiki Smith?
What are the criteria?
I don't understand.
And again, what happened to paintings in the years before?
Keith Haring had his charms, but no Fischl, no Salle, no Rothenberg?
Weren't they a part of the Zeitgeist after all?
And what about Elizabeth Murray who has yet to be given her due in any European exhibition of contemporary art.
She is the most inventive and formally radical painter around, turning image and surface inside out in unprecedented ways.
Isn't it about time!
And where is the conceptual or photo-based work that paralleled all this: Baldessari or Kruger or Lawler.
Finally, I would say that in a show of sixty-four artists it is astonishing that there are only five women.
This gender imbalance is perceived in Europe as being an American issue, but it is not, it is a universal question.
And, even if it were just an American issue, how can one claim to represent American art properly in the period when women's work often led the way without including some of the artists I've mentioned.
Setting this show and its problems aside, what we need generally is some fresh thinking and some fresh air.
Eighties-style extravaganzas or not, one hopes the Nineties will see it in some form.
Minneapolis
Fluxus pinned down by Walker Art Center
Vast collection of material will tour for two years
To coincide with the thirtieth anniversary of the emergence of Fluxus in 1962, an exhibition titled ‘In the Spirit of Fluxus’ is taking place at the Walker Art Center (to 6 June).
A loose association of artists, writers, composers, filmmakers and performers, Fluxus has never been satisfactorily defined and has fitted awkwardly into broader surveys of the period of its more energetic activity.
It provided a discordant note, for example, in the Pop Art exhibition organised by Norman Rosenthal for the Royal Academy and widely seen in other countries.
The materials of Fluxus artists were mainly ephemeral or paper-based, or centred on performance art, presenting problems for exhibition organisers.
The current show includes some 1,000 objects and other works of documentation by forty artists including George Maciunas, Joseph Beuys, Robert Fillou, Yoko Ono, Nam June Paik, Daniel Spoerri and La Monte Young.
Several important works or environments have been recreated.
They include Willem de Ridder's ‘European Mail-Order Warehouse/Fluxshop’(1964–65); Ben Vautier's ‘Living Sculpture’, originally constructed for a Fluxus festival in London in 1962 when the artist inhabited a gallery window for fifteen days; and a Flux-Labyrinth, a tactile obstacle course originally created in Berlin in 1976.
A catalogue publishes essays on a wide range of Fluxus issues by leading authorities including Andreas Huyssen, Simon Anderson, Kristine Stiles and Owen Smith.
The first proper historical evaluation of the subject to have been made in the United States, the exhibition has been organised by curator Elizabeth Armstrong and her associate, Joan Rothfuss, and will be seen at the Whitney Museum of American Art (16 July-3 October), Chicago's Museum of Contemporary Art (13 November-16 January 1994), the Wexner Center for the Visual Arts, Columbus OH (18 February-17 April 1994), the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art (12 May-24 July 1994) and the Fundacio Antoni Tapies, Barcelona (17 November1994–12 January 1995), the only European venue confirmed for this important exhibition of predominantly European material, although Armstrong told The Art Newspaper that she expects to add at least two further venues in Europe, one of which may be in London.
Bremen Kunsthalle paintings on show in Moscow
The exhibition ‘Western painting from the sixteenth to the twentieth century from the Bremen Kunsthalle Collection’, the show of some of the works of art looted at the end of World War II, has moved from the Hermitage in St Petersburg to the All-Russian Museum of Decorative, Applied and Folk Art in Moscow.
It is possible that this, the second showing of the collection in Russia, could also be the last.
The pictures may return permanently to Bremen at the end of the year.
Did Impressionism begin with Provençal painting?
A major exhibition of nineteenth-century Provençal painters, ‘Le Paysage Provençal et l'Ecole de Marseille avant l'Impressionisme’ showing at the Musée de Toulon until 30 May, aims to show that Impressionism was a logical development of the status quo ante, rather than a startling innovation.
Comprising 150 works by artists such as Guigou, Loubon, Isabey, Rousseau, Courdouan, Brest, Monticelli, Ziem and Gresy — who painted the Mont Sainte Victoire in 1843, well before Cezanne and whose ‘Les Baigneuses’ of 1854 inspired the latter's work of the same name — the exhibition is the fruit of ten years' research by the Musée de Toulon's curator-in-chief, Jean-Roger Soubiran.
Soubiran's doctorate thesis on the subject of the Provençal painters, published recently as a 624-page book by Reunion des Musées de France, charts the growth of painting in the south of the country throughout the nineteenth century.
It describes in particular the ways in which Provençal painting, influenced by the development of photography, ‘japonisme’ and out of doors sketching, used a range of techniques which art history has previously only associated with the Paris-based Impressionists.
Those interested in Provençal paintings should move on after seeing this show to the newly reopened Musée national des Monuments français in Paris, which is showing some of the same artists in an exhibition on Marseille until 5 July (see p. 8).
The show is to transfer to the museum of Saint-Remy-en-Provence from 3 July to 30 October and then, if negotiations are successful, to Genoa in Italy.
Anders Zorn, master of the sun-dappled nude, and Isabella Stewart Gardner
A feted and fashionable artist in his own lifetime, the pictures of Anders Zorn rose to extraordinary prominence in the Scandinavian art boom of the late 1980s: in August 1989 ‘Naked under the Trees’ sold for £1,424,554, having made £20,000 in 1976.
Due to the plight of the Scandinavian economy, the bubble has burst but scholarly attention is now being focused on his work, resulting in an exhibition at the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum, Boston (5 May to 22 August).
Isabella Stewart Gardner met Zorn at the Columbian Exhibition, Chicago, in 1893, where she purchased ‘The Omnibus’, one of his most celebrated paintings.
Admirers of his work included Munch, who spoke of ‘the great genius spread generously through his art’.
At her suggestion, the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston held an exhibition of his work which resulted in fame and numerous commissions in the US.
The friendship with Isabella Stewart Gardner lasted a lifetime and the artist also acted as her adviser on purchasing art: among the works he recommended was Gentile Bellini's ‘Portrait of a Turkish scribe or painter’.
The present exhibition will include ninety-two pictures and around seventy letters and photographs from the museum's archives.
Partly funded by the auction house Skinner, it is curated by Dr Michelle Focos of Case Western Reserve University, who is also the author of the catalogue.
Dr Focos is currently Fulbright Fellow in Sweden, and is completing research for a book on Zorn.
Will WONDERS never cease?
‘Napoleon’, the latest instalment of the city-sponsored WONDERS cultural series, has five months (until 22 September) to top the previous attendance records set by its predecessors ‘Rameses the Great’, ‘Catherine the Great’ and ‘Splendors of the Ottoman Sultans’, each of which brought hundreds of thousands to the region's cultural capital.
The marketing blitz has raged at full tilt for some time now, making it likely that this blockbuster will live up to its imperial ambitions.
The downtown convention centre plays host to 175 paintings, sculptures, decorative arts and costumes borrowed from collections in Europe and the United States.
The principal lenders are Malmaison, Fontainebleau, Versailles, the Louvre and the Musée Carnavalet.
Highlights include paintings by Gros, David, Gerard, Isabey, Regnault and Lejeune, the Emperor's death mask taken on St Helena, and fifteen marble sculpture busts of the Bonaparte family centring on ‘Napoleon as First Consul’ by Canova.
The exhibition is curated by Bernard Chevallier, a biographer of the Empress Josephine and director of the Chateau de Malmaison, Napoleon's residence during the Consular period.
The chateau's Council chamber has been transported and reconstructed for the exhibition, having been restored by the Reunion des Musées Nationaux courtesy of a $200,000 donation from Memphis.
Mr Chevallier's catalogue is complemented by Napoleon: An Intimate Account of the Years of Supremacy, 1800–1814 by Proctor Patterson Jones (Random House).
Paris
Titian's century is Louvre director's farewell
A triumphant exhibition, with the cleaned Titians a revelation; only Giorgione remains clouded
Michel Laclotte's valedictory exhibition is a triumphant success.
This writer has never attended a more populated exhibition of Old Masters and has rarely overheard so much intelligent discussion, particularly from ‘ordinary’ visitors.
Laclotte's decision to eschew evocative settings, contextualising knick-knacks, and viewer-orientation booths has been amply rewarded by the concentrated attention paid to the works on display.
Paintings and drawings, separated from one another in all but the first room, are arranged straightforwardly and unpretentiously and while some areas are too tightly hung nothing, except other people, interposes between viewer and work.
Daylight regrettably is excluded, apart from an occasional glimmer, but in compensation the light level for the paintings is reasonably high and constant with no modish alternation of spotlighting and shadow.
Following the ‘Genius of Venice’ exhibition at the Royal Academy in 1983–84, Venetian sixteenth-century painting has had a good decade, with numerous major monographic shows.
Thus a considerable proportion both of paintings and drawings has recently been widely seen.
But there is enough new or unfamiliar material — including a wonderful Savoldo drawing discovered at Dijon by Catherine Legrand — and enough well-known paintings have been cleaned, for the exhibition to seem fresh.
The main theme Laclotte has chosen to investigate is the work of Giorgione and Titian, and their influence through the century, and while a number of artists and types of art are inevitably sidelined, this choice gives the exhibition an unusual coherence.
It is revealing however that, since its first announcement, the title has contracted from ‘Le Siècle de Giorgione et de Titien’ to ‘Le Siècle de Titien’, for it is Titian's work that forms the exhibition's spine.
Titian's inventiveness in subject matter and form is demonstrated in groups of works hung together, and his impact is registered in succeeding rooms less in obvious derivations than in the ways that other painters exploited and developed the possibilities that he had revealed.
The exhibition's logic is more artistic than art-historical and it is the insight that it provides into the majestic statement and the creative response which so engages the viewer's attention.
Thus the emotively articulated skies and sleek luminosity with which Titian was experimenting in the early 1520s are echoed and developed in Palma and Lotto and Dosso, and the fluid and broken brushwork of the last three decades — itself, in part, a response to Schiavone — is transmuted in Tintoretto and Bassano.
Within the limits of possible loans, the organisation is sensitive and enlightening.
The exhibition and catalogue concentrate also upon certain problems, essentially of authorship and chronology, which have bedevilled understanding of the period 1500–1515.
These are addressed in the first five rooms, which treat late Bellini, Giorgione (above all in the half-lengths), the Venetian Sebastiano, early Titian and the Giorgione-Titian-Campagnola controversy among the drawings.
With great generosity Laclotte has allocated much of the cataloguing and, presumably, choice of exhibits, to other scholars including, in the problem areas, Giorgione and the early Titian to Alessandro Ballarin (Padua University), and the drawings to Konrad Oberhuber (Albertina, Vienna).
Indeed, the enormous catalogue — whose evident production problems will not prevent it from becoming an oeuvre de base — is the reverse of chauvinistic, with French scholars distinctly under-represented.
Nor has Laclotte imposed uniformity of style, let alone opinion, upon his collaborators, a pluralistic openness which has, however, created certain discrepancies; long self-reflexive entries by Ballarin co-exist uneasily with crisp and focused pieces by Sylvie Beguin and Laclotte himself.
In some cases entries have been allocated to scholars with nothing new to say.
In the problem areas, what was gained?
To this pair of eyes Giorgione remains a black hole: Ballarin's new chronology and most of his attributions seem completely unconvincing.
Sebastiano, with the cleaned San Giovanni altarpiece beside the San Bartolommeo organ-shutters and the Kingston Lacey ‘Judgement of Solomon’, provided one of the exhibition's greatest experiences, one which showed that the Louvre and Metropolitan Madonnas are not his.
The Prado ‘Virgin and Saints’, the Kelvingrove ‘Woman taken in Adultery’ and the ‘Concert Champetre’made up a coherent early Titian, and their juxtaposition with the Antwerp ‘Jacopo Pesaro presented to St Peter’— so often, as here, dated c. 1506 — eliminates a central confusion in the reconstruction of his early work, for it must be post-1511.
Among the drawings Oberhuber transfers to Giorgione a group hitherto given to Giulio Campagnola — a logical step which may or may not prove correct.
But finally the great revelation was, as always, Titian, above all the cleaned paintings from the Louvre, the ‘Supper at Emmaus’ and the ‘Crowning with Thorns’, the one of Vermeerian delicacy and subdued drama, the other as lavish and ferocious as a Rubens, an example not of ‘mannerist crisis’but of baroque dramatics.
The exhibition's poster carried the ‘Concert Champetre’, and for sheer beauty this choice was justified.
But Titian's dominance would have been more potently expressed by the Berlin ‘Self-Portrait’, from which emanates, down to the drumming fingers, a physical and intellectual energy, and an imperious will, which make it quite clear why, in Venice, 1500–1600 is the century of Titian.
The exhibition continues at the Grand Palais until 14 June.
Old Master drawings
Poland's noble collections tour the U.S.
The northern works stand out
‘Master Drawings from Polish Collections’ begins a four-city American tour this month.
‘The gaps and omissions in the selection dramatically illustrate how the constant wars and invasions on Polish soil from the Renaissance to the present have destroyed the country's cultural patrimony’, writes Anna Kozak, curator of foreign prints and drawings at the National Museum, Warsaw, and one of the Polish art historians who compiled the catalogue.
She refers with almost elegiac despondency to the once vast collections of eighteenth-century Polish aristocrats.
An area as vast as the Italian Renaissance, for example, is represented only by a Domenico Campagnola landscape, a ‘Christ Blessing’ from the circle of Lorenzo di Credi, a Titianesque boating scene, and a Bassano ‘Presentation of the Virgin’.
Organised by the Trust for Museum Exhibitions in Washington, D.C. and coordinated by the National Museum in Warsaw, the exhibition contains 110 drawings (fifteenth- to eighteenth-century) from twelve Polish institutions, the richest being the National Museum in Gdansk (a pre-war German museum), the National Museum of Warsaw, the Ossolinski National Institute of Wroclaw, and the print room of the Warsaw University Library.
The Trust for Museum Exhibitions put together a funding package for the show, including grants for in-kind services from LOT Polish Airlines, and cash from the Kosciuszko and the Rosenthiel Foundations.
Participating museums pay an undisclosed rental fee, while some reimbursement was made to the Polish museums for their costs and administrative expenses.
The later Italian drawings include a Guercino ‘Magdalen’, a Bellotto executed for King Stanislaus Poniatowski, a Piranesi fantasy, and a G.B. Tiepolo ‘Head of Cleopatra’.
French examples are in similarly short supply, lacking a single Poussin, Claude, Watteau, Ingres, or David, but the Clouet ‘Portrait of Mary Stuart’ is superb, as is Fragonard's red-chalk landscape at Villa d'Este, high points among a miscellany of works by Boucher, Natoire, Robert, and Greuze.
The greatest depth is in German and Netherlandish art.
Notable are Holbein the Elder's design for an altar in Augsburg Cathedral, figure studies attributed to Huber, Graf, Elsheimer, and Durer, and assorted Netherlandish works culminating in Rubens's ‘Rest on the Flight into Egypt’ and nine Rembrandt pen and inks.
The catalogue documents several unpublished drawings, and many never before published in English.
‘Master European Drawings from Polish Collections’ opens at the Nelson-Atkins Museum, Kansas City (until 6 June) then travels to the Milwaukee Art Museum (8 July to 29 August), the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts (10 October to 5 December, 1993), and the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford (15 January to 6 March, 1994).
Marseille in the nineteenth century
‘Africa is its faubourg, India its suburb and America its neighbour.
It has made a lake of the Mediterranean, a stream of the Atlantic and a winter garden of Algeria’.
This description of Marseille, by its citizen Joseph Mery (who introduced the town to Alexander Dumas and Gustav Flaubert) suggests something of its popularity and fashion in an age before drugs and the Mafia.
The first exhibition to be held at the newly reopened Musée national des Monuments français, Paris (see p. 14) is devoted to the artistic life, architecture and urbanism of the city from 1830 to 1914, a period during which the city's population grew from 130,000 to more than 500,000.
The exhibition is structured around three topics: the evolution of the city plan including the construction of canals and the all-important port; the work of native painters such as Loubon, Guigou, Engaliere, Monticelli and Ziem and the various schemes of decoration of public buildings; new developments at the end of the century with the work of Cezanne, Dufy, Braque and Signac.
Architectural models include the painted wooden 1848 Plan Lavastre of the city.
Until 5 July.
Museums
French cultural policy
Glass art cube by British architect opens in Nîmes
Southern town of Nîmes gets prestige institution at cost of $70 million
It has been French State policy over the last twelve years to foster its provincial museums, and in particular to increase the number of contemporary art museums outside Paris (see The Art Newspaper No. 26, March 1993, pp. 8–9).
On 8 May, yet another prestige modern building to display contemporary art opens, in the southern town of Nîmes.
By the rigorously modernist Sir Norman Foster, designer of the Sainsbury Centre near Norwich and the Sackler Gallery of the Royal Academy in London, not to mention Stansted airport, it now stands in icy glass counterpoise to the famous Roman temple, the Maison Carrée, to which it also alludes in its name, the Carré d'Art.
Foster, who won the international competition in 1984, calls his a ‘calm and classical building’ which suggests ‘ways in which the new can relate to the old, can pay respect but can also speak of its own age with integrity and without pastiche’.
He has been careful to hide most of its nine-storey bulk underground, which suits its other use, as the town library, and he says that the gallery courtyard, with generous cascading staircases linking all the public levels, has been inspired by the hill towns of the region, with their steps and terraces.
Keen to integrate the building into everyday life, he has made a diagonal route through it to encourage its use as a short-cut, and has redesigned the square outside, down to recreating the original pattern of Roman paving.
The Carré d'Art has cost FFr383 million ($70 million) against initial estimates of FFr360 million, of which the town has provided FFr278 million, the Region Languedoc-Roussillon FFr32 million, the Ministère de la Culture and Secretariat d'Etat aux Grands Travaux, FFr5 million, the Direction des Musées de France FFr46.77 million and the Direction des Livres et de la Lecture, FFr21.22 million.
The project has not been immune from some of the criticism levelled at the 400 museum rebuilding or building projects underway since the State launched its new museum policy in 1981, and the mayor of Nîmes defends himself against accusations of megalomania by saying, ‘We were lagging culturally.
The museum part has only cost FFr150 million and the rest was for the library’.
In fact, like the many German towns vying with one another in the Eighties, Nîmes decided on the building before it even had a collection to put into it, and since 1984 it has been buying in three areas with assistance from funds specially designated by the State for regional museums to collect contemporary works: French art from 1960 to 1990, with the Nouveau Réalisme and Figuration Libre via the Support-Surface movement; the Mediterranean scene, with art from southern France, Spain and Italy, with Arte Povera and the Transavanguardia, and represented by artists such as Jose Maria Sicilia, Miquel Barcelo, Susanna Solano, Janis Kounellis, Mario Merz, Giuseppe Penone and Enzo Cucchi; a taste of English and German tendencies, with Richard Long, Hamish Fulton, Gerhard Richter, Imi Knoebel, Helmut Dorner and others.
The Carré d'Art is being inaugurated with an exhibition, ‘The intoxication of the real’, devoted to the object in twentieth-century art.
It illustrates the revived importance of the depicted or inserted object by means of works by Picasso, Schnabel, de Chirico, Magritte, Warhol and so on.
Meanwhile, the town's Musée des Beaux Arts will be showing a selection of the Carré d'Art's permanent collection.
Corbridge Lanx presented to the British Museum
As part of an ‘in lieu’ payment of inheritance tax on the estate of the last Duke of Northumberland, a silver Roman dish known as the Corbridge Lanx has been presented to the British Museum.
The Lanx, a rectangular dish, 48 x 38 cm and weighing over 10lbs, was discovered by chance in February 1734 or 5 in the bank of the River Tyne at Corbridge in Northumberland by the daughter of the local cobbler, from whom it passed into the hands of the Dukes of Northumberland.
The dish, which was probably made in a major city of the Roman Empire, shows the shrine of Apollo on Delos.
Figures chased in low relief and line show Apollo standing on the right with Artemis entering on the left greeted by Athena.
Also shown are Leto and probably Ortygia, the personification of the island of Delos.
The Lanx may have been made to commemorate the visit of Julian the Apostate to the shrine in 363 AD.
The gift of the Lanx satisfies £1,832,000 inheritance tax in a ‘hybrid’ offer whereby the British Museum has agreed to pay the Trustees of the Duke of Northumberland's Family Settlements the difference between the tax liability and the special price agreed with the Treasury.
The shortfall has been made up by grants from the National Heritage Memorial Fund, the National Art Collections Fund and the British Museum Society.
In recent years the Lanx has been on loan to the British Museum.
The Art Newspaper interview: Lord Rothschild
A very private public figure
The Chairman of National Heritage Memorial Fund gives his views on British government policy towards the art world
On 7 May, the Central Hall of the National Gallery reopens, richly restored as a farewell present from its former Chairman of Trustees, Lord Rothschild.
The notoriously media-shy financier has come into his own in the last ten years as one of the most successful behind-the-scenes advisors in the British art world.
We asked him here about the Eighties and their aftermath.
Lord Rothschild, when did you start getting involved in the art world?
I was brought up in the world of the arts because, apart from the Rothschild side which had some influence on me, my mother was a completely Bloomsbury figure, and her mother was a great friend of Matisse and a distinguished collector — she was a Strachey, very English.
I was more brought up by my mother than my father and therefore the Bloomsbury influence was very strong.
Your father wasn't very interested, was he?
Well, he was more interested than he has been given credit for, and he had a wonderful collection of eighteenth-century English books which he gave to Trinity College, Cambridge.
He also bought three marvellous Cezannes in the Thirties, when not many English collectors were buying Post-Impressionist paintings.
So he was interested; it was just an interest that became less important to him.
Your Chairmanship of the Trustees of the National Gallery (1985–91) coincided with important changes in the nature of British national museums which were a direct consequence of Mrs Thatcher's desire to increase accountability and reduce spending in the public sector.
These changes gave museums the right to retain what they earned, to privatise some of their services such as restaurants, publishing etc, and also gave them responsibility for the maintenance of their buildings.
How successful do you think these changes have been and how far do you think privatisation in museums ought to go?
On the whole the changes have been very successful.
The problem now is whether there isn't withdrawal from the very significant devolution which occurred in the 1980s.
There seems to be a tendency towards centralisation, paradoxically going hand in hand with devolution.
Now the corporate plan of every museum may have to be approved by the Department of National Heritage before they receive their grant in aid.
If you believe that the Eighties are something of a tribute to the independent trustee system, then it's a pity that this centralisation is developing.
I think one of the problems with any new department is that there are new staff from other ministries and there must be something of a learning curve for them and probably some propensity to control their various parishioners.
What words of advice would you give to the Italians who are embarking on a similar process of privatisation in museums which Britain underwent in the 1980s?
Far and away the most important point is that the museums be allowed to keep the revenues that they generate.
I think central government anywhere does have certain fundamental responsibilities towards national museums: the care of the collections, warding, basic maintenance like wiring and mechanical services.
It's more the ‘bells and whistles’ of museum life which have grown so much in the last fifteen years, like restaurants, shops, publishing, which should be left to the private sector, and which generate important revenues for the museum.
Do you think that it's possible for the big Italian museums to privatise their subsidiary functions without an advisory body of trustees, if only to assist museum administrators who have little experience of dealing with the commercial side?
The question is, whether the culture of Italy is one that throws up people who will be public spirited, who will make good trustees while allowing the curators to get on with their work.
There are some private initiatives which suggest that such people do exist in Italy, such as Signor and Signora Baracco in Naples who have founded Napoli 99 to work for the revival of the town and it monuments.
But you've got to ask yourself what would happen if they got some tremendous tycoon always used to getting his own way, such as the chairman of some football club.
Then that might had to the worst side of the American trustee system developing.
What do you think is the proper role of a board of trustees, because an English board is more advisory, is it not, whereas an American one is to provide money, but tends to be more interventionist than a British board of trustees?
I think that American trustees have proved themselves to be very powerful in the 1980s; the British system is to leave power very significantly with the director and the curators.
In America, of course, trustees are chosen much more from the business community than they are here, and those trustees have wanted to encourage the commercial side of American museum life much more than we've done in Britain.
They have wanted the great, popular exhibitions, for example.
Then, of course, you saw the development of the kind of tycoon trustee who wanted not only his own wing but in extreme cases to appoint his own curator to that wing.
That really hasn't happened at all here.
The interesting question is whether, if we had had a lot of tremendous tycoons who were interested in the arts, the story would be a different one; we just haven't bred those sort of people in the last twenty or thirty years.
But I think our balance happens to be a very good one.
In Britain, the 1980s idea of plural funding, that is funding from a variety of sources, was a great stimulus and pulled in money and support from outside the public sector.
On the other hand, it perhaps also lulled government into a belief that it could cut back on core funding.
Is this a danger?
Yes, I think it is a worry.
Specifically, the recent merging of the purchase grant into the general grant is dangerous, and something that should be resisted.
I hope that the museums are successful in their campaign against it.
The Secretary of State, Mr Brooke, maintains that this was approved by the museums.
Well, they don't seem to think it's a very good idea.
If you look at the amounts of money involved, they are incredibly small: the National Gallery in 1993/94 will receive £17.8 million in total.
Now if you relate that to other things the government does like, for example, financing a fighter aeroplane, which costs £30 million, the sums are so small, one would hope there would be some shift in the allocation of resources towards the museums sector and the arts generally, because they are such extraordinarily important features of British life, not least in commercial terms.
The last Minister for the Arts but one, Tim Renton, made a remark to me about the difficulty of speaking up too energetically for the arts sector in the House of Commons, for fear that the other MPs would say, ‘Ah, poor chap, he's gone native’.
Do you think that there is even a sort of ‘them and us’ attitude, a feeling that the arts world is an ever open maw that cries out for endless sums of money and that the proper business of government is to resist?
I think there is some truth in that, all the more so, I'm afraid, at a time when Britain is borrowing more than £50 billion a year, and there's a resistance to any reallocation of resources.
One would hope that the recently formed Department of National Heritage, being a much larger ministry with more prestige and probably better staff, would help with that problem.
The National Gallery became notably richer while you were Chairman.
Did you help this to happen?
We had two quite extraordinary bits of luck in the 1980s.
One was the the great Sainsbury gift for the new wing.
Now that wasn't due to me but was John Sainsbury's initiative on behalf of his family.
He and I have been friends for many years, so it may have helped that I was there to give him some confidence in the project.
The case of J. Paul Getty was a different one.
There, it's fair to say, I was very much involved, and that was a once in a lifetime event which happened for very complex reasons.
He gave £50 million, which of course made an immense difference to life at the National Gallery, not only in the 1980s but for the future.
It is an endowment fund, and we read his intentions as being mainly to help with purchases, but in part it is to help toward some very important restoration projects, such as the Barry Rooms.
The National Gallery has been very carefully restored to its nineteenth-century splendours.
Did you have a guiding role in this?
There was a great debate as late as the early 1980s over whether it would be more appropriate to continue the policy set by Sir Philip Hendy of keeping the look of the gallery neutral as opposed to polychrome — the ‘porridge versus polychrome’ battle.
I was a trustee then and, yes, I was very much involved in it.
Did you enjoy being Chairman?
Both Michael Levey and Neil MacGregor, the present director, have had a genuine vision of what the National Gallery stands for and an authentic commitment to the idea of a museum.
They are completely true to the ideals of the National Gallery: public accessibility, free access, no selling of pictures.
The focus of the museum has always been the pictures in the collections, and it was a philosophy which I shared completely.
I couldn't have been more fortunate in working with two more intelligent and delightful men.
There was a series of scholarly exhibitions, but again, the main focus being on the pictures in the collection, and against that background I think the 1980s were a wonderful period.
There were superb acquisitions despite a very limited purchase grant.
The gallery now manages its own building; the problem of the site next door was resolved after over fifty years, and I genuinely believe that the gallery floor in the Sainsbury Wing built on that site provides the best space for Old Master paintings to have been created anywhere in the last forty or fifty years.
All told, I regard myself as incredibly lucky to have been given the opportunity of being Chairman of the National Gallery, and I couldn't have enjoyed it more.
Now you are Chairman of the National Heritage Memorial fund.
You've got a difficult year or two in front of you haven't you?
Yes, very difficult, because our grant, to our great disappointment, was cut from over £12 million to £7.8 million.
We had all been promised that the National Lottery money would be additional to what we receive and that there would been linkage to the funds we will obtain if all goes well and the Lottery Bill goes through Parliament in the next few months.
Then we will be the recipients of the sums for distribution to the heritage.
In the meanwhile, it is an awkward period.
What do you think would happen if the Duke of Sutherland's paintings, which include four great Titians and the Poussin ‘Seven Sacraments’ among other masterpieces, were to come up next month?
When the Thyssen Collection captured Mrs Thatcher's imagination in 1989, the National Gallery wrote a report saying that they thought that the Sutherland Collection was far more important to this country.
We tried very hard to underline the importance of these paintings, so that if they were ever to come on the market the government would be conditioned to their importance.
Unfortunately, if it happened now, I couldn't be very optimistic about the government producing the sums of money that would be involve.
If it were to happen in a few year's time when we have the lottery money, then I think the Sutherland Collection Collection is something that anybody concerned with heritage should make the highest possible priority.
The Smithsonian Institution
With $26 million voted by Congress, a larger, newer, smarter Freer Gallery
On 9 May, after a closure of four and a half years, the gallery reopens with, among other treasures, Whistler's restored Peacock Room
The Smithsonian's first art museum, the Freer Gallery, opened in 1923, the gift of Detroit railroad car manufacturer Charles Lang Freer who in 1906 left to the nation his collection of Asian and nineteenth- and early twentieth-century American art, along with funds to build and endow an Italian palazzo on the National Mall.
About one hundred yards to the east lies the Smithsonian's second museum of Asian art, the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery, which contains the 1982 legacy of the New York physician and philanthropist and, unlike the Freer, also presents travelling exhibitions.
Entirely subterranean, the Sackler was part of the Smithsonian's $75-million underground complex that opened in 1987.
Owing to the similarity of their holdings and the proximity of their locations, the museums share the same staff.
Hence, Congress immediately perceived the practicality of creating a physical link between them, and approved the necessary funds.
No sooner had the proposal been passed than it was amended.
Although the Freer's holdings have increased dramatically since the gallery opened — only 8% of the collections can now be exhibited at one time — it is nonetheless impossible to expand above ground near the Mall.
If expansion were to occur it would have to be underground, and what better time to accomplish it than during excavation for the connecting tunnel?
Again recognising the legitimacy of the request, Congress provided the funds needed to add 13,000 square feet of art storage and study space, as well as a state-of-the-art conservation laboratory that triples the size of the over-burdened existing lab — all of these facilities neatly tucked away beneath the Freer's central courtyard.
Since gallery space was already in short supply, the connecting passage to the Sackler was recast as a subterranean exhibition hall.
Finally, it made sense with the gallery's affairs already disrupted by the construction, to seize the opportunity to restore the original museum, reinstall the collection, and landscape the surrounding grounds.
Private funds (including $1.5 million from Professor Ikuo Hirayama, Nomura Securities Company Ltd. and the Nomura Cultural Foundation, all of Tokyo) were raised for the gallery reinstallation, a $1 million private gift permitted the renovation and refurbishment of the auditorium, and $500,000 was raised for landscaping.
One can only marvel at the wisdom of the U.S. government in enabling the Freer to make itself over.
Charles Lang Freer assembled a superb collection of Chinese, Japanese, Korean and South Asian paintings, screens, calligraphy, ceramics, sculpture and decorative arts.
He also owned the world's largest group of works by James Abbott McNeill Whistler, including the American expatriate's only surviving interior, ‘Harmony in Blue and Gold: the Peacock Room’.
As designed by architect Thomas Jeckyll for the London dining room of shipping magnate Frederick R. Leyland, the 20 x 32-foot compartment was lined with sixteenth-century leather wall hangings, and ornamented with walnut wainscotting and trellises on whose shelves were displayed blue-and-white Chinese ceramics.
The centrepiece was Whistler's painting ‘The Princess from the Land of Porcelain’(1863–64).
Leyland agreed to allow the artist to make minor adjustments to the decor, but while the patron was away, Whistler completely transformed the chamber, gilding the shelves and emblazoning the doors with golden peacocks.
After a row with Leyland, Whistler proceeded to cover the expensive leather hangings with a field of Prussian blue, and to paint caricatures of himself and his patron as peacocks.
This important nineteenth-century decorative scheme has now been cleaned and conserved, and appropriate porcelains gathered through the agency of New York dealers Khalil Riszk of the Chinese Porcelain Company and James Lally.
Leyland's own collection of oriental porcelain was dispersed at the time of his death and, apart from ten or so pieces, the shelves had remained empty until now.
The Freer saga is recounted in Freer: A Legacy of Art (Abrams), issued to coincide with the reopening, with archival photographs of the collector's life (1854–1919) and 125 colour images of the Peacock Room and other works in the collection.
Acquisitions
Getty buys second great religious Rubens
Sold at Christie's last December for $1.6 million
If you are George Goldner, Curator of Paintings at the Getty Museum, what do you do for a follow-up after you buy a great Rubens (‘Samson destroying the temple’, see The Art Newspaper No. 25, January 1993, p. 9)?
Answer: buy another one.
The Getty has just acquired the ‘Entombment’, a work of around 1616, from New York dealer Otto Naumann for an undisclosed price.
Naumann and occasional partner Alfred Bader purchased the work at Christie's, London, in December 1992 for £1,045,000 ($1,610,345), where it had been consigned as ‘The Property of a Lady and a Gentleman’.
Like the ‘Samson’, it is an important rediscovery, once in the Demidoff Collection, that had been missing for decades and was last seen in at the C.L.Cardon sale in Brussels in 1921.
The picture is a deeply felt and intense portrayal of the subject, very much in accord with Counter-Reformation teaching.
The massive figure of Christ, heroic and muscular even in death, is unflinchingly presented for contemplation by the viewer, surrounded by the mourning Virgin, St John and two holy women.
The religious aspect of  Rubens' works is usually encountered only in the great continental galleries of Europe: American museums (and their trustees) generally shy away from such stern Roman Catholic imagery, preferring the Rubens of Helene Fourment, cheerful Madonnas and putti, all apple-cheeked and plump (preferably in oil sketches).
Art and Mammon in Pittsburgh
The Women's Committee of the Carnegie Museum of Art have brought about an unusual act of collaboration between a museum and a commercial enterprise.
From 21 to 23 May the Committee is sponsoring an antiques fair at the Carnegie Hall of Architecture.
More than forty dealers in furniture and the decorative arts will participate and proceeds go to the Carnegie Museum of Art.
Honorary chairpersons include Mrs H. John Heinz III, Mr and Mrs Allan G. Lehman, and Mr and Mrs Henry L. Hillman.
Coinciding with the exhibition, two exhibitions on the decorative arts will be held at the museum.
‘Masterpieces of English silver from Temple Newsam House, Yorkshire’ will be on view from 21 May to 28 July and includes twenty-six pieces of seventeenth- to nineteenth-century silver.
‘French porcelain from the collection, circa 1730–1960’ will be on view from 21 May to November.
Columns of glass at the V&A
It is a not sufficiently known fact that the Victoria and Albert Museum houses one of the the world's two most significant collection of glass, equal to that of the Corning Museum of Glass, New York State.
The fifty-year-old display area is now to be replaced with a new space of suitably high artistic merit.
Designed by Danny Lane with architect Penny Richards, the existing gallery will be divided laterally by installing a glass-floored mezzanine, supported on steel columns.
The balustrade and balusters will consist of 140 pillars made of stacks of green, square plates of glass held together under pressure by a steel ‘spine’.
Light is refracted through each column.
Of the 6,000 objects in the museum's collection, 80% will be on show in the new space which is due to open in early 1994.
Funding has come from a variety of sources including the Wolfson Foundation and Charitable Trust, the Museums and Galleries Improvement Fund, the Worshipful Company of Glass Sellers of London, the British Glass Education Trust and private donations.
New-York Historical Society
State legislators vote $6.3 million to keep the Society up and running
Unavoidable deaccessioning brings State funding of museums under scrutiny
On 6 April, the funding miracle that the impoverished New-York Historical Society had been seeking took place.
New York State legislators voted to grant that institution a one-time infusion of $6.3 million for operations and capital improvements.
Earlier this spring, the Society, which had closed its galleries and ended all public programmes, announced that it would close its library and shut down entirely unless it received emergency public funds.
The State money announced on 6 April will be granted provided that the City of New York matches the $6.3 million amount.
Providing that city funding comes its way, the Society now has the opportunity to redefine its mission — heretofore the history of the Western hemisphere — and focus more closely on New York and regional history.
In the short term, the prospect of deaccessioning $20 million-worth from the Society's extensive collections of silver, decorative arts and European paintings has created panic, which the Society's financial adviser Wilbur Ross has tried to calm, cautioning that the sales in question represent only 2% of the collections.
His plan for weathering the current crisis (see The Art Newspaper, No. 27, April 1993, p. 13) earned the support of the American Association of Museum Directors, which cited the urgency of the Society's position.
The proposed deaccessioning, however, has raised some new questions among elected officials.
Among them is New York State Assemblyman Richard Brodsky, who had sought unsuccessfully in 1991 to pass legislation in New York State to curb ‘chandelier bidding’ by auction houses and monitor museum sales.
Now Brodsky's scrutiny has fallen on museums, who, he says, have sought resolutely to avoid regulation.
If the New-York Historical Society wants to deaccession works to pay for operating expenses, legislators who help fund the Society should have some veto power over those sales, particularly if works of art and other objects of local interest threaten to pass from museums into private hands.
Another concern Brodsky expressed focused on rumours that some New York City museums, particularly the Metropolitan Museum of Art, had approached New York City's Department of Cultural Affairs with ‘shopping lists’ of paintings they wanted should the New-York Historical Society go bankrupt and dissolve.
Through a spokesman, New York City's Commissioner of Cultural Affairs has denied that any such list exists, although the thought of museums cannibalising a moribund New-York Historical Society has brought fierce criticism in the press.
It seems likely that some legislators in New York State will demand a new public accountability from museums receiving public funds.
‘I have always gotten the sense that museums, which are very active in lobbying us for money, take the essential position: ‘Give us the money and leave us alone’’, Brodsky announced at a hearing last week.
‘I think that era's over’.
What is also over until further notice is the New-York Historical Society's exhibition programme, although a travelling show of Audubon watercolours is due to begin an eighteen-month tour at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C. in October.
Russia
UNESCO rides to the aid of the Hermitage
Coca-Cola helps out too with $320,000
The management at the Hermitage has finished drafting plans for the involvement of UNESCO aid in the reconstruction and development of the museum.
The plans were proposed last autumn during a general session of UNESCO held in Paris.
According to Hermitage director Mikhayl Piotrovskiy, rumours about the calamitous situation at the museum are somewhat exaggerated; the Hermitage needs developing rather than saving.
It goes without saying that the museum now needs hard currency in order to add to its collection.
Current expenditure in this area is negligible in comparison with the amount which foreign museums of similar standing spend.
One well publicised problem at the Hermitage is the shortage of space; a number of experts claim that the museum can only put 7–8% of its collection on display.
Just 350 rooms out of more than 1000 are open to the public, with the remainder used for stores and auxiliary services.
The additional buildings allocated to accommodate the museum's auxiliary services require money for expensive reconstruction work, as does the completion of the Technical Support complex construction of which began in the mid-'80s.
Meanwhile, there is a chronic shortage of funds.
The planned renovation of the Hermitage will cost a total of $200 million.
Following their visit to the museum, the two UNESCO experts, Mattias Dermitze, representative of the UNESCO Secretariat Department of World Heritage and Ted Pillsbury, Director of the Kimbell Museum, Fort Worth, Texas, agree with this assessment.
On the whole, their view of the state of the Hermitage coincides with that of Russian experts.
The Hermitage is not hoping for financing from UNESCO.
Rather, the museum wants an aid campaign to be organised and an international Friends of the Hermitage organisation to be set up.
Any revenue will be used for reconstructing the buildings with a view to expanding the area available for exhibitions, the refitting of the Special Storeroom which houses a unique collection of goldsmiths' work, and for computerisation.
There are also plans to set up an international school for the training of museum curators attached to the Hermitage.
Coca-Cola has also decided to ‘compete’ with UNESCO by giving the Hermitage $320,000 (for years Pepsi-Cola had the monopoly of the Soviet market).
The money is for fitting out a laboratory dealing with tempera paintings.
The donation is to be paid in full by the company over a period of three years.
The contribution of the Coca-Cola Company is to be mentioned when works restored in the new laboratory are reproduced.
This has aroused the criticism of ‘nationalist patriots’, who see something shameful in the admittance of Coca-Cola to the Hermitage.
Metropolitan opens new showcase for Pre-Columbian gold
In 1991, Jan Mitchell gave the Metropolitan Museum of Art a hoard of Pre-Columbian gold from Columbia, Peru, Costa Rica, Panama and Ecuador that experts estimate to be worth more than $3 million.
Six years earlier, the museum had exhibited the same seventy-five pieces, loaned by the trustee and benefactor.
This month the collection goes on permanent display in the South American Gallery of the Rockefeller Wing, integrated with the Pre-Columbian gold donated by Alice K. Bache (1966) and Nelson Rockefeller (1979).
The new installation, sponsored by Mitchell and dubbed the Jan Mitchell Treasury, contains some 225 artifacts that constitute the preeminent pan-cultural display of Pre-Columbian gold outside Latin America.
The collector caught the gold bug thirty years ago when he walked into Andre Emmerich's Manhattan gallery to consider buying a painting.
His attention was drawn instead to a small shiny figure on a bookshelf brandishing a flute, a rattle and an outsized erection.
Mitchell bought it for $250, and began making regular acquisitions of ancient American gold through dealers, auctions, and private collectors in New York, Zurich and London.
As with his collecting in other areas — Old Master paintings and drawings, silver, antiquities — he followed personal inclination, tempered with the advice of scholars.
He would often preface a purchase by consulting curators at the American Museum of Natural History.
More recently he has turned to Julie Jones at the Metropolitan.
It was Jones who, as a curator at Rockefeller's Museum of Primitive Art in the 1970s, first exhibited the Mitchell Collection, which subsequently travelled to the Hermitage, the Pushkin and the Kiev Museum.
In addition to gold, Mitchell has presented the Metropolitan with a number of Graeco-Roman and Etruscan artworks.
He was also a founder of the Israel Museum in Jerusalem, to which he contributed 160 Old Master paintings, drawings and antiquities.
The Swedish-born businessman and philanthropist is perhaps best known for having established in 1977 the annual Mitchell Prize for distinguished English-language books in art history.
Musée des Monuments français
Viollet-le-Duc's museum revived
France's greatest cast court reopens
The didacticism of the nineteenth century which led to projects such as the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Great Exhibition of 1851 and the Exposition Universelle of 1878, gave birth to one of Paris's great museums.
The Musée des Monuments français was conceived by the celebrated architect and medievalist Viollet-le-Duc in 1880 with the aim of reproducing France's great buildings and monumental sculpture in the form of casts.
Grouped by region, date and school, the casts were displayed in the palais du Trocadero built for the 1878 Exposition Universelle and expanded in the 1930s as part of a constantly evolving display.
Now new work at the museum together with an innovative exhibition programme will aim to place the museum at the forefront of thought and experimentation on urban design as well as in the context of French history.
After six months of work under the direction of Guy Cogeval, conservateur du patrimoine, the museum has reopened with a number of improvements and alterations to the building.
The entrance hall has been restored to its 1930s dimensions with original lighting.
It will house a new bookshop and cafe.
A ‘phototec’ which will allow greater access to the museum's photographic collection which dates from the nineteenth century.
Next year the permanent collection will be redisplayed on the first floor while a new space will be constructed one floor above, for temporary exhibitions.
This last development will take place in the context of a new programme of exhibitions.
One exhibition each year will fall under the organisation of the Direction du patrimoine with the programme as follows: ‘Marseille au XIXe siècle: rêves et triomphes d'une ville’(see p. 9); ‘Edouard Baldus’(May 1994 to August 1995); ‘L'Imaginaire de la Ruine, 1750–1950’(October 1995 to February 1996); and ‘Les Années trente’(Autumn 1996).
Other exhibitions will be organised by visiting curators, academics, architects and urban planners and will be conceived in  liaison with the adjacent Centre de Recherches des Monuments historiques in the Palais du Chaillot and the Institut français d'Architecture.
Eastern Europe
Historical tolerance
What to do with your Socialist-Realist art
The city of Budapest has come up with an imaginative solution to the problem of where to put over forty years worth of statues, sculptures and monuments dedicated to the heroes and events of communism.
Over forty-five gigantic works of Social Realism have been dismantled from sites all over the city and hauled to a 1.5 hectare sculpture park on the southern outskirts of the Hungarian capital.
Commissioned by the municipal Budapest Gallery, and designed by thirty year-old architect Akos Eleod, the works will be grouped thematically to represent historical eras, political figures and something called ‘Soviet-Hungarian friendship’.
The collection, which includes the inevitable granite Cubist sculpture of Marx, an enormous bronze statue of Lenin and robust sexless figures meant to symbolise Soviet strength and peace, is augmented with records and photographs of the works' creation, installation and removal.
The project cost in the region of Forints 55 million (£440,000) and the gates open at the end of this month.
‘Our task is to preserve the statues’, says Budapest Gallery director Andras Szilagy, ‘and to educate and remind people of this period in our history’.
But Mr Szilagy and his staff are not expecting the citizens of Budapest to flock in their thousands to see the collection of ugly lifeless forms.
After all, it was the Budapest public who demanded the removal of the eye-sores in the first place.
Conservation
The Czech Republic
A noble story
From the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, an account of a fifty year-old promise honoured to return an altarpiece to Bohemia were it ever to become free
The silent witnesses to the suppressed past of the Czech town Decin on the river Elbe (Teschen in German), are now free to say what they want, even speak German.
In 1991 the local council issued a German-language brochure on the history of the once splendid castle of the Thun-Hohenstein family up on the cliffs above the Elbe, which until two years ago housed a Soviet barracks and now is a semi-ruin with wrecked interiors.
This brochure remembers the Thun-Hohensteins, who for three centuries made the castle an artistic centre in North Bohemia, and the close links between this family — Bohemian patriots for the last 200 years — and the political and cultural life of the country.
Decin has been lucky in its democratically elected mayor, Zdenek Kropacek, chosen after the the triumph of the autumn 1989 Velvet Revolution.
The citizens sensibly selected a man who is gradually recalling the town's thousand year-old history back to Decin.
‘We are a town with a forgotten past and a suppressed tradition.
Our citizens must at last find out where their roots are’, he says.
‘There are no full stops in history, and it is impossible to step outside one's own past’, says the parish priest of the Holy Cross church in Decin, Pavel Jancik.
Suddenly, he speaks of ‘a miracle, a sign from God, which makes reconciliation in Decin easier’.
But caution is required where miracles come into play; let us stick to the facts.
The church of the Holy Cross, built by the Thun-Hohenstein family the castle grounds, burnt down in 1749, and with it the ‘Annunciation’ by the Czech baroque master, Karel Skreta.
The Thun-Hohensteins gave the commission for its replacement in the rebuilt church to Benedikt Kern, brother of the famous painter Anton Kern.
This ‘Annunciation’ stayed in the church until 1944, when it was sent to a restoration workshop in the Bohemian forest.
When the restorer was driven out of Bohemia in 1945, he managed — and this was truly a miracle — to take the picture with him over the frontier into Bavaria.
It was only after some years that he found the Thun-Hohensteins, who had also taken refuge in Bavaria, and could give it back to them.
Fürst Franz Thun-Hohenstein remembers: ‘When the enormous picture arrived packed up, my sisters and I were curious to see and touch something which really came from Decin, from Bohemia, which had taken on a kind of dream-like quality for us; Decin did live on for us, but was unattainable.
From then onwards, this picture from the old homeland of our ancestors accompanied our living and our dying.’
Franz Thun-Hohenstein had to promise his grand-father Franz Anton and his father Christoph, who died in 1990, that if Bohemia were ever to become free again, he would take the picture of the Annunciation back to the church of the Holy Cross in Decin.
In September 1991 the three-hundredth anniversary of the consecration of the castle church was celebrated.
On that occasion an agreement was signed between the town council of Decin, the present owner of the castle and church, and representatives of the bishopric of Litomerice, Leitmeritz in German, which settled the future of the church: the town would repair it and give it into the care of the Catholic Church.
One of the witnesses who signed was Franz Anton, grandson of the last German patron of the church.
The way to the return of the altarpiece now stood open.
The Thun-Hohensteins had still to overcome a German bureaucratic hurdle: the customs officials could hardy believe that a German-Bohemian family driven out of Bohemia could want to give back to Decin a valuable painting which was all that remained of their former wealth.
And a shock came when, on 12 March, the large picture was sent on its way to Bohemia; the transport firm in Decin had loaded up the lorry with gas containers from Belgium.
‘When I rang up Decin late in the evening and heard that the picture had made its last journey back home in the company of highly explosive gas containers, I said a silent prayer and sang halleluia three times’, said the dowager Fürstin Zita von Thun-Hohenstein.
On Saturday, 27 March, the Thun-Hohensteins went to the Church of the Holy Cross in Decin to celebrate the return of the altarpiece with a mass in German and Czech, together with the bishop of Litomerice, the mayor, the town council, and the citizens of Decin.
The speeches were short and unsentimental.
Mayor Kropacek said: ‘We must thank the Thun-Hohenstein family for having looked after and honoured the picture of the Annunciation for nearly half a century and for having now returned it, newly restored, to the church of the Holy Cross.
That the wall over this altar is no longer bare demonstrates the new, forward-looking nature of the hitherto so tragic, so complicated relations between the Germans and Czechs, and of their reciprocal readiness now to be reconciled ‘.
Fürst Franz-Anton Thun-Hohenstein spoke first in Czech and then repeated in German: ‘When President Hawel asked forgiveness for the driving out or resettling of most of the German-speaking population of Czechoslovakia, he set a high standard.
His words called to mind our own culpability, which we find hard to admit.
Therefore I want to to beg all your forgiveness for every injustice, suffering and humiliation which you, on the Czech side suffered at our hands’.
The crowded church was silent for a few seconds at these words no citizen of Decin had ever heard before.
Then applause crashed out.
Was this a miracle in Bohemia?
The near future will give us the answer.
For the record
Sir Ernst Gombrich
‘I think art historians are the spokesmen of our civilisation; we want to know more about our Olympus’
In a series of conversations with the Frenchman Didier Eribon published by Thames and Hudson this month, Sir Ernst Gombrich, former director of the Warburg Institute and one of the most distinguished academics of our time (yet one of the most accessible because of his belief that it should be possible to explain everything in language that can be understood by a child), talks about the development of his ideas, his values and the events which contributed to their formation.
Here we offer you a foretaste of his clarity of thought and witty expression as well as the exhilarating certainty he gives the reader of the importance of art and reflection
ON LANGUAGE, TRADITION AND PROGRESS
Sir Ernst Gombrich.
I believe very much that every artist must first learn the language of his art, the conventions, and only after he has mastered them, can he go on.
Language is a good analogy.
If you invented a completely new language, nobody would understand it.
I think the same thing holds for the philosophy of art.
The only time I have written about aesthetics, about my philosophy of art, is in the chapter on I.A. Richards in Tributes.
I quote there a sonnet by him, where he says that with him it is the language which creates the poetry.
And in a sense, I think that is true.
Always when a great artist masters an instrument, he tries out new effects by combinations and modifications.
He discovers that there really are things that nobody has ever done before.
In music you find that all the time.
But if you start by throwing our whole harmonic system overboard, I don't think it works.
I'm very critical of Schoenberg, for example.
You cannot really communicate in art without a common language.
The surprise effect, of which we talked before, depends on an expectation.
If you expect something and it surpasses your expectation, then you are thrilled.
Otherwise it is just a noise!
I believe that the importance that I attach to tradition in the philosophy of art is implicit in The Story of Art.
Perhaps I did not even know it.
Later, in The Sense of Order, my book on decoration, I say somewhere that the shepherd boy who cut a twig from a willow tree and made a little pipe to play a tune on may have been a great genius but we cannot tell.
It was only when the organ developed from that pipe and with the organ the tradition of fugue-writing could a genius like Bach arise.
But you cannot go from the reed-pipe to the art of fugue in one day.
Unfortunately, our modern philosophy of art does not always recognise the dependence of art on this balance between tradition and change.
Didier Eribon.
Your speaking of the balance between tradition and change in the evolution of art raises a crucial question: I mean the question of progress.
Can we speak of progress or is it just a series of changes which are going on?
That is a difficult question.
A very difficult question.
To my mind the answer is that there must always be at least a minimum of skill for us to speak of an artistic achievement.
In poetry this minimum may always be assumed to be present but that is not true of the making of images.
In the last chapter of the book I am writing now, on ‘The Preference for the Primitive’, I discuss this matter.
What I say is roughly this: primitive art as we call it, tribal art, is usually very good.
But Michelangelo is still better.
There is progress there.
But when you increase technical expertise, you also increase the risks.
There was bad art in the Renaissance, and there is much more now, because there are so many more ways of going wrong.
It becomes more and more difficult to master this immense complexity which the medium offers.
The simpler the system the fewer the risks.
And therefore I think that there is both progress and regression.
There is more bad art now than there was in ancient Egypt.
I am equally persuaded that the development of certain ‘genres’ of art (the drama with the ancient Greeks, or the novel, with Dostoyevsky or Joyce) have opened up possibilities which certainly did not exist earlier.
ON DECORATIVE ART
Your book The Sense of Order makes clear your deep interest in psychology, since its subtitle is ‘A Study in the Psychology of Decorative Art’.
It is an attempt, perhaps a rather naive attempt, to apply information theory to decoration.
What it says, very briefly, is that it is always a break in the order which attracts our attention.
But you can have a number of breaks in the order and in that case you get another order at a different level.
There is always a tension between the expected redundancies of continuity, and the new step in order or disorder which attracts our attention.
This is a slightly complicated theory, so naturally it has not become as well-known as ‘schema and correction’…
A reader is bound to ask how you arrived at the idea of writing on such a subject.
Your Viennese background must play a major role here too.
I say in my introduction that I wrote the book partly because I was annoyed that people thought I was only interested in representation.
…I also tell in the introduction of that book how my mother collected peasant embroideries of Slovakia.
I was very fond of these, and often wondered as a child why people did not consider them to be art.
And so I thought it is a very neglected subject.
It was not at all neglected in the nineteenth century.
Many people wrote about design and decoration.
But in our century this interest has almost totally evaporated.
Now it is coming in a little again.
The third reason, and it is an important reason, is Alois Riegl.
He had written a book called Stilfragen on the history of the acanthus motif, and that I had studied as a student.
So I had every reason to turn to this problem.
And I am terribly bored by my colleagues in art history, who always write about the same thing.
So, I try to think of things which not everybody has done.
Why did this interest in decoration vanish in our century?
Why did it become an ‘unregarded’ art, as you call it in your Introduction?
One of the reasons is, I think, that there was a kind of tension between abstract art and decoration.
You often hear people say, looking at a work of abstract art: ‘That would look nice as a curtain’.
In other words, it looks like decoration.
But the abstract painters don't want to produce decoration, they want to produce High Art.
For that reason, abstract art has been anxious to distance itself from decoration.
So decoration was pushed away from the centre of interest.
It really is an ‘unregarded’ art.
Many people do not notice the patterns of wallpapers or materials…
I soon became absolutely obsessed with discovering acanthus everywhere, because the motif is all over the place, in wallpapers, in lampshades — everywhere I found acanthus.
I was at that time really completely persuaded of the relevance and interest of this approach and of this subject matter.
But I did not quite agree with Riegl's methodology.
He was a convinced evolutionist and he thought that one could draw a line from the Egyptian lotus to the Greek palmette and from the Greek palmette to the acanthus which then developed into the arabesque like a biological affiliation.
I began to doubt this and I said so in my talk.
It is true there are forms of the palmette which look a little like acanthus but I would not say that they are necessarily earlier and that the acanthus developed out of the palmette.
It may also have been a contamination.
ON GOOD AND BAD IN ART
In your volume called Ideals and Idols, you put the emphasis on the reality of values.
We can know that a great master is a great master.
But all these things that we have been discussing — rediscoveries in the history of art, changes in taste, etc — all this makes me wonder.
When we read Francis Haskell's book Rediscoveries in art, which is all about how people suddenly start admiring this or that painter who was previously despised or ignored, one has to doubt the objective ‘reality’ of values.
You are absolutely right.
Haskell has written an excellent book.
I have reviewed it, and I said: I agree with everything except his relativism.
Titian would be a great master even if the time should come when nobody wants to look at his paintings.
He will always remain the best of his time.
That is partly a technical and a psychological matter.
What does great mean?
You can even call an acrobat or a football player great.
I do not think one can be a complete relativist in art.
But I do not think that there can be a rational, scientific criterion by which you can say: this is really the best.
The reason why I think that there is a limit to our rational understanding of what is great art is quite simple: I believe in the fundamentally biological foundation of our reactions.
If you like, that links me with psychoanalysis.
I do believe that a great work of art strikes a subtle balance between what seems too obvious and what seems too difficult.…
There are impressions that bring immediate satisfaction to the senses, for example those that have charm, brilliance or simple musical rhythms.
But it is also a psychological fact that immediate satisfaction can lead to disgust.
A psychoanalyst would perhaps say that we learn to deny ourselves this satisfaction in favour of more sublimated pleasures.
I think that without these basic reactions art could not exist, but one cannot explain art wholly in terms of these reactions; one must also take account of our self-denials.
This is what I mean when I talk of balance.
It is evident that the exact point of balance will differ according to individual people, civilisations, epochs and social conditions.
That is why I find Bourdieu's researches so interesting.
He has shown that certain sections of the population look for immediate, simple satisfactions, while the intellectuals take pride in rejecting kitsch and deny themselves these simple pleasures.
Where I differ from Bourdieu is that I do not think that this important distinction leads inevitably to absolute aesthetic relativism.
I believe that the two elements that I have mentioned are quite real, and you could take one of Beethoven's late quartets as an example of the process by which the simple elements of melodies and attractive rhythms are sublimated and integrated into a much larger context which demands a certain experience and effort to understand and appreciate.
What you are proposing is almost a ‘psychology of aesthetic perception’?
Yes.
If you give a deaf person the score of a piece by Bach or Mozart, he can learn to see the composition of themes and their recurrence but not why this is so marvellous because he cannot feel it.
And this feeling is biological.
Take rhythm: we certainly react to rhythmical movements and sounds, and this biological reaction is universal.
But the music of India and the music of Europe have both modified this simple reaction.
The difference between the monotonous beat of pop music and the rhythmical architecture of a great symphony is precisely that in classical music the primitive reaction is delayed and denied for a more varied satisfaction.
It is the same with our reaction to colours or forms.
I attach great importance to these observations because there is a fashion now in the humanities to deny that the old notion of human nature still has any utility.
I consider this tendency to be dangerous because it undermines the great eighteenth-century idea of the unity of mankind, an idea that is so menaced anyway by racism and other movements of the same sort.
When I received an unexpected invitation, I don't know how, to deliver the opening address of an important conference on Germanic studies at Göttingen dedicated to ‘Controversies ancient and modern’, I chose to raise this issue, which seemed so crucial to me.
I contrasted two quotations: an epigram of Goethe, saying that through reading Plutarch he learned that we were all human beings, and a passage from Hegel denying that we can ever understand the men of classical Antiquity because they represent a different stage in the evolution of the human mind.
In this address I also criticised the fashion of ‘deconstruction’, and I argued that we can effectively understand the cultures of alien peoples and remote epochs, although, naturally, we can also misunderstand them.
Since then I have continued in several pieces of writing to oppose extreme relativism.
In a lecture that I gave in Rome I tried to show that in spite of what Thomas Kuhn says (which has been much exaggerated by his followers), you cannot write the history of any branch of knowledge, whatever it may be, from a completely relativist point of view.
No one can deny that thanks to Champollion and a few others we have succeeded in reading Egyptian hieroglyphics and that we know, in most cases, what they mean.
Similarly, I have written against the idea that the interpretation of works of art can be completely subjective.
We know that the picture by Rembrandt known as ‘The Night Watch’ is not a night watch, but a scene taking place in full daylight.
All these texts are published in my most recent collection called Topics of Our Time.
But is there not a contradiction between being so fiercely hostile to relativism in history and aesthetics and at the same time asserting that there are no objective criteria for deciding whether a work is good or bad?
And above all, as you know better than anybody, the ‘biology of aesthetic pleasure’, which you have just explained, has to take account of differences between epochs, civilisations and, obviously, within the same society, between individuals.
Our reactions in front of a work of art are simply too complex to be analysed scientifically.
I think, for instance, that it is vain and quite pointless to try to enumerate all the elements that come together in our preference for this or that artist or poet.
We react as members of our civilisation who have absorbed its values through our education and society.
I have explained that some of these values are purely biological, including perhaps eroticism, to which psychoanalysis attaches so much importance.
But others belong to the sphere that psychoanalysis calls the ‘superego’, such as ideas of nobility, or heroism or tenderness.
Or generosity or the sublime.
Or even love, insofar as it is distinguished from sexuality.
These values enter into all our sensations, into our reactions when we admire a picture by Raphael or Michelangelo, when we read Shakespeare or listen to Mozart.
There, again, it is a question of reaction and self-denial.
But in our society the self-denial of which we speak has a moral dimension which is not strongly recognised in all civilisations.
ON STYLE, ZEITGEIST AND SWIMMING CATS
What I maintain is that there are certainly moments, like the Rococo, which go very far in general preference for certain forms, such as lightness, grace and playfulness.
We all know frames of mirrors or rococo pictures which are decorated in an asymmetrical and extravagant style.
But there are also contrary examples: the frames around Velazquez's paintings, for instance, do not harmonise in this way with the formal treatment of the paintings themselves.
And since, above all, in my view, Rococo has all the characteristics of a fashion, it is evident that this bias did not affect everything that was produced at this period.
The same goes for all styles and all periods.
It is we who project upon the continuous flux of history such categories as ‘Mannerism’, and it is evident that not everybody at that period was a Mannerist.
This may seem a minor disagreement, but if you were to question me about Panofsky, I would have to say that the disagreement was just the tip of the iceberg.
In fact, it is his whole way of envisaging the history of styles and of history itself which is at issue in this discussion.
To put it briefly, Panofsky represented a German tradition of art history which I have often criticised.
It is a tradition that goes back, as I have tried to show, to Hegel's philosophy of history and which loves to operate with ideas of the Zeitgeist (spirit of the age) and Volksgeist (spirit of the people).
This tradition postulates that all the manifestations of an era — philosophy, art, social structures, etc — must be considered as expressions of an essence, an identical spirit.
As a result, every era is considered as a totality embracing everything.
A great deal of erudition and ingenuity has been exercised by art historians of this persuasion to demonstrate interconnections of this sort.
Panofsky, with his intelligence and outstanding knowledge, also loved to establish these links.
I remember that he wrote that Michelangelo's drawing technique corresponded exactly to his Neoplatonism.
And, as you know, he devoted a book to this kind of connection: his study of Gothic architecture and scholasticism.
Right at the beginning of his book Renaissance and Renascences in Western Art, in the first chapter called ‘Renaissance: self-definition or self-deception’, he takes up the old idea that the Renaissance was the expression of a specific ‘spirit’.
In one of the footnotes he refers to a criticism of this theory made by my friend George Boas, the historian and philosopher.
Boas had objected that one could not define historical periods as one defines animal species.
Panofsky replied, politely but firmly, that in his opinion, one could.
He explained that there was a difference between a statement such as: ‘Cats are distinguished from dogs by embodying the spirit of cathood, as opposed to that of doghood’, and a statement such as ‘Cats are distinguished from dogs by a combination of characteristics (such as the possession of retractable claws,…and the inability to swim…) which, in the aggregate, describe the genus Felis as opposed to the genus Canis’.
And Panofsky added: ‘Should someone decide, for the sake of convenience, to designate the sum total of such characteristics as ‘cathood’ and ‘doghood’, it would do violence to the English language, but not to method’.
When I came across an article in The Times of 18 December 1964, on cats which could swim, I cut it out and sent it to George Boas…but not to Panofsky.
This Aristotelian idea of ‘essence of cathood’ or ‘essence of the Renaissance’is precisely what Boas and I do not accept.
But Panofsky believed in it absolutely.
I remember an art historical congress in Amsterdam in 1952.
People were beginning to be a little critical of Jacob Burckhardt and the idea of the Renaissance, and that made Panofsky very cross.
He put on the screen two different buildings, a Renaissance church and a Gothic church, and he said: ‘Something must have happened’.
And I said to myself: ‘Of course something happened, they introduced a new style of architecture.
But this is not necessarily the symptom of something else’.
Gombrich, the Wandering Scholar, pleads successfully
In 1937, the Warburg Institute, recently arrived in London from Hamburg, found itself homeless.
Permission was given for it to move into the Imperial Institute, but there was no shelving, which made the library unusable.
Month after month, the director Fritz Saxl sent letters to the senior civil servant at the Office of Works, Frederic Raby, asking him for shelves to be provided.
Now Raby was also a considerable scholar of Latin poetry of the Middle Ages; finally, Saxl asked Gombrich to write Raby a request in Latin poetry in case that might move him to action.
Here is that poem, in the style of the ‘Wandering scholars’.
The effect was instantaneous: Raby sent back a poem in the same rhyme-scheme saying that they could have their shelves.
As Sir Ernst said in sending these opuscula to The Art Newspaper, ‘The whole stands as a nostalgic tribute to a vanished tradition of the Civil Service’.
THE PLEA
Stella desperantium, miserorum lumen
Rerum primum mobile, nobis quasi numen
Audias propitie supplicantem sonum
De profundis clamitat studii patronum
Otium molestum est, et periculosum
Menses sine linea vexant studiosum.
Statum hunc chaoticum noli prolongare
Animam et domum nos fac aedificare
Libros nostros libera turri de seclusa
Quibus mus nunc fruitur gaudeat et Musa.
O, duc nos ad gratiae sempiternum fontem
Unde tibi lauri frons coronabit frontem.
Qui in Bibliotheca Warburgiana studiis se dedere ardent Frederico Jacobo Edwardo Rabio
[Star of guidance in despair,
Light of all the wretched;
Mover of the Spheres — to us
Almost God in Heaven:
Listen with a gracious ear
To the imploring voices,
Clamouring from the wilderness
To thee, scholar's patron!
Unwished leisure is as much
Dangerous as painful,
Months which pass without a line
Irritate the studious.
Suffer not to be prolonged
This primeval chaos,
Elevate our house; and thus
Elevate our spirits.
Liberate our Library
From its towered prison:
What the mouse now feeds upon
Let the Muse enjoy it.
Lead us to the fount of grace
As it flows for ever,
And we will enwreath your crown
With the crown of laurel.
From those who long to study in the Warburg Library]
To F.J.E. Raby
THE REPLY ADDRESSED TO DR FRITZ SAXL
Doctor disertissime, rector venerande,
Omnibus amabilis semper et amande,
Congemiscens audio verba deprecantum
Imo corde vocibus tactus eiulantum.
Set nunc tibi nuncio gaudium suave,
Te et tuos liberans studiosos a ve.
EANT LIBRI LIBERE.
Deus sit tutamen
Libris et legentibus in eternum.
Amen.
[Eloquent and learned man
Venerated rector,
Always lovable and hence
Loved by all around thee.
Groaning loud myself I heard
The plaintive application,
And my deepest heart was touched
By the suppliants' voices.
But I am the messenger
Now of joyful tidings
Which will free from present woe
You and your disciples:
Let the books go free at once!
And may God's protection
In eternity preserve
Books and readers.
Amen.]
Books
The Frick Collection
When the footnotes are as rewarding as the text
Two long awaited furniture catalogues, from Ted Dell and David DuBon
The world's greatest museums are not necessarily the world's largest museums.
This adage applies in many specialities, but never so appropriately as where French furniture is concerned.
The Wallace Collection in London and the Musée Nissim de Camondo in Paris both offer unrivalled opportunity to appreciate masterpieces in this field.
In New York, the visitor is drawn time and time again to the Frick Collection, where the opulent yet relaxed setting shows off the objects so much more sympathetically than the Disneyland-style ‘period rooms’ across the other side of Fifth Avenue.
The latest in the series of comprehensive catalogues, these two volumes chart Henry Clay Frick's lightning acquisitions in two of the most important fields of period furniture, namely Renaissance furniture from Italy and France (by David DuBon), and French furniture from Louis XIV to the Revolution (by Theodore Dell).
The two cataloguers' meticulous approach is immediately apparent in the scrupulously detailed descriptions and condition reports, and in the commentaries which follow them.
Scholars disagree about the need for such descriptions: photographs, some say, tell all the story.
But here the descriptions play an important role, and serious students would do well to read them carefully; for not only do they tell more than any photograph ever can, including technical details of construction, but, when studied with the photographs, or in front of the objects themselves, they are invaluable in helping to focus on the many significant details which might otherwise go unnoticed.
The condition reports, too, are highly educational.
At first glance, such precise and long-winded accounts of restorations, alterations and embellishments might indicate that Mr Frick employed limited discernment in his choice of purchases, but this is definitely not the case.
Other museums take note; only by use of technical knowledge such as that displayed here is it possible to build an honest and complete picture of the origin and subsequent vicissitudes of any object.
David DuBon has had to battle with a notoriously difficult subject, and is not afraid to state the plain facts, such as: ‘it is no longer possible to determine whether its present form is that of the original piece’(Vol.
V, p. 112).
Little Renaissance furniture survives intact, and the present catalogue will go a long way to furthering its understanding.
Serious detective work is also apparent in Ted Dell's section.
This, combined with the enormous quantity of information available about the makers and patrons of French eighteenth-century furniture, help to build up a much more complete picture than is possible for the earlier pieces.
The author displays a perfect mastery of his subject; his legendary library has helped him to single out a wealth of comparable material, and his practical knowledge of specific features of construction and style extends to such details as, for example, Riesener's handmade steel screws.
The absence of these has helped in rejecting one of the consoles-dessertes (Vol.
VI, p. 102) as a deliberate fake.
It is perhaps in the field of attribution that this catalogue serves the most useful purpose.
These are discussed with a clarity which enables the reader to fully identify with the author's train of thought.
Starting with the magnificent writing table attributed to Boulle (a rare example of bad display at the Frick — stuck away in a corridor), we are led through such aspects as ownership of designs, similar pieces by different ebenistes, the marchands-merciers and their relationship with their gilt-bronze manufacturers.
Not since Sir Geoffrey de Bellaigue's Waddesdon furniture catalogue of 1974 has the subject been treated so comprehensively, although it is sad to note that the quality of photography is not as good in this catalogue as in the Waddesdon one.
I advise reading this book one entry at a time, and, where possible, following up the footnotes.
Plenty of work, perhaps, but the serious student will find it intensely rewarding, and the newcomer may be encouraged to explore this difficult field; he will certainly be well armed against the problems once he has digested even a fraction of the mountain of information and enthusiasm contained therein.
Great country houses
Boughton, the English Versailles
A museum-quality study
Northamptonshire can boast a remarkable constellation of great houses: but among these, as this volume of studies edited by Tessa Murdoch demonstrates, Boughton is non pareil.
One may still sense the impact which experience of the France of Louis XIV had on its regenerator, Ralph Montagu, First Duke of Montagu.
But luckily for his successors, Montagus, Brudenells and, since 1790, Scotts, Montagu did not aspire to create an English Versailles.
The house he inherited was subsumed, and no one can doubt the distinction of the new entrance front, Marot's claims to which are clarified by Gervase Jackson-Stops.
That the magic of the place is more than an architectural phenomenon is expressed in both the introduction by the house's present owner, the Duke of Buccleuch and an essay on its history by John Cornforth.
For despite periods of benign neglect, the house continues to serve its original function as an occasional residence at the heart of a great estate.
Its original decoration was splendid, but the calibre of its collections was transformed in relatively recent times by the transfer of much of the contents of Montagu House, Whitehall, the successor to the first duke's great mansion in Bloomsbury.
So the ceilings painted in the house of Cheron, the tapestries and carpets for which it is justly famed — reviewed in articles by Wendy Hefford and Ian Bennett and Frances Michael, are supplemented by pictures acquired for Bloomsbury.
These include flower pieces by Monnoyer and the series of grisaille modelli for Van Dyck's Iconography, the status of which is championed by Michael Jaffe.
The frames supplied for the Duke by another Huguenot, Pelletier, here considered by Pippa Mason, are also remarkable.
The strata of the collection are explored in a number of essays, the French furniture by Peter Hughes, the English furniture by John Hardy, the armoury, and the library (Nicholas Barker).
Almost every generation left its mark.
Masterpieces by El Greco, Carracci, Murillo and Teniers were secured by the First Duke of Montagu of the second creation and his wife in the mid-eighteenth century, while as Rosamond Savile documents, the celebrated collection of Sèvres was acquired, in an astonishingly short period in 1830–31, by the Fifth Duke of Buccleuch, who also greatly enriched the holdings of French furniture.
This handsomely produced volume manages to convey the character of a remarkable house in which tapestried corridors leave as indelible an impression as the many great works of art in the state rooms.
Historicism in Europe
The Decorative Arts Society's new journal
Viollet-le-Duc, William Burgess, William de Morgan et al The Decorative Arts Society was founded in 1975 with the aim of encouraging the study of decorative arts in Britain, Europe and America from 1850 to the present.
The field covered ranges from architecture, interior and industrial designs, furniture, ceramics, glass, metalwork, textiles, jewellery, fashion, stage and film design and the graphic arts.
Its two publications comprise a twice-yearly newsletter providing information on the Society's special events, and an annual journal edited by Judy Rudoe of the British Museum.
Previous journals have been devoted to applied arts in the pre-war years, turn-of-the-century design, artists as educators, aspects of British interior design, and the European connection.
The new (1992) journal is on the topic of historicism in Europe 1830–80, and includes the following articles among others: ‘An appraisal of Viollet-le-Duc and his influence’ by Michael Barker; ‘William Burgess's furniture for Cardiff Castle’by Matthew Williams; ‘The revival of ‘Old English’style in nineteenth-century furniture’by Christopher Morley; ‘The table glass designs of Philip Webb and T.G. Jackson for James Powell and Sons, Whitefriars Glassworks’by Judy Rudoe and Howard Coutts; ‘John and Josephine Bowes's purchases from the International Exhibitions of 1862, 1867 and 1871’by Howard Coutts and Sarah Medlam; and ‘William de Morgan and the Islamic tiles of Leighton House’by Venetia Porter.
Full adult membership of the Society is only £10, which includes a copy of the journal.
Back issues of the Journal are priced separately at £15 and are available from the Hon Secretary, PO Box 844, Lewes, East Sussex BN7 3NG, as is information on membership.
Adam and Regency period
Putting on the style
Examining the house, piece by piece
The revitalised image of the historic Phaidon Press is well reflected by these two related books in which accurate and informed scholarship is conveyed to a wider and more popular audience than under the old dispensation.
While, at a superficial level, the titles might well mislead, a swift glance at the contents is reassuring.
Inevitably, there are bound to be risks when breaking the mould by attempting fresh patterns of presentation or using imaginative, unconventional layouts.
But these are the same hazards of the actual styles explored, where experimental forms as well as stucco, scagliola and cast iron swiftly replaced more conventional perceptions and materials.
In selecting the two period styles most notoriously prone to camp life-style confections and pastiches, Steven Parissien sets out to educate through entertainment as well as to provide sound practical advice.
As Education Secretary of the Georgian Group, he is well qualified to write with authority and commitment on critical matters such as paintwork, glazing, upholstery and furnishings.
Boldly displayed colour plates and a wealth of freshly selected details, often in the form of juxtaposed photographs and contemporary engravings, make these books a pleasure to use since images and texts are well co-ordinated.
In each book there has been a conscious decision to focus on relatively modest domestic architecture rather than providing yet more triumphant progresses through the great set-piece country houses.
An exception is the occasional use of the latter where authentic detail is more accessible.
After considering the broad characteristics of the style concerned, each book goes on to discuss its manifestations in the architectural shell, followed by chapters on technical aspects such as fixtures and fittings, joinery, plasterwork, colours and coverings.
Separate attention is devoted to services such as heating and lighting.
In the case of the Regency, there is also an extensive coverage of landscape and garden design where the house interior was extended into the outside world by means of French windows, conservatories and a whole new range of formal features and mass-produced ornament.
As appropriate to such highly informative books, the appendices are extremely useful, with brief biographies of key designers, glossaries of terms, followed by helpful lists of contact addresses or sources of information and further advice.
Details of public sector organisations, such as English Heritage, and planning procedures, are accompanied by a wide range of specialist and national amenity societies, in the USA as well as in Britain.
Further reading in the select bibliographies also covers the specialist topics of the main chapters, such as fanlights, wallpapers, firegrates and kitchen ranges, to select at random.
(No such lists can hope to be comprehensive but it is a pity that no reference is made to Geoffrey Beard's indispensable and pioneering studies on decorative plasterwork in the Adam period.)
It is to be hoped that these commendably practical volumes will be followed by similar ones, particularly for the later period styles.
The rage for DIY restorations and pastiches continues unabated despite the recession, and owners of historic properties badly need the kind of specific guidance that Parissien provides.
Please note, those responsible for education in the Victorian and Thirties Societies!
Venetian glass
Murano revived
A modern history
The Barovier family, to whom the author belongs, has been associated with the Muranese glass-making trade from its beginnings.
The present publication, Venetian Glass 1890–1990, covers a period which Rosa Mentasti has made particularly her own.
The book is, as it claims to be, the first real survey of the period, other writers having extracted individual companies or artists from a dauntingly rich and complex panorama.
She begins with a tantalisingly brief resume of the resurgence of Murano glassmaking in the mid-nineteenth century, that fascinating period, full of pioneers in the re-discovery and re-invention of ancient techniques from both Roman and Renaissance glass.
The main thrust of this book is, naturally, concentrated on the period around 1900 when attitudes within the reserved, even isolationist Murano were gradually relaxed, and from around 1910, when Muranese glassmakers and designers began to re-join the international scene.
Rosa Mentasti has brought together some wonderful glass, much of it new to this reviewer.
She illustrates the exuberant flowering which resulted from exposure to painters such as Gustav Klimt, whose richly patterned paintings were so influential in the mosaic-based designs of Teodor Wolf-Ferrari.
Rosa Mentasti also traces the superb achievements, both technical and artistic, from the mid 1920s onwards of the new companies of Cappellin, Venini and AVEM and the regularly recurring revitalisation and re-alignments of Barovier, Seguso, Toso, Ferro and other names.
She brings the story virtually to the present with a chapter on the glass of the 1980s; the history is complex and varied, perhaps too much so for what is a comparatively slim book.
A more generous format would have allowed her more scope.
It is a little disappointing that so handsome a book offers so breathless a review of the subject.
Unfortunately too, the translation is sometimes poor and the text layout cramped.
Nevertheless, this is an enticing introduction to the subject.
ARTscribble
Hollow words, hollow values
Last month, Sobor Press of Moscow launched a two-volume monograph by Valentin Novikov on the Russian painter Ilya Glazunov (b. 1930) at Roy Miles's gallery in London.
If size of following were proof of quality, then Glazunov would be a candidate for the title of greatest living artist: in Brezhnev's time (he was the premier's favourite artist) he ingratiated himself by playing on the sentimental Slavic strand in Soviet life with ‘symphonic canvases [which]overflow with the dreams and feeling of the Russian people’.
While the masses and nomenklatura flocked in their hundreds of thousands to Glazunov's exhibitions and he lived lavishly in Moscow, he ably kept going a parallel reputation for dissidence: ‘[He]has been a lifetime opponent of Soviet authority, and his art has always defied the politics and prejudices of his time’.
Here is a taste of his own thoughts on art:
‘Art is not a slave to fashion, but is eternal and always contemporary.
It is like a smiling girl, passing across a backdrop of clouds that are as mighty as a Bach chorale…‘
All quotes from the blurb launching the monograph
Italian furniture
Pleased by Piffetti
Everything about this book is pleasing, and everyone who has been involved with its creation deserves the greatest praise.
Its well made slip-cover is faced with a reproduction, in an attractive matt finish, of marquetry in close-up — such a relief from the glossy covers and jackets that are becoming increasingly tedious and are all too often vulgar.
Take out the book itself and you find a stylish, plain sky-blue rough paper jacket, tastefully printed with title, etc.
This enwraps a plain blue paper binding.
Inside one is faced with elegant lay-out, handsome printing (by Ages Arti Grafiche, Turin) on paper of pleasing quality.
Most of the photographs are excellent and many, notably the close-ups of the furniture, are superb.
The names of the five photographers concerned are listed with honour quite separately on the back of the title-page but credit must also go to the printers who reproduced their work (Fotolito Fotomec, Turin).
The author, Giancarlo Ferraris, of course earns our gratitude for his achievement in amassing so much largely fresh documentation on the famous cabinet maker Pietro Piffetti and on a flush of other Turinese baroque and rococo furniture-makers.
It is very evidently a thorough piece of work; the judgements seem well justified, and the whole exercise must surely have been a labour of love.
Acting as midwife to the enterprise has been Alvar Gonzalez-Palacios who was assisted by Roberto Valeriani.
Gonzalez-Palacios has totally transformed furniture studies in Italy since he came to live in that country.
He brought to this study the trained mind of an art historian coupled with enormous energy, a good eye and an excellent memory.
I greatly enjoyed his quip about the computerisation of art-historical studies, which is to be found in the penultimate sentence of his introduction.
Much of Piffetti's work is still to be found in the royal palaces of Turin, but several superb pieces, including two exquisite pedestals, drifted off to the Quirinal in Rome, and an altar-frontal of unbelievable complexity is in the Vatican.
It was in fact surprising to learn that so many of Piffetti's works take the form of oratories, private chapels and prayer-stools.
In my opinion, his marquetry is best when purely ornamental; and his work of the 1730s is stunning, as is exemplified by the detail of Item 1 which has charming bronze mounts by Francesco Ladetto.
Later, while figure-subjects executed in marquetry become more dominant but generally less attractive, it is the ornamental component that again gives most delight.
Astonishing is a bureau-bookcase of the 1760s, by which time the cool winds of classicism had tamed Piffetti's rococo ardour, where the marquetry resembles nothing so much as a stylish product of Parisian 1930s Art-Deco.
The notable talents of Luigi Prinotto are revealed by the excellent photography.
Somewhat older than Piffetti, more sober in his tastes, this cabinet maker's decoration of the queen's Oratory (1732–34) is exceptionally handsome.
His mobile furniture is mostly rather ungainly, although his marquetry ornament is brilliant and (again, when not figural) pleasing in the extreme.
I really cannot find fault with this book except to say that even splendid photography cannot make me love all of Piffetti's furniture.
Some of the shapes are really rather ugly although the decoration is usually charming in its detail.
But sometimes the whole piece is entirely delightful, and if the person who now runs the Royal Palace at Turin would care to send over to me one of the two stools called Item 55 in the catalogue as a present, I would be very happy.
I could then place this handsome book upon it.
An upholstered stool would be much more appropriate than a coffee-table for this attractive and scholarly volume.
Odilon Redon
A walk on the dark side
A new study fails to plumb the depths of the great Symbolist's tortured psyche
This well produced if flawed book has the effect of quickly vexing the reader, failing, as it does, to answer satisfactorily any of the main questions that it originally sought to address.
With its overtly Flaubertian title echoing La Tentation de Saint Antoine, Stephen Eisenman has divided his study of the graphic oeuvre of Odilon Redon into three chapters and an epilogue ostensibly treating themes of his early life, popular culture and what he has called ‘the crucible of Symbolism’.
However, the profane or pseudo-sacral layout he adopts does little to save the general premise that it is both a biography and a serious enquiry into the ideological formation of an artist, let alone, as it claims, an exegesis of the artist's stylistic development.
As biography, the book is an odd mixture of generality and specificity without enough information to help us form a well rounded view of the artist.
Its many digressions into the lives of artists like Rudolphe Bresdin, an early influence on Odilon Redon, suggest that either Eisenman did not have enough primary material for his main task, or that he was simply much more interested in the hapless engraver Bresdin.
The same might be said of Redon's frequently alluded to fragility: according to Eisenman he was ever teetering on the brink of depression and death, though this in turn does not explain why the artist lived seventy-five years of life quite satisfactorily.
In this respect Eisenman shares a common sentimental viewpoint that often taints writers who write upon Symbolism.
As for ideology, it is quite clear from this account that Odilon Redon did not have one as such (his connections with the anarchists of the period being tangential at most).
If ideology is the science of ideas, of broad metaphysical or abstract speculation, then the best that can be said here is that Odilon Redon pursued a private visionary agenda.
This is not intended to demean in any way the at times very fine lithographs that Redon produced, but rather to imply that they are directly connected in his mind to the literary and visual sources that interested him, including Edgar Allan Poe, Charles Baudelaire, Gustave Flaubert, Stephane Mallarmé, and Goya amongst others.
The crucial sub-text of the period was that of the human body and of identity itself at odds with the world.
This was what lay at the centre of the metaphysical speculations often pursued by the Symbolists.
Earlier Romantic interests in dream, haunting and death were revivified by Odilon Redon's lithographs and drawings and transposed into a mawkish fascination with human decollation and disembodiment (a prescient subject of much Surrealist interest later), witness perhaps of his desire to escape from the strictures of the body where only material limitation and disease existed — the concerns of eschatology, sexuality and mysticism certainly haunted Redon as they do so much Symbolist thought.
The book is similarly cursory in its treatment of style (a term that is never defined by the writer) with not much attention given to a formal or material analysis of the work.
This need not have mattered so much if he had made his contextual analysis more rigorous.
One feature alone redeems the book, namely that it illustrates many works which have rarely been reproduced since the original publication of the albums by Redon, though we could also have hoped that the quality of the reproductions were a little better.
A truly definitive study of Odilon Redon's ‘Noirs’ still remains to be written for, sadly, the efforts of Mr Eisenman have not achieved it.
New magazines
A forum for the Tate
The Tate Gallery is currently conducting a feasibility study on producing its own Tate magazine.
It will form part of the package offered to Friends of the Tate and be available for sale, in the style of the successful Royal Academy Magazine.
There are some significant differences however: the Tate magazine will be published by the architectural monograph publishers and publishers of Blueprint, Wordsearch, who will make the financial commitment to the project, aiming to sell a steep 25,000 copies each issue including the copies sent to the 8,000 Friends of the Tate and those bought in by the gallery; the Royal Academy Magazine is published ‘in-house’ and supports itself through its advertising revenue, capitalising on the fact that it has a guaranteed audience of 67,000 Friends.
Under current director Nicholas Serota, with his controversial yearly ‘new hangs’, and the additional excitement of the transfer of the Tate's contemporary collection into a purpose-built museum by the year 2000, the Tate has become a news-making institution, a factor that wordsearch will have taken into consideration.
Over 1.5 million people visit the Tate annually and could be expected to find a Tate magazine an attractive purchase.
One question that the newly appointed editor Tim Marlowe (of the Tate's education department) will have to decide is the editorial stance of the magazine: he has to balance the curatorial concerns of the Tate with issues that would appeal to a general reader while treading an ideologically independent path.
Equilibrium will also have to be attained between the needs of an independent publishing house aiming for profit and those of the gallery.
The pilot issue goes on sale in September and the magazine will appear three times a year.
The Art Market
German Expressionist Index
With a drop of 42% from the peak reached in 1990 the German Expressionist Index has held up better than the more volatile sectors of French and American painting.
The rise since 1975 stands at 340% — equivalent to a 9% annual growth-rate which could well be resumed.
Robin Duthy
The International Art Index is created by Art Market Research.
For valuation and appraisal of art collections, and for statistical analysis of 500 individual artists and schools of painting write to: P O Box AMR, The Art Newspaper, Mitre House, 44–46 Fleet Street, London EC4Y 1BN or Fax 071 254 5619.
Artists in the Index: Ernst-Ludwig Kirchner, Erich Heckel, Karl Schmidt-Rottluff, Emil Nolde, Max Pechstein, Gabriele Munter, Christian Rohlfs, Alexej von Jawlensky, Vasily Kandinsky
Statistical Method: The 1975 base US$ figure for each artist in the index is the average price of the central 80% of all paintings and works on paper by that artist sold at auction in 1974–1976, as reported in Art Sales Index.
Prices of works sold outside the US are converted into US dollars at the average exchange rates during the month of sale.
German week at Christie's
National sales pull in business
Last year Spain, this year Germany and Austria
One of the victims of the recent art market recession is the ‘national’ sale, including those Scandinavian, Scottish, Irish and Belgian painting sales which briefly flourished in the late 1980s.
The inherent weakness in targeting a specific market, both in terms of type of work and date, became all too apparent when buyers, particularly speculators, were hit by financial and art market recessions.
The auction houses quite wisely retreated, leaving specialist dealers bemoaning what they alleged were short-sighted policies.
Last year Christie's cleverly came up with a new slant to the national theme: the Spanish week at Christie's involved two sales, one of works of art on 20 May and the other of paintings on 27 May.
It proved one of the big money earners for the year.
While Christie's toyed with the idea of another Spanish sale, they quite rightly decided it was better not to overplay one market, which had in fact exhibited some weaknesses amidst the strengths.
Beginning in September they began to work on the current German and Austrian week (17 to 21 May) searching for consignments spanning the centuries and media.
According to Christie's Mark Poltimore, such theme sales, ‘help to concentrate attention, both of sellers and buyers.
Many consignments surfaced because sellers liked the idea of a national theme sale; the publicity generated has the potential of attracting cosmopolitan buyers beyond what a sale on the national soil might.
Further, the cross-fertilisation in terms of century and media is exciting and focuses existing national interest.
Indeed, the print run for these sales has been enormous: some 8,000–9,000 catalogues.
For Christie's, such sales help raise our European profile as well as assert London as an international centre of the art market.
Logistically it presents plenty of challenges: for instance trying to arrange cataloguing in many different fields so that entries present a certain conformity; giving a certain ‘look’ and ‘feel’to the sales, is also difficult.
It is unclear whether these sales will become a yearly feature.
Poltimore observed that there was a danger that in adhering to an annual formula, ‘quality might suffer.
Instead of struggling to fill a sale each year, it might be better to skip a year, or two, if necessary.
The crucial thing is to have a certain proportion of museum quality consignments, such as the Caspar David Friedrich (‘Spaziergang in der Abenddammerung’), the Wilhelm von Kobell (‘Reiter am Tegernsee’) and the Emil Nolde (‘Sonnenblumenbild I’) in hand.
These are truly wonderful works and capture the attention of cosmopolitan as well as national buyers’.
Another important and appealing factor of these sales is the degree to which objects are featured in ‘mainstream’ publicity-generating sales.
To see the five early seventeenth-century working miniature firearms from the workshop of Michel Mann of Augsburg and Nuremberg, a rare mechanical calculator made by Johann Schuster in 1822, a German Royal hunting knife made in Berlin in 1699 by Jaques Munier, and a pair of mid-eighteenth-century four-light candelabra (attributed to Christian Heinrich Ingermann) made for Augustus III, Elector of Saxony alongside what are traditionally regarded as archetypal ‘German’ and ‘Austrian’works, such as paintings, watercolours and prints by the German Expressionists, does indeed focus the mind on the manifold contributions to the history of art made by artists of the German speaking countries.
Part I, ceramics, silver, antique arms and armour, clocks, scientific instruments, printed maps and views, autograph and printed music, furniture, sculpture, to be offered on 19 May at 2.30 p.m.
Part II, Old Master, nineteenth-century, modern and contemporary pictures, drawings and prints, to be offered on 20 May at 10.30am and 2.30pm.
French auctioneers
A flat 9% buyer's premium imposed
‘It's good news, but not great news’ says Christie's Deputy Chairman Francois Curiel
The Paris auction market received a welcome fillip in the first week of April with the announcement that buyer's premium would be set at a flat rate of 9%.
This will replace the complex three-tier system which has been in use in recent years and involved graded brackets ranging from 12.5% on sales up to FFr15,000 down to 2.4% on those over FFr300,000.
At a time when the French auction business is under fierce pressure from Sotheby's and Christie's, the introduction of a premium lower than that of their rivals has been greeted with delight.
Speaking to The Art Newspaper, Drouot chairman Joel-Marie Millon said: ‘We have been asking for this measure for years.
It will provide an extraordinary boost for the art market in general and for French auctioneers in particular.
The Anglo-Saxon auction houses are imposing 15% and the 9% will help us to compete, invest and seduce’.
The reaction from Francois Curiel, Christie's Deputy Chairman and head of the company's French operations, was of guarded optimism.
While the timing of the news came as a surprise to him, he said, he had been expecting it since February 1992.
He noted that return on individual lots would obviously be better for vendors at 9% than Christie's current 15%-10% but that the levelling off to one figure meant that Christie's will look more competitive overall whenever they enter the market.
‘At 2.4% for items over FFr300,000 it was impossible for us to compete, now it is possible’, said M. Curiel.
‘It's good news but not great news yet’.
Reni ‘David and Goliath’ deferred
Guido Reni's painting of ‘David with the head of Goliath’, unsuccessfully offered at Sothbey's last summer with an estimate of £1.6–2.2 million, has had the decision on its export licence deferred.
This will enable a potential purchaser to come forward up until 1 July with the recommended £2 million or above.
The picture, a later version of a work in the Louvre, was bought at Sotheby's in 1985 for £2.2 million and loaned to the National Gallery, London.
Rumours in the Italian trade about its authenticity damaged its chances at auction last summer.
The Souillac Art Deco sale at Drouot
The Art Deco collection of Michel Souillac, sold at Drouot Montaigne on 5 April during a marathon five hour, 326 lot auction by Herye Poulain, raised FFr7.8 million ($1.4 million; £950,000; compared to an estimated FFr4.5–5.9 million) which will be donated to the restoration of a Gothic abbey at Crepy-en-Valois.
Estimates were low and reserve prices moderate: a desk made by Pierre Chareau for Robert Mallet-Stevens estimated at FFr1 million was bought by a London dealer for FFr1.8 million and a French dealer acquired one of Chareau's ‘religieuse’ lamps made in 1928 for FFr228,000, under its low estimate.
Sotheby's
It's that old special relationship
On Friday 2 April Sotheby's held a lunch party to celebrate the opening of its new front hall (part of a $9 million redevelopment package).
Chairman Lord Gowrie's speech included a  reference to the famous Egyptian granite figure over the main front door, now fully visible again.
Chivalrously, if none too politically correctly, he drew a parallel between the beautiful and powerful Egyptian goddess and the newly appointed Diana Brooks, just arrived from New York to head London operations.
The increasing Americanisation of Sotheby's London is evident in numerous ways.
At a time when the company was obliged to draw on its total shareholders' equity to pay its (reduced) dividend, the installation of a new mainframe computer system linked to New York (and horribly slow to use according to London experts) accounted for a sizeable percentage of last year's $7 million auction operating costs.
The recent emphasis on ‘human resources’ under London managing director Roger Faxon (an American) is evident in the new-style contracts which all experts were obliged to sign by 1 April.
These include goals and targets agreed by each expert with his or her head of department which the expert will be required to attain over the coming year.
Speaking to The Art Newspaper, President and Chief Executive of Sotheby's Holdings Inc.
Michael Ainslie (also an American), acknowledged that salaries are linked to an individual (rather than departmental) bonus scheme but denied that Mr Faxon's new contracts are the first step towards individual commission-based salaries.
Other ideas current in London include the sharing of departments between London and New York (one team jetting back and forth across the Atlantic to catalogue sales) and the dismantling of specialist departments in favour of more all-round teams of valuers.
On the wave of redundancies which has hit London hard since Christmas, Mr Ainslie noted that sufficient cost-cutting had now been achieved but that Mrs Brooks would be taking that area in hand.
On the general state of the market he felt that there was sufficient signs of returning activity to rule out the future closure of any major outlets.
The appointment of Diana Brooks may have radical implications for the management structure of Sotheby's London house.
Mrs Brooks, forty-three, has moved up from the role of president of US operations to overall president and chief executive officer of the company, a newly created post.
She joined the company aged twenty-nine and was appointed US president in 1987.
She is also its third largest shareholder.
Mr Ainslie noted that there was still too much geographic focus on where business was carried out within the company despite the international nature of the business and that there was room for a more unified focus.
The appointment of Mrs Brooks is aimed at a ‘real integration of the two operations’.
London management, currently headed by Lord Gowrie (rumours of whose impending departure continue to circulate) and Timothy Llewellyn, will report to her.
The appointment of Mrs Brooks is intended to enable Michael Ainslie to focus on developing auctioneering activities in new market areas such as South America and the Far East.
This renewed emphasis on auctioneering rather than other activities may be a reflection of the swingeing drop in revenue from principal activities evident in the 1992 end of year results, down from $15.9 million to $1 million (see The Art Newspaper, No 27, April 1993, p.21).
London roundup
Anglophilia
Few sales last month gripped the attention of the keen sale-goer.
As always, however, a few items stood out for rarity, beauty, or sheer high price.
We reproduce four of them below.
Walter Richard Sickert ‘Brighton Pierrots’, signed and dated 1915.
Sold Christie's 12 March for £200,000 ($300,000; est. £80,000–120,000), a record price for the artist.
Bought by the Fine Arts Society
Thomas Hope, ‘Homeric’ seat, designed by Hope for his Duchess Street mansion.
Recently bought by a dealer for £5,000 in a local auction, it sold at Christie's on 1 April for £34,000 ($51,000; est. £10,000–15,000), bought by a private art consultant, underbid by Blairman
Page from ‘A collection of drawings of the various insignia of the pontificate…
‘. Two albums of 202 drawings made in Italy for John Talman between 1709 and 1717.
Sold in the Gutmann sale, Sotheby's, 2 April, for the lower estimate of £150,000 ($225,000) to dealer Christopher Gibbs acting for a private client
John Constable, ‘Helmingham Dell, Suffolk’, inscribed ‘July 23, 1800. /Afternoon’.
Sold Sotheby's 1 April for £88,000 ($132,000), a world record price for a drawing by the artist (previous record £57,000).
Sold on the telephone against a Leggatt in the room
Modern British
Citibank chooses Sutherland
Classic names plus an interesting group of young British artists
A continually developing relationship with the international contemporary field together with the inclusion of new young British artists are two factors which make Modern British sales interesting and rewarding to follow.
Christie's sale on 26 March was their most successful post-war sale to date, totalling £698,522 (with premium), 75% sold by value and 68% by lot.
In general, the sale was characterised by more trade bidding than has been evident over the past year, while competitive bidding between private collectors was responsible for the morning's most surprising result: £21,000 ($31,500; est. £6,000–8,000) for Joe Tilson's ‘Ziggurat 1967’(lot 79)
The inclusion of work by artists such as Auerbach, Kossoff and Hockney added an international feel to the catalogue.
Hockney's photographic collages have performed poorly in contemporary sales, but ‘David Graves looking at Bayswater’(lot 25) of 1982 sold above estimate at £11,000.
Kossoff's work continues to decline in value: having previously changed hands in the London trade for around £20,000, the beautiful ‘Pauline II’ coloured chalk and charcoal (lot 22) was bought for a bargain £3,200 ($4,800) by another London dealer.
Among the more traditional offerings were a very good group of works by Graham Sutherland.
From the Richard and Dorothy Rodgers collection ‘The Palm’(lot 26) was a particularly accessible work characterised by a vibrant orange-red background.
Bought by Ian Dunlop of Citibank for £56,000 ($84,000; est. £40,000–50,000), it was underbid by Thomas Gibson and Ivor Braka.
The picture was followed by a group of five gouache studies of around 1954–55 for Sutherland's Coventry Cathedral tapestry, all of designs for the Crucifixion on a variety of coloured backgrounds.
These spare, elegant studies made between £2,600 and £4,400 each.
The continuing selectiveness of dealers and collectors in all areas of the market accounted for the failures of rather unexceptional works by Hitchens (lots 10 and 11), Piper (lots 7 and 9) and Lucian Freud.
The last artist's uninspiring ‘Still life with cactus and flower pots’, consigned by a New England museum, failed at £20,000 (est. £30,000–50,000).
‘Too early’ was Christie's Graham Southern's opinion.
Elsewhere, however, interesting lesser works such as‘Abstraction 1934’ and Vortex II 1939’(lots 1 and 2) by John Cecil Stephenson, a member of the Park Hill group of artists and associate of Nash and Nicholson, were the subject of enthusiastic trade bidding, bought by Jonathan Clarke.
Of the two Roger Hiltons (lots 44 and 45), the higher price was achieved by the smaller but compositionally more coherent ‘June 60 (Red)’, which made £13,500 ($20,250; est. £6,000–9,000).
In many ways the most interesting aspect of the present sale was the inclusion of a group of artists with established reputations but fresh to the auction market.
Outstanding among these were Ana Maria Pacheco's ‘Head’(lot 171), a totemic carved and painted wooden head with real teeth which sold for £4,500 ($6,750; est. £2,000–3,000).
A characteristic punk head by Tony Bevan (lot 83) made £4,200 ($6,300; est. £3,000–4,000) while a rather low-key landscape by John Keane (lot 85) sold below estimate for £2,000 ($3,000).
Works by Laurence Broderick, Nicola Hicks, Kate Braine, Kevin Sinnott and Ian Davenport all made first appearances with varying degrees of success.
Of a rather mixed sculpture section (pre-war works performed particularly badly and from now on will be offered in traditional British sales) the market for small pieces by Moore held up well.
Chadwick's important ‘Three winged figures’ of 1960–61 was a disappointing failure at £28,000, but seems likely to sell after the sale (it was underbid by a Spanish telephone bidder).
Most exciting, although absurdly cheap, were the four lots by Bill Woodrow from the Roos estate (lots 173–176).
‘Can with plug’, ‘Tea pot’ and ‘Can with padlock’made between £600 and £750 while ‘L'oiseau bleu’, formed from a painted and cut ironing board, sold to the same telephone bidder for £2,000.
Christie's /Sotheby's
The rival houses muster their contemporary art experts
The two leading auction houses chose a pair of modest mid-season contemporary art sales held on Thursday 25 March to present their new department teams.
Hugues Joffre, who joined Christie's at the beginning of the year after serving out the six months' notice enforced by Sotheby's when he resigned unexpectedly on the eve of last summer's sales, made his first public appearance in King Street, hovering around the telephone bank but participating only occasionally in the afternoon's business.
Gerard Faggionato, who had acted as the department's director, becomes his second-in-command.
Guy Jennings presided in the rostrum.
At Sotheby's, Faggionato's former assistant, Tobias Meyer, has been appointed as Joffre's successor, with Elena Geuna, who took charge of the department when Joffre left, reverting to her supporting role.
Almost concealing the nervousness at his new promotion, Meyer conducted the morning's sale at Sotheby's with competence and found buyers for seventy-two lots totalling £1.09 million ($1.61 million), with a further thirty lots failing to attract bids or reach reserves.
The sale's highest prices were achieved for two paintings by Dubuffet.
A fine nude female figure dating from the early years of the artist's career (lot 310, est. £60,000–80,000) was purchased for £115,000 by a bidder seated in the room against competition from New York dealer, David Nehmad, who captured Dubuffet's ‘Promenade Agreste’(lot 314, est. £65,000–85,000) for £128,000 against several telephone bidders.
Nehmad maintained a high profile throughout the session, keeping his eye firmly on the currency board and bidding on a number of other lots including Maria-Helena Vieira da Silva's ‘La Ville Fermee’(lot 320a, est. £60,000–80,000) which he lost to a French dealer for £62,000.
A rare moment of genuine excitement surrounded an untitled painting by Mimmo Paladino (lot 349, est. £18,000–24,000) which engaged the attention of no less than eight bidders before it was sold for £47,000.
But prices were generally low.
A strong and violent figurative picture by Karel Appel (lot 317, est. £40,000–60,000), which would have commanded £150,000 at the peak of the market three or four years ago, sold to Waddington for £46,000.
Sotheby's packaged its contemporary art sale as the sequel to a dull sale of Impressionist paintings and sculpture.
Christie's adopted a different tack, dropped its mid-season sale of Impressionist art and used contemporary art as the leader for a sale of modern British paintings and sculpture which took place the following morning (see p. 24).
It justified this decision by boasting a stronger and more interesting group of works in a larger auction in which 169 lots were sold for £1.57 million ($2.32 million), with only twenty-three lots failing to find buyers.
A further twenty-four lots were withdrawn as a result of uncertainty over ownership.
A fire painting by Yves Klein (lot 65, est. £50,000–70,000) attracted the session's highest price when it sold to a telephone bidder for £75,000.
Another telephone bid secured Calder's charming red bull (lot 57, est. £15,000–20,000) for £58,000 against competition from Waddington.
But the interest in the sale lay in its younger and more international image, partly due to the inclusion of forty lots from the estate of Swedish collector, Frederik Roos.
A good pastel by Francesco Clemente (lot 165, est. £10,000–15,000) fetched £17,000, two important paintings by Christopher Lebrun attracted keen interest, ‘Marcus Curtius’(lot 167, est. £14,000–18,000) being purchased by private dealer, Desmond Page, and sales at admittedly low prices, were made for works by Donald Baechler (lot 168), Kenny Scharf (lot 177), Matt Mullican (lots 185 and 186) and other New York artists rarely seen in London.
If Joffre and Faggionato bring more of this material to London, it will represent an exciting new chapter for contemporary art at Christie's.
(More results and pictures p. 33).
New auction house in Vienna
Kunstauktionen GmbH, a new auction house, will open for business in June and begin sales in December.
It will be headed by Otto Hans Ressler, until 1992 head of the picture department at Dorotheum.
Differences of opinion over Dorotheum's long-term strategy with Alfred Karny, head of Dorotheum's board of directors, apparently led to Ressler's forced resignation.
The new auction house will hold around four to six sales per year and will offer certificates of authenticity for all objects.
British paintings
Auction record for a double portrait by Allan Ramsay
£500,000 for ‘Sir Edward and Lady Turner’ sold by the sitters' descendants
Two sales of historic British pictures took place at Sotheby's and at Christie's on the mornings of Tuesday 6 April and Wednesday 7 April respectively.
Between them, they boasted only one painting which could properly be described as a masterpiece, a playful double portrait by Allan Ramsay which featured at Christie's, while both catalogues were padded with dull works, as is usual in this category of art.
Christie's had secured a good selection of attractive conversation pieces and landscape paintings calculated to appeal to private collectors on a budget, as well as the more interesting portraits and equestrian compositions, while the quality of the works at Sotheby's was particularly thin.
There, James Miller took charge of the rostrum and managed to sell ninety-eight lots for a total of £913,280 ($1.4 million), with another eighty-six lots failing to attract sufficient bids.
That sum compares with proceeds of £996,400 raised in the equivalent sale in November 1992 and £1.23 million from a year ago.
The morning's highest price was achieved for John Fernley Senior's picture of a hunt at Belvoir Castle (lot 90, est. £80,000–120,000) which sold to a London dealer for £119,000.
A portrait of the great naturalist Joseph Banks by Thomas Phillips (lot 51, est. £60,000–80,000) was bought by a private Australian collector for £55,000.
At Christie's, Noel Annesley presided over a satisfactory auction with his customary skill, a failing voice enhancing, rather than diminishing, his dry humour which maintained the momentum of the sale.
Eighty-nine lots were sold for a total of £1.55 million, with a further sixty-three lots failing to find buyers.
Those figures compare with £1.49 million raised in the sale of British paintings in November 1992 and £1.12 million in the comparable sale of a year ago.
Allan Ramsay's engaging portrait of Sir Edward and Lady Turner (lot 21, unpublished est. £250,000–350,000), fresh from exhibition at the National Portrait Galleries of Edinburgh and London and sent to auction by the sitters' descendants, fetched the morning's top price, as expected, when it sold for £500,000, an auction record for his work, to an agent bidding at the back of the room on behalf of a private collector against keen competition from David Posnett of Leger, who was the purchaser of a conversation piece by Nathaniel Hone (lot 26, est. £40,000–60,000) for £36,000.
Rafael Valls acquired an appealing half-length portrait of Miss Juliana Copley by Lawrence (lot 29, est. £50,000–70,000) for £92,000, but doubts had been expressed about the condition of the second Lawrence in the sale, a grand full-length portrait of John Allnutt (lot 30, est. £300,000–500,000), and it failed to attract any bids.
Alan Hobart of Pyms Gallery purchased a fine historical composition by John Hamilton Mortimer (lot 36, est. £8,000–12,000) for £40,000, but there were no bids for Constable's unconvincing portrait group of the three Lambert Children (lot 34, est. £150,000–200,000) which had been purchased by a private collector at Sotheby's in 1985 for the excessive price of £220,000.
Six modest landscape and equestrian pictures consigned by bankrupted Midlands construction contractor, A. F. Budge, did not reach the prices which the collector had paid when he was active in the market several years ago.
From that group, George Chinnery's portrait of two unidentified boys with a pony (lot 66, est. £50,000–80,000) reached £35,000, having been purchased in the same rooms in 1989 for £60,000.
Dealers & Galleries
Paris
Right-wing election victory boosts Salon de Mars
Organisers to cut back number of dealers next year
Fifty-five thousand people, 10% more than in 1992, attended this year's fifth annual Salon de Mars arts fair held 30 March to 5 April in a huge white marquee near the Eiffel Tower.
Dealers generally found trading better than they had expected — or feared — and reported that French clients, notoriously sensitive to political events, had been reassured by the right wing's win in the General Election and the appointment of Prime Minister Edouard Balladur's new Government.
The number of stands, however, was seriously down: ninety-two as compared to 115 last year and 120 in 1991.
Organisers tried to make good for the last minute defection of many major galleries, including the leading Paris furniture specialists, with provincial French replacements, and the quality of goods was often far from top rate.
At a meeting on 4 April, just before the fair closed, organisers decided to reduce the number of exhibitors next year to around sixty and control quality more strictly.
The selection committee, which will close its list of participants before the summer holidays, wants to have half a dozen galleries from each major speciality and increase the number of stands showing primitive and pre-Columbian art which proved particularly successful this year.
Contemporary art was anything but the strong point of the Salon, with Paris dealers in particular showing a large number of deja vu works and recording few sales.
Enrico Navarra and Claude Bernard courageously put on one-man shows of Jean Michel Basquiat (priced at FFr500,000–1.4 million) and Genevieve Asse, respectively.
Zurcher of Paris showed very interesting and modestly priced recent work, inspired by Bosch, by French artist Michaele-Andrea Schatt.
Six British dealers fleeing the recession attended the Salon; the defection of native Parisians such as Bellier and Hopkins-Thomas left two of them, James Mackinnon and Stoppenbach & Delestre, of London, alone in selling late eighteenth-, nineteenth- and early twentieth-century painting.
The latter fielded five fine works by Daubigny and Mackinnon's choice of French art included small but affordable turn-of-the-century oils by Georges Desvallievres at FFr25,000, watercolours by Paul Hunt and a small oil of the witches in ‘Macbeth’ by Delacroix.
Art Deco was well represented by Paris specialists Galerie Vallois and Arc en Seine.
Primitive art, however, was the star of the fair.
Jean-Jacques Dutko of Paris showed some astonishingly well preserved eleventh- to sixteenth-century Djenne terracotta figures from the South of Mali.
Philippe Giumiot from Brussels presented, among other things, fourteenth to fifteenth-century bronze objects from the lower Niger and some outstanding wooden Sepik sculptures from New Guinea — one, a bird-like flute plug, was held to embody the voice of an ancestor.
The stand of Dulon of Paris was peopled with South Vietnamese ancestor statues from the Kom Tum region and Anthony Meyer, whose Left Bank Paris gallery is the only one in Europe specialising in Oceanic art, brought a wide range of rare and extremely beautiful objects.
Old Masters
Kate Ganz rediscovers a Piero di Cosimo
‘Lost’ Bernini stars at Colnaghi
For the fourth successive year, Colnaghi will be holding their annual Old Master drawings exhibition in New York.
Fifty-seven sheets will be on show from 5 to 22 May, before being shown at their Paris address (9 to 19 June), followed by London (30 June to 9 July).
The most important among the Italian drawings is a portrait in red and black chalk by Bernini, one of only fifteen such portrait studies by the artist to have survived.
The drawing was recently purchased by Colnaghi for £2,500 from Sotheby's where it was catalogued as ‘Roman School, seventeenth-century: portrait said to be by Bernini’ and estimated at £600–800.
The drawing was firmly attributed to the artist when it was last sold in Munich in 1938, but was believed lost in the last war.
Elsewhere in the exhibition, a group of Bolognese drawings includes a ‘Penitent St Jerome’ by Guercino, and studies by Simone Cantarini, Donato Creti and Gaetano Gandolfi.
Two drawings by Annibale Carracci include an oil sketch of St Peter, recently assigned to the artist.
Other Italian drawings include a ‘Head of an Eagle’ by Giulio Romano, once in the collection of Thomas Lawrence, and a large oil sketch by Castiglione.
Among later drawings in the exhibition are a black chalk study of a pulpit by Boldini and a large study by Sir Edward John Poynter for his ‘Perseus and Andromeda’ of 1872, painted for the Earl of Wharncliffe and now lost.
The drawing has been in the patron's family since that date and has never previously been exhibited or published.
Kate Ganz has chosen the theme of ‘Heads and Portraits: drawings from Piero di Cosimo to Jasper Johns’ for her exhibition of thirty-seven drawings to be held at Jason McCoy, New York (6 May to 12 June).
Outstanding is the black chalk and charcoal head by Piero, once in the collection of John Skippe and spotted by Ms Ganz in a private collection where it had lain unattributed for the past thirty-five years.
It is close to his painted portrait of ‘Francesco Giamberti’ now in the Rijksmuseum.
Other drawings in the exhibition include newly-discovered self-portraits by Reni, Courbet, Puvis de Chavannes and Joseph Ducreux.
A section of the show is devoted to portrait drawings by artists of members of their family or friends and includes drawings by Annibale Carracci of his father, G.B. Tiepolo of his son, Gustave Schinkel of his daughter and Lucian Freud of his daughter.
Highly ornamental drawings at Hazlitt
The finest private collection of drawings made for ornament and the decorative arts, including sheets by Giulio Romano, Maarten de Vos, Stefano della Bella and Andrea Pozzo, will be shown at Hazlitt, Gooden and Fox from 21 April to 14 May.
Lodewijk Houthakker was an Amsterdam dealer who assembled the collection over thirty years (into the 1980s), buying privately and at auction.
According to Lindsay Stainton of Hazlitt the collection is probably broader in subject matter than any museum holdings and has works of comparable significance to those in the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Met and the Cooper Hewitt.
All the drawings were published in a magisterial catalogue by Peter Fuhring in 1987 and have been with Hazlitt for the last eighteen months.
The present exhibition is the first of a series of selections with prices starting at around £2,000.
Among the most spectacular drawings in the present show are a study by Pozzo for the ceiling of S. Ignazio, Rome, and a design for a silver ewer depicting the signs of the zodiac by Etienne Delaune.
Cologne Kunstmesse: facts and figures
The twenty-fourth Westdeutsche Kunstmesse International ran 20–28 March.
Total attendance figures were 28,000 compared to 40,000 at last year's event.
This year 184 dealers took part compared to 176 in 1992 and a number of participants expressed cautious optimism.
Institutional purchased included the Westfalische Landesmuseum, Münster, which bought ‘Aeneas rescues Anchises from the burning Troy’ by Ludger tom Ring the Younger, while the Boymans van Beuningen bought a van de Velde child's chair for DM15,000.
Classic modern art fared  surprisingly well: the Bertram Gallery, Bremen, sold a Heckel watercolour entitled ‘Port’ for DM450,000 and a painting by Hofer called ‘Girl with bathtowel’for DM125,000.
A fair too far?
The Nippon International
The difficulties of first grasping the nature of the contemporary art market in Japan, and then breaking into it, were experienced by participants at this year's second annual Nippon International Contemporary Art Fair (NICAF) from 19 to 23 March.
Small in comparison to major fairs such as Basel, it is however the leading Asian fair and this year included ninety-one galleries of which fifty-nine were from outside Japan (nine less foreign galleries than in 1992).
Last year's event was weakened by the fact that it coincided with the now defunct Tokyo Art Expo.
No participants at Art Expo have signed up for NICAF this year and the organisers have weighted the event heavily towards cultural and educational activities.
Japanese art fairs are extremely expensive for Western dealers due to the costs of transportation and insurance from Europe and the US.
There are also problems of tapping into the contemporary market in Japan.
Much of this revolves around living Japanese artists whose predominantly figurative work is executed in the traditional Nihonga style.
Prices are extremely strong for these works and they are represented by a tightly-knit circle of dealers who belong to the Dealers Association and control the market.
Fine Art and Antiques Fair
Olympian heights
This year the biggest event to date
The peak of the London antique fair season is undoubtedly the month of June which sees the high gloss of Grosvenor House.
Not exactly the opposite end of the scale, but rather a complementary event designed to include a wider range of objects with an emphasis on attractive decorative objects at reasonable prices, the Fine Art and Antiques Fair at Olympia celebrates its twentieth year of existence with the largest event to date from 3 to 13 June.
Last year's highly successful event netted in the region of £600,000 for the fair's owners, the shipping line P&O.
Four hundred dealers will take part this year with prices from well under £100 into the hundred thousands, most items priced between £2,500 and £20,000.
Last year saw attendance figures of 32,000, the highest for any fair world-wide with the exception of Maastricht (35,000 in 1992).
Among this year's participants are: Richard Philp (also exhibiting at Grosvenor House for the first time this year) whose stand will include a portrait by Cornelis Johnson and a group of antiquities; book dealer Nicholas Merchant of Harrogate who will have books on all aspects of European decorative and fine arts; Brian Beet of Bond Street who has a rare Spanish-colonial gold snuff box made in Peru in the mid-eighteenth century; numismatists A.H.
Baldwin and Sons who have a large display of Coronation medals from James I to the present; Adam Gallery, Bath, who specialise in British Impressionist and Modern pictures and are showing works by E.A. Hornel, Terrick Williams and James Patterson among others; decorative, topographical and sporting print dealer Julian Armytage; and Julian Simon Fine Art Ltd of Pimlico who will be showing a large and detailed topographical view of Paris by Louis Charles Wuhrer, shown at the Paris Salon of 1891.
Among the higher priced items this year is a 1,150-piece silver service made by Hunt & Roskell in 1895, shown by Jane Pollock of Cumbria, price on request.
First contemporary art fair for Athens this month
After the Istanbul Biennale last autumn, it is the turn of the Greek art dealers to make a bid to put themselves on the international map.
From 22 to 30 May, the Hellenic Art Galleries Association is holding a contemporary art fair entitled Art Athens 1 ‘93 in the Athens Exhibition Centre, a 3000 square-metre space.
Eighteen Greek galleries are participating in this event which is being opened by the Minister of Culture, Ms Dora Bakoyanni, and is accompanied by a symposium entitled ‘The restructuring of the relationship between metropolis and periphery’, with guests invited from all over Europe.
The openly declared intention of this is to attract galleries from outside Greece at next year's fair.
Christie's purchases Spink
In what must clearly be seen as an empire-building move, with particular reference to Christie's ambitions in the Far East, Christie's International plc have acquired Spink and Son Ltd, the adjacent fine art dealers and auctioneers, for £7.1 million ($10.65 million).
In 1992 Spink's turnover was £21.7 million with a trading loss of £0.7 million.
Spink's main activities are as auctioneers and dealers in coins and medals and as dealers in Oriental works of art and British pictures.
Timothy Hirsch, currently managing director of Christie's Stamp department, will become joint managing director with Telford Shute.
The two companies' coins and medals departments will be merged and run by Spink.
Iacovleff a la Vieille Russie
New York dealers A la Vieille Russie and Didier Aaron Inc have teamed up with a rather unlikely presentation of the art of Alexandre Iacovleff (1887–1938).
Born in St Petersburg, Iacovleff was associated with Bakst and Diaghilev  before moving to Paris where such was his repute that Sargent described him as one of the greatest living draftsmen.
Among the most interesting episodes in his career was his employment as official artist to the Citroen Motor Company's expeditions across Africa and Asia in 1924–25 and 1931–32 which resulted in elaborate pastels of subjects such as Ondorodiau, Chief Mombuti, a Congo Pygmy chief.
Iacovleff's works were last exhibited at the Grand Central Art Galleries in New York in 1939.
The present show results from a shared enthusiasm for his work on the part of the father and uncle of Vieille Russie director Mark Schaffer, and Herve Aaron.
From 5 May to 4 June at A la Vieille Russie.
BADA: a new London fair and a symposium
A new fair takes place in London from 5 to 11 May, timed to coincide with the seventy-fifth anniversary of the British Antique Dealers' Association.
Over ninety dealers will exhibit a broad range of objects from English furniture to silver, porcelain, clocks and paintings.
Dealers taking part include: Ackermann and Johnson; Norman Adams; J.H. Bourdon-Smith; Christopher Clarke; William Drummond; Jonathan Horne; David Messum; Ronald A. Lee; and S.J. Phillips.
The fair will be held at the Duke of York's Headquarters, King's Road, London SW3.
As part of the anniversary celebrations, a symposium on the theme of Collecting and Collectors will be held at the Victoria and Albert Museum on 27 and 28 May, jointly organised by the BADA and the V&A.
The event will be divided into four sections, the first three comprising lectures by dealers Jonathan Horne, John Bly and Peter Nahum; by collectors Peter Hornsby, Lady Victoria Leatham and Vanessa Brett; by museum curators Phillipa Glanville (V&A Metalwork department), Sarah Medlam (V&A deputy curator Furniture and Woodwork department), Rose Kerr (V&A Far Eastern collection); and lastly a critical paper chaired by writer and art journalist Conal Gregory, followed by an open forum.
Tickets for the full session cost £60 and are available from Kathy McLauchlan, Box Office, V&A, South Kensington, London.
Around the galleries
New York
The art that got away
Gallery invitations at Exit Art: Outsider Art at St Etienne
This is a test.
Have you ever thrown away a Rauschenberg?
How about a Duchamp?
A Larry Rivers?
Ever toss a Joseph Cornell into the dustbin?
Put a David Smith out for the garbage truck to haul off?
No?
Think again.
If you are a constant reader of this column the chances are good that your mailbox brims daily with the glossy opportunities of galleries about town requesting your presence at this or that artist's show.
And we know the usual fate of such ephemera: consignment to the bottomless circular file below the desk.
But precisely in that act of consignment you may have committed an unconscious iconoclasm — for each of the above-mentioned artists at one time or another personally designed his own exhibition announcement.
This month at Exit Art/The First World, the recently expanded art conglomerate founded ten years ago by Jeanette Ingberman and Papo Colo, you can see the very same announcements by Rauschenberg, Duchamp, Rivers & Co that you may have thrown away — along with about 200 others — in ‘The Design Show’, a survey of gallery invitations from the years 1940–92.
Not every piece, of course, was artist-designed.
Some are by professionals — Elaine Lustig Cohen, Milton Glaser, Keith Goddard; others by gallery owners — Sidney Janis, Arne Glimcher; and all too many by unknowns.
Materials involved range widely — from common paper to plastic, magnets (Cynthia Dantzic at East Hampton Gallery, 1966), match books, mylar, cigarette paper boxes (Arman at ACE, L.A., 1970), plaster, foam, slides (Janet Fish at Kornblee, 1972), cardboard and grit (an earth work show at Dwan, 1982), stone, elastic, paper napkins (William Copley at Brooks Jackson, 1981), wood, fabric, cut-up money (Barton Lidice Benes at Feingarten, L.A., 1986) and chewing gum (Open Studios, P.S.I., 1990).
The show, on from 1 May to 12 June, was curated by Jean-Noel Herlin and the catalogue has an essay by Steven Heller.
In the realm of the print, however, it is safe to say that paper napkins and chewing gum wrappers occupy the lower depths (though let's not forget that A. Hyatt Mayor, the legendary Curator of Prints at the Metropolitan, acquired torn-off New Yorker covers for the collection as well as Tiepolo etchings).
Occupying more empyrean regions, it is equally safe to say, are the series of mezzotints produced in the early nineteenth century by a collaboration between John Constable and David Lucas, an ex-farmhand who re-invigorated the mezzotint technique — known since the seventeenth century — by replacing copper plates with steel.
He made a spectacular series of prints after Constable landscapes and Constable himself provided hands-on involvement in five of them.
Constable said of Lucas that he ‘showed me to the public without my faults’.
Long believed lost, the plates recently surfaced and were acquired by the Tate Gallery.
In view of their superb condition the museum decided to re-print a limited edition from them — and these, along with related Constable paintings and prints — are on view at Salander-O'Reilly from 6 May to 5 June.
There is a catalogue with an essay by the Tate's Leslie Parris and profits from the show go to the benefit of the museum.
Eleven of the steel plates themselves, incidentally, are also included in the show.
A century and a half after David Lucas worked with John Constable, Luis Remba, a master printer in Mexico City, invited Rufino Tamayo to make some prints.
Tamayo said he would, but only if Remba could invent a process that would allow them to have a relief-like dimensionality.
Remba went to work and created ‘Mixografia’, a method in which copper printing plates were formed from impressions of diverse materials and textures — charred wood, lead, cement, burlap, found objects.
And so from 1974 until his death two years ago Tamayo created a series of saturated-colour, high-relief prints in the new technique.
Associated American Artists has gathered together a representative group of this work in a show called ‘Rufino Tamayo — seventeen years at the Mixografia workshop’.
It's on until the 28th and the catalogue has an essay by Kathleen Slavin.
Tamayo's insistence on using new materials to construct his prints is very much part of a long tradition in modern art.
The history of twentieth-century art is, in fact, largely the story of how canvas, oils, clay and bronze eventually gave way to just about anything you can dream up.
Robert Rauschenberg (whose newest work, ‘Bicycloids’, ‘Urban Bourbons’ and ‘Eco-Echo’is at Knoedler from 8 May to 4 June) would, in his salad days, make ‘combines’out of whatever junk came to hand during an evening's walk in the streets.
The search goes on.
Fred Tomacelli, who was in the notorious ‘Fever’ show at Exit Art some months ago, makes abstract paintings using over-the-counter drugs as materials (at the new Jack Tilton space on Greene Street, all this month), while Peter Hopkins (at American Fine Arts from 15 May to 5 June) soaks fabrics in ‘effluents’(‘the outflow of a sewer’, according to Webster's) and glues them to canvas in an effort to re-think earth art.
Body de-construction — it's a hot art opportunity these days — is a natural for unusual materials.
Jennie R. Nichols, at Germans van Eck until 22 May, weaves human hair into huge mat-like wall hangings.
And Rona Pondick — who must have had an epiphany upon first seeing a photograph of Kurt Seligmann's 1937 three-legged Ultra Furniture stool — is showing hanging legs, dismembered breasts and fur balls with teeth in them at Jose Freire all this month (until 5 June).
Galerie St Etienne have grasped an area of art rising in popularity just now with ‘The ‘Outsider’ Question, non-academic art from 1900 to the present’.
In trying to deal with non-academic work on its own terms it is carrying on the debate opened in the recent exhibitions of ‘High and Low’ at MOMA and ‘Parallel Visions’at LACMA.
Works by European and American artists can be seen until 28 May.
Before she died tragically in 1977, Ree Morton was known for her elaborate decorative tableaux, often involving a kind of stiffened fabric called ‘celastic’.
But until 1974, when she began using it, she relied on unstretched canvas and wood.
Projects she devised — mostly for museums and alternative spaces between the years 1971–74 — can be seen from 1 May to 5 June at Brooke Alexander.
They include ‘Sister Perpetua's Lie’, made for Philadelphia's ICA in 1973.
Bronze — as traditional a material as you might imagine — continues, of course, to fascinate legions of artists.
Magdalena Abakanowicz shows work from the past five years at Marlborough, including a couple of ten-foot-high hand-like bronze trees; Joel Shapiro fills both up- and downtown Pace with recent bronzes incorporating cylindrical and spherical forms new to his repertoire (both shows until 5 June); Beverly Pepper peppers Emmerich with new bronzes as well as a survey, in photographs and maquettes, of recent public commissions; and Robert Shelton, who hears the surf pounding daily in his Malibu studio, calls his recent show at Louver ‘thingsgetwet’.
The materials are bronze and — what else?— water (both shows until 29 May).
Mark di Suvero, over the years, has often worked in bronze — but it is his steelworks for which he is best known.
Large new pieces in that medium — including one gigantic rigid construction at Wooster Street — make up his first show at Gagosian (until 12 June).
The catalogue consists of the artist's writings together with transcriptions of his unpublished remarks and poems which have on occasion inspired him — all compiled and deftly arranged by the di Suvero authority, Monroe Denton.
Elizabeth Catlett, now in her seventies, is a legendary figure in the long story of artistic relations between the United States and Mexico.
She continues to maintain studios in both countries and during their lifetimes was close to Diego Rivera and Frieda Kahlo.
A selection of work by her, in bronze and other materials, is at June Kelly from 8 May to 8 June while at Midtown-Payson, until 28 May, there is a large recent bronze work by Mark Frank — as well as a new monumental-size painting.
Abstract paintings on the boards this month include those of James Brooks, the first generation Abstract Expressionist who died last year aged eighty-five.
A selection of paintings and drawings from his estate — now represented by Joan Washburn — are at her gallery until the 28th.
The lure of the stripe, even after having been put through every possible variation and contortion, remains irresistible for many artists.
Sean Scully at McKee, from 10 to 29 May, continues his investigation of the subject while at De Nagy Bill Pangburn — a young newcomer from Texas — registers his painterly thoughts on the matter.
Daniel Buren, undoubtedly Monsieur Rayure if ever there was one, installs and intervenes at Weber until the 22nd.
Mary Heilman has lately been setting herself the task of uniting the eccentric spaces resulting from what appear to be the merging of two or more rectangular canvases.
In other words, how do the angled edges of a shaped field inform what goes on inside it?
Her newest meditations on the subject are at Hearn until 22 May.
Brice Marden's increasingly complex calligraphies, in paintings, drawings and etchings — are at Matthew Marks from 5 May to 26 June and recent abstract works by Paul Bloodgood are at Sandra Gering.
Anselm Kiefer, who never allows abstraction to completely take over his imagery, shows new pieces at Goodman.
(Both of the last two shows until the end of the month).
The work of the painters Bob Thompson and Jan Muller seems, somehow, fated to be linked.
Although the two never met, they both forged a figurative style out of the Abstract Expressionism raging all about them — not the most popular move to make at the time.
Both of them, tragically, died young.
Muller was born in Germany and came to America to study with his compatriot Hans Hofmann.
Thompson, from Kentucky, came to know Muller's work in Provincetown after Muller's death in 1958.
Both shared an interest in myth, allegory and symbol.
‘Two Painters: Two Decades’— at Vanderwouds-Tannenbaum all this month — sets out their similarities and differences.
Matthew Radford is an English painter who has been working in New York for the past ten years.
When he arrived he settled into a studio in the Wall Street area and immediately began taking its narrow streets and their bustling crowds of people as his subject matter.
Examples of his boldly-brushed observations are at Borgenicht until 15 May.
Faces appear in Y.Z. Kami's work at Toll (4 May to 12 June).
He tells the story of Joseph and his brothers by painting the faces of young men on top of photographically-enlarged pages from the bible.
Scenes from his native Iran are also used as backgrounds for further facial superimpositions.
Bobby Adams, a San Francisco photographer, specialises in combining parts of different faces into one single image: those, for instance, of parents and their children.
(Has he, too, noted in the informal engagement announcement photographs the New York Times has recently taken to running that the couples more often look like siblings than prospective husbands and wives?
And will he be encouraged in future to do pets and their owners?)
At Germans van Eck until 22 May.
Until the end of the month James Casebere is showing ‘The Prisons’ at Klein, photographs of abstract models he has built after studying actual prisons, such as Sing-Sing.
For the first time his work appears in large format and in Cibachrome colour.
At the other end of the spectrum, James Welling shows small, black and white prints at Jay Gorney (until 5 June) of ‘Calais Lace Factories’.
Mostly interior scenes, they were recently shown at the Galerie de l'Ancienne Poste in Calais.
Aviva Green — at Kenkelba until 22 May — is an artist true to her name: her canvases are filled to bursting with lush vegetation and flowers, all rendered in lively fireworks of colour.
The only things missing in her New Eden are apples.
And for those you need only apply to Berry-Hill where, beginning 6 May and lasting until 26 June, ‘The Apple of America’ gathers together bushels and bushels of nineteenth-century paintings on the subject of America's favourite fruit and New York City's informal symbol.
Works by Homer, Eastman Johnson, Martin Johnson Heade, John LaFarge and Childe Hassam are among the over seventy pieces on view.
There are loans from museums in Princeton, Cambridge, Mass., Brooklyn and Washington, D.C. and a fully-illustrated catalogue is available.
LONDON
Cork Street loses Jackson
D'Offay's new programme of younger art with Kiki Smith
In a sad indication of just how little local business is being conducted by galleries specialising in British art, William Jackson has left Cork Street and moved to the basement space previously occupied by Nigel Greenwood in New Burlington Street.
He continues to hold the lease of his former premises but intends to present exhibitions there only at irregular intervals and has trimmed the list of artists whom he is able to represent accordingly.
He will, for example, be showing David Mach at the Cork Street Open Weekend in November.
At other times, the gallery will be available for hire for short periods in competition with the Mall Galleries or Smith's Galleries in Covent Garden.
Jackson will, instead, concentrate upon the international art fairs as his preferred market vehicle and is one of the British dealers travelling to Chicago for this month's Art Chicago International.
In other galleries in and near Cork Street, Klaus Ottmann, editor of the Journal of Contemporary Art, has curated an exhibition entitled ‘Irony and Ecstacy’ for Salama-Caro (to 29 May).
It features paintings and drawings by twenty younger American artists who have rarely, if ever, exhibited in this country.
They include Jessica Diamond, Raymond Pettibone and Nicholas Rule.
It is Ottmann's thesis that these artists are making work which is more personal and less ostentatious than was the character of new painting a decade ago.
Sean Scully is one senior abstract painter whose work is both personal and ostentatious.
His exhibition at Waddington at the end of last year revealed him in commanding form.
Now Waddington previews Scully's illustrations to Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness (18 May-5 June).
It is an entirely suitable match since Scully used the title of the great author's adventure story for a celebrated picture which launched his expressive style a decade ago.
For this new publication, Scully has created eight monochromatic etchings which will be shown with related studies and four new paintings.
Thirty new paintings by William Tillyer are to be spread between Bernard Jacobson (5 May-19 June) and Adelson Gallery, New York (11 May-19 June).
They are described as ‘Fearful Symmetries’, a title suggested by William Blake's famous poem, The Tyger, and referring to Tillyer's practice of cutting a geometric shape into his landscape compositions of swirling brushwork.
At Browse and Darby, William Darby has collected thirty-five paintings from different periods of the career of Sir Robin Philipson, who died last year (to 29 May).
A tribute rather than a retrospective, it includes important loans from Scottish collections and will be shown at Roger Bilcliffe Fine Art in Edinburgh next month.
There are two exhibitions of Graham Sutherland's work as a printmaker.
At Marlborough (7 May-12 June), the selection concentrates upon the artist's work after 1955 and features several important portfolios including ‘A Bestiary’(1965–68) and ‘The Bees’(1976).
At the Fine Art Society (to 14 May), Gordon Cooke has organised an exhibition of Sutherland's etchings from 1923 to 1938, the formative period when he was influenced by Samuel Palmer and then began to forge his own style.
At Lefevre, there are new paintings by Sandra Fisher (13 May-4 June), wife of R.B. Kitaj and formerly represented by Odette Gilbert.
In Dering Street, Annely Juda is showing several large new wood sculptures by David Nash in an exhibition titled ‘At the Edge of the Forest’(to 19 June).
The exhibition's centrepiece is ‘Two Charred Menhirs’, tall charred oak timbers resembling a pair of monarchs.
The exhibition includes seven drawings which document recent projects completed by Nash in woods in Finland, France, Poland and other countries.
The projects are illustrated in the accompanying catalogue.
An important development takes place at Anthony d'Offay with the exhibition of new sculptures and drawings by Kiki Smith (11 May-18 June).
The promising young American sculptress, who was included in ‘Post-Human’ and ‘Strange Developments’, both curated by Jeffrey Deitch, has a room in the current Whitney Biennial in New York, and will be seen in the Aperto section of the Venice Biennale, is the first female artist to exhibit with the gallery, pace Gwen John, and her exhibition introduces a programme of younger art which the gallery will be presenting in the autumn under the supervision of staff member, Sadie Coles.
In Sloane Street, there is a second exhibition of sculpture by Tim Harrisson at the New Art Centre (19 May-12 June), following his impressive debut in 1991.
It comprises four new works, each created from a single block of Purbeck stone quarried in Dorset.
In Soho, Karsten Schubert is showing three new sculptures and ten drawings by Alison Wilding (to 22 May).
Widely expected to have won last year's Turner Prize, which was, in fact, awarded to Grenville Davey, Wilding is, nevertheless, enjoying a high profile, with a museum exhibition of ten sculptures from the last ten years having been organised by the Newlyn Art Gallery, where it was seen in March, and now transferred to IKON in Birmingham (to 5 June).
At the time of his exhibition at the Whitechapel Art Gallery (14 May-11 July), Frith Street Gallery is exhibiting new paintings and drawings by Tony Bevan (19 May-3 July).
‘The Art of Survival/Baby-Doll Saloon’ is the intriguing title of a collaboration between Angela Bulloch and Swiss artist, Sylvie Fleury, at Laure Genillard (to 15 May).
Both artists are included in the Aperto Section of the Venice Biennale.
Jill George is showing one large drawing and twenty other charcoal sheets by Hughie O'Donoghue (12 May-11 June) who was included in ‘Heaven and Hell’ which Alistair Hicks curated for Purdy Hicks in 1992.
Declan McGonagle is organising a touring exhibition of O'Donoghue's work which opens at Dublin's Museum of Modern Art in 1994.
In the further reaches of town, there are fourteen new abstract paintings by Gillian Ayres at Purdy Hicks (21 May-26 June), her first exhibition since the closure of her former dealer, Fischer, in 1991.
COLOGNE
What's on at the May Festival
Miller Nordenhake, the L.A./ Stockholm initiative, to close
What have Eduardo Chillida's abstract engravings and terracotta sculptures got in common with neck-rests of the Song and Ming dynasties?
What links the Chinese neck-rests, which astonishingly are made of natural stone, with the earth-coloured, or occasionally black and white, works of the Spanish artist?
Is it that the colours resonate off each other or are there more profound similarities between the exponents of two such diverse cultures?
These are questions raised by an exhibition at Desire Feuerle, Hansaring 77.
For the first time ever in Germany, Chillida, who normally works with museums in Spain, will be exhibiting pieces from his private collection.
The pillows will be on display side by side, their anvil-like forms having survived the centuries unscathed (until 26 June).
From 30 April to 12 June, Aurel Scheibler is presenting Serge Spitzer, born 1951 and resident in New York, at his gallery at Richartzstrasse 10.
Spitzer produces his drawings in a darkroom by applying a titanium mixture on to parchment, which gradually turns black in daylight.
Spitzer is obsessed with the visualisation of time — be it, as in ‘Hannover Relevator’(1990/91), by installing a vertical steel construction bearing an operational conveyor-belt in a bank building or, as in ‘Powder Tower’(a medieval defence construction used to store munitions), by concealing an industrial robot in the roof structure, which drops the most diverse objects, one after another, into waiting water containers.
In addition to the drawings showing at Scheibler, there is also a Spitzer retrospective, entitled ‘Index’, showing at the Kunstverein fur die Rheinlande und Westfalen in Dusseldorf from 7 May.
Scheibler is also exhibiting two major watercolours by Joe Zucker, born in Chicago in 1941 and resident in East Hampton: ‘Backdrops’, meaning sketches for his works, in which Zucker, a ‘painter without a brush’, uses woollen socks, gloves, or a ski-mask to apply globs of paint on wood, the calligraphic effect then overlaid with networks of cables.
Almost all Cologne galleries have put on new shows for the Premierentage Festival that began 30 April, including Gisela Capitain who is showing new works on paper by Richard Artschwager (until 29 May).
Over the same period, Isabella Kacprzak, at Maria-Hilf-Strasse 17, will be presenting three artists each showing a work from an earlier period and filling one room: ‘Trittbrett’(Running-board) by Jurgen Drescher, an 8-metre long sculpture which, in the truest sense of the word, makes it impossible to jump aboard the moving train; the abstract stereometric forms of rusted metal by Miroslaw Balka, and finally a folding screen with glass artefacts by Asta Groting.
The aesthetics of fractals is celebrated by Peter Telljohann, born 1935, at Carla Stutzer (Kamekestrasse 21) with ‘Millers’ a piece made of a number of small, changeable wooden sculptures, all the same colour.
‘Millers’ follows the building-block principle: the variable wooden structures and units, however combined, produce a closed whole: resulting from the fixed total number of elements.
A work by Simon Ungers investigates the interplay of mass and space at the Sophia Ungers gallery (Aachener Strasse 23, until 29 May).
Two walls hinge on the axes of the gallery's two columns, allowing variable spaces to be constructed.
Mathematics, minimalism, and an almost Roman sense of order are the hallmarks of Ungers' works — in 1992 at the Philomene Magers gallery he installed a horizontal and a vertical beam, made of wood and plexiglass respectively: the x and y axes of an imaginary co-ordinate system.
Ungers plays with conceptions of order that have seemed irrefutable since Galileo and Newton: he created a 1:1 replica of the ceiling of Sophia Ungers' gallery on the floor — neon strip lights, fixtures, and the capitals of the columns — everything was stood on its head.
When space is no longer the obscure object of scientific desire, its history becomes evident.
In the case of the Stommeln Synagogue, located in Pulheim-Stommeln in the extreme west of Cologne, an unusual exhibition venue has been created which has excited attention with its sensitive presentation of single works by Jannis Kounellis and Richard Serra.
The small village synagogue survived the Nazi pogroms of November 1938; during the war it was used as storage space by a farmer.
Since 1983 it has been restored by the Pulheim council, which now owns it, and is now showing a sculpture by Georg Baselitz.
In the coarse texture of a bright yellow wooden column, Baselitz, to whom the notion of ‘German-ness’ is attached more strongly than anyone else, unites such obsessions as paranoia, mutilation fantasies, but also lust.
The phallus-like object is on display on a podium in the centre of the wide religious space until 31 July.
Until June 10 the Paszti-Bott gallery, at An der Linde 27, will be showing ‘Aufstrich — Flaches Zeug’(Spread — Flat Stuff) by Suse Wiegand.
The artist alienates her objets trouvés through clever arrangements and marriages of incompatible elements — as in the Lautreamontesque encounter of a sewing machine and an umbrella on a dissecting table.
The exhibition of found objects is accompanied by drawings and texts.
Andrea Paszti and Hans-Werner Bott have discovered a large exhibition space in the tower of a disused factory in the Ehrenfeld district of Cologne, showing the work of twenty-three artists based on ‘Nature Studies’.
From 20 to 24 June
And finally, there is a loss to bemoan: The Miller Nordenhake gallery is closing its doors in Cologne.
The synergetic model of two gallery owners, Burnett Miller from Los Angeles and Claes Nordenhake from Stockholm, located in the centre of Cologne's Belgian quarter at Bismarckstrasse 60, will come to an end with their last joint presentation at the Contemporary Art Fair in Brussels.
Miller is currently contemplating an autumn debut with his own gallery in Cologne.
PARIS
Rachel Whiteread's empty space
Natural magic at Claire Burrus
Rachel Whiteread constructs concrete images out of the invisible space surrounding everyday objects.
From such things as mattresses, wash-basins and bath-tubs, she makes plaster casts and it is these that are presented to the public.
In this way, casting ceases to be just an intermediary stage in the act of creation but is itself the finished product of that act.
A few years ago, the young British sculptor covered the walls, furniture and furnishings of an entire room with a layer of plaster.
This was displayed as a ‘work of art’ to the visitor, who was invited to see and touch that area of space in which we live but are unable to make visible and tangible.
In Paris, Rachel Whiteread leaves her own particular mark on empty space at Claire Burrus until the end of June.
‘Natural Magic’ is the title of a series of photographs by Sarah Charlesworth on show at Rizzo until 15 May.
Running simultaneously at the same gallery is an exhibition of humorous scenes captured for posterity by the camera of American artist Laurie Simmons.
She comments on the role of women in contemporary American society, using a variety of technical tricks to reveal the ‘feminine’ nature of objects that crop up regularly in day-to-day life.
Franz Graf is at Renos Xippas until 1 June, while Jean-Marc Bustamante, Rosemarie Trockel and James Welling continue at Samia Saouma until 3 June.
Crumpled sheets of tin are featured this month by Liliane and Michel Durand-Dessert.
An exhibition of Bernard Lavier's latest sculptures can be seen until the middle of June.
Lavier continues to reflect on paradoxes, with such examples as the superimposition of a safe on a refrigerator, both objects having been covered with paint of precisely the same colour as the original.
Sculpture is also on show at Thaddaeus Ropac with the most recent works of Anish Kapoor sharing the gallery with a series of works by Antony Gormley.
In the sea off the coast of  Brittany , Marcel Dinahet immersed his clay, sea-shell and white cement sculptures to a depth of six or seven metres.
He then filmed and photographed them as they were enveloped by seaweed and marine concretions.
The video tape of the submersion can be seen at Sous Sol until mid-May, together with the latest works from German artist Jakob Gautel, Tiina Ketara from Finland, and the Frenchman Christophe Vigoureux.
At Barbier-Baltz, Enrico Baj and Regis Deparis are exhibiting paintings that might be described as being created by four hands, were it not for the chronological and geographical distance between the execution of the two parts of the picture.
One on either side of the Alps, each artist works independently.
(Deparis first defines a space, then, in the second phase, Baj fills it in).
The exhibition lasts until 12 June.
Meanwhile, Maurizio Nannucci is at Gilbert Brownstone, the composer Pascal Dusapin at Froment & Putman, and Roman Signer at Anne de Villepoix until 29 May.
Bottcher Strawalde is an artist who lived for several decades in the shadow of the Berlin Wall (the film was discovered or rediscovered by Parisians a month ago at the Jeu de Paume).
He has brought his largest paintings to Monde de l'Art, along with some works specially painted for this particular gallery.
The exhibition continues until 22 May, while his drawings and pastels can be seen at the Goethe Institute's Galerie Conde until 14 May.
Udo Koch's one-man show is at Gilles Peyroulet until 29 May, while Delsol & Innocenzi present Pietro Fortuna's latest paintings until 12 June.
Meanwhile, Lelong's tribute to Miró continues until the summer break.
The exhibition comprises twenty-seven works on paper executed by the Catalan artist in the 1930s and never before shown in France.
The most recent intimist paintings of Piero Pizzi Cannella are on show at Di Meo Brothers, from 14 May until 10 July, and at Vidal-Saint Phalle from 6 May until 26 June.
The latest paintings by Jean-Michel Alberola, still preoccupied with myth and religion, can be seen at Daniel Templon throughout the month.
At the same time, at the Pompidou Centre, there is a fine exhibition of his drawings on the subject of the Crucifixion.
Philippe Favier's ‘L'Archipel des Pacotilles’ continues at Yvon Lambert until 26 May, while Ed Paschke continues at Darthea Speyer until the gallery closes for the summer.
Peter Eiseman, who with Frank Gehry represented the United States at the last Venice Biennale, brings his latest reflections on symbolism and allusion in contemporary architecture to Sadock & Uzzan, where his drawings and sculptures can be seen until the beginning of June.
Thomas Shannon is featured at the Galerie des Archives from 5 May until 12 June, with ‘Sun Rotunda’ and ‘Le Grand Joint’, mobile sculptures based on the principles of equilibrium and levitation.
The American artist has also suspended 202 spheres from the ceiling of the gallery.
They are painted on their internal circumferences with all the colours of the spectrum, and are arranged like the atoms in a crystal.
The magnetised spheres move in such a way that the colours naturally align themselves with the magnetic field of the Earth, following the points of the compass.
According to the angle from which they are viewed, the spheres offer the visitor different chromatic environments.
Finally, Marie-Helene Montenay presents a series of paintings by Eva Hesse from the period 1960–64.
The exhibition runs from 7 to 29 May and coincides with the retrospective of Hesse's sculptures at the Jeu de Paume.
Art Market
Picture popping
New York, Sotheby's, 3 May.
Sotheby's will sell ten Pop works by Warhol from the collection of his agent and manager Frederick Hughes in this auction of contemporary art.
Three paintings deal with ready-made images all from 1961: ‘Old telephone’(est. $600,000–800,000; £400,000–533,000), ‘Schlitz-cans’(est. $500,000–700,000; £333,000–466,000) and ‘A boy for Meg’(est. $600,000,800,000; £400,000–533,000).
Also included are ‘Double Elvis’(est. $700,000–900,000; £466,000–600,000) and ‘Gold Marilyn’(est. $450,000–650,000; £300,000–433,000).
Other important pictures by various artists include an untitled oil by Clyfford Still from 1953 (est. $1–1.5 million; £666,000–1,000,000) and ‘Black stripe’ of 1957 by Mark Rothko (est. $800,000–1,000,000; 533,000–666,000).
Drip, drip
New York, Christie's, 4 May.
An untitled drip painting by Jackson Pollock which has not been on the market since 1949 is estimated at $1–1.5 million (£666,000–1,000,000) and will be the highlight of this sale of contemporary art.
Bacon's ‘Study for a portrait on a revolving chair’ dated 1967 should fetch $1–1.8 million (£666,000–1,200,000).
One of the most important works by Motherwell to appear since his death, ‘Elegy to the Spanish Republic’ is estimated at $600,000–800,000 (£400,000–533,000).
Chippendale?
London, Sotheby's, 7 May.
A lacquer-mounted serpentine commode chest dated around 1775 and attributed to Thomas Chippendale will provide the focus of this sale of English furniture.
The top is decorated with a mountainous landscape and the panelled doors in Chinoiserie designs.
The incorporation of Chinese lacquer pieces into the best English craftsmanship of the period clearly shows the continued interest in the Orient during these decades (est. £150,000–200,000; $225,000–300,000).
A set of fourteen late George II mahogany chairs for Hinton House may realise £250,000–300,000 ($375,000–450,000).
Major Moroccan Matisse
New York, Sotheby's, 11–12 May.
Sotheby's open the Impressionist season with Matisse's ‘Fatma, la mulatresse’ painted in 1912 and one of the few pictures of this period likely to come on the market.
Sotheby's confidently expect bids of over $10 million (£6.6 million).
A similar price is expected for Cezanne's ‘Still life with apples’ from the early 1890s which was last sold at auction at the Goldschmidt sale of 1958 and has been consigned for sale by a European collector.
Other pricey paintings include ‘Femme dans un jardin’ by Renoir (est. $2.5–3.5 million; £1.66–2.33 million), Monet's ‘La debacle’, one of a series of eighteen pictures of the Seine in winter (est. $2–3 million; $1.3–2 million) and Magritte's familiar image of a bowler-hatted man, ‘Le maitre d'ecole’(est. $1.5–2 million; £1–1.3 million).
Monet without money
New York, Christie's, 12–13 May.
‘La jetée du Havre’ with its vivid representation of nature's moods was one of the fruits of Monet's stay in 1868 at his aunt's house in Normandy where he sought refuge from his financial woes.
This impressive painting will be offered in the first part of the Impressionist and modern painting sale with a cryptic estimate of ‘several million dollars’.
With these paintings he established his lifetime habit of starting a work in the open and finishing it in his studio.
Two Degas pastels will be offered: ‘Danseuses russes’ from a series executed around 1895 (est. $2.5–3.5 million; £1.6–2.3 million) and ‘Deux danseuses aux foyer’from around 1901, when the artist was losing his sight (est. $1.8–2.2 million; £1.2–1.46 million).
Pissarro's ‘Le boulevard Montmartre; temps de pluie, après-midi’ of 1897 reveals a return to his classic Impressionist brushstroke (est. $2–3 million; £1.33–2 million).
His ‘Bassin de Tuileries, après-midi, soleil’ of 1900 should realise $900,000–1.2 million (£600,000–800,000).
Other representative paintings on offer include Renoir's ‘Leontine lisant’ of 1909 (est. $2.8–3.2 million; £1,860,000–2,130,000), Braque's ‘Le canal Saint-Martin, Paris’, 1906 from the collection of Alain Delon (est. $900,000–1.2 million; £600,000–800,000) and Magritte's ‘La folie des grandeurs’, sold by order of the Menil Foundation (est. $900,000–1.2 million; £600,000–800,000).
American size America
New York, Christie's, 17–18 May.
The one unmissable lot in this sale of Latin American art will be Rufino Tamayo's ‘America’, both for being a landmark in his art and in the history of Latin American painting and quite simply for its size: at 13.9 x 4 metres (45′8″ x 13′3″), it is one of the largest movable oils on canvas in the world.
It was conceived to grace the largest lobby in the United States (in a Houston bank) and has remained there ever since.
‘America’ represents a utopian vision of the Americas and dates from Tamayo's most creative period (est. $2–3 million; £1.33–2 million).
In 1933 Frida Kahlo visited New York with her husband Diego Rivera.
‘My dress hangs here’ is her only picture of the period and expresses with sharp irony her sense of outrage at her husband's glorification of American values and incidentally reveals as much about her own sense of insecurity (est. $1–1.2 million; £666,000–800,000).
Also on offer are Tamayo's ‘Women with red mask’ of 1940 (est. $800,000–1,200,000; £533,000–800,000), eleven works by Botero with estimates between $250,000 and $650,000 (£166,000–433,000) and Rivera's ‘Madre y nina’of 1939.
This last work has never been published or publicly exhibited.
Latin American art
New York, Sotheby's, 18–19 May.
Fernando Botero's ‘Quatre Femmes’ of 1987 should be the most expensive work sold with an estimate of $800,000–1,000,000 (£533,000–666,000) followed by Rufina Tamayo's ‘Figura’from 1957 (est. $500,000–600,000; £333,000–400,000).
Ancestor for sale
New York, Christie's, 18 May.
This inaugural sale of tribal art at Christie's in New York will feature a Fang head from the property of the William B. Loeb Trust (est. $250,000–350,000; £166,000–233,000) and a rare Hemba ancestor figure estimated at $200,000–300,000 (£133,000–200,000).
A fine Benin brass warrior chief plaque from the sixteenth to seventeenth century should realise $120,000–140,000 (£80,000–93,300).
Landskips and vedute
New York, Christie's, 19 May.
Christie's sale of Old Master paintings offers a variety of 18th-century vedute and earlier Dutch landscapes.
The finest are two views of Rome along the Tiber by Bellotto dating from the 1740s (est. $1–1.5 million each; £666,000–1,000,000), a river landscape by Francesco Guardi (est. $150,000–200,000; £100,000–133,000) and a view of a fortified manor house on a river by Jan van Goyen (est. $40,000–60,000; £26,600–40,000).
A representation of ‘Adam and Eve’ by Wtewael should fetch $700,000–900,000 (£466,000–600,000) and a still-life of fruit in a wicker basket set in a stone niche by Juan van der Hamen y Leon $250,000–350,000 (£166,000–233,000).
There will also be works by Sir Joshua Reynolds, John Hoppner, Roelandt Savery and Pieter Brueghel the Younger.
Flowers in a basket
New York, Sotheby's, 20 May.
Highlights in this auction of Old Masters include Juan de Arellano's ‘Still life of various flowers in a basket’(est. $800,000–1,200,000; £533,000–800,000), a Giovanni di Paolo triptych with the ‘Madonna and Child’(est. $600,000–800,000; £400,000–533,000) and a Boucher oil, ‘Peasant girl with a cupid’(est. $500,000–700,000; £333,000–466,000).
Uncle Ned
New York, Christie's, 26 May.
‘Uncle Ned at home’ of 1875 and ‘The noon recess’, both by Winslow Homer, will be offered in a sale of American paintings, drawings and sculpture (est. $600,000–800,000; £400,000–533,000 and $700,000–900,000; £466,000–600,000 respectively).
‘The flag outside her window’ by Frederick Childe Hassam, dated 1928, should fetch $250,000–350,000 (£166,000–233,000).
Bath time
New York, Sotheby's, 26 May.
The outstanding picture in this sale of 19th-century European paintings and sculpture is Alma-Tadema's ‘The baths of Caracalla’.
This picture was the artist's personal favourite and is estimated at around $1 million (£666,000).
Gerome's ‘Reception of the Duc de Conde at Versailles’ dated 1878, originally from the Vanderbilt collection is estimated at $500,000–700,000 (£333,000–466,000).
Tissot's ‘Jeune fille sur un banc’ will also be offered ($1–1.5 million; £666,000–1,000,000) as will as ‘In the Louvre (l'esthétique)’from his ‘Etrangère’series (est. $150,000–200,000; £100,000–133,000) and ‘L'escalier’of 1869 (est. $500,000–700,000; £333,000–466,000).