

The Challenge of the Enlightenment
At the peak of the Middle Ages, around the year 1200, Christianity was more or less solidly established as the religion of Europe.
Europe itself made up the greater part of what Europeans regarded as the known world.
It was bounded and threatened to south and east by the forces of Islam, which were eventually to submerge the ancient eastern Christian Empire with its capital in Constantinople.
In western Europe, however, was the world of Christendom, undergirded and sustained, in spite of all internal conflicts, by the Christian faith.
All the emerging nations (at least nominally) acknowledged the spiritual authority of the Roman pope; the church was seen as the divinely instituted ark of salvation, riding the storms of the world and history, and mediating to men both the infallible truth of God and the sacramental means of grace as guide and nourishment to their souls upon the pilgrimage to the life beyond; and theology was regarded — and not only by theologians — as ‘the queen of the sciences’, the supreme intellectual discipline.
Church and society alike were hierarchically ordered.
On the one hand were pope, cardinals, bishops and abbots, priests and laity; on the other emperor, kings, princes, nobility and common folk.
These hierarchies supplied the (God-given) structure of society, the framework within which each individual found his appointed place and travelled on his path towards heaven (or hell).
The entire interwoven pattern constituted an essentially static unity, whose focus was found in the spiritual authority of Rome.
This magnificent vision of church and society united as an organic whole was, however, doomed to disintegrate.
With the expansion of trade and the growth of powerful merchant classes, economic forces were unleashed which eroded the older social structure and undermined the established order and authorities.
The world beyond Europe began to be opened up with voyages to India, China and America, and this transformed men's horizons in a way fully as dramatic as space travel in our own time.
The world was found to be vaster, more varied, and full of previously undreamt-of possibilities.
At the same time, new attitudes were formed both to the past and to the natural world.
In the Renaissance, which began in Italy in the fifteenth century, ancient art and literature began to be rediscovered with a freshness which inspired a new confidence in man's capacity to enquire into and understand the past as it had really been, and a desire to emulate its achievements for himself.
The scientific approach to the world of nature developed as a way of looking to see what was actually there and interpreting it in the light of its own evidence instead of simply accepting received, traditional wisdom.
The net result of all this was a new, critical attitude to traditional authority, and a fresh impulse towards creative exploration and the opening of new horizons, along with a huge shift of interest towards the investigation and exploitation of this present world.
While the Protestant Reformation of the sixteenth century cannot be wholly explained simply in terms of this general cultural and social upheaval, it was most certainly part of it.
It was not only other ancient literature that was opened up for new understanding by the Renaissance: the Bible too began to be read with new eyes, eyes no longer focused simply by the authoritative teaching of the church.
These eyes began to discern in the Bible distinctive themes and emphases which did not harmonise with the official theology.
Thus the unique authority of the Bible as the inspired Word of God came to be stressed with a quite new sharpness over against the established teaching.
In the Bible the voice of God was to be heard speaking with its own authentic power and force: there and there alone was divine truth authentically and immediately available.
At the same time there was a good deal of variation in the ways in which the Bible was understood and interpreted by different groups of reformers, and this led to a further fragmentation of the previously unified world of  Christendom.
So, for example, in the England of the seventeenth century, Anglicans, Puritans, Presbyterians and others all made the same appeal to the Bible; but their different convictions about what the Bible was chiefly saying often seemed more prominent than their shared allegiance to it.
As the centuries passed, the seeds already sown produced much fruit, not all of it necessarily palatable to the now multifarious churches or to theology.
Politically, the road ran via numerous conflicts — the Hundred Years' War, the English Civil War, the French Revolution and the American War of Independence, for example— to the emergence of modern democracy, and through more recent upheavals to the communist alternative.
Economically, the rise of capitalism, the industrial revolution, the appearance of the social classes we know today, and the phenomenon of urbanisation have transformed the pattern of human life almost beyond recognition, bringing about the consumer society with its practical and all-pervasive materialism which so dominates life in the affluent west.
At the same time, the astonishing flowering of science and technology has made it possible to organise and exploit the world and its natural resources on a scale which no earlier civilisation could have imagined; it has also bred a widely held belief, verging on the mythical or superstitious, that ‘science is the solution to all our problems’.
We have been carried very far indeed away from the medieval vision of society, of Christendom, of the place of the church and of theology as the crown of genuine knowledge.
In effect, for all practical purposes, modern western man assumes that the human race is thrown upon its own resources to cope with life and discover what meaning, if any, it may have.
Even if he is also religious — as he often enough still is — his religion is most commonly seen as a private, individual affair, divorced to a greater or lesser degree from the everyday concerns of the public world.
The broad movement of society and culture has tended to squeeze religion out of the centre of human concern.
While that movement has nowhere been wholly completed and has gone less far in some countries than in others, there is no western nation where its effects cannot be seen.
These developments face the churches and theology with a whole series of difficult and delicate questions.
What place should religion or theology claim in this kind of society?
Should theology accept the valuation which its contemporary world appears to  place upon Christianity, or should it reject it?
What might theology for its part have to say about the direction that world seems to be taking?
What responsibility does it have to try to influence the human outlook?
How does theology stand vis-à-vis other disciplines, such as the natural sciences, which have come to be so important and successful with the passing centuries?
These and similar questions have been forced on to the theological agenda by the way in which the modern western world has grown.
They help to mark out the field within which the theologian has to work and to discover what his own role and contribution should be.
In short, theology is no longer simply taken for granted or even accepted by society at large .
This is a situation of which modern theologians have been well aware — often too much so for the comfort of many in the churches — and with which they have tried in various ways to deal.
Within that wider development, the credibility of Christian faith itself first came to be seriously challenged in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries — in what is commonly called the Age of Reason or the Enlightenment .
The chief mark of that period was a new confidence in the power of reason, as opposed to acceptance of authority, to discover truth: we find things out, not simply by believing what someone else tells us, but by considering the evidence, reflecting upon it, and accepting what can ‘prove itself at the bar of reason’.
The challenge posed by this new outlook can be illustrated from three great areas of conflict between Enlightenment rationalism and the orthodox belief of the same period — the authority of the Bible; the possibility of miracles; the idea of ‘natural religion’.
To these must be added two further issues which became more central towards the end of the eighteenth century: the problem of knowledge and of the limits of reason, and the question of history.
These emerged as the movement represented by the Enlightenment itself became more self-critical and less brashly confident in its own rationalism; but that does not make them any the less significant or challenging for theology.
If anything, they have subsequently been more important and have played a more central role in theological debate than the earlier orthodox/rationalist debating points.
But we must first say something about the earlier arguments.
The Authority of the Bible
We have already noticed the new weight that the Reformation came to place upon the Bible.
This led on in later generations to a widespread belief among orthodox Christians that the Bible should be looked upon as a compendium of truths directly revealed by God, inerrant and totally consistent in all its parts, and thus the supremely authoritative source of information not only on points of doctrine but on any other matters on which it might touch.
With the rise of rationalism in the Enlightenment period, this conviction came to be questioned on two scores.
First, an increasing gap opened up between the new scientific understanding of the universe as developed by men like Copernicus, Galileo and Newton, and the picture which orthodoxy generally believed it could find in the Bible, especially in the accounts of creation in the first two chapters of Genesis.
Second, the developing study of the biblical documents themselves began to undermine the rather monolithic orthodox understanding of it.
Investigation of the manuscripts and of the history of the transmission of the text of the Bible (what was later to be called ‘lower criticism’) revealed a mass of variant readings, often with quite different senses.
Where in all this was the clear and straightforward infallible message?
The orthodox answer was on the surface clear and precise enough, ‘in the original text’— but this was little help if the original text could not with certainty be recovered.
More serious still were the questions raised by the emergence of what would later be termed ‘higher criticism’.
This studied the texts by the techniques of literary and historical analysis, attempted to separate out historical material from legend or poetry, and even began to raise sensitive problems of authorship — as, for instance, whether all the first five books of the Old Testament were in fact written by Moses.
Once it was accepted that this kind of question could be raised, the way was open to the conclusion that the Bible should simply be treated as a collection of ancient religious literature with no special claims to be heard or accepted except where it happened to express some general religious ‘principle’ that could be recognised as universally valid — the kernel within the husk.
The fundamental issue which underlay this conflict between rationalism and orthodoxy was not merely the factual question  whether or not‘what the Bible says is true’.
At bottom, the difficulty was religious and psychological.
Could you at the same time treat the biblical texts as objects of critical scientific study and as the medium of a message from God?
That question itself was not peculiar to the Age of Reason.
It had been faced and dealt with in the early centuries of the church and later along the lines that the inspiration of the Bible did not mean that God simply dictated the words, or that the authors ceased to be human and fallible.
That had also been the view of the great Reformers, such as John Calvin.
But Protestant orthodoxy in the generations after the Reformation had inclined to treat the Bible in a rather hardened and absolute fashion, and to search in it for a wider range of information than the Reformers were looking for.
On the other hand, the broad unity and homogeneity of the Bible itself had not been really seriously challenged in earlier centuries, whereas it could now appear to be falling apart under the impact of the new critical approaches of the eighteenth century.
It is this that explains the sharp opposition which developed between the two contrasting attitudes, and the antithesis that came to be sharply drawn between ‘reason’ and ‘authority’.
The echoes of that conflict reverberate around us still, though as we shall see in later chapters, the issues need not be posed in quite the fashion of the Age of Reason.
Miracles
As the authority of the Bible began to be questioned, its defenders commonly appealed to the miracles recorded in it as guarantees of the truth of its message.
These events, they argued, demonstrated that the hand of God himself was at work in the history with which the Bible deals, and so served to authenticate the Bible's own divine origins.
This, however, rapidly proved a double-edged weapon.
The same critical and questioning attitude which was forming the new approach to the Bible was at the same time stimulating scientific study and experiment and discovering the regularities in the natural order — what were and commonly still are called ‘the laws of nature’.
This scientific attitude did not by any means always lead to a denial of the reality of God; but it did not encourage the anticipation that God would actually intervene in the ordinary course of events; nor, when faced with a strange or unexpected occurrence, would it immediately turn  to God as the only possible explanation.
Rather it would presume that there must be some natural cause which was as yet unknown.
This was the stance adopted in deism , a rationalist movement in theology which became prominent in England in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
Deists believed in the existence of God, and held that he was the necessary ‘First Cause’ and ‘Supreme Architect’of the universe.
But they also held that the universe itself was rather like a vast machine, which, once started off, ran according to its own inbuilt laws and patterns.
God was therefore seen as the ultimate explanation of everything, but not as the particular, immediate cause of specific, individual occurrences.
A not dissimilar attitude was later expressed with classic simplicity by the great French astronomer Laplace.
When Napoleon asked him where God came into his theory of the cosmos, he replied shortly, ‘I have no need of that hypothesis.’
From this point of view, which could make no place for miracles understood as cases of divine, supernatural interference with the laws of nature, reports of alleged miracles could only be regarded as evidence of credulity and ignorance on the part of those who originated and passed on the stories.
The Bible's miracles, so far from supporting its claim to supernatural authority, served rather to undermine its credibility.
So the same kind of stark opposition grew up between orthodoxy and rationalism on the matter of miracles as on the authority of the Bible; and the issues raised then have surfaced again in a number of forms since.
Before we move on, it is worth noticing that just as the debate about the Bible rested to a large extent on a rather dubious notion of what kind of authority was in question, so too the argument about miracles was one in which both sides generally shared an equally questionable concept.
Rationalist and orthodox alike defined a miracle as a supernatural interference with the natural order of things: what they disagreed about was whether such interferences actually happened.
Both had in the background the idea that the universe is a machine which is normally wholly determined by causal laws, and that a miracle is a temporary suspension of these laws.
While that conception of the matter was a natural one in the world of thought of the Enlightenment period, in which the emerging sciences were dominated by the model of a machine-like world, it is open to serious scientific and theological challenge.
The new frontiers opened up by the development of the sciences  through the nineteenth and twentieth centuries have taken them far beyond the model of the machine and revealed a far greater degree of randomness and unpredictability in the fundamental structure of the universe.
From a theological point of view on the other hand, it is more than debatable whether the notion of ‘the suspension of natural law’ is an adequate paraphrase of ‘miracle’.
The very terms in which the question was posed need to be critically reconsidered.
Natural Religion
The new outlook we have been outlining as coming to stand over against Christian orthodoxy was by no means necessarily irreligious or anti-religious.
It could hold, as deism did, to belief in God; it could believe that religion is a ‘natural’ and proper element in human life, and that spiritual and moral truths are preserved in the Bible and in Christian teaching.
This led some to speak of a ‘natural religion’ implanted in the human heart and necessary to human well-being.
But this natural religion need not be grounded specifically upon the authority of the Bible or the Christian tradition, though it might allow these a place.
Ultimately, it would attempt to find its basis elsewhere — in rational proofs of the reality of God, in the (assumed) self-evident truth of ethical and religious principles, in the spontaneity with which religion in diverse forms arises in human communities.
This kind of desire for a natural — and ‘reasonable’— religion developed strongly in deism, and led to the same kind of conflict with orthodoxy as with the Bible and miracles.
On the one side the appeal was to reason; on the other, to faith and special divine revelation.
The titles of some of the books which were published in the golden age of deism well illustrate the terms of the debate: Locke's The Reasonableness of Christianity (1695); Toland's Christianity not Mysterious (1696); Collins' The Grounds and Reasons of the Christian Religion (1724); and, on the other side, Butler's The Analogy of Religion, Natural and Revealed (1736) and Dodwell's Christianity not Founded upon Argument (1742).
This same period also brought, especially in England, much criticism of traditional Christian creeds and doctrines, notably that of the divinity of Jesus Christ, and the emergence of Unitarianism — a form of Christian belief which rejected Christ's divinity and the doctrine of the Trinity, holding simply  (as its name indicates) to the oneness of God the Father as the only God.
With this the criticism of traditional orthodox formulations, which had long been regarded as absolutely central and essential to Christian belief, came on the stage in a new way and ushered in a debate which has continued up to the present.
A particularly famous instance of the search for a natural religion is to be seen in the early years of the French Revolution.
In 1794 Robespierre made his short-lived attempt to replace Christianity, not with atheism, nor yet with the adoration of Reason, but with ‘the worship of the Supreme Being’, worked out along lines earlier suggested by Jean-  Jacques Rousseau (1712–78).
In The Social Contract (1762) Rousseau had advocated such a religion, to be maintained by the state, and to include five articles of faith: the existence of a divinity who is omnipotent, intelligent and benevolent, and who foresees and provides; the future life; the happiness of the good; the punishment of the wicked; and the sanctity of the ‘social contract’(on which society itself is based) and of the law.
This programme for a natural religion has its own importance as making explicit something which is often enough assumed, but has been heavily criticised in much modern theology — the idea that religion functions chiefly to safeguard the good ordering of society.
Apart from that, it also shows how wide a gulf had opened up between this sort of natural religion and classical Christianity.
The earlier deists were not so sharply aware of this gulf, and often believed themselves to be defending Christian faith by offering it a solid foundation.
With Rousseau and Robespierre it is clear that what is being offered is not a support for Christian belief, but a rival.
The search for this sort of natural religion in fact threatened Christianity in two related ways.
First, by drawing a distinction between what it regarded as the natural (and therefore genuine) core of religion and the complex of authorities, traditions, institutions and doctrines which went to make up the forms of Christianity, it implied that much, indeed very much of the latter was redundant and could safely be jettisoned.
In the process everything distinctively Christian was eliminated: the baby was thrown out with the bath water.
Second, and by the same token, the way was opened to setting Christianity on exactly the same footing as any other religion.
All might preserve some religious truth and meaning, but none could be allowed to make any absolute claims, though each would be acceptable to the extent — but only to the extent — that it conformed or could be made to conform to the standard of natural religion, conceived of as a set of beliefs or principles which could stand very well on their own feet.
The appeal of such a position is of course very considerable, and seems no less strong today than two centuries ago.
Those, and there are many, who believe that there is certainly value and truth in Christian belief, but are unhappy about what they feel to be an arrogant and intolerant insistence on the uniqueness of Jesus Christ, still commonly seek to follow the trail blazed by Rousseau.
But it may be observed that the general movement of culture offers little support to anyone who would pin his hopes for the future of man as a spiritual being on this kind of natural religion.
Robespierre's experiment was, scarcely surprisingly, a dismal failure; and while the delicious dream of a universal, natural and reasonable religion may have an understandable attraction for those who are influenced by but not wholly committed to Christian (or some other) belief, it does not appear capable of offering any very stable resting-place, or any adequate defence against the more radical challenges to religion as such which have been raised from without and within Christian theology in modern times.
At the same time, the conflict between reason and natural religion on the one hand, and faith and authoritative revelation on the other, opened up an area in which theology had to listen to both sides, to learn from both, and to attempt to find its own way without necessarily falling into either of the sharply polarised alternatives.
The desire for natural religion reflected an awareness that religious faith has to do with the inner life of human beings, that it connects up with profound needs, drives and searchings at the core of our existence.
Against an orthodoxy which at that tune was inclined to reduce faith to the mere acceptance of ‘the truths’ in the Bible or in the teaching of the church — an acceptance which could leave one's inmost self unaffected, and could even involve the toleration in blind obedience of contradictions and incoherences in the official system of belief — the voice pressing the claims of reason and the inner self needed to be heard.
It is significant that this same era saw the rise to prominence and widespread influence of several movements within the churches which strove to integrate warm personal commitment with the  reaffirmation of the broad pattern of orthodox belief.
Pietism and the Moravian movement on the Continent and the Evangelical Revival and Methodism in Britain and America can all be seen as attempting to hold together these two sides.
And to a large extent the subsequent history of theology has been determined by the struggle to find the balance between them and to chart a course which will take proper cognisance both of the demands of the inner human self and of the need to hear and recognise the voice that speaks to us from beyond ourselves.
The Enlightenment debates about the Bible, miracles and natural religion all throw into relief one of the characteristic new attitudes of the age, acutely expressed in Pope's lines from his Essay on Man (1733–4),
On the rationalist side in each case the enquiry begins from what may be called an anthropological starting-point.
Man begins with himself in his search for understanding.
The Bible is treated primarily as a human product; the world is explored by human investigation, and only what can be established rationally and scientifically is to be believed; religion itself must be validated by reference to human experience, human values and human reason.
Here lies the key to the outlook of the Age of Reason.
One of its outstanding early proponents had been the French mathematician and philosopher René Descartes (1596–1650).
He maintained that all genuine and certain knowledge begins with your own awareness of your own reality:cogito, ergo sum , ‘I think, therefore I am.’
Having thus established his own reality, he proceeded by working out from there to ‘prove’ the existence of the external world, of other people, and of God.
The details of his arguments need not concern us here: it is the point of departure that is important.
Conflict could not but arise between this new attitude and the traditional Christian conviction that man, in and by himself, is not the measure of all truth.
Essentially, that is the issue in the debates which opened up in the Enlightenment period, and it has remained central in theology ever since.
Still in the eighteenth century, however, the rather confident and aggressive forces of rationalism were to be shaken into a more  humble estimate of the power of human reason itself.
At least three distinct developments, all flowing out of the Enlightenment, contributed to this.
First, there was a powerful and widespread revolt against the rather cold and abstract notion of reason which had earlier held the field, and a fresh interest in the whole range of human experience, including feeling and emotion.
This can be seen in the religious movements mentioned above which reacted against an orthodoxy which in its own way had a distinctly rationalist colouring, even though it was opposed to humanistic rationalism.
But it can also be recognised more widely in the Romantic movement which began with Rousseau, and was the predominant influence in literature and culture generally from the latter part of the eighteenth century and well into the nineteenth.
Romanticism is notoriously difficult to define, and includes a host of diverse movements in art, literature, philosophy and science.
Broadly, however, it tended to emphasise the natural as against the artificial, the spontaneous as against the imposed, experience and emotion as against cold rationality, inwardness and imagination as against the outward and formal.
Where rationalism was inclined to search for ‘the eternal truths of reason’, and to disregard or dismiss from serious consideration anything more mundane, the Romantic was one who sought to appreciate and sense the rich diversity of life and wonder over its multifarious forms and expressions.
Romanticism has had an immensely powerful impact on the modern outlook, and we shall see in the next chapter how it fed into theology at the beginning of the nineteenth century.
The second major shift came when the concept of reason itself was subjected to a fresh critical examination, especially by David Hume and Immanuel Kant.
The third was connected with a new awareness of history, of the fact that human societies and institutions have developed through long centuries and have taken on many different shapes at different times and in different places — an awareness which was especially sharply focused by the work of Gotthold Lessing.
The work of Hume, Kant and Lessing was to be of especial significance for theology; for while they undermined the earlier kind of rationalism by restricting the claims and powers of reason and pointing to the sheer variety and diversity of history, they raised equally sharp questions for theologians.
These same questions have remained close to the heart of theological debate ever since: How do we know what we know, and how  can we be sure that we really know it? and, What is the importance of the history recorded in the Bible for Christian faith?
The Limits of Reason
The deists and Christian rationalists of the Enlightenment believed that rational argument could demonstrate the existence of God, just as Descartes had maintained before them.
In this, they followed a venerable tradition.
For two thousand years and more the branch of philosophy known as metaphysics had dealt with arguments and proofs about the existence and nature of God, his relation to the world and human beings, and such related matters as human freedom and life beyond death.
These were widely (though never universally) held to be demonstrable by appeal either to direct awareness or intuition, or, more often, by indirect argument starting off from ordinary human experience of ourselves and the world around us.
Theology had long been  familiar with this kind of argument, and had on occasion made very extensive use of it.
The outstanding example is to be found in the work of the greatest of the medieval theologians, Thomas Aquinas, who died in 1274.
He offered a series of philosophical proofs of God's existence — the ‘Five Ways’— which could supply a ‘natural theology’, a theology which could be established, at least in principle, by the exercise of natural human powers of reasoning.
This natural theology was then supplemented and completed by ‘revealed theology’, which drew on scripture and the teaching of the church.
Thus he held together the two things which in the Enlightenment tended to fall apart, and to be defined in opposition to each other— faith against knowledge, revelation against reason.
This is not to say that his own particular method of synthesising them was necessarily valid, but it does underline the extent to which the modern problems spring from the disintegration of the medieval framework.
Essentially, the proofs of the reality of God appealed to him as the only adequate explanation for the existence of the world.
The arguments could be developed in several quite different forms, and we need not list them all.
Three, however, were both characteristic of the general approach and especially central in the eighteenth century: the argument from causality, the argument from design, and the ontological argument.
Put very simply, the  argument from causality runs like this.
Everything that happens is caused by something before it.
Therefore the universe itself must have a cause.
But there cannot be an infinite series of causes stretching back endlessly; for in that case, no matter how far back we were to look, we should never find a beginning of the whole process, and that in turn would make it quite impossible to understand how it could ever have got off the ground, let alone reached its present state.
Therefore there must be a First Cause which itself is uncaused; and this can only be God.
The argument from design is fairly similar.
The world and everything in it shows signs of order and pattern, but such signs are inexplicable without the mind of a Planner.
Therefore there must be an Architect and Designer of the universe.
The ontological proof is rather more subtle.
It took different forms;, but all of them turn on the idea that ‘God’means something like ‘supremely perfect being’, and that supreme perfection must include the fact of actual existence.
Being real is thus seen as one of the defining attributes of God, just as having three sides is one of the defining attributes of a triangle.
The argument readily connected up with the thought that the existence of God is necessary : God could not not -exist.
This also found expression in the cosmological argument, which in structure resembles those from causality and design: all that exists is real, but only accidentally so; for it might not have existed, may cease to exist, and can certainly be conceived of as non-existent.
Therefore it cannot exist simply from itself: it must depend upon the necessary being of God.
Arguments of this sort were devastatingly attacked by David Hume (1711–76) and Immanuel Kant (1724–1804).
The main thrust of their philosophical work, as it was carried through especially in Hume's Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding (1748) and Kant's Critique of Pure Reason (1781/7), was to raise with a quite new sharpness the question of epistemology , of the character and basis of genuine knowledge and understanding.
The result was to draw the boundaries of certain knowledge much more narrowly than before.
Hume argued that all our knowledge of facts (as opposed to what he called ‘relations of ideas’, as he termed the necessary, ideal truths of, for example, mathematics) is drawn from experience and must be firmly based upon it.
We run into immense difficulties  as soon as we attempt to project our minds any distance at all above or beyond the area of our concrete experience, for then our reasoning and arguing cannot be properly controlled.
This focus on experience (in Greek empeiria ) is expressed in the standard description of Hume's type of philosophy as empiricist rather than rationalist; and empiricism of this stamp has been especially influential in British philosophy in more recent times as well.
It led Hume to be extremely sceptical of the kind of jump that is made when we attempt to argue from the existence of the world to the reality of God beyond the world.
We are, he observed, only too willing to make this sort of leap, and not only in the field of theology (Hume was also very critical of what he saw as the pretensions of the science of his day to uncover the ‘hidden springs’ of things), but we need to be much more modest and cautious, to realise how limited the scope of our experience and knowledge is, and how liable our minds to go astray when they over-reach themselves and fish in waters too deep for their lines to plumb.
This general modesty about the rights and powers of human reason might not appear a very dangerous threat to natural theology, but the way in which Hume sharpened and applied it was to have a quite shattering impact.
He singled out for particular attention the concepts of cause and effect, which we use and take for granted in everyday life, which are central to scientific study, and which were also essential to the theological argument from causality.
Where, he asked, do we discover that there is some kind of necessary connection between two events, so that we can confidently affirm that A ‘causes’ B?
Do we actually perceive a link between them?
No!
All we in fact observe is that h is regularly followed by B. This consistent association leads us to connect the two in our own minds, to expect A always to be followed by B, and this we then express by saying that A is the cause of B and B the effect of A. This is all perfectly in order, and indeed it is through such links and associations that we build up an ordered and coherent conception of the world around us and make sense of our experience of it.
But we are wrong, he insisted, if we then imagine that we have discerned some mysterious necessity, some metaphysical connection binding A to B, or if we attempt to project and extend the chain of cause and effect entirely beyond the realm of our direct experience.
When God is posited as the First Cause, the very ideas of cause and effect are being torn out of the context  in which they properly belong, that of the perceived regularities in the world of which we are aware.
Hume's line of thought was equally destructive of the argument from design.
That argument rests on the claim that the universe displays the hand of its Architect in the same way as a human artefact is recognisable as the work of an intelligent designer.
How do we know this, however, of human artefacts?— simply because we have had repeated experience of them and of the people who make them.
If we were to come across an object the like of which we had never before encountered, we would be in no position to determine whether it was an artefact or not, or to conclude with certainty that it had actually been designed and made by human beings.
A single instance of B, and of B on its own, cannot enable us to associate it with A. The universe as a whole, however, is just such a single instance: we have no direct experience either of other worlds or of world-designers.
On what basis, then, can we demonstrate that the world has been made , like an artefact, and not simply grown, like a vegetable?
Is there not even something rather arrogant about the assumption that the human mind and capacity to make things supply the only proper model for conceiving of a supreme reality?
Thus, he argued, while we may well believe that the world is in fact designed by God, we cannot prove it.
Reasoning up from our restricted experience cannot supply any definite and conclusive demonstration of the reality and character of God.
Following Hume, Kant subjected human reason to an analysis even more radical and far-reaching.
In the Critique of Pure Reason he called for a ‘Copernican revolution’ in our ideas about knowledge.
Copernicus had shown that the apparent movements of the planets as observed from the earth cannot be satisfactorily or coherently explained on the assumption that the earth itself lies immobile at the centre of the universe.
Rather, it too is moving, and our observations are affected by that movement, which must therefore be taken into account in interpreting them.
In the same fashion, Kant maintained, the nature of our knowledge cannot be understood if we assume that it is simply fed into us from outside ourselves, and that we are merely passive recipients of information from the world around us.
Our experience and understanding are shaped by our own minds, and necessarily so; for they are our experience and our understanding.
We have no access to ‘things in themselves’ apart from our experience of them; a ‘thing in itself  (Ding an sich ) is in fact utterly inconceivable to us, for any possible conception that we can form of anything at all will necessarily draw upon some real or imagined experience of it.
Knowledge is the product of an interaction between our percepts mediated by sense-experience and the concepts which arise in our minds as the means of ordering and interpreting the percepts.
‘Percepts without concepts are blind; concepts without percepts are empty.’
Further — and this was where Kant moved decidedly beyond Hume and everyone else before him — even the most fundamental categories which we use to supply the framework of our knowledge of the world, those of space and time, must be set in this light.
They are essential postulates or presuppositions of all experience and reflection, and without them no coherent understanding would be possible.
But we have no means of proving their objective validity in a world behind or beyond our own experience, nor do we ‘know’ space and time in themselves.
This does not invalidate them or render them somehow doubtful — for they are indispensable — but it locates them and their validity firmly within the context of the mind's encounter with experience rather than elsewhere.
On this basis, knowledge of God could only be established if either God himself were immediately accessible to our awareness, or ‘God’ were a category demonstrably necessary, like those of space and time, to the ordering and shaping of our understanding.
But he is not directly accessible in any ordinary sense, nor can the necessity of the concept of God for the interpreting of our experience be demonstrated, at least so far as pure reflection on the nature of our knowledge can take us.
All the traditional proofs of his existence, Kant argued, ultimately involve an appeal to the ontological argument.
But, he insisted, the concept of a ‘necessarily existent Being’ rests on a confusion between existence and attributes .
Particular attributes or qualities may indeed be part of the very definition of something, and therefore inseparable from it.
But the question whether a particular thing exists in reality is a factual one, which cannot be settled simply by defining it as necessarily existing.
Accordingly, no valid demonstration of God's existence can be founded on the concept of a necessary Being.
The situation is, however, rather different when we move from ‘pure’ to ‘practical’reason, from the analysis of the conditions and character of knowledge to the consideration of morals and action.
The core of morality was seen by Kant in the ‘categorical imperative’, the unconditional demand upon us to do what is right for its own sake.
This imperative he saw as disclosing three ‘postulates of practical reason’, three presuppositions or fundamental conditions without which the categorical imperative itself would lack any ultimate basis.
These were, first, our freedom as responsible moral agents, for the ‘ought’ of the categorical imperative implies the ‘can’of our ability to obey it or to refuse to obey it; second, immortality, which brings with it the prospect of reward and punishment, and the advance towards higher and fuller good than can be attained in this life; third, God himself as the supreme Good, the ultimate guarantor of the moral order of the universe.
Thus while the reality of God cannot be proved by ‘pure reason’, it can reasonably be believed in the context of ‘practical reason’.
So Kant sought by ‘limiting knowledge to make room for faith’, and to connect faith with moral awareness and action.
Where the work of Hume and Kant has been taken fully seriously, theology has faced a choice between two options.
Either it might see what could be done within the area which Kant had left to it; or it might ask whether there might not after all be rather more to be said about the way in which genuine knowledge of God is made possible.
As we shall see, both options have been taken up in subsequent thinking.
The Relevance of History
We have already touched on the challenge which the beginnings of modern historical study posed for theology by questioning a certain understanding of the authority of the Bible.
In the second half of the eighteenth century, two fresh problems came into the open, particularly through the work of Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (1729–81).
Lessing was a man of many parts — writer, literary critic, historian, advocate of religious tolerance — who also made pioneering contributions to the study of the New Testament, and was from time to time embroiled in the continuing controversies between rationalism and orthodoxy.
It is in that setting that these two problems belong.
The first was relatively straightforward.
Once the Bible began to be approached as historical material, open to critical historical study, it was natural that the New Testament, and in particular the life and personality of Jesus himself, should come to be re-examined.
Might not Jesus himself have been rather different from the picture given of him in the gospels and the subsequent teaching of the church?
Could not the ‘real Jesus’ or, as later generations were to term him, the ‘historical Jesus’, conceivably have been quite a different sort of figure from the Christ who was subsequently preached and described in the terms of the Nicene Creed as God made man?
At any rate, should not the New Testament material be studied critically and carefully with these questions in mind?
One of the first of a long series of attempts to reconstruct the facts behind the records was undertaken by Hermann Samuel Reimarus (1694 — 1768) in his Apology for the Reasonable Worshippers of God .
(The title itself reflects Reimarus' own rationalism, and the scepticism with which he approached all supernatural elements in the gospel accounts.)
He himself never published this work, but after his death Lessing brought out parts of it as Fragmente eines Unbekannten (‘Fragments by an Unknown Author’).
This ushered in what was to become known in Germany as the Leben-Jesu Forschung (‘Life of Jesus research’) and in English as ‘the quest of the historical Jesus’.
We shall have more to say about this in the next chapter: it was to produce a quite bewildering variety of ‘reconstructions’ of Jesus' personality and history, having for the most part only one thing in common— the conviction that whatever the truth about him might be, it was not the traditional Christian picture of him.
The second problem was of a more subtle kind, and was well formulated by Lessing himself.
Although he published Reimarus' work, he was not primarily concerned with the correctness or otherwise of the particular interpretations there offered, but with a more fundamental question altogether.
As a historian, Lessing was sharply aware of the difficulty of uncovering the past and interpreting the evidence with accuracy; he was also conscious of the great differences between one period and culture and another, and in particular of what more modern writers have sometimes called the ‘cultural gap’ between the New Testament and the modern world.
This led him to doubt whether authentic religious belief can properly be tied to and bound up with particular historical events.
Two famous remarks of his mark out the dimensions of the question.
First, ‘There is a broad, ugly ditch of history that I cannot  jump across.’
The past by its nature is only indirectly available to us; we cannot enter it with the same immediacy as the present.
How then can religious certainty be based upon the inevitably shaky foundation of historical investigation?
Second, ‘The accidental truths of history can never become the proof of the necessary truths of reason.’
If religious truth is genuine, surely it must be so eternally and universally?
Historical events do not have that character at all: they do in fact occur in one way rather than another, but they could all conceivably have turned out quite differently.
It is true, for instance, that God is good; and it is also true that Julius Caesar invaded Britain.
These are not, however, the same kind of truth; for the first holds for all time and every place, whereas the second has to do with a specific event which as a matter of fact took place at a particular point in history.
So, Lessing maintained, the first kind of truth cannot be demonstrated by the second, nor brought down to the same level.
Religious truth is of a different order from the truths of history.
An equally famous expression of the same view was given by Kant's pupil, the philosopher Fichte (1762–1814), ‘The metaphysical only, and not the historical, can give us blessedness.’
What then is the place of history, and in particular the relevance of the events recorded in the Bible?
Lessing offered his solution in The Education of the Human Race (1780).
History is the arena in which, first through the period of the Old Testament, then by the teaching of Jesus in the New, the way has been prepared for the gradual purifying and refining of man's religious sense which will lead to a third, future era, in which religious values will be seen to shine in their own light as ‘necessary truths of reason’.
Until that happens, creeds, dogmas and the Bible itself have a necessary but essentially temporary and provisional authority.
The ‘revelation’ to which they witness offers nothing that the development of a rational religious sensibility would not in time be able to discover for itself.
Past history is thus significant as the occasion by which we have been enabled to see what otherwise we might have failed to grasp; but the real content of the revelation is in principle detachable from the particular history through which it has been manifested.
In focusing thus sharply on the question of the relation between religious faith and historical knowledge, Lessing put his finger on what was to prove a more or less permanently controversial topic  in theology from his day to this.
Like Kant, he leaves theologians with two broad choices: either to accept this account of the situation, with its absolute distinction between the relativities and contingencies of history and the truth of religion, or to search for some other framework within which to set up the question.
The chief motive which would naturally encourage Christian thinkers to look for such an alternative is that Lessing's horizon necessarily scales down to merely relative and passing significance the events on which Christian faith itself depends — the history recorded and interpreted in the Bible, and in particular that of Jesus himself.
The last two centuries have brought a variety of attempts in theology to cope with these questions, and both the alternatives bequeathed by Lessing have been followed.
New Beginnings: From Schleiermacher to the First World War
The nineteenth century saw the flowering of a rich and diverse crop of theological approaches, reflecting both the challenge of earlier developments and the complex changes rapidly sweeping over western society.
In the churches, traditional orthodoxy of a more or less pre-Enlightenment character fought to retain its footing, but alongside it grew other movements ranging from what today would be called Conservative Evangelicalism to those which were consciously progressive, liberal and modern.
New philosophies, new scientific theories about man and the natural world, new interpretations of history, economics and politics, and a deepening interest in non-Christian religions all came to appear variously as enemies or allies of theology.
Out of this maelstrom we can select only a few thinkers and those ideas which stand out in retrospect as marking out the major developments and as setting the scene for more recent times.
This can best be done by concentrating primarily, though not exclusively, on Germany, and on three broad lines which may be distinguished there.
(For a fuller account, which gives a much more rounded picture than is possible here of such thinkers as Schleiermacher, Hegel and Kierkegaard, and which also gives special attention to British and American theology, Claude Welch,Protestant Thought in the Nineteenth Century , vol. 1: 1799–1870 (1972), is especially to be recommended.)
The first line begins with the man who has justly been termed  ‘the father of modern theology’, Friedrich D. E. Schleiermacher (1768–1834), who was Professor of Theology in Berlin from 1809; and leads on to Albrecht Ritschl (1822–89), Professor in Göttingen from 1864, and those who under his influence formed the school of what is now generally known as Liberal Theology.
A second and much more broken line runs from Schleiermacher's contemporary Georg W. F. Hegel (1770–1831, Professor of Philosophy in Berlin from 1818), and includes such diverse figures as the theologian A. E. Biedermann (1819–85), the New Testament scholars F. C. Baur (1792–1860) and D. F. Strauss (1808–74), and the philosophers Ludwig Feuerbach (1804–72), Karl Marx (1818–83) and Søren Kierkegaard (1813–55).
In both of these lines one central issue was that raised by Lessing of the relation between theology and history.
This was made even more pressing through the nineteenth century by the growth of a sharper historical awareness, by the general influence in the intellectual culture of the time of the ideas of evolution and progress, and by the advances made in historical study of the Bible and past history in general.
Our third theme will be the way in which the questions these developments raised were illustrated towards the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the present century in the work of Albert Schweitzer (1875–1965), Johannes Weiss (1863–1914), William Wrede (1859–1906), Martin Kähler (1835–1912) and Ernst Troeltsch (1865–1923).
Thereafter we shall very briefly outline some of the main trends in theology beyond Germany in the same period.
Schleiermacher and Ritschl
The most important of Schleiermacher's many writings, so far as we are concerned here, are his Addresses on Religion, to its Cultured Despisers (1799) and The Christian Faith (1821/2; a second and considerably altered edition appeared in 1830/1).
The Addresses offered a general analysis and defence of religion, which Schleiermacher wished to commend to the intelligentsia of his own day who were tempted to dismiss it as mere primitive superstition, while The Christian faith is a comprehensive and systematic presentation of the main themes of Christian teaching.
It is very much longer and fuller, and also very much more definite about  Christian affirmations, than the Addresses ; but the ground-plan of his thought is recognisably the same in both.
The Christian Faith spells out in detail the kind of overall understanding of Christian theology which was opened up by the conception of the nature of religion presented in the Addresses .
In both, Schleiermacher can be seen attempting to chart a middle way between traditional orthodoxy and cold rationalism, to find a means of re-stating classical Christian convictions in a fresh and modern way which will not reduce them or dilute them, but rather uncover their real force and depth.
It should be said that his range of original and indeed trail-blazing contributions to modern theology was wider even than this.
He was a renowned preacher, a pioneer critic of the New Testament, one of the founding fathers of the discipline of hermeneutics (the philosophy or science of interpretation); but it is with his fundamental work on the nature and basis of theology itself that we must deal.
Schleiermacher was deeply impressed by Kant's philosophy, and accepted Kant's demolition of rational, philosophical knowledge of God.
But where Kant then found a place for religious faith in the realm of practical reason, in ethics and morals, Schleiermacher held that this too was inadequate.
Neither metaphysics nor ethics is the home of religion, nor does either hold the key to its real nature.
Where religion is reduced to either, and treated as if it were simply a form of knowing or a form of doing , it is lost to sight altogether.
It has to do rather with the infinite, universal wholeness of all things, of that all-embracing totality which may or may not be labelled ‘God’, but which includes and enfolds everything within itself.
Our knowledge and our moral values inevitably reflect and are marked by our own finitude and all its limitations, and to scale religion down to them is to sow the seeds of fanaticism and intolerance by giving them a more absolute standing than they properly deserve.
But there is in us another level of being which lies deeper than knowing or acting, and it is at that further depth that the genuine religious impulse arises and lives.
He describes this deeper level in terms of‘feeling’, ‘consciousness’, ‘immediate awareness.
Propositions 3 and 4 of the second edition of The Christian Faith (referred to  hereafter as , summarise the essential points he makes about it.
This immediate consciousness of dependence is something which in Kantian language might be called ‘transcendental’.
It lies below and beyond the distinctions between subject and object which are inbuilt in ordinary experience at the level of knowledge and action; so it opens up a direct awareness of the God on whom our existence hangs as given in and with our deepest awareness of ourselves.
There is thus, for Schleiermacher, an inherently religious awareness at the very core of our own existence as human beings: it is both inherent in ourselves, and inherently bound up with the reality of God.
Self-awareness, at its deepest level, involves at one and the same time awareness both of our finitude and of the infinity on which we depend.
Schleiermacher's theology is commonly described as centred on ‘religious experience’.
The description is a valid one provided it is remembered that he does not build on special or peculiar ‘religious experiences’ of a mystical or emotional kind.
What he appeals to is, he believes, primordially human , the foundation and basis of all other experience.
It is also sometimes called a theology of ‘feeling’, and he himself uses this language.
But again, he does not mean by this to reduce religion to emotion, though he is clear that emotion plays a part in it.
What he is trying to describe, and to find terms to name, is what would later be called ‘existential awareness’, an awareness which includes and involves ourselves by contrast with any more or less detached knowledge of facts and truths quite external to ourselves.
‘Immediate self-consciousness, is thus a less misleading description than ‘feeling’ taken by itself.
It should also be said that while he speaks of ‘absolute dependence’, he does not mean to imply that we have no personal freedom or responsibility, that we are mere puppets in the hands of omnipotence.
Rather, his argument is that our consciousness of  ourselves conveys to us that we are not self-enclosed or self-sufficient, not our own cause or our own explanation.
This brings as its corollary the awareness of the one on whom we depend.
It was a complete caricature of Schleiermacher when Hegel remarked that on this account a dog must be more religious than his master, because even more completely dependent.
Obedient passivity and emotional dependence are not at all what Schleiermacher was talking about, though some of his language, taken out of context, could give that impression.
In the background to this central theme in his thought lie two major influences upon him which interacted with each other and with the impulses derived from Kant.
First, both in his childhood home and in his education in Moravian schools, he was imbued with a deep and warm Christian piety which never left him; but at the same time he reacted against what he felt to be a too strict insistence by his father and his teachers on doctrinal principles.
This certainly helped to open up in his mind a sense of the gap between religious dogmas and the essentially religious attitude and awareness.
Second, he was very much a Romantic, with all the Romantic's preference for the vital, inward and spontaneous over the static, outward and formal.
In this, he reflected not only the spirit of his own age, but a wider temper and habit of mind which is still very much alive, and not least among many Christians.
That is part at least of the secret of his continuing appeal.
The consciousness of absolute dependence, which he can also sometimes call simply, ‘God-consciousness’, might at first sight seem a slender thread indeed on which to suspend a comprehensive statement of all the themes of Christian theology.
One might expect it to lead only to a rather vague pantheism which could make no real place either for religious institutions or for specific doctrines and formulations.
And at points in the Addresses that does seem to be the direction in which Schleiermacher is heading.
They were not, however, his last word; and in The Christian Faith he builds broad and high on this apparently unpromising foundation.
It supplied him with nothing less than the key to a fresh overall grasp of theology which was able to cope with the most serious challenges proffered in the previous century.
It did so only at a price; but it is the measure of his greatness that few others in ancient or modern times have attempted, let alone carried through, a comparable essay in the reorientation of Christian thought.
(It  is also remarkable how commonly ideas similar to his have kept re-surfacing up to the present day, often without any apparent awareness on the part of their authors that Schleiermacher had already developed them, or that the subsequent movement of theology was to expose serious inadequacies in them.)
Three aspects of his reconstruction demand special attention: his account of the nature of theological doctrines; his general account of religion; and his reinterpretation of the inner meaning of the Christian faith itself.
The character of doctrines .
In a nutshell, ‘Christian doctrines are accounts of the Christian religious affections set forth in speech’.
Christian teachings are expressions of the religious awareness in its Christian form.
They can only be understood, and their truth can only be measured, by reference back to that awareness.
To treat them simply as statements of objective fact, to be proved or disproved by appeal to observation of the world around us, to the speculations and arguments of metaphysical philosophy, or even to the authority of the Bible understood as a collection of ‘divine truths’, is to misconceive their nature and function.
To say, for example, that God is the Creator and Preserver of the world, is to give particular expression to the awareness of absolute dependence; and it is in and through that awareness that the meaning and truth alike of the doctrinal affirmation are opened up.
This is not to imply that the Bible has no authority:.
it plays an essential role in shaping and informing the Christian God-consciousness.
But the centre of gravity lies in that consciousness itself.
So Schleiermacher offers to religious language a new foundation and point of reference, one with inbuilt defences against the attacks of the Enlightenment.
The essential religious awareness, if only it is allowed to address us, will supply the needed evidence.
The awareness which finds expression in doctrines is not something purely private and individual.
It is shaped and nurtured in a religious community, and its expression grows and develops through history.
The work of the theologian is set by Schleiermacher in that context.
He has to serve the church by articulating its teaching, and at the same time, and as part of the same task, to explore and clarify the understanding it contains.
‘Dogmatic theology is the science which systematises the doctrine prevalent  in a Christian church at a given time’.
This is not merely a matter of re-stating what had already been said; it involves a genuine progress and advance towards a fuller and clearer understanding enabled by the onward movement of history.
At the same time, the present stands in continuity with the past out of which it has grown, and the Christian theologian and the Christian church are bound in particular to the origins in Jesus and to the teaching of the Bible, especially the New Testament.
This twofold emphasis upon religious consciousness and on the task of theology in the present brings with it a major shift in the understanding of the character of theological and doctrinal statements — a shift from the objective to the subjective pole, from the truth to be affirmed to the awareness and intention of the person or community affirming it .
This becomes quite clear in some of the significant details of Schleiermacher's account.
So, for example, ‘All attributes which we ascribe to God are to be taken as denoting, not something special in God, but only something special in the manner in which the feeling of absolute dependence is to be related to him’.
Again, he distinguished between those doctrines which give direct expression to the religious awareness, and those which do so only indirectly .
The doctrine of the Trinity ‘is not an immediate utterance concerning the Christian self-consciousness, but only a combination of several such utterances’; that is, it serves to combine and hold together the different affirmations of the Christian consciousness concerning God the Father, Jesus, and the Holy Spirit, but it is essentially a theological construction which has its place in theology but should not be taken as expressing the truth about God .
It ‘has not equal value with the other proper doctrines of the faith, but is simply a summary statement’.
Therefore, while he could indeed describe the doctrine of the Trinity as ‘the true coping-stone of the system of Christian doctrine’, he relegated it to an appendix in both editions of The Christian Faith .
Religion and religions .
The fundamental religious awareness ‘leads necessarily in its development to fellowship or communion, and so forms the different religious communities and traditions of mankind.
Each particular religion is marked off from others in two ways — outwardly, by its origins and history, and  inwardly, by the particular way in which it gives expression to the essential religious consciousness.
That expression may itself vary in two major respects.
First, it may be scattered and diffused among a variety of objects of devotion, as in polytheism; or it may have a single focus, as in monotheism.
The monotheistic forms of religion are the higher, for they more clearly and purely bring the God-consciousness to expression, ‘and all others are related to them as subordinate forms, from which men are destined to pass on to those higher ones’.
Second, it may ‘subordinate the natural in human conditions to the moral’, or, alternatively, ‘subordinate the moral to the natural’.
Of the monotheistic faiths, Islam, with its passive fatalism (as Schleiermacher saw it), does the second, whereas Judaism to some degree and Christianity more perfectly emphasise man's ethical freedom and responsibility.
They are thus more ‘moral’ or, as he can also say, more ‘teleological’than Islam, for they discern and hold out an ethical purpose and direction for human life.
All these definitions and distinctions come together in Schleiermacher's famous definition of Christianity itself,
In this way, Schleiermacher was able to include Christianity alongside other faiths under his general conception of religion, and at the same time to affirm its distinctiveness and indeed superiority over all other contenders.
To do this he did not need to make any apparently arbitrary appeal to particular revelation or received authority.
The analysis of religion as such shows that in the Christian faith it has received its highest, clearest and fullest expression.
This leads on now to its distinctive mark: by its history and by its inner meaning alike, it is bound up with ‘the redemption accomplished by Jesus of Nazareth’.
But what exactly did Schleiermacher understand by that?
The meaning of Christian faith .
Schleiermacher's interpretation of Jesus and of the meaning of redemption is linked in two ways with his controlling conception of God-consciousness.
First, that consciousness, like every element of our experience, involves the  awareness of both pleasure and pain.
It is the antithesis between these that Schleiermacher takes as the introduction to the doctrine of redemption, which occupies the second (and larger) of the two main divisions of The Christian Faith .
He unfolds it there as the antithesis between sin and grace.
The God-consciousness which is aware of its own limitations, and beyond that, of its own imperfection, becomes a consciousness of sin.
That is the painful aspect.
The other side is the consciousness of perfection and blessedness which we recognise as mediated to us through Jesus and communicated to us by him.
So, ‘the distinctive feature of Christian piety lies in the fact that whatever alienation from God there is in the phases of our experience, we are conscious of it as an action originating in ourselves, which we call Sin; but whatever fellowship with God there is, we are conscious of it as resting upon a communication from the Redeemer, which we call Grace’.
Both sin and redemption are therefore describable in terms of God-consciousness in its negative and positive aspects.
Second, God-consciousness also supplies the key to the person of the Redeemer and the redemption he has accomplished.
Jesus was divine in the sense that he was ‘distinguished from all (other men) by the constant potency of his God-consciousness, which was a veritable existence of God in him’.
Similarly, ‘The Redeemer assumes believers into the power of his God-consciousness, and this is his redemptive activity’.
The awareness of God which is fragmentarily and partially there in all men was fully and perfectly formed in Jesus, and spreads from him to those who believe in him.
This is the essential meaning of the old dogma which described him as God incarnate and as our Saviour and Redeemer.
It is also the meaning of the doctrine that he alone was perfect and wholly free from sin.
The Christian consciousness of God is thus, for Schleiermacher, inextricably bound up with Jesus himself, and derived from him.
It is not simply a general or universal awareness of God, though it gathers up and refines the more general consciousness to be found in other religions and at the very core of human existence as such.
But it is only in and through the Christian modification of the God-consciousness that the significance of Jesus can be grasped, and it is in terms of God-consciousness that his person and work, who he was and what he achieved, must be interpreted.
By working from this new standpoint, Schleiermacher aimed to bypass the antitheses which had emerged so sharply in earlier generations between reason and revelation, natural religion and received authority, the natural and the supernatural, and to offer a fresh synthesis in which both the authentic and distinctive character of religion and the special nature of the Christian faith would be preserved.
It is impossible in a few words to do justice to Schleiermacher's stature and impact.
He ushered in a new era in the study of religion and of theology; he brought a new conception of what the disciplined and ordered study of both could be; he underlined in epoch-making fashion the importance of the subjective aspect of religious awareness, pointing to what lies deeper than intellectual formulations, yet is not reducible to inchoate and diffuse ‘feelings’; he attempted to grasp and express in an original and modern way the abiding significance of Jesus, and to uncover the living and personal meaning of what were in danger of being dismissed as merely the fossilised accretions of doctrine.
In all these ways, he set his stamp on theology and decisively altered its course.
This is more remarkable since in his own lifetime he had but few enthusiastic followers, nor did a school grow up around him to carry on his work.
Yet he so influenced or anticipated what was to come that he remains still the great point of departure for modern Protestant theology.
In spite of the weaknesses in his attempted synthesis, the same can be said of him in the context of the theology of the last century and a half as of Sir Christopher Wren on his tomb in St Paul's Cathedral,Si monumentum requiris, circumspice —‘If you would see his memorial, look around you.’
This said, however, it must be added that the weaknesses in his system are very considerable.
His analysis of doctrines as expressions of the religious consciousness leaves a fair measure of uncertainty whether what is said is in any sense true about God , or only about our understanding of God.
The sting of this question was to some extent drawn for Schleiermacher himself by the fact that he so closely identified immediate self-consciousness with God-consciousness as to believe that he had found a real and solid bridge between the two sides of the matter.
But that identification itself is open to question.
Schleiermacher had no doubts about it: it was the fundamental axiom of his whole system.
But it is hard  indeed to see how that axiom itself could be made more convincing either to a purely humanist philosophy or to a theology which maintained that God is something more and other than the obverse of our finitude.
Again, is it adequate, or even in principle correct, to interpret the divinity of Jesus and his work of redemption in terms of God-consciousness?
Is there here a tendency to reduce Christianity simply to a movement within history, describable in the favourite Romantic categories of inner awareness and historical development?
Finally, while he is indeed very careful to underline the distinctiveness and uniqueness of Jesus and of Christianity, do hidden thorns lurk in his description of Christianity itself as ‘a religion’ which can be classified along with other ‘religions’?
It is no denigration of his immense achievement to point to these real difficulties which it raises.
We shall see as we continue how they have repeatedly emerged in later discussion.
The fundamental issue is whether this essentially Romantic vision of history, of religion, and of the nature of theological truth and the reality of God, is an adequate vehicle for the reformulation of Christian faith.
Forty years passed after the publication of the second edition of The Christian Faith before a comparable essay in constructive restatement of Christian doctrine appeared.
This was Albrecht Ritschl's The Christian Doctrine of Justification and Reconciliation , which came out in three volumes between 1870 and 1874 and launched the movement which was at first called ‘the Ritschlian theology’, but is now generally labelled ‘Liberal Theology’.
(The label, ‘liberal’, has been used in a variety of ways in theology.
Older books surveying the theology of the nineteenth century, such as John Oman's The Problem of Faith and Freedom (1906), commonly applied it to extreme radicals, and spoke of Ritschl as neither ‘liberal’ nor ‘orthodox’but ‘mediating’.
Other writers have used ‘liberal’ as a blanket term for the whole broad line of development which runs from Schleiermacher.
More recently, however, Liberal Theology has become a recognised description of the Ritschlian school, and it is in that sense that it is used here.)
Its leading figures included the theologians Wilhelm Herrmann of Marburg (1846–1922), Theodor Haering of Tübingen (1848–1928), Julius Kaftan of Berlin (1848–1926) and the church historian Adolf von Harnack, also of Berlin (1851–1930).
It had very  considerable influence in Germany up to the First World War, and also, in somewhat diluted form, in both Britain and America (see chapter 6).
Mention should also be made of the French theologian Auguste Sabatier (1839–1901), through whom the movement also made some impact on the French Roman Catholic Modernists, notably A. F. Loisy (1857–1940).
Indeed, like the thought of Schleiermacher, the main themes and concerns of Liberal Theology are still very much with us, though often anonymously and unrecognised.
While Ritschl was certainly not, as some of his more enthusiastic followers confidently believed, a second Schleiermacher, he was nonetheless a major figure whose work also raises serious issues which cannot be ignored.
Ritschl's own attitude to Schleiermacher and his work was somewhat ambivalent.
He could and did talk at times as if he were simply continuing Schleiermacher's programme, and described Schleiermacher as his predecessor in the matter of method .
Indeed there are strong resemblances between them, especially when one looks back on them from the present day and across all that has happened in theology since Ritschl.
He too insisted on drawing a clear line between theology and philosophy; he accepted Kant's demolition of any philosophical natural theology, and insisted that theology must be permitted to proceed with its own work without dictation from speculative metaphysics or the imposition upon it of alien concepts and patterns of thought and investigation.
He too worked out a general conception of religion, and saw Christianity as its highest and purest form.
He too approached the task of talking about God very much from our side, the side of the believer or the theologian, exploring the meaning of theological statements for those who made them, and seeking in that way to disclose their authentic basis and character.
In all these respects he reminds us today of Schleiermacher.
But there were also very significant differences, and it was upon these that Ritschl himself laid greater weight.
They are chiefly associated with his distinctive emphases on historical revelation and on the ethical rather than mystical nature of religion.
Ritschl's bête noire was mysticism in any way, shape or form.
What he meant by mysticism was belief in a direct, immediate experience of God (or of Jesus) which dissolved the distinction between God and man or between Christ and ourselves, a rapture of union which could carry us beyond time and history and the  challenge and responsibility of the present.
This kind of religious outlook he regarded as neither biblical nor Protestant.
It was characteristic of him that his last work, and his greatest apart from Justification and Reconciliation , was a three-volume History of Pietism (1880–6), in which he applied his very considerable erudition to demonstrating that Pietism represented the improper infusion into German Protestantism of alien, Roman Catholic conceptions of the Christian life.
His own aim was to return to the message of the Bible via the teaching of the Reformers, and on that basis he wished to outline a very different conception of the nature of Christian faith and life.
In place of God-consciousness, for which he had little time, he wanted to put on the one hand the revelation made in Jesus and recoverable through the historical study of the New Testament, and on the other the moral and spiritual response to Jesus which issues in Christian living and acting.
Both of these are of course present in Schleiermacher too; but they do not supply the framework of his system as they do for Ritschl.
To this end, Ritschl offered a fresh account of the nature of religion, an account which began by considering what religion is for .
Its purpose, he argued, is not to supply immediate or direct knowledge of God; it is rather to enable the overcoming, with God's help, of the contradictions which run through human existence.
For man is a divided being.
At bottom this division is based on the fact that he is at one and the same time part of the natural order — along with the elements, plants and animals — yet also a spiritual and personal being who feels a destiny and calling to rule over the natural world.
But other aspects of the matter can also be discerned: there is also a contradiction between the way human beings actually live and behave and God's purposes for them, and there is consequently a gulf and alienation between God and man.
The keynote of Christian faith, however, is reconciliation , and this in turn rests upon justification , the making of man right with God.
Justification had been the great theme of the Reformers, especially of Martin Luther, and Ritschl aimed to restore it to the centre of theology by drawing out its consequences and implications in reconciliation, and opening up the force and meaning of Christianity from that centre.
Reconciliation is worked out, made concrete and extended in the establishing and development of a new, ethical human community, which the New Testament calls the kingdom of God.
This was what Jesus had come to bring about.
So Ritschl offered his own definition of Christianity, which resembles yet also differs strikingly from Schleiermacher's,
In a figure which he was fond of using, Christianity is not a circle with a single centre, but an ellipse with two foci.
One focus is Jesus, who reveals the love of God for us, and so reconciles us to God,; the other is the spiritual and ethical community which he founded.
This community is the church, but its goal is the transformation of the whole of human society into the kingdom of God.
A fair summary of the whole might be ‘the brotherhood of man and the Fatherhood of God, revealed in Jesus’ teaching and example, and set before us as the goal which we are called to realise'.
It is very clear here that Ritschl had moved back behind Schleiermacher towards Kant's linking of religion with ‘practical reason’.
In other respects too, he is strongly reminiscent of Kant.
For one thing, Kant himself had developed the thought that the kingdom of God is to be identified or interpreted as the ethical organisation of human society.
For another, Kant had made a sharp distinction between ‘judgements of fact’ and ‘judgements of value’, between ‘This is the case,’and ‘This is what this means for me’; and that distinction had been further developed by the philosopher Lotze (1817–81).
Like them, Ritschl believed that religious and theological statements are essentially judgements of value-for-us.
So to say, ‘Jesus is God’, does not imply or claim that we have made direct observation of a hidden ‘divine nature’ in him, or explored his relationship with the Father from the inside.
It means rather that he ‘has the value of God for us’ because in him the love of God towards us is made known.
Here, Ritschl was following up a famous dictum of Luther's younger contemporary and associate, Philip Melanchthon in his Loci Communes of 1521, ‘To know Christ is to know his benefits, not…to contemplate his natures.’
It is only through the work of Christ, through the impact on us of what he has done, that we can recognise him as divine and describe his person in divine terms.
On this ground, Ritschl was critical of much previous theology, and especially of the way the doctrine of the person of Christ had developed in the early centuries.
The dogmas of his consubstantiality with the Father and of his possessing two natures in one person, can only mislead us if they are taken as objective, factual descriptions of the constitution of his being.
What they really refer to and bring to expression is his meaning for us; and their significance is to be grasped afresh, not by their simple repetition, but by returning behind them to the history of Jesus' life and teaching, and to the message of his cross and resurrection.
That is the dynamic, historical revelation of the Father's love, which draws us into the community of faith and sets us to work in the service of the kingdom.
An enormously popular and influential exposition of Liberal Theology was presented by Harnack in a series of informal lectures which were published in 1900 as Das Wesen des Christentums , ‘The Essence of Christianity’(E.T.
What is Christianity ? 1901).
The essence was to be found in Jesus' teaching, which Harnack summarised under three heads: the coming of the kingdom of God,; the Fatherhood of God and the infinite worth of the human soul,; the ‘higher righteousness’ and the command of love.
This had been Jesus' gospel; it concerned the Father only, not the Son — for Jesus had not proclaimed himself.
At the same time, he did embody his own message, so that it could be said that in him, ‘the divine appeared in as pure a form as is possible on earth’.
As a result, even within the New Testament documents, a shift towards an intensified emphasis upon Jesus himself could be traced; and thereafter the early church had been increasingly preoccupied with speculation about his ‘divine nature’.
This had then led to the classical dogmas of the Trinity and the incarnation, which Harnack described in his great History of Dogma as ‘the fruit of the Greek spirit on the ground of the gospel’, the product of the ‘hellenisation of Christianity’.
Harnack himself defended that development as necessary for the survival of Christian faith in the ancient Graeco-Roman world, but believed it must now be transcended, for it brought with it the immense danger of transforming the original and authentic gospel of love preached and exemplified by Jesus into abstract intellectual formulae, of confusing the husk with the kernel.
Fortunately the unbiased historical study of the New Testament, set free from the crippling restrictions of  dogmatic assumptions, could once more uncover the heart of the matter and present modern men afresh with the abiding message and enduring essence of Christian faith.
Like the thought of Schleiermacher, Liberal Theology has its own coherence, attractiveness and plausibility; but it too is open to damaging critical questions from several angles.
These questions are all the more important in that the picture it paints of the real meaning of the New Testament, of Jesus' message, and of the essential nature of Christianity, accurately reflects an understanding of the matter which is still very widespread among Christians in the present day, though usually in less sophisticated form.
Indeed, it is no exaggeration to say that Harnack's exposition expresses the popular conception of Christianity of the contemporary Christian ‘man in the street’— a broadly ethical Unitarianism, in which Jesus is seen as a noble teacher and inspiring example of love and heroic self-sacrifice.
It is a grave mistake to dismiss Liberal Theology simply as a manifestation of late nineteenth-century German culture, to which no special attention need be paid: it has a far deeper and wider appeal even now.
That is certainly a witness to the fact that there is much that is very fine in it, and it would be foolish to pretend otherwise.
But it is no less necessary to face up to its weaknesses as a comprehensive interpretation of the meaning of Christian belief.
Many of these weaknesses will emerge more clearly in later chapters, where we shall see how powerfully the pendulum has swung away from the position of Liberal Theology in recent generations, at least among the leaders and pioneers of theological thinking.
For the moment, however, we may briefly indicate some of the problems which the Ritschlian approach encounters.
Is the category of ‘value-judgement’ adequate to characterise the nature of theological statements — especially when it carries with it such a sharp disjunction between value and fact ?
Again, does the essence of Christianity really lie in its high spiritual, ethical and personal values, in ‘the message’ and ‘the kingdom’rather than in Jesus Christ himself?
Can the revelation of God in Jesus of which Christians have spoken from the New Testament onwards properly be interpreted simply by saying that Jesus manifests the divine love in the most perfect form attainable on earth?
Can justification, the putting of sinful man right with God, be fully accounted for in these same terms?
Is the kingdom of God spoken  of in the New Testament simply ‘the moral organisation of the human race’, or does that conception owe more than the Liberals themselves realised to their own enlightened and optimistic view of the development of Protestant culture in their own day?
Is it adequate at all to try in this fashion to interpret religion as a means to an end, and to define that end in progressive humanistic terms as having to do with the elevation and betterment of human society?
There is more than ground for the suspicion that throughout, the second focus of Ritschl's ellipse is the dominant one, and the first is made subservient to it.
Finally, is the Liberal confidence in its historical study justified?
Is the figure of Jesus it claims to have uncovered really there in the New Testament, and is his message the one that Harnack claims?
Is the kingdom he preached the kingdom proclaimed by Ritschl, or something quite different?
These last questions were already being raised in the heyday of Liberal Theology itself, as we shall find later in this chapter, and with devastating effect.
First, however, we must go back to Schleiermacher's contemporary in Berlin.
Hegel and after
In many ways, Hegel appears to be the complete opposite of Schleiermacher — whose relations with him in the years that they were colleagues in Berlin might charitably be described as strained.
He too was concerned to move beyond Kant, and to offer a new basis for theology; he too was profoundly influenced by the spirit of Romanticism.
But Hegel was a philosopher, and a philosopher who held that the responsibility of philosophy was to work out a universal and all-embracing system of understanding which would include literally everything — God and religion not excepted.
This all-enfolding system was to be thoroughly metaphysical and consistently rational.
So where Schleiermacher had drawn a sharp line between theology and philosophy, rejected metaphysics as an avenue of approaching truth, and stressed consciousness as lying deeper than rationality, Hegel subsumed theology under philosophy, and gave reason the highest place.
His motto, as stated in the preface to his Philosophy of Law (1821), was, ‘The real is the rational, and the rational is the real.’
Reality does not lie in things but in reason (Vernunft ), which lies deeper than mere detached understanding (Verstand ).
Reason  directly links the mind with the rationality which is the supreme reality.
For this reason, his system has sometimes been called ‘Panlogism’, from the Greek pan (‘everything’) and logos (‘rationality’).
More commonly, however, it is known as Absolute Idealism.
Idealism here has nothing to do with ‘ideals’ in the ordinary English sense of ethical or spiritual values: it is connected rather with ‘ideas’, and serves to label any kind of philosophy which puts the emphasis on mind, understanding and reason rather than on experience and the senses.
Hegel's Idealism is ‘absolute’ in that it sees all reality as gathered up in the all-encompassing, impersonal Mind which is God.
This concept of the Absolute Mind, or Absolute Spirit (the German word Geist includes both English senses), is one of Hegel's controlling motifs.
Another is the dialectic , a pattern of movement which proceeds from a starting-point (the thesis ) to another which stands over against it in opposition or contradiction (the antithesis ), and then moves on to a third stage in which the two are reconciled and reintegrated on a higher level (the synthesis ).
In this movement, Hegel saw the very rhythm of reality itself, both as a whole and in every part, and also the dynamics of knowledge and understanding by which the initial gulf between subject and object is bridged in genuine synthesis, the act of cognition.
In the background here lies one of the favourite themes of the Romantics: that of the coincidentia oppositorum , ‘coincidence of opposites’.
They had exploited this idea as doing more justice to the nature of life and movement and the discovery of truth than the older rationalist insistence on the ‘law of non-contradiction’.
Put crudely, that law states that if A contradicts B, at least one of them must be false.
This was felt by the Romantics to be too static, too absolute, too cut-and-dried, and to leave no place for the dynamics of discovery, the interplay of diversities, the movement from partial to fuller understanding, the connection between the inward and the outward, the whole and the part, the individual and the universal.
Apparent oppositions, they felt, should not only be tolerated but gloried in: ultimately they would prove to be resolvable in a wider harmony.
Hegel's dialectic brought this sense to a further degree of refinement.
A third important feature of his theory is the contrast he drew between image (Vorstellung ) and concept (Begriff , sometimes also rendered, much less happily, as ‘notion’).
An image is a  pictorial understanding of a kind which is true so far as it goes, but which falls short of full rational clarity, and must eventually be superseded by a concept.
The expressions and ideas of religion — that of the Fatherhood of God, for instance— belong in the category of image, and it is the task of the philosopher to break through to a clearer conceptualisation, refining the images into concepts.
With these basic materials, Hegel developed his total system which included and explained everything from the nature of knowledge through the evolution of human society and culture to the whole history of the universe.
The world itself is presented as a kind of self-projection of Geist , in which it brings itself into being as Nature, and so as over against itself (thesis and antithesis).
Then, through the emergence of conscious mind in the world, the Absolute Geist returns to itself in a new kind of self-awareness (the synthesis).
Finite mind within the world also advances dialectically, from undifferentiated consciousness through objective awareness of things other than itself to the act of understanding in which the subject/object dichotomy is overcome.
Similarly, all the forms of human culture — art, law, religion and so on-are objectifications of the human spirit by which it projects itself externally in order then to move on through them to a higher self-realisation.
In this process, art can then be seen to belong to an essentially subjective stage of immediate, concrete picturing; religion appears at that of objectifying symbols; and philosophy breaks through to the conceptualisation in which full and genuine understanding is attained.
In this way, Hegel's system itself gives final form to the understanding of the world and of God which is imperfectly represented in all religion, more adequately sketched in Christianity, and at last attains its fullness in Absolute Idealism.
There the finite mind of man, which is but a fragment and form of the Infinite, discovers its true identity with the Absolute — and that is at the same time the return of the Absolute to itself, its own self-realisation.
The doctrine of the Trinity thus becomes the universal dialectical process, while the dogmas of creation and incarnation speak of Mind's projection of itself as Nature, and witness to the ultimate identity of Infinite and finite Mind.
Unlike Schleiermacher, Hegel had a large number of followers who sought to carry on from the point he had reached.
They  tended, however, to go off in different directions.
The tradition of Absolute Idealism in his own sense was continued chiefly outside Germany by philosophers such as Edward Caird (1835 — 1908) and F. H. Bradley (1846 — 1924), eventually leading through Josiah Royce (1855 — 1916), A. S. Pringle-Pattison (1856 — 1931) and J. M. E. McTaggart (1866 — 1925) to a form of Idealism that was more ‘personal’ than ‘absolute’, in line with a more general trend towards a personalist emphasis in much other modern philosophy.
Within Germany, the Hegelian school divided into a ‘right’ and a ‘left’wing — the right aiming on the whole to retain Hegel's broad framework, the left building on elements in it, but in a way which led to very different eventual results.
On the whole, it was the left wing that was the more creative and influential, and it was to it that some of the men we must now mention belonged.
The developments which they initiated will serve to highlight some of the major theological issues raised by Hegel's tour de force of systematic synthesis.
One point which cries out for consideration is this: do the Christian doctrines which Hegel has transposed into his own metaphysical key still mean the same?
Or, to put the question in terms closer to his own, are the principles enunciated in the system of Absolute Idealism really the truth to which these theological teachings point?
The force of this question is brought out by the line of interpretation offered by the distinguished Swiss Hegelian theologian A. E. Biedermann (1819–85).
Only one feature of his thought can be mentioned here, but it is both central to this sort of Hegelian theology and typical of an approach which has appealed to many others as well.
He made a clear distinction between what he called ‘the principle of redemption’ and the person of Jesus.
The principle is the ‘idea’, the eternal truth, of ‘God-manhood’, of the unity of finite and Infinite Mind.
This eternal idea was brought to light and exemplified concretely in Jesus, and through him it is also made known to us.
It is not that Jesus himself was God and man in the special and quite unique sense that Christian dogma had so long maintained.
Rather, the dogma is a means of expressing the more general principle which he brings to awareness in our religious consciousness.
So, under the aegis of Hegelianism, Biedermann comes close to the view earlier stated by Fichte: it is not the historical as such, but the metaphysical, that makes us blessed — not the historical person of Jesus as God and man, but  the metaphysical idea of God-manhood, which is simply exemplified, illustrated, and communicated by Jesus.
This leads in turn to what is perhaps the fundamental difficulty in Hegel's entire pattern of thought.
While it does set out to include and explicate the sense of the whole movement of history, history itself seems to be in the end rather unimportant.
It does not appear as the arena of significant events, of accidental developments which can nevertheless have the most far-reaching consequences, of puzzling loose ends, or of real contradictions and inexplicabilities.
It is simply an element in what, in its totality, is seen as the drama of the self-determined unfolding and return to itself of Absolute Mind.
Granted that the whole of history may have a meaning, a purpose and a direction — and granted, too, the power and fruitfulness of many of Hegel's ideas — are that purpose and direction so easily uncovered as he suggests?
Or does he too quickly take flight from history altogether into a realm of the Absolute?
The same kind of problem arises if the system is looked at from the angle of the natural sciences.
They proceed on the assumption, which Hegel also shared, that there is a sense and pattern in the structure and dynamics of reality, and that these can be explored and entered into through experimentation and theorising.
But the scientist cannot lay down in advance what the pattern will turn out to be.
Significantly, though Hegel himself was much interested in science, especially in astronomy, his own efforts in that direction were none too successful: physical reality tended to be uncomfortably unwilling to accommodate itself to his theoretical predictions.
Nor did his philosophy contribute significantly to the development of the scientific enterprise in succeeding generations.
It was too much inclined to wrap everything up and regard it as settled.
It was on this general point that another of Hegel's followers, Ferdinand Christian Baur (1792–1860), was particularly critical of him.
Baur was the leader of the ‘Tübingen school’ which opened up new lines of study of the New Testament, and was the most widely influential and controversial movement in biblical criticism in the first half of the nineteenth century.
It was regarded by many as dangerously radical and extreme — in much the same style as the ‘Bultmann school’ in the last forty years — but it did introduce a new epoch in critical New Testament research, most notably by drawing attention to the distinct strands and theologies within  the different New Testament documents.
The contrasts between the synoptic gospels (Matthew, Mark and Luke) and the fourth gospel, between the various letters ascribed to Paul, and between Paul's theology and that of other leaders in the primitive church, all now came in for serious consideration.
In this new study, Baur made considerable use of Hegel's dialectical conception, finding the New Testament to reflect, not a homogeneous movement, but a conflict between an earlier, Petrine theology and a later, Pauline type, which the later New Testament documents were attempting dialectical movement in the development of the church and theology in subsequent ages.
While the procedure was to some extent artificial and led to conclusions that did not always stand up to later study, it did at least mean that the different forms of early Christian teaching could now be admitted for discussion, and the possibility of real conflict between opposing views recognised as a natural and proper element in the development.
But while Baur used these ideas of Hegel in this way, he criticised the master's overall system as a new form of Gnosticism — the escape from history and its untidiness into an untroubled world of heavenly truth lying far beyond it.
He directed the same charge against Schleiermacher as well, and in this paved the way for Ritschl and Liberal Theology (Ritschl himself began his career as a New Testament scholar in the Tübingen tradition).
So far as his own understanding of Jesus himself was concerned, however, Baur resembled Biedermann: Jesus was the exemplary embodiment of an ‘idea’.
He differed from Hegel in his particular emphasis on historical study of the New Testament, but remained Idealist in his theology.
This combination of an insistence on the relativity of history and an attempt to express the significance of Jesus in terms which appeal to something more universal than the concrete particular person of Jesus himself was indeed widely characteristic of much nineteenth-century thought.
Liberal Theology went the same way, though it substituted the categories of Ritschl's system for those of Hegel's.
(Nor, it may be added, was it only in the nineteenth century that this stratagem was adopted: it has figured in a good deal of more recent writing as well.
But the nineteenth century was also to see more radical questioning of this assumption about the proper approach to the matter.)
While Biedermann and Baur were in accord with Hegel's aim  to combine Christianity and speculative philosophy, others drew from him the material for frontal attacks on Christian belief, notably Strauss, Feuerbach and Marx.
Strauss began his career as an Idealist theologian and New Testament scholar in the Tübingen mould, but by the end of his life had abandoned Christian faith altogether.
Feuerbach's position was more consistent: he was a philosopher who did not believe in God but was on his own admission passionately concerned with religion and theology, whose real object he held to be man himself.
Both Strauss and Feuerbach in effect fastened on the hinge of Hegel's system — the identification of finite and Infinite Mind — and, having grasped it, turned it upside down.
There is, they held, no supernatural God of the kind Hegel still believed in; there is only man, and it is the human spirit which finds oblique expression in religion and theology.
Here, they drew on Hegel's account of religious doctrines and institutions as symbolic objectifications of that spirit.
But having snapped the thread which had led Hegel on from there to his speculative Absolute, they turned back to find the real meaning and reference of these objectifications in the subject which had produced them as forms of its own self-expression.
Theology was thus transformed back into anthropology.
Strauss' most influential work was his Life of Jesus (1835), which was enthusiastically translated into English by George Eliot.
Here, he introduced into New Testament criticism the idea of ‘myth’, and applied it to the supernatural elements in the gospels.
In the past, the orthodox approach had been to take these literally, while the rationalists had dismissed them as arbitrary fiction.
Strauss maintained that both approaches were equally shallow.
These features of the gospels are neither simple history nor redundant embroidery.
They are the means used by the writers and the early church to express their own awareness of the significance of Jesus who, as the Founder of Christianity, had been the first to discover the deep truth that God and man are one.
But what is said about Jesus really expresses the truth about the human race as a whole.
Man himself is the union of the finite and the Infinite, of Spirit and Nature, the miracle-worker in whom Spirit rules over Nature;, and mankind as a whole is sinless and destined for perfection in its onward and upward march, symbolised by the New Testament in terms of death, resurrection and ascension.
This new, technical use of ‘myth’ to mean, not a falsehood, but  a truth indirectly expressed, has since become very common in theology — though not always with the same idea about what truth actually is as in Strauss.
Similarly, the recognition that what is said about Jesus in the New Testament is the expression of faith in him, and that this side of the matter, though not the only one, cannot be left out of account, has also become a basic axiom of much modern New Testament study.
In these ways, the Life of Jesus ranks with the work of Baur as epoch-making in New Testament research.
But for Strauss himself it represented a stage in what was to become an anguished and sometimes bitter drifting away from even this somewhat diluted and Idealist ‘Christianity’.
Feuerbach's position was developed particularly in The Essence of Christianity (1841),The Philosophy of the Future (1843) and The Essence of Religion (1853).
It centres in the conviction that the very idea of God is itself a projection in which man seeks to transcend the limitations of his own finitude.
Religion reflects man's desire to be the God he imagines.
More recent interpretations of religion as illusory self-projection (Sigmund Freud) or as expressions of the structure and self-understanding of human society (Emile Durkheim) owe a great deal to Feuerbach, in whom the broad lines are already laid down.
But he did not simply dismiss religion on this score; rather he kept returning to reflect upon it.
He believed that once the real heart and living impulse at its core were discerned, it had validity and significance as expressing the nature of man himself.
This was the main difference between Feuerbach and the more radical Karl Marx, whose early thought was much affected both by Feuerbach and by the more militantly atheistic Hegelian Bruno Bauer.
Marx maintained that the human consciousness which could project this refracted religious self-image must be a ‘false consciousness’, profoundly alienated from itself; that it had been brought into this state by the development of divisions within human society between the different social and economic classes; that religion served in that situation as an ‘ideology’, a system of beliefs functioning to support the established order, and an ‘opium’ which would keep the proletariat passive in the face of their oppression and exploitation by diverting their attention and hopes to another world and its promised rewards; that it was not enough for the philosopher to understand and diagnose this situation, but that he must go on to change it; and that this involved  moving back from Feuerbach's ‘critique of heaven’to a fresh ‘critique of earth’, of economics, politics and society in general, with the aim of changing the structures of the established order and overcoming the forces of division and alienation which both produced religion and drew support from it.
Marx also believed that the day of Christianity was already past: it really belonged to an earlier, feudal pattern of society, and had been undermined beyond hope of recovery by the emergence of the bourgeois culture, which had already passed beyond it, and appeared to maintain it only for the most cynical of purposes.
While in the nineteenth century, Marx appeared simply as an ‘anti-theologian’, many of the themes in his work have come to play a role in more recent theological discussion.
These developments on the left wing of Hegelianism, and the work of Feuerbach in particular, throw into high relief a profound ambiguity not only in Hegel's thought, but also in that of Schleiermacher and Ritschl.
Although they all speak with great seriousness of God, their procedure concentrates very much on man — whether on his religious awareness, his moral striving, or his rational understanding.
Does their theology then really speak about a real God, or merely about man himself?
If the former, have they made the point sufficiently clear, shown the foundation on which they are building, and set up adequate defences against Feuerbach's criticisms?
While they, unlike Feuerbach, certainly did not intend to turn theology into anthropology, did they nevertheless risk doing precisely that?
By focusing attention, albeit in negative and often hostile fashion, on that issue, the radical Hegelians placed on the agenda what was to become an urgent matter in later generations.
The way in which that topic was to explode on to the stage in the twentieth century is anticipated in the frontal attack  launched on Hegel's system by the Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard.
He received but scant attention outside his native land for half a century after his death, but then came to be a major force who made a profound impression on both theology and philosophy.
In a literary career lasting only some twelve years, he poured out a steady stream of sermons, pamphlets and books, some under his own name, some with symbolic pseudonyms.
Among the most significant for theology were Philosophical Fragments (1844),Stages on Life's Way (1845) and Concluding Unscientific Postscript (1846).
Throughout his work he circled endlessly around the question of what it is to be a Christian, to have faith, to encounter God.
He was a brilliant but also a tortured thinker, in many ways a solitary and tragic figure, his personality marked by a tendency to depression, and by the decision he made in 1843 to break off his engagement to Regine Olsen.
His profound psychological insight owed a great deal to a neurotic streak, and it was no accident that one of his contributions to subsequent technical terminology was the term Angst (‘dread’), and that he published books with such titles as The Concept of Dread, Fear and Trembling and The Sickness unto Death .
But he was far from being merely neurotic; rather, he was a visionary of genius comparable with that of William Blake or Fyodor Dostoievsky, one of those rare souls whose work, forged in the fires of their own pain, shatters established perceptions and calls their readers into a new and different world.
And against the background of the dominant trends in theology, Kierkegaard offered something very new and different indeed.
His thought was shaped by two distinct but complementary convictions.
The first has to do with his understanding of the character of truth and the way in which it is opened up and attained, and is expressed in one of his battle-cries, ‘Truth is subjectivity!’
By this, he did not mean that truth is simply subjective, merely my own opinion, what I happen to like to regard as true.
He meant that the deepest and profoundest truth, the truth that ultimately matters and is in the end really worth grasping, cannot be of the sort that can be contemplated and appropriated in an attitude of serene detachment.
It must be seized with passion and entered inwardly.
Nor can it be had simply as a possession: it must be ‘leapt into’ repeatedly and afresh.
There are of course all kinds of truths that are not of this sort; but they lie on a lower level altogether.
The truth with which faith deals is of the highest and most ultimate kind, and faith itself is a ‘leap’ and a ‘passion’, a leap into the truth that can only be grasped on the road of authentic commitment.
The second conviction is, again in his own expression, of ‘the infinite qualitative difference’ between God and man, the infinite and the finite, eternity and time.
From this sense of the immense gulf between God and himself, and between God's holiness and his own sinful existence, arises the pathos of Kierkegaard's understanding of faith itself.
Man stands over against the awful  otherness of God, by which his own existence is challenged, questioned and judged; but in faith he finds the power nonetheless to live in that encounter with God by which each present moment becomes a meeting with eternity.
But in this meeting the absolute difference between the two sides remains: it is not dissolved away in a ‘coincidence of opposites’, an ‘identity in difference’, an ‘eternal God-man unity’.
The heart of Christianity, for Kierkegaard, lies in the recognition in Jesus of the intersection of time and eternity, the coming together of God and man.
But this intersection is not a Hegelian movement from thesis through antithesis to eventual  synthesis .
It is, rather, what he terms ‘the Absolute Paradox’, for the absolute difference between God and man remains, even when God becomes man in the incarnation.
How he could do so at all is something beyond our finite comprehension, and the full significance of the intersection of eternity with time in Jesus is only grasped along with the awareness that it is beyond our power to understand or explain.
This recognition occurs in a decisive ‘moment’ in which we find ourselves faced and encountered by the reality of God in Jesus.
This ‘moment’ is itself a point in our own time and history, but insofar as it is also the encounter with eternity, it is the ‘eternal moment’, and shares something of the quality of the intersection of time and eternity in Jesus himself.
And it is itself always also paradoxical, for it discloses what cannot be scaled down to be contained, proved, measured, demonstrated or explained within the framework of finite human reasoning.
Jesus is God ‘incognito’: it is of the very nature of the presence of God as man that it must be ambiguous, that it may not be recognised by everyone, that the ‘sign’ by its very nature may be ‘spoken against’.
It follows that once a person reaches the level of authentic faith — which he sees as the third and highest stage along the path of life, following others which he terms the ‘aesthetic’ and the ‘ethical’— it is led and governed purely by obedience to God and not by anything merely human, however lofty.
The archetype of faith is Abraham, who went out at God's command though he did not know where he was going, and who was prepared at that command even to sacrifice his own son.
This approach led Kierkegaard to tackle the question of the connection between Jesus' history and our own in a quite new fashion.
He did this by contrasting Jesus with Socrates as he is described in Plato's dialogues.
Socrates is a teacher, but his function as he himself describes it is to uncover in the minds of those he teaches what they really know already, but have simply failed to recognise or make explicit.
He calls himself a ‘midwife’, and like a midwife, has only a temporary and external role to play in the process of birth.
His task is to provoke and stimulate, and it is completed once the lesson is over and the point has been grasped.
The approach to Jesus in much of the theology and teaching with which Kierkegaard was familiar tended very much to see him too in that kind of light — as the founder of a religion, as the discoverer and imparter of divine truths, as the exemplar of particular values, which were only accidentally bound up with him, but in principle could be detached from him.
We have already noticed how that approach was broadly characteristic of the Hegelians and of Liberal Theology, and Schleiermacher too can fairly be added to the list.
They all insist on the centrality of Jesus, but incline then to explain that centrality in terms of something more general or universal, which is thought of as exemplified in him, and then as spreading out from him and moving on through history.
By contrast, Kierkegaard asserted that the whole point is that Jesus is not another Socrates.
He does not claim to offer us some ‘truth’ separable from himself, but challenges men to recognise him as the one who is the truth, and the truth into which we too are brought out of our own untruthfulness when we recognise who he is.
That in turn involves much more than simply studying him as a figure of past history, or breathing in his historical influence.
It means encountering him as the one who is eternally present before us and who therefore meets us now .
This is the recognition of faith, and there is no way in which it can be demonstrated to be valid by appeal to merely historical argument about Jesus.
The ‘believer at second hand’, the one who believes through having heard the witness of those who believed ‘at first hand’, i.e. the original disciples, must make the same leap of faith as they did to break through Jesus' incognito: they have no advantage over him of the kind that a purely historical approach to Jesus might suggest.
Kierkegaard thus rejects decisively and with withering scorn all attempts to present Christian faith in terms of Idealism or moral values, of historical influence and historical study, or of belonging  to an established Christian church.
Idealism obliterates the infinite qualitative difference between God and man, loses sight of the ineffable paradox of the incarnation, and ends in what Kierkegaard mercilessly pillories as the ludicrous identification of the thoughts of a philosopher with the mind of God.
Both the object of faith — Jesus as God in history — and the character of faith itself disappear from view in the Idealist reconstruction.
The Infinite becomes merely the extension ad infinitum of the finite instead of a reality ‘wholly other’.
The same is done when religion is reduced to ethics, or treated simply as a movement within history, to be explained and defended, or even proved, by historical research and demonstration.
The encounter between time and eternity cannot be fitted into either pattern of interpretation.
Finally, ‘Christendom’ itself has betrayed Jesus by domesticating him as if he were the possession of the church, and by making faith the acceptance of formulae and practices hallowed by the authority of the past.
This dissolves the central paradox which is of the very essence of faith, and turns faith itself into an inheritance rather than a permanent passion of risk, commitment and obedience.
The gauntlet thus thrown down against ideas and assumptions so widely current in the Christianity and theology of his own day was Kierkegaard's great contribution.
In many ways it must be admitted that his thought was unbalanced and inadequately developed.
He worked out his positions very much through polemical critique of others, and tended to be clearer about what was to be rejected than about what was to be put constructively in its place.
The categories and concepts he hammered out in his attack on Idealism — many of them of course drawn from Idealism itself, but refashioned by him — are by no means wholly adequate to serve the restatement of Christian theology, and could indeed lead to the emergence of philosophies quite alien to Christianity itself.
In resisting rationalism he risks emphasising paradox to the point where it can seem sheerly irrational; his insistence on the otherness of God and the sinfulness of man, and his fondness for some of the more arbitrary-seeming accounts of God in the stories of Abraham and Job, leave much too little place for a positive grasp of grace and mercy, goodness and love, though he does attempt to give them place; his stress upon the centrality of the incarnation of God in Jesus commonly seems to reduce to the bare repetition of the claim that Jesus was also, paradoxically, God, but not fully  to work through the implications and purpose of this identification of God with man; his bitter attacks upon ‘Christendom’ in his latter years reveal rather too much of the solitary individualist who has little sense of the nature of community.
Nor has his influence always been entirely healthy: he resembles Nietzsche and Schopenhauer in that it has sometimes been the more morbid and pathological features of his thought that have exercised the strongest fascination on his readers.
When, generations after his death, theology rediscovered him, it also found it necessary to move beyond him.
Nonetheless he stands out as a prophetic beacon, a fresh and radical thinker whose radicalism did not lie in attempting a consciously ‘modern reinterpretation’ of Christian faith, but in struggling afresh with the heart of the matter, and charting out a very different course from those being recommended on all sides around him.
We have just seen how Kierkegaard rejected any idea that faith could be proved by the appeal to historical argument.
Earlier we traced the new emphasis which, by contrast, Liberal Theology laid upon the historical approach to the New Testament.
The wide gulf between these approaches reveals the extent to which the relation between theological and historical study became problematical through the nineteenth century.
Some of the main issues arising here can be illustrated further from the course taken by the historical study of Jesus through the century, and from the rise towards its close of quite new approaches to the study of the history of religions in general.
In 1906 Albert Schweitzer published a lengthy book,Von Reimarus zu Wrede.
Eine Geschichte der Leben Jesu Forschung (‘From Reimarus to Wrede.
A History of the Life of Jesus Research’), translated into English as The Quest of the Historical Jesus .
In it, he surveyed and criticised a large number of attempts to reconstruct ‘the real Jesus’, from Reimarus' Fragments , published by Lessing in the 1770s, to William Wrede's Das Messiasgeheimnis in den Evangelien (‘The Messianic Secret in the Gospels’) of 1901.
The various Lives had been written from a variety of standpoints, but he observed that the best of them had been inspired with hate — hate, not of Jesus, but of the ‘Christ of dogma’.
The general  aim was to tear away the wrappings in which orthodox Christianity had enshrouded Jesus and to allow his real face again to be seen.
How far they had been successful was, however, another matter entirely: the main effect of Schweitzer's brilliant study was in fact to put an end to that quest, at least in its most widely popular form.
In the period he covered, Schweitzer distinguished three broad stages, in which three distinct issues were successively at the centre of discussion.
The first ran up to Strauss' Life of Jesus , and struggled with the question whether the supernatural and miraculous elements in the gospels should be accepted.
Strauss had settled that question by treating them as myths, in which the significance of Jesus was indirectly expressed.
Similarly, theologians such as Schleiermacher had moved away from the idea of a miracle as a supernatural intervention in the normal processes of nature, and were in essential harmony with Strauss' conclusions.
As a result, the key to the meaning of Jesus had come to be looked for, not in supernatural accreditation by miracles, but in his personality, his consciousness of God, his teaching and his impact upon his followers.
This had then opened up what Schweitzer described as the ‘psychologising’ approach to Jesus, which set out to explore his understanding of himself, tracing his awareness of God, his key ideas, even the development of his teaching through the career which ran from Galilee to Golgotha.
Schleiermacher's own account of Jesus relied heavily on such psychological study; so, for that matter, did that of Liberal Theology; and so too did those which saw Jesus only as a particularly heroic and noble representative of the human race, as did the immensely popular Life of Jesus by the Frenchman Ernst Renan (1823–92).
Just this approach had, however, been rendered impossible by the development of the second and third stages in critical New Testament study, for they had removed any real basis for it.
The question in the second stage, which was ushered in by the work of Baur, was raised by the manifest differences in style and content between the synoptic gospels and the gospel of John.
Baur, and the generality of leading New Testament scholars after him, had come to hold that the fourth gospel was not a reliable historical source.
It was much later than the others; it was the product of hellenistic circles in the church of the early second century; it was therefore altogether remote from the life and times of Jesus himself.
Once it was felt not to be reliable as evidence for Jesus' own  history and teaching, however, most of what the psychological biographies had chiefly depended upon was removed along with it.
Without the fourth gospel there were very few sayings which could be taken as directly expressing what Jesus' own self-understanding might have been; for most of these statements are in it, not in the synoptics.
Without it, too, there was no longer a clear chronological framework within which to set and arrange the events and stages of Jesus' ministry; for most of the indications of dates and journeys are in it.
The biographical approach to Jesus' life, and the psychological study of his own mind, were thus left with far too little to work with.
That was bad enough; but worse yet was to come in the third stage.
That third stage had been introduced by the work of Johannes Weiss in his Die Predigt Jesu vom Reiche Gottes (‘The Preaching of Jesus concerning the Kingdom of God’), published in 1892.
Weiss was Ritschl's son-in-law, and had set out to investigate the theme of the kingdom of God in the synoptic gospels with a suspicion that it amounted to something rather different from what Ritschl had made of it.
The suspicion proved amply justified.
Weiss found that the kingdom Jesus preached belonged in the apocalyptic, eschatological framework of contemporary Jewish thought.
Jesus was not inviting men to join a spiritual and ethical community directed towards the moral organisation of mankind.
He was proclaiming the imminent end of the present world, and the coming victorious rule of God which would break in from beyond.
This showed, Schweitzer forcefully argued, that the entire quest of the Idealists, Liberals and humanists had been utterly misconceived.
The New Testament message was consistently eschatological, having to do with the end of the present order of things and the coming of something quite new; and Jesus himself represented the final flowering of the apocalyptic spirit of late Judaism.
As Reimarus had long since argued,that , rather than the intention of ‘founding Christianity’, was the key to his preaching and teaching.
The real Jesus could not have been more removed from Renan's ‘amiable carpenter’ who spoke beautifully about the lilies of the field in order to convey a new and simple principle of love,; the ‘historical Jesus’of so many searches and ‘discoveries, was not historical at all.
As Schweitzer's contemporary, the Roman Catholic Modernist, George Tyrrell, remarked, the biographers of  Jesus ‘looked into the deep well of history, and saw there only the reflection of their own faces’.
A final nail in the coffin had been hammered in by Wrede.
By studying the gospel references to the apocalyptic Jewish figure of the ‘Son of Man’— whom Jesus sometimes appears to identify with himself, but sometimes not — Wrede had come to the conclusions that Jesus had not in fact applied the title to himself; that after his resurrection the church had come to anticipate his return; that it had then identified Jesus himself as the coming Son of Man; and that the impression given in the gospels of a ‘messianic secret’ that Jesus in his lifetime conveyed only to his closest disciples, and charged them not to reveal to others until the proper time came, was a mere literary device to support that identification.
l he general conclusion reached here was that any attempt to get behind the early church's proclamation of Jesus to what Jesus himself had actually believed about himself could only be built on psychological conjecture and historical guesswork.
The importance of Schweitzer's study is twofold.
Along with Weiss, he forced theology to approach with a new seriousness the eschatological element in the New Testament and in Jesus, message.
They look beyond history as such to the activity of God, and set the movement of history itself in that light.
While Schweitzer tended to dwell too exclusively on this aspect, he was certainly justified in stressing it.
Second, he effectively demolished the picture of Jesus and his teaching which had been developed in the ‘progressive’ theology of the previous generations.
The further question of where now theology ought to be going was one he was less equipped to tackle.
His own answer to it was in some ways remarkably similar to those he attacked, for it added up to this: historical study cannot bring Jesus down to our own time; rather, it reveals his strangeness to us, and he loses all colour and significance if we attempt to tear him out of his own historical and religious setting in late Judaism.
So too his message of the coming kingdom cannot be lifted out and carried over to the present: that message was refuted when Jesus himself attempted to provoke the intervention of God and bring about the end of history by challenging the powers and authorities of his own day.
He attempted to stop the wheel of history, but the wheel turned on and crushed him on the cross.
But there is something else: what Schweitzer calls the ‘spirit’ of Jesus.
That lives on, and we are  called and challenged to share it, to hear the words once spoken by the lake-side, ‘Come, follow me.’
And Schweitzer's own subsequent work in Africa, whose guiding principle he described as ‘reverence for life’, stands as a monument to his understanding of what that spirit and that following meant.
It is however noticeable that while on the point of history he was directly opposed to Liberal Theology, his appeal to a ‘spirit’ somehow detachable from the Jesus of history, and his practical application of it, run very much along similar lines to the Liberal approach.
Some years earlier, the same issues had been opened up from a more consciously theological angle by the Halle professor Martin Kähler.
In his Der  Sogenannte  historische Jesus und der geschichtliche, biblische Christus (E.T.
The so-called historical Jesus and the historic, biblical Christ , 1966) published in 1892, he took issue with the underlying aims and presuppositions of the ‘life of Jesus research’.
The question he broached was whether or how far the historical approach to the New Testament is appropriate as a means of uncovering the truth about Jesus and supplying a solid basis (or correction) for Christian belief.
That question was already implicit in his title, with its distinction between the adjectives historisch (corresponding to the noun Historie ) and geschichtlich (from Geschichte ).
Both Historie and Geschichte may be translated as ‘history’, and both historisch and geschichtlich as ‘historical’; and there is no easy way directly to represent in English the contrast he drew between them.
Geschichte as Kähler used it refers to past history as such;Historie to history as studied by the means and methods of historical study.
But the distinction carried other overtones as well, which have become even more central in more recent applications of the distinction.
Historie can be seen as describing the past as past , and as fragmentarily reconstructed by the detached, scholarly and scientific method of the historian,;Geschichte as describing a past which in some fashion also impinges upon and involves the present, a past which must be approached via subjective commitment rather than by a purely objective analysis of a more neutral kind.
Kähler rejected any purely historisch approach to the figure of Jesus for three main reasons.
First of all, the available evidence is not of the right kind.
The gospels do not furnish us with the materials for a modern-style biography, nor do they give us a window into Jesus' mind by which we could peer into his inmost soul.
They were written to proclaim him as the Christ, the anointed of God, the revealer of the Father, and to elicit the appropriate response of faith and trust in him.
Second, any reconstruction of Jesus' personality must involve, like all such reconstructions, the general principle of analogy .
We must assume that he was a man like ourselves, and apply our own experience and use our own sympathetic imagination to visualise and enter into his mind.
But, Kähler insisted, precisely this principle cannot be relied upon in the case of Jesus, because of the witness of the Bible and of Christian experience of him that he is unique, perfect and free from sin.
There is a difference of kind, not merely of degree, between him and ourselves.
Third, all purely historical study by its very nature can offer only provisional results.
If faith is to be solidly grounded at all, it must rest on some more secure foundation than that.
Otherwise a ‘papacy of the professors’ would be set up between Jesus Christ and those who believe in him.
By its very nature, faith rests and must rest in a ‘storm-free territory’ which mere historical consideration and reconsideration cannot in any way disturb.
Overall, historical (historisch ) study of Jesus attempts to reconstruct the kind of real Jesus whom the historian, for whatever good or bad reasons of his own, thinks to be worth finding.
Faith, by contrast, approaches Jesus with a radically different attitude, recognising in him the revelation of the invisible God, believing that it is true that ‘he who has seen me has seen the Father’.
This is not the artificial ‘historical Jesus’, but the Jesus who was and is seen and trusted as the Christ of God, the Christ of Geschichte rather than the mere Jesus of Historie .
Kähler's insistence that faith and historical research are not the same thing is obviously valid.
But it is nonetheless questionable whether his statement of the difference is entirely adequate.
How far is the wedge to be driven between Historie and Geschichte ?
Is ordinary historical study wholly irrelevant to the approach of the believer to Jesus?
Kähler's thought, and the distinction he drew, were to find many echoes in later debate, along with the work of Schweitzer, and we shall meet these questions again.
For the moment it is enough to observe that the Historie/ Geschichte dichotomy could very easily end up looking rather like Lessing's between the accidental truths of history and the necessary truths of reason, or Fichte's between the historical and the metaphysical, and thus  lead to a position open to the same charge of Gnosticism that Baur had laid at the door of Hegel and Schleiermacher.
A wider but related set of matters was brought to the fore around this same period by the ‘history-of-religions school’(Religionsgeschichtliche Schule ), which may be reckoned to have begun with Otto Pfleiderer's Primitive Christianity (1887; E.T.
1906).
This shared and to some extent grew out of the Ritschlian emphasis on history and historical investigation, and was concerned to set the history of the beginnings of Christianity in the wider context of the culture, philosophy and religion of the ancient world.
Powerful impulses in this direction had been supplied by the immense development in the study of antiquity throughout the nineteenth century.
As more and more material was uncovered, the interest of students of both Old and New Testaments had extended to take in increasingly large tracts of the surrounding fields, and to seek to locate the biblical material in that broader setting.
The most radical thinkers in the Religionsgeschichtliche Schule — such as Richard Reitzenstein (1861 — 1931) and Wilhelm Bousset (1865–1920)— inclined to treat Christianity itself as an eclectic synthesis of religious and philosophical ideas flowing in from a variety of sources in the ancient world.
Reitzenstein in particular pushed to its extreme limits a view, which was to be held by others in the following generation, notably Rudolf Bultmann, that the ideas of redemption displayed in the New Testament were in fact derived from pre-Christian gnostic mythology.
Other members of the group, notably Johannes Weiss, were more cautious.
Their approach, however, inevitably raised further questions both about the assumptions on which it was based, and about the implications for the standing of the Bible and for the uniqueness and distinctiveness of Christianity of this kind of historical comparison with non-biblical sources.
These led on to the further issues of the relation between Christianity and other religions in general, and of the impact of the critical study of religions on Christian theology; for that study too had made huge strides through the nineteenth century.
The most systematic theological reflection on these problems was offered in this period by Ernst Troeltsch.
Behind Troeltsch stands the philosopher Wilhelm Dilthey (1833 — 1911) who in turn drew much of his inspiration from Schleiermacher.
Dilthey set out to construct a philosophy of  history which would disclose the real nature of historical knowledge and establish its significance for modern culture.
Basic to it is a distinction, which he took from the English philosopher John Stuart Mill (1806–73), between ‘natural science’ and ‘moral science’, which he rendered in German as Naturwissenschaft and Geisteswissenschaft respectively.
In natural science, we study the phenomena of the world around us, the world of things , of objects .
There, we are always in the position of observers, looking in, as it were, from without.
We are necessarily at a distance from them, detached.
In moral (or human) science, by contrast, we deal with that with which we have immediate contact within ourselves — the human spirit and the forms in which it expresses and manifests itself.
This is what enables us in historical study to bridge the gulf between the present and the past, to enter into the experience and awareness which are opened up for us in the thoughts, beliefs, practices and social customs and institutions of other times and other cultures.
The various forms of religion in particular reveal the human spirit facing the ultimate questions about the meaning of existence, and by studying them our own understanding can be deepened and extended.
In this, however, we are not dealing directly with God — Dilthey bracketed off the question of God himself — but with religion as a human phenomenon.
In the process we become aware of the diversity — and therefore also of the relativity — of the different particular forms it has taken.
But the enduring constant is the spirit of man in which we also share.
Troeltsch himself worked in three main fields.
He sought to develop further Dilthey's philosophy of history, seeing the modern awareness of history as the key to the nature of our culture.
He developed a sociological approach to the study of church history in his The Social Teaching of the Christian Churches (1911; E.T.
1931), where he distinguished three main social forms of religious institution: the church-type, the sect-type, and individual mysticism.
Finally, he devoted a good deal of attention to the problem of the implications of his general historical approach for understanding the character of Christianity itself, particularly in The Absoluteness of Christianity (1901; E.T.
1972), the unfinished Der Historismus und seine Probleme (‘historicism and its problems’), published in 1922, and a lecture written just before his death on ‘The Place of Christianity among the World Religions’.
In The  Absoluteness of Christianity he rejected the idea that any historical phenomenon, including the Christian faith, could be absolutely and universally valid, but still tried to hold that Christianity was nevertheless in some fashion the ‘normative’ form of religion.
By the end of his life, his position was somewhat more relativist, and that can fairly be seen as the result of the consistent working-through of his earlier principles.
Troeltsch's approach to the question follows the lines of a general study of the religious history of mankind.
That study follows three basic principles: of criticism, analogy and correlation .
Criticism demands that all evidence must be critically weighed, and all conclusions open to revision in the light of fresh evidence.
Analogy means that the events being investigated are essentially similar in kind to those of which we ourselves have direct experience.
Correlation specifies that every event in history is connected with others, and the whole of history is a kind of network of these inter-relations.
There are no breaks in it in the sense of special divine interventions; and while every event is in its own way particular, individual and unique, none is qualitatively of a wholly different kind from all others.
The net result is that no religion can be ‘absolute’ or ‘final’, and Troeltsch eventually rejected the attempts of Schleiermacher and Hegel to establish the uniqueness of Christianity in any absolutely distinctive sense.
Historical study cannot make place for any such absoluteness, let alone demonstrate it.
At very best, any particular religion can be normative or valid only for those who happen to subscribe to it.
Within that horizon, its doctrines may of course be affirmed and presented as true; but the wider and more ample perspective of the study of religion in general cannot permit such restrictions — though it may be engaged in by one who also , as a personal matter, adheres to a particular faith.
Christian dogmatic theology as traditionally practised is an aspect of  Christian practical theology, the working-out of the mode of expression of Christian beliefs in a Christian context.
The disciplined study of religion reaches out more broadly to cover all the forms of religious experience.
In Troeltsch, the focusing of attention on ‘religion’ which had been so central for Schleiermacher and Liberal Theology is thus intensified to the point where its separation off from Christian theology becomes inevitable.
In this way, Troeltsch anticipated  the further expansion through the twentieth century of the study of religion by comparative, psychological, anthropological and sociological means.
This study has been and doubtless will continue to be enormously fruitful in many ways, but the question which Troeltsch's own work so clearly poses needs to be faced.
How far is this inevitably relativising method of study compatible with genuine religious belief and commitment?
In particular, how can it be held together with Christian conviction.
In Troeltsch's own case, it is very clear that even when he sought — as he also did — to function as a Christian theologian, and to work out a pattern of Christian doctrine, his approach was deeply coloured by the relativism of his wider approach to the study of religion.
He was able to tolerate this because he did have a kind of ultimate theological perspective of his own: in a style that owed a good deal to Hegel, he believed that all history is a movement of the spirit which is on the way to a return to God, and will at the last find its home in God.
All religion could therefore be seen as an immanent reflection and intimation of the ultimate reality of God himself.
And some such ultimate perspective is required if Troeltsch's method of study is not to dissolve into complete scepticism about genuine truth in religion.
But is this broad and almost pantheistic frame of reference in itself any more valid than, for example, the traditional Christian affirmation of the absolute uniqueness of Jesus as the incarnation of God?
The initiative in theology in the closing years of Troeltsch's life was already passing to those who held that it was not, and that the whole direction of thought which could be seen as culminating in him needed to be put into reverse.
One negative consequence of this has been that positive Christian theology on the one hand and the study of religion on the other have very largely tended to go their separate ways; and this too does little to resolve the problem posed by Troeltsch himself.
His solutions may not be acceptable; but others must be found.
Other Nineteenth-century Trends
So far in this chapter we have concentrated on only a small selection of the most creative and influential thinkers in theology from Schleiermacher to the turn of the century.
A full survey even of German theology in that period would have had to mention very  many more, and to bring out a far wider range of approaches and issues; but we have attended particularly to those whose legacy did most to shape the background to more recent thought.
Before we leave that age, however, we must at least mention some others, especially in Britain and America, and note some further themes in their work.
While Schleiermacher was working in Berlin, ideas in some respects similar to his were being advanced in less systematic form in England by Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772 — 1834), particularly in his Aids to Reflection (1825) and Confessions of an Enquiring Spirit , published in 1840.
Like Schleiermacher, Coleridge rejected any attempt to prove the truth of religion by appeal to rational, philosophical proofs: this seemed to him completely to miss the character of faith, which he described as having to do, not with theory , but with life .
This does not mean that faith itself is irrational, nor is it mere emotional ‘feeling’.
It is an imaginative reaching out to grasp the reality of God, to encounter and respond to his will, and to find in him living truth.
Coleridge thus moved beyond Schleiermacher in stressing the personal in God's own being, though, like Schleiermacher, he too tended to place the theological centre of gravity in the inner experience of faith.
He was to have a wide, if rather scattered, influence in English theology through the nineteenth century, and served to introduce into it some of the same impulses that Schleiermacher brought in Germany.
He also played a part in developing in England, even before the full force of the new historical criticism of the Bible had been felt there, an understanding of the authority of the Bible which did not rest simply on regarding it as the inspired and inerrant compendium from which the truths about God could be read off in literal and rationalist fashion.
Instead he insisted that the truth of God is to be found in it when it is approached in the proper way — by one who is searching in awareness of his own need.
Self-knowledge and knowledge of God are closely bound up together.
Here the new voice of the nineteenth century can be clearly heard, with its insistence upon self-awareness, self-expression and self-discovery — an insistence whose dangers we have already remarked upon where it is taken to extremes, so that the human self entirely fills the horizon.
But that was not Coleridge's intention.
He stood more in the classical Christian tradition, which insisted that self-knowledge and knowledge of  God are intimately connected, but that they are not at all the same thing.
A somewhat similar note was being struck at the same time in Scotland by the lay theologian Thomas Erskine of Linlathen (1788–1870).
His concern, especially in The Unconditional Freeness of the Gospel (1828) and The Brazen Serpent (1831), was to set a fresh insistence on God's love and forgiveness over against the rather rigid and authoritarian Calvinism which (at least in theory) dominated his native land.
Calvinism as it had developed and hardened had tended to place a huge emphasis on man's total depravity and sinfulness, to limit the forgiveness offered in Jesus Christ to the ‘elect’, and to speak as if faith were a condition of forgiveness, our side of a bargain made with God.
Erskine sought to put this into reverse: forgiveness is there for all in Jesus Christ, who is the representative head of the whole human race, and faith is the glad recognition that we are forgiven and reconciled to God through him.
A position very like Erskine's was also represented by his friend John McLeod Campbell (1800–72).
He was deposed from the ministry of the Church of Scotland in 1831 for teaching that ‘assurance of salvation’ is attainable, and is indeed part of genuine faith, and for views on the atonement incompatible with the Westminster Confession .
His teaching found its fullest form in The Nature of the Atonement (1856).
Here he rejected the widely accepted ‘penal theory’, according to which Jesus bore on the cross the punishment which God must exact from sinners if he was once more to be gracious to them.
This approach tended to stress law and judgement as primary in God's attitude towards sinners, and to see grace, love and mercy as secondary, and as available only if the conditions of the law had been satisfied.
Campbell set the matter in the directly opposite light.
God's love and desire to forgive are primary.
Because of this, Jesus Christ as God incarnate identifies himself with sinners, takes their part, vicariously confesses and bears the burden of their sins and the judgement which they bring about.
Campbell thus sought to subordinate law to love, and the ‘judicial’ element in our relation to God to a deeper and wider ‘filial’one.
A counterpart to Campbell in America at the same time was Horace Bushnell (1802–81), with his The Vicarious Sacrifice (1866) and Forgiveness and Law (1874), in which some of the same  emphases appear.
In themselves they were by no means new — they were indeed centuries old — but they constituted a direct challenge to the rather abstract and clear-cut penal theory which was much subscribed to on both sides of the Atlantic, and to this extent also reflected something of the atmosphere of the new age.
The concerns of Erskine, Campbell and Bushnell also throw into relief the fact that Anglo-Saxon theology tended to devote rather more attention than German to the matter of the atonement — indeed the very word ‘atonement’ is an English one which has no precise German equivalent.
Coleridge, Erskine and Campbell were all among the formative influences upon Frederick Denison Maurice (1805 — 72), who ranks with John Henry Newman (1801–90) as one of the outstanding English theologians of the whole nineteenth century.
Until his conversion to the Roman Catholic Church in 1845, Newman, along with others such as John Keble (1792 — 1866), Edward Pusey (1800–82) and Richard Hurrel Froude (1803 — 36), was a leader of the Tractarian movement, which developed into the Anglo-Catholic wing of the Church of England.
By contrast with what it saw as the corrosive and unbelieving spirit of the age, that movement was deeply concerned to recover and reinstate the ancient doctrines of the faith, especially the great dogmas hammered out in the early centuries; and with them to restore the sense of continuity and rich unbroken tradition which found its expression especially in ritual and liturgy.
Newman's greatness did not lie chiefly in fresh theological insight, but in the enormous impact of his spirituality, his hymns, and his studies of the church fathers.
He did however attempt in his Sermons Chiefly on the Theory of Religious Belief (1843) and The Grammar of Assent (1870) an analysis of the nature of religious belief which shows some affinity with Coleridge, and includes Newman's own original idea of the ‘illative sense’ by which we find it possible to proceed through probabilities to certitude; and in his celebrated Essay on the Development of Christian Doctrine (1878) struggled with the problem of change and continuity in the expression of Christian faith down through the centuries in a fashion which has helped many others to grasp something of the questions, if not in most cases to accept his answers.
Maurice, in spite of early contacts with the Tractarians, took a very different road.
In their emphasis on ritual and doctrine he  sensed the same danger of a too purely objective conception of faith as in the rigid understanding of man, sin and atonement in which he had been brought up, and which, like Erskine and Campbell, he rejected.
Maurice had a horror alike of all-too-neat theological schemes and systems and of ecclesiastical parties.
The central matter to which the gospel points, he insisted, is Jesus Christ himself; and it is in him, as the head and Lord of all mankind, that all men are invited to discover God, their neighbour, and themselves.
The gospel does not direct us to our sin and the threat of judgement, but to reconciliation in the kingdom of Christ.
This does not mean that sin is unreal: it runs through the whole fabric of our existence, both individual and social.
But in him it is overcome, and the church is an instrument for the reconstitution of human community around him.
So Maurice could call himself a ‘Christian socialist’, though his socialism, like that of his associate Charles Kingsley (1819 — 75), was of a somewhat idealistic and utopian character.
Nevertheless, he anticipated both some of the themes and concerns of the Ritschlian theology and the christological emphasis which was once more to come to the centre in the twentieth century.
His thought was in many ways inadequately worked out, but he set signposts for the future.
Towards the end of Maurice's life, in 1860, there appeared a collection of papers by seven Oxford dons, entitled Essays and Reviews , and these made a great impact in Britain.
They were not, by modern standards, especially radical in tone; but they introduced to a wider public the new approaches to the critical study of the Bible which up till then had developed more on the Continent, and only to some extent in the cloistered world of the English universities.
So, for example, the paper by Benjamin Jowett (1817–93)‘On the Interpretation of Scripture’ pointed out that it was not always easy to know what might be meant by ‘proving a doctrine from Scripture’, and insisted that the Bible must be interpreted like any other piece of literature.
The book raised a storm of controversy, and two of the authors were in fact tried for heresy (though finally acquitted).
The strength of feeling that could be raised by what was felt in many quarters to be the attack of modern criticism on the authority of the Bible was shown again some years later in the Robertson Smith case in Scotland.
Smith was Professor of Old Testament in the Free Church College in Aberdeen.
In 1875 a contributed  an article on the Bible to Encyclopedia Britannica , in which he considered and in part accepted the hypothesis of Wellhausen that the first five books of the Old Testament were composites, made up of different interwoven literary strands.
After some years of controversy (in which, admittedly, Smith himself did little to smooth things over, tending if anything to exacerbate the situation by his own behaviour), he was finally deposed from his chair in 1881.
Fortunately for him, he was very soon offered instead the chair of Arabic in Cambridge.
The effect of the case, however, was the reverse of what some of his critics had hoped for: attempts to bring similar charges against others failed, and the right and indeed duty of biblical scholars to explore these questions came to be tacitly accepted in Scotland as elsewhere.
An indication of the gradual change of climate was another collection of papers published thirty years after Essays and Reviews .
This was Lux Mundi , edited in 1890 by Charles Gore (1853–1932).
The contributors all came from the Anglo-Catholic wing of the Church of England, but their shared aim was to assist the re-expression of the central Christian doctrines in a way that would be appropriate to their own time, and that would take account of the historical character both of the Bible and of subsequent theology.
One emphasis, for which Gore himself was especially noted, was on kenotic christology.
This approach, which had already been followed by several German theologians in the nineteenth century, especially Gottfried Thomasius (1802–15), took its cue from Philippians 2:7, which speaks of Christ as having ‘emptied himself’(in Greek,ekenosen ).
Kenotic christology took this to mean that in becoming man, the Son of God divested himself of his specifically divine attributes, such as omniscience and omnipotence.
In this way, it hoped to do justice to the real humanness of Jesus, while still affirming the established doctrine of his ‘two natures’.
Kenotic christology of this sort did have its own internal problems: on closer examination it is not easy to understand what exactly it can mean to speak of this ‘self-emptying’, and attempts to make the matter more precise tend to fade into a tangle of artificialities and contradictions.
Nevertheless, this emphasis on the fact that Jesus was a real man, and the rejection of what was certainly a widespread tendency to picture him as a purely superhuman (and rather unreal) figure, were clearly necessary: here lies one side of what classical Christian teaching has always held.
A very different response to the critical approach to the Bible was worked out on the other side of the Atlantic by Charles Hodge (1797 — 1878) of Princeton, the Presbyterian seminary which came to be a veritable bastion of Calvinist orthodoxy.
The tradition was carried on after him by his son, Archibald Alexander Hodge (1823–86), and Benjamin B. Warfield (1851 — 1921).
The characteristic emphasis of the Princeton theology was on the inspired and infallible authority of the Bible.
While it could and did allow that the discoveries of natural science and of philological and literary criticism of the text could cast light upon the meaning of the Bible, it held that the proper responsibility of the theologian is to interpret the Bible out of itself.
Its teaching supplies the data which he must gather and interpret scientifically by tracing the general principles running through it and underlying the particular propositions it contains.
In this way, it applied to the Bible the ‘inductive method’ of scientific study developed in the rise of modern natural science, which similarly aimed to work up from pieces of data to more universal principles or laws.
The overall shape of the theology which resulted was strongly reminiscent of the Calvinist systems of the seventeenth century, which these men sought to follow and to update.
This kind of approach is still followed in some branches of Calvinism, especially in America and Holland.
But the Princeton theology has also had a much wider influence among more conservative Christians to the present day.
There, it has not so much been its Calvinism that has been welcome as its emphasis upon the inerrancy of Scripture.
It should however be added that there were important elements, especially in the theology of the two Hodges, which foreshadowed the revival of a fresher form of Calvinist thinking in the twentieth century.
Their emphasis on the responsibility of the theologian towards the Bible, and on the need for a disciplined hermeneutic which will allow the Bible itself to speak, will be found again, albeit much modified, in the thought of Karl Barth; as too will Archibald Hodge's principle that ‘Christ and his work is the centre around which all Christian theology is brought into order,’ as he put it on page 16 of the 1878 edition of his Outlines of Theology , which was first published in 1860, and, together with his father's Systematic Theology (1871), is a classic textbook of the Princeton method.
To conclude this very selective sketch, one other type of  American theology must be mentioned — that of the ‘Mercersburg school’ of John W. Nevin (1803–86) and Philip Schaff (1819–93), who were colleagues in the seminary of the German Reformed Church at Mercersburg, Pennsylvania, in the years preceding 1853.
In that year, the college moved away from Mercersburg, Nevin retired, and Schaff later embarked on an outstanding career as a Church historian at Union Seminary, New York, where he published in 1876 his great History of the Creeds of Christendom .
Like Maurice, with whom they had some affinities, Nevin and Schaff had a horror of party-spirit and sectarianism, and also of the individualism they found deeply entrenched in much American Protestantism, especially in the revivalist movements which came more and more to the fore through the nineteenth century.
They wanted to recover a wider, more comprehensive vision of the church, one which could include and make room for the different forms in which the church had appeared through history, and in this way to overcome the deeply entrenched divisions between the separated confessions and denominations.
They found a theoretical perspective on the matter by developing Baur's application of Hegel's dialectic to church history.
So, for instance, they saw the Roman Catholic Church as representing a ‘Petrine’ approach, over against which Protestantism had emerged as a ‘Pauline’antithesis; and both should ultimately be reconcilable in a ‘Johannine’synthesis.
In this way, the ‘ideal’ reality of the church was seen as involved in a continual process of dialectical movement through history, a process in which conflict and separation had their place as necessary but provisional moments in the growth towards a fuller and more complex unity.
Theologically, the basis for this understanding lay in Jesus Christ as the one in whose own person God and man are reconciled, and in the vision of the church — the whole church — as the continuation of his life through the centuries.
Liturgically, it centred in the sacrament of the eucharist: there was the heart and focus of the life and worship of the church, the key and core of its participation in the life of Christ.
While the Mercersburg theology as such was short-lived, and made relatively little impact in its own day, it presaged the emergence of the ecumenical movement some two to three generations later, and to a remarkable extent anticipated some of that movement's central themes and concerns.
A Changing Climate
The nineteenth century brought a new kind of search for the basis and foundation of theology itself; a fresh attempt to bring human awareness and experience into the centre of theological study; the forging of more specialised techniques for the literary and historical study of the Bible, techniques whose application helped to raise what were often felt to be disturbing and challenging questions about its meaning and relevance as well as about the standing and authority of established Christian doctrines; and the sharp new question whether Christian theology itself ought not to be subsumed under some more general study of religion and religions.
While very different answers to these various questions were offered, the struggle with them reflected a new and consciously modern outlook.
There was an intensified sense of a gap between present and past, and of the need to find a way of bridging it which would make possible an adequate statement of belief for the present day.
There was also a fair amount of uncertainty, as the examples of Kähler and Kierkegaard well illustrate, whether the most fashionable current restatements were in fact adequate.
These doubts were to find a wider resonance in the twentieth century.
Theology in the last sixty years or so has naturally built upon and extended aspects of the work of its nineteenth-century predecessors; but it has also gone through some striking changes of direction, especially from the aims and programme of Liberal Theology.
This is hardly surprising when it is remembered how  far the world has changed in living memory, and in ways which inevitably made their mark on theology itself.
The most dramatic and explosive of these changes was the devastating impact upon the social and political fabric of Europe of the First World War.
It did not only transform the political and military map: by the destruction which it wrought, unparalleled in previous human history in its scale, it hurled a black question mark against the confidence in the onward and upward progress of Christian civilisation which had so strongly characterised Liberal Theology, and forced the bitter question whether the advanced theological thought of the nineteenth century as a whole had not been far too unaware of the darker side of human nature, too optimistic about innate human capacity for good, too willing to take contemporary culture at its own high evaluation of itself, and overall too disposed to take God for granted, and to assume that he was somehow simply ‘given’ in what it regarded as the highest ethical, spiritual and religious values of mankind.
These questions have lost nothing of their force in the decades since 1914 as subsequent conflicts have contributed their own appalling demonstration of man's capacity for inhumanity, and as a new sensitivity has developed to the dilemmas facing the human race and to the degree of inequality and injustice in human affairs in general.
Human nature and human achievements have come to appear far more ambiguous than the progressive hopes of the nineteenth century admitted.
Where the force of the challenge has been felt in theology, it has led not only to a more sober evaluation of man's spiritual and ethical potential, and to more serious reflection on the meaning of human sin, but also to a widespread doubt whether theology itself could really be solidly built on the basis sketched by a Ritschl or even a Schleiermacher.
Could one, as it were, argue up to the reality and character of God from the analysis of religious experience or ethical awareness, as they had tended to do?
Must not theology, if it were to be possible at all, be established from the other side, by God himself — by the God who makes himself known to us in Jesus Christ rather than the God whom we choose to recognise in him, a God who comes from beyond ourselves to judge, redeem and save?
This reversal of the questions which dominated the field at the turn of the century has been characteristic of the main movement in Protestant theology in the last sixty years.
It has certainly not been the only  movement, nor has it always taken the same form or led to the same conclusions.
But this shift of focus, which as we shall see came about with remarkable suddenness through the 1920s, is the primary clue to the shape of more recent developments.
Other far-reaching changes in the modern world have also made their mark on theology, notably the immense advances in science and technology, and the accelerating contact and interaction between different races and cultures in what it is now normal to call ‘the global village’, The explosion of science and the application of its discoveries have altered the world even of our grandfathers beyond recognition.
Virtually no aspect of our lives, especially in the developed countries, has remained unaffected by them, and religion and theology are certainly not exempt.
One set of issues has to do with the way in which science and technology so drastically alter previous patterns of life that they erode and undermine the social, ethical and spiritual values which had been encapsulated and preserved in them.
The corrosive acids of modernity have powerfully assisted a general movement of ‘secularisation’, and faced all kinds of religious tradition — Christian and non-Christian alike — with a challenge which cannot be ignored.
This is sometimes described by saying that the church has at last entered a ‘post-Constantinian era’, an era in which the synthesis of Christianity and western culture and society ushered in by Constantine, the first Christian Emperor of Rome, has finally dissolved, and the church once more represents a social minority in an increasingly pluralistic age.
Or, to put the matter more succinctly, the age of Christendom is finally over.
While there is a good deal of division of opinion both about these attempts to characterise the present situation and about what further conclusions theology should draw from it, there lies here a nexus of issues to which theologians have had to turn their attention, especially since the Second World War.
In another way too, the advance of science has posed a challenge for theology.
The natural sciences have proved so enormously successful in modern times that they are now commonly regarded as the supremely useful and valid intellectual discipline, and as setting the standard to which all other kinds of enquiry must conform if they are to be taken seriously as dealing with truth and reality.
Theology, like other studies in the broad field of the ‘humanities’ or the ‘liberal arts’, has been compelled to face the  implications of that challenge, and has sought to do so in a variety of ways.
The meeting and mixing of diverse cultures has also had a profound impact on religious life in general, and on Christian theology in particular .
This century has seen the rise to prominence on the world-stage of the ecumenical movement, which grew out of the need felt by Christians engaged in foreign mission to overcome the divisions between churches and denominations which made less and less sense in the missionary context.
While the progress towards the reunion of separated churches has been much slower than many had hoped, the last sixty years have seen dialogue and joint action at many levels, from the local to the international, between Christian communities which had for long centuries been very largely isolated from each other.
One result of this has been that theology itself has become ecumenical in a fashion undreamt of a century ago, and many of the main fronts in theological debate and controversy now run across rather than along denominational boundaries.
Bridges are being built between different confessions, and a new atmosphere of mutual respect is slowly helping to find ways of overcoming what were once felt to be absolutely irreconcilable differences.
In addition, the rapid expansion of Christian churches in parts of the Third World (contrasting very markedly with what sometimes appears to be a steady decline in the west) has led those churches increasingly to feel the need not merely to copy the styles of life, worship and theology developed in western Christianity, but to develop others appropriate to their own setting.
This has brought in a new dimension to recent thinking, and begun to raise sharp questions about what has been called the ‘Latin captivity’ of western theology.
This fresh ecumenical contact and its opening of new horizons has by no means been restricted to the meeting of Christians with Christians.
The question of the relation between Christianity and other world faiths has taken on a new urgency in a time where, for instance, an Indian Christian must take stock of his position vis-à-vis his Hindu fellow-countrymen, or a British or American Christian finds himself living alongside adherents of other religions in his own homeland.
That issue has been sharpened even further by the fate of the millions of Jews murdered in Nazi extermination camps — a fate for which centuries of Christian anti-semitism must bear at least part of the blame.
While in this survey  we are chiefly concerned with modern Protestant theology, and with its main development in the west, the impact upon it of this new ecumenical awareness cannot be left out of account.
Another subject directly connected with the way more recent theology has moved is that of philosophy — or, rather, of the various kinds of philosophy which have influenced theologians.
Behind much of the theology of the nineteenth century stood the towering figures of Kant and Hegel.
They remain important influences still, but other schools and approaches have more recently become prominent, and fed into theology at various points.
These other approaches for the most part reflect a leading feature of most twentieth-century philosophy — the revolt against Absolute Idealism of the Hegelian type, with its tendency to downgrade the individual, the personal, and the historical in favour of the ideal and impersonal.
The revolt itself has taken many forms, and issued in a variety of quite different conceptions of what philosophy itself is about.
On the face of it there are more contrasts than resemblances between, for example, the brand of empirical and then linguistic philosophy which has predominated in England in recent decades, the existentialist thought which has led the way in western Europe, and the critical reflection on human history and society on a broadly Marxist basis which has naturally held sway in communist countries, but more recently come more to the fore in the west as well .
Yet each in its own way reflects the rejection of the abstraction and impersonality of Absolute Idealism, and the endeavour to relate philosophy more concretely to the textured fabric of human life and experience.
Marxism and Existentialism have exercised the greatest influence upon theology, while in addition the general question of how far theology should permit itself to be influenced by philosophy has also been given a good deal of attention.
Several of the issues just outlined will be given special attention in our last chapter, which will look at the wider horizons opened up for Protestant theology by the ecumenical movement, the encounter with other faiths, and the development of science.
Before we come to that; however, it may give a better picture of the dynamics and movement of theology itself if we approach it more chronologically, and deal in turn with the two main impulses stemming from Germany and Switzerland which largely set the  tone in the period from 1920 to 1960 — those associated above all with Karl Barth and Rudolf Bultmann — with trends outside Germany in that same period, and then with the movements which have received the widest attention in the last twenty years or so.
To a large degree, all of these developments can be traced back to a sudden and quite unexpected revolt against the drive and direction of nineteenth century thinking.
The man who, more than any other, provoked and personified that revolt was Karl Barth (1886 — 1968); and the book which, as one critic put it, ‘fell like a bomb on the playground of the theologians’, was his Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans , first published in 1918, when its then virtually unknown author was pastor of Safenwil in his native Switzerland.
From Rebellion to the Church Dogmatics: The Theology of Karl Barth
Karl Barth had been pastor in Safenwil since 1911.
In 1921, the year that the second (and heavily altered) edition of his Romans appeared, he was called to a university chair in Göttingen, and thereafter to Münster (1925) and Bonn (1930).
His active opposition to the Nazis, the leading part that he played in the Kirchenkampf , the struggle against the Nazi attempt to take over the German Evangelical Church, and his refusal to take the oath of loyalty to Hitler, led to his dismissal from Bonn in 1935.
He then became professor in Basle, where he remained for the rest of his long life.
His early concerns as a parish minister and his active involvement in the cultural and political turmoil of Germany in the 1920s and 1930s are of direct relevance for his theology, and in particular for the passionate conviction that ran through all his work from 1918 to 1968: that Christian faith rests solely on the revelation of God in Jesus Christ, and that the task of theology is to allow that revelation to shine in its own light and stand on its own authority as the Word of God to us.
Theology lives out of the Word;, and the name of the Word is Jesus.
This positive conviction carried with it the rejection of any attempt to compromise with other sources, authorities or norms, or to establish theology itself on any other foundation.
These fundamental axioms were refined, clarified and applied through a long series of debates and conflicts with the Liberal Theology in which he had been trained, and which he had earlier  enthusiastically followed, with the claims of the Führer to be the chosen instrument of divine providence, and with colleagues, notably Emil Brunner (1889–1966), Rudolf Bultmann (1884–1976) and Friedrich Gogarten (1887 — 1967), whose approaches, though having some affinities with his own, he felt in the end to be in varying degrees unsatisfactory.
In his years in Safenwil, Barth and his closest friend throughout sixty years, Eduard Thurneysen (1888 — 1974) engaged in an intense questioning search for the foundation and ultimate rationale of their calling as pastors and preachers.
Barth was driven to this not only by his own exceptionally and relentlessly enquiring mind, but also by the shaking of the foundations of the world he had known under the impact of the First World War.
In August 1914, as the war broke out, a group of 93 German intellectuals, among them many of his own former theological teachers, issued a declaration supporting the Kaiser's war policy as necessary to the defence of Christian civilisation.
This ‘black day’, as he later called it, convinced the neutral (and strongly socialist) Barth that not only the political ideals of his teachers, but their underlying theology too, could have no future.
Kulturprotestantismus (‘Cultural Protestantism’), the identification of Protestant Christianity with (German) culture, lost all credibility.
So too, in this same period, did the Ehrfurcht vor Geschichte (‘reverence before history’) which had loomed so large in the historical concerns of much nineteenth-century thinking, and which in Harnack bade fair to become the great and chief obligation and dignity of the theologian.
Neither cultural Protestantism nor reverence before history could tell him what to preach in Safenwil, Sunday by Sunday, while the inheritors of Christian civilisation tore the world apart in the name of their enlightened values.
Several influences combined in this period to help him in the search for an alternative theological approach.
Both the philosophy of Kierkegaard and the novels of Dostoievsky spoke directly to his own questions by pointing to the tyranny of power, the pretensions of institutionalised Christianity, and contrasting both with the vital depths of human experience and need and the infinity of God.
Closer to home, he found the work of the Swiss philosopher Franz Overbeck (1837–1905), who had been a friend of Nietzsche.
Overbeck had launched his own attack on Christianity and Christendom.
He insisted that a genuine religion, if such there  be, must rest on a supernatural revelation coming from beyond history; and he denounced the ‘historicising’ of Christianity, by which the original message of Christ and the apostles, a message which spoke of the wholly supernatural kingdom of God, had been betrayed by the transformation of Christianity itself into a social, cultural, and political movement within history — a movement which the advanced theologians and Christian apologists of the nineteenth century had then, with complete consistency, attempted to interpret and justify in purely historical and psychological terms.
Overbeck's critique connected directly with the recent rediscovery of the eschatological emphasis of the New Testament in the work of Weiss and Schweitzer; and these were powerfully reinforced in their effect upon Barth by the preaching of J. C. Blumhardt (1827 — 91), which had centred on the call to live in the light of the future coming of the kingdom, in which the victory won by God in the death and resurrection of Jesus would at last become apparent.
By contrast with the Liberal understanding, the kingdom as Blumhardt preached it was not gradually evolving through history, nor identified with the moral progress of human civilisation, but would come ‘from beyond’.
It did have ethical, social and political implications even for life in the present time, but it could not be reduced to these: rather it set the present in the light of God's future.
All this led Barth back to a closer reading of the Bible, and especially of Paul.
Here, as he put it many years later, he made the 
God is God, not man writ large; and he cannot be spoken of simply by speaking of ourselves in a loud voice.
He cannot be taken for granted as simply ‘there’ in our religious sense, our spiritual depth, or our moral awareness, for he transcends, he stands over against all of these.
He can be met, really met, only in the encounter in which we finite creatures of time and history are confronted by  the One who is infinite and eternal, and who remains infinite and eternal and ‘wholly Other’ than ourselves in that meeting.
In biblical language, God makes himself known always and only as the Lord who lays his claim upon us; in that of Kierkegaard, he is the Subject who can never be reduced to an object, but is always the One who challenges us across the gulf of the ‘infinite qualitative difference’, and so awakens in us the ‘infinite passion’ of faith.
The implication of this for theology is that if it is really theology , it can only take place as God conveys his own Word to us and enables us to hear it; but the Word itself always remains his and not ours.
It cannot be trapped in the net of our human thoughts and expressions.
Instead, it flashes across between them, coming ‘vertically from above’, and leaving behind only the marks of its passing, much as lightning scorches the earth where it strikes.
There is absolutely no continuity, similarity or resemblance between God and man, no analogia entis (‘analogy of being’) between God and ourselves, or between God and anything else at all.
There is only what from our side is neither predictable nor controllable — the coming of the Word from beyond which opens and displays to us the overwhelming advent of God as he makes himself known in the ‘eternal moment’.
In that moment, the Word which touched time and history in Jesus Christ touches them again, and so the original Word itself is heard, leaping across the distances of time which are no barrier or hindrance to the running of the communication from eternity.
This was the basis of the position which Barth presented with particular volcanic power in the second edition of his Romans ; but it contained another central element as well.
The Word of God is one of both judgement and mercy.
It contradicts and condemns us in our pride, our self-sufficiency, our ethics, our politics,and our religion which, far from being our point of closest access to God, is the house we build in order to hide ourselves from him, to convince ourselves that we have him in our control.
The hurricane of the Word tears away the flimsy structures of our pretensions, the altars of our false gods, the artificial securities to which we love to cling, all that Paul describes as ‘the righteousness of the Law’.
The cross of Jesus is God's final and decisive ‘No!’ to all that: it leaves us literally nothing of our own on which we can rely.
But that is only the first stage, the negative side of the matter.
God's ‘No!’ to any form of self-reliance on our part is  spoken in order to enable us to put our trust solely in him, and to hear behind and beyond his ‘No!’the even deeper and more final promise of his ‘Yes!’
It is only through the cross, only through the ‘No!’ of judgement and destruction, that God's will to affirm us as his children can be heard; but the affirmation is the real purpose of the negation.
It is that that makes real and radical faith possible, faith which lives from nothing in itself, but solely from the promise and invitation of God.
Faith is thus not — as in Schleiermacher — a general and universally accessible awareness of absolute dependence, but the response in the ‘moment’ to the Word of God himself, a Word which continually creates and renews the possibility of faith.
The appearance of the first, and then the second, editions of Romans made a considerable and widespread impression.
Barth himself later said that he had been like a man who, tripping in the darkness of the church tower, had accidentally caught hold of the bell-rope to steady himself and alarmed the whole countryside.
The analogy was an apt one, for the book helped to set in motion the new movement which came to be known as Dialectical Theology, and whose leading lights, apart from Barth himself, were Brunner, Bultmann and Gogarten.
The ‘dialectic’ here was that of Kierkegaard rather than Hegel.
It underlined, as Barth had done, the absolute contrast between God and man, the interplay of the ‘No!’ and the ‘Yes!’of the Word to man; and also, following from these, the fact that no human speaking about God could directly or immediately express or contain the truth about him.
Rather, all our statements must be qualified, and indeed negated, even as they are made, and only by such affirmation and negation is room made to hear the authentic Word of God himself through them.
The new approach which thus came into being and swept rapidly to prominence in Switzerland and Germany was clearly very different in tone and style from the previously established Liberal Theology.
But it was not only different: the two were diametrically opposed.
Gone now was the concern with ‘religion’, so central for Ritschl and Schleiermacher, and their desire to commend ‘the Christian faith’ to their contemporary culture; gone too was the emphasis on inwardness or on history as the avenues into the meaning of the gospel.
All that stood under God's ‘No!’
Here, the Dialectical Theologians took up afresh one of the prominent  motifs in the thought of the Reformers: that the kind of religion that man works out for himself is in the end idolatry, for its real object is not the living God, but man's own secret divinity.
Now Feuerbach's critique came into its own within the new movement of theology itself.
From this standpoint, the efforts of Schleiermacher and Ritschl came to be diagnosed as effectively displacing God by man, reducing theology to anthropology, resting on the hidden assumption that God and man were ultimately somehow identical, and thus failing to take sufficiently seriously the reality of God himself, the need for revelation, the authority of the Bible as the vehicle of his Word, the finiteness and sinfulness of man, and the radical character of authentic faith.
As a result, the nineteenth-century approaches had misconceived the nature of God's Word itself, turning it into a spiritual ideal, a heroic example, or a set of ethical norms, and interpreted Jesus accordingly, instead of recognising in him the perennially contemporary event of the encounter of time with eternity, the intersection of the finite by the infinite, by which everything human and creaturely is contradicted in its self-enclosedness and opened up to the reality of God.
Dialectical Theology thus set out to reverse the approach, and in particular to emphasise, first, the ‘Godness of God’; second, the reality of the Word of God in Jesus Christ; third, the impossibility of building theology itself on any other foundation.
Within a very few years it succeeded in drastically altering the climate in its own homelands — much to the pain of surviving Liberals, such as Harnack, who saw in the entire regrettable enterprise the swamping of properly respectable theological and historical study by a wave of sheer barbarism, of uncouth and indeed vulgar ‘enthusiasm’.
The three emphases just mentioned were and remained central to Barth's theology.
In the earlier years, however, it was the first and the third that he most tended to emphasise — the otherness of God, and the  impossibility of climbing up to true knowledge of him by our own efforts — so that even today his thought is widely interpreted as essentially negative, as circling ever around God's ‘No!’ to human presumption.
In fact, however, the second point — the reality of God's giving himself to be known in Jesus Christ — was always the real focus of his concern, and he came to stress it more and more as the years passed, and as he moved away from what he later said to have been the one-sidedness of his earlier writings.
(He continued to insist, nonetheless, that that one-sidedness had been necessary, and that the negative points he had made must not be withdrawn, nor even weakened, but merely held together with the positive.
The real force and power of God's ‘Yes!’ can only be heard along with the ‘No!’that is necessarily carried with it.)
The core of Barth's theology is not that God is in principle unknowable, nor yet that man is an arrogant sinner who, left to himself, will ever be about the business of fashioning golden calves to worship, but that God has crossed the infinite gulf in Jesus Christ to claim man as his friend and partner.
This Barth saw as the irreplaceable basis of Christian theology; and, he insisted, once it had been recognised, there could be no possible reason for casting around in other directions, and certainly not for turning theology back into the contemplation of our own spiritual navels, or for blunting the challenge and promise of the gospel by seeking to reinterpret or ‘improve’ it in the terms of some alternative (and therefore competing) theological or philosophical frame of reference.
By its very nature, Dialectical Theology was a vital and tempestuous movement, and its leaders were by no means all of the same stamp.
As the years passed, they moved away from each other to a greater or less degree.
Barth and Brunner had most in common.
They were both Swiss, both Reformed (i.e. Calvinist), both theologians rather than historians or biblical specialists, and both men of immense intellectual power and energy, capable of ranging far and wide over the whole spread of Christian thought in search of the resources and materials to fashion the theology which had to be reconstructed.
Bultmann was primarily a New Testament scholar, and his theological position, once he had settled it to his own satisfaction, remained more or less inflexible thereafter.
Like Gogarten — another systematic theologian — he was German and Lutheran; and he was also much influenced by the Existentialism of Martin Heidegger (1889 — 1976).
Through the 1920s, a clear gap opened up between Barth and Brunner on the one hand, and Bultmann and Gogarten on the other, though it was only to be later that the full significance of the divergence between them became apparent.
Each pair in fact began to gravitate to opposite poles within the horizon which  Dialectical Theology had opened up.
The emphasis on God's revelation and on the faith that apprehends it raised the further question of what theology itself can speak about directly —the revelation , or merely faith's apprehension of it ?
Does God's making of himself known have any abiding content which can be articulated, or can it merely be pointed to and fleetingly glimpsed, but not retained?
In the second edition of his Romans , Barth had really given the second answer, and Bultmann and Gogarten continued to give it.
Accordingly, they concentrated on what could be spoken of — the life and experience and understanding of faith.
Barth and Brunner moved on from that position and came to focus their attention on the re-working and re-stating of the main classical Christian doctrines, especially of christology, in which they believed the meaning and content of the revelation was explicated.
They thus became the outstanding exponents of what has sometimes been called, with a variety of overtones, ‘Neo-orthodoxy’; and in the widening gulf between them and the other two there emerges very clearly what one recent writer has aptly described as ‘the divided mind of modern theology’.
We shall come back to Bultmann and Gogarten later, and for the moment concentrate on the line struck out upon by Brunner and, in particular, by Barth.
The first great public indication of the shift in Barth's thinking came in 1927, when he published the first volume of a projected Christian Dogmatics , which was intended eventually to handle in a systematic way all the main Christian doctrines.
The title of the volume was significant:Christian Doctrine in Outline, Vol. 1.
The Doctrine of the Word of God, Prolegomena to Christian Dogmatics .
The aim of this introductory study (‘prolegomena’) was to make clear the basis for the entire enterprise and the methods which it would use, and the emphasis on ‘the doctrine of the Word of God’ signalled Barth's intention to ground it on God's own revelation of himself and nothing else.
In the book itself he carried through this programme by asserting that theology could not be dictated to by another discipline either about the nature of its object or about the methods appropriate to its study.
Echoing Kant, he insisted that any properly objective enquiry could not impose on its material methods worked out in advance or in relation to some other topic; only within the context of encounter with and experience of the object itself could it discover how to speak of it and enquire into it.
Theology must  take as its starting-point the actuality of God's self-revelation in Jesus Christ, disclosed to us by the Holy Spirit, and set its sights and adjust its compass by that.
It must in fact plunge into the heart of the matter in order to lay bare the fundamental conditions which made it all even possible.
These conditions of the possibility of Christian theology were on the one hand the actuality of the revelation in Jesus, and on the other the reception of that revelation in faith empowered by the Holy Spirit.
Outside that horizon, one might, if one had nothing better to do, endlessly debate whether such a thing as theology might be possible; but there could be no ground for giving a positive answer.
Within that horizon, however, it can be seen that God's making of himself known through Jesus has a threefold pattern: he makes himself known in Jesus Christ and to us , and this triadic structure is nothing other than that of the Trinity: that God is Father, Son and Holy Spirit; that the Son is the Word and Image of the Father; that the Holy Spirit is the power who discloses that Image and conveys that Word.
The doctrine of the Trinity, so far from being an appendix (even if also a coping-stone) to Christian theology, as it had seemed to Schleiermacher, supplies the ground-plan, the inner dynamics of the whole.
This volume was thus very largely taken up with an exposition of the doctrine of the Trinity, not as a second-order theological construction, but as sketching the basis within God himself of the possibility and actuality of his making of himself known to us in jesus Christ.
Within that horizon, Barth went on to distinguish three ‘forms’ of the Word.
The primary form is God's own self-expression, his eternal Word which was made flesh in Jesus; the secondary form is the witness of the Bible in Old and New Testaments to that primary Word, the witness by which the Word itself is mediated and heard; the tertiary form is the proclamation of Jesus Christ in the church as the Word of God to us.
In each of these forms, the Word is the Word insofar and only insofar as God really expresses and communicates himself through it; and the special task of Christian dogmatics is to refer the present proclamation of Jesus Christ back to its original ground in God himself in order to clear away distortions and misrepresentations so that the Word itself can be heard afresh in its own integrity.
Dogmatics thus has a critical function in relation to the present witness and preaching of the church, recalling it to its basis and assisting it  to uncover and hear what it is called to say today.
It is not merely the study of dogmas as accumulated down through the centuries (as in the Roman Catholic understanding of dogmatics), but their critical subordination to and testing by the primary and original dogma , which is nothing other than Jesus Christ himself.
It was clear here that Barth was very substantially qualifying his earlier Dialectical approach.
He was in fact becoming increasingly dissatisfied with an exclusive concentration on the infinite qualitative difference, and the encounter in the eternal moment.
Time and history, and above all the revelation in (and not merely through ) Jesus Christ, were all too likely to be sold short by this.
His emphasis on the independence of theology, on refusing to allow any other intellectual discipline to dictate to it, reflected an awareness that his own earlier thought might itself have been guilty of imposing inappropriate categories and of squeezing theology into a strait-jacket.
But his new slant sent waves of horrified shock through many of his  contemporaries who had valued the fresh ad radical air of Dialectical Theology, but were scarcely prepared for such a wholesale repristination of — of all things!— the doctrine of the Trinity.
Was this not, they wondered, a quite disastrous return to the past, a toppling over of the (admittedly partly justified) reaction against Liberal Theology into sheer traditionalism?
These critics did not perhaps all observe the extent to which Barth was opening up a new path, for no one before had handled the doctrine of the Trinity in this fashion.
We shall notice in a little how he was to build further upon the foundations laid in 1927, and what a distinctive theology resulted.
At any rate, Barth himself was to come to make exactly the opposite criticism of the book, which he later used to call ‘my well-known false start’.
He subsequently concluded that, in spite of his own intentions, it was still too deeply coloured by the thought of Kierkegaard and Heidegger, that it gave faith a wrong kind of priority over revelation in the arrangement of its material, and that its account of faith was more Existentialist than Christian.
Five years later he took up the project again under the new title of Church Dogmatics .
This time he sought to expunge every trace of Existentialism, but retained much of the material from the first draft, including the elements mentioned above.
They were to remain corner-stones of his thought.
A significant stage on the way to the Church Dogmatics came  with a study of Anselm's Proslogion , which Barth published in 1931 as Fides Quaerens Intellectum (‘faith seeking understanding’: the phrase was Anselm's own description of the task of theology).
The book ranks as one of the most penetrating modern accounts of Anselm's thought, though it is not without its weaknesses as an interpretation of Anselm himself.
But it also served to clarify and develop Barth's own understanding of what theology is about:.
it has the function of exploring and articulating the rational, intelligible sense of what is believed.
God's Word is not simply a bare event of encounter with the Subject who stands over against us as Lord.
It is also rational with the rationality of God himself.
His Word, in Greek, his Logos , is not only personal address, but also his own divine intelligibility.
This does not mean that that intelligibility can be wholly captured in the formulations or in the mind of the theologian; it does, however, mean that the divine intelligibility comes across to us, that God gives himself to be known and understood, and that the understanding that is made possible in theology is and is intended to be a genuine understanding and an authentic contact with the intelligibility of God.
The Word was made flesh in Jesus Christ; God has given himself to be understood in our terms and on our level; and even in these terms and on that level it is the reality of God that is given for us to understand.
This carried Barth decisively away from Dialectical Theology, and especially from Bultmann.
Bultmann too was happy to describe theology as ‘faith seeking understanding’; but what he meant by this was faith's self -understanding, an understanding having to do with self-awareness and self-knowledge, subjective rather than objective.
To Barth, this could only indicate that Bultmann was in effect taking the same path as their nineteenth-century forefathers.
He had rejected Romanticism and Idealism, but simply substituted Existentialism for them, without challenging the essentially anthropocentric focus.
Nor was Bultmann much concerned to deny the charge
In the same period, a smaller but nonetheless very important gap was also opening up between Barth and Brunner.
From the late 1920s, Brunner had become increasingly interested in the question of natural theology .
By this he did not mean the philosophical proofs of God's existence or the natural religion which had been the focus of so much discussion in the eighteenth  century, and which he and Barth, like Schleiermacher and Ritschl before them, had rejected.
Nor did he mean what he and Barth had joined in attacking in Schleiermacher and Liberal Theology (Brunner being indeed far sharper and harsher against Schleiermacher than Barth ever was: Barth used to insist that only one who was capable of loving Schleiermacher was entitled to criticise him), namely the supplementing of the revelation of God in Jesus Christ by additional sources of a more general religious or ethical kind.
Brunner was as insistent as Barth that God is known only by revelation, and that that revelation is Jesus Christ himself.
But that left open a further question which concerned Brunner deeply: what was the connection between that unique revelation and three other more general areas: the whole universe as God's creation; the existence of human beings as ‘made in the image of God’, albeit as ‘fallen’ they have in some fashion lost or disfigured that ‘image’; and the ordering of human life and society by such institutions as marriage and the state, which theology had traditionally treated as divinely ordained?
These three together marked out the ‘natural order’, marked and disfigured, certainly, by sin and fallenness, but also upheld by God's preserving providence.
Therefore the connection between these and the work of revelation and restoration in Jesus Christ must be explored, the ‘point of contact’ which they offer for the advent of divine grace must be found.
Only in this way, Brunner felt, could a theology based, quite properly, on the revelation in Jesus be preserved from operating in a vacuum, and enabled to open up the apologetic and educational perspectives essential to the missionary and pastoral work of the church.
Here too he also saw the opening for what he called eristics , a kind of ‘polemical apologetics’ in which the Christian understanding of human life as marked by sin and in need of grace could engage in controversial dialogue with other views in order to clarify the difference made by the message of the gospel.
Barth was deeply suspicious of this entire concern, which he had earlier tried to combat in Gogarten, who through the 1920s had developed a strong interest in the theology of ‘the orders of creation’.
This appeared to Barth inevitably doomed to dilute the concentration of theology on its proper task by compromising between the revelation in Jesus and other sources and authorities.
The Word of God, he held, makes its own ‘point of contact’, created its own space in which to work, and must be allowed to do so freely.
His sense of acute danger here was further sharpened by developments within Germany, as the Nazis sought with the help of Reichsbischof Müller and the ‘German Christians’ to make the church subserve their quasi-religious ideology of ‘blood and soil’, an ideology in which Hitler was unashamedly presented by the indefatigable Goebbels as a new messiah, commissioned by divine providence to save the German nation and establish the supremacy of the chosen, Aryan race in the ‘thousand year Reich ’.
While Brunner naturally had not the remotest intention of supporting anything of this kind, his concern for his own kind of natural theology seemed to Barth to be wholly without adequate defences against it.
He was convinced that, in the words of the Barmen Declaration which he with others drafted in May 1934 in opposition to the German Christians, ‘Jesus Christ as he is attested to us in Holy Scripture is the one Word of God, which we have to hear, and which we have to trust and obey in life and in death.’
Later in 1934, Brunner published a polemical tract against Barth entitled Nature and Grace , to which Barth immediately replied with characteristic vigour in No!
An Answer to Emil Brunner .
A fair sample of his style is this retort to Brunner's appeal to the tag gratia non tollit sed perficit naturam , ‘grace does not destroy nature, but perfects it’.
This riposte throws into relief the central difference between the two as Barth saw it.
In his view, the revelation of God in Jesus Christ, and the repairing and restoring of fallen human nature brought about through it, were nothing less than a miraculous new beginning, an act of creative divine power, whose discontinuity from what had preceded it was signalled by the double  miracle of Jesus' birth from a virgin and his resurrection from the grave.
(Brunner, on the other hand, rejected the virgin birth, though not the resurrection.)
Because there is that discontinuity, the connection can be established only from God's side, not from ours.
Therefore we must not speak as if there were any ‘capacity’ in fallen human nature to receive or prepare for God by itself.
That could only prevent the sheer miracle of grace from standing as it must on its own as God's free and loving initiative and movement towards us.
Here Barth applied, in contrast to what Roman Catholic theology called the analogia entis , ‘analogy of being’ between God and man, what he described, following Calvin, as the analogia fidei , the ‘analogy of faith’.
The whole character of faith is that it does not rest on itself, nor on what can be seen as an extension of itself, but on what is quite other than itself, by which its own emptiness is filled.
And this is the model, the pattern, which must be seen to run through theology: it is in this fashion that the relation between God and ourselves is to be seen.
Accordingly, Barth regarded any theological concern with created and fallen nature apart from its re-creation in Jesus Christ as quite superfluous.
Natural theology, even of Brunner's qualified kind, could only be a snare and a delusion, a thing in which one ought to have no interest except that properly shown for an abyss beside the path — the interest whose concern is to avoid falling into it.
Brunner by contrast appealed to the Reformers, and especially to Calvin, in support of his contentions that there is a ‘general revelation’ of God in the ordering of the created universe, simply because it is of his making and bears his signature, and that this has its subjective correlate in man, made in God's image.
Though that image has been defaced by the fall, its form if not its content remains in our essential humanity, our personhood, our reason and our ethical responsibility.
It is this in fact that makes it possible to speak of man as a sinner, deserving judgement, because he is capable of guilt and bears responsibility for what he has made of himself; and precisely here lies the point upon which God's grace in Jesus Christ comes to bear.
So Brunner rejected the possibility of an independent natural theology in which man could attain to knowledge of God through the general revelation in nature; for the defacing of the image of God in him had made that impossible.
But, he insisted, Barth was simply running to the  opposite extreme from the Enlightenment's rejection of revelation in favour of reason, and eroding the theological significance of the natural realm altogether.
While Brunner's interpretation of Calvin was weak at many points — as Barth took a somewhat mischievous delight in pointing out — his claim to stand more clearly than Barth in the line of Calvin was not without foundation.
Here in fact we come to the most characteristic and distinctive feature of Barth's whole approach to theology: his absolute, thoroughgoing christocentrism .
Barth, unlike Brunner and unlike Calvin too, insisted in his mature work on unfolding every aspect of Christian faith in the light of Jesus Christ and only in that light.
The full implications of this are best indicated if we observe that far more is involved in it than merely the uniqueness of the revelation in Jesus, solely the issue whether there is genuine access to knowledge of God in any other place.
What is also involved — and this was the point at issue between Barth and Brunner — is whether there can be any valid Christian understanding of creation, or nature, or sin, apart from Jesus Christ.
Brunner wished to speak of man as created and fallen, as standing in guilt under the wrath and judgement of God,apart from Jesus Christ.
(The ‘eristic’ element in Brunner's apologetics also reflects this.)
In this, he was following the main line of traditional Reformed theology, and indeed of western theology in general.
Its most common approach through long centuries had been a kind of two-pronged one.
It dealt with the creation and fall of man, stressed the gravity of sin and fear of divine retribution, and then turned to present Christ as the answer and escape.
The doctrines of the creation and of sin thus supplied an overall understanding of human life and posed a problem; and Jesus Christ was then brought into that horizon as the solution to that problem.
But the horizon and the problem stood, as it were, on their own feet; they could be and were independently established.
The clearest and harshest expression of this twofold approach (and one which certainly brings into the open its ultimate presuppositions) was perhaps the application of the doctrine of predestination in the Federal or Covenant Theology of the seventeenth century as expressed in such classic statements as the Westminster Confession , which for centuries held sway on both sides of the Atlantic as the most widely authoritative summary in English of Reformed orthodoxy.
According to the Confession , God in his free  and eternal counsel has predestined some men to everlasting life, some to everlasting death.
The reprobate (the condemned) fall under the judgement imposed on man because Adam broke his ‘covenant’ with God, a ‘covenant of works’in which he and his descendants were promised eternal life upon condition of their obedience, which condition he failed to observe, thus plunging himself and all his seed into ruin.
The ‘elect’ are saved from this just punishment because of a new ‘covenant of grace’established in Jesus Christ: he fulfilled the terms of the covenant of works, bore the penalty for Adam's breaking of it, and thus became the means of salvation for the elect .
All men stand under God's just wrath; but the elect have his love opened to them through Jesus.
This theology thus drew an outer and an inner circle, and located Christ in the inner one: the outer circle of sin and judgement stood quite independently of him.
Only in the nineteenth century did widespread protests against this kind of thinking break out within the main stream of Reformed theology itself.
Such diverse figures as McLeod Campbell, Schaff, Hodge and Ritschl began to insist (even if they did not always fully carry it through) that the person and work of Christ must determine the whole shape of Christian thinking.
(This was a point on which Barth seems to have given Ritschl little credit; but Ritschl so represented the things against which Barth was having to fight that he could rarely find anything at all to praise in him.
He was far fonder of Schleiermacher.)
But it was Barth himself who really carried this programme through, insisting that even the doctrines of creation and sin must be grounded in christology, that there is no predestination of God apart from Jesus Christ, that on the cross Jesus himself is the one rejected and abandoned by God, and that both judgement and mercy, reprobation and election, must be seen as worked through in him, All these lines must, so to speak, be carried into the centre where they meet in Jesus Christ himself, and be seen as opening out from him rather than as constituting a distinct frame of reference into which he can be subsequently fitted.
There can in this view be no room whatsoever for any separate or even semi-independent perspectives.
While Barth had by no means worked through all the implications of this at the time of his controversy with Brunner, the disagreement which came into the open in 1934 can be seen in retrospect as foreshadowing the shape of his own future theology.
The rift between the two was never really healed, and from the 1930s onwards they pursued their separate paths.
Brunner never accepted Barth's absolute christocentrism, was sharply critical of the amount of attention that Barth devoted to the Trinity, and saw in the unfolding of the Church Dogmatics a relapse into an excessively objective kind of theology.
In his Truth As Encounter (2nd edn, 1963; E.T.
1964) he maintained that Barth and Bultmann had come to represent the extremes of objectivism and subjectivism, and offered his own attempt to chart a middle way in which both the given truth of God and the need for it to be apprehended in the personal encounter of faith would be given their proper place.
This concern to avoid a false polarisation was certainly justified; but it is a real question whether Brunner in fact did justice to Barth in his interpretation of him, or appreciated what Barth was really doing in reconstructing the foundations of theological thinking.
So, for example, when Barth came in a later volume of the Church Dogmatics to discuss the image of God in man, he did so in a fashion which led Brunner to assert that Barth had now changed his ground, and adopted Brunner's own stance as developed in Nature and Grace .
In fact, however, Barth's revised (and more positive) treatment of the theme of the image was still grounded in christology, and the essential contrast with Brunner stood unchanged.
If Barth was now able to say at least some of the things that Brunner also wished to say, he was doing so within his own perspective — and demonstrating at the same, time that that perspective was not as narrow and restricted as Brunner had imagined it must be.
While Brunner's theology was for a time regarded, especially in Britain and America, as more ‘moderate’ than Barth's, and therefore preferable, he must now be regarded as the less radical and less creative of the two.
But if he suffers to this extent by comparison with Barth, he towers over most other theologians of his generation; and it is more than a little sad that two men so gifted and with so much in common should not have managed to remain closer to each other.
As Barth once put it, he and Brunner were like the elephant and the whale: both were God's creatures, but it was impossible for them to meet!
Perhaps, however, the last word ought to be the message which Brunner received on his deathbed from his old colleague and adversary, ‘If he is still alive, and it is possible, tell him again, ‘Commended to our God’, even  by me.
And tell him,Yes , that the time when I thought that I had to say ‘No’ to him is now long past, since we all live only by virtue of the fact that a great and merciful God says his gracious Yes to all of us' (Eberhard Busch,Karl Barth , E.T.
1976, pp. 476–7).
The Church Dogmatics was never completed, but by the time of Barth's death ran to thirteen part-volumes which appeared at intervals between 1932 (vol.
I/ l) and 1967 (IV/4, Fragment).
The centre and focus of the whole is Jesus Christ himself — Jesus Chalst as ‘true God and true man’, and so as the key both to the nature and activity of God and to the meaning and purpose of human existence.
Working from that centre, Barth explores four great intersecting circles which supply the overall structure of the whole: the doctrines of the Word of God (vol.
I), of God (vol.
II), of Creation (vol.
III), and of Reconciliation (vol.
IV), each being developed with reference to the trinitarian structure of God's own being as Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
(A further projected volume on the doctrine of Redemption was never begun, let alone completed.)
The four circles are not presented as dealing with quite separate topics, such that to move from one to another would be in any sense a change of subject, but rather as four equally fundamental and interlocking dimensions of the same ground-motif that runs throughout: that Jesus Christ is the actualisation and realisation in time and history of God's eternal decision to be God for and with man; he is himself the everlasting covenant of God with us, and in that covenant the meaning and purpose of the created universe itself is contained; and in him too lies the uncovering and overcoming of man's estrangement from God by the divine ‘No!’ of the cross which leads on to the ‘Yes!’of the resurrection.
This concentration on christology is of the very essence of Barth's method, but the greatness of his theological achievement lies not simply in the method and form of the whole, but in the way in which he succeeded by this means in re-integrating and casting quite fresh light on all the great leading themes of classical orthodox belief.
Not without reason has his impact on theology been compared with that of Einstein on physics.
Where Einstein broke through the previously accepted notions of space and time and re-ordered the fundamental concepts of established physics around the single constant of the velocity of light, Barth undertook a comparable reorientation of theology around the single centre  of Jesus Christ.
And just as Einstein's work involved a drastic revision of accepted ideas about space and time, mass and energy, velocity and movement, Barth's necessitated a comparable rethinking of established views both of God and of creation in general and man in particular.
We have already mentioned one aspect of this in his departure from the predestinarian scheme of classical Calvinism, and many comparable illustrations could be given.
Of these we can select here only one or two typical examples.
In respect of christology itself, Barth powerfully defended and re-stated the orthodox doctrine that Jesus Christ is both God and man, ‘two natures in one person’, as the Council of Chalcedon (AD 451) had described it.
But he developed and extended the rather static idea of ‘nature’ in a dynamic way, tracing in Jesus, person and history a ‘double movement’of God to man and man to God.
This movement ‘down’ from God to man expresses and reveals the character and nature of God himself; for his being is not separate from his action ; and in the answering movement ‘up’from man to God, we see that human existence itself is grounded upon and made to answer to the divine initiative.
Jesus is therefore not simply the human instrument of God's purposes, nor simply a man responding to divine grace: he is God come as man in order to work out and establish in himself the true destiny of man in friendship and communion with God.
So the very being of God and the true nature of man are opened up for us in him.
In respect of God's being, the fundamental axiom with which Barth works is that God is ‘eternally and antecedently in himself’ what he shows himself to be in Jesus.
There is no other God than this, nor is he God in any other way than he here makes known.
In Jesus' own relation of sonship to the Father, a relation which is mediated and empowered by the Holy Spirit, the triune structure of God's own eternal being as Father, Son and Holy Spirit is shown as the eternal ground within God of the human person and history of Jesus.
(Similarly, the self-relatedness within God's triunity is opened up as the basis on which he calls into being creatures other than himself, creatures whose raison d'être is to mirror and participate in his relation to himself.)
So the doctrine of the Trinity is presented as intrinsically bound up with the incarnation of the eternal Son as Jesus Christ, and as supplying the ultimate framework for a theology centred and focused in him.
In this way, Barth distanced himself from what had been a very common tendency in much previous theology to separate off very sharply from each other(a) the being of God,(b) the triunity of God, and (c) the incarnation .
This had led in a good deal of theology and piety to a concentration of attention on a vaguely unitarian ‘God’, loosely identified with the Father, and to increasing difficulties in connecting that up in any coherent way with either the Trinity or the incarnation.
Barth insisted that the God with whom we have to deal makes himself known in and through Jesus Christ as the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, and that this is the real key to his being as God.
For this reason, too, he broke away from the traditional pattern of definitions of the ‘attributes of God’ in terms of such qualities as omnipotence, eternity, omnipresence, infinity, perfection and so on.
Instead he insisted that God as revealed in Jesus is he who has freely bound himself to be God for man, and that his primary essential characteristics are therefore love and freedom , ‘God is he who loves in freedom!’
On the side of man, however, though his very existence depends solely upon the creative love of God, there is a surd element in the equation.
This emerges in all its terrifying inexplicability in the fact that the incarnation involves for Jesus humiliation, rejection, and the cross, with the awful cry, ‘My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?’
God's love for and claim on man are worked out through a judgement and condemnation which disclose a profound alienation and estrangement between man and God, a contradiction in which man has attempted to break away from the tie with God, so that God's claim on him has become a consuming fire.
This is the mystery of sin which has no rational explanation, for it is ultimately and radically inexplicable.
That God's creatures should revolt against him, and so cut themselves off from the ground of their own being, is an ‘impossible possibility’ which has nonetheless been actualised.
To it, God can only utter the dreadful ‘No’ which abandons sin to the nothingness that is its own real nature.
But this is not his final nor yet his strongest word, for two reasons.
First, it leads on from the cross of Jesus to his resurrection, from condemnation to vindication, from destruction to restoration.
Second, it is God himself who not only speaks but also hears that ‘No’ in the person of the one man who does not deserve to hear it, the righteous one who stands in the place of the unrighteous.
He is the real man as none other; for  he alone is man as God intends man to be; he alone has travelled to the uttermost limits of the ‘far country’ of man's estrangement; and in him alone has the judgement been passed, carried out, and overcome to issue in reconciliation.
All of this has been enacted and realised and completed in Jesus himself, and the meaning of sin, so far as we are concerned, is only really opened up at the very place where it is borne and done away with.
In spite of the millions of words they contain, and some noticeable shifts of emphasis over the years, the volumes of the Church Dogmatics are marked by an immense overall coherence and harmony.
The seemingly endless variations and applications all circle round and reflect the single theme.
Barth travels far and wide through the Bible, from Genesis to Revelation, and digests, criticises, and re-states a vast amount of material from the previous history of Christian thought, and from contemporary discussion — much of this in lengthy pages of tiny print, which readers are sometimes relieved to discover can be passed over without loss of the main drift (though it should be said that some of the finest passages are to be found in the small print).
But all this is contained in a framework which, in its clarity and essential simplicity, has reminded many commentators of Barth's passionate fondness for Mozart.
He used to say that he did not want to listen to a man like Beethoven, whose stormy music told his hearers all about himself and his troubles, but rather to hear the pure beauty of musical form, which so far as he was concerned reached its acme in Mozart's classical perfection.
The same desire to articulate theology as something of beauty and of joy in the light of the God who has made himself known to us in Jesus Christ runs through all thirteen volumes, and makes them a unique achievement.
The mountain peaks of Christian belief are travelled there in a style that has few rivals in the whole history of the church, and none at all in the twentieth century.
A project as ambitiously conceived and energetically executed as this naturally provoked both admiration and criticism from various quarters.
Nor indeed did Barth pretend to be beyond criticism, though he was not slow to point out where he thought his critics had misunderstood or misrepresented his views.
He commonly observed to his students that it was doubtful whether there was as much joy in heaven as in some places on earth at the rise of the ‘Barthian school’— and would add that he at any rate did  not belong to it.
He also used to remind them that theology, even at its best and highest, was a human activity which could take no pride in itself, but only in its object; it dare not take itself too seriously, but must rather be ‘a modest, free, critical and happy science’(Evangelical Theology , E.T.
1963, p. 64).
This was of a piece with his fundamental conviction that the whole truth about God and about ourselves lies in Jesus Christ and must be found there.
What then have been the main criticisms?
They vary a good deal depending on the distance between the critics' positions and outlooks and Barth's own.
Some stand quite close to him but are unhappy about this or that emphasis or point of detail, or about tendencies which they see running through his work; others differ from him so radically on the nature and basis of theology itself that they in effect reject his approach wholesale.
While we cannot discuss these very fully, we may try to sketch some of the main issues raised by each group.
An objection which has been raised by Jürgen Moltmann (see chapter 7) and by others who have been concerned to set our present time in the light of the eschatological emphasis of the New Testament is that Barth and his allies in the 1920s who aimed to recover that emphasis in fact misinterpreted it by twisting it into the ‘eternal moment’ of the encounter between time and eternity,; and that his mature theology distorted it in a-different but equally damaging fashion by swallowing up the whole of time and history in the central history of Jesus Christ, and by dissolving that away in turn in the eternal self-determination of God within the council of the Trinity to be ‘God for man’.
Thus, so the charge runs, he evacuated time and history, and in particular our present and future, of real theological significance.
Related to this is Brunner's objection that he led theology back into a ‘false objectivism’, the complaint we shall later find Reinhold Niebuhr making that he does not take the challenge and struggle of Christian life sufficiently seriously, and the widespread feeling that he seeks to approach theology, and especially christology, ‘from above’, from the side of God, whereas today we must work ‘from below’, from ‘the man Jesus’ and ‘the human situation’.
Another charge of a similar kind is that Barth was excessively concerned with ontology , with the rationale of the being of God; that he misused biblical terms and concepts on the one hand by  treating them semi-literally as ‘ontic’, as descriptive of the way things actually are when they are often pictorial or metaphorical, and on the other hand by turning the whole of Scripture into a vast allegory of Jesus Christ; and that this reflected a Platonist streak in his thinking which encouraged an unbalanced concentration on eternal realities rather than the actual world of concrete life and experience.
So far as this bundle of interconnected criticisms is concerned, at least two distinct questions can be asked.
First, how far did Barth do what he is accused of? and second, to what extent is there here a basis for valid criticism?
On neither score is there any universal agreement, and many would deny that the objections are well grounded, holding that they rest on over-simplifications, and that even to the degree that Barth did move in the directions suggested, he nevertheless did not fall into the extreme positions of which he is held guilty.
Others, however, would rather maintain that these charges have sometimes been exaggerated, but that they do highlight genuine dangers of which one ought to be aware in reading Barth: dangers which lie partly in what he actually says, but also partly in what he can very easily be taken to be saying when his real meaning is subtly but significantly different.
A more radical criticism was formulated by Dietrich Bonhoeffer (see chapter 7), who questioned what he called Barth's Offenbarungspositivismus , ‘positivism of revelation’.
By this he meant that the appeal to revelation upon which Barth laid such emphasis, especially in the 1920s and 1930s, was in the end all too arbitrary and served to evade genuine questions about the basis for theological affirmations.
Bonhoeffer's unease was intensified towards the end of his life (in 1945) by a growing sense that not only ‘revelation’ but all the other categories of traditional ‘religious’language were no longer viable in the modern world.
In this way, he sought to carry even further Barth's own attack on ‘religion’.
Similarly, he retained a strong christocentrism, but tried to find a ‘non-religious’ interpretation of Jesus as ‘the man for others’in whom God is indeed present, but present in weakness, suffering and hiddenness rather than in the authoritative majesty which was so markedly appealed to in Barth's earlier writing.
Some elements in Bonhoeffer's criticism were met very adequately by the later development of Barth's thought as the stress on revelation was counterbalanced by others, and the humanity rather than the otherness of God came to the fore.
The fundamental issue, however, was not disposed of by this, and we shall see in chapter 7 how it erupted afresh in the 1950s and 1960s.
The question is whether the kind of dogmatic theology which Barth undertook is any longer possible or valid in ‘a world come of age’, a secularised post-Christian culture.
Is his work, to put it at its bluntest, a throwback to an age long past, a magnificent but doomed attempt to breathe life into fossils?
Can the classical doctrines of the Trinity and the incarnation continue to serve as focusing and shaping theology for today, or must they give way to some quite different approach?
Does the future lie with ‘demythologised’, ‘secular’ or revamped Liberal theology of the kinds we shall discuss in the following chapters?
Alternatively, is traditional dogmatic theology to be retained, but in a form of synthetic alliance with traditional natural theology of the kind Barth was so determined to avoid?
That too, as we shall see, is what some other schools would recommend, especially in England, where the main stream of Anglican theology has been strongly critical of Barth's ‘one-sidedness’.
Or are those on the right lines who maintain that Barth's broad approach is correct and must be built upon, but at the same time opened up to permit more ‘input’ into theology from the natural and human sciences, as we shall find attempted, for example, by Moltmann and Torrance?
These questions take us to the very heart not only of recent theological debate about Barth, but of the inner problematic of the entire development of modern theology as we are tracing it.
His has been the strongest and most resonant of the voices which have called for a change of priorities.
He did not seek so much to answer the questions posed from the Enlightenment onwards as to reverse them.
Where others were most sharply conscious of the crisis posed for theology by the development of modern culture and the change in our self-awareness, he saw the real crisis as lying in the inability of theology to do justice to its object, and called it to look in the opposite direction from that it had been taking.
Not our questions about the problem of God, but God's call and invitation to us determined the direction of his thought and shaped his writing; and it was this basic orientation that led him on to the restatement of christological and trinitarian dogma as the foundation and horizon of theology itself.
The challenge which he poses is to accept or reject that foundation, to adopt or refuse to adopt that  horizon.
Either way, the choice involves fundamental perceptions of the source and task of theology as such.
It is not therefore surprising that Barth's work has been and continues to be controversial.
In recent years, after an earlier period of reaction, most of the leading German theologians have been post-Barthian in the sense that while they have departed from him in various ways, they have nevertheless taken a basic orientation from him.
In Britain and America, there has been a greater variety of attitudes reflecting a wider diversity of theological stances.
Those who enthusiastically acknowledge his influence are certainly in the minority; but there are enough to ensure that the debate will continue.