

At the end of the road a boy was doing good business from the refrigerated box mounted over the front wheel of his bicycle.
A crowd of 40, perhaps 50, had gathered to watch the coming and going of the police and the counter-terrorism team.
They stood quietly in the light rain, and more than half of them sucked at their ice creams.
The road that was blocked off was residential.
There were good-sized villas hidden behind high whitewashed walls.
There was the barking of guard dogs.
It was the sort of road where the pick of the surgeons and lawyers and import-export dealers made their homes.
Erlich paid off his taxi.
He reckoned the boy had doubled the price for his ice cream because he was up at the smart end of town, not plying his usual pitch at the bottom of the Acropolis.
Beside the boy an argument was developing between an overweight policeman and the auburn-haired girl who had parked her florist's truck across the end of the road.
Erlich could see why she wanted to deliver her flowers.
He reckoned the armful of red roses would have cost the policeman his week's wages.
The girl held her head high.
Her shoulders were back.
Erlich didn't understand much Greek but he got her drift.
Eventually the policeman was prepared to lose face.
He stepped aside and the auburn-haired girl strode forward into the empty road carrying the roses loosely in her arm.
Erlich shouldered his way through the crowd and went after her.
The policeman shuffled into his path.
Erlich said quietly, ‘F.B.I.’
excuse me, please.’
He kept on walking.
He doubted that the policeman had understood a word he had said.
Perhaps the policeman had looked into Erlich's face and calculated that if he had not stood aside then he might just have ended up on his back.
He stepped back and saluted.
Erlich smiled and walked past the policeman, a dozen strides, into the centre of the road.
He had known Harry Lawrence since the fall of '88.
There were not many in the Agency that he would call a true friend.
He had thought of Harry all the way out of Rome to Leonardo da Vinci, all the time that he had stood in the check-in line, all the time he had sat on the Alitalia, all the time he had stood at Customs and Immigration at Athens International, all the time in the taxi out to the Kifisia suburb.
If the policeman had stopped him getting close to where Harry had been shot to death then Erlich might just have punched him.
He stood still, absorbing every detail of the street.
Best done at the very start of an investigation.
‘You poor old son of a bitch, Harry.’
A hundred yards down on the other side of the road a knot of men were gathered.
The girl with the flowers stopped, looked across at the men, then turned into a front drive and was gone from sight.
It would have been a pretty road in spring, with the blossom on the trees that lined it.
The leaves were down now.
He knew very little of what had happened, had been out of touch since the first report had reached the Embassy in Rome and he had started running.
They always sent a Fed when an American citizen was killed, and the Rome office covered Athens.
The men grouped together ahead of him were hunched against the drizzle.
Erlich recognised from his balding head Harry's Station Chief.
If that was where Harry had died, there should  have been a big area quarantined off with tape.
There shouldn't have been a cattle herd of feet trampling over the grass.
Erlich walked forward.
He reached the group.
The killing had been early in the morning.
The Station Chief would have come from home because he wore no tie and he was draped in an old windbreaker, probably the first coat to hand on the pegs by his front door.
Killings never came convenient.
The Station Chief detached himself from the group.
He took Erlich's hand, as if he were a priest, offering his condolences.
The Station Chief would have known that Harry Lawrence and Bill Erlich were close, that their friendship crossed the divide of Agency man and Fed.
The Station Chief pointed between the trousered legs and the shoes of the Greek police and security officials.
There was blood on the grass, thin darkened streaks.
The pointing finger moved on, away from the grass and over towards the pavement.
On the pavement were two patches of blood.
The Station Chief said, ‘Harry had a contact with him — they were both taken out…
Good to have you here, Bill.’
He didn't have small talk, not his way.
Erlich said, ‘This is unbelievable.’
‘It's their back-yard…’
‘Has this place been cleaned up?’
‘They got the cartridge cases…’
‘What else?’
‘I don't know what else…’
‘You happy with that?’
‘Where was your Scene of Crime experience?’
‘Atlanta, Georgia,’ Erlich said.
‘Listen here, Bill, this is sure as hell not Atlanta.’
‘And you take that?’
The Station Chiefs voice was low.
‘We are foreigners, we are far from home.
What I know from long and painful experience is this: we kick them, they go mightily obstinate.
The harder we kick, the less we get.’
‘I hear you.’
There was the rattle of iron gates behind him.
Erlich turned.
A woman came from the villa to which the girl had delivered the flowers.
She wore a tailored two-piece grey suit and delicate shoes, and there was a scarf over her hair that came from Dior, minimum, and she carried the red roses.
She walked in the rain across the road and round the group of policemen.
Erlich watched her.
She went to the stained pavement, where the blood pools were washed by the rain spots.
She knelt.
Her eyes were closed, her lips moved.
She crossed herself.
The woman laid the roses on the pavement.
She stood.
For a moment she stared down at the stains and the roses, and then she walked away.
Erlich said softly, ‘Thank you, ma'am.’
He didn't know whether she heard him, she gave no sign.
Erlich said to the Station Chief, ‘I'd like to see Harry.’
Bill had been enough times to a morgue.
He knew what they looked like, what the procedures were.
A body didn't change if it had been blasted with an automatic weapon in a robbery on Lenox Square or gunned down on a sidewalk in Athens.
Morgues were the same, bodies were the same.
He fancied that the section of the morgue in Atlanta that dealt with violent death was cleaner, but it would be cleaner, had to be, because it was busier.
The attendants stood back to allow Erlich and the Station Chief to go on their own to the centre of the room where the two stretchers were parked on their wheeled bases, draped with green sheeting.
The harsh central neon light glared down onto the contours of the sheeting, and gouged back at Erlich's eyes from the white-tiled walls.
He lifted the sheet nearer him.
A pale, sallow face.
A neat, dark moustache.
A half-crescent of recently cut hair set round a receding scalp.
A scraped discolouration on the left cheek.
‘Where he fell — they were all body shots that took him.’
Erlich lifted the sheet further and studied the two gaping exit wounds.
‘Who was he?’
The Station Officer said, ‘Dissident, Iraqi.
Price on his life, living in Damascus.
Harry had met him before.
The guy was back in town, rang Harry.
Harry liked to pump him…’,
He laid the sheet back over the face.
He skirted the two stretchers, then raised the sheet of the second.
He swallowed back the bile in his throat.
It would have been a back-of-the-head shot.
A low-velocity round tumbling against the toughness of the skull bone.
The exit was a mess where the eyes and nose of his friend had been.
The mouth was what he would remember.
Where the laughter was, where the good cracks were.
Only the mouth told him that he looked on the face of his friend.
The Station Officer said, ‘There are six wounds on the joker — Harry just took the one.’
‘Which means?’
Erlich knew the answer.
The Station Officer said, ‘Almost certainly it means, wrong place, wrong time.’
‘Makes my day.’
‘He wasn't the target, just in the way.’
‘The Iraqis do their own people…?’
‘When they step out of line, sure, why not?’
Erlich drew the sheet back over his friend's wretched face.
He would get autopsy details later.
He didn't need more time in this chilled room.
From what he had seen he estimated that the low-velocity rounds had been fired at a maximum of a dozen paces.
It probably didn't matter whether his calculations were right or wild.
A good man and his good friend was dead.
‘As long as I am allowed to, I will follow this, Elsa.
That is my most solemn guarantee, no backing off.
If it takes a month, a year, ten years…
Elsa, I promise.’
His friend's wife sat on the sofa.
The two kids were against her, one on each side, and she had her small and narrow arms round her kids' shoulders and she pulled them to her.
It was five months since he had last seen her, since he had last been in Athens.
Barbecue time late on a Sunday night on the balcony, and another Embassy staffer from the floor above leaning over his parapet and complaining about the smoke.
She might have understood him, and she might not.
She wasn't a pretty woman, but to Erlich's eye she was about the best there could be.
Okay, so he didn't have a wife of his own — but of the wives of the men he knew, Elsa Lawrence was the first in line.
She had been weeping, he could see that, but there was no chance that she would cry now because the apartment was filled with Agency staff, four men moving through the small apartment, packing the family's belongings.
In the fifteen minutes Erlich had been there, not one of the men had come to Elsa to ask her what case which clothes should go in.
They were shadow walkers, emerging every few moments with a suitcase, bulging, from one of the bedrooms, stacking it in the cramped hallway.
‘As long as it takes, Elsa.’
She took her arms away from round her kids' shoulders and held them out for him.
Erlich came close to her, kneeling on the rug he knew that Harry had brought back from a fast run to Beirut.
Her arms were round his neck.
He kissed her cheek.
He could feel the wetness of his own tears.
He broke away.
When he looked back he could see that once more she hugged her children to her.
In the hall the Station Officer said, ‘Good talk, fighting talk.’
‘Not a lot else to say.’
‘You're paid to do a job.’
‘Yes.’
‘Not to play Victim Counsellor.’
‘Yes.’
‘The same job whether you knew him or didn't.’
‘Taken.’
‘How many shots?’
‘Twelve cartridge cases, seven hits.’
‘How many weapons?’
‘One weapon.
Pistol, .22 calibre, with silencer.
A professional's.’
‘And are you sure that Harry Lawrence was not the target?’
‘That's the way it looks.’
Erlich wrote it all down in a pocket notebook, longhand.
The policeman sipped coffee.
He was not welcome, Erlich knew that.
He could hardly have been welcome, because when he had entered the senior police officer's room it had been with two aides trying to keep him out by every manoeuvre other than manhandling him.
He'd got there, and he was staying…
He hadn't been offered coffee.
‘Do you have any evidence on which to base this supposition?’
‘The aim of the shots.’
‘Do you have an eyewitness?’
The grating of the cup on the saucer.
A pause.
The snapping of a cigarette lighter.
‘That is a very straightforward question, sir.’
‘Yes, Mr Erlich, I have an eyewitness.’
‘Who saw it all?’
‘So I understand, yes.’
‘May I talk to the eyewitness?’
‘Probably — at a suitable time.’
‘Is tomorrow suitable?’
‘I cannot say…’
Again, a pause.
The smoke curled between them, eddied to Erlich's face.
A telephone rang in an outer office.
The policeman  glanced upwards as if he hoped that the phone would give him an excuse to get rid of this intruder.
‘Well, sir, what do you have?’
‘What do I have?
Put simply, Mr Erlich, I have an intelligence agent of a foreign country going about his activities without informing the local authorities of his work…
Do you think, Mr Erlich, that if I went to your Embassy to request a detailed briefing concerning the work in my country of Mr Harry Lawrence, Central Intelligence Agency, that I would be shown anything, other than the door…?’
‘You have the hit car?’
‘Burned out, no help.’
A welling frustration.
‘We're on the same side.’
The last time he had been in Athens, when the group that called themselves ‘November 17th’ had hit the Procter & Gamble offices with an anti-tank rocket, he had not been admitted to the presence of this big man.
The warhead had not detonated, there had been no casualties.
He hadn't been welcome then, wasn't welcome now, but he hadn't pushed his luck as hard when the target had been a corporation and no casualties, as when the target had been an American government servant, dead.
‘Are we, Mr Erlich?’
‘What do you have?’
‘Lawrence and his contact walking in a quiet street.
An Opel Rekord, stolen three days earlier in the Piraeus, pulls up 20 yards behind them.
One man out, Caucasian, blond short hair.
The contact shot.
Lawrence blunders into the path of the bullets, is hit…’
‘White?’
‘Caucasian, Mr Erlich, white.’
‘Is that it?’
‘There was a shout from the car driver.’
‘What was the shout?’
‘The word ‘Colt’.’
‘What?’
‘The shout was the one word.
Please, Mr Erlich, be so kind as to excuse me.
The one word shouted was ‘Colt’.
Only ‘Colt’.’
He was Colin Olivier Louis Tuck.
Tomorrow would be his 26th birthday, but there would be no cards and no presents.
He sat and stared out over the skyline of the city in the chill of the evening.
The first thing he had done when he had come into the apartment had been to turn off the heating system, and then he had opened the window in his bedroom and the window in the sparsely furnished living room.
He hated to be boxed up.
What had gone wrong he did not know.
He had been met by the Defence Ministry people, who had taken him directly from the aircraft steps, but no one had said a word on the way into the city.
There had been no pumped handshakes, no kissed cheeks, no back slapping, so something was wrong.
And there was a man at the door, standing as if on guard.
A man in a two-piece suit, and a thin cotton shirt and his tie knotted at the second button of the shirt.
There was little light in the room but he wore wrap-around dark glasses.
Colt had his back to his watcher, but could hear him shiver in the draught.
They would say whatever it was they had to say in their own time.
There was no hurrying them, that's what he had learned since he had been in Baghdad.
He ran his fingers hard through the cropped growth of his fair, light golden hair.
He closed his eyes.
He'd wake when they came.
His day had started at 4.30 with the bleeping of his wrist-watch alarm.
No breakfast, because he never took breakfast.
No coffee.
No food, nothing to drink.
He had dressed.
He had stripped the weapon, rebuilt it, satisfied himself, and then unloaded and reloaded the magazine.
He always checked the mechanism before firing because the Ruger/MAC Mark I was now vintage and occasionally liable to jam.
At 5.30 he had left his room in the  west quarter of Athens, in the student sector.
The car had been waiting for him.
As he lolled in his chair, not asleep but relaxed, he could remember that he had felt no tension, less excitement, as he had thrown his bag into the back seat of the car, climbed into the front carrying the Ruger with the integral silencer in a large plastic shopping bag.
The driver was good, no sweat.
The driver was from the Colonel's staff, and he had travelled ahead a full month before so that he knew the city, the back-doubles they might need and the side streets.
Colt had known the driver for eleven months, and he knew he was good because the Colonel had told him how the driver had once handled an ambush.
Colt had been taken to the hotel where the target was staying…
He had seen the target leave the hotel…
It was his decision as to when he should take out the target.
As the target had come out of the hotel, his hand had stiffened on the grip of the Ruger in the plastic bag and he had eased his weight towards the passenger door.
But the taxi rank outside the hotel had been full and idle and the target had been straight into a vehicle.
They had followed, and he had let his feelings rip when the driver had lost the taxi at a traffic light.
The driver had stayed calm and quartered the streets until the taxi was picked up again two full minutes later.
The driver would have known it was his first time, didn't take offence at the yelling.
The taxi had stopped eventually at a crossroads in a suburb, and the target had paid it off and walked straight to a man who waited on the pavement.
The target and the man had walked away up a tree-lined road.
It was as good a place as any.
No cars parked in the road, no pedestrians.
The road was two hundred yards long and empty…
It was as good a place as he could hope to find.
He could remember the car pulling onto the verge 20 yards behind the target.
He could remember calling out, because he wanted to separate the target from the man who masked him.
He could remember the suppressed clattering noise of the firing on semi-automatic.
The second man had lunged across the target, he could remember  that, and he could remember that he had kept squeezing the trigger.
He would have shot the second man anyway.
It was too good a place to miss out on.
But it would have been tidier if he could have separated them.
It was just bad luck for the second man that it had been a good place.
They had fallen, both of them, he could picture it exactly in his mind, and he could remember Kairallah, calling to him to get back to the car.
There wasn't a great deal else to remember because it had all been pretty damn straightforward.
Running for the car, the car going steadily, not too fast to the airport, and out onto the flight to Ankara.
And even less to remember of the delay at Ankara before the connection to Baghdad.
Actually, he had done well…
The Thoughts, memories, lulled him.
He had made his choice.
For the time being it was a one-bedroomed apartment on the sixth floor of the Haifa Street Housing Project.
It was an open window looking out onto the wind-rippled waters of the Tigris and across to the Al Jumhuriyah and Al Ahrar bridges and over to the tower blocks of the foreign-money hotels.
It was his bed, and he would lie on it.
He heard the scrape of the guard's feet as the man scrabbled to get to the door.
He heard the rap at the apartment's outer door.
He pushed himself to his feet.
He stood with his back to the open window.
The Colonel was a thick-set man.
He smelled of lotion, from Paris.
He was not tall, but there was nothing flabby about the weight of his body.
He wore a plain olive-drab uniform, only the insignia of his rank on his shoulders, no medal ribbons.
His calf-length paratrooper boots were not shined, they were streaked with the grey dust of the street.
He liked the Colonel.
The Colonel, his patron, his friend, in his mind was without bullshit, but tonight there was no warmth, no smile even.
‘Were you seen?’
‘Seen?
What do you mean, seen?’
‘Were there any eyewitnesses to the shooting?’
‘No.’
‘Is there any possibility you could be identified?’
‘Nobody saw me.’
‘Think hard.
Could anybody have seen you to associate you with the car even?’
‘The road was empty.’
‘You were seen by nobody?’
‘Only by the target, and whoever was with him…’
‘Whoever…?’
‘They're both dead.’
‘Do you know who it was who was with the target?’
‘I did not ask his name before I shot him, no.’
He stood very still.
He knew that the target was a writer, an exile.
He had been told what the writer wrote about the regime and the Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council.
He had been told also, in whispered confidence, that two attempts against the target had failed.
He was the Colonel's card…
Below him he could hear the passing wail of sirens, a familiar sound after dark had fallen over the city.
The squads from the Department of Public Security always did their work at night, taking into custody those they claimed were a threat to the regime.
And the sirens escorted their prisoners from the Department to the Abu Ghraib gaol, and those who had not survived interrogation from the Abu Ghraib gaol to the Medical City Mortuary on the other side of the Al Sarafiyah Bridge.
‘You shot an American, Colt…’
‘I killed the target.’
‘A C.I.A.
American…’
The boy laughed out loud.
He laughed in the face of the Colonel, and at the watcher standing against the door.
‘So what…?’ he said.
‘He was an intelligence officer.’
‘It was a good street, got me?
It was great.
It was dead, there was no one.
No nannies, maids, deliveries, really good.
The target, he was already fidgety, I couldn't follow him all day, not  a target who was that sharp.
The street was right.
If the American hadn't gone then he had my face, and he had the car.
He had to go…and he should have chosen his friends more carefully.’
At last the Colonel smiled, and there was the gravel growl of his chuckle.
‘And you did nothing stupid in Athens…?’
‘You taught me what to do.’
‘…
Nothing Colt-like, nothing wild?
What did you do, Colt?
No girls, no boasting?’
‘You taught me.
I'm clean.
It was a good street, Colonel.
There was an opportunity and I took it.’
‘You could not be identified?’
‘I'd go back, to Europe, because I know that I cannot be traced.’
The Colonel laid his broad hands on the young man's shoulders.
He looked into the calm of the face, into the clear eyes.
‘It was well done, Colt.’
Amongst those few who knew Zulfiqar Khan, and what work he did, news of his killing spread fast.
And with the news, fear.
In Paris, an engineering specialist in deep tunnelling in heavy rock strata, home on leave, made up his mind there and then to turn his back on the remaining two and a half years of his contract.
The tunnelling that the Frenchman was paid — and handsomely — to supervise was off the road to Arbil, close to the village of Salahuddin, due north of Baghdad.
The area so far excavated was the size of a football pitch, and deep enough for three levels of laboratories and workshops that would be concrete-lined.
One more floor was required.
The cavern was eminently suitable for the work intended for it.
It was safe from air attack and shielded by the Karochooq mountain mass from satellite photography that would tell the story of the purpose for which this rock cave was fashioned.
News of Dr Khan's murder had eddied amongst the foreign specialists on the project.
By midday word had reached all the hard-hat staffers.
By late that night, two of those staffers  were at Baghdad International airport.
They had driven the two hundred miles from their Portacabin compound in the village of Salahuddin at high speed.
They waited for the first flight out of Iraq on which there were seats.
It might be to Jeddah, or to Karachi, or to Budapest.
At the airport was an Italian who specialised in the fitting of the argon gas filters necessary for the hot cell boxes.
The Italian sat close to his friend on the front row of the plastic-coated seats, and studied every two, three, minutes the T.V. monitor that would announce the next flight out.
The friend had an office in the same block at Tuwaithah.
The friend, who was an engineer involved in the precision shaping of chemical explosive, had that morning received a letter bomb which by chance had failed to detonate.
They had been at the airport for six hours, waiting for a flight, any flight out of Iraq, going anywhere.
Erlich was breaking the rules.
A Fed on assignment overseas with the ranking of Assistant Legal Attaché must always work through local law-enforcement agencies.
Back at F.B.I.H.Q., where the book ran the show, they would have been climbing the walls in the Office of Liaison and International Affairs if they had known that he was out on his own.
At the very least, he should have had a local policeman with him.
At best, he should have been waiting until the morning and then politely requesting a desk and a telephone and an interpreter somewhere in the back reaches of their Counter-Terrorism building.
But Erlich was his own man.
He had been his own man on the training run at Quantico and it had not been held against him there.
And his own man in Atlanta, where his straight talking and his independence had won him his next posting.
And his own man in the Washington Field Office, the CI-3 team, and putting in the longest hours and never a word of complaint, and that had won him the job in the Attaché's office in Rome.
It was not his intention that he would spend the rest of his life as a Special Agent.
Ten years, he had set himself, to  running a Field Office.
Twenty years, he reckoned, to an Assistant Director's desk in Headquarters.
It was a break, coming down to Athens, and a good break should be grabbed with both fists.
The sadness was that it came from the killing of Harry.
The excitement was that it was a really brilliant break.
Sadness and excitement, both already seeking their own compartments.
At the edge of his flashlight beam he could see the dampened flowers, flattened now by the steady fall of rain.
He wasn't interested in an examination by torchlight of the exact spot where Harry Lawrence and the contact had fallen.
He paced out an arc of twelve paces, looked for the killer's place.
He could be very thorough…
A body on a garbage dump nine miles out west of Atlanta.
Female, eighteen, black.
Believed to be the victim of a serial killer, probably the fourth.
She'd fought, her fists were bruised to show she'd fought, and there was nothing to work from.
Over to the right of the dump was a high tree, holding the storks' nests.
Erlich, rookie Fed, had demanded of the local police that they get a man up there, up to the nests, that they get each of the nests down, that they sift each of the nests on the very long chance that the storks had lifted a fibre of torn clothing to bind a nest wall.
They'd done it, too, the police, and they'd found nothing…
After fifteen minutes he was crouched over tyre marks on the grass verge between the pavement and the road.
Possibly the tyre threads of the Opel Rekord, that was burned through and useless for evidence prints.
After 40 minutes, on his hands and knees, peering into the beam of his flashlight, he found the butt end of a small cigar.
He had already found chewing-gum wrapping, sweet papers and cigarette filters faded by weather.
The butt end of the cigar was fresh.
Everything else he had collected he abandoned in the street drain.
The butt end of the cigar was three paces from where the tyre treads were clearest, probably where the car had braked.
He heard a shout.
He looked up.
On the pavement opposite a small boy watched him.
The shouting grew fiercer, and the gates opposite were thrown open.
It was the woman who had put the flowers on the place where Harry Lawrence had died, and there was a small toy dog, a Pekinese, yapping by her ankles.
The child went to her, reluctant to leave.
The gates closed.
From his pocket, Erlich took a small plastic bag, and into it he dropped the cigar butt.
It was a beginning.
The wind came from the west.
It blew hard on the beach and the militia men who kept guard, protecting the Sheraton and the Ramada and the Tel Aviv Hilton against a landing by guerrillas, turned their faces from the stinging sand.
Two streets behind the sea front the cafés on Ben Yehuda were quiet.
There were five of them at one table and they were the only ones still outside.
The men drank beer from the bottles, and one of them passed round the cigarettes he had bought on the flight, and the blond girl contributed a half-bottle of Stock brandy.
They no longer talked about the substance of the mission.
The debriefing had gone on through the afternoon and early evening in the sound-proofed rooms of their headquarters.
The mission was completed.
They would probably not work as a team again, and certainly it would be many months before the girl, on any pretext, work or vacation, was permitted to leave the country.
Drinking at a pavement café on Ben Yehuda was for each of them a way of signing off from the mission.
There was the senior officer who had authorised the mission after assembling the detailed biography of Professor Zulfiqar Khan.
There was his deputy who had collated the intelligence that gave the itinerary of the Pakistani.
There was the girl who had played the whore and who would go home that night to her husband.
There was the man who had killed Khan and who later would go barefoot into the children's room to kiss them and not wake them.
There was the  man who had been with him and taken the briefcase from the hotel room and who in the morning would go back to the Golani Brigade stationed on the Lebanese border and who would be chided by his fellow officers for having taken leave while the military workload was intense.
Only when the café owner remonstrated with them did they leave.
In the middle of Ben Yehuda they kissed each other.
It was the only display, through the days and nights of tension, of their emotion.
They kissed and they split.
The senior officer walked with the girl.
When he waved down a taxi, he saw that her hand ferreted in her bag.
As the taxi stopped, he saw that she pushed back onto her finger her narrow and plain gold ring.
He opened the door for her.
‘It was necessary,’ he said.
‘If we do nothing, if we sit back and watch…the State is finished.
If that dwarf, Tariq, is permitted to build them a bomb…’
The senior officer of the Mossad drew his finger across his throat then quietly shut the taxi door, waved, walked away.
Colt went to the Khan Murjan in the old quarter only when someone else picked up the bill.
This time he had the table to himself.
The Colonel was paying.
Prawns and avocado, lamb, cheese, fruit, and French wine.
It was his favourite eating place in Baghdad.
There was a small band away from the tables, and the singer had started as he had begun his meat and called for a second bottle.
He was not actually hungry, and it was rare for him to drink, but they were paying and he would make sure they noticed, and — apart from the singer — the Khan Murjan was a hell of a fabulous place.
A great arched ceiling of close brickwork, carpets too beautiful to put a dirty shoe on.
The singer was crap, but he could handle the singer, just switch that amplified voice off in his head, just as he could  shake out of his head the recoil thud of the Ruger on semi-automatic…
He had walked through the old city with the guard a dozen paces behind.
The city was his home, and the Ruger, and the Khan Murjan restaurant, they were as much of a home as he was now at liberty to make for himself.
Light years ago, at his school, and Colt of course not a part of it but compelled to sit through it,Murder in the Cathedral .
The troublesome priest.
The Colonel had trusted him to rid the Chairman of the darts of the writer with the poisoned pen.
Two had failed, he had succeeded.
One had failed to penetrate airport security at Budapest, got himself arrested and deported.
A second had failed on the streets of Zagreb, lifted by the Yugoslavs, locked up and the key thrown away.
Colt had succeeded.
He knew why he had been chosen.
He was white, he was European, he had access .
He had justified the Colonel's faith.
He was the only European in the restaurant, because all the bastards who were in town to fight like cocks in a pit for the reconstruction contracts would be in the restaurants of the Babylon Oberoi and the Sadir Novotel and the Mansour Melia.
He wore his better Jeans and a laundered shirt, open at the neck.
He had shot an American.
So what?
He drank deep.
When he had finished his meal, when he had collected his guard from the hard chair by the entrance, then he would stride back to the Haifa Street Housing Project, and he would chew on the pistachio nuts that were loose in his trouser pocket, and he would write to his mother.
The first of the November frosts had settled on the lawn in front of the house, and the Sierra was an age starting.
There were some mornings, Monday mornings in particular, when it would have been as quick for him to walk to the main gates and then catch an internal minibus to his office block.
On Monday mornings there was a solid traffic line at the junction where Mulfords Hill joined the main road from Kingsclere to Burghfield Common.
But Frederick Bissett detested walking, and because his Sara's car was in the garage, and his own car sat outside overnight, he condemned himself to five minutes of scraping the ice from the windscreen and the back window and to revving the engine, blowing grey fumes away down Lilac Gardens.
Sara seldom saw him off to work.
She was generally too busy getting Frank and Adam ready for school.
His neighbour came through the front door of the house to the right.
He was kissed.
His wife always kissed him.
His neighbour always wore grey overalls when he went to work.
His neighbour was a plumber.
‘Good morning, Fred.’
Frederick Bissett, Senior Scientific Officer, loathed being called Fred.
He waved his de-icer without enthusiasm.
‘Better mornin' for cuddling up — eh?
What?’
His other neighbour was twelve years younger than Frederick Bissett, wore white socks inside his black shoes, and sold Heinz products into local supermarkets.
His other neighbour's child-bride  kissed her boy hero each morning, in her floating web dressing gown, as if he were going to the Falklands for three months.
He drove an Escort XR3i complete with fluffy toys, and had moved to Lilac Gardens in the eye of the housing price slump, aided by the bequest of a dead aunt.
Bissett had been told that often enough, about the dead aunt and her bequest.
He had very little to say to his other neighbours.
He could live in a cocoon of his own making.
That was the way of his work, and that was the way of his life in Lilac Gardens.
Bissett laid his old briefcase on the back seat of the car.
The case contained only his sandwich box and his thermos flask of coffee.
He drove out onto Mount Pleasant and was stopped at the temporary lights where the new sewer pipe was going in.
He was held up again when he needed to turn into Mulfords Hill because no one would let him into the flow.
The next hold-up was outside Boundary Hall where a stream of cars was emerging from his left and not acknowledging his right of way.
He was stopped outside the Lloyds Bank by the entrance to Boundary Hall.
It was far too early for the manager to be coming to work.
An hour at least before the manager turned up to write his acid little letters.
There was a short gap between the cars sprinting out from Boundary Hall, he gunned his engine and surged forward.
The Audi that thought it had a clear run had to brake hard…
Excellent…
He recognised the driver, one of the Principal Training Managers lodged at Boundary Hall, saw his annoyance and felt the better for it.
Another hundred yards, and then held again at the Kingsclere-Burghfield Common crossing.
It was the same every morning, only worse on some mornings.
Eyes into his mirror.
He recognised the man with the white handlebar moustache sitting high in a ridiculous Japanese jeep, Health Physics branch, and he heard the sharp horn blast before he saw that the road ahead of him was clear.
He took his chance and crossed the road.
Another queue of cars at the Falcon Gate.
They had the rods out with the mirrors.
No end to it…
State Amber Black at the Falcon Gate…
He always left the newspaper at  home in the mornings for Sara.
He never listened to radio news in the mornings, and in the evenings he usually turned his chair away from the television set, so that he could read.
He had an idea there had been a car bomb at another barracks.
He did not know where, and did not particularly care, except that it meant that the Establishment was on Amber Black, and every car had to have the magic mirror wand shoved underneath the chassis.
He was waved ahead.
He drove forward.
He was inside the perimeter fence of his workplace.
There are five such workplaces in the world.
There is the Los Alamos National Laboratory in the desert uplands of New Mexico.
There are the Institutes and Design Laboratories of the Ministry of Medium Machine-Building in the Chelyabinsk region of the Ural mountains.
In France, there are the Centres d'Etudes of the Directions des Applications Militaires which is a sub-division of the Commission d'Energie Atomique at Ripault.
There are the design facilities of the Ministry of Nuclear Energy at Lanzhou in Gansu province in the People's Republic of China.
And in Great Britain there is the Atomic Weapons Establishment which has been built upon a World War Two airfield in the countryside of Berkshire, 50 miles from London and overlooking the Thames Valley.
When Bissett had left home the sky had been clear.
No longer.
The chill of the early morning was dispersing under the grey cloud base that spread in from the west.
He took the central avenue, along the old runway.
Where he drove, surrounded by cars and bicycles and mopeds and minibuses, there had once been the strained drone of Dakotas pulling gliders into the air for the flights to the bridges and crossroads behind the D-Day beaches of Normandy, and for the flights to the Dutch town of Arnhem.
He drove slowly down the wide Third Avenue.
Grey  concrete buildings that had been thrown up, always wherever they could be fitted in, on either side.
The coiled wire above the fences that surrounded the A area where the plutonium was worked, and the B area where the chemical explosives were fashioned, and the contaminated areas, and the waste storage areas, all separated by their own grey wire barricades.
The four great chimneys to his left spewing out their fumes into the grey cloud.
Bissett drove to the H area.
His workplace was H3.
The building was single-storey, red-brick walls, metal window frames, flat-roofed.
The H3 building had been put up hastily in the early 1950s to get the scientists out of their first accommodation that had been little more than Nissen huts.
There should have been a lifespan of twenty years for H3, but other priorities had been higher, and every four years since 1973 there had been a doctoring of the patient, a new lick of paint on the inside, an attempt to reinforce the roofing against damp, new wiring to carry the power of the computer that ran their lives.
There was also a new fence around H area, all a part of the new security drive.
Once more he showed his I/D card to the Ministry policeman.
Carol was at the coffee machine, stoking up for the day, the cover not yet off her typewriter.
‘Morning, Dr Bissett.’
Wayne was lighting his first cigarette.
He was the most recent recruit into H3, and only had a Lower Second from Aston.
‘Morning.’
Reuben Boll was unwrapping the first of the boiled sweets he bought each morning in Tadley.
The door to his office was always open.
He was the Superintendent, Grade 6.
He was the man in charge of H3, and he spoke with his émigré parents' guttural Central European accent although he had been born in Ipswich, and he had been in H area for 26 years.
‘Morning, Frederick.’
Basil Curtis slammed the door behind him.
He had been there since ever.
Basil shrugged out of his dufflecoat.
The dufflecoat  would have been the one he had worn when he first came to work at the Establishment.
There were no Civil Service retirement regulations applicable to Basil.
The stitching of the rent in his corduroy trousers was his own work, the runs in his pullover were his cat's.
Bissett thought him the most brilliant man he had ever met.
‘Morning, Bissett.’
They were the first in.
There would be others on the clerical staff who were always late, always pleading that the school bus hadn't turned up, or that their dog had to be walked.
And others on the scientific level who would claim the excuse of a school run, or taking the wife to Surgery.
Bissett was never late.
He went down the corridor that led off the central area.
Third on the right.
He unlocked the door with the key that was on his chain.
His routine was invariable.
Each morning he first switched on the power for his terminal.
Then he took his sandwich box and his thermos of coffee from his briefcase.
They went onto the shelf behind his chair, between the photographs of Sara and of the two boys.
Then he went to his wall safe, opened it with the second key on the ring attached by a chain to his trouser belt, and took out his papers.
His Personal Air Sampler, the size of a small matchbox, hanging by a cord from his neck, banged on the desk top.
It always banged on the desk top, each morning, before he remembered to tuck it below his tie.
Carol knocked, came in before he was able to tell her to.
Her husband was a lathe operator in B area.
She always said she could have done a better job running the place than the Director or his boss, Controller Establishment Research and Nuclear.
‘This got delivered here, Dr Bissett.’
The envelope was marked Personal and Confidential.
As at Los Alamos and Chelyabinsk and Ripault and Lanzhou, the Atomic Weapons Establishment at Aldermaston is a workplace governed by secrecy.
Behind the grey wire, beyond the uniformed guards with their  sub-machine guns and automatic pistols and attack dogs, 5000 people daily go about their work, to research, design, test and finally manufacture an independent source of nuclear weapons.
Much of the work moving from the A.W.E.
consoles and design tables and laboratories and workshops is considered, by the few who so jealously guard their knowledge, as information too sensitive to be transmitted to any but those in the topmost reaches of government.
Infinitely too sensitive to be shared, even in the most vague terms, with the general public, for whom the nuclear shield remains the ultimate defence.
Nine tenths of the work done here would be known to the scientists and engineers at Los Alamos and Chelyabinsk and Ripault and Lanzhou.
But Los Alamos and Chelyabinsk and Ripault and Lanzhou and Aldermaston form the club with the greatest exclusivity yet devised.
No helping hand will be offered to newcomers.
The door is closed to new members, and the membership protects itself against what it calls Proliferation with wire, guns, attack dogs, certainly, but above all with a suffocating cloak of secrecy.
It was noon.
He had arrived at the forward brigade post three hours earlier.
His car was mud-splattered, parked amongst the jeeps and armoured personnel carriers, a hundred yards from the helicopter pad.
He was Dr Tariq.
Dr Tariq had never liked the featureless flatland of the Fao peninsula before the war.
After seven years as a battlefield it was now an unearthly, hellish landscape.
Around the excavated brigade post were gun positions, and trench patterns, and mud.
As a scientist, Dr Tariq despised the waste and confusion of the place.
His back was to the waterway.
He had no wish to look out over the Shatt al-Arab, the narrow glistening strip that divided his country from the Islamic Republic of Iran.
He did not care to look beyond the semi-sunken hulks of the bombed merchantmen towards the clear flames rising from the refinery tower of Abadan.
He waited.
He paced close to his car.
As far as he could see back up the Basra road were the headless date palms, lopped by the shrapnel.
As soon as he had received news of the death of Professor Khan he had requested a meeting with the Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council, at the Chairman's earliest convenience.
As Director of the Atomic Energy Commission, Dr Tariq was familiar with the dark undercurrents of Iraq's body politic.
He knew of the coup attempt of seven weeks earlier and he had heard the rumour that nine Air Force officers had been put to death.
It did not surprise him at all that the Chairman's answer should come, hand-delivered, to his villa at four o'clock in the morning, and that the rendezvous would be away from Baghdad.
He knew that the routine and itinerary of the Chairman were a closely guarded secret.
Dr Tariq would not have said that he liked the Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council, but he admired him.
Nothing was possible, not any movement, without the clearance of the Chairman.
He admired in particular the durability of the man, and his capacity to absorb succinctly presented detail, and his ability for work.
So he awaited his summons without impatience.
Dr Tariq had rehearsed what he wished to say.
When, eventually, he was admitted to the presence of the Chairman he would have perhaps fifteen minutes to explain himself.
It was well known amongst that elite of which he was a part that the Chairman detested news of crisis.
But the killing of Professor Khan, no doubt at the hands of Zionist agents, and a letter bomb to one of his scientists at Tuwaithah, that was crisis and had to be confronted.
The defection of foreign personnel from his programme, that too was crisis.
Like every man who had direct contact with the Chairman, Dr Tariq had a most sincere fear of his master.
He knew of the disappearances, the torturings, the hangings.
He had been told that the Chairman had with a handgun shot dead a general who had dared to argue with his strategy during the dark days of the war.
So he had prepared his words with care.
The officer approached him.
Dr Tariq, five foot two inches in height, thin as a willow wand, stood erect.
He raised his arms, to permit the officer to frisk him.
Then, without fuss, Dr Tariq opened his briefcase for inspection.
He followed the officer, stepping through the churned mud, towards the concrete steps down into the brigade post, and the presence of the Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council.
Not yet past the lunch hour, and Erlich had had his first argument of the day.
It could have been the second, but he had swallowed his pride when they had shown him the room that was allocated him.
It was scarcely a box.
Just a table and a chair and a telephone that wouldn't be secure, and the room was two floors and the length of a ministry corridor away from the Operations Co-ordination Centre of the Counter-Terrorism section at police headquarters.
He had accepted that.
What he would not accept was the refusal to make available to him, face to face, the eyewitness.
It was not suitable that he should meet the eyewitness, he had been told.
He didn't know how much of his fury had been translated by the interpreter.
The guys who had been up at Lockerbie, after Pan Am 103, working alongside the British police, they didn't know how lucky they'd been…
Same language, same culture, same team…
But they had given him photographs.
He had on the desk the photographs that showed Harry and his contact on the grass and the pavement.
Every goddam way they had taken Harry's picture, so that he saw the part of Harry's head that was intact, and the part that was blasted.
They had given him one written statement.
It was a photocopy and the name and address of the eyewitness had been omitted.
He copied into his notebook all that his interpreter dictated.
Harry and the contact walking and talking in 28th October Street.
No traffic.
Twenty-eight minutes to nine o'clock in the morning.
The silver-grey Opel Rekord pulling onto the grass verge, braking 20 yards away.
No description of the driver.
A fair-haired  man getting out of the passenger seat, front.
A shout from the fair-haired man.
The targets turning.
The fair-haired man opens fire.
Pistol plus silencer.
The contact hit.
Harry blundering into the field of fire.
The second shout, the driver's shout, ‘Colt’.
The car turning in the road, getting the hell out.
Harry dead, and the contact dead when the first police and ambulance crew had arrived…
He left his desk as bare as he had found it.
He took a taxi to the Embassy.
He had to wait for fifteen minutes before he was admitted to the Agency's annexe.
Erlich told the Station Chief what he had.
He was seeking to trade information, and he was going to be disappointed.
I'm not opening up our file to you, Bill.
It's nothing personal…’
‘And it's not co-operation.’
‘It's the facts of life.
I give you a file, it goes into your system.
You nail a guy, weeks ahead, months, and my file is evidence.
My file gets to be prosecution material.
Any asshole who wants it gets to read my file.’
‘Is that final?’
‘As I said, it's nothing personal.’
Erlich stood.
He had the cigar butt in the plastic sachet in his pocket.
He had not spoken of the cigar butt to the Station Chief…
‘Bill, look at it our way, do me that favour.
Harry Lawrence was your friend and I appreciate that, but Harry Lawrence was not the target.
An Iraqi was the target, and it's your assessment and it's mine.
We are in deep stuff, real deep.
We have a big mission down in Iraq, during the war we did all we damn well could to make certain those boys didn't go under to the Ayatollah's shit-pushers.
We gave them A.W.A.C.S. material, we put up satellites just for them.
The enemy of Iran is our friend, got me?
But we keep our hands dirty, we stay in touch with the regime's enemies.
We don't make any noise about that…’
‘Investigating a murder is making a noise?’
‘You've a job to do, O.K., but don't make waves.’
‘I want to know the identity of a man, I want to reach him, I want to put him in handcuffs and read him a charge of First Degree murder.’
‘Beautiful.’
‘With or without help.’
‘Brilliant.
You're a detective, you don't mix easily in diplomacy, neither does hustling for commendations…
You go on like this and you'll find yourself short of help.’
‘With respect, what I'm after is a result.’
Erlich walked out.
Didn't even bother to close the door behind him.
He walked straight through the outer office and out past the security gate and the Marine guard.
He headed for the main building, and the area of the basement where secure matter could be despatched back home.
As she filled in the forms for him, the girl in Despatch, big and black and at last a friendly face, told him she was from Mississippi, and sure as hell she hated Greeks, Athens, moussaka and retsina.
In front of him, she sealed the cigar butt in the plastic sachet into a small tin box and then into the padded envelope.
The package was addressed to the Laboratory Division of F.B.I.H.Q. Erlich, like every other Fed, had plenty to grumble about in the running of the Bureau, but the Laboratory was the best.
‘You okay, Mr Erlich?’
He'd slept poorly.
He hadn't eaten breakfast.
The coffee at Counter-Terrorism was ditch water, and he had been poleaxed twice.
He should have been at the airport last evening to see Elsa Lawrence and her children off and the casket.
For Erlich not much was allowed to get in the way of a job and he supposed that was why he had been sent.
She said she would get him some coffee, proper coffee, coffee from home.
While she was making the coffee, boiling her kettle, he glanced across at her Herald Tribune .
He saw the Rome dateline.
He read  the name of the hotel, and the name of the street.
He had been in that street two weeks earlier.
He read of the death of the Pakistani nuclear scientist last seen in the company of…no leads…
The coffee she brought him was great, kept him alive.
All through the morning there had been detonations and gunfire.
Of course there had to be detonations, and of course there had to be shooting practice, but Monday morning was hardly the appropriate time.
On any other morning, Bissett would have been able to live with the thudding blast of the explosives and with the crisp rattle of sub-machine gun and pistol fire.
But not that morning, not on the morning that the envelope marked Personal and Confidential had lain unopened in his briefcase.
He had spent two hours in his room, at his console.
By 10.30 he had gone down the full length of the corridor that ran past his office and he had then spent two and a half hours in H3's laboratory.
He had achieved next to nothing in his own room, and in the laboratory he had been the victim of Reuben God Almighty Boll's sarcasm.
So that every technician and every junior could hear him, Boll had enquired just how much longer before his present project would be completed, how much later than it was already.
Lunch hour, and quite suddenly, when it didn't matter, it was perfectly quiet.
Boll would be in the Directors' dining room, Basil would have gone to see his cronies in A area, Wayne would have gone out with those as young and limited as himself to the Hind's Head in the village, Carol would be in the canteen wittering with the other Clerical Assistants and her husband.
He had drunk his coffee.
He had brushed the crumbs from his desk top into his wastebasket.
He screwed the top, that served as a mug, back onto his flask.
He was determined not to rush himself.
He had deliberately not used his home address.
He replaced the plastic sandwich box in his briefcase, and took out the envelope.
He checked that his door was closed.
He tore open the envelope.
A fearful mess of it, he made, because his hands were trembling.
There was the letter heading.
Imperial Chemical Industries.
‘Dr Frederick Bissett, B. Sc.
(Leeds), A.W.E., Aldermaston, Berkshire.’
He didn't look to the end of the letter first.
He exercised his self-control.
He began at the first line.
He held the paper in both hands and he saw the paper waver in front of his spectacles.
Dear Doctor Bissett,
Thank you for sending your application for employment, dated October 19th.
I do understand that because of the nature of your current employment your C.V.
has remained narrower than would otherwise have been expected…
Idiot.
Of course his C.V.
was narrow.
He had worked for twelve years on matters covered by the Official Secrets Act, of which, obviously, he was a signatory.
…
However, I understand from your application that you have been concerned in your A.W.E.
work with the areas of Fluid Dynamics and Plasma Physics, but with the necessary somewhat restricted interpretation…
How in heaven's name could his interpretation be other than restricted?
His work was concerned with the interplay reactions at the moment of implosion.
The effect of micro-second synchronised detonation of chemical explosive onto beryllium, then onto uranium 238, then onto uranium 235, then onto weapons-grade plutonium 239, and then onto the innermost pit and the core of tritium/deuterium.
In the innermost pit, if the work of the scientists in the H area had been successful, it would be assumed that a nuclear explosion would generate a heat in the core of tritium/deuterium of one hundred million degrees Centigrade.
So, yes, it was somewhat restricted.
…
Sadly, it has been our experience in the past that the most specialised work carried out at the Atomic Weapons  Establishment leads scientists into a cul-de-sac of research that has little, or no, relevance to science as practised in civilian life…
The science that was relevant to Frederick Bissett was the moment, too fast for any but the most powerful computer to register, when chemical explosive was driven by uniform spherical detonation against the fissionable material of highly enriched uranium and plutonium creating some millions of pounds overpressure per square inch…
His head dropped.
In front of him the page blurred.
…
With regret, therefore, I have to inform you that we are not in a position to offer you employment in any research division of the company.
Yours sincerely Arnold R. Dobson, Personnel Director.
(dictated, and signed in his absence)
He felt sick.
He took the letter and the envelope out of his office and down to the abandoned area at the end of the corridor.
He ted the sheet of paper and the envelope into the shredding machine beside Carol's desk.
He went back to his room.
Later he would hear Carol's laughter, and Wayne's giggle, and the clumping tread of Basil's iron-tipped shoes, and the coarse grate of Reuben Boll's voice.
And later he would hear the dull punch of explosive detonations.
He would work until it was time to go home, on the new warhead design that would replace the free-fall WE-177 bomb with an air-launched cruise system.
He would work on the mathematics of implosion until, in the late afternoon, he cleared his desk, and took his briefcase, with empty sandwich box and empty coffee flask, to his car, and drove home.
In crisp early morning sunshine the Air Force plane touched down at Andrews Air Base.
Nothing hurried, none of the subterfuge of moving a body quietly and in the dead of night out of Athens.
The networks were there, penned behind a steel barrier.
The high-level officials from State Department stamped their feet on the tarmac and waited for the aircraft doors to open.
There was a bearer party, old friends and colleagues of Harry's.
The Director of the Agency and the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation were there.
The F.B.I.
Director said, ‘My first man into Athens, a young man but a good friend of Lawrence's, has promised the widow that we'd go for the jugular on this one.’
The Agency Director mused, ‘But, whose jugular?’
‘Whichever.’
‘Something tells me you may bump into a little politics on the way.’
The F.B.I.
Director said, ‘Just this once, fuck the politics.’
The Agency Director said, ‘I didn't hear that…but I wish you luck.’
They had brought Agency men back to Andrews, in caskets, from Europe, from Lockerbie, from Lebanon, from Central America.
It was a regular run for the Agency Director, down the Capital Beltway from Langley to Andrews.
He was used to shaking the hand, gravely, of a young widow.
He was accustomed to dropping his arm round the shoulders of young and fatherless children.
The aircraft door was open, and the cargo hatch.
They saw, at the top of the steps, the small, intimidated figure of Elsa Lawrence, her children behind her.
They saw the casket taken from the cargo hatch, and draped in their flag, and lifted onto the shoulders of Harry Lawrence's work friends.
The Agency Director said, ‘You know what?
Half the C.B.S.
story on Lawrence last night was time taken explaining where Athens is.’
When it came to their turn, both men shook Elsa Lawrence's hand, felt her limp grasp in theirs.
And both men put their arms  round the children, and felt them flinch from the touch of strangers.
Dr Tariq, frail and looking as though the gentle zephyr that came in off the Tigris might flatten him, could muster a savage temper when attacked.
He had been badly damaged when the Zionists had sent their commando squad with explosives to La Seine-sur-Mer, close to the French port of Toulon, to destroy the two reactors that were to have been shipped to Tuwaithah 48 hours later.
That had been twelve years ago, just one year after the Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council had promoted him to Director at the Atomic Energy Commission.
They had hurt him again, killing el-Meshad in Paris in 1980, and frightening off the Italian companies who had been engaged to deliver hot cell boxes.
And ten years ago he had been hurt worst of all when the Zionist Air Force, the E-16s and the E-15s, had come to Tuwaithah out of the setting sun to put down 16 tons of explosive ordnance onto the Osirak reactor.
He would never forget the great dust cloud that climbed over the reactor shell, broken like a duck's egg, after the jets had soared away into the June evening.
Hundreds of millions of dollars blown away.
Hundreds of thousands of working hours lost.
And the ground defence system had not got one shot off in retaliation.
He could remember lying on the floor of his office on a carpet bright with the shards of his shattered windows, and how he had howled in his frustration.
Over long years, he had sought to rebuild the nuclear programme, as he had been charged to by the Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council.
In those long years when the war had taken priority, Dr Tariq had rethought the detail of the programme.
On the day after the Cease Fire he had been granted an audience with the Chairman of the Revolutionary Council and he had argued his case for the revitalisation of his dream.
And now the Zionists had attacked him again.
Professor Khan had been a crucial cog in the great mesh of wheels that made up the whole for the creation of an Iraqi nuclear warhead.
He was a foreigner, he had been bought, just as Frenchmen had been bought, and Italians.
In the brigade post at Fao, Dr Tariq had won his day.
The Chairman gave orders for the military helicopter to fly the scientist back to Baghdad.
In spite of the headset that he wore for the flight, his ears were still ringing when he climbed down from the helicopter.
Waiting for him was an army officer, squat and powerful, rocking on the soles of his paratroop boots.
The voice of the Colonel was faint, hard to understand, as they scurried bent low from the helicopter's hatch door to safety beyond the reach of the thrashing rotor blades.
‘I am at your service, Dr Tariq.
Whatever it is that you wish, I am instructed to provide.’
In the late afternoon, Erlich was back from the airport.
Protocol and politeness had taken him out to the airport to meet the Temporary Duty men off the flight.
It was what should have happened to him when he had come in from Athens, and hadn't.
Nothing better than a smoothed way through Customs and Immigration, and ready transportation for the trip into a new city.
They would be on the same corridor as him in the Embassy's accommodation annexe, and later they would talk through the case history together.
The three T.D.Y.s were all senior to him, all had done more than ten years in the Bureau.
He hadn't met any of them before.
That was the way of these things.
Only a small chance that an overseas liaison Fed would know the guys coming in as firemen from Stateside.
The one who was born Greek and fluent, had lost his baggage, presumably in transit in London, and wanted action, and seemed to think that young Erlich would do the needful.
Erlich smiled coldly at him and said nothing.
All three were exhausted, and two, the older two, would crash out and try and sleep away the jet lag, and the Greek ethnic could shout all afternoon and all night into the telephone for his bags.
What it came down to was that Erlich had one last evening as an independent, and that from first light, from waffles and coffee time, he'd be part of their team and doing their bidding.
The senior man, who had come in from Los Angeles to E.B.I.H.Q. after Erlich had left Washington, he'd be everybody's friend, he'd have them eating out of his hand down at Counter-Terrorism, he'd probably take out citizenship.
The other older one had been in Chicago, moved to Washington less than a year back, and Erlich knew his name because he'd the distinction of having run the sting in the Board of Trade's soybean futures pit.
He left them to get their heads down.
They were all top of the ladder.
He didn't know their long-term histories, but each one of them would have had the break far back, hooked into it, started climbing.
He didn't reckon to waste his last evening as an independent.
He had the Embassy driver take him out, again, to 28th October Street.
He told the driver that he would find his own way back.
He started on the left side of the road.
Some of the gates were electronically controlled.
He had to identify himself from the pavement.
‘I am Bill Erlich, of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the United States of America.
I would be most grateful if you could spare me a few moments of your time.’
One gate that he could open himself let him into a front garden patrolled by two Dobermans, but he was okay with dogs because there had always been dogs at his mother's home, and at his grandparents' home.
He could talk his way past dogs.
Some of the villa front doors were wide open to him.
He talked to maids, struggling with his limited Greek, sometimes doing better in Italian, and to the camp boy servant of an old woman, he talked to wives and husbands and teenage children.
Some gave him their answer at the door, others invited him inside and sat him down to ask his question.
To a few he was a nuisance, to most he was merely a curiosity.
As each door opened to him, he made the same statement.
‘A colleague of mine, an American official of our Embassy, was killed here yesterday morning.
Did you, or anyone in this household, see anything of the incident?’
Some gave him their life history, then came round to saying that they were in bed, in the back of the villa, in the bath, already gone to work.
Some were brusque.
They had seen nothing, they knew nothing.
It was dark by the time he had finished with the left side of the road.
He thought that none of those he had spoken to could have told him anything of the killing.
He believed their denials.
But there was fear there, shrouded by some with belligerence, hidden by others with courtesy.
It wasn't any different from what it would be back home.
None of them wanted trouble.
Erlich had been on his last months in Washington when he had read the lesson, digested it, that safe folks crossed the road from danger, and didn't mind who they turned their backs on.
He was in Washington, and Mrs Sharon Rogers was living her life out in San Diego, California.
Trouble was that Mrs Sharon Rogers' husband had been commander of the U. S. S. Vincennes .
Down in the Gulf, the Vincennes had blown an IranAir jet liner out of the skies and killed more than 250 people.
The hit squad blew her vehicle off the road, and she was lucky to have jumped clear before the main explosion.
How did the good citizens of San Diego react?
Erlich would not criticise a timid woman or a timid man in the Kifisia suburb of Athens…
The parents of the kids at the school where Mrs Rogers taught had her barred from the school, in case the hit squad came back for a second try.
If Americans didn't stand up for Americans, why should Greeks stand up for…?
He worked his way down the right side of the road.
Of course, he remembered the front gates.
The front gates were across the road from where Harry had died.
The flowers were still there.
The rain and the wind had done them damage.
He walked through the gates.
He felt a stabbing pain at the back of his ankle.
A Pekinese had hold of his ankle.
He kicked hard with his free foot.
He heard the dog whimper.
His trouser was torn, and there was blood on his fingers when he rubbed the wound, and he wiped it away on his handkerchief.
He rang the front door bell.
‘Good evening, ma'am.
Do you speak English?’
It was the woman who had brought the flowers to the pavement.
He could sense her fear.
She stood with her hands on the door latch, as if she were ready to throw the door back in his face.
‘My name is Bill Erlich.
I am an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation from the United States.
Yesterday morning, an old friend, an Embassy officer, was shot dead in this road…’
‘Yes.’
‘It was very much appreciated, your flowers…’
‘It was nothing.’
She wore good jewellery, and her hair was freshly made up.
She was not attractive, her jaw was too prominent, and her eyes too close set…
Steady, Bill…
It was the 28th house he had called at.
The pain had gone from his ankle, but a throbbing replaced the pain.
‘I'm looking for an eyewitness, ma'am.’
‘Somebody who saw…?’
‘Somebody who saw my friend killed.’
‘Is that not the job of our local police?’
‘Indeed it is, but it is also my job.’
He saw that she hesitated.
She wavered.
Perhaps she recognised him from yesterday.
The dog was at his ankle, and wary of passing him.
She must have looked down at the dog, and seen the blood stain and the tear on his trouser.
She must have understood why the dog hung back.
‘Is it important to you, to find an eyewitness?’
‘Yes.’
‘Would you come in, please, Mr…?’
‘Erlich, ma'am.
Bill Erlich.’
She opened the door fully.
He walked into the hall, and brushed his feet hard on the mat.
This was money, serious money.
He could see the money in the paintings and he could see also the alarm wires leading to them.
Money in the drapes, and in the pottery that had a shelf to itself by the wide, dark wood staircase.
Money in the rugs over which her slippered feet moved.
She didn't take him to one of the two formal reception rooms opening off the hall.
She went ahead of him into the living room.
A television set was playing Indiana Jones .
The dog slunk past him and settled in front of the electric fire and growled back at him.
He saw a child's head peer round the wing of the comfortable chair, the child from last night.
She switched off the film, she waved for him to sit down.
She motioned for the child to sit on her lap.
Erlich thought the boy was about eleven, could have been younger.
She spoke quietly in Greek to the boy, soothing his annoyance at the turning off of the video.
‘Mr Erlich, more than forty years ago my country was divided by civil war.
My father took one side, perhaps it was the right side and perhaps it was the wrong side.
He was killed by the Communists.
Mr Erlich, no one came to ask in that village for eyewitnesses…’
She held her child against her.
‘…
He is a bright boy, Mr Erlich.
We had an English girl as a nanny for three years.
Andreas learned good English from her.’
Carefully, no sudden movements, Erlich took from his inside pocket his notebook, and removed the top from his ballpoint.
The boy talked.
It was before he had gone to school.
He was in the front garden with the dog.
He had seen two men walking in the road.
He had seen them through the gates.
A car had come fast behind them, a silver-grey car, and it had braked sharply.
A man had climbed out of the car.
A white-faced man, with  fair to golden hair.
The man had in his hand a gun with a long and fat barrel.
The man had held the gun out in front of his chest with both hands, away from his body.
The man had shouted.
In front of him the two men had separated, reacted to the shout, and then to the sight of the gun.
The firing of the gun, a soft thudding.
The smaller man was hit first, and then the taller man had seemed to move across to him, and then he had been hit.
The man with the gun had stopped, stared.
And the driver had shouted.
The man with the gun had run back to the car.
The car had turned and driven away.
That was it.
The death of his friend, told in the simplicity of a child's-eye view.
‘What were the shouts, Andreas?’
‘The driver of the car, he shouted ‘Colt’.’
‘You are certain?’
‘Colt.’
‘Couldn't have been anything else?’
‘Colt.’
He believed the boy.
The belief was instinctive.
He wrote the word ‘Colt’ in his notebook, and each time the boy spoke the word Erlich underlined it again.
‘What sort of age?’
‘Old.’
‘How old?’
The boy turned to his mother.
‘As old as Nico.’
She said, smiling, ‘Younger than you, Mr Erlich, perhaps 25 years.’
‘How tall?
Heavy or light built?’
The boy's response was immediate.
‘Not fat, just ordinary height.’
‘Hair?’
‘Fair, like Redford, but shorter.’
Erlich paused.
He let the words sink, and he wrote sharply, and his eyes never left the boy.
‘The other shout, the shout of the man with the gun?’
‘It was ‘Hey, there…’'
‘How did he say it?’
The boy shouted, ‘Hey, there.’
Erlich tried to smile.
‘Did he say it like Harrison Ford would have said it?’
‘English, not American.’
‘You know that difference?’
‘Like Nanny Parsons would have said it, English.’
‘Andreas, this is really extremely important…’,
‘It was English, Mr Erlich.’
‘I could waste an awful lot of my time…’
‘English.’
The words ‘Hey, there’ were underlined and across the top of the page he had written in bold capitals ENGLISH.
He apologised for his intrusion.
The boy had been good.
He had no doubts about the boy.
Because he had taught school before becoming a Fed he had some experience of kids.
Erlich helped out with the Little League team in Rome that played and practised at the American School on the Via Cassia most Saturday mornings.
When he was in Rome, when Jo was off somewhere, he enjoyed being one of the helpers.
The coach liked having him there.
The coach was an Embassy staffer in Rome and said that it was twice as good having helpers who weren't parents.
The Little League baseball squad was fine relaxation for Erlich.
It had given him the chance to go on talking to and getting to know children and he was sure he would know if a boy was telling him the truth.
He said no to tea, thank you, or a scotch and soda.
He walked down the driveway to the main gates of the villa.
He crossed the road.
He bent by the flowers, and tidied them.
He went down the road to the junction to look for a taxi.
‘That's all you've got, Bill, the testimony of an infant child.’
Don was a Fed from his shined shoes to the loosened necktie at his throat.
Old guard, old school.
Don had led the ‘rotten apple’ investigation five or six years back.
The arrest of that worm had been the greatest cross Don had ever had to carry, the most dangerous traitor ever in the history of the government's security service.
Erlich remembered his face from the network news, bleak and uncompromising and shamed, when the announcement was made.
Don pushed away the breakfast plate and lit his pipe.
‘Ninety-nine times out of a hundred a kid will tell you what he thinks you want to hear,’ Vito said.
Vito was too sharp a dresser to look like a Fed.
Gold bracelet, sports shirt, and a small crucifix dangled from a 24-carat chain round his throat.
The soybean sting in Chicago had been his.
Fantastic to have run two agents inside the sealed world of the soybean futures pit.
It was said in Washington, at the level that Erlich had worked, that Vito could tackle anything, other than Mafia.
He'd have been good there, with his background, but his wishes were respected.
‘You take the kid's word and you're going down a tunnel, might be a wrong-way tunnel,’ Nick said.
Nick, the Greek, was first-generation American.
His parents had left a village in the mountains near the Albanian border just after the Civil War.
He had the language.
More important, he worked on Counter-Terrorism programmes specialising in the Middle East.
In ‘87, Nick had been in Athens as one of the team  that lured Fawaz Younis to a boat out of territorial waters, and put the handcuffs on him, and read him the charges of Air Piracy and placing a destructive device aboard an aircraft and committing violence aboard an aircraft and aiding and abetting a hijacking.
Nick was wearing yesterday's shirt and the damp smell round the breakfast table told Erlich that Nick had washed his one pair of socks the night before.
Nick wouldn't be contributing much that morning, he'd be out buying his changes.
‘If it's a wrong way tunnel,’ he said, ‘we start burning up man hours.’
‘The boy is telling the truth,’ Erlich said.
‘You'd go to the wall for the boy's story?’
Don said.
‘Yes, sir, I would, and before you dismiss that story, I'd like to take you out there to hear it for yourself.’
Don's eyes seemed to devour Erlich's face.
They would have been told, all of them, before they left Washington that he was a friend of Harry Lawrence.
Vito was eating, he'd left the decision to Don.
Nick had his back to them, was trying to attract the attention of the waitress for his third can of Coke.
‘Suppose we go with what the kid says, what do you see as the next step?’
‘We have a physical description, we have a name or a nickname, and I believe he's English.
We have to start asking questions in London.’
Don said, ‘So go to London…’
Erlich took his hand, shook it.
‘Thanks.’
‘Nick, take him to the airport, give him what you can.’
And they were gone.
Vito had raised his dark brows in question.
Don said, ‘If he's right then that's the best.
If he's wrong, so what's an air ticket?
Catch on…
Lawrence was his friend.
I don't want anyone with personal feelings stumbling across my path.
Feelings is for Rita Hayworth, that's what I used to get told.’
They drove north out of the city, the guard, his sleepless ever-present shadow, at the wheel.
The road took them between the old splendour of the Khulafa and the Gailani mosques, and across the railway track that wound half the length of the country to Arbil, and out through Housing Project Number Ten, and through the concretescape of Saddam City, the Chairman's way of marking the end of the Iranian war.
Colt had heard it said that after the war the country's debt was 80 billion dollars.
Now, that was a sum of money to be reckoned with.
Eighty billion dollars was a little more than the mind of Colt could cope with.
Never mind the debt, the slogan seemed to be, get the show on the road.
The show was all around, as far as the eye could see, any direction.
New hotels, new fly-overs, new housing, new monuments to the Fallen Martyrs.
Back home, in a small Wiltshire town, dear old Barclays was nursing an overdraft in the name of Colin O. L. Tuck, which was £248.14 at the last count.
You'd have to add interest, of course, but even so he would take his hat off to a man 80 billion in the red who never stopped spending.
On the other hand the great portraits of the Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council were way over the top by Colt's reckoning.
Usually he was in camouflage smock and holding an A.K. at the hip, and would probably have knocked half his pelvis off from the recoil if he had fired at that angle.
Sometimes he was in the robes of a desert prince and the headdress of Joe Arafat, riding a white horse.
Sometimes he was in a City of London pinstripe and showing off his new dentures.
Colt didn't hold with the personality bit, but he knew enough to keep his opinion to himself.
Not least because — although Colt didn't suppose that the Chairman had an inkling of his existence — Colt owed the Chairman his liberty certainly, possibly even his life.
When they were clear of the city's traffic, Colt eased himself back in the seat and lit a small cigar.
He wore erratically laced army boots, and olive-green fatigues, and a heavy-knit dun brown sweater.
His eyes were closed.
It might get to be a bit of a bastard, the next few days, and then it might just get to be amusing.
But then, Colt liked fun, fun on his terms, and he'd give the bastards a run.
It would be the third time that he had taken part in the escape and evasion exercises of the Presidential Guard.
He was one day past his 26th birthday.
In two weeks' time it would be one year since he had first come to Iraq.
Colt would have liked his father to know how he was spending the next few days.
It would give the old man pleasure.
At the village of Al Mansuriyah, below the escarpment of the Jabal Hamrin, as the sun climbed, they were met by a jeep.
Colt was given a rucksack filled with a sleeping bag, field rations, water, and a first-aid kit.
He was given a map, compass, and binoculars.
He was shown on the map the village of Qara Tappah.
Two of the Presidential guardsmen were giggling as they pointed to the name of the village that was his target.
He told the guard, his minder, to get back to Baghdad.
He told the troops to go and scratch themselves somewhere else.
In the centre of the village was the square, dominated by a portrait of the Chairman.
Colt sat at a table outside the café that saw everything that moved in the village.
He asked for coffee and fresh cake.
He put his feet on an empty chair.
He closed his eyes.
He would move at the end of the day.
He was that rare person.
He was the person, taught by his father, who preferred darkness to light, night to day.
She was hurrying that morning.
There was little enough in her life that she could honestly say was exciting, but that morning she was a little nervous, and, yes, a little excited.
She wanted to get all of the washing out, then cross her fingers for a dry day with a bit of sunshine and a drying wind.
‘Morning, Mrs Bissett.’
Little Vicky, and she'd be standing on tip-toe to see over the fence, and not even dressed yet.
God alone knew what the girl did after the  golden boy had gone off to sell his 57 varieties, heaven only knew why she couldn't get herself dressed before ten o'clock.
She had a mouth full of pegs.
‘I've told you, Vicky, I don't answer to that.’
A hesitation, a smaller voice.
‘Morning, Sara…’
‘Good morning, Vicky.’
It was her own fault.
If she hadn't been an awkward, obstinate bitch of a teenager, it would all have been very different.
If she hadn't sulked with her father, fought like a cat with her mother, she wouldn't now be hanging up Frederick's threadbare underpants on the drying frame in a tiny back lawn in Lilac Gardens, Tadley.
There should have been a nice young man on the Sunningdale marriage circuit, and then a nice house in Ascot, and probably a cottage in Devon, and two boys at a good  preparatory school in Surrey.
But it had been her choice.
She had turned her back on her upbringing, but it didn't matter how many times she told Vicky.
She was always going to be Mrs Bissett to Vicky, and Mrs Bissett to Dorothy on the other side.
‘Got none of this ‘flu, then?’
‘Wouldn't have the time for it, Vicky.’
‘You busy, then?’
She saw Vicky's face, over the fence, crestfallen.
Poor little soul must be as lonely as sin.
Come in, join the club…
She said cheerfully, ‘Big day today, Vicky.
I'm joining an art class.’
She didn't have to tell the girl.
She didn't have to tell anyone.
She hadn't told Frederick, there just hadn't seemed to be the right time.
‘Oh, that's clever, Mrs…
Sara.’
‘Probably be a bloody mess.’
She should have stayed and talked with the girl, but this morning, unlike most mornings, she had a deadline to meet.
Simply didn't have the time to make soap-opera conversation over the fence.
It was their fence, and it was coming down, and she had pointed that out to Frederick, and she had known he  wouldn't do anything about it, any more than he would buy himself new underpants.
He said that he much preferred the money they could afford for clothing to go onto the boys' backs, and onto her.
She thought that her father probably now earned more than £100,000 a year, but she did not know for sure because it was nine years since she had last visited him, four years since she had last received a Christmas card from him.
Her mother didn't even telephone.
No reason for either of them to write or telephone, not after what had been said.
‘It would be wonderful to be able to do pictures.’
The telephone was ringing inside the house.
She had the last of the shirts pegged to the frame.
She should have stayed to talk to the girl, but her telephone was ringing.
‘Sorry, Vicky, another time…’
She ran inside.
She went through her kitchen, past the pool of water.
Dorothy's husband had plumbed in the second-hand washing machine for her, and refused to accept money, taken all Saturday morning doing it.
Because he had refused to be paid she couldn't ask him to come back again to deal with the seepage.
So it would stay leaking.
She went through the hall.
They needed a new carpet in the hall, and on the stairs.
She picked up the telephone.
‘Yes?’
It was the bank manager, Lloyds.
‘Yes?’
He had written twice to Mr Bissett.
‘Doctor Bissett, yes?’
He had written twice asking for a meeting, and he had received no reply.
There were matters to be discussed that were really quite urgent.
Would Doctor Bissett be so kind as to call back and arrange the appointment?
‘I'll tell him you phoned.’
He would be very grateful if she would do just that.
She rang off.
She had seen the two letters.
The first had arrived ten days before, and the second had been delivered four days  before.
She had seen him, ten days before and four days before, scoop up the letters from the kitchen table and put them in his briefcase.
He hadn't remarked on them, and she had not asked.
Each morning she had been too busy getting the boys ready to query the letters from the bank.
It was years since she had last been to an art class.
She didn't really know what she should be wearing, but that morning she put on an old pair of jeans.
All of her jeans were old.
She had dressed in a vivid red blouse and a loose woollen blue cardigan, and she had tied her long dark hair into a pony tail with an orange scarf.
She hadn't been to an art class since she had been married.
She thought that she looked good, and she felt bloody good, and she wasn't going to let a telephone call from the bank manager interfere with her seldom-found excitement.
When it was dusk, Colt walked out of the village of Al Mansuri-yah.
The last light played on the cliff wall of the Jabal Hamrin, but by the time he reached the steep-sloping ground he would be covered by darkness.
The sun's rays lingered on the one narrow minaret tower in the village behind him, and on the flat roofs where the corrugated iron was weighted down with heavy stones against the spring gales.
When he was clear of the goat herds and the sheep that grazed around the village, he moved down to the river that was a tributary of the distant Tigris.
His boots were comfortable, had a deep tread.
He scrambled down to the water's edge.
With his fingers he broke away mud from the river bank and wet it in the river.
He smeared the mud across his face, and then across his scalp so that it matted in his close-cut hair.
He layered more mud onto his throat and down to his chest and across his shoulders.
Last, he rubbed it over his hands and wrists.
They had tested him in Athens, now they tested him again.
He had no hesitation in telling himself that he would win.
Failure, he had often said to himself, was not a part of his life.
He had sat forward, in Club, because Tourist was full.
The whole plane was full and Nick had done well to get him a seat at all.
He had never before been through Customs and Immigration at Heathrow.
Not a bad experience, because there was an Englishman with Erlich's name on a sheet of cardboard waiting at the entrance to Immigration.
That was good.
He wouldn't have his suitcase to show.
The man had a card that did the work at the desk, saved them the queue, and it did the business at Customs too.
The guy let him carry his own case and led him through into the concourse where the English driver from the Embassy pool was waiting.
That was okay.
He hadn't reckoned on one of the Liaison team coming down from Central London just to shake his hand, talk baseball results, and drive him back.
It was a good run into the city, against the outgoing commuter traffic.
They ended up close to the Embassy in a road called South Audley Street.
The driver gave Erlich an envelope with his name and the South Audley Street address on it.
Inside a glass door he was met by a security man, plainclothes, not at all talkative, probably from Kansas.
He was given a key and left to find his own way up two flights of stairs.
It was a room like any other room.
It was what Bill Erlich, the bachelor, was used to, clean and soulless.
Inside the envelope was a note from the London-based Legal Attaché.
He was tied up that evening, apologies, and the rest of his team were out of town.
Could Erlich be at the Attaché's office at eight in the morning at the Embassy?
Erlich was alone in a city that he didn't know.
He dialled Jo's number in Rome, and grew lonelier and sadder as it rang on and on, unanswered.
Colt could easily have killed him.
Colt thought that ‘elite’ was the most overworked word in the military dictionary.
He  reckoned that the word elite was usually applied to those who had the best publicity machine.
In the Baghdad Times , the English-language newspaper, the Presidential Guard were always written up as an elite force.
They had all the kit, down to the nightscope.
They had bivouacs, sleeping bags and cold-weather anoraks.
He had found the observation post two miles beyond the outer rim of the Jabal Hamrin.
He had skirted it and approached them from behind.
Three troopers of the Presidential Guard.
They did two hours on, four hours off.
It was the first obstacle in his route from Al Mansuriyah to Qara Tappah, and he could have ignored it, simply carried on, but that was not his way.
He had waited, motionless, until the frost had settled on his body.
The gag was across the trooper's mouth, and the pressure of Colt's knee was into the small of his back, and the sheer strength of Colt's arm took the trooper's wrists up into the blades of his shoulders.
He trussed the trooper so that he could not move his feet or his hands.
On top of the gag, he forced into the trooper's mouth the trooper's own filthy handkerchief.
Where he had been a child, when the fox came at night around the barricaded chicken houses then the old bugger always scented the chicken house sides, left his stirik, boasted that he had been there.
And it would amuse the Colonel to hear what he had done to the President's elite guard.
He would have a 90-minute start on them, maybe longer.
‘I am afraid, Dr Bissett, that ignoring facts does not make those facts go away.’
It was a quarter past nine.
It was a clear hour after Bissett would normally have been at his desk.
‘Now, if we could, please, just go over the figures…’
He hated to be late.
It was the way that he had been reared.
‘Your salary as a Senior Scientific Officer currently runs at £17 500 I am correct?’
He had heard Carol, only the week before, say that the man who delivered coal to her house was paid £345 a week.
For loading and unloading sacks of coal, and driving a lorry round the villages, that was £440 per annum more than a Senior Scientific Officer earned slaving for the defence of his country.
That was the society they lived in.
No account taken of intellect and value.
‘Your wife does not work…
Don't misunderstand me, I am not implying that she should be working…
I sometimes feel that a great many of our social problems at the moment, young people rampaging, are brought about by mothers going out to work…
So, there is no other source of income coming into the household?
Correct again?’
She had worked in the supermarket off Mulfords Hill for five and a half months.
It had been the first time that he had really seen Sara in tears.
Adam had fallen over in the playground, hit his head on a bench, been taken to hospital.
The school hadn't had his number at A.W.E.
The teachers couldn't ask Frank where his mother might be because his class was out for the day on a Project Course.
The first Sara had known of Adam's injury was when she had turned up to collect him at the school gate.
She'd told him about the looks aimed at her by Adam's teachers.
That was the end of her working, and anyway the money had been peanuts.
‘Your mortgage is currently set at £62,500, Dr Bissett, which is slightly excessive for the salary you command, but I do quite understand that you bought at the top of the market and that interest rates were then not at their present level.’
They had made the move to Lilac Gardens in the summer of 1988.
They had paid £98,000.
They had known they were on the knife edge, and interest rates had been at 8 per cent.
Sara had said that she just was not prepared to live any longer in the jerry-built little terrace at the bottom of the village.
‘Now, your salary works out at approximately £1460 per month, gross.
Then, we've tax, insurance, local government rates, pension  contributions, and the mortgage.
I would estimate that, allowing for your outgoings, you have around £600 a month at your disposal.
But that, of course, does not take into account the loan we made you at the start of the year.
Six thousand five hundred, repayable over three years, plus of course interest.
That's another £180 a month, without interest.
You are behind on the interest, Dr Bissett, and you are two months behind on the repayment…’
The loan had been to buy the second-hand Sierra, and then had been topped up to cover repairs required by the M.O.T.; and then increased again when Sara's Mini had just died on her, expired in the middle of the village with 110,000 miles on the tombstone.
Sara had to have a car.
And topped up again to pay for the repair of the flat roof over the kitchen, and the man who had done the work should have been prosecuted for fraud.
‘Dr Bissett, I hate to say this to a government employee, but…private enterprise round here is on its knees for skilled and qualified people…’
‘What I'm interested in is no use to the private sector.
And I'm a research scientist, damn it, not a yuppie.’
‘So be it…
Can you look for promotion, a better salary scale, a higher grade?’
‘I've been looking for it for years, but I'm not in charge of promotion and the people senior to me in my department are some of the most brilliant minds in England, and elsewhere for that matter.’
The bank manager eased back in his chair.
He was young and a butterfly, flitting from branch to branch and all the time climbing.
His elbows rested on the leather padded arms of his chair, and his fingers were clasped comfortably in front of his chin.
‘Something has to be done.
We cannot go on like this, Dr Bissett.’
Sara said that the exterior woodwork of the house was a disgrace and needed painting, and that the kitchen floor needed new vinyl, and that the hall carpet was awful.
Sara said that if they couldn't do better than last year's holiday, a caravan in the rain in West  Wales, then it wasn't worth bothering…
Bissett stood.
When he was angry then the Yorkshire surfaced again in his voice, the grate of the harsh streets of Leeds.
So bloody hard he had fought to get those streets behind him.
All that struggle, just to have this jumped-up little man lecturing him.
‘Try telling the government that ‘something has to be done’.
Try telling bloody Downing Street ‘we cannot go on like this’.’
‘Nobody forced you to buy that house.’
Bissett stared at him.
‘Don't ever say anything as stupid as that to me again.’
In his adult life he had never struck any person, certainly not Sara, not even his children in anger.
He stood, looming over the manager's desk.
His forehead beneath his curled brown hair was reddening.
His spectacles had shaken down the arch of his nose.
His fists were clenched at the seams of his trousers.
His breath came in short pants.
‘Steady down, Dr Bissett.’
He could see that his bank manager was further back in his chair, almost cowering.
The bank manager waited until Bissett was at the door, until he was sure of his safety.
‘I have to say it again, Dr Bissett, we cannot go on like this.’
The door slammed.
The papers leaped on his desk.
In fairness, the bank manager would concede, he could not see where the poor fellow could make another economy and continue to live a half-way acceptable life.
But the man needn't have shouted…
Anyway, the whole thing was ridiculous, maintaining that white elephant when every school child knew that the Cold War was over and done with.
Erlich's morning was a write-off.
He hadn't expected the red carpet to be unrolled for him, but he had thought that at last he would be at work, setting up his meetings, on the move.
The Legal Attaché  was once more apologetic, he had a late runner in his programme, a problem with a fraud extradition.
There were problems with the warrant, and the Legal Attaché was going to be down at New Scotland Yard for the morning, and probably for the afternoon.
Could Erlich manage eight o'clock the next morning?
He rang Rome, the Legal Attaché's office, and spoke to the girl who typed his letters and answered his telephone.
He didn't know when he'd be back and she should cancel everything for the next several days.
A lunch with the Capo dello Squadro Anti-Terrorismo that he had been waiting a year for, a session with a good guy in the Guardia di Finanze , and a squash game with Dieter who was number two to the Legal Attaché, and he just didn't know whether he'd be back before the Little League All Stars trip to Naples and the game against the Sixth Fleet which was the high point of the season which they played now courtesy of the Italian sunshine into late fall.
Everything on his desk to go into Pending.
He had never been a happy sightseer and until his work was done, until Harry Lawrence's killer was identified and caught he couldn't see himself playing the tourist at the Changing of the Guard, or the Tower of London, even Poets' Corner which he had longed to see, as a passionate student of English poetry…that would have to wait.
When this assignment was well and truly nailed he would ask Jo, long chance, if she could get over here.
It would be a pleasure to share these glories with Jo.
By mid-morning he had been through the day's edition of the Herald Tribune .
Under the dateline of Rome, that caught his eye, he read that increasing mystery surrounded the murder of Professor Zulfiqar Khan.
It was now known that the body of the Professor who specialised in nuclear physics had been claimed by the Iraqi Embassy in Rome.
It was not yet known what had brought the Professor to the city…
By the time he had read the Herald Tribune from front page lead to back page comic strip, the maid had come to make up his room.
There was a sniff of disapproval signifying that it was  out of court for a grown man to be still in his bedroom in mid-morning, and not at a place of work.
Her vacuum cleaner drove him into the street, in search of a coffee shop.
Two espressos and a Danish pastry later, he was reduced to buying postcards.
One for Jo.
He had tried again in the early morning, and again the phone hadn't been picked up.
He could have rung the C.B.S.
office in Rome, and asked where she was, where they'd shipped her.
But Jo never rang him at work, and he never rang her office secretary to find what flight she'd taken.
That was their way, their understanding.
The Herald Tribune had told him that there was more confusion in Prague, more rioting in Zagreb, an O.P.E.C.
meeting in Geneva, and a European summit starting that evening in Madrid.
She could have been assigned to any one of them.
He wouldn't have admitted it to Jo, but deep down he resented it when she was out of town and not picking up his calls.
They met whenever she had a free evening and he had a free evening, and it wasn't often.
It was even rarer that they could share a weekend in the villages round Orvieto.
They spent their evenings together in a trattoria on the square beside the Ponte Milvio or down in Trastevere, before a couple of hours at his place, or half a night at her apartment.
They each said that it suited them, that kind of relationship.
He wrote ‘Jo honey, will you pick up the goddam phone?
It's me, your friend, and I need to hear your voice.
Where are you?
Maybe you're in London.
Will look more closely at all the girls in future.
Just in case.’
One for his mother.
His mother had married Herbie Mason just three years after his father had been killed.
They ran a hardware store and diner in the White Mountains of New Hampshire, serving the hikers and campers up on the Appalachian trail.
He rarely heard from his mother, but he rang her each Christmas morning, wherever he was, and on her birthday, and he sent her maybe a dozen postcards a year.
One for his grandparents.
They were his mother's people, they  had an old weathered brick house close to the harbour moorings at Annapolis, Maryland.
He was fond of them both.
A bit correct for a small boy, a little formal, but they had been his proxy parents for school terms after his father's death, and after his mother had taken off with Herbie.
Good people.
They had never once criticised his mother's behaviour in their grandson's hearing.
School terms in Annapolis, and holidays in the White Mountains, it could have been a lot worse.
His grandfather was retired Navy, action in the Pacific and off Korea, where he had his own command.
If his father had lived he would now have been in his sixtieth year.
Every time that he wrote postcards to his mother and to his grandparents memories of his father revived.
Memories of a man going overseas in his best uniform.
Memories of a man coming home for burial, with full military honours…
Such a very long time ago.
He had once heard an Englishman say that what he knew of nuclear physics could be written on the back of a blackcurrant.
It was an expression that still gave him pleasure and he would have used it to describe his own limited grasp of the subject, but it would have been wasted on the sparrow-sized man across the big desk from him.
The Colonel had swiftly appreciated that if he needed to describe Dr Tariq's sense of humour the backside of a blackcurrant was all he needed, and to spare.
Soldiering was what the Colonel understood.
As a young paratrooper he had fought in the north against the Kurdish rebels.
It was where his reputation had been forged.
It was his battalion's heroic defence of their positions on the Basra to Baghdad road, when the rats from Iran had swarmed in their thousands from the marshlands, that had given him his present renown.
He had commanded a unit of the Presidential Guard which provided close escort to the Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council.
When the traitor scum, the creatures of the Al Daawa al Islamiya, last tried to assassinate the Chairman, six of the  Guard had been killed, the Colonel had taken a bullet to the stomach, but the Chairman had survived untouched.
Rewards followed.
The rewards of the Chairman could be generous.
But the Colonel had seen to it that his name did not go forward for promotion.
He could learn from the fate of those who had climbed too high.
He would never be a rival, he would remain the loyal servant of the Chairman.
Now he directed a section of the Military Intelligence unit concerned with the security of the state from threats outside its boundaries.
Dr Tariq told him of the death of Professor Khan, of the defection of the two French engineers, and of the Italian laboratory engineers, of a letter bomb that had been received, correctly addressed, to the same complex, to the very building alongside the one in which he now sat.
He was told of Dr Tariq's passage throughout the offices and laboratories, his attempt to steady the morale of the Germans, the Austrians and of two more Italians and of a Swede.
He was told that the fear must be cauterised, that the defections must be stopped.
‘I shall be frank, Colonel.
I have no time to waste.’
‘Of course.’
‘We can delude ourselves, and we could delude others, as to the real situation here, and what do we achieve?
Only a crucial loss of time.’
‘I understand, Dr Tariq.’
‘If this complex had not been bombed by the Zionists in 1981, then we would by now have the capability for the production of nuclear warheads.
During the war with the Khomeini zealots, I could not command the necessary resources to reactivate the programme following the ‘81 setback.
I now have the necessary resources.
I have the commitment of the Chairman.
But — and this is why I am obliged to require your co-operation — at a certain level there are gaps in my team.
In specific areas of the programme I am short of men of the required experience.
I had recruited abroad in those areas.
Do you understand me?’
‘I understand you.’
‘I had recruited Professor Khan…’
‘I understand you.’
The Colonel needed no instruction in the politics of fear.
He had ordered firing squads into Kurdish villages.
He had executed in public deserters from his battalion when it fought for its life on the Basra to Baghdad road.
He had witnessed the death by hanging of two members of the Al Daawa al Islamiya who were believed connected with the attempt on the life of the Chairman.
Much of his present work was aimed at silencing, by fear, the community of dissidents in exile.
Silencing them or killing them.
‘The Zionists murdered Professor Khan, they sent a letter bomb, simply to create an atmosphere of terror amongst the foreign nationals employed by me.’
‘Professor Khan travelled…’
‘Covertly, of course.
Yet evidently they knew his itinerary.
Just as they were able to single out an important member of my staff here, and address him by name.’
The Colonel lit his cigarette.
He blew the smoke to the ceiling.
‘Then you have more than one problem, Dr Tariq.’
Dr Tariq said, ‘Quite so, Colonel.
I have someone leaking information from inside Tuwaithah.
And I have the problem of filling gaps from outside, from the top echelons of a scientific community that is growing more, not less, hostile.
As I said, I will be frank.
I recognise the extent of the problem.’
‘Where can you fill such gaps?’
‘No longer from France, I think.
Nor perhaps from Italy, though these have been our best recruiting grounds to date.
The Soviet Union and China are not impossible, but we have not been successful there before.
The United States is difficult.
Their security services are watchful and their private sector pays inordinately high wages.
In Great Britain, on the other hand, the position is very different.
I should look to Britain, Colonel.
I should look to the Atomic Weapons Establishment in the village of Aldermaston in the Thames Valley.’
The Colonel laughed out loud.
‘I get a bus, do I?
I drive a bus  to the front door.
I shout in a very loud voice that the Republic of Iraq will pay well for atomic scientists.
I fill the bus and I drive it to the airport.
Is that what you have in mind?’
He had been right the first time.
There was not a jot of humour in the man.
There was the thin voice beating at him across the desk.
‘You are reminded that I have the backing of the Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council.
And the Chairman, who deigns to place a measure of trust in you, Colonel, anticipates that what I want you will make it your urgent priority to find.
I want a scientist who specialises in the physics of implosion.’,
The Colonel took out a notepad.
He wrote ‘physics of implosion’.
He arranged to return at the same time the next day to set about identifying the traitor in Tuwaithah.
He left behind him the scene, still shockingly evident, of the destruction by the Israelis of the Osirak reactor, the flattened mound of concrete.
When his car was past the missile launchers, past the guards, he demanded speed.
He wanted to be through Baghdad before the evening traffic.
He was quiet in the car — none of his customary banter with his driver — as he digested the consequences of failing Dr Tariq.
The spy in Tuwaithah would be an interesting challenge.
For once the wielding of fear as a weapon would certainly be counter-productive.
But the procurement of scientists from overseas as a novelty intrigued him.
It was somewhat outside his province and yet, he thought, anyone who was willing to leave a Western nuclear establishment to help Dr Tariq build his atom bomb was either an idiot or a traitor, and traitors were after all his special subject.
And to solve Dr Tariq's problems all he had to do was to find two traitors.
One here and pray he wouldn't be yet another scientist who needed replacing, and one in the West.
The Colonel had a momentary vision of himself being captured by the Special Forces of a Western army as he tried to recruit a physicist…
He wanted to be at the village of Qara Tappah before dusk became night.
The newest building in the centre of Qara Tappah had been built in 1934.
It was the coffee house.
There were oil lamps hanging over the verandah, and they threw black shadows towards the mosque entrance, and towards the shop where clothes were sold, long since shut.
Across the square ran the open sewer of the village.
The lamps from the coffee shop flickered on its silver, glistening surface.
The coffee shop was abandoned, the square was empty.
There was not one villager who had dared to emerge from behind his shuttered door, not since the foreigner had come to the village.
At the edge of the sewer, Colt lay.
The pain racked his whole body.
The headlights of the Mercedes found him.
He heard the slamming of the car door.
He looked up into the face of the Colonel.
‘Did you win?’
He had come to the village at last light bearing a balaclava helmet, a webbing belt and trousers, and a mess tin all belonging to the Presidential Guard.
He had won because, over 20 miles of open country, he had eluded the patrols of the Presidential Guard.
He had walked, dishevelled and mud-plastered, out into the square from the coffee shop and thrown at the feet of the Captain those trophies that he had lifted from three different observation posts along the way.
He had come through the back of the coffee shop yard, through the kitchen, out onto the verandah.
Colt had laughed at the Captain and the men around him, laughed until they took out their failure on him with the most savage beating he had ever received.
He wondered how much the Colonel had wagered on his winning.
His voice was a croak.
‘No problem.’
Erlich was content just to be on home territory.
He couldn't imagine a government servant working abroad who did not feel that tug of pleasure when he walked up the steps of his embassy in a foreign capital.
Past the locally employed security man, that didn't count, and up to the best-dress marine.
The marine was where Erlich could believe he started to belong.
Four minutes sitting in the big lobby and hearing the splatter of the ornamental pool and waterfall, and the lady coming to meet him.
In each embassy he knew that had a Legal Attaché's office there was a lady who looked like everyone's mother, and who did the confidential typing and the greeting downstairs.
Just about time to take in the portraits of the most recent Ambassadors before she was at his side, hair in a bun, flat shoes, blouse and cardigan, and shaking his hand and making him welcome.
Up three floors in the elevator, and away down the long corridor that was chaos because the electricians were rewiring the floor, and on to the security gate into Bureau territory.
There must have been a blueprint in F.B.I.H.Q. for Legal Attachés' premises, because the set-up in London, the mechanism of the outer security door, was identical to the one in Rome.
Occasionally, behind his back, subordinates called him Desperado, to his face he was always Dan.
Feds all used their given names, whatever their rank.
The Director was the only one who was called by anything but his given name.
That was part of the folklore.
Dan Ruane, the Legal Attaché, was at home in his office, as if it was an extension of his comfortable house in North London.
The Indian wars prints on the walls were his; he had his own bookcases, his own imitation Georgian partner's desk, and his own tilting leather-backed chair.
He was politely apologetic at having had to cancel the day before.
‘What have you got, then, Bill?’
‘His accent is English.
Either his real name, or the name he answers to, is ‘Colt’.
He works for the Iraqis.
It's 99 per cent sure he was the hitman for the dissident.
It looks like Harry simply got in the way.’
‘Harry?’
‘Harry Lawrence, Agency, also a friend.’
‘Friendships should be side-lined for an investigation.
But you'd know that.
What else have you got on the killer?’
‘Nothing else, not yet.’
‘What's the Agency say down there?’
‘They say it's the Iraqis, but no one is going to lift a finger of complaint even, until the case is watertight.’
‘What do you want here?’
Ruane's giant stockinged feet were on the desk.
His chair was tilted back as far as it would go.
From the cupboard beside the screwed-down floor safe, he had taken a mess tin in which he kept his shoe-shining kit.
He rubbed polish in little circles onto the shoes that Erlich thought were impressively polished.
A West Point cadet would have been proud of those shoes already.
It usually took Erlich little more than 30 seconds to get his shoes presentable, but Ruane was burnishing now with a golden duster.
‘I want the bastard named, then I want to be part of a team that goes hunting him.’
‘Sounds about right.’
‘And this should be the town where I get him named.’
‘Did you get much help in Athens?’
‘Excuse me, they pissed on me…’
The polish and the dusters were folded neatly back into the  mess tin.
The mess tin went back into the cupboard.
He couldn't see Ruane's face because it was bent below the rim of the desk, as he put his shoes back on.
The voice was a growl.
‘You like that, Bill, being pissed on?’
‘Didn't bother me.’
‘Won't lose you sleep?’
‘Not a lot does.’
Ruane took a key from his pocket that was fastened to his waist belt by a fine chain.
He unlocked a drawer.
He took out a small black leather address book.
‘Do you know what the form is in this country, Bill?’
‘Never worked here.’
‘Right, okay, digest…’
The shoes were back on the desk top.
Erlich could only see the soles.
At least the soles weren't polished.
‘…
In London I work through three agencies — you note that I say that I work through — I don't know what you guys get in Rome, but here it is through …that's most of the time…’
There was a dry smile.
‘…The three agencies are, first, Secret Intelligence Service who are involved solely in overseas intelligence gathering, same as the Agency.
Second, the Security Service who are internal, have responsibility for counter-espionage and are deep into counter-terrorism.
Third, Special Branch of the Metropolitan Police who have about the same job as Security but are more up-front, more visible.
What sticks in their throats, any of those outfits, is if we start running around like it's our territory.’
‘Meaning?’
‘It means that I am in a liaison role here.
It means that I have to work through these guys.
It means that I don't play round here like a Wyoming steer in a glass shop…unless I have to…
Enjoy your day yesterday?’
‘No.’
‘Pity, it may have been your last day off for I don't know how long.’
The feet swung clear of the desk top.
As his weight came off it, the chair heaved upright.
Ruane had his address book in his hand when he went to the office door.
Erlich heard his instructions to the lady who had brought him up to the third floor.
Three names, three numbers, appointments required that day.
No excuses, no nonsense about previous engagements, three appointments that day.
Ruane turned back from the door.
‘I was your age once.
I reckoned to get ahead.
Back then, I'd have given my right arm to have had the opportunity you've collared.
Do well and you'll be going places, cross me and you won't.
You with me?
Nothing personal, Bill, but just remember that I work in this town, and for me to work here then I need doors opening up for me.
You foul my pitch and you'll be on the next plane back to Athens, whether Harry Lawrence was a friend of yours or not, whether that damns your record…
Got me?’
‘Got you, Dan.’
The whistle on the kettle and the front door bell went off together.
Major Roland Tuck swore peaceably under his breath.
Nurse Jones was a busy woman and he valued the minutes he had with her over a cup of tea when she came down from the bedroom.
He left her propped against the Aga.
The kitchen was the warmest room in the house, apart from the sickroom.
He went through the hall with the dog at his heels.
The dog invariably followed him to the door, as if she expected, with each visitor, that her master would be back.
He opened the door.
There was a young man standing in the porch and looking around him.
Not much to look at, because the front lawn and the drive to the Manor were a shambles.
The leaves hadn't been swept up, and the gravel was alive with weeds.
Behind the young fellow was a small van belonging to a household cleaning firm.
‘Major Tuck?’
‘Yes.’
‘Could I come in, please?’,
‘What for?’
The man looked around him again, as if he expected that they were being watched.
Tuck didn't think they were, not that day.
‘I have a letter for you…’
‘Good heavens, my dear fellow…come in.’
Each time it was a different courier, a different cover.
The young man followed him into the hall, carefully wiping his feet on the mat.
The dog had lost interest and was heading back towards the kitchen.
There had been two letters that year.
He wanted the letters, of course, yet each time they had the effect of shattering the quiet routine of the Manor.
The boy was their son, God dammit, no escaping that.
The courier took an envelope from his inside pocket and passed it to Tuck, and also offered him paper and a pen, so that the receipt could be acknowledged.
Tuck held the envelope in his hand, and his fist was tight, screwing at the paper.
‘I've never asked this before.’
‘Asked what, Major Tuck?’
‘Could I send a reply back with you?’
‘Don't see why not.
I'll give it them, can't promise more than that.’
He told the young man to wait in the hall.
He went to the kitchen and asked if the nurse would be so kind as to wait, just a few moments, and he was out of the room before she could tell him how tight her schedule was.
He left the young man to admire the ibex head that was mounted above the hall clock.
He went into his study and shut the door behind him.
He opened the envelope.
He gutted the four sheets of his son's writing.
He sat at the desk, a French antique, and took a sheet of notepaper.
He wrote a single sheet.
The boy was a wicked little bastard, but he had the right to know about his mother's illness.
He didn't know whether Louise would last until Christmas.
He folded the paper and addressed the envelope with the one word COLT.
He went back to the hall.
The young man seemed mesmerised by the gentle gaze of the beast on the wall.
‘Please ask those who sent you to do their utmost to see that my son gets this letter as quickly as is humanly possible.’
He let the young man out through the front door.
For a moment he stood with his hand on the courier's shoulder, as though that were a link, however tenuous, with his son.
He closed the door.
He heard the engine start up outside.
He did not think that the house was watched that day.
The dog usually knew if the house was watched.
When she had the hackles high on her shoulders, when she whined and scratched at the back door, then the house was watched.
He went back into the kitchen.
Thank the good Lord for that Aga, for its comfort.
Nurse Jones, bless her, had made the pot of tea.
She poured her own mug, stirred in two sugars, and then she poured for him.
He had known Nurse Jones for thirty years, she was an institution in the village.
‘Just time for a quick one, Major.’
‘How is she?’
‘I've left a shopping list for you — just the chemist in Warminster, and the supermarket.’
‘Mrs Jones, how is she?’
‘Losing the will to go on fighting — but then you'd know that better than me.’
‘Yes.’
He sat at the kitchen table.
On the table was that day's newspaper, and the previous day's, neither unfolded.
He cradled the mug in his hands.
She told him when she would be back.
She said that she would see herself out.
When he had finished his tea, he slowly climbed the staircase.
She had just had the pains when Colt had last written, not been feeling herself.
Perhaps it had all been his fault.
Country people who ran whippets and lurchers and labradors and terriers said that there was no such thing as a bad dog, only bad owners and bad breeders  and bad trainers.
As the recent months had passed, and as Louise had sickened, he felt the guilt more frequently.
He knew many people in the village, almost everyone except the newly arrived and the ones who used the village as a dormitory and who worked in Bath or Chippenham or Swindon, but he knew very few that he could classify as friends.
The problem of living in the big stone-built Manor House on the edge of the village, with the trees shielding it from the road, and the drive.
He could think of no man, or woman, in the village that he could have gone to and talked with, and been reassured on the question of his guilt.
As his wife, as his Louise, had slipped, there was no friend with whom he could share the sorrow he felt over his son.
In his own time he had been a maverick, and for being a maverick his grateful sovereign had pinned on his chest the gallantry medal of the Military Cross.
In the worst passages of his despair, Tuck could believe that the little bugger had learned to be a maverick from his father.
At the door of her bedroom, he paused.
He loathed to be in the room now.
It was the room they had shared for 30 years since they had moved in to claim his inheritance.
He slept next door now, in his dressing room.
He paused, so that he could shed the sorrow that had taken hold of him.
He was smiling when he went into the room.
‘Good news,ma petite fleur , a letter from that young rascal of yours, a letter from Colt.’
The room was dim because the curtains were half drawn, but he saw the sparkle of her eyes.
He walked to the bed, and he sat, and he took the gaunt hand in his own.
‘I'll read you what the blighter has to say for himself…’
Erlich didn't know Englishmen.
He had never had to work alongside them.
He thought this one must have escaped from the National Theatre down the road.
They were in a pub overlooking the Thames, a stone's throw from Century House, the Secret Intelligence Service offices.
There was no way that S.I.S.
would allow Erlich into their tower block, Ruane had warned him in advance.
The stage Englishman wore a pink silk shirt and a lime polka-dot bow-tie.
He was old and pompous.
They were in the crowded saloon bar with the lunchtime white-shirt crowd, while the other bar was filled with the building trade.
To Erlich, it was an idiotic place to meet.
They were forced to sit so close that each wrinkle of the boredom on the man's face was apparent.
The man seemed to think that everything said to him was excruciatingly tedious and barely worth his attention.
Erlich drank Perrier, Ruane drank tomato juice.
The Englishman drank two large gin and tonics, without ice, with lemon.
Erlich gave him the name of Colt.
He was told that it would be checked out.
Outside, watching the man stride away along the pavement, Ruane said, ‘Just because they speak our language, don't imagine they do things the same way.
Right, the Agency has an address, and a signpost at the right turning off the Beltway.
These people don't exist, not here anyway.
Very shy people…’
‘Are all of them that exotic?’
‘Colourful, I grant, but underneath that conspicuous plumage you will get to know, if you are as lucky as you are ambitious, a very down-to-earth bird.
He organised, was control of, a mission into the Beqa'a Valley.
He achieved with a marksman more than a Phantom wing of the Israeli Air Force could have, took out a real bad guy.’
Erlich said deliberately, ‘Sorry I spoke.’
Major Tuck's letter to his son, by now encoded, was transmitted by teleprinter to the Defence Ministry in Baghdad.
All matters concerning Colin Olivier Louis Tuck were dealt with in that small group of offices behind their own perimeter fence and guarded by their own troops.
By the time that Colt's father had warmed  a broth to take upstairs with the scrambled egg and toast that he would himself eat for his supper, the letter to his son would have been delivered to the Colonel's department.
Time , in Frederick Bissett's private world, the world of H3, was referred to as a ‘shake’.
Time was ‘quicker than a shake of a lamb's tail’.
A shake was measured at 1/100,000,000th of a second.
The nuclear explosive process that would obliterate a city involved a reaction taking place in a few hundred shakes.
Distance was counted in new language, because it was necessary to be able to refer to the diameter of a unit as small as that of the electron that orbits the neutron in the core of the atom.
The diameter of the electron is a ‘fermi’, named in recognition of the Italian scientist who achieved that mathematical calculation.
There are 300,000,000,000,000 fermis in twelve inches.
Temperature was talked of in the context of some hundreds of millions of degrees Centigrade, necessary for the stripping away of the electron from the hydrogen atom, vital for the removal of the hydrostatic repulsive forces of the nuclei, leaving them free to collide.
The greater the temperature, the greater the force of the collision, the more complete the reaction.
Pressure was worked on the scale of ‘megabars’.
The pressure in the pit of a nuclear explosion was one megabar times one million, equal to 8 billion tons per square inch.
Energy was the release of such power that 2.2 pounds weight of the material, plutonium, could in the event of complete fission produce violent strength in the muscle of physics that was equivalent to the detonation of 20,000 tons of conventional explosive.
For his work among those Times, Distances, Temperatures, Pressures and Energies, Senior Scientific Officer Bissett, Grade 8, was paid less than his neighbour the plumber and his neighbour the tinned-food salesman.
Reuben Boll was at his door.
The man's voice boomed in the small room, would be heard  down the corridor in the outer office where Carol lorded it over her clerical assistants.
‘Tell me, kindly tell me, when is your material going to be ready?’
Bissett did not reply.
Each month the pressure of the work was greater.
He should draw a graph of the increasing pressure upon his work.
The Trident programme had seen the start of the pressure, because the submarine-launched system was the priority programme at the Establishment.
Everything was sacrificed to Trident.
Bissett's own project had been shunted backwards, removing from him colleagues, laboratory time, engineering space, facilities.
The staff shortages were the further factor.
Fewer scientists, fewer technicians, fewer engineers.
What sort of first-class science graduate would be recruited to A.W.E.
when he could earn half as much again or double in the private sector?
There might not be money for Frederick Bissett's salary or funds enough to supply him with badly needed back-up, but by God, oh yes, there was money for the building programme.
More than a billion for the A90 complex, and he had heard, and he believed it, that there was £35 million of money just for the new fencing and perimeter security equipment…money for that, money no object for the bloody contractors.
‘Frederick, I asked when is the material going to be ready?’
He felt so hopeless.
‘Soon, Reuben.’
‘What is ‘soon’, Frederick?’
‘When it is ready…’
‘I have a meeting in the morning, Frederick.’
‘I am doing my best.’
The fact was that the facilities were not there.
Computer time was not possible.
Staff were not available.
Every time he went across to A area, he was lucky to get half an hour of their time.
He would be heard out, and he would see the shaking heads, and he would be told that facilities and staff were tied down, knotted down, on Trident.
‘So, what do I tell them?’
‘Tell them whatever the hell you like…’
He heard the door close.
Absurd of him, because at the end of the following week the annual staff assessments were due to be drawn up by the Superintendents.
His own assessment was written up by Boll.
‘Nice to see you, Dan.’
‘And you too.’
‘Wife enjoy herself?’
‘Very much, apart from the prawns.’
‘Ah, the prawns.
Not universally successful, the prawns.’,
Erlich sat back.
The chair was not comfortable, but at least they were allowed inside the building.
What a heap…
They had come back across the river and they were in a street close to the Embassy.
He had seen the building the day before when he lit upon a trattoria for his supper, without of course realising what it was.
He was learning.
The lesson said that neither the Secret Intelligence Service nor the Security Service advertised themselves.
There had been no sign on the doorway, just a number.
Erlich wondered how men and women could work in such depressing surroundings.
They had been allowed in, they had gone past the uniformed security, and then had had to sit and wait in a grey-painted lobby, watched by the plainclothes minders, before the man had come down for them.
They were in the building, but only just.
They were a dozen paces down a ground-floor corridor, and then ushered into an interview room.
‘I'd like you to meet Bill Erlich, F.B.I.’
‘I'm Bill, pleased to meet you.’
‘James Rutherford.
My pleasure.’
Erlich looked across the bare table at Rutherford.
He saw a solid man, good shoulders on him and a squat neck and a good head of dark hair.
He thought the guy would be about his own age, certainly not more than mid-thirties.
His working clothes  were bottle-green cords and a russet sweater worn over an open check shirt.
‘What do I call you?’
‘What you like, Bill.’
‘Most people just call him ‘Prawns’, ‘Prawns Rutherford’,’ Ruane said.
‘James will do nicely.’
Ruane said, ‘Christ, are we formal?
Okay, work time…
Harry Lawrence, Agency, shot dead in Athens, am I going too fast for you?,’
‘I read the reports.’
‘The bad news is that the trail leads right into your front garden.
Tell him, Bill.’
Erlich told Rutherford what he knew of the assassin who spoke with an English accent, and to whom the word ‘Colt’ had been shouted.
‘Is that all ?’
‘That's all I've got so far.,’
Rutherford hadn't made a note.
He had just nodded his head, and then returned to the talk about the social evening, and how difficult it was to be safe with prawns, and he had wanted to know if Dan and his lady would be coming to the Service's New Year's Eve party.
Out on the pavement, Erlich said, ‘Thanks, Dan, but I wouldn't classify that guy as a picture of enthusiasm.’
There was a moment of sharp anger from Ruane.
‘He's as good, for his age, as they've got, and his wife is one of the sweetest women I know in this town.
If you just happen to stick around here you'll learn to sing his praises.
He can be a friend, a really fine friend.
Oh, and don't tell him your war stories because they might just seem trivial to him.’
Debbie said, ‘But you've got to come…’
Sara shook her head.
She pulled a face.
‘Just no can do.’
‘Sara, we are a group of middle-aged, well, nearly middle-aged, housewives, who amuse ourselves while the men are toiling, with a little bit of painting, sketching.
There's no one in our cosy little set-up who has a quarter of the talent you have.
I won't hear of it.’
‘It's just not possible.’
Debbie persisted.
‘We go after the kids are safely in school, we're back before they come out.
Everyone's got kids.
We'll be back in yonks of time…’
Sara looked away.
She turned her back on Debbie.
She looked out of the window.
They were in the dining room of Debbie's house.
She looked out through the big picture window and across the manicured lawn and down towards the ponds and away towards the line of birches at the bottom of the garden.
It was a big house, at least four good bedrooms, and the garden must have been the best part of two acres.
‘Is there a problem?
I mean, tell me.
Is it just because we're amateurs ?’
The classes were at Debbie's house.
When she had rung in response to the advertisement card on the board in the Tadley Post Office, she hadn't thought of where the classes might be.
She had wanted to draw again, and to paint, and she had not wondered before the first class as to the group she would be joining.
She was the outsider.
She came from a housing estate in Tadley, and her husband worked at the Establishment behind the Falcon Gate.
She had not stopped to think that she might be inserting herself into a social scene that she had walked away from when she had left home.
Rich wives, with rich husbands, simply amusing themselves twice a week.
She liked them, that was the trouble.
After the class they treated themselves to lunch, cold poached salmon the first day and the best cut of cold beef the next, and wine to go with it, and a raffle amongst the six of them for a bottle.
Five pounds for each class…
And there had been her materials.
She could say, in all honesty, that she had looked out  her college paints and brushes but they had been dried up and beyond recall.
It must have been a dozen years since they were last used.
For the first class she had just taken two soft pencils, and she had sketched while the others had mixed watercolours for the still life of a bowl of apples, oranges and pears.
For that day's class she had taken her own watercolours, bought with the Visacard in Reading…
They were going by minibus to London for the visit to the Tate Gallery, with a driver, and the transport alone was £15 a head.
Just a miserable mistake.
She had waited behind after lunch.
She had helped Debbie clear away.
She had wanted to speak to Debbie after the others had left, and all the talk over lunch had been of the trip to the Tate.
She could have bought each of the boys a pair of trainers for what she had spent on the watercolours.
‘It's nothing to do with whether I'm good, whether I'm lucky enough to have been given more talent than you, the rest of you…’
It was to do with money, bloody, bloody, money.
She turned back to Debbie.
She felt dirtied in her old jeans, and her old student painting smock.
The other women hadn't pulled something out of a bottom drawer to come to the classes.
The other women, Debbie and her friends, would have been shopping in Newbury or Hungerford, run round the boutiques, for something careless and suitable.
Debbie's husband owned a software business outside Newbury.
‘Bloody hell, am I stupid.’
Debbie's voice had softened.
Sara turned to her.
There was a turquoise stone set in a pendant and hanging from a fine gold chain at Debbie's throat.
The chain was long, too long, and Debbie had unbuttoned the two top buttons of her blouse so that the stone wouldn't be hidden.
Sara thought the stone would have cost all of their own take-home money for a month after the mortgage was paid.
‘It's boring old money, isn't it?’
Sara nodded.
She should have been at home.
She should have been thinking about the boys' tea, and about Frederick's dinner.
‘Well, I have the solution,’ Debbie said.
‘You're going on the payroll, Sara.
You're going on a freebie to the Tate because you're going to be our guide.
And here, too, because when we need a model, you will be our model.’
She wanted so much to belong, could not help herself.
Debbie said, ‘You're prettier than any of us, anyway.
You'll be brilliant.’
Sara said, ‘I really don't…’
‘You're not modest , are you?’
The Chief Inspector was not a snappy dresser.
If he had been working for three days and three nights then it was in the suit he was wearing now, and his shoes had mud on them, and Erlich didn't think Ruane would be impressed.
A yawn, then a big sigh.
They were in a small office on the fourth floor, and one wall of the office was glass, and the heater was full on.
Again the yawn.
‘Now, what can I do for you, gentlemen?’
Erlich was getting sharp on the routine.
He could get through it in a minimum of words.
The voice was English, the face was Caucasian.
Height, about 5' 10’.
Age, mid-twenties.
Eyes, bluish.
Complexion, tanned.
Build, solid without spare weight.
Hair, short and fair.
The name he answered to, ‘Colt’.
The Chief Inspector of Special Branch no longer yawned.
‘An Englishman shoots a C.I.A.
staff man and an Iraqi journalist in Athens, that's a pretty bizarre set-up, Mr Erlich.
What's the motive?’
‘Iraqi state-sponsored terrorism.
Our opinion, they would have set it up, used your national as the contract man.’
‘Can't be all that many Englishmen qualified for work of that sort, don't grow on trees.
A single shot, you say, through the head at twelve paces.
He ought to be quite an interesting young man.’
Erlich said, ‘I want an identification.’
‘I'm sure you would…
Working for Iraqi intelligence?
An Englishman?
If we find him for you, I fancy we'd value a few minutes of his time ourselves, if we find him…’
And the yawn broke again on the Chief Inspector's face.
Erlich said, ‘I'm asking for your best effort, sir.’
‘Do what I can, can't promise more.’
Erlich thought that he wouldn't be doing anything before he'd put his head down.
Trouble was, if he put his head down then he might not wake up again for 24 hours.
He went through the hallway of New Scotland Yard with Ruane, past the flame that burned alongside the Book of Remembrance.
Outside, he braced himself as the wind lashed them.
‘Will he do us the business, Dan?’
‘Maybe.
He'll do his best.’
Erlich said, ‘I didn't get the message we were exactly priority.’
Ruane said, ‘They may have a crowd in town from Abu Nidal.
That's to say, they do have a very dangerous crowd, they just think they're Abu Nidal.
They have no line on a target, but they have four addresses staked.
He came off that to meet you.’
‘Good to hear that somewhere at least the killing of an American matters.’
‘No, it's not that…he owes me at poker.’
Colt was escorted into the Colonel's office.
He was invited to sit, he was offered a cigarette.
He sat opposite the Colonel.
He declined the cigarette, he lit for himself a small cigar.
The Colonel beamed across at Colt.
Not for Colt to ask why he had been summoned to the Intelligence Section of the Ministry.
He rarely asked questions of them.
He had learned early on that they did not appreciate questioning.
They appreciated only answers to their own questions.
He jolted.
Away along the corridor from the Colonel's office, a man screamed.
A rising wail of pure agony.
And then a shorter second scream.
And then silence.
Colt had already shut the sound from his head, and the Colonel showed no sign of having heard it.
When a rabbit was in a snare, pinioned, and the fox closed in, then the rabbit screamed in fear and agony.
Colt knew the sound, he knew the ways of the regime that was his host.
‘Are you well, Colt?’
‘Very well, sir.’
‘Not damaged?’
‘Girls I know, sir, could have hurt me worse.’
The Colonel smiled.
‘I won a bet on you, Colt.’
‘I hoped you would, sir.’
‘I bet my friend, who commands the 4th Battalion of the Presidential Guard, that he could deploy 50 men and that none of them would lay hands on you.
But you were impertinent to take their kit.’
‘I hope it was a good bet to win, sir.’
‘The favours of a Thai whore…’,
Colt grinned, and the Colonel laughed.
Colt sat upright in the chair, there was less ache in his spine that way, less of a throb in his kidneys.
His body was still a rainbow of bruises.
‘Colt, will you tell me about your father?’
He spoke in a flat monotone, suppressing all the emotion he might have felt.
‘He comes from what in England is called a good family.
His parents had status, what a good family means.
He is 70.
Being of a so-called good family doesn't mean much these days, and the sort of money required to keep things ticking over a few years back doesn't get you anywhere now.
After the war, when he was out of the army, he tried his hand at several things, and they were all pretty much a disaster.
The money he had inherited with the house just wasn't enough.
He tried business, just about anything.
When I was a child he was selling insurance, then he was offloading imported sheepskin coats in the London street markets, then it was free range eggs.
None of them worked.
I really don't know where the money comes from these days.
They live, him and my mother, in one of those damn  great draughty houses in the country.
I suppose it's just about falling to pieces.
It was after the war that he married.
My mother is French, they met in the war.
Truth is that everything that was best in my father's life happened during the war.
He was a young regular officer, Brigade of Guards, at the start of the war, and he went to France with the Expeditionary Force.
You'll have heard that they lifted the army off the beaches at Dunkirk.
They took most of them off, but the rearguard and the wounded were left behind.
My father was in that last line that protected the beach-head.
When he knew they were going to surrender in the morning, he slipped away from his unit.
I suppose you could say that he deserted.
He moved out into the countryside, and eleven months later he was back in England.
He had moved himself right across France and through Spain to get himself repatriated.
Early in the war, in London, they set up something called Special Operations Executive, and my father was a natural for it.
He was recruited.
In the next three years he was twice parachuted into Occupied France.
There are parts of France, used to be anyway, where he was almost a legend.
Won't be too many places he'd be remembered these days, all those who could remember him are dead, or trying to die.
He was an explosives man.
Signal boxes on the railway, power lines, bridges.
When they sent more men across, to liaise with him, it didn't work.
He was his own man, never a team player…
As long as the planes came to drop his explosives he didn't give a damn for the rest of the war effort.
When it was over he was given a Military Cross by the British, and the Croix de Guerre by the French.
It was the best time of his life, and everything since has been second best.
He's older than his years and I don't know how much longer he can last.’
‘You are proud of him?’
‘We used to fight, morning, noon and night.
Once with fists and boots and teeth.’
‘Is your father proud of his son?’,
He could remember clearly, when he had last been at the Manor House, the day he left.
His mother had been crying as  she had rifled the house for money for him, and as she had made sandwiches to put in greaseproof paper because it would be dangerous for him to stop at cafés on his way to the airport.
His father had followed him from room to room, half a dozen strides behind him all through that late afternoon.
When the telephone call had warned that Micky and Sissie had been arrested, there had been no option but to run.
There was bound to be something in their squat that would lead the police to him.
He had gone out through the kitchen door.
He had left his dog tied to a drainpipe by the kitchen door, so that it could not follow him.
At the end of the kitchen garden, by the stile to the open fields, he had looked back.
They were framed by the kitchen doorway.
His mother's head was bowed in her tears.
His father had stood erect, his arm round his mother's shoulder.
His father had not spoken a single word to him, just followed him around the house, not a solitary word.
His mother had waved him on his way, not his father.
‘I doubt he'd think there was much to be proud of.’
The Colonel bent to retrieve a sheet of paper from his briefcase, then pushed the decoded typescript across the desk towards Colt.
Colt read the letter that had been written that same morning, in haste, by his father.
‘I need to go home, sir.’
James Rutherford, first thing after he had closed the door behind him, took a tumbler of malt whisky up the narrow staircase to his wife.
Penny said, ‘If it doesn't kill the prawn bugs, it'll finish me.’
‘Are we on the mend?’,
‘Reckon so.’
‘Dan called by today.
You're not alone, his missus has the same.’
Rutherford knew that his wife liked Dan Ruane, always had a good word for him.
Service wives were not generally involved in  the social scene, only when it was an American evening.
Penny would have known more wives from the Agency and from the Bureau than she would have met wives from the Service.
She was sitting up in bed, and she drank, spluttered, and grinned.
‘Brilliant…what did Dan want?
Sorry, sorry, wasn't thinking…’
She was the well-drilled Service wife.
She had to be.
Service wives did not grill their husbands about bloody work .
She made it her rule that Belfast, the Provisional wing of the Irish Republican Army, casual atrocities never crossed her lips, not after his last trip away, because the man who had come back to her from Northern Ireland had been frightened of his own shadow.
She hoped to God that he would never have to go back there again.
But James Rutherford didn't give two tosses for that particular tenet of Service discipline.
‘The American killed last week in Athens, Agency man, looks like he was shot by a Brit.’
‘You're joking?’
‘No.
Some sort of renegade, some dreadful little creature looking for a cause to pin himself to, I expect.
The Library's trawling for him.’
‘And how was Dan?’
‘Didn't really have a chance to talk to him.
He'd a chap in tow who is doing the case.
Civil enough young fellow, bit gauche, bit wet behind the ears.’
Penny giggled.
The malt was working the colour back to her cheeks.
‘Well, he's American, isn't he?’
Erlich sat in his quarters in South Audley Street.
He had half an hour before Ruane took him to dinner.
There was a card game next door whose progress he could hear through the partition wall.
When he had left the University of California, Santa Barbara, he had taught literature at a school in Battle Creek, Michigan.
He taught the children of ‘Cereal City’.
Everyone worked for Kelloggs, and the plant turned out, each day, enough for ten million people's breakfasts.
The kids didn't want to know about life outside Battle Creek.
They wanted to get on the production line and turn out more breakfasts.
They were enough to stretch a teacher who wanted them to learn the beauty of poetry.
They'd stretched him, but they hadn't snapped him.
While he had been kicking his heels yesterday he had spent an hour in a tiny bookshop in Curzon Street and had come away with a paperback edition of the Parsons Rosenberg and the Seamus Heaney and Ted Hughes's anthology.
He had left home so hurriedly as to have packed not one of the poetry volumes that he was very seldom without.
While he waited for Ruane to be announced from the hall desk, he read.
Red fangs have torn His face.
God's blood is shed.
He mourns from his lone place
His children dead.
His father would never have heard of Isaac Rosenberg, an English poet, killed in the last weeks of the ‘war to end all wars’.
His father had died at somewhere called Duc Co that was somewhere in the Central Highlands in Vietnam.
He thought of the cruel death of Isaac Rosenberg and the death of his father in the breaking of the siege of the Duc Co Special Forces camp.
Move him into the sun —
Gently its touch awoke him once,
At home, whispering of fields unsown.
Always it woke him, even in France,
Until this morning and this snow.
If anything might rouse him now
The kind old sun will know.
This he could recite without the book, a poem of Wilfred Owen's which he had impressed into the minds of every one of his pupils in Battle Creek.
Think how it wakes the seeds,
Woke, once, the clays of a cold star.
Are limbs, so dear-achieved, are sides,
Full-nerved — still warm — too hard to stir?
Was it for this the clay grew tall?
— O what made fatuous sunbeams toil
To break earth's sleep at all?
He thought of his father, killed thousands of miles beyond reach, of Wilfred Owen, killed, of Harry Lawrence, his friend whose death he could avenge.
And of Elsa and her children.
He had made his promise.
For Erlich there was no way that promise could be undone…
The telephone rang.
Ruane was downstairs.
He went fast down the stairs.
‘Have they got anything?’
Ruane said, ‘One fence at a time, Bill.’
Carol had told him before he went home, so Bissett knew what to look for — Carol was the conduit of all the gossip for H3 — and it put him in his best humour of the day.
He made a detour to see it.
Across Fourth Avenue, right up to the inner perimeter round B area.
Through the close-mesh fence topped by razor wire he could see the wide double doors large enough to let a three-ton lorry into the huge earth mound.
He saw the aerosoled message: ‘WE WOZ ‘ERE’.
As Carol had heard it, the Special Air Service had somehow broken through all the perimeter fences in the night, evaded the Ministry police and their bloody dogs, and reached the doors of the earth mound where the chemical explosives were stored.
Carol had said that the S.A.S. had also penetrated A area where the  plutonium spheres were fashioned, walked right into the Citadel of the Establishment.
Never mind about A area, in B area it was plain to any Tom, Dick or Harry.
Bloody well done, the S.A.S. Bissett, along with almost everyone else at A.W.E., had a profound disrespect for the Ministry police.
So many times held up at the Falcon Gate, so many times made to open his briefcase and his empty sandwich box and turn his empty coffee flask upside down when he was anxious to get home, so many times subjected to their questions when he was going about his business visiting other corners of the Establishment.
He could see the savage glower on the face of the Ministry policeman some 50 yards ahead of him.
So, the S.A.S. had been in and demonstrated that the Ministry police security was a load of rubbish…
Bloody well done, the Special Air Service.
He imagined with pleasure the bollocking that would be administered to the men who had been on duty the previous night.
Perhaps they would be a little less arrogant in future.
‘In London, in 1934 when the knowledge of the power of the atom was a dream in very few minds,’ Dr Tariq said, ‘there was a Hungarian refugee.
His name was Leo Szilard.
It was he who first comprehended the potential of that atom.
He foresaw a release of energy utterly beyond anything considered by scientists before him.
He was standing on the pavement of a street called Southampton Row.
The idea of this power, this energy, came to him as he waited for the traffic lights to change so that he could cross.
If he had been able to cross immediately then perhaps the idea might never have formed in his mind.
It was pure luck.
But also his very great skill and his dedication — the fact that he was a Jew does not undo his skill and dedication —earned Leo Szilard his luck.
If you work with great skill, Colonel, and with great dedication then you will earn your luck.’
The Colonel elaborated on the straightforward business of the reference section of the Ministry preparing for him a dossier on  the British nuclear weapons programme.
He also reported to Dr Tariq that he had put a London Embassy staffer, who worked directly to him, exclusively to following up one or two specific leads.
He did not vouchsafe that this particular staffer was routinely tailed by the British secret services.
They would all need luck, he reflected.
Dr Tariq did not vouchsafe to the Colonel the news that had reached him that morning, that a Frenchman, home on leave, had sent by letter his resignation.
Nor did he tell him that a German was now packing up his quarters, having refused to work another day.
The Colonel, whose information on the morale inside Tuwaithah was by now almost as good as Dr Tariq's, was not surprised that this news was withheld.
It would be one more damaging admission of cracks in his programme, and Dr Tariq was a vain man, his vanity complicated certainly by fear.
Fear of failure.
Fear, too, of the consequences of failure.
Dr Tariq saw the slackened jowl of the Colonel, he noted the way that the man dragged at the butt of his cigarette, his third, he watched the fidget of the man's fingers.
It would be too soon, he thought, to remind the Colonel of the fate inescapably awaiting those who failed a mission which had the total support of the Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council.
‘You should seek, Colonel, to earn your luck.’
It was Justin Pink's lucky morning, that's what he would say afterwards.
What he called his workshop was a conversion of the roof space over the detached garage.
He used it sometimes rather than go into the factory at Newbury.
That morning there had been no reason to drive to Newbury.
He prepared his papers, and the contracts, in his workshop.
Justin Pink was a winner.
He was a winner, he realised, each time that he dressed in a Savile Row suit.
His shirt was first time on, and his initials were monogrammed over his heart.
His tie was silk, his hair was groomed.
He felt vibrantly alive, he felt clean, scrubbed by Debbie in a long cold shower.
He crossed from the garage loft to the great expanse of his brick-built house.
He passed the cars in the driveway.
Bloody women, never could park…
These women did themselves well, at least their husbands did them well.
There was Bea's beautifully preserved E-type, not a scratch on it, Jill's Audi, Susie's B.M.W., Alice's Saab Turbo, Ronnie's Metro Vanden Plas, and one car that he did not recognise, a Fiat 127 with an A registration.
There was rust on the bonnet and rust on the tail.
He carried his briefcase into the house.
They were out to dinner that night at Wally and Fiona Simpson's on the Kennet.
That was a great house, four acres, nearly a hundred yards frontage onto the river, super fishing.
Wally had rung to say that it was black tie, and he'd  forgotten to tell Debbie.
He went to the dining-room door.
He had never actually seen what happened at Debbie's art class.
Bloody hell…
He stared over the shoulders of Alice and Susie and Jill.
The table was folded away.
The fire was lit, going well.
They were in a half-moon, and all facing the fire.
Alice and Susie and Jill had their backs to him.
Bea on the left.
Ronnie and Debbie on the right.
They had all reacted to the door opening, as if he'd thrown a grenade into the room and they were frozen.
He stared at the woman.
She sat on a hard chair.
She was naked, not a stitch on her.
She had long good legs, white.
The legs weren't together.
There was the black matt of the woman's hair.
There was a little flabbiness in her lower belly, because she was a woman and not a girl, but she had a tight waist.
Big breasts hanging, and the pink nipple buttons.
His eyeline had not reached her face when Alice squealed and Bea had a giggling fit.
The woman's hair was dark and loose over her shoulders.
He looked into the woman's face.
Her eyes didn't shift.
Ronnie, who had carrot-red hair to go with it, had blushed pillarbox red.
She was a great looking woman, so damn relaxed.
He had supposed Debbie and her cronies painted flowers, or bowls of fruit, or landscapes up on the Ridge.
Damned quiet in the dining room, he'd thought, as he crossed the hall, and if Bea Smith was in a room and it was quiet then something pretty peculiar had to be happening.
Her eyes never left his, the woman's, and she did not a damn thing to cross her legs or put her hands across her breasts.
He heard Debbie's voice, soft and amused, ‘Get out, Justie, you dirty old thing.’
He muttered something in the direction of his wife, something about ‘if she had a moment’.
He stepped back outside.
Inside, Bea led the choir of laughter and giggling.
Debbie was beside him.
‘You are rotten, Justie.’
‘Forgive me for breathing.’
She had hold of his hand, she marched him to the front door.
‘Who the hell is that ?’
There was the great breadth of Debbie's smile.
‘Dump-head…
You never listen to what I tell you.
I told you about Sara…’
‘Didn't tell me she was a stripper.’
‘She's bloody clever, and poor as a church mouse.
I told you, she's married to some pathetic scientist from Aldermaston.
She's going to model for us so she gets grub on the house.
You know what?
You gave a very fair impression of a man who's never seen a woman undressed before…’
‘Sorry…’
‘So just piss off to your boring little job, and don't horn in on our fun.’
She kissed him.
Her body was against his.
Her tongue was in his mouth, until she broke away.
‘Will you buy me a pencil set for Christmas?’
‘Go away, you randy bugger.’
Justin Pink was at the M4 junction before he remembered that he had forgotten to tell Debbie that it was a black-tie job at the Simpsons'.
Colt hit the target with 15 shots out of 18 from a distance of 20 paces.
The target was man-shaped, man-sized, and was moved electronically across the sandbagged wall at a brisk walking pace.
Only the instructor had done better and none of the officers who had come to amuse themselves on the range had more than a dozen hits out of 18 rounds.
Colt had not handled a weapon since Athens.
He felt good.
The act of firing was liberation to him.
When he had inspected the target, when he had seen the envy of the officers who were gathered behind him, when he had received the instructor's grudging approval, then he walked to his guard's car.
The suppressed sound of the gunfire was still in his ears, and the sweet cordite smell hung at his nostrils.
He was escorted by the Military Police into the Colonel's office.
It was his luck that the Colonel had that morning been sent a  report prepared by the Ministry of Transport and Aviation in conjunction with the Ministry of Finance.
Colt was told of a target and an address.
He was shown a blurred photograph, taken from a moving car, of a thief, an enemy of the state.
Colt had his ticket to London.
Erlich thought that the last week, waiting in the Legal Attaché's section, had been the slowest in his eight years with the Bureau.
Treasure that quiet first day, Ruane had told him, because it would be his last.
There had been a whole quiet week.
He had come to London to push an investigation, and the investigation was going nowhere.
He had been twice into Ruane's office, and the first time the block had been polite, and the second time he had been told rather less politely to sit on his hands and wait, like everybody else had to.
So for a full week he had sat in the outer office, and waited.
There were four Special Agents in the London office, and they had plenty to do, so much so that the fidgeting intruder could just about be ignored.
Erlich had offered to help them with anything they might shout for, and he had been turned down.
That was fair enough.
The extradition was still stalled; there was another fraud investigation involving a British defence equipment company that had been ripped off in an American takeover deal; there was a coke run in London that the Bureau in New York were interested in; there was a guy who was under surveillance and who was going to have a Grand Jury warrant out for him for chopping his girlfriend's mother into small pieces; there were investigations that were vaguer, and things that were closer.
They didn't want his help, each one told him straight, because by the time he was briefed into what they were working on, then he would be away and they'd have wasted the classroom time.
What he did learn was the coffee machine.
Anything ever go wrong with a coffee machine, then send for Bill Erlich.
Too much milk, too little sugar, too much chocolate…send for Bill.
He had stripped the machine down.
Not bad for a graduate in literature and one who normally took evasive action at the sight of a screwdriver.
The lady who ran Ruane's office said the dispenser was giving them better coffee, better chocolate, than any time in the last nine years.
If things didn't improve, then he would set about the central-heating system.
Jo was still not back.
If he had been able to speak to Jo each morning before he left for the Embassy, he probably wouldn't have been such a pain in the outer office.
His success with the coffee machine was acknowledged, grudged but acknowledged, but he had been made aware that there was an argument for calling in the professionals when it came to tampering with the thermostat on the air system.
Trouble was that the professionals had had more than 20 attacks on the system.
On the other hand, he had never touched a thermostat in his life.
He had the Intelligence and the Security and the Branch all burrowing in their computers for an Englishman called Colt who wiped people for the cause of the Republic of Iraq, and he had sweet nothing to do, unless he went eye to eye with the mysteries of the thermostat.
He read three newspapers a day.
He watched the network news on television in the evening.
He read poetry in bed at night, after he had rung and failed to connect with Jo.
He knew they were burying Harry that morning, and here he was, not an inch closer after a week in London, to solving his murder.
Perhaps if he wrecked the thermostat, someone would think it worth putting a little pressure on their British friends.
‘Bill, care to walk in?’
‘Sure thing…’
Ruane always did his talking in his own office, like it was necessary to keep everything compartmentalised.
‘Maybe it was time you got lucky, Bill…
Branch has been on.
You should get yourself down there.’
‘Great, thanks…’
‘Not much, it's a start, they'll tell you.’
Erlich turned to the door.
He had shed ten years.
The voice growled from behind him.
‘And let them know you're grateful.’
Bissett had been content, had worked intensely and well for the whole of the previous week.
Reuben Boll had been taking the last part of his annual leave.
He had even been able to purloin half an hour of Basil's time.
That had been the highspot of the last week, sitting in his office, entertaining Basil, and showing him the problems that confronted him.
Basil was magnificent.
Every single scientist in the whole Establishment knew how exceptional he was.
Bissett's difficulty lay in the time he had been allocated for his paper on the theoretical dimensions of the device.
On any programme hitherto it had been accepted that the period between preliminary design and introduction to service could be as long as 15 years.
Fifteen years was quite adequate for the necessary stages of component research, reduction of options, testing of prototypes, laying down of a production line, through to full-scale manufacture.
Nowadays everything was subject to time and motion study and fine scientists, original minds, were working to schedules created by smart-alecks hired from private enterprise.
And there was hassle over money, over facilities.
It was a monstrous way to have to work in such a complex field.
There had been two areas of particular difficulty.
On the one hand the balance of tritium in the warhead pit, and on the other the weight of the carbon casing on the protective shield of the warhead.
Half an hour of Basil's time had been a godsend.
Of course, he hadn't come up with answers, but he had indicated where, in what directions, further work might pay the necessary dividend.
But that was last week and this morning his luck had run out.
The Sierra had not started.
Not a cough, not one glimmer of a spark.
Inevitably, he had flooded the engine, and then had to wait before he could try again, and still no sign of life.
They had  had a bitter, sniping quarrel in the hall, because Sara had said that she needed her car.
He had even offered to run the boys to school, but, no, she had needed the car.
She had been strange that morning, even before the row over her car, and dressed strangely.
She didn't seem to be wearing a brassiere under her purple blouse.
What the hell were they going to think of that at the school gates, any of the other parents or any of the teachers?
He had to wait until nine o'clock to telephone the garage, and he had been told they had no time that morning and would try to get down in the afternoon.
He had had to walk to the Falcon Gate.
The Ministry policeman who checked his I/D had been another one of those patronising cretins who had obviously too soon forgotten the massive two fingers dealt them by the S.A.S. His raincoat was wringing wet, and he was drenched, when he stepped off the minibus outside H area.
Now, Carol's noisy insistence that he take his coat into his own office and not leave it to drip on the communal coat-stand.
Bissett was two hours and 25 minutes late.
On the balls of his sodden feet he advanced along the corridor to his room.
‘Frederick?’
‘Yes, Reuben.’
‘I had hoped to find your paper on my desk.’
‘Nearly there, Reuben,’ Bissett said.
‘I trust some progress has been made in my absence.’
Reuben Boll must have been down to the Canaries or Tenerife.
He looked like a broiled frog, hunched over his desk, grinning and satisfied.
‘Chemical Explosives were asking after you, B12 wanted you.
I gather you have been chasing them for two weeks for their time.
I said you would be over in 30 minutes, but that was an hour ago.’
Bissett went on down the corridor and unlocked the door to his room.
He threw his briefcase onto the floor, into the corner, and with all his force he slammed his door behind him.
The contract was worth £1.31 million, and that was good money by the standards of the business owned and run by Justin Pink.
It was his second gin, and they poured them so that they tasted like a horse's kick.
Justin stood with the Trade Attaché, and the Trade Attaché's assistant, and the Chargé had joined them.
He knew perfectly well that the software was going into the Ministry of Defence, he had not asked to what use it would be put when it was installed, and he certainly hoped there would be more of the same.
He knew that it would be going to the Ministry of Defence, but the paperwork submitted to the Department of Trade and Industry would state that the purchaser was the Ministry of Agriculture; Department of Trade and Industry rules said that manufactured goods could be exported to Iraq only if they had no military usage.
Typical of the government's hypocrisy, in Pink's view, that it could bleat about the failure of exporters while at the same time putting every sort of obstacle in their path.
He had been twice to Iraq.
It was a good market, nothing more and nothing less.
If the contract had been ‘straightforward’ then it would have been worth half the £1.31 million that he was to be paid.
That it was not straightforward gave the deal an added excitement to Pink.
He knew all about the Target Teams of Customs & Excise.
He knew the wording by heart:Attempt to export equipment with intent to evade prohibition then in farce by the Provision of the Export Control and Goods Order and C & E Management Act (Section 68/2), 1979 …and he knew that the offence carried a maximum sentence of seven years imprisonment…
Excitement was important to Justin Pink.
There were more junior officials around them, and Pink was the centre of attention.
The Trade Attaché and the Chargé seemed to hang on his words, and he had the girl at his elbow with the Gordons in one hand and the Schweppes in the other.
A great looker, and he may have shown his admiration because she had ducked her dark head in mock embarrassment and given him the slowest smile as she had moved away.
‘Beautiful,’ the Chargé murmured.
‘Charming,’ the Trade Attaché sighed.
‘The Ambassador's daughter…’ the Chargé warned.
‘To see her is to start the day well,’ the Trade Attaché whispered.
‘Actually, my own day started pretty well,’ Pink said.
Their eyes were on him, enquiring.
Yes, it was his day.
His day to talk, their day to listen.
‘You know what?
I walk into my dining room at 9.26 this morning, just to say my goodbyes to the little lady.
There's a woman sat there, in front of the fire, and she's stark naked.
That started my day well, I can tell you.’
‘Very privileged,’ the Chargé said.
‘May I visit you at home, Mr Pink?’ smirked the Trade Attaché.
‘Super looking woman, didn't bat an eyelid.
My wife has an art class for her friends twice a week, and this was their model…’
‘Very smart.’
‘Greatly fortunate.’
Pink thought that he felt the admiration of his audience, and they wanted more.
‘She's the wife of a chap at A.W.E., sorry, I should explain, where I live we're right alongside the Atomic Weapons Establishment.
This woman hasn't a bean, so she's going to pose for my wife and her girlfriends once a month or so, and she'll get the classes thrown in free.
You won't have me up here again, not too early in the mornings, not on art class mornings…’
‘Hasn't a bean?’
‘Colloquial for penniless.
It's extraordinary, really, but some of the best scientific brains in Britain are shut away there, at A.W.E., and they're paid peasant wages.’
‘Extraordinary.’
‘I tell you what,’ Pink said, ‘I'd prefer to be on a building site than be a government scientist in this day and age.’
‘In our country a scientist is treated with the utmost respect.’
His glass was refilled, too much gin, not enough tonic.
He grimaced at the Ambassador's daughter.
He turned back to the Trade Attaché.
‘He's probably a front-line scientist, and the family's on subsistence level.
Still, if his wife is sitting in my dining room being a nude model it can't be all bad, can it?’
Pink was never aware of the man who hovered behind him.
By the time Pink left the Embassy, worried now as to whether he was fit to drive, a Major who dealt only with Intelligence matters was preparing a report to send to Baghdad.
The report would go directly to the desk of the Colonel.
‘Please sit down.’
Erlich sat.
‘What have you got for me?’
‘Would you like coffee?’
Erlich said, ‘I'd rather know what you've got for me.’
‘Milk and sugar?’
Erlich said, ‘No sugar.’
‘Have to do it myself, my girl's off sick.’
Erlich had gone down to New Scotland Yard fast enough to be more than 25 minutes early for his appointment.
They had made him wait.
He had been taken to the fourth floor at exactly the time of his appointment.
It was a bare working room.
Erlich had seen nothing like it in CI-3, in Washington Field Office, where each room had photos of wives stuck onto cork boards, of kids, postcards from vacations all over the world, cartoons, clippings of headlines and a huge blow-up of a quote from an English thriller writer: ‘The most suspicious, unbelieving, unreasonable, petty, inhuman, sadistic, double-crossing set of bastards in any language [are]the people who run counter-espionage departments.’
Nothing like that here.
Not even a picture in a frame.
The Chief Inspector came back in with two plastic containers of coffee.
Erlich thought that the Chief Inspector looked, if it  were possible, more tired.
He thought that any Special Agent who dressed like this guy would be disciplined.
The Chief Inspector took his pipe from his pocket, filled it slowly, methodically, and lit it, and when the room seemed to Erlich dangerously full of smoke, he lit it again.
‘For the last week I've had my head into Irish files, got me?
In this country Irish files come first, and every time I'm into an Irish case I find myself cursing just about everything American, got me?
American money keeps the Provos alive…
And one more thing.
We put a hell of a lot of time and effort into feeding your crowd detail on the Provos on your side of the water, and trying to get your judges to extradite the bastards back here is harder than getting water out of rock.’
‘You'll have to forgive me, Chief Inspector, I've got a one-track mind and I'm here only to locate the man called Colt, the Englishman who murdered an Agency man in Athens.’,
‘Just so you know what kept us busy.’
The Chief Inspector put flame to his pipe once more and under cover of the smokescreen took a thin file out of the desk.
‘We have a movement here called the Animal Liberation Front,’ he said.
‘It's made up of anarchists in part and in part middle-class softies.
This is a free country and people are allowed to sound off about the fur trade, about vivisection, about experimenting with live animals.
These people do all that, but they are also known to plant fire bombs and rough people up who work in laboratories where animals are used for experiments.
A couple of years ago, the A.L.F.
was getting out of hand.
There were two department stores gutted by incendiaries; there was a laboratory where three dozen beagle dogs were ‘liberated’; a bomb was put under a car but failed to explode; a scientist who was trying to find an antidote for cystic fibrosis was beaten up.
There was a special unit set up here, Animal Rights National Index, but these idiots had tight security, a good cut-off cell system, and it took us a hell of a long time to open the can.
The breakthrough was a squat we turned over on the south coast, two years back.
We found a set of initials  there.
We were able to put names to all the initials.
Four males, two females.
Three males and one female were arrested.
The fourth male was identified as a boy named Tuck.’
‘And that's Colt?’
The Chief Inspector ferreted again for matches.
‘That's Colin Olivier Louis Tuck.’
Erlich said, and he meant it, ‘Great thing, this special relationship, and thank you very much.’
The Chief Inspector leaned over the desk, his voice hissed in anger.
‘I'll tell you what I think of this so-called special relationship.
It's whatever you want, and when you want it.’
Erlich did not understand the hostility of this man.
He had been given a name.
He had said what he thought was the decent thing to say, and had it chucked back at him.
‘What's your problem, Chief Inspector?’
‘My problem?
By Christ, I'll tell you what my problem is.
My son has been dead for three years.
My problem, as you call it, is that he was 19 and serving his first year in the Light Infantry, in the Bogside of Londonderry, and the weapon that shot him dead was an MI6 high-velocity rifle, product of America, put into the hands of those scum by scum in America protected by American judges.’
Erlich dropped his head.
‘I'm sorry,’ he said.
He was told that the liaison procedures were being sorted out.
By tomorrow they would be in place.
Erlich let himself out of the room.
In the outer office a young detective intercepted Erlich.
‘Mr Erlich?’
‘That's me.’
‘A Mr Rutherford has been trying to reach you.
He said would you call by, Curzon Street, side door.’
The passport that the Colonel had given him was in the inside pocket of his anorak.
The contact telephone number and the contact address he had memorised.
He was going home, and home meant to him no more and no less than the room where his mother was dying.
The Colonel had no need to pressure him to return again to Baghdad after his mission was completed, and after he had visited his mother who was dying.
They might as well have had a rope round his ankle.
He was a fugitive from the justice of his own country.
He knew the sentences that had been handed down to his associates.
Twelve years the men, seven to the girl.
Of course, he was a fugitive.
His own country offered him only the deathbed of his mother, and twelve years' imprisonment.
Of course, he would come back to Baghdad.
It was rare for him to feel gratitude to any person, but the nearest was his feeling for the Colonel.
He had drifted into the Colonel's orbit.
He had come from a bulk tanker that had tied up in the oil terminal in Kuwait harbour, thanked the Master who had allowed him to work his passage from the port of Perth, and gone ashore.
He had gone because the great forward deck had in its turn become another confining space to him.
Kuwait meant nothing to him, but the place was crawling with his countrymen, in the hotels and eating houses, on the streets and beaches.
Brits were bad for Colt, so he had hitched a ride away from the city, to the frontier, and crossed over to Iraq.
He had smiled at the frontier guards and kept walking with his rucksack slung over one shoulder…until the hand had clamped on his collar, and the boots had pitched him into a cell.
Bruised and bloodied from days of interrogation on the floor of a cell that was an inch deep in his own shit and piss, the Colonel had found him and freed him.
Of course, he would return to Baghdad.
They had a need of him, he a need of them.
At the gate of the security zone where there was access directly onto the apron, he formally shook the Colonel's hand.
The Colonel kissed him on both cheeks.
‘The Thai whore, sir, she was good?’
The Colonel hugged his shoulders, and he laughed.
‘If you had lost the bet, sir, what would you have paid them?’
The hands moved to the back of Colt's neck and squeezed.
It would have been a long story, the warming of friendship and respect between the barrel-chested Iraqi Colonel and the young man from England who had proved he could stalk and kill.
But a long story was an indulgence.
Colt could only abide a short story.
So it was a short story as he told it to himself, of an English runaway crossing the frontier from Kuwait, and failing in spite of many beatings to satisfy his interrogators until the arrival of the Colonel at the Public Security base at Basra.
Colt seldom lied, not now, not then.
He told the Colonel his life story between puffed lips, chipped teeth, and the Colonel was amused.
He had been taken to the Colonel's bungalow.
He had been told that he would teach two overweight, spoilt teenage boys the English language.
Colt, bottom of the class before he was expelled, now Colt the tutor.
He had been lifted from a detention cell and given the job of English teacher because the Colonel liked a boy who could smile into the face of an interrogator who wielded a rubber truncheon.
And Colt, after long days of torture, had recognised in the Colonel someone he could like, someone whose trust he would value.
‘Until we meet, Colt.’
He was the last passenger onto the aircraft.
Rutherford sensed Erlich's impatience from across the room.
‘Right, Mr Erlich…’
‘Bill.’
‘Right, Bill…concerning Colin Tuck, who we shall call Colt, I am your liaison while you are in Britain.
Anything you want, you put in a request to me.
Any actions you may think necessary will be vetted by me, any interviews you wish to carry out will be arranged through me.’
Rutherford hoped that he spoke with sufficient polite force to nail the message home.
‘Mr Ruane will have told you, no doubt, you adhere, most strictly, to the guidelines that we lay down.
That way you get all the help  and co-operation we can provide, any other way and you get shown the door.
Are we quite clear?’
He saw the American rise.
He was like the pellet-fed rainbows in the Fishery waters near Penny's parents.
But the American rose and didn't take, had more sense than those daft trout.
‘Thank you for hearing me out, Bill.
Sorry for the claptrap, but the rules are important to all of us.’
‘Quite understood.
Tell me about Colt.’
There wasn't too much to tell, and after Rutherford had finished he would leave the American in the room with the file and let him gut it for himself.
He gave him the digest.
He told the story of a loner, a drifter, a maverick boy who went from banner-waving at public meetings to protest at experiments on animals, all the way to incendiaries and assault and finally an attempted car bomb.
And then the sudden flight and the disappearance of the boy from the face of the earth.
He mentioned the request for information from the Criminal Investigation Division of the police in Western Australia, of a description received from Perth of a murder suspect, which might be relevant and might not, couldn't say.
‘He went to the pub in the village where his parents live the night before he disappeared.
He was in the pub, that we know.
The next day his parents’ home was searched, and the boy was gone.
His parents have always refused to co-operate or even to discuss the boy.’
‘Isn't that where we start?’
‘The house is periodically watched, the mail is routinely opened, telephone calls are intercepted.
We have no indication that his parents have had any contact with him since he disappeared two years ago.’
‘It's still where we start, I'd reckon.’
Rutherford said, ‘Would you not rather read the file first?’
Rutherford saw the determination, the jutted chin, of the American.
If he had been working out of the Embassy in Washington, if he was being shunted round the F.B.I.
and the Central 
Intelligence Agency, if he had been twiddling his thumbs for a week, he might just have been a little determined himself.
This was not a Lockerbie operator, that was clear.
He had heard that the Feds at Lockerbie had been good as gold, working at the pace required, picking up on every small detail provided by the forensic team at Farnborough, where the 747 had been reconstructed.
This young man was a bull looking for a china shop.
He assumed Erlich to be ambitious, looking for results that would lift his career forward.
He didn't care for ambition, perhaps he should have done.
Rutherford found ambition a little vulgar.
He pushed the file across to him.
He saw it snapped open.
The photograph spilled out.
Rutherford saw the way Erlich's eyes focused onto the photograph.
It was a vendetta, any child would have seen that.
This was Bill Erlich versus Colin Tuck, and anything that was personal in an investigation was going to be a bloody nuisance.
‘I'll leave you to it.
Be back shortly.’
Not good form to leave Erlich alone in his office, but his safe was locked, and the drawers of his desk were locked, and he wanted to get to Accounts before they closed, to draw a float before setting off.
The Swede's office was on the second floor of the building.
Outside his window there was a small garden, well watered on these warm evenings.
The garden was often used by the target for a short relaxing walk.
The distance between the Swede's second-floor office and Dr Tariq's ground-floor suite was 60 feet.
The Swede had measured it.
He was at Tuwaithah because his much-loved sister had married an Israeli Air Force pilot.
On his last visit home, to the university city of Uppsala, he had met with countrymen of his sister's husband.
When he had returned to Baghdad, he had limped through Customs and Immigration to the car sent by the Atomic Energy Commission.
He had leaned heavily on a stick.
With his baggage had been a Sony music centre.
The stick, after the apparent improvement of his pulled tendons, remained in his office, always in the corner by the door where he hung his coat.
The stick concealed a rifle microphone, which, after much debate — over the alternative merits of contacts, spikes, tubes, any number of possible bugs — had been manufactured for him.
He could only use the microphone after his two Iraqi assistants had gone home.
It was a huge risk, each time he unscrewed the base of the walking stick, took out the rifle microphone, plugged it to the small receiver that by day nestled in the back of his music centre, put on the headphones which on most days he used to listen to classical music.
The fear, the terror of detection, each time, left him physically drained.
But the job he had been given by the Mossad agents, who traded ruthlessly on his love of his sister, was a narcotic to him.
He had become addicted to the terror.
He had twice before seen the Colonel walk through the garden to Dr Tariq's office, but on each occasion his assistants had still been at work.
It was 17 days since he had last locked the door of his office, turned down the lights, and unscrewed the cap of his walking stick, and heard Dr Tariq and Professor Khan discuss a series of meetings in Europe.
He crouched now beside the window.
It had seemed so very straightforward at first, at the time of his recruitment.
He was a techno-mercenary in the laboratory at Alto Gracia under the Sierra Chica mountains of North-West Argentina.
Their first approach, late at night in his hotel room, came a week after he had received his sister's long and excited letter telling him of her marriage.
Perhaps he had been bored, perhaps he simply hadn't believed in the danger.
There were a number of Iraqis at Alto Gracia.
They were the banker of the Condor missile development on which Argentina co-operated, with the further expertise of Egyptian engineers.
It had all been stage-managed by the Mossad.
By a chance remark in passing in the Sierra hotel bar where the foreigners were billeted, a remark in the hearing of a senior Iraqi scientist, the Swede had let it be known that he found the missile programme tedious, that he really needed more challenging work.
It had been true, and he often reflected, the work was challenging.
For a bachelor, too, the working conditions and the pay were well above what he thought he could command elsewhere.
Barely a week later an invitation had been made to him.
He had thought, naïvely, of the excitement, and of his sister.
But the conditions and the pay were long since beside the point.
The point was the barbed hook of the Mossad in his nervous system.
The venetian blind was drawn down.
The window was open.
The microphone rested on the window ledge.
Sharp and much too loud in his ears, the evening song of the birds and, between the calls of the birds, voices.
It was hard for him to catch the words, because the flowerbeds had just been hoed and the birds were raucous in their search for food in the fresh-turned soil.
‘…
Only H area, Colonel.
Their A area, no, no, just engineers.
Their B area, that we do ourselves.
He must come from H area, nowhere else…
I don't want a chemist, I don't want an engineer…
A scientist, Colonel, and he must come from H area…’
The Swede never attempted to assess what he eavesdropped.
He passed it on verbatim.
Every shrill cadence of the birds' song, every soft utterance of Dr Tariq poured into him the high exhilaration of fear.
Colt flew into London on the last flight from Frankfurt.
He had changed aircraft already at Prague.
At Immigration he produced the Irish passport that the Colonel had given him.
He was nodded through.
No problem.
And why should there have been a problem?
Saad Rashid was a shrewd man, good with figures, but it did not take his shrewdness to know that a sentence of death would have been passed upon him by those who had once been his colleagues in Baghdad.
It was a month since he had made the initial transfer.
Twenty-nine days earlier he had personally visited the National Westminster Bank in Lower Regent Street, and in the office of the Deputy Manager he had ordered the movement of 500,000 American dollars from the account of Iraqi Airlines (London) to a numbered account in Dublin.
Twenty-eight days earlier he had travelled to Dublin to transfer that sum to a second numbered account in Liechtenstein.
Twenty-seven days earlier he had, by telephone, moved that same sum out of Liechtenstein and into the secrecy-shrouded computers of the Credit Bank of Zurich.
On the day on which Saad Rashid had received the confirmation of the transaction from Switzerland, he had tidied his desk at the back of the Iraqi Airlines office, taken what few personal possessions he kept there and placed them in his briefcase, locked his door, pocketed his key, and told his assistant manager that he believed he was showing the first symptoms of the ‘flu that was sweeping London.
He had gone then to the Syrian Embassy and had applied for a visa for himself, for his English-born wife, for his two daughters.
On that day, twenty-seven days earlier, he had travelled from the Syrian Embassy back to his rented home in  Kingston-upon-Thames, and there he had, for the first time, informed his wife of their changed circumstances.
They had moved out that evening from the house in Kingston-upon-Thames.
They had spent two nights in bed-and-breakfast accommodation before taking a month's let on a furnished flat close to Clapham Junction mainline railway station.
Twenty-five days of suffocating in the one-bedroomed flat with his wife and the two children.
He was a man used to taking his favoured clients to the Ritz or to Claridges.
When he was on business away from home he stayed and entertained in the Hiltons and Sheratons and InterContinentals.
The children wanted to go back to school.
Zoë wanted to go shopping in Knightsbridge.
He was suffocated.
The third night, above the rattling progress of a late train, he had pummelled Zoë with his fists, and not heard the frightened crying of his children, when she had said that no fucking way was she going to be holed up for the rest of her days in bloody, bloody Damascus.
It was the first time that she had forgotten the place of the Arab's wife.
He had beaten her, cowed her, instilled in her once more the rule of obedience.
Zoë Rashid now accepted that she could not visit her mother before she flew out to Syria.
She understood that she could only leave the flat to shop for food at the Indian-owned store at the end of the street.
She accepted — rather, she understood — her position because she was never allowed from the flat with both daughters at the same time.
Rashid had left the flat only once, to go by taxi to the Syrian Embassy to press further his application for asylum, and on that occasion, while he had talked and drunk coffee in an inner office his two daughters had sat outside with their colouring books and crayons.
It was prudent of Saad Rashid to hide himself and his family away.
A Shia cleric, an enemy of the regime, had been shot dead in a hotel lobby in Khartoum.
Qassem Emin, the political activist, who had made free with his denunciations of the Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council, had been tortured and had his throat slit in Turkey.
There was the wife of a Communist  who had been stabbed to death in Oslo.
There was Abdullah Ali, a businessman in exile, who was known to Rashid, and who had eaten in a restaurant in London with men he believed to be his friends, who had died in St Stephen's Hospital of a rat poison that had been sprinkled on his food during a moment of inattention.
What decided Saad Rashid to steal half a million dollars and seek a life of exile in a country reviled by his homeland was the telephone call from his cousin's wife.
On a poor line from Baghdad he had been told, in a voice distraught with tears, that his cousin was under arrest, charged with treason, held in the Abu Ghraib gaol.
It was their way, the men from the Department of Public Security, to take one man, and then trawl through his family for any small hint of the cancer of dissent.
It was 27 days since Rashid had left his office at Iraqi Airlines for the last time.
With his two daughters, one holding each hand, he came down the long staircase from the top-floor flat.
He had first checked from the window that the taxi he had telephoned was waiting.
The passports, with the visa stamps, were waiting at the Embassy.
He would fly that night to Damascus with his wife who had once been a dancer and with his children whom he loved.
In his head was the account number at the Credit Bank of Zurich.
He closed the outer door behind him.
He hurried with his daughters down the steps and towards the taxi.
He watched as the taxi pulled away.
It was 28 hours since he had driven the clapped-out Ford Capri into the street, and counted himself lucky to find a space to park that was pretty near opposite the front door from which the man had emerged with his two small girls.
He would hand it to the Colonel: given the motivation they could, by God, do things right.
Colt knew that the target was a thief, that he had been observed entering the Syrian Embassy when that Embassy was under regular Iraqi surveillance.
Colt  knew that the target had been followed to the house in Clapham.
Colt knew his target at once from the photograph that he had been given.
Colt thought it a serious mistake by his target to have gone in person to the Syrian Embassy.
He had found the Ruger under the mattress in his Bayswater hotel room, and with it the keys of the Capri, and the tool box, and the overalls, plus the scrap of paper on which was the street and the number.
The bill was prepaid, so that he was away from the hotel before the front desk was manned, and the car had started first turn.
For the whole day and all the previous evening, he had the hood up and tinkered with the engine.
He worked his way through a bag of sandwiches and four cans of Pepsi.
When night fell, he had slept in the back of the Capri, slept and dozed.
They wanted it over and he wanted it over.
It was his deal with the Colonel, that once the business was finished then he was free to go west, head back to his roots.
He lay on his back.
His head was under the outside front wheel housing.
He could not avoid it, he took a lungful of the diesel fumes from the taxi as it pulled away.
The pistol was under the main chassis, in a plastic bag, and the magazine was in place, and the safety was off.
He had reached for the Ruger as soon as he had seen the taxi pull up, and he had had the Ruger in his grip when the front door opposite had opened, and he had loosened the grip when he had seen that the target carried no cases, only had his daughters’ hands in his.
He'd be coming back…
The time would be when the target returned.
When the taxi had cleared the street, Colt pushed himself out from underneath the Capri.
He pulled the woollen cap that had been in the pocket of his overalls further down over his close-cut hair.
When he had lifted the hood of the Capri, and fastened the arm to hold it open, then he bent again and reached under the chassis to retrieve the plastic bag holding the Ruger.
He put the plastic bag on top of the battery, always close to his  hand.
The taxi, when it came back to the street, would be crawling because the driver would be looking for the number.
They were pretty children, Colt thought.
Pretty clothes and their hair well brushed…
Not easy if the target had hold of both the kids when he came out of the taxi.
It was as though he had come into work on a Sunday.
Not that he had been to work on a Sunday for several years, but that was how he remembered it.
This one was a big strike.
Different from the time the Radiological Protection Unit had been out, and different from the Boilermakers' stoppage.
This was the real thing.
This was clerical staff and Health Physics surveyors and instrument technicians, even the ‘Ploot’ grinders.
They were all at the Falcon Gate, banners and placards, with the Transport and General Workers Union convenors haranguing them over loudspeakers.
It was hushed as a mid-week chapel inside H3 because Carol and her typing tribe were all out in the rain with banners bearing crudely daubed exhortations to the government to raise their pay.
Bissett had heard there was even talk of the fire cover being withdrawn.
Frederick Bissett was a member of the Institute of Professional Scientists, and a fat lot of good that did him.
He had joined the Institute in his first year at the Establishment because at that time the organisation seemed to have some sinew to it.
He had been to the Top Rank entertainment centre in Reading when all the scientists had gathered one evening to formulate a demand for a 40 per cent pay rise.
Whistling in the wind, that had been, because they had settled for half, and never recovered from the shame of behaving in the same way as the typists and fitters and laboratory assistants.
Waste of his time, the Institute of Professional Scientists, which was why the annual assessments, prepared in his case by Reuben Boll, were so crucial.
Be interesting, of course, if fire cover were withdrawn, because then they would have to rustle up the R.A.F. crews from Brize Norton who  wouldn't know their big toes from their elbows when it came to plutonium and highly enriched uranium and chemical explosive.
He had H3 almost to himself.
Boll was over in F area because the Director had summoned all the Superintendents to a planning meeting.
Wayne had rung in to say that he was sick, which meant that the little creep didn't want to drive past the picket line.
Basil was in his office, probably hadn't registered that anything was different.
In the late morning he locked his safe, checked to see that all of his desk drawers were secured, and shut down his terminal.
Because there was a strike, because their own laboratories were idle, the high and the mighty of A area were prepare to squeeze in a visit from lowly Frederick Bissett of H3.
He drove across Second Avenue, and past the new colossus that was the Ago building.
The building was a great show box of concrete.
He had never been inside the box, nor had he seen the Decontamination Centre that was alongside, nor the Liquid Waste plant.
At least they were working on the complex that day, at least the civilian contractors had been able to bribe their private work force to cross the picket lines.
It was said that Ago and its ancillaries would end up costing the taxpayer £1.5 billion.
He'd heard that stainless steel was going inside that box at such a rate as to absorb the country's entire annual output, and that the rip-offs were a scandal.
It was being said that when A90 came on song there wouldn't be enough people to work it and there wouldn't be enough plutonium to make it work.
Naturally, there was enough money for Ago…money, money, money…not a squeak out of the bank manager that week.
He cut across First Avenue.
Ahead of him was what those who worked there called the Citadel.
The Citadel was the A area.
The Citadel was where nuclear warheads were made.
Inside the Citadel, in Bissett's opinion, there was little that was innovative, much that was wasteful — but then what else could be expected of engineers?
The Citadel was a sprawl of buildings, erected in  various bursts of haste and always in secrecy since the early Fifties.
Everyone who worked outside it said that the Citadel buildings creaked with age, improvisation, and therefore danger.
There was A1, in at the birth pangs of the British weapon, where the plutonium was heated in the furnaces so that it could be shaped into the melon-sized spheres for the inner workings of the warheads, and it was no secret amongst the Establishment staff that a dozen years earlier cancers had been rampant amongst the technicians.
There was A45, the Materials Assembly unit, where the plutonium sphere was wrapped in a second concentric sphere of highly enriched uranium before the sealing of the lethal elements in 22-carat gold foil.
Bissett had once met the gaunt technician from A45 who had apparently received through a faulty glove a particle of plutonium the size of a pinhead and whose body had been cremated six months later before there could be an inquest.
There was A12, Waste Management Group, where the plutonium and highly enriched uranium and beryllium and tritium were taken from weapons that had achieved their shelf life in the guts of submarines and the bunkers of Air Force camps, then reworked for newer and more potent devices.
There were the open-air vats alongside A12 where acid burned out the plutonium before the sludge could be reprocessed.
Bissett had only to see the wire of the Citadel's perimeter, to see the smoke from the Citadel's chimneys, to feel a loathing for the place.
He was required to leave his car outside the perimeter fence.
In the walkway inside the high double fencing, an alsatian, an ugly and vicious-looking brute, dragged at its handler's leash.
The dog, leaping at the wire, snarling its frustration, frightened him.
The Ministry policeman, flak jacket unfastened over his chest, sub-machine gun hooked on a strap over his shoulder, checked his I/D card at the entrance to the razor-wire tunnel, consulted a list of the day's expected visitors, thumbed him through.
The machine gun unnerved him, always had and always would.
At the second check, at the end of the wire tunnel, his name was searched for again, and he had to hand in his H area card in  exchange for a temporary pass, and a phone call was made ahead.
He was kept waiting.
He could never have worked in A1 or A1/ 1 or A45 or A/2.
Every time that he had been inside the Citadel he went home as soon as his day's work was finished and scrubbed his body from toe to scalp.
He could never have taken his urine and faeces samples once a week to Health Physics.
He could not have endured the clamouring siren bells that marked an alarm and that caused A area to be sealed down, passage in and out of the Citadel suspended until the malfunction was located.
He was ushered forward after cooling his heels for four minutes.
He met three men inside A45.
For half an hour he took tea and biscuits with them, and discussed the problems of weight reduction through additional use of gallium worked into plutonium.
Weight was the key to a warhead.
He could have sat down with only one of them and achieved the same guidance on weight and machining capability, but three of them came to the meeting, which he thought typical of engineers.
A sniff of tea, a whiff of biscuits, and there would soon be a crowd.
Because of the shortage of plutonium, because of the call on plutonium by the Trident programme, he was required to reduce the warhead weight for the cruise system.
As he left, the engineers were on their third cup and discussing last week's retirement party.
But he had had some valuable help.
He went out through the ‘airlock’ system of the wire tunnel.
He was handed back his identity card.
The dog was still there, still straining to break through at him.
It was always the same when he came out of there, he thought there was an itch at his back as if he had been touched .
They actually wore, those engineers, four different samplers on their chests and pinned to their jackets or shirts.
He drove back to H area.
At least the post was not strike-bound.
Carol, on her picket line, would be suffering in the knowledge that a whole delivery of post would escape her.
A bundle of recycled internal envelopes for Boll, mostly journals and magazines for Basil, an O.H.M.S.  for Wayne, a motley of envelopes for the technicians from H3's laboratory.
He saw his own name on a plain white envelope.
Because Carol wasn't there, wasn't arching her head to see the contents of a letter, it was not necessary for him to take the envelope into his own office.
He read the neatly typed letter…
Dear Frederick,
Hoping this finds you well.
As you will see, I am now the Professor of Physics here.
In an effort to make life more interesting for our younger members of staff and our graduate element, I have been inviting past students back to lecture on any aspect of their current work.
Obviously much of what you do is restricted, but come and give us a talk on anything unrestricted that you think would be of interest.
You are something of a legend here still and would be assured of a fine welcome, a passably good dinner, and a bed at my humble abode — plus travel expenses.
Perhaps you could test the water at your end, and let me know when you could come.
Thursday evenings are our best.
Yours,
Walter Smith
PS: What on earth do you do with yourself these days?
Surely they must be about to close the bomb shop down.
Sara could see the raindrops falling from the bare branches of the apple tree in the garden, and she could feel the freshness of the wind on her arms.
She stood at the drying frame with her box of pegs and her tub of washing.
It was a strange thing, really strange to her, that she could feel her underclothes against her body.
It was the third day after she had dressed, gone out, without wearing her underclothes, into her car, driving on the main road through Tadley, driving all the way to Kingsclere, knocking at the front door of the home of a woman who was almost a stranger, going into a house that she hardly knew.
Her underclothes had been neatly folded in the bottom of her handbag.
No sketcher nor painter nor artist wanted to see the elastic weals on a model's shoulders and chest and hips and thighs, every model left her underwear off for as many hours as possible before posing.
The eyes of the man in the doorway had been a reawakening for Sara.
It was more years than she cared to remember since she had last seen a man stare at her in frank admiration.
When had she last seen Frederick stare at her, worship her?
Back beyond memory.
When she had been at art college, but that was just kids hunting for trophies, and they hadn't meant a toss to her.
She had turned her back on the lot of them, and married Frederick Bissett, from a terraced house in Leeds, bright boy of the street.
That was her statement to her parents, to her school, to her upbringing.
She could not remember when poor old Frederick had last gazed in lust at her naked body, not like Debbie's husband had.
It had been better, a long time ago it had been better, when their loving had made Frank, and better up to the time of Adam's birth.
Such excruciating pain and three weeks premature, and fast, but with the pain, and Frederick on his one and only trip to New Mexico.
Alone in her agony, she had vowed that the responsible bastard would go short…
He'd gone short and the trouble was — she pegged his flannel pyjamas to the frame — that he didn't seem to care.
When she had finished hanging out the washing, before she went for the weekly shop at SavaCentre, Sara applied her lipstick, and around her throat she squirted the toilet water which she had had for three years and never before used.
Debbie's husband would have cared if he had gone short, oh yes.
Rutherford was in a poor humour, because the best that the pool could provide was a two-year-old Astra with 70,000 on the clock, and a ticket on the windscreen.
He couldn't have been more than two, three minutes collecting Erlich in South Audley Street, but there it was.
Accounts would be pleased.
He couldn't use his own car because they were going to be way out of radio range, and he needed the car telephone with the scrambler attachment.
He had argued with the pool supervisor, but it was the Astra or nothing.
He detested starting the day with an argument.
At least he hadn't argued with Penny.
She never fussed when he said that he was going down to the country and didn't know when he'd be back.
Best thing that had ever happened to him, Penny.
Erlich had the passenger seat as far back as it would go and he still shifted his weight about as if he needed another six inches of leg-room.
They had come off the M3 and were cruising on the dual carriageway A303.
That was the Astra's optimum pace, a reasonably quiet 70 m.p.h.
It had no guts left in it.
Pool cars were watchers' cars, and were hammered.
There was the fork ahead of him, and he slowed for a gap in the oncoming traffic.
The stones were wonderful.
There was light shafting off the Plain ahead, cutting down behind the stones.
He loved that place.
He had loved the magic and mystery of Stonehenge since early childhood.
On the way down to their holidays in Cornwall his parents had always stopped at Stonehenge for a slow coffee break while he had crossed the road to walk around the stones.
Penny only wanted a West Country holiday, not the least ingratiating thing about her, and they took the same cottage that his Mum had rented, and they stopped, he and Penny, for the same coffee  and the same stroll round the monument.
Well, nowadays you could get no closer than the wire cage around the perimeter, thanks to the hippies or the busloads of Americans or druids maybe, who knew?
He pulled into the car park.
‘You want to stretch your legs?’
‘Not particularly.’
‘You want a coffee from the stall?’
Rutherford gestured towards the open-sided van at the edge of the car park.
‘No, thanks.’
‘You want to see the stones?’
‘I should?’
Rutherford said evenly, ‘Those stones were cut and erected four thousand years ago.
Each one weighs more than 100 tons and was brought 200 miles overland on rollers, by sea on rafts.
We still don't understand how prehistoric man achieved that feat.
Nobody in this much bull-shitted century has achieved anything that can outlast what the men who laid out these stones did here.
So, yes, you should, just for five minutes forget about being a policeman and be a human being.
I do it regularly myself.
It gives me a balanced perspective.’
The wind tore at their trouser legs as they circled the cage, and Erlich smiled his admiration of the great stone circle.
‘Well, we mustn't lose time, must we?’
Rutherford said, ‘Tell me, then, who in this age of miracles can be set against the master designer of Stonehenge?’
‘I am afraid you will have to take account of the men of the Manhattan Project,’ said Erlich through chattering teeth.
‘They will be remembered as long as there is history.
And now, mind-boggling as this shrine of yours is, I think I need one of those coffees.’
Tork, Station Officer for Tel Aviv, always responded immediately to a summons from that office, cancelled whatever appointments he had.
Tork's time there was never wasted.
And after the affair  in the Beqa'a Valley, he was trusted.
A famous mission organised by Tork's London masters — an Israeli sniper with an English guide — had killed a P.L.O.
training-camp commander.
Tork was shown the transcript of a brief conversation.
The text totally underlined in red ink, he was told, was that of the Director of Iraq's Atomic Energy Commission.
Tork had been Station Officer in Tel Aviv for eleven years.
He had learned that there were no favours handed out.
He had learned also that if there were a continuing nightmare in Israel then it was that an Arab enemy might one day possess the capability to strike at the Jewish heartland with nuclear weapons.
‘I'll get it off to Century at once.’
‘But will they act on it?’
‘It's not a lot to go on.’
‘But you will give it a ‘most urgent’ rating.’
‘At my end, of course.’
She had lived all her life in the street running alongside the railway, and since she had retired from her late father's business, a haberdashery store in Wimbledon, since she had sold it to a family from Northampton for a good price, Hannah Worthington walked each day to the shop at the end of the street.
She never bought more, nor less, than she would need for her housekeeping for the next 24 hours.
It was one of the rituals of this lonely spinster's life that every day she would take her chihuahua to the shop on the corner and back again.
Miss Worthington was a small woman.
In her winter coat she appeared to be little more than a central pole with a tent draped from her shoulders.
She wore a dark grey hat taken from the store on her last day as owner, and that was 17 years ago, and a plain grey scarf round her throat, and leather gloves that had stood a long test of time.
In her flat and comfortable lace-up shoes, she made good progress on her daily outing.
She walked towards the shop.
In her wicker basket there was a shopping list for a packet of porridge, one pork chop, some oven-ready chips, a carton of frozen broccoli, one apple and one orange, a small loaf of wholemeal sliced bread, and an 8oz tin of Pedigree Chum.
What she liked about the shop was that it was open for business on every day of the year.
Even on Christmas Day, after church, she could walk to the shop and buy her necessaries.
Of course, the street had changed mightily in the years since her birth in 1909, the year King Emperor Edward the Seventh died.
Before the Great War, and afterwards also, this had been a street where bank managers and principal shopkeepers lived.
After the Second World War, the street had changed, and she knew that had brought sadness to her late father.
He had talked about moving, but after his passing her late mother had simply refused to countenance what she had called ‘evacuation’.
Miss Worthington often felt it would have been an unendurable sorrow to her parents if they had lived to witness the extent of the deterioration.
To start with, every single front door in the street, excepting her own, was now festooned with illuminated bell buttons, marking the division of fine family homes into little warrens of flats.
To go on with, in the former days, between the Great War and the Second World War, there would never have been men working on cars in the street, as if the place were a communal garage.
She saw the taxi inching down the street.
Between the Great War and the Second World War there were always taxis in the street, not now.
Taxi drivers came down her street in this day and age as if in fear of their lives.
Her dog sniffed for a moment at the ankle of the young man who worked at the engine of his car.
She pulled the dog away.
The taxi passed her.
Her chihuahua was making its ‘business’ in the gutter, and that was a relief because it meant she wouldn't have to take him out again in the evening, and wait around for him.
There was poor enough lighting in the street, and so many peculiar people…
‘Good boy,’ she murmured.
‘Well done, little boy.’
She heard the taxi stop and the door open.
She heard the charge of feet behind her.
She heard the shout.
‘Hey, there.’
There was a faint rattle, metal being drawn across metal.
There was the slight sound, a light and muffled drum beat.
Miss Worthington turned.
She thought the man was drunk.
It was the middle of the day, and the man reeled, staggered.
That's what had happened to her street, drunks in the middle of the day.
She stepped out into the road.
The man could barely stand.
She would cross over.
The man fell.
She saw the man on the pavement, beside the driver's door of the taxi, and he was writhing, a thrashing fish.
She saw the blood across the grey white of the man's shirt.
She saw two little girls, nicely dressed, running up the steps to the nearest house, starting to beat at the paint-scraped wooden door.
She saw the man with the fat-barrelled gun held out from his shoulder.
She saw the man with the gun shoot again at the man on the pavement.
She was a dozen paces from the man with the gun, and she heard nothing.
She saw his wrists jump from the recoil.
She saw the man on the pavement shudder, and the thrashing cease.
She saw that the man with the gun had on his head a woollen cap.
She saw that the cap was tilted.
She saw the splash of short fair hair.
The man with the gun turned.
Eyes meeting.
The eyes of a killer…and the eyes, masked by heavy Health Service spectacles, of a spinster in her 81st year.
There was a moment, God's truth, she would not forget it, when the man with the gun seemed to smile at her, God's truth and she did not trifle with that.
She saw him run.
As he ran she saw the man working the gun into the front of his overalls, and she saw him also, with his free hand, drag the woollen cap back down across his forehead.
The Chihuahua strained on its narrow leather lead to be clear of the shooting, and the shouting, and the crying of the little girls.
The vet had said that the dog's heart was weak and that the dog should not be over-excited.
She picked up her dog, put it under her arm, and walked briskly to her home.
Safe in her own hallway, Miss Worthington bolted the front door, turned the master key.
She could not bear the thought of returning to the street, going to the shop, to get the tin of dog food for her chihuahua's midday meal.
She was in her first-floor sitting room, secure in her easy chair, when she heard the first sirens, saw the first police cars turn into her street.
It hadn't been real.
It was like a disagreeable dream and she wasn't going to have anything more to do with it.
She turned her armchair away from the window.
The body was gone.
The blood was on the pavement.
The children had been taken upstairs.
The growing crowd was a hundred yards back, behind the white tape.
The discharged cartridge cases were in the roadway and the gutter, close to the back wheel of the taxi.
The taxi driver said, ‘You tell me he was shot, he looked like he'd been shot.
I didn't hear no shooting.
I heard a man running, but I ain't seen nothing.’
Of course, they started with a house to house, but it was the sort of street where most of the flats, bedsitters, were empty during the day.
When a constable knocked on one door, at the extreme end of the street, he heard the distant yapping of a dog, but no one came to the door.
He presumed the dog must have been left alone in the house.
At the other extreme of the street, Mr Patel was able to confirm that a man had been working the previous day, and that morning, on the Ford Capri that was still there, still with the bonnet raised, still with a plastic bag on the battery.
No, Mr Patel was very sorry, no, he had not seen  the face of the man who worked on the car.
When Mr Patel had passed, the previous evening and that morning, the man's head and shoulders had been underneath the car, and no, he had not come into the shop at all.
Later, an Anti-Terrorist Branch detective would tell his Inspector, ‘Middle of the day, well-used street, and no bugger saw anything, not even the little kiddies, nothing that's half a description.
It's hard to bloody credit…’
Just about the time they had seen the signpost, the rain had started in earnest.
Erlich's first impression was that this place was closed to outsiders.
They drove the length of the village.
Rutherford was muttering something about a by-pass always changing a country community, as if he felt the need to apologise for the place.
Erlich said that he wanted to walk.
Rutherford said that he would give him a 20-minute start, then drive back through the village and collect him.
Erlich took his raincoat off the back seat, the heavy Burberry that he had paid a fortune for in Rome.
He shrugged into the coat.
He walked.
Small houses of grey and weathered stone on which the lichen had fastened; small windows to the small houses, some of them mullioned; gutters overflowing because they were clogged with leaves; tiny front gardens flattened by the ravages of the winter.
He thought the houses, on the road, were low-set, as if for pygmies.
A tractor powered past, pulling a trailer loaded with silage rings — shit — had splashed straight through the puddle round the silted-up culvert.
Godammit!
Mud on his Burberry, on his trousers, all over his shoes…
Past a bigger garden piled high with abandoned cars.
Past a small shop where there were farmers' boots and garden forks and rakes stacked outside despite the rain, and stickers in the window for frozen foods.
Past a house that was larger, set back from the road, beyond a lawn on which  the rain made ponds, and he saw the flash of an old woman's face at a window and then the falling of a lace curtain.
Past the entrance to a farmyard rutted deep in soft mud, and he could see the slipped roofing of the barns where the fallen tiles had been replaced by corrugated iron.
Past a gateway, and the wide gate had long ago subsided, and the driveway was leaf-scattered and weeded, and there was a house way back behind beech trees and the trunks of the trees were running green with water.
There was the jabber of a car horn in his ear.
He was looking up the driveway, trying to make out the shape of the house through the trees.
It was the biggest house he had seen so far in the village.
He damn well jumped.
If he hadn't jumped then the car would have hit him.
He jumped for the pavement and a small car swept past him.
He saw a woman in the rich blue of a nursing uniform at the wheel.
She didn't acknowledge him.
She drove up the drive.
Past more small, stone houses.
A man came towards him.
The man was elderly, bearded, bow-legged in his farm boots, and his old army greatcoat was fastened at the waist with twine, and the man carried a broken shotgun across his forearm.
The man didn't give way, and Erlich stepped into the road to let him pass.
Past the pub, and the noise of laughter and the music of a jukebox and the bell chime of gaming machines.
He was at the end of the village.
He stood beside a muddy soccer pitch.
The rain dripped down his neck.
His shoes and his feet were soaked.
His raincoat was heavy with damp.
Colt's village.
He heard the car squelch to a stop behind him.
They drove back the way they had come.
They stopped in the next village two miles away.
They stopped at the modern bungalow that was the home and office of the local police constable.
He was Desmond, he was young and bright and flattered that a man had come from the Security Service to see him, and agreeably surprised that a Field Agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation had ended up in his stockinged feet in his front room.
Desmond's wife brought them tea and a sponge cake that was still warm.
The rain drummed on the windows.
Erlich had out his ballpoint and his notebook.
Desmond said, ‘I've never seen the lad.
I was posted here barely a week after he went missing.
But what you have to understand is that he's the biggest thing in these villages, so he has to be the biggest thing in my life.
What I normally do is vandalism, poaching, driving without insurance, petty opportunist larceny.
Master Tuck faces Attempted Murder, Arson…and if you're here then, I suppose, it has to be worse than that…
Start with the name.
Round here he's Colt.
Not just because of his initials, but because of what he is, young, unbroken, wild.
He represents something exciting to this community, two fingers to the authorities.
O.K., so he was involved with the Animal Liberation Front, serious crimes.
What I hear, people talk to me, took a time but they do, is that the Front was just a vehicle for him, that there were no deeply held principles in it, more that he was in love with the danger, the risk of arrest.
I'm not a psychologist, but I read, and I would say that attitude gives him a colossal arrogance.
‘The Serious Crime Squad come down, and sometimes I'm told when they're on my patch, most times I'm not, they keep the Manor House under observation, on and off, but they've not picked up any scent of him.
Recently, they've been more often.
His mother was big in his life and she's, well, she's not long to live, it seems.
It's sad, actually, she's a very respected woman in the village.
His father's respected, but in a different way.
She's respected and she's loved.
If Colt knew, then he'd be back, but it looks like he never made contact from the day he disappeared, so he won't know.
He had a girl here too, but I doubt that meant too much, as wild as him.’
They had drained the teapot, finished the cake and Erlich offered his thanks.
He understood more, much more, of the man who had looked into Harry Lawrence's face, and shot him dead.
They booked into a guesthouse on the far side of Warminster, and they had time to get into the High Street before the shops  closed to buy Erlich a pair of wellington boots, and a rainproof coat that wasn't so City, and a hat.
‘Absolutely out of the question.’
‘It's not as if I'd ever touch on…’
‘We do not go outside and give lectures.’
‘Do I have to spell out to you how important this is to me?’
‘Do you think you are the only one who is asked to give lectures?
Myself, I get a dozen invitations a year…
Basil, he must get 50.
But one doesn't give it a thought.
One has no choice.’
‘But this is absurd, it wouldn't be about my work…’
‘Frederick, you are being truly stupid.
Anything you talk about is of interest to outsiders, because of where you are employed.
And how can you lecture about anything other than your work?
What have you the chance to know about other than your work?’
‘That's offensive, Reuben, and your attitude altogether…’
‘Frederick, I am very busy, I have lost a day in meetings…
I appreciate that your vanity was stirred by this invitation, and of course I understand your regret at having to decline it, but frankly I think your friend is a little jejune.
He knows perfectly well what the rules here have to be.’
‘Is that your last word?’
‘My last word.
Good night, Frederick.’
He had allowed himself to hope.
He had looked forward to a day in the sun, the simple admiration of colleagues, young scientists.
There were tears of frustration in his eyes when he was back in his office and scrawling his letter of regrets in longhand to his former tutor.
He was a prisoner in the Atomic Weapons Establishment.
The best years of his mind he'd sacrificed to this godforsaken place and precious little did he have to show for it.