

ADAM & EVE
ADAM & EVE is a simple to use but sophisticated piece of software to help all language teachers give their students a wide variety of exercise material tailored to their needs.
Advantages for teachers
thorough preparation according to student needs
quick evaluation of  appropriacy of authentic texts
easy integration of texts into teaching programme
rapid generation of a wide variety of exercises
flexibility of presentation
automatic evaluation of student performance
may be customized to the developing needs of your students
can be used by groups of teachers or students
support from the manual
Advantages for students
choice of text and exercise type
adapted to specific learning needs
decide on own pace of learning
help with exercised provided
immediate feedback
automatic assessment and scoring
choice between using printed worksheets or working on screen
Choose your own texts
ADAM & EVE allows you to create exercises based on any text you want.
The text could be from the course-book you are using, from a reader, from a newspaper — whatever your students are interested in.
Analyse your texts
ADAM & EVE will analyse the vocabulary of the text according to the database of word frequency contained within the software.
From this analysis you get a precise idea of the level of difficulty of a text, you can compare one text with another text, and you can see whether it fits in with the syllabus your students are working to.
Generate exercises
ADAM & EVE will then create a wide variety of exercises based on this analysis.
These exercises, which are easily and quickly generated, can be presented to your students either as printed worksheets — you will be provided with the answers on a separate sheet — or can be put on to a floppy disk so that a student or group of students can work on screen.
Their performance will be automatically evaluated and the score recorded.
Simple to use
No previous experience with computers is necessary.
If you can type using a word processor (or know someone who can!) you will have no difficulty in putting your texts into the software.
The whole program is ‘menu driven’ in any one of five languages so you will always know where you are and it will be obvious from the screen where you can go next.
There is a full and clearly written manual to help you get started.
Once you are familiar with the basic workings, don't forget to go back to the manual to learn about the program's finer points.
Something for the whole school
Up to twenty-five different teachers can work with ADAM & EVE.
The program will keep each teacher's texts and the exercises generated on those texts in separate files which are only accessible using that teacher's password.
THE ANALYSIS
The ADAM & EVE database, which forms the basis for all the analysis, is the result of long-term research into the frequency and coverage of words in the language.
Both spoken and written material were taken into consideration.
The core of the analysis is a listing of the 2000 most frequent ‘word groups’.
A word group is all the most usual forms of a word; so table /tables ,look /looks /looking /looked ,go /goes /going /gone /went are each a word group.
These 2000 most frequent word groups are then arranged into four ‘sluices’ so that Sluice 1 contains the most frequent 500 words, Sluice 2 the next most frequent 500 words, and so on.
When a text is analysed, all the words from that text are put into the appropriate sluice.
All words from the text which are not included in the 2000 most frequent word groups are put into a separate sluice.
The program allows you then to create your own sluices — up to five — so that you can define a sluice to coincide with a specific syllabus (‘all year 3 vocabulary’ or ‘all unit 15 vocabulary’, for example) or with a specific technical field (‘all words to do with engineering/banking/tourism/etc’).
As you work with more texts you can build up these specialist sluices and so create a unique resource for your own teaching situation.
The analysis will also automatically identify all pronouns, prepositions, conjunctions and verb forms in the text.
THE EXERCISES
When a text has been analysed, you can then create exercises based on the vocabulary of any sluice or combination of sluices.
You can, for example, create exercises on only the 500 most frequent words, or those words which you have put into your ‘Unit 15 sluice’ or your ‘Banking sluice’.
The choice is yours — you have seven basic exercise types to choose from and more than thirty different formats.
The basic types are:
OUTSIDER
This exercise type produces gapped texts, gapped according to the chosen sluices.
A variety of formats are available; you can provide your students with help or clues, or not, as you wish.
POLYSEMY
Words have different meanings in different contexts.
ADAM & EVE draws on a database of 3000 sentences to allow you to create exercises that will give your students experience and practice with these different meanings.
You can choose to limit the additional contexts to a single alternative to the text, or you can extend the choice to include several.
COLLOCATION
Collocation (combinations of words regularly used together) constitute a major learning difficulty.
ADAM & EVE allows you to create your own ‘user database’ of collocations for texts and then generate exercises on these.
VERB
This exercise type puts all the verbs in a text into the infinitive form.
The student's task is to supply the correct tense forms.
COHESION
With this exercise you can automatically delete from a text all the prepositions or all the conjunctions or all the pronouns (or any combination of these) for re-insertion by the student.
This provokes awareness of and gives practice in those features of language which provide links within sentences or across sentence boundaries: the glue that makes them stick together.
CLOZE
ADAM & EVE provides three versions of the popular and effective cloze test.
In the first two versions, you can choose the frequency of the words to be blanked out (‘every fifth word in the text’, for example) and the program will blank out either half of the word or the whole word.
In the third version, the whole text is replaced by dashes; by a process of trial and error the text has to be reconstructed.
SEQUENCE
This exercise type can be used either to scramble the words in a sentence or the sentences in a paragraph.
ADAM & EVE — a simple and valuable resource for individual teachers or the whole school.
Currently available with the English language module.
French, German, Dutch and Spanish language modules are in preparation.
Dictionary and collocation databases are also in preparation.
OXFORD ENGLISH VIDEO
Here is a special newsflash from Oxford University Press 
…
THREE HOURS OF AUTHENTIC BRITISH TV NEWS…
WITH READY-MADE BACK-UP MATERIAL…
OUT NOW
Introducing ITN WORLD NEWS…
Major international news stories from national UK television
ITN WORLD NEWS…
An extensive guide to news reporting in English
ITN World News is a video compilation of major international news stories.
War, disasters, and diplomatic activities are all covered in this sixty-minute compilation specially linked by John Suchet, one of Britain's leading newsreaders, and presented as originally broadcast on Independent Television News.
The stories not only cover major events in recent months — the Gulf war, summit conferences, etc — but also concentrate on issues of ongoing interest and importance, such as threats to the environment.
Together they present upper-intermediate students with an authentic guide to news reporting in English, and the types of language appropriate to each story.
ITN WORLD NEWS comprises:
A 60 minute Video Cassette
An 80 page Activity Book containing tasks and exercises designed to help students develop skills that will enable them to benefit from any news broadcast in English.
An outstanding source of authentic video material…
Central News and ITN World News can be used
As supplementary material for any intermediate and upper-intermediate level course.
As stand-alone extension and consolidation material for students working on their own.
without the cut and paste!
Both Central News and ITN World News make full use of authentic material; no story has been invented or truncated for these videos.
Together with the Activity Books they provide an invaluable teaching resource which will save teachers hours of time which would otherwise be spent recording or researching materials.
CENTRAL NEWS 1–4…
Topical news items from regional UK television
CENTRAL NEWS 1–4…
A valuable insight into what's happening in Britain
Each edition of Central News brings ten interesting and accessible stories originally broadcast on Central Television in the UK.
Intermediate and upper-intermediate students will gain a better understanding of natural spoken English and an insight into what is happening in Britain today.
Central News provides a wide selection of news stories covering the full spectrum of events — unusual and everyday — in Britain.
Each story is unabridged and wholly authentic; together they offer natural conversations, television interviews and presentations, and embrace a cross-section of regional accents and age groups.
The four editions of Central News with the Activity Books provide teachers with a valuable classroom and self-access resource.
Each edition of CENTRAL NEWS comprises:
A 30 minute Video Cassette.
An Activity Book for students, with tasks based on the news stories.
It is designed to ensure that students gain full benefit from the video, and provides a variety of reading material from newspapers and other authentic sources, paralleling the items on the video.
Transfer activities, which concentrate on both written and spoken skills, stimulate active language production.
The Activity Book includes teaching notes and an answer key to the exercises.
Business Assignments
EIGHT ADVANCED CASE STUDIES WITH VIDEO 
Confidence in English…means confidence in business
In the international market place, in almost all walks of commerce and industry, confidence in English can be the key to better performance.
Picking out the salient points of a lengthy report, making a positive contribution to a formal meeting or an informal social gathering; making an effective presentation or negotiating a deal that will stick…
In such instances, language skills and business sense need to come together.
We believe your business students and management trainees will find they can develop these essential but elusive skills through Business Assignments —Eight advanced case studies with video .
Challenging, interactive, and realistic,Business Assignments brings eight business case studies alive through a range of media and activities — and gives participants the chance to develop greater confidence in their professional lives.
a dynamic approach
EIGHT INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS CASE STUDIES PRESENTED THROUGH VIDEO, AUDIO CASSETTE, AND PRINTED DOCUMENTS
Communicating effectively in business means more than familiarity with the language.
It means being able to put the language into action.
Through the case study approach,Business Assignments brings the real thing —— business communication — into the controlled environment of the language training session.
The wide range of source material presents participants with the challenge of working in English in order to get to grips with a variety of business problems.
As each case unfolds, participants become ever more actively involved in carrying out realistic business assignments such as negotiating, problem-solving and decision-making.
Business Assignments is designed for the centres that set the standards in executive language training …
Language schools and training companies offering Business English courses to middle and senior managers.
Business Schools and Schools of Economics and Commerce.
Companies with their own language training programmes.
a package designed to succeed
CREDIBLE BUSINESS SITUATIONS
COHERENT AND CONVINCING PRESENTATION
CLEAR INSTRUCTIONS
RELEVANT HELP WITH LANGUAGE
THE COMPONENTS OF THIS UNIQUE PACKAGE ARE AS FOLLOWS:
Information File
This contains the printed exhibits — company profiles, articles from business magazines, letters, telexes, memos and financial documents which provide vital input to each case.
PLUS
The Assignment Briefs which prepare each participant for a role in the final simulations.
The simulations include group problem-solving, detailed information exchange, one to one and team negotiating.
Audio Cassette
Further input in the form of key telephone conversations relating to each of the eight cases.
Video Cassettes (2)
Eight film sequences of key discussions from each case.
Each sequence lasts around seven minutes and enables students to focus clearly on the business problem.
Deskwork
This is the language component: it provides the activities which help participants to understand the business situation as presented through the Information File , the Video , and the Audio Cassette and to develop the skills necessary to perform the assignment.
Activities include intensive and extensive reading comprehensive reading comprehension; writing tasks (reports, memos, letters, telexes, note-taking); presentation of numerical information; telephone practice; active viewing.
Teacher's Notes
The Management Notes ensure the business content of each case is accessible to all teachers.
The Classroom Notes give detailed guidelines on the Deskwork and model answers to the written exercises.
a unique combination
Help for the student
The wealth and variety of the input material and the challenge of the assignments are complemented by the language-based activities in the Deskwork .
Much is demanded of the participant in carrying out the tasks, but a lot of relevant help is given.
The key to learning and progress lies in this support.
Flexibility for the teacher
Depending on language level, the balance between the Deskwork (focusing on language and skills development) and the Information File (concentrating on the business task) may well vary.
The cases can be carried out in any order and entirely selectively (there is no ongoing storyline).
The material is credible to the business expert yet accessible to the non-specialist teacher.
A unique package
Simply by the virtue of the fact that it provides a varied selection of business case studies with video,Business Assignments is a remarkable set of materials.
Add to this the outstanding quality (in terms of business content, pedagogical clarity and sheer entertainment) and you have a package of unique value.
bringing international business alive…
The truly international flavour of Business Assignments appears most strongly in the eight video sequences which feature two dozen characters of eight different nationalities.
Each video sequence contributes a key source of input to the relevant case study, a clear focus as the participants prepare their assignments, and some fertile areas for discussion.
The Video covers numerous areas of business language including presentations, negotiating, management meetings and technical briefings, as well as informal socializing.
A professional TV director and professional actors working with a clear but natural script ensure that the Business Assignments Video is good television as well as good training material.
The case studies
The case studies simulate a variety of international business situations in which English would be the likely language of communication.
EIGHT ADVANCED BUSINESS CASE STUDIES WITH VIDEO
A VERSATILE MULTI-MEDIA PACKAGE
REALISTIC, INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS CASES
A HANDS-ON, TASK-BASED APPROACH
Judge for yourself:
Make sure you see the Business Assignments sample video.
Your local Oxford English representative will be happy to provide further information about the material.
Can your students answer these questions?
Can you…?
What is the Poll Tax?
Is the Privy Seal an endangered species?
When should a man walk on the outside the pavement?
Can you play scrumpy?
What part of your body shouldn't you put on the table during a meal?
When is Boxing Day?
Look inside to see how Oxford can help…
When in Britain 
Intermediate
How do you get your students to learn about Britain, explore their own culture and attitudes, and talk at the same time?
The answer is with When in Britain , the cross-cultural book that demands little preparation.
This versatile book combines communicative activities with information on topics as varied as national customs, food, and the generation gap.
Whether your students are planning to attend holiday courses in Britain, or are merely curious about the lifestyle, customs, and civilization of the British,When in Britain is designed to encourage them to think about not only the British way of life, but also about their own.
The stimulating range of topics and attractive illustrations will appeal to young adults, and teachers will find it a flexible and valuable supplement to their normal coursebook.
The book is accompanied by a cassette which provides lively listening tasks.
exercises and tasks develop speaking skills
lively illustrations encourage students to speak
invites students to make cross-cultural comparisons
wide range of topics relevant to young adult learners
P.S.
You shouldn't put your elbows on the table at mealtimes.
A man should walk on the outside of the pavement when he is accompanied by a woman!
Spotlight on Britain 
Elementary and Intermediate
If you're looking for an interesting and approachable background book on life in Britain to use with your class, look no further than Spotlight on Britain .
The new edition contains a greater variety and number of activities including comprehension questions, lively discussion topics, quizzes, and games.
The glossaries and answer keys also make it suitable for self-study.
This thoroughly updated and expanded second edition will take your students on a fascinating region-by-region tour of England, Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland.
It does not aim to tell them how to use a British public telephone — what it does provide is a wealth of thought-provoking information about modern Britain and the British!
From the noise and excitement of London's West End to the savage beauty of the Scottish Highlands,Spotlight on Britain enables your students to get off the main roads to explore the many regions that give Britain its unique character.
And from Punks and Rockers to the Royal Family,Spotlight gets behind the stereotypes to examine the diverse mixture of people who inhabit this country.
attractive full-colour illustrations
opportunities for lively discussion
entertaining insights into every region of Britain
P.S.
Boxing Day is 26 December, the day after Christmas Day.
Scrumpy is the name for strong cider in the West of England.
An A to Z of British Life 
Intermediate to Advanced
Finding your way around life in contemporary Britain can be a confusing experience.
But An A to Z of British Life will provide the answers.
This is an invaluable reference book which will explain the puzzling and amusing references to British life that you and your students may encounter in reading or conversation.
And it is more than just a dictionary — the extensive cross-references lead the reader from one subject to another, and the thematic index provides a framework for studying topics.
So, you'll find that once you pick it up, it's very hard to put down!
There are over 3,000 entries covering topics such as famous people and organizations, political life, geography, food, the media, tradition, work, and sport.
The numerous illustrations and photographs help to explain certain entries, and there are useful appendices which include maps and other information in list or chart form.
illustrations help to clarify the meaning of certain entries
for each entry the recommended pronunciation is given
many up-to-date new entries
alphabetically organized for ease of use
P.S.
The Privy Seal is a seal fastened on royal documents.
The Poll Tax (or Community Charge) is a new system of local taxes introduced in Scotland in 1989, and England and Wales in 1990.
BOOKS FOR ADVANCED LEARNERS
Five books for advanced students
1 COURSEBOOKS
Headway Advanced 
With the authority and control characteristic of the highly acclaimed Headway course,Headway Advanced sets out to clarify and resolve those areas of language which remain problematic for advanced students, and which present a barrier to the fluency and accuracy they seek.
The language points covered range from the specific, finer grammar questions — such as the use of as versus like , complex time clauses, modal auxiliary verbs, and tense usage for hypothesizing — to larger, less clearly defined problems, such as understanding and using phrasal verbs and idioms, important collocations (i.e. words frequently used in combination), or adding emphasis in speech or writing.
Specific problems are resolved, while larger issues are clearly presented and students are given solid strategies on which to build long-term development.
Headway is above all an ‘intelligent’ course.
Advanced students appreciate the cognitive approach (reflected in the Language Review sections throughout the units and the self-contained Grammar Section at the back of the Student's Book), the first-rate listening and reading texts, and the stimulating tasks and topics.
Headway Advanced 's multi-syllabus organization ensures that vocabulary, reading, writing, and discussion skills are all systematically developed.
The course has a strong literary focus, with many extracts from well-known 19th and 20th century writers, from Oscar Wilde to Roald Dahl, in both reading and listening material.
The Student's Book is accompanied by a Teacher's Book, Workbook and 2 cassettes.
Headway Advanced is preceded in the series by Headway Intermediate and Headway Upper Intermediate, both of which now have new Pronunciation Books.
GRAMMAR AND USAGE
Practical English Usage 
Practical English Usage is a comprehensive reference book for advanced students and teachers who want to check troublesome points of grammar and usage.
It provides clear explanations, under alphabetically ordered entries, of virtually all learners' recurrent difficulties.
Topics covered range from relatively simple ones, such as the difference between since and for , to complex grammatical points and stylistic differences between formal and informal usage, or spoken and written English.
Practical English Usage is invaluable because it solves many problems which are frequently not dealt with in coursebooks.
Practical English Usage is set out like a dictionary.
All the points are dealt with in short separate entries for maximum clarity.
Entries are fully cross-referenced and each point is listed under all its possible key words in the index, so that the relevant explanation can be pin-pointed quickly and easily.
Each entry is presented in the most practical and straightforward way possible, with both an explanation of the problem and examples of correct usage.
Where helpful, examples of typical mistakes are used as starting points for entries.
3 IDIOMS AND PHRASAL VERBS
Oxford Dictionary of Current Idiomatic English
Volume 1: Phrasal Verbs 
Volume 2: English Idioms 
Mastering phrasal verbs and idioms is frequently the greatest challenge facing the advanced learner, and it is a considerable challenge given the idiomatic richness of the English language.
The Oxford Dictionary of Current Idiomatic English is undoubtedly the finest and most comprehensive reference book available to help the advanced learner to meet this challenge and learn to use natural, colloquial English with confidence.
ODCIE is divided into two volumes: Volume I concentrates on explaining phrasal verbs e.g. break down ,get up to ; Volume 2 deals with general idioms e.g. keep the ball rolling ,the proof of the pudding .
Both volumes provide explanations of headphrases in simple language, using illustrative quotations drawn from a wide range of 20th century literature and media.
Codes (explained in clear tables) show how headphrases are used in typical sentence patterns so that students can make confident active use of the idioms they look up.
Where necessary, notes explain and illustrate any special features of grammar and usage.
In addition, stylistic values (e.g. formal or slang ), and specialist fields (e.g. commerce ,technology ) are clearly marked.
Indexes of collocations, variant forms, derivations and compounds make the dictionary highly accessible and help students explore the relationships between idioms.
4 DICTIONARY
Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary 
The Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary is the world's best selling dictionary for learners of English.
The recently published fourth edition was updated with reference to the database of the incomparable Oxford English Dictionary , itself published in a new edition in 1989.
OALD contains more than 57,000 words and phrases, including 12,700 phrasal verbs and idioms.
As a particular strength, it offers broader coverage of specialist vocabulary — from medicine to computers, journalism to aerospace — than any other advanced learner's dictionary.
The main differences between British and American English are also explained.
But OALD is far more than just a dictionary.
It is designed to provide advanced students with all the grammatical and semantic information they are likely to need.
Verbs are labelled according to a simple new verb pattern scheme; 81,500 examples provide abundant illustration of words in context and are particularly helpful in demonstrating collocation (that is, the way in which many English words often occur together); usage notes clarify difficult language points; 1,800 illustrations help to reinforce the definitions of words in many fields; and pronunciation and stress are clearly indicated.
Two Guides — one a simple introduction, the other a detailed explanation of all the dictionary contains — encourage students and teachers to make the best possible use of the dictionary.
Also useful are the 11 Appendices consisting of: an Illustrations Appendix with pictures arranged in thematic groups such as birds, types of houses, and musical instruments; Irregular Verbs; Punctuation; Numerical Expressions; Weights and Measures; Geographical Names; Common Forenames; Family Relationships; Military Ranks; Chemical Elements; and SI Units.
5 ENGLISH LITERATURE
Chapter and Verse 
Chapter and Verse introduces students to a wide range of unsimplified literary texts taken from over 40 well-known English and American authors, from William Shakespeare to John Steinbeck and Graham Greene.
The texts include some complete short stories and poems, plus extracts from longer works, and are organized in 10 thematic chapters.
Chapter 9, for example, entitled ‘Alone’, contains writings by Roger McGough, William Wordsworth, Katherine Mansfield, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, and Herman Melville.
The texts are accompanied by a variety of exercises, activities, and discussion topics.
These are intended to go well beyond simple reading comprehension checks, and they focus on aspects of style as well as giving abundant opportunities for vocabulary work, language development, and discussion.
The aim is to help students develop both the linguistic skills and the critical awareness they need in order to read for pleasure, to discuss, and to write about literature.
Many of the texts are recorded on the accompanying cassette.
Brief biographical details about each of the authors appear at the back of the book, as do comprehensive Teacher's Notes.
Please order through your normal bookseller.
In case of difficulty, please write to:
Bringing together theory and practice…
ELT JOURNAL
See back page for subscription details
The international journal for teachers of English
If you work in the EFL profession, it is in your interest to keep up with the latest developments in the field.
ELT Journal is an internationally renowned journal.
It is produced for teachers, teacher trainers, and trainees at all levels who want to broaden their understanding of classroom practice, to discover new ideas in methodology, and to learn more about language acquisition and the English language itself.
ELT Journal brings together the everyday concerns of teachers in the classroom, and the various academic disciplines such as psychology, sociology, and linguistics, that can offer significant insights into the world of ELT.
Published in association with The British Council, and with IATEFL, the ELT Journal provides a truly international forum for the exchange of ideas and information, with contributors and subscribers from over one hundred countries.
Regular features include:
Articles relating current theory and research in fields such as psychology, sociology, and linguistics to actual classroom practice 
Interviews with well-known writers and teachers
Correspondence: lively and often controversial debate among readers
Reviews: professional, critical assessments of new publications.
Survey reviews: comprehensive comparisons of books on related themes
Language conundrums: Michael Swan sets and solves problems of usage
Key concepts in ELT: a chance to build your own dictionary of ELT terms
Annual index of authors, subjects, and countries referred to
Please address all correspondence on editorial matters to:
Volume 47 (1993) will include articles and reviews on the following subjects:
The contribution of SLA studies to ELT
Focused communication tasks and SLA
Psycholinguistic issues in ELT
Teaching strategies in the EFL classroom
Literacy development in ESL learners
Teacher roles in the learner-centred classroom
Creative writing
Maximizing learning potential in the communicative classroom
Meeting the needs of teacher trainees on teaching practice
Process evaluation on an INSET course
Lexical collocations
Pacing and spacing as predictors of difficulty in speaking and understanding English
Saying please: pragmalinguistic failure in English interaction
From contributors including:
The contributors will be writing about their work with multinational groups of teacher trainees and English language learners in, for example, Japan, Germany, USA, UK, Canada, Australia, and in other countries around the world.
Published quarterly
Subscribe today!
ELT Journal is the ideal way for you to keep in touch with the world of English Language Teaching.
To subscribe to ELT Journal , simply fill in the form on the back of this leaflet and send it off, with payment, to the address supplied overleaf or send off for a free inspection copy.
THE JOURNAL WITH THE INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVE
Applied Linguistics
VOLUME 14 1993
In the field of applied linguistics, authoritative and up-to-date information on developments across the globe is an invaluable asset.
Applied Linguistics , now in its fourteenth year and recognized and respected world-wide for its contribution to the field, is an ideal source for this information.
The journal bridges the gap between theory and practice through its reports both on recent research and on the planning and implementation of practical programmes.
Contributors to Applied Linguistics are drawn from a wide variety of teaching and research backgrounds all over the world.
Applied Linguistics also includes a reviews section containing authoritative contributions on recent publications.
How to subscribe to Applied Linguistics …
Keeping informed of the latest international research and developments in the field is easy if you take out a subscription to Applied Linguistics .
Make sure that you receive all four issues of the 1993 volume by filling out the form on the back of this leaflet and sending it off, with payment, to the address supplied overleaf, or send off for a free inspection copy.
It is also possible to obtain back issues or single issues of the journal.
For details of all rates please see the order form.
Members of AAAL, BAAL, and AILA are entitled to further reductions on the individual subscription rates.
HEADWAY
In a class of its own
Now with a new pronunciation component!
‘I have to confess that I find nothing in the current stock of recent coursebooks to compare in originality or methodological advance with the vastly popular Headway series…’
Coursebooks for the '90s, EFL Gazette
The challenge
Lots of students reach intermediate level in English but how many go on to achieve real fluency and accuracy in spoken and written English?
This is the challenge which Headway takes on, and its success can be judged by the popularity of the course with teachers and students alike.
Headway is goal-orientated: every aspect of the course has been designed to take students through and beyond the intermediate plateau to the advanced standard of English required at university and professional levels.
From the classroom…for the classroom
Headway possesses the unmistakeable sureness of touch that only comes through authors' long and direct involvement with ELT at grass roots level.
The Soars each have many years' experience as teachers and teacher trainers in the UK and abroad.
Both have worked at International House, London, and Liz is one of the chief examiners of RSA Dip TEFL.
Accuracy and fluency combined
Headway offers a unique balance of language work and skills development.
The course has a strong grammar base with questions, explanations, and practice designed to encourage students to think about the structures they are studying and the rules behind them.
Each unit includes a Language Review section, while a self-contained Grammar Section at the back of the Student's Book provides a practical grammar reference source.
Running parallel to the language syllabus, other syllabuses control and monitor skills development, vocabulary work, and revision throughout the course.
Progress on each syllabus is clearly defined in the contents section describing the units.
Headway 's thorough multi-syllabus approach means that students and teachers can be confident of rounded language development on all fronts.
Respecting the student
Headway is above all an ‘intelligent’ course.
It embodies the belief that students are best motivated through stimulating, interesting tasks and topics, and through an approach which invites them to become directly involved in their own learning process.
The enthusiastic reception the course has received from teachers and students all over the world is the best evidence that Headway is right on target for language-learning success.
Headway Intermediate
The first level of Headway provides a thorough revision and extension course at the intermediate level.
Areas covered include the basic English tense system, modal verbs, and an introduction to phrasal verbs.
Headway Upper-Intermediate
The second level continues the programme of revision and extension but deals with more complex tenses and language points e.g. the correct use of articles.
There is a higher proportion of fluency work including, for instance, coverage of short answer forms, the uses of ‘get’, and other idiomatic expressions.
Headway Advanced
At this level, focus is on the acquisition and retention of the more subtle skills that produce fluency.
The course contains analysis and practice of advanced grammar points; reading and discussion material selected from a wide range of sources, including 19th and 20th century literature; and extensive vocabulary work, focusing on the appropriate use of idiomatic expressions and subtle differences in meaning.
Headway Advanced can be used by students preparing for the Cambridge Proficiency examination.
Free Tests
Headway Tests provide an invaluable means of monitoring progress at each level.
They are available separately for Headway Intermediate and Upper-Intermediate , and are included in the Headway Advanced Teacher's Book.
Headway Pre-Intermediate is now in preparation!
Headway Intermediate Pronunciation
Headway Upper-Intermediate Pronunciation


A uniquely systematic pronunciation programme
Headway Pronunciation provides teachers and students with a complete pronunciation package which can be integrated into any intermediate or upper-intermediate English course.
The two books contain units to match the corresponding Headway coursebooks, and a number of activities are derived from the coursebooks so as to maximize progress when the two are used in conjunction.
Each level is accompanied by three cassettes which provide all the necessary models and practice material.
A key at the back of the book provides the answers to the exercises plus any tapescripts not given in the exercises themselves.
The approach is cognitive and the books offer a combination of explanations, examples, and a variety of imaginative exercises.
The aim of the programme is to give students a thorough grounding in the basic rules and patterns of English pronunciation, from the sounds of vowels and consonants to the complexities of stress, intonation, and connected speech.
Each book contains an unnumbered introductory unit teaching the complete phonemic alphabet and this is constantly revised and practised throughout both levels.
Ideal for classwork or self-access The exercises can be done in class and include some pairwork and group activities.
However, almost all of them can equally be done by the student working independently, either in a language laboratory or at home.
Each unit works on the following five areas of pronunciation:
Sounds — This section focuses on individual sounds or groups of sounds and practises them as they arise in common contexts (e.g. the sounds /s /, /z /, and iz at the end of words).
As a special feature, a letter code indicates which nationalities are likely to have problems with the sound(s) in question.
Connected speech — This section shows how the pronunciation of individual words can change when they are part of a phrase or a sentence.
Particular emphasis is given to weak and strong forms, and word linking.
The upper-intermediate level features passages for dictation and reading aloud, modelled on the cassettes.
Intonation and sentence stress — This section looks at the most common intonation patterns and problems in English, and gives students practice in the intonation used, for instance, in making polite requests, showing interest, disagreeing politely etc.
Word focus — This section looks at groups of words which are problematic in terms of sounds and word stress e.g. words ending in -sion ,-tion , -ture,and -ous .
Some lexical sets are also included, such as homographs and homonyms, compound nouns, and academic subjects.
Everyday English — This section focuses on areas where meaning is internationally understood but pronunciation is often faulty.
It has a strong cross-curricular component and includes, for instance, names of countries and nationalities, mathematical language such as decimal marks and fractions, and standard abbreviations.
The new pocket-sized guide to English grammar
by the authors of A Practical English Grammar
A new, compact guide to English grammar in a friendly, convenient size
Oxford Pocket English Grammar 
Oxford Pocket English Grammar is modelled on the authors' best-selling classic,Practical English Grammar , and is designed for learners of English at lower intermediate and higher levels.
It is easy to use and has the following features:
All the essential points of English grammar, with emphasis on learners' problems
Short explanations in simple English, followed by examples
Exercises in the text, with answers
Comprehensive index
Glossary of grammatical terms
Handy size, ideal for carrying in a pocket or bag
How the Oxford Pocket English Grammar works
The sample pages opposite show the treatment of a common grammar problem for learners of English: questions in reported speech.
1
Index gives section reference.
2
Explanation is in simple English.
3
Model sentences show the structures in use.
4
Follow-up exercises provide reinforcement and test understanding (with answers at the back of the book).
Another grammar problem solved!
Oxford Pocket English Grammar
The ideal grammar book for:
Students on English courses
Students learning English on their own
Business executives and other professionals using English as an international language
OXFORD BOOKWORMS
Stories to capture the imagination
MORE TITLES NOW AVAILABLE
quality reading with a wide appeal
Every teacher knows that reading is one of the best ways of helping students to learn a language.
Through reading students acquire a ‘feel’ for the language and an appreciation of natural language patterns and idiomatic expressions.
The problem is to provide students with high-quality stories which are well-constructed and entertaining — and which are at the right level linguistically for their ability.
OXFORD BOOKWORMS are successful because they combine these elements.
The six carefully graded stages take students from elementary to advanced level.
In the lower stages many of the titles are imaginative stories specially written for BOOKWORMS.
The higher stages include adaptations of a wide variety of titles originally published for native speakers.
The six-stage BOOKWORMS series is followed by the OXFORD BOOKWORMS COLLECTION, which gives students the opportunity of reading works by well-known authors in unabridged and unsimplified form.
Something for everyone
A range of genres ensure that all students will find some titles to their taste, whether it be science fiction, horror stories, whodunnits, stories of well-known films, or classics.
When students pick up a BOOKWORM they know that they will rapidly become immersed in an enjoyable, skilfully-written story which provides an excellent introduction to real reading in English.
New titles available in 1992
Due to the immense popularity of OXFORD BOOKWORMS, new titles are constantly being added.
This leaflet gives details of those available in 1992.
True to the philosophy behind the series, the new titles have all been chosen for the quality of the writing and because they provide the satisfaction of a ‘good read’.
Stage 1
Mary Queen of Scots 
Mary was Queen of Scotland when she was one week old.
At sixteen, she was also Queen of France.
She was tall and beautiful, with red-gold hair.
Many men loved her, and died for her.
But she also had many enemies…
The Coldest Place on Earth 
In the summer of 1910, a race began between Scott and Amundsen.
A race to be the first man at the South Pole, in Antarctica.
But Antarctica is the coldest place on earth, and it is a long, hard journey over the ice to the Pole.
Some of the travellers never returned to their homes again.
Under the Moon 
It is the year 2522, and the planet Earth is dying.
The Artificial Ozone Layer is only 300 years old, but it is breaking up fast.
Now the sun is burning down on Earth with a white fire.
There is no water.
Without water, nothing can live.
Trees die, plants die, animals die, people die…
In a colony under the moon, people wait for news.
The Phantom of the Opera 
It is 1880, in the Opera House in Paris.
Everybody is talking about the Phantom of the Opera, the ghost that lives somewhere under the Opera House.
Everybody is afraid of the phantom — but who has actually seen him?
Stage 2
William Shakespeare 
Born April 1564, at Stratford-upon-Avon.
Died April 1616.
Married Anne Hathaway: two daughters, one son.
Actor, poet, famous playwright.
Wrote nearly forty plays.
But what was he like as a man?
We know the facts of his life, but we can only guess at his hopes, his fears, his dreams.
Stage 3
Tales of Mystery and Imagination 
The human mind is a dark, bottomless pit, and sometimes it works in strange and frightening ways.
These famous short stories by the master of horror explore the dark world of the imagination, where the dead live and speak, where fear lies in every shadow of the mind…
Wyatt's Hurricane 
Hurricane Mabel is far out in the Atlantic Ocean and moving slowly northwards.
Perhaps it will never come near land at all.
But if it hits the island of San Fernandez, many thousands of people will die.
Only one man, David Wyatt, believes that Mabel will hit San Fernandez, but nobody will listen to him…
The Brontë Story 
Close to the wild beauty of the Yorkshire moors, a father brought up his young family.
Who had heard of the Brontës of Haworth, then?
Bramwell died while he was still a young man, but the three sisters who were left had an extraordinary gift.
They wrote marvellous stories…
But Charlotte, Emily and Anne Brontë did not live to grow old or to enjoy their fame.
The Star Zoo 
In the far distant future, Hummingbird is a girl of sixteen who lives somewhere in the Galaxy, on a planet called ‘Just like Home’.
But she has never seen a real hummingbird.
She has never seen any living animal or bird at all.
The Book of Remembering says that there were once many animals on a planet called Earth, but that was before the Burning, a long, long time ago…
Stage 4
Death of an Englishman 
It was a very inconvenient time for murder.
Florence was full of Christmas shoppers and half the police force was already on holiday.
The case became more and more complicated.
But all the time, the answer was right under their noses.
They just couldn't see it.
It was, after all, a very ordinary murder.
Stage 5
Wuthering Heights 
The wind is strong on the Yorkshire moors.
There are few trees, and fewer houses, to block its path.
There is one house, however, that does not hide from the wind.
That house is called Wuthering Heights.
Far from the Madding Crowd 
Bathsheba Everdene is young, proud, and beautiful.
She is an independent woman, and can marry any man she chooses — if she chooses.
There are three men who want to marry Bathsheba.
When she falls in love with one of them, she learns that love brings misery, pain and violent passions that can destroy lives…
I, Robot 
A human being is a soft, weak creature.
A robot is made of metal.
It is stronger, more efficient — and sometimes more human than a human being.
In these short stories Asimov gives us an unforgettable and terrifying vision of the future.
Brat Farrar 
‘You look exactly like him!
You can take the dead boy's place and no one will ever know the difference.
You'll be rich for life!’
And so the plan was born.
A few weeks later Patrick Ashby came back from the dead and went home to inherit the family house and fortune.
Stage 6
Deadheads 
An English rose garden on a summer's day.
A small boy called Patrick, watching with interest as his great-aunt cuts the deadheads off the rosebushes with a sharp knife.
What could be more peaceful, more harmless?
Yet many years later, somebody tells the police that Patrick Alderman is killing people…
Dublin People 
Jo has come to live and work in Dublin.
But life in a big city is full of surprises for a shy country girl…
Gerry Moore is a man with a problem — alcohol.
But drink is a hard enemy to fight…
These stories are full of affectionate humour and wit, and sometimes a little sadness.
An excellent introduction to real reading in English
The Oxford Bookworms Collection
THE OXFORD BOOKWORMS COLLECTION offers students the opportunity of reading the work of a wide range of well-known authors in unsimplified and unabridged form.
The first two titles in the OXFORD BOOKWORMS COLLECTION are thematic short story collections in which the work of a number of authors is represented.
Crime Never Pays…or does it?
Stories by Agatha Christie, Ruth Rendell, Dorothy L. Sayers, and Graham Greene, where murder is committed…with varying results.
From the Cradle to the Grave Authors such as Saki, Evelyn Waugh, Roald Dahl, Raymond Carver, and W Somerset Maugham look at youth, marriage, parenthood and new relationships in later life, in stories each with a unique twist.
Each title contains glossaries as well as exercises that will be of relevance both to students reading alone and those who are working in class with a teacher.
Oxford Bookworms Cassettes
Cassettes are available for selected titles.
They present a complete recording of the text read by a professional actor.
LEADING BY EXAMPLE
‘OALD's reputation passes from one generation of students to the next, and also seems to carry authority in a way its rivals do not, perhaps because of its family resemblance to the Oxford English Dictionary.’
Language and Education 
‘a stellar piece of work’International Journal of Lexicography 
‘possibly now the most comprehensible and accessible companion for the serious language learner’Times Educational Supplement 
See inside for another first from Oxford!
From the world's first advanced learner's dictionary…
The new Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary is the fourth edition of the very first advanced learner's dictionary of English, A.S.
Hornby's Advanced Learner's Dictionary of Current English , published by Oxford University Press in 1948.
The fourth edition has been completely updated and revised, drawing in particular on the Oxford English Dictionary New Words Series which collects new words and senses for the incomparable Oxford English Dictionary , the world's most authoritative dictionary of the English language.
The OALD now has more words, more examples, more information on usage, pronunciation and stress, and more illustrations than ever before;and it is easier for the student to use.
MORE EXAMPLES THAN ANY OTHER LEARNER'S DICTIONARY!
The OALD prides itself on the number and quality of its examples — it contains far more than any comparable dictionary.
When learners look up a word or phrase they need to know what it means, but they also need to know how to use it.
So in OALD the examples support and enlarge on the definitions; they are sentences or phrases showing the word or phrase which has been defined in use .
Only examples can help learners to make correct, active use of words or phrases, by showing them in natural and typical contexts surrounded by appropriate vocabulary.
The OALD examples have been specially written to give the learner the greatest possible help in using the relevant word or phrase correctly and confidently.
OXFORD ADVANCED LEARNER'S DICTIONARY
A wider coverage of contemporary — and specialized — vocabulary than is provided by any other learner's dictionary.
Over 200 new usages notes explaining points of grammatical and semantic difficulty.
Thorough treatment of idioms and phrasal verbs which are so important to advanced level learners.
A short user's guide at the front of the dictionary which explains to the learner in simple terms how to make the best use of the dictionary.
New illustrations of over 1,800 items, which help learners to distinguish related items and to build their vocabulary.
American English vocabulary, spelling, and pronunciation.
Eleven appendices packed with valuable cross-curricular and cultural information.
…to the world's first encyclopedic learner's dictionary!
How do building societies operate in Britain?
When did Jane Austen live?
Where and how big is Birmingham?
Who was Paul Revere?
Not all the questions asked by advanced learners of English are about grammar, usage, or meaning.
Students who have reached this level also need access to a good source of general knowledge, and particularly of British and American cultural information.
The new Encyclopedic Edition of the Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary combines an expanded version of the best-selling fourth edition of the dictionary with encyclopedic material which answers questions like those above.
It will be invaluable to students in higher education with essays to write, to professionals reading or writing reports, to people working in the fields of science or technology, and to advanced learners from all walks of life…as well as to numerous teachers of English preparing classes and talks on specific topics.
A FANTASTIC NEW RESOURCE FOR ADVANCES LEARNERS AND FOR TEACHERS AT ALL LEVELS!
OXFORD ADVANCED LEARNER'S DICTIONARY
Encyclopedic Edition
7,500 more words and phrases than the OALD fourth edition itself, reflecting wider coverage of specialized subjects including chemistry, physics, computing, architecture and music.
4,500 encyclopedic entries on people, places, politics and current affairs, literature, science and technology, history and geography, the arts, religion, linguistics, sports, and many other fields, selected for their appropriateness to the study of British and American life, culture and institutions.
94 extended articles on specific aspects of British and American life and institutions, ranging from ‘architecture’, ‘clothes’, ‘advertising’ and ‘newspapers’, to ‘television’, ‘the police’, ‘the royal family’and ‘humour’(conveniently located at their alphabetical position in the text).
Notes on the special literary and cultural associations of certain words.
Maps for every country in the world.
Many added illustrations, including photographs, drawings, and diagrams.
Extra appendices 
For a sample page of the OALD Encyclopedic Edition see overleaf.
A BREAKTHROUGH IN EFL REFERENCE MATERIAL!
1.
Expanded entry giving extra encyclopedic information
2.
Geographical entry
3.
Half-tone illustrations
4.
Scientific, literary and artistic biographical entries
5.
Extra idioms
6.
‘Mini-note’ on the special connotations of a word
7.
Extra vocabulary
8.
Mythological entry
Advance with English
a complete post-primary course with traditional virtues
  

OPTIONAL LISTENING COMPONENT
the easy way to learn and teach English!
Advance with English is a four-year language course designed for all children aged 12 years and upwards who have completed an English course at primary level.
While reflecting current trends in language teaching, the course retains the well-tried and practised approaches that teachers have already put their trust in.
The emphasis is on a purposeful and communicative approach to language learning which at the same time will provide students with a sound command of language structure and vocabulary.
The authors are respected writers whose previous coursebooks have been successful in classrooms all around the world.
A complete post-primary language course
Presents English as a language for international communication
A balanced approach over the whole range of skills and language elements
Ideal for large classes, especially with mixed-ability students
Provides the foundation for most school-leaving examinations.
Easy to teach!
Easy to use!
A simple layout
The layout of Advance with English makes it easy to work with.
It allows flexibility with large, mixed-ability groups of students and enables students to use it on their own.
A guided approach to learning
The methodology in Advance with English leads the learners gradually from exercises in which they are given a great deal of guidance, to ones in which there is almost no guidance.
The aim is always to guide students to understanding and thereby to help them minimize, if not avoid, errors.
Students therefore learn by accumulating a bank of correct patterns of language and gain confidence to use their knowledge in a range of situations.
A purposeful and communicative syllabus
A range of communicative functions are dealt with under various headings such as‘Guided Conversation’, ‘Dialogues’, ‘Problem Solving’, ‘Following Instructions’, ‘Interpreting Rules’ and ‘Using English’.
A complete post-primary course
Advance with English provides plenty of material for a full teaching year and offers the foundation for most school-leaving examinations.
A wide range of reading material and exercises
The themes covered in Advance with English have been chosen for their appeal to young learners who are becoming aware of the world around them.
Consequently, the topics reflect a global and cross-curricular selection.
There is great variety, too, in the practice exercises, which cover the range of language elements and skills in widely differing contexts.
A strong emphasis on skills development
All the main skills are treated thoroughly and form an integrated part of the course:
Reading and comprehension
Interesting passages with a variety of types of comprehension exercises
Exercises to introduce summary writing and consolidate new vocabulary
‘Reading for Information’ covers the skill areas of reading for exact information (e.g. when following written instructions), reading for specific information (e.g. when reading a timetable), reading for the main idea, reading for implied meaning, note-taking and summary writing.
Writing
All types of writing are practised (e.g. letters, narratives, dialogues, instructions)
Special attention to spelling and punctuation
Dictation exercises to practise spelling, punctuation, as well as new language items.
Speaking
Guidance in both pronunciation and conversation
‘Guided Conversation’ sections deal with a number of useful functions (e.g. asking for information/permission, making requests, reporting) and give students practice in speaking in a whole range of situations and contexts.
Listening
An optional element, included in the Workbook only
Exercises linked to the accompanying cassette.
COMPONENTS AT EACH LEVEL
Student's Book, with material to cover a full teaching year.
In Books 1 and 2 there is a useful set of appendices on Spelling Rules, Grammar Summaries and Phonetic Symbols.
Workbook, containing additional exercises for use in class or at home.
It contains an optional listening component for the course.
Cassette, containing the listening practice material in the Workbook.
Free tapescript available from the ELT Promotions Department in Oxford.
Reduced opening from Workbook 1
ARTHUR WINS AGAIN!
NOW!
ACCESS NEW EDITION
Access to English is changing to meet the needs of today's students, with:
NEW IMPROVED WORKBOOKS
Grammar Practice with added exercises
Words and phrases with words in semantic groups, phrases in context, and new wordgames
Communication Practice with new communicative activities in every unit
REVISED TEACHERS BOOKS
new introductions
new help with lesson plans and using the texts and dialogues
new section in each chapter includes both Grammar Summary and Preliminary Teaching Points
new notes on texts and dialogues
new key to Workbook exercises and tests
new alphabetical vocabulary list
NEW CASSETTES
new music
even livelier dialogues
drills now available separately
Arthur sings
New song cassette
Hear about Arthur's disastrous visit to the Wrong House ; his problems in the song When You Learn To Drive and get your hankies out when Arthur finally finds true love in Little Bit Of Love .
Ranging from reggae to rock and roll, ballads to blues, these ten new songs have been recorded with full instrumental backing.
Arthur put to the test
New Testbooks : Two new books of tests covering Starting Out and Getting On with one test per chapter and a Progress Chart for students to keep.
Access to English: the comprehensive and highly successful English language course which takes students from beginner to upper-intermediate level.
Your checklist of new Access to English editions and course components.
ENGLISH NOW
The informed choice for those who want to know
by 
A two-part intermediate course for the adult learner, that makes you work and allows you to think.
Do you like to think…
English now is a course for people who like to think.
It is a course for people with experience of life who enjoy exploring ideas and who have confidence in their ability to form and to express opinions.
Too often these people are frustrated by their inability to communicate in the new language.
English now offers material appropriate to their knowledge and experience, and provides the opportunity for them to be equally articulate in the new language.
you're well-informed…
The content of the course is of the highest-quality.
The reading passages, in particular, are intelligent and well-informed, and reflect the opinion of the best of our modern media over a very broad range of interest.
Adult readers will be absorbed by the flow of information and thought, and will find themselves reading English prose simply for pleasure.
well-connected…
Units are loosely linked by a theme in groups of six, of which the last is always a reading unit.
The group is rounded off with a two-page grammar summary and accompanying set of exercises.
Each unit is prefaced by an apposite quotation, or ‘pointer’, to set the tone and get the student thinking.
Every unit has its own ‘Pronunciation spot’ with, wherever appropriate, a ‘Focus’on grammar and ‘Help, Help, Help’for vocabulary in context.
and highly-skilled?
The four skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking are well-practised in a wide variety of tasks, including scanning, summarizing, categorizing, building definitions, and comprehension.
Students are also asked to make frequent use of their imagination, creatively, to resolve complex situations.
English now is a varied, informative and intelligent course.
It gives students something to get their teeth into because many students enjoy, and demand, this level of challenge — and because learning a language well demands this level of enjoyment.
A brief ‘pointer’ that summarizes the content and sets the student thinking.
A variety of exercises that draw on the student's own experience and creative imagination.
Pronunciation practice in every unit.
Frequent use of the Classroom Cassette to draw the student into the material, and to start him/her talking.
A clear guide to the grammar of the unit, placed where the student needs it.
An immediate explanation of difficult vocabulary in the context of the unit.
Closing the gap — Intermediate Plus
The first part of this course is set at a level that closes the gap which students frequently encounter between Intermediate and Upper Intermediate.
It also provides a wealth of interesting material for students to practise at this level — in particular, a broad range of informative and well-written reading passages.
Moving ahead — Upper Intermediate
Once students have completed this part of the course, they will have attained a standard of English which well prepared them to undertake Cambridge First Certificate work.
They will also have gained considerable confidence in confronting, examining and expressing new ideas in a new language.
All parts available now
All components of the course are available from February 1989.
At ‘Intermediate Plus’(which leads the student neatly up to ‘Upper Intermediate’) and at ‘Upper Intermediate’there is a Student's Book , a Teacher's Book , a Workbook , a Classroom Cassette and a Student's Cassette .
And they are all available at the same time.
The Teacher's Book provides detailed notes, answers and background information, together with further ideas for the exploitation of the material in the Student's Book .
The tapescript of the Classroom Cassette is to be found at the back of the book.
The Workbook , with its accompanying Student's Cassette , can be used either for self-study at home or as extra material for the classroom.
It contains further reading, writing and listening exercises.
At the back of the book is an answer key, and the tapescript of the Student's Cassette .
ENGLISH for COMPUTER SCIENCE 
An intermediate reading course in English designed for those working with computers or studying computer science
NEW EDITION REVISED & UPDATED
English for Computer Science is designed for the growing number of people working with computers or studying computer science, who need English to carry out their jobs more effectively.
English for Computer Science helps students in two main ways.
It aims to develop the reading skills necessary to extract information from texts, and it also teaches the grammar and vocabulary of the English used in computer science.
English for Computer Science is suitable for in-company training programmes, and for universities, colleges and technical schools.
The clear structure of the book — reading passages, exercises and Focus sections — means that teachers who are not computer experts will find the course easy to teach.
It is also ideal for students studying on their own.
The book contains a comprehensive glossary of the computer terms covered and there is also a complete Answer Book.
The Units
The reading texts provide up-to-date information on computer components and processes.
Covering topics such as the memory, computer arithmetic and program design, they provide the student with an introductory course in data processing.
The exercises develop the reading skills necessary to find the main ideas expressed in a passage, to follow the development of the argument, and to pinpoint specific information.
The Focus Sections
The Focus sections are interspersed as appropriate throughout the units.
They present and practise grammar and useful language functions, such as explaining, defining and comparing.
They teach the vocabulary of the English used in computer science, which is also listed in full in the glossary.
New Revised Edition
To keep up with the rapid advanced in computer technology,English for Computer Science — although only published in 1984 — has been completely revised and updated to contain up-to-the-minute information.
All the reading passages have been revised, and the information updated where necessary.
The final section, ‘Projections’, has been lengthened to cover the newest applications of computer technology, and to give students the opportunity for extensive reading.
The glossary has been increased to include the latest computer terms — such as fourth generation languages, viewdata, and mouse.
The Answer Book has been completely revised.
A listening cassette now accompanies the course for use as a pronunciation guide.
It contains most of the reading passages, together with the pronunciation of all the terms listed in the glossary.
English for Computer Science — an essential coursebook for all who need to improve their English within this specialized area.
Chatterbox
The Primary Course CHILDREN choose…
Now available at four levels
Because they can understand…
Each of the four levels of Chatterbox introduces a continuing story in comic strip form.
The familiar characters, the colourful picture contexts, and the lively cassettes all help classes to predict meaning and gradually to acquire new language quite naturally.
It's even better with the cassette!
Because they can get excited…
Chatterbox enters the child's world of humour, fantasy, and fascination.
Funny monsters, robots, animals — as well as a variety of humans — appear in situations which appeal to the young imagination.
Because they can do things with language…
Children are more interested in what language does, than in what language is.
That is why Chatterbox is full of songs, rhymes, and movement.
Children need to get involved in using language from the first lesson.
And because it keeps them busy…
As children grow, they become keener and keener on games and puzzles which, in fact, test their developing cognitive skills.
Chatterbox is full of activities that help children assimilate some of the patterns of English — and encourage them to think and communicate on the way!
Teachers choose Chatterbox too!
As all teachers know — if the class is happy, then so is the teacher.
But additional features make Chatterbox a winner with teachers are:
An exhaustive Teacher's Book with an introduction to the methodology and step by step lesson plans
Clear unit structure
Wonderful recordings which provide a delightful model for children to imitate
A carefully graded syllabus which allows for the recycling of language
‘The book is so appealing that my pupils constantly want to know what comes next.’
Try this activity with one of your older classes!
It comes from Chatterbox 4.
Here are the instructions from the Teacher's Book 
Play the game: Pair work: Give each pair a Yes/No coin and two counters.
Say: Point to the boat.
This is where you start.
Then follow the ‘This Way’ sign.
Every time pupils reach a question, they must stop and both players toss the coin, one after the other.
Pupils follow either the ‘yes’ or ‘no’road until they get to the next question.
When they reach an obstacle, such as the sharks, they have to go back to the previous question.
Explain the game briefly.
When pupils start playing, go round the class helping them, and making sure they understand the rules.
The first pupil to find the treasure is the winner.
A game: Explore treasure island
Chatterbox: the Primary course that gets results
Each level consists of:
Pupil's Book — presents and reviews new words, grammar structures, and functions in clear contexts
Cassette — provides recordings of stories, songs, and other listening activities in a variety of voices and accents
Activity Book — follows up language points with reading and writing consolidation
Teacher's Book — helps you with lesson plans and offers suggestions for extra activities
CENTRAL News
Have you heard the latest…?
Good news for teachers and students!
If your students need to break out of the intermediate doldrums…
If they need well-structured practice in communication skills…
If you want to enrich your teaching with that vital motivating dimension…
turn on to CENTRAL NEWS, the exciting new video magazine from Oxford University Press.
BRIGHT
Each edition of Central News bring you ten bright and accessible stories culled from the news magazine programme of Central Television, all on a 30-minute video cassette.
Our aim is to give your intermediate students a fuller understanding of natural spoken English, and the British way of life today.
RED-HOT
The features cover everything from the environment to business, from shutting down a nuclear power station, to opening up a red-hot Mexican restaurant.
AUTHENTIC
The material is unabridged and wholly authentic.
Your students will be exposed to natural conversations, TV interviews and presentations, embracing a cross-section of regional accents and age groups.
SUBSTANTIAL
The package has been conceived as an interactive whole.
The Activity Book , written by Tony Cornish and Bill Horncastle, is substantial and original, to ensure that your students gain full benefit from the video.
It provides a variety of reading material from newspapers and other authentic sources, which parallel and reinforce each story.
Your students will be prepared for each news item by structured discussion, and then helped with language and comprehension while watching; after each item, they will practise and consolidate skills and vocabulary, through parallel reading and further exercises; and finally they will be able to express themselves in follow-up writing tasks and communicative activities, such as making their own radio broadcast.
SELF-ACCESS
The Activity Book contains full teaching notes and an answer key.
This integrated package is also ideal as a valuable self-access resource.
TO BE CONTINUED…
Central News 1 (October 89) and Central News 2 (January 90) are the first editions of a continuing video magazine that will regularly complement your intermediate courses.
ENGLISH FOR ACADEMIC PURPOSES
SOCIAL SCIENCES
INTERMEDIATE TO ADVANCED
Reading Skills for the Social Sciences 
This reading skills course was developed over a four year period at the Faculty of Political Science in Bologna, Italy.
It was devised to teach students to read English and, in particular, academic prose.
It draws on authentic texts from a variety of disciplines in the social sciences such as economics, sociology, and political history.
One special feature of the materials is the fact that it was thoroughly tried and tested by the authors and their colleagues over a number of years before reaching its present form.
Classes are big in Italian Universities, attendance often erratic, and successful course material has to be transparent in its aims and approach.
Reading Skills for the Social Sciences tackles these problems and talks clearly to the learner.
The Skill and Practice of Reading , an introductory section, sets out to sensitize students to the methodology of the course and to introduce key elements such as linkers, modal verbs, and reference.
The hope is to give students an insight into them reading process and involve them more in thinking about their learning.
Each unit of the book contains three sections: Approaching the Text, Intensive Reading, and Language Work.
The various exercises encourage the students to use their prior knowledge in attacking the text, getting the gist, and then going deeper into the meaning.
The language work develops awareness and build students' knowledge in lexical and linguistic areas most typical of academic prose.
The exercises themselves are aimed to be helpful both in terms of clarity and relevance.
Extensive use is made of tables, charts, and diagrams to guide students in their reading and understanding of a given text, and in their analysis of how it is constructed.
Students who work with Reading Skills for the Social Sciences , are most likely to notice that they read with greater confidence and that they have a better command of academic/specialised vocabulary as a result of using the book.
But the more rigorous student may also pick up some excellent study habits and note-making techniques on the way.
STUDY SKILLS
INTERMEDIATE TO ADVANCED
A Study Skills Handbook 
‘Mr. Smith, I can read everything I'm asked to, and I can understand all the words, so why is it that I can never work out what the main points are?’
A Study Skills Handbook ‘has been written for students whose mother tongue is not English, yet who, for one reason or another are completing a course of study where English is the only language of instruction.’
It was trialled on the Foundation Course at the University of Papua New Guinea.
We are confident A Study Skills Handbook will become a mini-classic with a wide section of students worldwide, especially in those countries where the gap between ‘spoon-fed’ secondary education and the more scholarly approach of university education is at its widest.
First year university students are often left bewildered by the challenge of having to organise much of their study time and find they lack the necessary reference skills to work effectively.
They may also be short on the reading skills and note-taking skills to cope with the volume of information they are now required to process.
Planning and producing written work, quoting sources, checking: these too are often daunting tasks for the student.
A Study Skills Handbook sets out to train the students in all these areas and does so in an  authoritative no-nonsense manner (making frequent use of Golden Rules ) and through a wealth of practical exercises.
Good news for the student: last of the eight units deals with examination skills.
Good news for the teacher: the units and sections appropriate for self-study (almost half) are clearly identified in the introduction along with hints on effective marking.
Whether or not the teaching of study skills already features on your syllabus, we feel you cannot fail to be impressed by A Study Skills Handbook and its relevance to the university student.
READING/WRITING
ADVANCED
Upgrade Your English 
The Purpose of Higher education; The Secrets of the Pyramid; What is Man?
One cannot accuse Anita Debska of being lightweight or whimsical in her choice of topics.
But then, in terms of language teaching objectives,Upgrade your English is likewise ambitious in its scope and depth.
Inference; textual analysis, summary writing, work on sentence/paragraph structure; note-making and composition;Upgrade your English makes a most thorough assault on academic reading and writing skills — all in a modest and slender volume.
It may just be the book you have been trying to find for years!
COMPOSITION
INTERMEDIATE TO ADVANCED
The Written Word 
‘The Written Word is the product of some eight years of experimentation and practical use, first at the University of Edinburgh and later at the University of Quebec.
‘In Edinburgh, the course originally developed as a means of helping foreign post-graduate students — working in subjects as diverse as architecture, law, medicine, language teaching, and the physical sciences — to write clearly and logically in English.
In Quebec, this was adapted to cover late secondary, junior college, and university work.
These two very distinct areas of work proved compatible largely because the basic skills of writing are the same for most people and for most purposes.
Everybody has to be able to write clearly, spell adequately, punctuate consistently, follow the rules of grammar, handle stylistic devices, and, importantly, be aware of the options offered within what people see as ‘good written English’.
this is as true today as it was a hundred years ago.’
(From the introduction by the author).
The Written Word is not a free composition course.
What it aims to do is discipline students, systematically, in the areas mentioned above, training them to edit their own work, correcting errors in style, grammar, and punctuation.
It is ideal for students working largely on their own (and at their own pace) with occasional access to a tutor.
As a key is provided, and the writing tasks are controlled, the tutor will not be flooded with piles of marking however large the class.
LITERARY CRITICISM
INTERMEDIATE AND ADVANCED
Chapter and Verse 
Chapter and Verse introduced language students to literary texts — complete short stories, poems, prose extracts — to be read for pleasure, for discussion and for language improvement.
Chapter and Verse covers a wide range of unsimplified texts ranging from Shakespeare, Ben Jonson, and Dickens to Roger McGough, Muriel Spark, and John Steinbeck.
Rather than providing a survey of English Literature, the ten units are aimed to guide students towards acquiring the linguistic and critical awareness which will enable them to read for pleasure, discuss and write about literature.
The authors have chosen to group the texts by theme (for example, Money, Pleasure, Education, Identity).
The activities accompanying the texts go well beyond checking comprehension.
and focus on aspects of style as well as giving an opportunity for vocabulary work, language development and discussion.
There is, in addition, a cassette which contains many of the extracts and teacher's notes are provided at the back of the book.
Chapter and Verse is probably most effective with smaller classes — where there is a chance for open discussion — but many of the activities, and of course the texts themselves will be relevant to students in larger classes or those working on their own.
ECONOMICS
INTERMEDIATE TO ADVANCED
A Rapid Course in English for Students of Economics 
The Science of Economics ,Mixed Economies ,Supply and Demand and the Open Market …
These are four of the basic economic concepts presented in A Rapid Course in English for Economics .
But A Rapid Course is not intended so much as an elementary textbook in economics as ‘a graded series of readings and exercises designed to prepare a student studying economics in the English language.’
The general feel of this unintimidating textbook is that it is certain to inspire such a student with confidence.
The reading passages are never too long and the progression is gentle.
There are exercises to check comprehension and to provide practice in the most relevant lexical and grammatical areas.
These activities are most likely to appeal to the more methodical student wishing to follow a clear procedure.
There is a full key at the end of the book.
Students will appreciate the word-list (over 800 terms with a phonetic transcription) and the index of grammar exercises which enables them to find immediately a range of exercises on a number of key grammar points.
This compact volume offers great flexibility and whether used as the basis for a year's study or recommended for some last minute cramming, the student will derive benefit from it.
READING SKILLS
ELEMENTARY TO ADVANCED
Reading and Thinking in English 
Reading and Thinking in English is aimed at a wide range of learners whose ‘main need is to gain access to information through English.’
It will help students read text-books, works of reference, sourcebooks and journals in English.
The series moves from sentence/paragraph level in the first book, through whole text level in the second; the third book presents real (but slightly modified) academic texts; and finally, in the fourth book, genuine unsimplified texts are used.
Throughout the series, use is made of tables, diagrams, and charts which are used to sensitize students to the way in which written texts are structured and also to support the numerous information transfer activities that ensure that meaning is never lost.
Concepts in Use
Basic vocabulary, basic structures, short passages, and straightforward messages.
Virtual beginners can learn to process information in English and develop elementary reading strategies.
Exploring Functions
How do we read?
How are written texts organized?
Students come to grips with the following types of academic writing: instructions, describing how things work, generalizing, exemplifying, comparing, explaining.
Discovering Discourse
If we have a purpose, make use of context and prediction; if we learn to distinguish between different levels of generality in a passage (e.g. general and specific information, expression of likelihood, frequency, and degree) our reading will be much more effective.
Intermediate students will sharpen up their reading skills in applying these strategies to a number of academic texts.
Discourse in Action
Exposition, enquiry, and argument: the three main types of discourse encountered in academic texts.
Students gain familiarity with these in order to carry out realistic study assignments on a variety of unsimplified passages from textbooks and other sources.
BUSINESS ENGLISH
It's never been so clear
The indispensable new dictionary for learners of business English.
OXFORD DICTIONARY OF BUSINESS ENGLISH FOR LEARNERS OF ENGLISH
Crucial business vocabulary at your students' fingertips
When they invest in the Oxford Dictionary of Business English for learners of English your students will enjoy instant access to all the words they need in their professional lives.
The words and phrases they need for meetings, negotiating, and presentations will no longer be on the tip of their tongues but at their fingertips.
Not to mention the words they need to describe manufacturing processes, distribution systems, schedules, and sales performance.
So whether your students are studying for exams or brushing up their English for professional reasons, this dictionary will deliver the answers — often before the question has even been asked!
Highly reliable information in an easy-to-use format
Your business English learners won't have to waste any time puzzling out what the Oxford Dictionary of Business English has to offer; the innovative design provides the maximum amount of information in the easiest format possible.
And the value of the information students find is guaranteed; experienced teachers of business English were involved closely in researching, devising the format, and writing the dictionary, and a professional adviser was used to check the technical accuracy of all the information on business and finance.
Excellent coverage with up-to-date words and definitions
The Oxford Dictionary of Business English guarantees excellent, international coverage of all areas of business with over 4,200 words and phrases, 5,576 examples of use, and the most accurate information on common collocations drawn from the British National Corpus (further information on the BNC is provided on the back of this leaflet).
From brand image to brainstorming , and payback to point of sale the coverage is both comprehensive and up-to-date.
Concise definitions have been specially written to be understood by learners
Example sentences are corpus-based so that students will learn the most popular and up-to-date usage of words
Collocates appear in the language column, helping students to find out which other words commonly occur with the headword
Cross-references direct students to compound nouns, opposites, confusables, and related words so that they understand words better and learn more vocabulary
Also look out for the following:
Essential grammatical information is clearly provided in the righthand language column
A complete key to symbols appears across every two pages
(Two actual size sample pages from the Oxford Dictionary of Business English)
The indispensable new dictionary for learners of business English
The Oxford Dictionary of Business English is one of a new generation of Oxford dictionaries compiled with the help of the British National Corpus.
The British National Corpus is a project which is in the process of collecting 100 million words of contemporary spoken and written English taken from a range of text types.
These texts are held on computer to enable a more scientific approach to the study of the language than has been possible up to now.
Analysis of the Corpus has already yielded valuable information about grammar, new meanings, spelling, and usage, which is of obvious benefit in the field of lexicography.
It is also intended that the finished corpus should be widely available for linguistic research.
Oxford University Press is the Lead Partner in the consortium which is producing the corpus, the other members are Longman, Chambers, the universities of Oxford and Lancaster, and the British Library.
The initiative is supported by funding from the government's Department of Trade and Industry, and the Science and Engineering Research Council.
In compiling the Oxford Dictionary of Business English , the British National Corpus was used to check the most common uses of words, compile example sentences, and to find common collocations.
CHECK THE AREAS COVERED — FROM ACCOUNTING TO TRANSPORT
CHECK OUT 20 UP-TO-DATE WORDS FROM BACS TO WHITE KNIGHT
WHY USE THESE?
…
WHEN YOU CAN USE THESE
Fast Forward is a unique classroom and self-study package for adult intensive courses.
Whether you are providing a 30 hour crash course for pre-intermediate students, or an 80 hour maintenance programme at post-proficiency level, you will find Fast Forward offers the right kind of material, the right amount of material, and the most balanced and effective approach for your learners.
The material: focusing on adult learners
The aim of Fast Forward is to provide mature students with an approach and a range of subjects which they can respond to as adults.
It provides an open invitation to language learners to use their imagination creatively, express their views openly, and gain greater confidence with the language they need.
The variety of each unit, the flexibility of each course, and the belief that the language learning process should be enjoyable and challenging will maintain a high level of motivation within your class.
The right amount
You may be thinking that you have heard all this before.
There is plenty of good material available.
Too much.
The problem is getting the material under control in order to reach ambitious learning goals in a short space of time.
Teachers using Fast Forward find the material is already under control and organized ideally to ensure rapid progress.
They do not have to waste energy thinking up imaginative presentations and memorable role plays, seeking out authentic reading texts or devising self-study activities.
These are all provided in a manageable package, leaving the teachers free to concentrate on teaching in the classroom, identifying needs, and directing self-study activities.
And for teachers…
Each course has a substantial Teachers Book which not only explains how Fast Forward works and provides teachers notes, but also gives ideas for possible classroom organization, lesson plans, and guides to the different types of exercises and activities.
‘The presentations of new language are lively and there is plenty of practice work in both the Classbook and the Resource Book, which are packed with a wide variety of useful and stimulating material.’
‘OFF THE SHELF’ MATERIAL FOR ADULTS ON INTENSIVE COURSES
The original Fast Forward
If you need an intensive course which provides 60–80 hours of teaching materials then use Fast Forward .
Each of the Fast Forward courses consists of two Student's Books: the Classbook and the Resource Book, which work parallel with each other.
The purpose of the Classbook is to achieve maximum results in the classroom, in particular by developing the communication skills.
The objective of the Resource Book is to allow your adult learners to pursue their studies in their own time.
The Resource Book contains extra practice exercises covering the four areas of grammar, writing, listening, and reading, plus summaries of all the essential language points.
Fast Forward Short Course Editions
If you need an intensive course which provided 30–40 hours of teaching material then use Fast Forward Short Course Editions .
Due to popular demand, levels one to three of the original Fast Forward have been split, producing six short intensive courses.
Each of the Student's Books contains units from Classbooks, and in addition, language summaries and exercises taken from the Resource Books.
The short course editions maintain the same teaching approach as Fast Forward , aiming to maximize results both in and out of the classroom.
Fast Forward 1 
Fast Forward 1 is designed for adults at elementary level, eager to try out their language skills in communicative activities as soon as possible.
The main emphasis therefore is on developing listening and speaking proficiency so that the language can be put to practical use straightaway.
There is some emphasis on basic ‘survival English’ skills.
Fast Forward 2 
Fast Forward 2 for intermediate students, continues the same pattern and approach followed in the first course.
However, there is a greater subtlety of grammatical and functional input, and an increasing emphasis on skills work, project work, simulation and role play.
Fast Forward 3 
The emphasis in Fast Forward 3 is on improving upper-intermediate students' skills in the areas of speaking, listening comprehension, and intensive reading.
It also helps students to expand and develop vocabulary, which is one of the key needs at this level.
The Classbook contains 10 units which offer a variety of reading texts, on topics ranging from ‘Advertising’ to ‘A Taste of Literature’, designed to promote classroom discussion.
The Resource Book concentrates on grammar and writing skills.
Fast Forward Advanced 
At this level, there is a much sharper focus on authentic listening and speaking.
However, in keeping with the whole approach of Fast Forward, the emphasis in the Classbook is always on communicative work in class, while the Resource Book concentrates on text analysis and grammar practice.
Consultants for Fast Forward 1 and 2 are Rod Bolitho and Christopher Candlin.
Fast Forward 3 is published in co-operation with the Regent Schools of English.
Fanfare
it's magic!
FOR CHILDREN WHO ENJOY LEARNING THROUGH DOING
Fanfare is an activity-based course for young learners which promotes a highly positive attitude towards learning English.
Children learn to listen and speak through participation in projects — such as making and using masks — and through songs, stories and games.
The emphasis throughout is on learning through creative tasks: making things and doing things.
The unforced pace builds children's confidence and keeps their motivation strong.
Fanfare is not just about learning English.
It helps children to explore their gradually expanding world through topics that are relevant and interesting.
It also provides opportunities for pupils to develop vital skills and learning strategies that can be applied across the school curriculum.
A COMPLETE TEACHING PACKAGE
Designed to be a complete teaching package,Fanfare does not need to be supplemented by any additional material.
Cut-outs and templates for the projects and craft activities are all provided, together with full support and advice for the teacher.
The first two levels of Fanfare concentrate on developing listening and speaking skills, while reading and writing are introduced gradually.
As the course progresses, pupils move increasingly towards personal expression through speaking and writing tasks.
THE CLASS BOOK
LIVELY, ACTIVE LEARNING
The Class Book contains:
12 units, each covering one topic which is familiar and relevant to young learners, such as My Family, Christmas, or Food.
Each unit provides material for six lessons.
numerous songs, chants, puzzles, and games
the instructions for the projects
THE PROGRESS BOOK
A PERSONAL RECORD OF EACH CHILD'S ACHIEVEMENT
The Progress Book complements the Class Book and is used alongside it.
The Progress Book gradually builds into a scrapbook of pupils' own work, forming a personal and lasting record of what they have learned and achieved.
The Progress Book includes:
imaginative exercises related to the topics in the Class Book, involving writing, drawing, colouring and sticking
regular self-assessment, in the form of ‘hard’ or ‘easy’faces which pupils circle at the end of each unit, to encourage children to start taking responsibility for their own learning
cut-outs and templates for the projects
Pictures Dictionaries made by the pupils themselves.
Pupils use the dictionaries to revise words, for example, in Level 1 flaps over the words help pupils test themselves and each other .
THE TEACHER'S BOOK
AN INVALUABLE TEACHING RESOURCE
The Teacher's Book offers full support and guidance to the teacher.
It provides:
comprehensive teaching notes for each lesson
photocopiable extension activities
a compendium of classroom games
tests and evaluation checklists to profile individual pupils
detailed suggestions for extending the topic of each unit into other areas of the school curriculum, such as art and craft, drama, language, maths, movement, music, and general learning skills.
CASSETTES (2)are available at each level.
One contains instructions for the activities, pronunciation models, and the chants and songs.
The other is a Teacher's Resource Cassette containing the extension stories and help with presentation techniques.
FLASHCARDS at Level 1 help teach the main vocabulary items.
WALLCHARTS at Level 2 present attractive scenes illustrating different topics.
TRY MAKING A POP-UP BIRTHDAY CARD!
Here is one of the many activities included in Fanfare .
See what fun pupils will have!
Simple instructions for the activity are provided in the Class Book.
Photographs of children carrying out each step provide visual reinforcement of the verbal instructions.
Cut-outs for the projects are provided at the back of the Progress Book, minimizing teacher's preparation time and ensuring each lesson runs smoothly and successfully.
Clear, comprehensive guidance to the teacher is offered in the Teacher's Book, along with invaluable suggestions for further activities.
FANFARE MOTIVATES CHILDREN BECAUSE:
IT IS ACTIVITY BASED
An activity-based course is ideal for young learners.
As well as being enjoyable in themselves, projects, games and songs provide the perfect opportunity for classroom interaction and language development.
IT HAS A CROSS-CURRICULAR APPROACH
In addition to developing language ability, the activities in Fanfare help to develop a number of cross-curricular skills, such as logical thinking, manual dexterity, imaginative and artistic skills, awareness of rhythm and music, and strategies for becoming an independent learner.
IT BOOSTS CHILDREN'S CONFIDENCE
Language is presented gradually and recycled frequently, so that all pupils gain essential confidence and a satisfying sense of achievement.
Fanfare takes into account the diversity of abilities in any one class by providing a wide range of activities, including extension stories for the quicker learners.
IT IS ENORMOUS FUN
The activities in Fanfare are both challenging and fun.
Delightful illustrations — including the wacky cartoon characters Wizzy the witch and Morgan the monster—appeal directly to children's imaginations and sense of humour.
Fanfare ensures that children's first, all-important encounter with English is a highly pleasurable experience.
Fanfare 1: Scope and Sequence Chart /Units 1, 4, 8, 12
FIRST CLASS
ENGLISH FOR TOURISM
& 
First Class: English for Tourism is a new course for people working, or training to work in all areas of the tourist industry.
Researched and piloted in France, Italy, and Spain, in both private and state-sector tourism schools, it takes students from low-intermediate through to intermediate level, and reflects the latest developments in the world of tourism.
First Class covers all aspects of tourism, from the day-to-day dealing with payments and taking reservations to growth areas such as special interest holidays and conference organizing.
It provides students with the language and communicative skills they will need in their professional lives.
The international settings and a word-list in six different languages give it a truly world-wide appeal.
Each unit of First Class deals with a particular topic and language area and provides a balance of language skills which reflects what the trainee will need a career in tourism.
Vocabulary
First Class provides the essential vocabulary for tourism in the nineties.
There is a summary of key vocabulary at the end of each unit for easy reference, and a special feature of the course is the multilingual word-list in French, Spanish, Italian, German, Turkish, and Japanese.
comprehension practice and presentation of new language
practice exercises consolidate new language
clear explanations of grammar
Language study
The key language of each unit is presented through situations such as booking flights, comparing hotel facilities, or attending a job interview.
The language study section provides clear explanations of grammar, and follows on with exercises so that students can practise and consolidate new language.
Listening
People working in tourism need to understand many different sorts of English.
Every unit in First Class contains at least one listening section.
The listening activities feature dialogues with native and non-native speakers, allowing students to gain access to a wide variety of accents.
The scripts of the dialogues are at the back of the Student's Book.
Reading
First Class offers plenty of realistic reading material with interesting examples of the kinds of documents trainees can expect to see in the workplace such as letters, faxes, telexes, bills, and receipts.
Many of the reading sections have been recorded for further listening practice.
Writing
First Class also gives guidance and practice in various kinds of writing, including letters of confirmation, apology, and application.
Students will also learn how to prepare and write promotional material, and itineraries.
For the teacher…
The Teacher's Book includes helpful teaching notes, ideas for extension activities, and a key to the exercises.
interesting, relevant and up-to-date texts
writing section provides further practice
new words section highlights key vocabulary
reduced sample pages from First Class
Get Ready! 1 + 2


NEW Young Learner's Course from Oxford
Get Ready!is a lively two-level course for children who are learning English for the first time.
It is based around songs and activities, carefully matched to the interests of young learners, and suitable for use with large or small classes.
Get Ready!teaches pupils to say and understand a basic English vocabulary and a small number of useful expressions.
It teaches numbers and the letters of the alphabet and introduces pupils to the early stages of reading and writing.
Get Ready!is the ideal preparation for English at primary level, giving pupils that basic knowledge and feeling for English which is the foundation of successful learning.
A Complete Course
Get Ready!is a highly flexible course.
Its colourful Pupil's Books can either be used along, or combined with a complete range of supporting material.
Pupil's Books
These make extensive use of lively songs, rhymes and games.
The basis of the course is oral, but reading is gradually introduced.
in Get Ready 1 , pupils learn to recognise the letters of the alphabet and know the sound each one makes.
Basic reading is covered in Get Ready 2 .
Words or letters for the pupil to read are clearly shown in colour in the Pupil's Books, while words in black are there only to guide the teacher.
Activity Books
The Activity Books include a range of drawing, writing and matching activities, which develop left to right orientation, letter recognition, and later basic reading.
Handwriting Books
These provide a clear and very carefully controlled approach to English handwriting.
Numbers Books
Basic number sets and simple addition are taught and practised in the first Numbers Book.
The second Numbers Book deals with larger numbers and subtraction.
Teacher's Books
The Teacher's Books explain clearly how to teach each lesson, and how to get the best out of each of the books that make up the course.
Cassettes
These contain recordings of the songs and rhymes in the Pupil's Books.
There is one cassette per level.
The Language Syllabus
The language syllabus of Get Ready!is carefully graded to cover the essential areas of vocabulary and structure needed for the very young learner.
Here is the general syllabus for the two levels of the course.
Get Ready to Sing!
All of the songs in Get Ready!area specially written for the course, and will appeal directly to the interests of children of this age.
Many of these songs give opportunity for pupils to mime or perform actions while seated at their desks.
Songs are a vital ingredient of Get Ready!, offering your pupils an enjoyable and motivating way of using their English immediately.
How the course works
Get Ready!has two levels, each divided into 60 steps.
Each step consists of one page in the Pupil's Book, a half page in the Handwriting Book, one page in the Activity Book and a half page in the Numbers Book.
This is how a representative unit fits together .
The new grammar series for young people
…and some new friends too!
Grammar
Grammar is a new series of four appealing grammar books for young learners.
It aims to put grammar in a context they can identify with, and includes communicative oral and written practice of structures.
It is intended to be used as supplementary material alongside any main course, in class and for homework.
The Grammar series introduces learners to a new circle of friends — Jenny and Nick Bell from the town of Merton, their parents and their friends, including Trig from the planet Triglon.
The activities and adventures of the group are a focus of interest and continuity throughout the series.
They also provide a context which makes the grammar work meaningful and enjoyable.
Engaging exercises provide plenty of practice of each grammar point.
The material is often exploited in more than one way and there are opportunities for extending the exercises.
Both presentation material and exercises are generously illustrated to enable learners to visualize contexts and to help with difficult vocabulary.
Memory games and puzzles add to the fun — and if learners have fun they learn more quickly and the teacher's task is easier.
1 An illustrated presentation bring the grammar point to life.
2 The ‘Grammar lesson’ gives a clear summary of the grammar point.
3 Headings and write-in rules stand out in colour.
4 Motivating contextualized exercises involving new or familiar characters — or the students themselves — provide practice in the new structure.
5 Oral and pairwork exercises are included for communicative practice and to encourage self-expression.
Teacher's Book
Each level is accompanied by a Teacher's Book which includes, for each chapter, a description of the teaching aims of the chapter, vocabulary which may need to be pre-taught, notes on the presentation, grammar and exercise sections, ideas for additional activities and answers to the exercises.
The Teacher's Books also contain useful texts.
Turn over for the Contents of Grammar One and Grammar Two.
Smile!
It's time for Grammar
Grammar Three now available
The happy grammar series for young learners
Grammar is a series of four illustrated exercise books written for young learners and designed for use in the classroom and for homework.
The first three books in the series are now available.
Grammar at the right level
Throughout the series, enormous care has been taken to approach the study of grammar in a way which will be successful with young learners.
The syllabus for each book reflects that of the major coursebooks used at the same level.
To avoid overloading students with complicated explanations or examples, language is presented through short dialogues and texts.
Clear, concise ‘Grammar lessons’ then present a summary of the basic rules.
Examples taken from the introductory presentation show how these rules work.
Grammar for the right age group
The presentation of texts and dialogues — and the exercises — have been written exclusively with young learners in mind.
Contexts involve characters of the pupils' own ages and subjects which are relevant to their lives.
A special attraction is Trig, the friendly visitor from outer space, who has already captured the imagination of children around the world.
Exercises which bring grammar to life
Oral and written exercises help pupils to become familiar with the forms in a controlled way and then give them more open-ended practice.
In addition to more traditional exercises, there are pairwork activities, games, puzzles, and opportunities for learners to express their own views and talk about their own lives.
Designed for easy use
Each page has been carefully planned for easy use.
The layout is uncluttered and the illustrations are helpful — and fun.
The type is large and readable and there is plenty of space in which to write the answers.
Presentation texts (often in dialogue form) illustrate and highlight the grammar points in use.
Contexts which will appeal to young teenagers.
Concise ‘Grammar lessons’ summarize the grammar and use examples drawn from the presentation text.
Written exercises have ample space for answers to be clearly written in.
Oral extensions to some exercises can be written out for homework.
Pairwork opportunities and exercises which give pupils the chance to talk about themselves.
Why Grammar has proved so popular with teachers
‘It's the first time my students have said at the end of the book that they love grammar!’
‘Grammar has never been so easy to teach.’
‘A fantastic book filled with life and fun.’
(Comments from teachers who have used Grammar One and Two )
Teacher's books
Accompanying teacher's books at each level provide answers to the exercises, ideas on how to extend them, and photocopiable tests.
HEADWAY
Introducing Headway Pre-Intermediate
the new winner from the successful Headway family
HEADWAY PRE-INTERMEDIATE


Headway Pre-Intermediate is a new coursebook for adult and young adult learners.
The emphasis in Headway Pre-Intermediate is on learning and mastering the basic tenses and structures of English.
The key language points are presented in a clear and systematic manner through topical themes that are guaranteed to motivate students to express their opinions and participate actively in class discussion.
Headway Pre-Intermediate has managed to retain all the best features of the Headway series at pre-intermediate level.
The lower language level does not mean a low interest level
Headway Pre-Intermediate is full of stimulating and accessible texts.
The reading texts have been carefully selected from a variety of sources such as newspapers, magazines, and short stories — and are graded where appropriate.
They are challenging but manageable.
Listening texts are based on real interviews with real people, radio programmes, advertisements, and songs.
They are short enough to be accessible to the pre-intermediate learner, and students will be pleased with their progress in understanding spoken English.
Learning to learn
Learning is always easier if students know why they are doing something.
Headway Pre-Intermediate invites students to think about how they learn, and actively encourages good study habits.
Throughout the Student's Book, the key language of each unit is clearly stated at the beginning.
Teachers and students will appreciate the clear objectives and simple layout.
Workbook
This is an important, integrated part of the course.
It provides valuable further practice, and a carefully-structured writing syllabus.
There is also a ‘Stop and Check’ revision section in the Workbook after every third unit to allow students to review what they have been doing in class and to decide their own priorities for future self-study.
Teacher's Book
The Teacher's Book contains additional ideas on how best to exploit the Student's Book, photocopiable progress tests, tapescripts, and a key to the exercises in the Workbook.
close integration of skills work provides practice in a variety of combinations such as listening and speaking, reading and discussion, listening and reading
activities are signposted, and every new stage of a lesson is indicated so that learners can focus their attention on the task in hand
training in dictionary work
interesting texts provoke thought and discussion
the new ‘Everyday English’ section at the end of each unit gives fluency practice in informal everyday situations
The course provides 120 hours' work — about 8 hours per unit.
An additional feature of the course is the self-access grammar reference section at the back of the Student's Book.
HEADWAY PRONUNCIATION


Headway Pronunciation is a complete training course in English pronunciation.
It helps students to master the basic patterns of phonology and provides them with the training they need to handle English sounds, stress and intonation, and connected speech, all presented with the usual Headway clarity.
Headway Pronunciation is unique in the way the exercises link pronunciation with language work, such as structures, functions, and vocabulary.
Teachers who have already taught pronunciation will appreciate its imaginative and practical approach.
And teachers with less experience in the field will find its simplicity and thoroughness a great help.
Headway Pre-Intermediate Pronunciation by Bill Bowler and Sue Parminter will be available in Spring 1992.
Headway Pronunciation
integrates into the Headway course at the appropriate level
can be used with any course of the same level
comes with cassettes which provide models for the exercises, and all the practice material
is ideal for the language laboratory or self-access centre
is useful for self study
provides balance and variety in the timetable
teaches the phonemic alphabet
The Headway success story
When Headway Intermediate was published it quickly became a firm favourite with students and teachers alike.
‘Headway Intermediate is one of the soundest, most innovative coursebooks to have appeared for some time.’
—Practical English Teaching 
Today,Upper-Intermediate and Advanced have also established themselves as modern classroom classics.
‘I have to confess that I find nothing in the current stock of recent coursebooks to compare in originality or methodological advance with the vastly popular Headway series…’—Coursebooks for the '90s ,EFL Gazette 
In addition, in the English-speaking Union's Duke of Edinburgh Book Competition,Headway Intermediate was Highly Commended in 1987 and, in 1988,Headway Upper-Intermediate was awarded First Prize.
So what has made Headway so popular?
Here are some of the reasons teachers give:
the thorough approach to grammar and vocabulary
the learner-centred approach
the systematic skills development syllabus
the challenging and varied choice of texts
the grammar reference section at the back of the Student's Book.
The success Headway has enjoyed in the classroom reflects the authors' long involvement in ELT at grass-roots level.
John and Liz Soars each have many years of experience as teachers and teacher-trainers in the UK and abroad.
Both have worked at International House, London, and Liz was one of the chief examiners for the RSA Dip.
TEFL exam.
Headway Intermediate
Headway Intermediate provides a thorough revision and extension course at intermediate level.
It is designed to lift students over the notorious ‘intermediate plateau’ where they so often have the feeling that they are learning more slowly, and that English has become a much more complex language!
The grammatical syllabus concentrates on verb forms, in particular the tense system, and modal verbs.
It also introduces phrasal verbs.
Headway Upper-Intermediate
This level continues the programme of revision and extension in Headway Intermediate , but aims to extend the students' understanding of English grammar by dealing with more complex tenses and language points such as the perfect tenses and idioms.
There is a higher proportion of fluency work with a greater emphasis on vocabulary development.
Forthcoming: Making Headway
The new accompanying supplementary series will soon be available.
The first title,Everyday Listening and Speaking is in preparation.
Going from strength to strength
It is our pleasure…
…to put English at your service
Highly RECOMMENDED
Highly Recommended is a course for young trainees in the hotel and catering industry.
Every aspect of this course has been designed to achieve two critical goals :
1.
The trainees will acquire a basic level of competence in English, appropriate for their work.
2.
The trainees will know that they have achieved this competence.
Let us show you how we have done this.
Nothing succeeds like success
We realise that your trainees may have neither the time nor the academic background to deal with the complexities of a new language.
So we have made it simple.
Each task is simple.
They will be able to do them.
We show them that they can.
And when they have, we like to tell them that they have.
At the end of each task we emphasize their new competence: ‘Now you can take enquiries at the desk/…answer the telephone.’
And they know they can.
It all serves a purpose
Every task has a clear end in view — when they listen to a conversation on the cassette, they know why they are listening and what they need to find out.
Having a purpose takes the worry out of listening, and puts the ‘language’ firmly in its proper place — a means, not an end.
The cassette plays a vital role.
Much of what the trainee does in the workplace will involve following spoken instructions: the cassette is the only way to meet this highly practical need, and it must be the teacher's most valuable resource.
Think of a colour — it helps you think
Remembering foreign words is difficult, but it has to be done.
We have made the process easier in three ways:
selection — we supply a range of essential vocabulary when it is needed.
grouping — new vocabulary is arranged in distinct category groups
colour — colour is used to create mnemonic associations — similar categories of vocabulary have similar colours.
It is the same with all new expressions: there is one colour for what the trainees need to understand (what they will hear) and another colour for what they will need to use (what they will say).
Have a look at how this works in practice.
1
Each unit starts with listening — as will all the trainees' tasks in the workplace.
2
Blue for what they hear; pink for what they say.
Simple expressions, simply expressed.
3
More listening: and, once again, a practical task.
4
Another chance for the trainees to make their own use of the structures covered in this unit.
5
Tell your students what they have learned to do — a sense of achievement breeds a sense of confidence.
And, finally, those extra, necessary words — grouped and coloured — somehow more than just a list of words!
Are you ready to order now?
Are your students…
…preparing for the London Chamber of Commerce and Industry Examinations?
…in need of writing practice for Business English?
Getting the results…with Written English for Business
Writing accurate and professional business letters, reports, memos and faxes can be difficult.
Writing them in a foreign language demands even more skill!
You may be familiar with the London Chamber of Commerce English for Business exams which aim to test these important business writing skills.
Your students' success in exams does not depend solely on their familiarity with English, but also on their familiarity with the exam itself.
Written English for Business is the first course written specifically to prepare students for these exams.
With three book in the series — for First, Second, and Third examination levels,Written English for Business takes your students through each section of the exam, step by step.
It prepared them for exactly the kind of material they can expect to see on the day — and because it is written by the examiners themselves, you can be sure that it tells you exactly what the examiners are looking for!
Even if your students are studying Business English without working for the LCCI exams,Written English for Business offers a varied selection of realistic Business English writing tasks.
Written English for Business places the emphasis firmly on practice — just what students need to build their confidence.
With its clear, simple layout, essential notes on the marking, realistic documents, and full comments on both high- and low-scoring answers, these three compact volumes are perfectly suited for use in class or for self-study.
Confidence in LCCI exams!
Confidence in written Business English!
Clear advice on what is expected from successful candidates
A wealth of practice material
Guidance on how to approach each question
Model answers to practice questions with examiner's comments
Notes on common pitfalls to avoid, based on low-scoring questions
Marking schemes for each question
LANGUAGE TEACHING
EDITORS:
A SCHEME FOR TEACHER EDUCATION
THE SERIES DESIGNED TO MAKE SENSE OF THE THEORY BEHIND TEACHING
Language Teaching: A Scheme for Teacher Education
The Language Teaching: A Scheme for Teacher Education series is designed to help teachers relate theory to their own classroom practice.
Each book in this highly-acclaimed series provides clear explanations of some of the main principles behind language teaching.
But the originality of the Scheme lies in the fact that the reader is not merely presented with relevant and essential observations about language teaching methodology.
The carefully designed tasks, which are a feature of all the books, challenge the practising teacher to reflect on the information in the text and apply it to their own knowledge and experience of teaching.
This explicit relating of theory to practice is a feature which is all too often missing in texts written about language teaching.
The series is intended for teachers on RSA/UCLES Diploma courses, teacher development groups, and all those who need clear, topic-specific introductions at MA level.
These books are also useful for teacher-trainers preparing in-service courses, and as reference sources to teachers working on their own.
They provide an excellent resource for more in-depth treatment of topics which are often covered only briefly in general courses, and contain plenty of suggestions for further reading.
Each book consists of three sections:
Section 1 — Explanation
‘what has been said’
This section outlines the theoretical background to the topic in question, and provides a conceptual framework for the tasks in the following two sections.
Section 2 — Demonstration
‘what has been done’
The second part considers how the conceptual framework relates to published teaching materials and classroom activities.
Teachers will learn how to evaluate materials in the light of the theoretical background.
Section 3 — Application
‘what you can do’
The last section sets out ways in which teachers can relate theory to practice in their own teaching by carrying out small-scale classroom research tasks.
The series divides into three areas of language study:
1.
Language itself —Vocabulary ,Pronunciation ,Grammar , and Discourse (green covers)
2.
The ways in which language is used —Reading ,Writing ,Listening , and Speaking (grey covers).
3.
Issues important in the teaching and learning process —Classroom Interaction ,Roles of Teachers and Learners ,Syllabus Design , and Evaluation (blue covers).
Vocabulary 
Vocabulary provides a clear and comprehensive overview of this important area of language teaching.
The author explains the various theories of how the lexicon is organized and illustrates the ways in which theory has been applied in both teaching materials and reference books.
A wide range of examples illustrate the text, designed to help teachers evaluate and adapt the materials they themselves use.
Discourse 
Discourse analysis — the study of spoken and written language in its social and psychological context — can provide important insights for the language teacher.
This book explains the relevant theory and related it to classroom activities designed to improve students' discourse skills.
The author concludes by suggesting ways in which teachers can use and develop these activities in their own classroom.
Reading 
This book places reading firmly in its social context, discussing what it means to be a reader in the modern world.
It contains many innovative ideas on how to approach reading in the language classroom, and presents a variety of text-related exercises and activities.
The final section invites teachers to explore the attitudes of their own learners as readers, and to design reading activities for them.
Speaking 
How do learners learn to speak a foreign language?
What different approaches have been developed to teach this important skill?
Speaking deals with both these questions, providing clear explanations of recent research and developments in methodology.
In the final section the author suggests practical ways in which teachers can gain a better understanding of the role of oral classroom activities.
Listening 
Listening provides a fresh perspective on listening comprehension.
The authors show how research can help teachers and materials writers to grade listening activities more accurately; this discussion is illustrated with a wide variety of extracts from published materials.
The book also includes a selection of small-scale tasks to enable teachers to design and select effective listening materials for themselves.
Evaluation 
Testing is only one component in the evaluation process.
This book shows how evaluation of learners, course design, curricula, methodology, and materials, can provide teachers and other ELT professionals with a great deal of useful information.
The authors both examine the principles underlying the subject and give practical guidance on the planning of evaluation activities in the classroom.
Syllabus Design 
Syllabus Design demonstrates, in a practical way, the principles involved in planning and designing an effective syllabus.
It examines important concepts such as needs analysis, goal-setting, and content specification, and serves as an excellent understanding of syllabus design in order to evaluate, modify, and adapt the syllabuses with which they work.
Roles of Teachers and Learners 
Both teachers and learners adopt roles in the classroom.
This book explains the social and psychological background to classroom role playing, and examines the kinds of activities and materials which bring teachers and learners into the most effective partnership.
By helping teachers understand classroom roles, it enables them to discover for themselves the best ways of fostering co-operative learning.
Classroom Interaction 
Learning a language is essentially an individual process, but typically it takes place in the social context of the classroom.
What kinds of classroom interaction, then, are most likely to provide conditions for effective learning?
This book shows teachers how they can gain a better understanding of what goes on in their own classrooms, and how to use this understanding to guide their learners effectively.
The authors
All the Scheme authors are practising teachers, teacher-trainers, or researchers with long experience of their subject and the classroom.
The Editors
Through work with The British Council, The Council of Europe, and other agencies, both editors have had extensive and varied experience of language teaching, teacher education, and curriculum development overseas.
Both contribute regularly to seminars, conferences, and professional journals.
‘This Scheme for Teacher Education is one of OUP's most imaginative contributions to ELT literature.’
EFL Gazette 
‘a rare and particularly effective, teacher-friendly fusion of theory and practice.’
Times Educational Supplement 
‘an excellent basis for staff training sessions’ELT Journal 
DANGER
DRAMA
SUSPENSE
The thrilling way to learn English
the JERICHO conspiracy
Jane Masters, a young radio reporter, steps into a web of intrigue in business, politics, and the academic world.
The campaign to save a local arts centre starts innocently enough, but soon becomes the target for intimidation, and Jane finds herself in increasing danger as she uncovers layers of corruption that spread from an Oxford college to the Houses of Parliament.
The excitement of high quality drama!
The Jericho Conspiracy combines high quality drama with a lower-intermediate language syllabus aimed to help lift students over the intermediate plateau.
The gripping storyline and quality of the production provide a powerful antidote to the frustrations of language learning at lower-intermediate level.
A complete language consolidation package.
The video, in eight short episodes, covers a syllabus which presents and revised the language structures essential at the lower-intermediate level.
In addition, the Activity Book provides a stimulating range of tasks designed to develop reading, writing, and speaking skills.
COMPONENTS
2 × 30 minute Video Cassettes, divided into a total of 8 episodes
Activity Book for pupils, with imaginative and interesting classroom activities for full exploitation of the video, and with a transcript of each episode
Video Guide for teachers, giving detailed guidance on how to use the video and the Activity Book
The Jericho Conspiracy can be used:
As a supplement to any lower-intermediate level course
As a short, independent video-based course at lower-intermediate level
Oxford Placement Tests 
SOLVE THE HEADACHE OF PLACEMENT TESTING…
TEST ALL YOUR STUDENTS IN JUST ONE HOUR
CUT DOWN MARKING TIME
PLACE YOUR STUDENTS WITH CONFIDENCE
THE MOST EFFICIENT AND RELIABLE WAY OF PLACING YOUR STUDENTS
What are the Oxford Placement Tests?
For years, the Oxford Placement Tests have provided a unique resource for all teachers and course supervisors needing to place students by language level.
The tests have proved invaluable, especially:
at the beginning of courses when a new intake arrives
subsequently, with an established case, to measure progress
for placing students in relation to the most widely recognized public examinations
Oxford Placement Tests have proved effective with all students from elementary level up to post-Proficiency and in a wide range of institutions.
What the Tests achieve is to provide an objective measurement of your students' ability through a Listening Test and a Grammar Test.
The years of research that went into preparing the Tests have ensured that they are accurate with all students from elementary level upwards.
This reliability, coupled with the convenience of having one-hour test papers and a high quality audio cassette — ready prepared — has made the Oxford Placement Tests popular with a wide range of institutions.
New Edition!
The new edition ensures that these extensively researched tests are now even easier to administer and quicker to mark.
Improved new design makes the questions easier to read.
A new Marking Kit cuts down marking time dramatically.
A new Diagnostic Key helps locate students' strengths and weaknesses.
In addition, the text of the questions has been revised so that all references are completely up-to-date.
How do the Tests work?
The new edition of the Oxford Placement Tests now gives you everything you need to test your students, mark their papers, and place them in the right class with accuracy and efficiency.
Administering the Tests
The Tests last an hour.
There are two sections in the Tests : a listening section which lasts ten minutes and a grammar section which lasts 50 minutes.
There are 100 questions in each section.
All the teacher has to do is as follows:
1
Hand out the question papers from the convenient tear-off pads which contain 40 test papers each.
2
For the Listening Test, play the cassette.
Students then tick the boxed word or phrase which corresponds to the sentence they think they heard.
3
For the Grammar Test, which also uses a multiple choice format, instruct the students to tick the boxes they think are correct.
4
Having made sure students have written their name in the appropriate space, at the top of the paper, collect in all the papers which are then ready to mark.
Marking
To ensure that the marking goes as quickly and smoothly as possible, Marking Kit overlays are now available.
Each Marking Kit contains seven overlays, so up to seven teachers can mark together at the same time.
1
Slide the transparent overlay on top of the test page.
2
Line the boxes up.
3
Count the boxes with ticks.
4
Write in the total at the bottom of each page.
5
Add the subtotals for each page to get the final score.
If you wish to use the Test diagnostically, indicate the wrong answers in the appropriate space on each line.
Placement
1
Simply place the papers in order of highest and lowest scores, or into groups corresponding to class entry level.
2
If you wish, refer to the Levels Chart which relates the scores achieved in the Tests to major public exams such as Cambridge First Certificate.
3
Give any borderline students an oral interview before making a final decision on class placement.
4
Keep the test papers safe or pass them on to the class teacher (or the student) so that weak areas can be diagnosed.
How reliable are the Tests?
Both the Listening Test and the Grammar Test have been the subject of rigorous research over a number of years, with up to forty different nationalities of students.
The Tests themselves have been carefully scrutinized for balance and consistency to ensure they are reliable time and time again.
The Listening Test is taken from a vast resource bank of authentic data: thousands of examples of ‘slips of the ear’ where a native speaker said one thing and the non-native speaker — who was listening — heard another .
For example:
A What about those things I asked you to bring?
B I've got them.
As opposed to:
A What about those things I asked you to bring?
B I forgot them.
Hence, the Listening Test can be said to measure students' communicative ability by exposing them to the kind of authentic misunderstandings which have occurred in real situations.
The Grammar Test focuses on the grammatical structures of English covered by the vast majority of coursebooks and public examinations.
The final format of the grammar questions and the balance of language items tested were completed after computer analysis of extensive data from a rich sample of nationalities.
What do the Tests consist of?
Test Packs
The Tests come in two packs, Test Pack 1 and Test Pack 2.
They are identical in terms of difficulty.
Test Pack 2 simply provides an alternative to Test Pack 1 — especially useful if you need to test the same student again, at a later date.
Each Test Pack contains two pads, with 40 tear-off test papers in each pad.
The two sections of the Test are as follows:
A Listening Test with 100 questions which lasts 10 minutes.
A Grammar Test with 100 questions which lasts 50 minutes.
Note that the Grammar Test has been divided in two parts (1–50, 51–100).
This makes it possible only to use one part if there is limited time available.
The Test Packs also include instructions for the teacher and a Levels Chart.
The latter can help enormously in assessing students' exam prospects.
Cassette
This contains the recording for the Listening Test.
There is one cassette for each Test .
Marking Kit
This comes in a smart folder which contains the Marking Kit, the User's Guide and the Diagnostic Key.
The Marking Kit comes in the form of seven transparent overlays which slide over the test papers and allow the markers to see the right and wrong answers at a glance.
The User's Guide provides advice on administering the Tests and placing students.
The Diagnostic Key provides a detailed breakdown of the Grammar Test.
It is ideal for planning remedial work and helps identify which grammatical areas should be worked on.
It is also cross-referenced to the relevant sections in Practical English Usage , M Swan (OUP, 1980) and Basic English Usage , M Swan (OUP, 1984).
This makes it accessible to elementary as well as more advanced students.
GRAMMAR FOR THE REAL WORLD
OXFORD PRACTICE GRAMMAR 
The intermediate practice grammar that looks outside the classroom — for learners who want to use their knowledge in REAL situations.
Say goodbye to mechanical grammar
Do you ever wonder what has gone wrong?
One minute, your students are ploughing through a set of grammar exercises with apparent ease; the next, when the opportunity arises to use the same language in a real context, dreadful mistakes occur.
Are they doing it on purpose?
Probably not.
Have you checked whether their grammar book really prepared them for the complexities of communication?
Does it enable them to make the right choice in the heat of the moment?
Or does it simply train them to become expert exercise-doers in the safety of the home or the classroom?
Discover Oxford Practice Grammar: grammar for the REAL world
Tackle language use as well as form and prepare students for REAL communication.
Oxford Practice Grammar has been designed to satisfy your students' need for clear grammar rules and exercises.
But the 120 units offer much more — a guide to the way in which language is used in communication.
It will not just teach learners how to form the passive or reported speech, but also when and how to use them.
Language is seen in CONTEXT
Oxford Practice Grammar uses text, conversation and situations to explain and practise language in context.
This helps to reinforce the meaning of the structures students are learning, and ensures that form is rarely looked at in isolation.
In this way, students become more aware of correct language use.
The exercises challenge students to make CHOICES
Oxford Practice Grammar avoids mechanical exercises.
Care has been taken to ensure that getting the right answer requires a genuine understanding of the grammatical rules.
An element of choice faces the student, just as it does in real life.
A fuller picture emerges through revision and CONSOLIDATION
Oxford Practice Grammar , like all grammars, divides language into small bits.
Where it differs, is in that it makes a serious effort to put the bits back together again!
This is done in three ways;
1
Contrastive exercises where distinct structures are brought into contrast, especially in common areas of confusion;
2
Summary exercises which test whether students have grasped the whole as well as the constituent parts;
3
Review units comparing and contrasting large areas of study, such as present and past tenses, future forms and linking words.
Please see inside for sample pages
Oxford Practice Grammar: an ideal format for the classroom or self-study
Clear signposting and an easy-to-use format are essential to students learning largely  on their own.
This is an example of a contrastive unit.
It looks at language areas students are already familiar with and shows how the structures differ in meaning and use.
To explain the difference between the two structures, they are placed in a realistic context.
These texts highlight use more clearly.
Explanations are clear but thorough.
Complex information is summarized through diagrams.
The explanations look beyond what is correct and incorrect in grammatical terms to explore how or where the structures are really used in everyday life.
Oxford Practice Grammar contains over a hundred double-page units with the exercises facing the explanations so that students can glance across from the exercises to the rules and back.
Every effort has been made to ensure maximum clarity for the user.
For example, whenever fuller explanations are needed, and to avoid over-simplification, there are longer, four-page units (see below) which ensure each point is given the attention it needs.
With answers edition for self-study or class use
Without answers edition for classwork and homework with secondary classes
Two units explaining linguistic terms
American English appendix
Note the progressive sequence of the exercises.
They concentrate first on a single problem (A), before tackling different problems together (A–C).
Grammar explanations and practice exercises are rigorously signposted and cross-referenced to make sure students can find their way around the book.
The exercises, like the explanations, use realistic contexts.
Finally, a summary exercise to revise the whole unit (A–D).
English in your Pocket
The Pocket English series offers learners the authority of Oxford's reference books in a handy, convenient format.
The books provide quick and reliable solutions in the home or classroom to queries on English grammar, idioms, usage or vocabulary.
OXFORD POCKET ENGLISH GRAMMAR
LOWER INTERMEDIATE TO INTERMEDIATE


A compact reference grammar with spot-check exercises for the intermediate learner.
‘Lucid, concise and practical…
A real diamond’(Times Educational Supplement)
OXFORD POCKET ENGLISH IDIOMS
INTERMEDIATE TO ADVANCED


3,000 Idioms clearly organized and indexed
Simple definitions
Examples of use to help comprehension
106 exercises, with answers
OXFORD POCKET BASIC ENGLISH USAGE
LOWER INTERMEDIATE


This alphabetical guide to the most common problems of grammar and vocabulary puts Basic English Usage into a handy format.
Practical and easy to understand
Settles problems
Corrects mistakes
OXFORD LEARNER'S POCKET DICTIONARY WITH ILLUSTRATIONS
26,000 words and phrases in your pocket!
Clear, concise, up-to-date
250 illustrations to aid understanding and help vocabulary building
Information on grammar, pronunciation and American English
Streamline ENGLISH CATALOGUE
Contents
Streamline checklist
Streamline English
First published in 1978,Streamline English set a whole new style in ELT coursebooks.
It is now a bestseller.
More than two million students have learned English with Streamline in countries throughout the world.
New components are added every year and it remains one of the most comprehensive and effective courses available.
CLARITY
The basic concept of a Streamline Student's Book is that each page is a complete unit and in most cases the unit has one central teaching point.
At the higher levels, the syllabus is necessarily more complex and in Directions , the fourth book in the series, the standard unit format is the double page spread.
The advantage of this system is that lessons have a clear focus, which is beneficial to student and teacher.
The Workbooks mirror the Student's Books so that for every Student's Book unit, there is a parallel page of Workbook exercises.
This makes it easy to work with the components of Streamline in an integrated way.
Each page of the Workbook also has a summary of the main language point of the unit, to reinforce the focus of the lesson.
The Teacher's Editions of the Student's Books have pages of teaching notes interleaved on a spiral binding between the full colour student's pages.
This enables the teacher to lay the book flat on a desk and see the one-page unit in the Student's Book side by side with a page of teaching notes.
SYLLABUS DESIGN
The language syllabus of Streamline is based on the carefully controlled introduction of new structures and vocabulary.
In the first two books there are also units which focus on situational English, while in the later parts of the series a functional syllabus is combined with a structural grading.
There is also a progression in skills.
The emphasis in the first two books is on oral/aural work with reading and writing becoming more central as students develop towards intermediate level in Destinations .
The complete series takes students up to First Certificate level.
MOTIVATION
The clear organization of Streamline gives students confidence in the material, and the one-page units give a sense of progress.
In addition, the short units have enabled a great variety of topics to be included.
This ensures that everyone's interest can be engaged and that there is never time for the class to get bored.
Much of the material in the first two books is humorous and this is reflected in the illustrations and recordings.
At the upper levels, more of the units deal with substantial or informative topics, including subjects as varied as video games, design, Shakespeare, pop music and the British royal family.
Typically the approach is fresh and designed to hold student interest.
(Do your students know about video-game-addiction or the Queen's pet hates?)
The recordings are particularly important, not only in providing students with models and exposure to a variety of voices, but in bringing the humour and the characters to life.
Units such as‘The Yes/No Contest’ in Connections have now become classics of the EFL classroom and will actively involve students in learning.
FLEXIBILITY
The four levels of Streamline provide either four separate coursebooks or can be used as a series.
Used alone, the Student's books and tapes are ideal for intensive courses but by adding other components Streamline may be used on extensive courses.
The split editions also make it possible to use Streamline for short courses.
The range of supplementary materials is still growing, and as well as materials for reading skills development and the listening centre or language lab, there are graded readers and video.
This enables schools to build up a flexible resource which teachers can adapt to the varying needs of classes.
Even within the course there is exceptional flexibility.
For while there are detailed teacher's notes provided, the Student's Books themselves are not at all prescriptive.
There is therefore plenty of breathing space for the teacher who wishes to use Streamline for a more personal approach.
Free supplements to the Teacher's Editions for Departures and Connections are available.
These Teacher's Extras contain more than four hundred ideas for communicative activities.
An American edition of Streamline is also available and some schools use this as well as the British edition according to the needs of different classes.
What teachers say
‘a favourite’
‘Streamline books should be standard equipment for any teacher looking for real results.
Beautifully constructed courses which immensely satisfy both student and teacher alike with their intelligence and vigour, they have set a standard for classroom work that has yet to be matched.’
‘Streamline ?
I can't teach without Streamline!’
‘We have found the Streamline series a favourite one both with our students and teachers.’
‘The Streamline English course has proved that it is one of the best, if not the best, methods on the market today to encourage students with a wide spectrum abilities to build up a fluency and accuracy in spoken and written English.
Our teachers have mastered its methods with ease and it has been met with great success, interest and enthusiasm by our students.
Streamline 's method offers such a wide range of activities and tasks that I cannot see it having anything other than effective and long-lasting results.’
‘classroom effectiveness’
‘Streamline has been in regular use at the Chambre de Commerce since the early 1980's.
It's a good book for further educational purposes.
The size of units is very practical and progression is well measured.
There is also a wide variety of material in the books and plenty of complementary work.
Our students and teachers like Streamline very much.’
‘Adult students enjoy Streamline because of its vivid presentation.
They like the Workbook since its progression is carefully ‘dosed’ to make the work appear easy.
They appreciate the humour and find the lesson units neatly fit the time we have to spend with them in class.
It is not unusual to find that they have forged ahead on their own between lessons and are proud of the visible progress they have made.’
‘The thing that most impresses me and most encourages my students when I use Streamline is that Streamline is an audiovisual course.
If it is well handled, the pictures will speak for themselves and the dialogues will never fall short of pupils' or teachers' expectations.’
‘a pleasure to use’
‘Streamline has swept away the cobwebs from the English class.
With most courses even the keenest students are put off by what is artificial or repetitive, dry or academic.
Streamline proves that English learning can be realistic and varied, useful and fun.
Realistic — at last recordings that sound like real English (funny too).
Varied — graphics, layout and language presentations that are stimulating and don't follow the same old boring pattern.
Useful — really functional language items that can come in handy in real situations.
Fun — the smile, the chuckle and the hearty belly laugh are recognized as valid teaching aids.’
‘Virtually everyone who has been correctly oriented to the Streamline approach says that all of its positive features such as interleaved teacher's notes, reintroduction of previously learned material, jargon-free instructions, emphasis on aural/oral study and clearly defined lesson targets make the series a joy to use.’
‘I've been using Departures for nearly ten years, with mixed nationality classes and with monolingual groups.
It is still my favourite text book!
The illustrations and subject matter manage not to patronize, and the humour manages to appeal to most people.
Used in conjunction with the Workbook, it provides beginners with an enjoyable and thorough grounding in both structures and basic functional English.’
‘flexible’
‘It's so flexible that it's the first book we reach for, whether for an intensive teenager or adult refresher course.’
‘Flexible, complete and enjoyable, the Streamline series makes life in the classroom a little easier for students and teachers alike.’
Departures
Streamline English Departures is an eighty-unit course designed for beginners.
It assumes no previous knowledge of English.
The material of Departures is carefully graded to cover the elementary structures and vocabulary of English with an emphasis on the development of oral/aural skills.
Departures aims to give students a command of simple spoken English so that they can communicate at a basic level in day-to-day situations.
Departures always presents language items in interesting contexts: its wide range of topics — from amusing dialogues to news reports, exciting cartoon strips to romantic stories — are all chosen with the adult and young adult in mind.
At this level, both reading and listening texts consist of short, bite-sized chunks which are accessible to beginners.
Throughout the Student's Book, 12 units called ‘Everyday Conversation’ appear at regular intervals.
These are designed for the students to practise language items which they are likely to need in a number of common situations.
A Vocabulary Index is included in the Student's Book for easy reference.
‘Departures makes my present perfect and my future simple.’
‘Streamline is the best beginner's course on the market.’
Connections
Streamline English Connections follows on from Departures or provides an independent eighty-unit course for pre-intermediate students.
Connections maintains the lively, humorous style of Departures and also includes some more informative and serious topics.
It continues the development of oral/aural skills begun in Departures and adds to this a greater emphasis on reading skills, now that students have progressed beyond the beginner level.
A variety of reading text types, such as magazines, letters, newspapers and dialogues, are included.
Like Departures ,Connections contains 12 units of ‘Everyday Conversation’ on such subjects as ‘Booking in Advance’or ‘Cheques and Credit’, plus a students' Vocabulary Index.
‘I have been teaching Connections since it first came out, and I enjoy it very much, and so do the vast majority of our students.’
Destinations
Streamline English Destinations follows on from Connections or provides a separate eighty-unit courses for intermediate students.
It revises, consolidates and extends the structures and vocabulary students will have come across in previous Streamline books or in other pre-intermediate courses.
Destinations contains a marked increase in text over the two previous Streamline English coursebooks and some units are of two pages, reflecting students' developing proficiency in the language.
There is also a higher proportion of informative and serious topics intended to promote students' involvement and discussion.
The focus is now on all four skills and a feature of the course is more extensive listening practice, teaching students to listen for gist and for specific information.
These longer listening texts appear in an Appendix in the Student's Book.
Directions
Streamline English Directions is for upper intermediate students, such as those approaching or at the level of Cambridge First Certificate.
Directions presents and revises complex structures and covers new functional/notional areas of the language.
Systematic attention is paid to vocabulary extension, through a study of word-formation and phrasal/prepositional verbs.
Directions has sixty units, each consisting of two pages.
Topics are extremely varied and are often viewed from unusual angles.
Out of these arise activities and discussion appropriate to students' increased sophistication in the language.
In addition to a wide range of practice in all four skills,Directions aims to develop students' capacities for explanation, argument and discussion, plus the acquisition of reference skills.
‘The book achieves all that it claims — another first in modern language teaching.’
‘My students didn't know what phrasal verbs were until they discovered Streamline Directions Workbook!’
Streamline English Video
Teachers and students can now enjoy the benefits of Streamline English in the exciting new medium of video.
Two Streamline videos are available, combining the most advanced audio-visual technology with the proven principles of Streamline teaching practice.
A Weekend Away and A Week by the Sea are integrated with the syllabuses of Departures and Connections respectively, and can be used to supplement any beginner or pre-intermediate courses or for intensive revision.
Each video is sixty minutes long (on two video cassettes) and is divided into eight short episodes of six to eight minutes.
The videos are accompanied by students' Activity Books and teachers' Video Guides.
ACTIVITY BOOKS
The Activity Books are fully illustrated and contain a wealth of material to ensure that the video is fully exploited for its language potential.
For each episode there are: ‘before’ and ‘after’viewing activities; exercises which develop the teaching points of the episode; transfer activities such as role play and writing tasks; language summaries; and a video transcript.
VIDEO GUIDES
The Video Guides contain detailed, step-by-step guidance for the teacher in using the video and the Activity Books.
These include suggestions for prediction and reviewing work, role play, and the correct use of the video controls.
Suggestions are also made for incorporating video into the overall teaching programme.
These show how to combine traditional classroom techniques with the use of video and will increase the confidence of teachers who may be unfamiliar with the medium.
As a special feature, the Video Guides offer a variety of lesson plans to fit different teaching situations.
The basic plan provides for two classroom periods to spent on each episode.
Alternative plans, however, allow an episode to be expanded to four periods or reduced to only one period where time or access to equipment is limited.
Both videos are sparkling situation comedies written especially for adult and young adult learners.
They were filmed entirely on location in England with a cast of experienced actors and a top television light entertainment director.
A WEEKEND AWAY
A Weekend Away corresponds to the level of Streamline English Departures and is appropriate for students in their first year of English.
Each of the eight episodes practises and consolidates the language of ten units of Departures .
The story-line follows the adventures of a group of characters on a weekend minibus trip to Oxford, where a number of amusing situations arise against the picturesque background of the university city.
‘The element of listening comprehension is extremely valuable in Streamline Video.
There is also immediate oral practice for students which helps them to correct errors on the spot.
This, in turn, increases oral confidence.
This video is certainly a valuable investment.’
A WEEK BY THE SEA
A Week by the Sea is integrated with the syllabus of Streamline English Connections and will be effective with all learners at pre-intermediate level.
Each episode covers the language of ten units of Connections .
The video takes up the story of two of the characters from A Weekend Away whom we now meet on holiday on the south coast of England.
Again, a variety of attractive locations form the backdrop to a lively sequence of events.
‘I have observed a marked increase in student participation since using Streamline Video in lessons.
It has the effect of making students enthusiastic and energetic in the classroom.’
Streamline Graded Readers
this new series of graded readers gives students the chance to extend their learning beyond the classroom through enjoyable extensive reading.
Such reading not only consolidates what learners already know, but helps them develop that general ‘feel for language’ which cannot be readily taught.
What's more, readers offer students the opportunity to direct their own learning in choosing what to read and how to tackle it.
Readers make language learning fun.
A GOOD READ
Streamline Graded Readers are first and foremost ‘a good read’.
These original stories, by various authors, have been selected for their strong narrative content.
Students will remember the tales of conflict and coincidence, mystery and revelation.
meet Strawberry and the Sensations , the rock group which receives a threatening message on the last night of its concert tour
examine the story behind the curious computer palm-readings of the people of Chatford in Life Lines 
investigate the coincidental disappearance of some famous jewels from the Prado and of a young American tourist in Spain in The Eyes of Montezuma .
Once read, never forgotten…
CONTEMPORARY STORIES
The series has a decidedly contemporary feel both in topic and in vocabulary.
The word list has been created with an eye to current concerns so that students will be exposed to an up-to-date vocabulary that is relevant to them.
AN EASY READ
Streamline Graded Readers cater for the earliest levels of language learning.
Typesize and layout have been chosen to help maintain the flow or reading and the stories are short and simple enough to be read at normal first-language speed.
Streamline Graded Readers encourage students in their language learning and help them to gain confidence in their ability.
CAREFUL GRADING
Ease of reading depends on careful grading of structure and vocabulary.
Streamline Graded Readers are based on the same clear and well-controlled syllabus which has made the Streamline coursebooks popular with teachers all over the world.
GLOSSARY AND EXERCISES
Each reader includes a glossary of new words and exercises to extend students' understanding of the text.
Readers are available at the following levels:
Level 5 in preparation.
Departures & Connections in Reading
Departures and connections in Reading are designed to develop the reading skills of elementary and pre-intermediate students of English, and are based on the structures and vocabulary of the first two levels of Streamline English .
Departures in Reading A & B and More Departures in Reading A & B make reading an easy and enjoyable experience for students just beginning to learn English.
Connections in Reading A & B encourage pre-intermediate students to read for pleasure and develop their reading skills.
Both levels are packed with lively and interesting material ranging from puzzles and cartoons to complete short stories.
Students will enjoy reading these books on their own as well as in the classroom.
Each reader provides three different types of reading material,plus optional comprehension exercises in four-page pull-out supplements:
Intensive — short reading passages which have been lexically and structurally graded for intensive reading practice.
Reading skills development — a wide variety of authentic materials to develop skills such as sequencing, scanning, skimming, matching and jigsaw reading.
Extensive — complete short stories for extended reading practice.
Speechwork
Speechwork has been designed to offer supplementary listening and speaking practice for users of Streamline English Departures ,Connections and Destinations .
A variety of dialogues, drills and exercises are provided for use in the language laboratory, in class or at home.
Each level consists of five cassettes, a tapescript and a student's book.
Twenty sections of recorded material are organized so that each section covers four units of the corresponding coursebook.
‘Streamline Departures Speechwork is proving very effective used both in class and as self-access material, particularly for slower or less confident students.’
free
TESTS
Tests are also available to help teachers monitor the progress of students using the first three Streamline coursebooks:Departures ,Connections and Destinations .
The test booklet accompanying each coursebook contains four tests, each covering twenty units of the book concerned.
TEACHER'S EXTRAS
Teacher's Extras are available as supplementary material to accompany Streamline English Departures and Connections .
These booklets contain more than four hundred ideas for communicative activities, role plays and games which may be used in class to supplement the Streamline course work.
‘In my opinion the communicative activities suggested by the Teacher's Extras for Departures and Connections are most interesting.
These suggestions will certainly help the secondary school teachers being trained at this establishment to prepare their own lesson models during their teaching practice.’
The best-selling series of readers for young children
START WITH ENGLISH READERS
GRADE 1
A New Tooth
Polly learns that getting a new tooth is part of growing up.
Mary and her Basket
The story of Mary's shopping trip.
Pat and her Picture
Children will understand Pat's feelings on her first day at school.
Po Po
The popular adventures of Po-Po the wooden doll.
The Kite
A brother and sister argue but then Ben loses his kite and Sally rescues it.
GRADE 2
John and Paul go to School
The familiar and busy routine of the school day.
Peter and his Book
Peter shows his family photographs.
The Bird and the Bread
The amusing story of a bird outwitting a cat.
Tonk and his Friends
Pupils will love this funny story of a young robot called Tonk.
Two Stories
A little girl and an old man stop thieves.
GRADE 3
Sam's Ball
The tale of a lost ball…
The Big Race
Will short legs or long legs win the race?
The Fox and the Stork/The Bird and the Glass
Two beautifully told traditional stories.
The Man in the Big Car
A tale about what happens to selfish people.
The Queen's Handkerchief
The charming story of a little girl and a queen.
GRADE 4
An Apple for the Monkey
An exciting story of rescue and friendship.
Four Clever People
Four amusing stories about four different people.
In the Cave
Catherine and Alex are trapped in a cave.
Nine Stories about People
Traditional fables charmingly retold.
GRADE 5
Doctor Know It All/The Brave Little Tailor
How a poor man can become rich and a tailor can marry a princess.
People and Things
Children will be fascinated by the wealth of information in this book.
The Flyer
The true story of the Wright brothers' daring race for the sky.
GRADE 6
The Bottle Imp
A retelling of the old story of the genie in the bottle.
The World Around Us
Fascinating topics for young learners ranging from blood banks to deserts.
NEW
START WITH ENGLISH READERS PACKS
Twelve readers have now been recorded and are available in Readers Packs .
Each pack contains a book, accompanying cassette and parent/teacher notes, giving full instructions on how to integrate the cassette with the book either in the classroom or at home.
The Notes are in eight languages: English, French, Italian, Spanish, Arabic, Greek, Japanese and Portuguese.
The recordings of the stories use an interesting variety of voices and sound effects to bring them to life.
Additional listening exercises are included on the cassettes for Grades 1 & 2.
Readers Packs come in an easy-to-store form and can be shelved just like a book.
Please order through your usual stockist.
Start Reading


A new Primary Reading Course from Oxford
It has long been recognized that reading can provide young pupils with the chance to develop a general ‘feel for the language’.
This in turn will build up their confidence in English which they will carry with them throughout their English learning careers.
Start Reading is a captivating new series of six reading books for young children, which will bring this confidence into your classroom.
The easy-to-follow and entertaining stories will give your pupils a richer and more meaningful context for language practice.
And they're fun !
Start Reading will make their first experience of reading English colourful and enjoyable.
Major features include:
Carefully graded material providing an ideal accompaniment to any junior beginners' course.
Fully illustrated reading passages covering a range of topics which will appeal to children.
A variety of useful and interesting exercises to follow every reading passage.
A picture dictionary at the back of the book explaining the words used in the passages.
Simple, amusing stories presented in various styles including cartoons, which are known and loved by all children.
Appealing characters which children will easily identify with.
Bright and zestful illustrations.
Easy-to-use and richly illustrated picture dictionary.
A range of self-contained exercises.
Exercise to check understanding and reinforce vocabulary learning, both orally and in writing.
This comprehension exercise also revises previous grammar work.
Colourful picture association to practise vocabulary.
Start Reading's graded syllabus at a glance
Other primary materials from Oxford include Start with Words and Pictures and Start with English Readers .
For further details of all our primary titles, please contact your local Oxford representative.
14 ways to be a better teacher
RESOURCE BOOKS FOR TEACHERS
‘the excellent OUP series Resource Books for Teachers…over the years we have learned that anything with the Maley name attached is worthy of serious consideration.
These books are no exception.’
Times Educational Supplement
This series gives the classroom teacher practical guidance in key aspects of language teaching and considers some of the underlying concepts.
Each book consists of an introduction presenting important issues in the area under consideration, followed by examples and discussion of actual classroom materials and techniques.
These resource ideas are clearly presented, and offer teachers all the information they need about appropriate level, time, preparation, materials, classroom management, monitoring, and follow-up activities.
Teachers who use these books can draw on the banks of ideas they provide to extend and diversify their current practice.
Organizers of in-service training courses will also find them useful.
Alan Maley , the series editor, worked for The British Council from 1962–1988, serving as an English Language Officer in Yugoslavia, Ghana, Italy, France, and China, and as Regional Representative for The British Council in South India (Madras).
He is currently Director-General of the Bell Educational Trust, Cambridge.
Alan is also series editor for the New Perspectives series, and the Oxford Supplementary Skills series.
Grammar Dictation 
The title Grammar Dictation describes a language teaching procedure known in those areas of the world where it is already extensively used, as ‘dictogloss’ or ‘the dictogloss procedure’.
Grammar Dictation offers an innovative approach to the study of grammar in the language classroom.
The procedure consists of the following stages:
Listening : a text is dictated at a speed which allows only key words to be noted.
Text reconstruction : students pool their resources to reconstruct their own version of the original text, learning about English grammar in the process.
Analysis : the correction process enables students to understand their errors and the language options available to them.
Literature 
Literature is an innovative resource book which offers the teacher a wide variety of interesting and practical ideas for using literature in the language class.
The book is designed specifically with the needs of the language learner in mind.
No previous knowledge of literature is required either by the teacher or by the students.
Literature is not a book on how to study literature, but on how to use it for language practice.
An important feature of this book is that all the activities described can be used not only with the sample material provided, but also with other materials of the teacher's own choice.
Self-access 
Self-access is designed to help EFL and ESL teachers with the practicalities of setting up and managing self-access study facilities and so enable learning to take place independently of teaching.
Students can choose and use self-access material on their own to correct or assess their own performance.
The first two chapters describe activities which will help overcome problems such as learner resistance.
The remaining sections contain a wealth of ideas and suggestions for activities to develop the four skills, grammar, vocabulary, and social language.
Translation 
Translation is designed for teachers and students from any language background who are involved in the study of English.
Alan Duff explores the role of translation in language learning and provides the teacher with a wide variety of translation activities from many different subject areas.
These activities are lively and innovatory and use the medium of translation to develop both written and oral skills.
No specialist knowledge or previous experience of translation is required.
‘an excellent piece of methodology…one of those rare books which make good reading, and this one is packed with good activities…
After Alan Duff, very few teachers' books would have stood a chance.’
Times Education Supplement
Call 
Computer Assisted Language Learning offers the teacher a bank of practical activities, based on communicative methodology, which make use of a variety of computer programs.
Both authors of CALL have extensive practical experience in the area, and they have organized the book so that it can be used by teachers with any degree of experience in CALL.
The first section, ‘Program Types’, introduced the types of software used in the book.
The second section, ‘Activities’, provides ideas for the use of computers in the classroom.
The third section, ‘Schemes of Work’, shows how computers can be used to meet the needs of different groups of students.
‘the activities…are imaginative, stimulating, and make sense from the language teaching point of view.
The book has stimulated this reader…to become more involved in this area.’
Times Educational Supplement
Writing 
Writing presents a range of writing tasks within a framework of current thinking on the process of writing.
It discusses the different areas of writing ability and looks at ways in which classroom activities can help learners to develop these.
The first part of the book focuses on ‘authoring’ skills: developing a sense of audience, planning, drafting, and revising.
The second section considers elements of ‘crafting’: the way in which a writer puts together the pieces of the text and chooses correct and appropriate language.
The tasks are designed in relation to a variety of writing purposes and a range of text types for general-purpose language learners.
‘One of the best books on writing I have ever come across…
The activities I have tried have been successful, and I shall try many more.’
Practical English Teaching
NEW
Video 
Video is an immensely usable resource for EFL teachers and their students.
Examining both pre-recorded and video camera work, it offers a wide range of communicative activities designed to reinforce and enhance the language learning process.
Video is a practical book which provides students with real tasks involving the language of perception, observation, opinion, and argumentation.
The book falls into four sections: active viewing; making your own videos; making small group videos, and videoing your textbook.
NEW
Music and Song 
Music and Song describes the wide variety of ways in which teachers can use music and song in the language classroom.
The book can be used with all age-groups, from small children to teenagers and adults, and includes all types of music from traditional, folk, and classical to jazz, rock, and pop.
The activities are designed to exploit the motivating and memorable appeal of music to the learner and the author proves his point that ‘anything you can do with a text, you can do with a song’.
Class Readers 
Class Readers is a comprehensive collection of activities offering practical advice and suggestions on how to exploit class readers to promote language and to develop both perceptive and literary skills.
It emphasizes activities which encourage the students' own personal response, while facilitating exploration and extension of the language.
There are activities for individuals, pairs, and groups at all levels, and ideas for all stages before, during, and after reading.
This book will be of use to all teachers, including those in non-EFL classrooms.
‘from its opening pages, Jean Greenwood's Class Readers presents alternatives which are a challenge to our perceptions of what can be done with graded readers, and of why the alternatives might be tried…
Class Readers seem to me to be an excellent book…
I shall use the activities myself, and recommend the book to others.’
Reading in a Foreign Language
Project Work 
Teachers are increasingly aware of the benefits of project work: namely, that it involves learners in authentic activities, bridges the gap between the classroom and the outside world, and produces observably high levels of motivation and cooperation among students.
Project Work is the first attempt to bring together in a coherent way the wealth of information available on this topic.
It includes a variety of bridging activities to introduce students to project work, clear guidance in choosing, organizing and monitoring a project, and clarification on the ways in which project work can develop all four skills.
A collection of full-scale projects of different kinds, lengths, and complexity is described in detail.
These range from a short expedition task taking three hours, to twelve-week projects involving considerable interaction with the local community.
Role Play 
Role play is one of the most flexible communicative techniques at the disposal of the teacher.
Its major advantage is that it trains students to deal with the unpredictable nature of language, to think on their feet, and ‘to handle the skein of language as it unravels’.
Role play also lends itself to every aspect of language work, including structures, lexis, functions, intonation patterns, and register.
Role Play encompasses an extremely varied collection of activities ranging from highly controlled conversations to improvised drama, and from simple dialogues to complex scenarios.
The book moves from teacher-directed activities to fully-fledged simulations devised and written by the students themselves.
There are sixty activities, suitable for use with classes of all sizes and at all levels of general or ESP courses.
The book functions equally well as a resource for the experienced teacher, and as a handbook for those looking for guidance on how to use the role-play technique.
Vocabulary 
In this book, the authors — who have a reputation for creating innovative language teaching materials — avoid the normal ‘word field’ approach and concentrate on the more personal and associative aspects of vocabulary acquisition.
Vocabulary explores words and the learning process in the context of the learner's thinking and feeling, and its activities are based on the premise that depth of experience and personal interaction are necessary for words to be permanently acquired.
‘There are some very good books on the market with good suggestions and, as far as I know, Vocabulary is one of the best.
Really, one should buy and read the book itself instead of reading about it.’
IATEFL Newsletter
Conversation 
Conversation is unique in its insistence on the need to teach specific conversational, rather than merely speaking, skills.
The authors' approach is to examine what native speakers do when they ‘make conversation’, and then to use this information as the basis for more than eighty tasks and activities.
The four basic types of activity offered in Conversation are: controlled activities to give students confidence and support; awareness activities to increase students' sensitivity to what they are aiming at; fluency activities to give students the practice they need to use English for communication; and feedback tasks to allow students to reflect on their own performance so that they become aware of areas in which they have to improve.
‘For those teachers who are jaded by the often poor response of students to conversation classes, Conversation will prove an excellent source of material that can be quickly and easily exploited in the classroom.’
IATEFL Newsletter
Drama 
Used effectively, drama can change a roomful of strangers into a happy cohesive group and make the process of language learning a great deal more creative and enjoyable.
This book looks at the contribution drama can bring to the classroom.
Section One of Drama contains first-hand practical advice on the use of drama techniques to improve coursebook presentation, and to improve the teaching of spoken communication skills, pronunciation and literature.
Activities vary from short verbal and non-verbal drama games to longer sessions, incorporating scenes from well-known modern playwrights such as Woody Allen and Peter Shaffer.
Section Two moves outside the classroom to focus on the full-scale drama project, guiding the teacher through the whole process with valuable suggestions and clear instructions.
Clear, easy-to-follow teaching aids
Each Resource Book provides clear, easy-to-follow lesson menus for you to use in class.
There are comprehensive instructions for each activity, stating the appropriate student level, the approximate time the activity will take to complete, its language teaching aim, the preparation you will need to do, and a detailed guide to classroom procedure.
All the activities in the Resource Books can be photocopied for classroom use.
In addition, the introduction to each Resource Book gives you vital background knowledge about the concepts and methodology underlying each technique.
Language Teaching: A Scheme for Teacher Education 
WHY do you do what you do?
If you're interested in the ‘why’ of teaching as well as the ‘how’, then ‘Language Teaching :A Scheme for Teacher Education is the series for you.
The books in the series are not dry academic tomes.
They are clear explanations of some of the main principles and theories behind language teaching, written in an accessible, common sense style.
The series is designed especially for teachers and anyone involved in teacher-training.
The books demystify language teaching theory, and provide invaluable background knowledge which will extend professional skills.
The tasks throughout each book put the theory into context, and enable the reader to relate the text to their own existing knowledge and teaching situations.
There are three sub-series in the scheme: Sub-series One (green covers) focusses on language knowledge .
Sub-series Two (grey covers) on modes of behaviour which practise that knowledge, and Sub-series Three provides ideas for action research.
‘This Scheme for Teacher Education series is one of OUP's most imaginative contributions to ELT literature.
Practising teachers will find them useful resource books.
Teachers preparing for examinations…will find them rich sources of information.
Groups of teachers could use them as the basis of informal discussion groups.
Finally, they are a magnificent resources for teacher educators…
The suggestions for further work in the third section are both relevant and well-planned.’
EFL Gazette
SYLLABUS DESIGN 
Syllabus Design provides an introduction to language syllabus planning for teachers who want to gain a better understanding of the subject in order to develop the skills to evaluate, modify, and adapt the syllabuses with which they work.
SPEAKING 
Speaking reviews the different approaches which have been adopted to teach this important skill and suggests ways in which teachers can act to acquire a better understanding of the way speaking is learned.
‘Quite simply, Speaking evinces a rare and particularly effective teacher-friendly fusion of theory and practice.’
Times Educational Supplement
ROLES OF TEACHERS AND LEARNERS 
There are many factors, both social and psychological, which influence the roles of teachers and learners in the classroom.
This book helps teachers to understand these roles, and the ways in which co-operative learning may best be fostered.
‘An excellent basis for staff training sessions.’
ELT Journal
CLASSROOM INTERACTION 
How can the social encounter best be described and managed by the teacher?
Classroom Interaction stimulates teachers to explore the implications of the subject and, as a result, to understand and guide their learners' initiative to greater effect.
‘The thoroughness with which the ideas are dealt with, and the meticulousness of the task construction and presentation are exemplary.’
ELT Journal
LISTENING 
How can a teacher best go about selecting and designing effective learning material for their own classes?
Listening provides a much-needed perspective on the subject, and includes material from the authors' own recent work in comprehension task design.
‘The style of writing is lively and straightforward, and the reader could not fail to be stimulated by the ideas presented.’
SATEFL Newsletter
DISCOURSE 
How can discourse analysis — the study of spoken and written language in its social and psychological context — provide important insights for the language teacher?
Discourse explains the relevant theory and applies it to classroom activities designed to improve students' discourse skills.
‘the theories are very clearly explained’.
Journal of the Institute of Linguists
VOCABULARY 
This book shows how the teaching of vocabulary can acquire a principled foundation; how appropriate linguistic models of the lexicon, and knowledge of the way in which vocabulary is learned and stored, can transform a seemingly vast, shapeless mass of words into an organized resource.
Read the Language Teaching Series: it makes sense
THE PRIZE-WINNING COURSE FOR TEENAGERS
Project English
now complete!
Student-centred approach
Creative treatment of grammar
Written by experienced EFL teacher/teacher trainer
An innovative, three-year English course for young teenagers from beginner to intermediate level.
How Project English balances theory and practice
Project English aims to be both theoretically sound and pedagogically useful.
It makes use of the latest knowledge about language and language learning, but at the same time it has a firm practical basis and is readily usable in the classroom.
The most crucial factor to have emerged from the recent research into language learning is not what language the learners are exposed to but what the learner does with the language.
Project English recognizes the central importance of this idea, and puts it into practice in a straightforward, practical and enjoyable way.
In Project English , particular attention is paid to the following areas:
Presenting the language in interesting contexts relevant to the learner
Engaging the learner in activities they can become involved in
Ensuring the material provokes a positive response from the learner
Ensuring the material develops the necessary processes and strategies for learning
How Project English encourages learning through thinking
Project English recognizes that a grammar system is the best foundation of language learning.
To teach this system effectively, it uses the cognitive approach.
This encourages learners to build on their existing knowledge of their mother tongue to try and predict the codes of another language through analysis, comparison, and hypothesis.
Pupils are not simply presented with rules; instead they are required to think about the new language and are guided to work out the rules of the language themselves.
Grammar work in Project English is an enjoyable activity and makes pupils think , and learn something of how languages work.
How Project encourages learning through doing
Project English encourages learning through project work: as the pupils work through the projects in the Student's Book, they gradually build up similar projects of their own by carrying out a number of project tasks.
These tasks involve the pupils in collecting, organizing and presenting pictures and information about their own lives.
Through these activities the newly acquired language is transferred to the pupils' own world and enables them to talk about their own experiences.
The topics are presented in a great variety of enjoyable contexts, including history, science, everyday stories and science fiction fantasy.
Numerous games, puzzles, jokes and problem-solving activities all add fun — the lifeblood of effective learning.
How a unit works
Project English encourages learners to explore and experiment with language, but at the same time it provides firm support through a clearly structured syllabus, so that learners feel secure and confident.
Each project in Project English follows a similar pattern, gradually introducing new language items and leading pupils through graded activities to the point where they can use the language in a truly communicative context.
Language practice
Controlled practice of the language point.
Language presentation
Presentation of the language point in a reading or listening text.
This particular passage focuses on the gerund.
Students will thoroughly enjoy following the exploits of the comic cartoon characters, Carstairs and Carruthers, who are engaged in a race around the world.
Language spot
Regular language spots encourage the students to think about the grammatical structure of the new language.
In Project English 3 the cognitive approach to grammar continues, but greater emphasis is given to functions, as is appropriate to learners' needs at this level.
Language use
The first steps towards using the new language in communication, both written and oral.
The projects
Finally, pupils reach the stage where they can put their knowledge to use more creatively in the context of stimulating projects.
Project work is an opportunity for learners to express their own ideas, feelings and opinions, which stimulates their critical awareness, logical thought and creativity.
Through project work, English becomes a window on the culture of the English speaking world, and a means through which learners can express their own culture.
Sample extract from Project English 3
Tom Hutchinson receiving the award for Project English from His Royal highness, The Duke of Edinburgh, at Buckingham Palace.
Project English has quickly established itself as a leading new course, with an important contribution to make to English language teaching.
In 1986 Project English won first prize in the English Speaking Union's Duke of Edinburgh Book Competition.
The prize was awarded for the coursebook considered by the judges to have the greatest potential influence on the teaching and learning of English.
All three levels of Project English are now available!
The following components are available for each level of the course:
Student's Books
These contain eight projects and provide material for 100–120 hours' teaching.
Teacher's Books
These outline the methodology and contain detailed lesson plans.
Project English gives the experienced and confident teacher maximum scope while providing a clear and supportive framework for the less experienced teacher to try out new techniques.
The pages are fully interleaved with those of the Student's Book.
Workbooks
The Workbooks contain a wealth of additional exercises and practice material.
Cassettes
Lively recordings of the texts and tape-based exercises in the Student's Books are contained on the Cassettes.
Project English 1
In Project English 1 the emphasis is on a structural syllabus.
It builds up the foundations of the grammar system and essential vocabulary, as appropriate to the learner's needs at this level.
These are reinforced through numerous communicative tasks.
Project English 1 is divided into eight projects on topics which will appeal to teenagers, such as‘Communication’, ‘The Family’, ‘Animals’ and ‘Space’.
The projects are presented by a group of English-speaking children from Britain, America and Australia, so that pupils are reminded that English is an international language.
Project English 2
The syllabus of Project English 2 is still mainly structural, but there is more emphasis on the functional and communicative elements.
Project English 2 puts the project concept into a magazine context.
The Student's Book is divided into eight projects which take the form of eight issues of the magazine, ‘Hot Dog ’.
The magazines are based on such various topics as ‘Accidents will Happen’, ‘Eating’, and ‘Newspapers’.
Project English 3
In the third year of the course, a more functional approach is used.
The language resources already learnt are applied to a wide range of communicative problems.
Project English 3 is also divided into eight projects and is based on the idea of The Canterbury Tales .
The characters run a company called Canterbury Holidays.
Each of the group members presents one of the units, and takes it in turn to entertain their fellow travellers by talking about their interests in life or about their travels.
As with Project English 1 and 2 , the learners are given projects which relate the material to their own lives.
PROJECT ENGLISH
THE FORMULA FOR SUCCESS: a project-based approach within a sound grammatical framework
optional video component now available
PROJECT ENGLISH — a prize-winning course
Project English is a student-centred, three-year course taking young teenagers from beginner to intermediate level.
It successfully combines the appeal of project work with the cognitive teaching of grammar.
It encourages learners to explore and experiment with language, but at the same time provides security and support through a clearly structured syllabus.
The author, Tom Hutchinson, is a highly experienced EFL teacher and teacher trainer.
Widely acclaimed for its innovative approach to language teaching,Project English won first prize in the 1986 English Speaking Union's Duke of Edinburgh Book Competition.
Since then the excellent reputation it has earned among both teachers and learners alike has continued to grow.
Cognitive grammar activities
Regular grammar activities encourage the students to think about the grammatical structures of the new language.
Pupils are helped to work out the rules and patterns for themselves and to try out the new language forms.
Listening
Purposeful listenings.
Learners are always given tasks to do whilst listening which encourages motivation and gives them a reason to listen.
The Projects
Through project work, learners are able to express their own ideas and opinions in English.
It encourages creativity and allows pupils to use the language they have learnt in the context of stimulating and relevant projects.
Project English gives your students a firm grasp of grammar…
Project English recognizes that in order to learn a language effectively, students need a sound understanding of the underlying grammar system.
To help students learn this system,Project English adopts the cognitive approach.
Students are not simply presented with grammar rules — instead grammar is treated as a problem-solving activity.
Students are encouraged to build on their existing knowledge of their mother tongue to try and predict the codes of another language.
They are required to think about the new language and with guidance are helped to work out the rules of grammar for themselves.
…combined with the stimulus of a project-based approach
Project English encourages learning through project work.
Each level of the course is divided into eight projects, covering a wide range of topics which are both relevant and of immediate interest to this age-group.
As students work through the projects in the Student's Book, they carry out a number of tasks and activities which form the basis for similar projects of their own.
Project work is fun: it involves learners in collecting, organizing, and presenting information in imaginative and unusual ways.
It allows learners to be creative within a carefully controlled language framework.
Above all, project work provides learners with the opportunity to use the newly-acquired language to talk about themselves, and to express their own ideas, feelings, and opinions.
Components at each level
Student's Book, containing eight projects with material for 100–120 hours teaching.
Teacher's Book, outlining the methodology and providing detailed lesson plans.
Workbook, containing additional exercises and practice material.
Cassettes, containing high-quality recordings of the texts and tape-based exercises in the Student's Books.
NEW
Project English Grammar and Practice Books 1 & 2
The Grammar and Practice Books consolidate the cognitive grammar approach used in the Student's Books.
They provide summaries and clear explanations of the grammar points covered, as well as write-in grammar exercises for further practice, homework, or revision.
A free answer key is available for teachers.
NEW
Introduction to Project Work
This booklet answers the most common questions and the main worries teachers have about using project work in the classroom.
It provides an introduction to project work, together with guidance on preparation and evaluation.
It draws on the real experience of a large number of teachers, and is illustrated throughout with samples of work by students of different ages and levels.
Let your students enjoy the extra dimension of video!
Project Video can be used as an optional component of the Project English course.
Alternatively, it can be used as an independent, project-based video course for young teenagers.
Project Video adds a new and exciting dimension to the learning experience by inviting the student to step out of the classroom into the world outside.
The language is controlled to suit the needs of the learner, although occasional passages of unscripted language use help students become accustomed to the real language of everyday life.
Project Video comprises three levels based on the syllabus of the Project English coursebooks.
Each level consists of eight themes presented in a dynamic documentary format.
As with the coursebooks, the video aims to encourage learning through thinking and doing.
Project Video develops listening skills
Learners are exposed to the voices of children and adults, native and non-native speakers, and a number of different regional and national accents.
Project Video provides cultural background
Project Video is set in a variety of locations in all parts of Britain, and gives insights into life in Britain today.
The topics aim to be both informative and educational, and can be used as a starting point for comparison with other cultures.
Project Video stimulates active language use
Project Video provides a stimulus for learners to produce their own projects.
The Activity Book at each level provides a project task which encourages learners to explore the video topic in relation to their own environment.
This involves the active use of structures and vocabulary introduced by the video.
Components at each level
Two Video Cassettes, divided into a total of eight episodes
Activity Book offering full exploitation of the video.
It also includes a language review section and transcripts of the video.
Video Guide, with a full introduction to project work and detailed guidance on how to use the video.
Primary Readers from Oxford
An appealing world of fantasy and fun
Humorous stories to read or act
Spellbinders
Beginner to Upper-Elementary
This new, three-level series of readers combines humorous narrative with a play-reading element.
It can be used as an exciting and refreshing supplement to any primary course.
A step into ‘real reading’
In line with recent methodological trends, the stories are enjoyable for their own sake, and aim to resemble as closely as possible the style of book children would choose to read in their first language.
For reading aloud or play-acting
Too often reading is seen only as a solitary activity:Spellbinders promote the more social aspects of reading.
The dialogue-based text is ideal for reading aloud in class or for encouraging pupils to act out the stories.
Each reader contains two pages of activities which provide a balance of structural and communicative activities.
Teacher's notes give practical hints on developing reading skills, together with ideas for implementing play-reading in class.
Sample spread from The Hairy Tree Man (Spellbinders, Level 1)
Action-packed and fun!
English Today Readers
Beginner to Pre-Intermediate
Full of adventure,English Today Readers are based on the syllabus and wordlists for the six levels of the successful English Today!series.
The lively, contemporary quality of the stories is emphasized by the attractive illustrations.
The stories can be used in conjunction with any course at primary level.
Picture glosses
A feature of Levels 1–3 is the use of picture glosses which appear at the foot of the page and give immediate help with the meanings of the words.
Each reader also has a picture dictionary.
Language consolidation
At the back of each book there are exercises to check understanding.
These are picture-based at the earlier levels, and text-based at the higher levels.
Charming stories with a traditional feel
Start with English Readers
Beginner to Pre-Intermediate 
Start with English Readers feature original stories with a traditional feel.
Children can choose from a rich variety of titles which include animal stories, adventure stories, science fiction, and more factual topics.
The structures and vocabulary content of the six levels are graded to correspond with the six books of Start with English , although they can be used with any primary course.
Every reader contains a full-colour dictionary explaining words used in the story.
Grades 3–6 contain exercises at the end of each book to check comprehension.
Cassettes available
Children like to listen to stories as well as read them, and so selected titles from each level are also available on cassette.
The recordings, which are brought to life through a variety of voices and sound effects, aid fluency and give confidence with pronunciation.
Extra listening exercises are included on the cassettes for Grades 1 and 2.
Practical Reader Packs
In addition, a number of titles from Grades 1–4 have been made up into sturdy and convenient Readers Packs.
Each pack contains a book, accompanying cassette, and notes to guide the parent or teacher in English, French, Italian, Spanish, Arabic, Greek, Japanese, and Portuguese.
The magic of a story
Children love nothing more than a good story.
In a child's world, stories mean adventure and new horizons, without leaving the familiar warmth of the school or home environment.
Most children are eager to enter the marvellous world of reading in their own language, but reading in English is another matter.
Too often pupils are put off by material which is dull, linguistically unsuitable, and which bears little resemblance to the colourful storybooks they are used to.
Yet reading is of vital importance in language learning: it is through reading that children can acquire not only new vocabulary and structures, but a real ‘feel’ for the language.
Oxford Primary Readers — the incentive to read in English
Oxford University Press offers young learners an attractive range of bright, imaginative readers, all of which give pupils a strong incentive to read in English for pleasure.
Each series is based on the same principles:
Graded language
All the readers are graded to give children confidence, and to ensure that they are not distracted by unfamiliar words and structures.
Children can relax and concentrate on enjoying the story itself, as they would do in their own language.
Engaging storyline
The strong, imaginative storylines contain the elements of fantasy and humour which appeal to this age group.
Above all, each story provides a ‘good read’, motivating pupils to read on to find out what happens next.
Stimulating illustrations
Colourful and stimulating illustrations are integrated into the text, helping pupils through non-verbal clues to follow the story.
Fun
Oxford primary readers are fun: they help pupils discover that reading in English doesn't have to be hard work — it can even be a delight!
Readers in the classroom
Oxford primary readers are designed to be used very flexibly.
Reading need not be a solitary activity: there are a number of ways in which readers can be used to encourage classroom interaction.
pupils can take turns in reading aloud
they can use role-play to act out the text
they can try and guess how a story ends
they can draw pictures to illustrate part of a story they have listened to.
Developing reading skills
Start reading
Beginner


This series of six graded comprehension books is an excellent way of helping pupils develop reading skills.
It can be used with any junior beginner's course.
Each book contains ten reading texts followed by short and varied exercises.
The exercises not only check comprehension but consolidate structural points and vocabulary.
A useful picture dictionary at the back of each book helps pupils with new words.
Variety of material and treatment
The keynote to the series is variety.
There is a wide range of topics, which includes stories of adventure and science fiction as well as a selection of factual texts.
The material is presented in a number of ways, including cartoons, so that pupils get used to different styles and different types of reading.
Oxford English Primary Materials
Everything you need to give children the best possible start in English!
CONTENTS
Children's first experiences of learning English at the primary level colour the whole of their subsequent language learning development.
Oxford English provides all the materials needed to set children on the right track.
The books, video, and support materials listed in this catalogue draw on all the best current developments in teaching English to children.
Teachers using this material can count on finding the support and flexibility they need to make children's language learning enjoyable and effective.
A solid framework for teachers
Teachers need high-quality materials to provide a framework for their own specific teaching situations and individual styles.
The following pages describe an exciting and comprehensive set of resources for the busy teacher, with materials specially designed to meet the needs of a wide variety of teaching contexts and approaches.
Language learning through enjoyment
Variety and enjoyment are vital at the primary stages of language learning.
Oxford English primary materials generate high levels of motivation and involvement by inviting children to participate in activities designed to appeal to youngsters and to stimulate their ever-inquisitive minds.
This, combined with lively illustrations, provides material that is easy to teach and fun to learn.
Try the game from Chatterbox on the back cover and see for yourself!
Coursebooks for all needs
The coursebooks described on pages 3–7 are designed to fit a variety of timetables, and include courses in two, four, or six parts which can be used alone or in combination with our range of supplementary materials.
Supplementary materials for maximum teaching flexibility
On pages 8–15 you will find a wide range of supplementary materials including readers, video, activity books, skills practice, songs, and picture dictionaries.
These offer the variety and flexibility essential for teachers wanting to supplement an existing programme or to develop a programme of their own.
courses
Get Ready!


The ideal introduction to English for very young children
Get Ready!is a complete course in two levels for very young children first beginning to learn English.
How it works
The lively approach of Get Ready!, with its extensive use of songs, rhymes, and activities, will involve children in miming or performing actions at their desks.
This provides young learners with the stimulus and movement necessary to hold their attention and keep them enthusiastically involved.
The course is carefully paced: language and content are precisely graded to match the needs, interests, and abilities of young learners.
Unique Step system
Get Ready!offers the teacher a complete package of support materials, arranged for maximum ease of use into sixty Steps at each level.
Each Step consists of one page in the Pupil's Book, accompanied by one page in the Activity Book, plus half a page each in the Handwriting Book and the Numbers Book.
The Teacher's Books explain clearly how to cover each Step and Cassettes at each level offer recordings of all the songs and rhymes in the Pupil's Books.
NOW AVAILABLE!
12 full-colour Wallcharts to accompany each level.
Sets of Picture Flashcards and Word Flashcards to be used with both levels.
Start with English 
A six-part course especially suitable for large classes
Start with English is a colourful, straightforward course in six parts which takes young children from beginners to pre-intermediate level.
It is delightfully easy to use and is particularly suitable for large classes.
The right pace
Each lesson in Start with English presents only either four or five new words or a new structure.
This gradual progression means that children can really assimilate and enjoy each stage in the learning process without experiencing the negative effects of frustration.
Full skills coverage and regular revision
Start with English provides full coverage of all four skills, with an emphasis on reading skills in Books 4–6 to match children's developing abilities.
Vocabulary and structures are constantly revised throughout the course to reinforce the language learning process and to ensure that children who join the class late do not find themselves struggling.
Colourful Wallcharts at the early stages
Attractive, full-colour Wallcharts are available to accompany levels 1–3, clearly linked to the relevant lessons in the Pupil's Books.
Notes at the foot of each wallchart on the vocabulary and structures covered make these a valuable teaching aid.
Chatterbox 
Complete in 1990!
The pupil-centred course for beginners!
Chatterbox is a four-part course for beginners which aims to develop confidence in English through enjoyment of the learning process.
A friendly title for a friendly book
Chatterbox succeeds in getting children to speak English by drawing on all their favourite things.
They love the bright, colourful illustrations, the varied activities, the emphasis on games and picture puzzles, and the fact that there is a song for almost every lesson in the course.
Another appealing element is the exciting comic strip adventure story which runs through each unit, starring ace detective Captain Shadow and her friends.
A thorough basis in English
The course is carefully designed to give children a solid foundation in English grammar.
Vocabulary and structures are recycled continuously and all four language skills are covered, with special attention given to the recognition and formation of letters and words at beginner level.
The new structure ‘can’ is taught through the context of a picture puzzle
A model dialogue gives children the language to talk about the picture
The structure is practised in a simple and lively song
Teaching points are conveniently highlighted in footnotes for the teacher
The language is recycled in another exciting Captain Shadow episode
English Today!
A colourful, activity-based course for beginners
English Today!is a complete, six-part course to take children from beginner to pre-intermediate level.
Language for a real purpose
The wide variety of communicative activities at the core of English Today!gives children the opportunity to use language for a real purpose in some of their favourite contexts: games, puzzles and riddles, pairwork, rhymes, songs, and stories for reading and listening.
The clear, lively illustrations in full colour add to children's motivation.
Steady progression
Language learning progresses at an easy pace, with plenty of reinforcement and revision to ensure lessons are thoroughly learnt.
In Books 1–3, the emphasis is on listening comprehension and oral work, while in Books 4–6 there is increased emphasis on reading and writing skills in line with children's developing abilities.
To accompany English Today! 1
Activity Pack
Over 500 activity cards provide a wide variety of games, pairwork, and group activities.
A detailed Teacher's Book is included, which describes more than 30 games.
Flashcard Pack
The Pack contains word and picture flashcards for 80 words, complete with Teacher's Notes.
PLUS
Free Tests to accompany Books 1–4!
Games give pupils the opportunity to practise new language and enjoy themselves
Systematic pronunciation practice: the sound ‘t’
Vocabulary items clearly illustrated
American English
Open Sesame
The exciting series, featuring the world-famous Sesame Street Muppets, that takes children from beginner to high intermediate level.
Children's enthusiastic response to the irresistible Sesame Street Muppets, combined with the sound methodological principles behind the series, make this flexible and comprehensive course a pleasure to teach.
Jazz Chants for Children 
Jazz Chants for Children provides a way of teaching the rhythm, stress, and intonation of American English which will keep children enthralled.
The material ranges from beginner to intermediate level.
Each of the chants, songs, or poems that makes up a unit teaches a basic structure and is extended by a relevant picture activity.
The Student Book is accompanied by a Cassette and a detailed Teacher's Edition.
Jazz Chant Fairy Tales 
Carolyn Graham's jazz rhythms are used to tell eight fairy tales which are international favourites among children, such as Rumpelstiltskin and Little Red Riding Hood.
The stories range from beginner to intermediate level; they are designed to present basic language structures and to teach conversational American English.
Beautiful illustrations help children to follow the storylines.
Reading
Start Reading 
Give young learners a taste for reading in English!
This series of six superbly produced reading books will encourage children to develop a real love of reading in English, while at the same time providing an excellent supplement to any beginner's course.
Lively material and treatment
Colour and variety are the keynotes of the series; children's attention is stimulated and held throughout by the bright and lively illustrations, and the variety of text and topic types, with subjects ranging from adventure and science fiction to factual material.
Excellent language work
Start Reading follows a carefully graded syllabus throughout.
Each reading passage is followed by motivating exercises, full of colour and fun, which not only check comprehension but also consolidate grammar points and develop vocabulary skills.
A full-colour picture dictionary at the back of each book provides another delightful resource.
Simple, amusing stories presented in various styles including cartoons
Bright, lively illustrations and appealing characters
A range of colourfully presented exercises to reinforce and revise language work
New!
English Today Readers
A new series to encourage young learners of English to read for pleasure
English Today Readers are a new series based on the syllabus and wordlists for the six levels of the successful English Today!course (see page 6).
Good stories
At all six levels, strong storylines are closely integrated with attractive, full-colour illustrations, making the texts easy to follow.
Structures and vocabulary are carefully graded so that children consolidate and build on their English in a motivating way.
Solid language support
There are a variety of exercises to check understanding at the back of each book and all the readers contain a picture dictionary, illustrating the words that appear in the stories.
Levels 1–3 also include ‘picture glosses’ at the foot of the page to give immediate help with the meaning of unknown words.
Start with English Readers 
The bestselling series of readers for young children!
Start with English Readers offer a superb selection of original stories, beautifully illustrated in full colour and carefully graded to correspond with the six levels of the popular Start With English course (see page 4).
A wonderful range of stories
From children's adventure stories and animal stories, to science fiction and fantasy topics, and more traditional and factual tales,Start with English Readers appeal directly to children's interests and extend their English reading in the most natural way possible.
Every reader contains a full-colour dictionary explaining words used in the text.
The readers at Grades 3–6 also include exercises at the end of each book to consolidate language work.
Lively recordings of a selection of readers from each level are available on cassette.
Practical Reader Packs
Selected titles in Grades 1–4 have been made up into sturdy Reader Packs, each containing a Reader, a Cassette, and Notes for the Parent/Teacher in English, Italian, Spanish, Arabic, Greek, Japanese, and Portuguese.
The Cassettes at Grades 1 and 2 also include additional listening exercises.
Video
The Magic Music Man 
The best possible motivation for young learners!
The Magic Music Man is a video for young learners in their first year of English.
It offers children the unique opportunity of seeing and hearing English in a full audio-visual context, with a language syllabus based on Book 1 of the best-selling course,English Today!(see page 6).
A complete framework for language work
The Magic Music Man consists of two forty-minute video cassettes, together containing 10 episodes.
Each episode includes an enthralling children's story full of magic, mystery, and music; a ‘language insert’ which breaks into the story to give direct language practice; and a song to practise the vocabulary and structures being taught.
The Activity Book, illustrated in full-colour, ensures that the language work presented in the video is developed to the full through a variety of lively exercises, games, and tasks.
The Video Guide gives the teacher step-by-step guidance on making the best integrated use of the video and the accompanying materials.
The Audio Cassette offers a compilation of music and songs from the video, plus extra songs from the Activity Book.
supplementary
Oxford Activity Books for Children 
A wealth of engaging and creative activities for young learners!
These six activity books provide children who are beginning to learn English with a wide range of activities through which they can practise English grammar and vocabulary, and develop their reading and writing skills.
Fun with English!
The books are delightfully illustrated and full of activities which appeal irresistibly to children's intelligence, creativity, and sense of fun, from drawing, matching, and discrimination tasks, to following directions and problem-solving.
Language Learning Cards
Language Learning Cards Packs A and B practise vocabulary introduced in the Activity Books.
The Packs contain 16 pages of cardboard to be cut up into picture, word, letter, and number cards, together with a Teacher's Guide offering instructions for using the cards in conjunction with the Activity Books.
Are You Listening?
For purposeful and effective listening
Are You Listening ? provides extra listening practice for children who have been studying English for a year or two.
It is based on the principle that pupils are capable of understanding more English than they can produce and aims to stretch children's listening skills.
Children enjoy the challenge!
The Are You Listening ?
Cassette contains 42 short listening passages.
Children have to extract the necessary information from these passages in order to complete a page of enjoyable activities in the accompanying Workbook.
These activities include drawing, cutting out, identifying objects, and written exercises.
The Are You Listening ? approach motivates children to develop this important skill by requiring them to listen with a purpose.
The Teacher's Book contains transcripts of all the recordings, and detailed information to ensure material is exploited to the full.
New!
My ABC
My ABC is a delightful colouring book designed to help children learn the letters of the English alphabet.
Each letter of the alphabet is shown in capital and small letters in association with a key word beginning with that letter.
The key word then features in a large illustration for the child to colour in.
The paper of My ABC is of a very high quality, suitable for crayon or felt tip pen.
Practise with Puzzles!
Two books of puzzles which will motivate children beginning to learn English to practise a range of language used for making guesses, agreeing and disagreeing, deciding, etc.
Each unit has a ‘Let's Talk’ section with model conversations for talking about the games and puzzles, and a ‘Let's Write’section with written exercises.
Each level is accompanied by a thorough Teacher's Book with detailed lesson plans, teaching suggestions, and solutions to all the puzzles.
For your classroom walls!
Picture ABC
The illustrations from My ABC are also available in 13 separate sheets intended to be coloured in by individuals or groups and then hung up as a mural to decorate the walls of the classroom.
Jingle Bells and Other Songs 
Children will love this varied selection of Christmas songs, action songs, number songs, and memory songs, which provides a motivating supplement to any English course for young learners.
All the songs are recorded on the cassette.
Start with Words and Pictures 
Start with Words and Pictures is a beautifully illustrated picture dictionary for young beginners which contains 470 headwords, arranged in alphabetical order and including important verbs and prepositions.
Start with Words and Pictures takes the unique approach of explaining a word by contrasting it with other words.
This method gives children a clear idea of how groups of words relate to each other and makes it easier for them to remember new words and meanings.
Activity Book 
The Activity Book helps children to get the most out of the dictionary.
A variety of enjoyable activities, from completing words and families of words, to colouring and drawing exercises and simple word games, give children valuable extra practice in reading, writing and speaking, and in developing dictionary skills.
Clear teacher's notes are included.
Oxford Children's Picture Dictionary 
This is an up-to-date, topic-based dictionary for young learners.
The full-colour illustrations will motivate children's interest and provide an excellent springboard for both oral and written work.
Each topic introduces a maximum of 15 new words which are listed in a clear alphabetical index at the back of the dictionary.
A rocket race to Mars
Try this game from Chatterbox 2 with your class.
Make as many photocopies as you need and divide the class into four rocket teams.
For each rocket, there is a set of five questions which the teams have to answer in order to reach Mars.
Pupils can go on to play in groups of four.
TURN TO PAGE 5 FOR DETAILS OF CHATTERBOX
Streamline GRADED READERS
A series of modern stories carefully graded for beginner to intermediate students
Make reading a pleasure
The series
This new series of graded readers had been designed to help students in the early stages of language learning to extend their learning beyond the classroom and to discover the enjoyment of reading in English.
Such reading is invaluable because it not only consolidates what learners already know, it helps them to develop that general feel for a language which can give such a boost to the learning process.
Readers also offer students the opportunity to direct their own learning through choosing what to read and how to tackle it: readers increase students' confidence and independence and make language learning fun.
The Streamline Graded Readers series is divided into five levels.
These correspond to the syllabuses of Streamline English Departures ,Connections and Destinations in the following way:
Careful grading
The Streamline Graded Readers series has been specially designed to meet the needs of students at the lower levels of language learning and to ensure the ease of reading which will keep students encouraged and motivated.
To this end:
structures and vocabulary have been carefully graded at each level
typesize and layout have been chosen with a view to maintaining the flow of reading
high-quality illustrations aid comprehension while helping students to get a feel for the story
At the end of each reader, there are exercises and a glossary of new words to consolidate the learning process.
Finally, care has been taken to keep the stories short and simple enough to allow them to be read at normal first-language speed.
A good read
These original stories, by a variety of authors, all share a strong narrative content, with characters and story-lines that will really engage the interest of adults and young adults.
They also share a highly contemporary flavour, aiming to be modern stories for today's students.
At each level, the word list has been created with an eye to current concerns so that students are exposed to an up-to-date vocabulary which is really relevant to their needs.
LEVEL 1
The Locked Room
A man wakes up in a beautiful room in a strange house.
The door is locked.
Who is he and why is he there?
And who is the person in black clothes?
Slowly the man remembers…
The New Road
Beth Archer, a photography student, spends her free time photographing the natural world of Raintree Wood.
When she learns that a road is to be built through the wood her immediate thought is that Raintree must be saved.
But how?
And what should she do when the engineering company which is building the road offers her younger brother his first chance of a job?
A Song for Ben
On her visit to Britain, American pop-singer Katie Cotton is befriended by nine-year-old Ben.
But, one day, while Katie is teaching Ben her latest song, Ben is snatched from under her eyes by kidnappers.
Katie sets out on the trail of the kidnappers and her song for Ben becomes the means to save his life.
George Sees Stars
Anyone could be forgive for thinking the Happy Holiday Hotel was a madhouse, with its bizarre collection of staff and its temperamental manager, George.
But George sees the opportunity to make the hotel great when he receives a booking from TV star, Tony Madoc.
To George's annoyance, everyone seems to be conspiring against his grandiose plans — especially the old lady who arrives on the same day as Tony Madoc.
The visit turns out to be memorable, but not in quite the way George intended.
LEVEL 2
The Visit
Police Constable Harry Evans is driving along a country road when he sees strange lights in the sky and an object larger than a bus hovering in the road ahead of him.
Is this an encounter with a UFO?
The experience changes Harry's life…
The Picture
A grandmother's last gift to her grandson is a portrait of a lady.
The picture becomes almost a real person to the boy, replacing his dead grandmother and helping him to carry on when circumstances seem to be against him.
When he thinks he has lost the girl he loves and is left penniless and alone, he decides to sell the picture.
However, events take a path of their own and the picture finally brings him the happiness it seemed to promise all along.
Strawberry and the Sensations
Strawberry and the Sensations are a rock group on tour.
Just before their last concert, a police officer arrives with a strange message for them.
Is there a crazy killer somewhere in the audience? 3,000 fans are waiting to see Strawberry — will she stop the show?
The Eyes of Montezuma
Shelley Marn, a Californian student on holiday in Europe, is travelling on the ferry to Spain, when she meets a young English couple, Clare and Nick Harman.
Shelley promises to lunch with them once she has got her things from the car.
However, Shelley never returns, and the Harmans learn that the two biggest diamonds in Spain — the Eyes of Montezuma — are also missing.
Nick Harman becomes involved in the search for Shelley — and the Eyes: what he finds is danger…
LEVEL 3
Sunnyvista City
Sunnyvista is a city in the future, a place where all you have to do is sunbathe, watch television and play sports, and where everybody is happy.
Everybody except Dan.
Nobody knows why they are in Sunnyvista or what is happening outside the city.
Dan decides to find out…
Life Lines
Rachel works for Computer Astrology Ltd.
She has a clever new idea for using the computer to read people's hands.
The idea is highly successful and the company flourishes, but Rachel begins to wonder if it is really possible to tell the future.
She decides to experiment and asks the computer to compare photographs of thousands of hands, with surprising — and frightening — results.
African Adventure
Teresa Dunn returns to Kenya, where she was born, to help a famous doctor with his research.
The doctor claims to be looking for a cure for river blindness but his strange behaviour makes Teresa suspicious.
Meanwhile Teresa finds herself learning the hard way how to survive in Africa and she discovers that its beauty is not without danger.
Finn's Business
Fashion designer, Finn McGill, is heading for a brilliant career when her mother falls ill and she decides to turn her back on Paris to return to her home town, Belfast.
There she sets up her own fashion business, ‘Finn's Business’, and plans a show in the Europa Hotel to launch her new collection.
But Finn finds that she can't keep the political troubles of Belfast separate from her life.
LEVEL 4
A Tidy Ghost
You don't find ghosts in modern houses, do you?
When Marilyn and Rick move into their new house, strange things begin to happen.
Have they got a ghost — a very clean and tidy ghost?
Marilyn decides to find out more about the house.
Save the Goldfish
In this fable for our computer age, a computer freak Joe Jenkins becomes obsessed by a computer game in which he has to save a goldfish.
He succeeds in the game and the goldfish offers him a prize.
He treats the offer jokingly, but finds that something seems to be working to bring him and his wife good fortune.
Is it the magic of the goldfish or just coincidence?
Joe's obsessive desire to know what is happening brings disastrous results.
The Night of the Green Dragon
Howard wakes up in hospital with two people waiting to question him about a robbery and a dead body.
All he can remember is a green dragon and a pool of blood.
Howard escapes from the hospital and goes back to the scene of the robbery where everything is strangely familiar.
While trying to avoid police officers guarding the building, Howard falls headlong into a cellar.
As he regains consciousness, he gradually remembers the terrible events of the last few days.
Space Affair
Gareth is a passenger on The New Adventurer, a starship travelling through space.
One day he finds something in the bottom of his shower.
This discovery begins a love affair with a woman he has never seen.
But how can they meet?
Will they have to wait until the starship completes its ten-year journey?
Streets Ahead
The one-way route to the top.
Serious fun for adult beginners
No-nonsense grammar
Exam success
600-word active vocabulary input
Based on a soap opera
Entertainment, variety, and fun
Here's the situation: adult classes
Part-time or evening classes can really give you the blues.
Large classes and students of different abilities and levels can all make your job very difficult — but that's not all.
Your adult students have probably all got different reasons for learning English — to pass exams, to get a better job, for travel, or simply because they want to learn.
Whatever their reasons, they have given up their own free time to come to your classes.
What is more, they are probably paying for their own lessons, so they expect results .
But many adult learners also hold down a full-time job, and in the middle of a hard week's work they are likely to be tired.
They may find it difficult to concentrate.
How can you cater to all their needs?
How can you hold their attention?
How can you help them to get the results they want?
Here's the answer: Streets Ahead
Streets Ahead by Paul Aston and Elizabeth Edmondson is a new two-part course for adult beginners, structured around a soap opera.
It makes the business of learning English simpler and more fun for students and teachers.
Here's how Streets Ahead works
Each unit is divided into four distinct sections
1 The Preview
The key language points of the unit are previewed clearly on a double-page spread.
This means that students are already familiar with the new language when they meet it later in the soap, and so will be able to relax and enjoy the content of the story.
The soap-opera manages to tell a great story within carefully controlled vocabulary and structural limits.
2 The Soap
Each lively episode of the Streets Ahead soap, covering a double-page spread, presents natural language in an authentic context.
The soap opera gives the whole course a light-hearted, fun touch.
All ten characters in the ‘soap’ are young professionals who will appeal to your students.
For example, there is Poppy who is 19 and French.
She's quick, determined, and looks for the good things in life.
And there's Toby, 24, an architect.
He's in love with Poppy, but she ditches him.
However, although he might look a bit lost, he makes good in Year 2.
Through the characters' relationships, work problems, and everyday interactions, new language is introduced in contexts which your students will recognize and identify with.
3 The Performance
This is the students' turn to show what they can do with the new language.
Six separate sections on two double-page spreads give them varied and interesting practice in all aspects of the language points they have met in the Preview and the Soap.
Comprehension.
A variety of comprehension exercise types help the learner to look for information and to recognize language forms.
Practice.
The language is then practised thoroughly within the context of the storyline.
Pronunciation.
Accompanying listening tapes provide models for exceptionally thorough work on pronunciation, stress, and intonation.
Development.
The language presented in the earlier sections is extended beyond the context of the story, and made personal to the student through ingenious and motivating activities which include translation.
Reading.
From the first unit, students are encouraged to develop valuable reading skills, such as close textual study, and learning to scan authentic everyday material for information.
Grammar.
Streets Ahead is based firmly on a grammatical syllabus.
This final section summarizes the grammar points presented in each unit, and provides diagrammatic ‘grammar trees’ of the key sentence structures.
4 The Options
The unique Options section provides a vast menu of extra activities from which you and your students can pick and choose according to your own needs.
You can use the Options in class whenever you need additional activities, games, and puzzles to keep some of the class busy and happy while you give help to the students who need it most.
All the activities are marked with a clock to show you how long each activity takes, so you can keep your students busy right up to the end of the lesson.
False beginners may now race ahead.
They can be encouraged and guided to work on the Options activities alone, either for homework or purely to reinforce previous work.
Your real beginners will also enjoy the games and puzzles of the Options, acquiring valuable social skills and tips on communicating with native English speakers.
Streets Ahead is entertaining.
It will get you results.
Streets Ahead is lively enough to keep the most weary students interested, motivated, and even — dare we say it?— entertained.
Underneath the entertaining surface of Streets Ahead lies a solid structural syllabus aimed at getting results .
The language is taught systematically, thoroughly, and clearly, with rapid progression throughout the course.
Although the authentic language feature implies a high passive vocabulary, the active vocabulary is only 600 words.
At every stage, students know exactly what they are doing and why they are doing it.
And this means that they are more confident about their work and really feel they are making progress.
The workbook contains a number of novel features to Streets Ahead which actively encourage learner independence , including a personal phrase file , in which students built up their own lists of useful phrases, vocabulary, and social exchanges,review pages for self-assessment,games and puzzles , extra reading material , and special listening tasks with an accompanying Student's Cassette.
The Teacher's Book contains notes on all the activities in the Student's Book, including a special story section to help your students gain full benefit from the soap opera.
Overview of the main grammatical components of each unit
FIND YOUR WAY IN ENGLISH:
GET STREETWISE
The course specifically designed for the teenager of today
A two-level course for intermediate and upper-intermediate students,Streetwise is specifically designed to appeal to the teenager of today.
Through relevant, accessible topics,Streetwise provides essential language consolidation and helps students extend their skills to become confident and proficient users of English.
Streetwise keeps students' motivation strong…
Teenage students at intermediate level can easily become bored and frustrated.
Streetwise maintains vital interest through:
its attractive, magazine format
Each unit in Streetwise is presented as an issue of a teenage magazine, introduced by a cover designed to stimulate speculation about the issue's contents.
Teenagers relate well to a magazine format, with its familiar and up-to-date feel.
The articles inside are varied, with many different writing styles: documentary reports and interviews, stories, letters and humour.
its thought-provoking topics
The topics cover a range of issues which are directly relevant to teenagers.
Intriguing, interesting, and informative, they get students thinking and talking.
The reading and listening texts are drawn from authentic material suitable for a teenage audience.
Topics in Streetwise Intermediate include: how to cope with adults; fears and phobias; fashions; drugs in sport; and moral dilemmas.
Topics in Streetwise Upper-Intermediate include: consumerism; endangered species; left-handedness; the morality of the press; and baseball.
its flexible approach
At intermediate level the problem of mixed ability can become acute, as so much depends on what students have done and assimilated in the past.
Streetwise caters for this by providing ‘core’ material, together with extra sections and optional activities.
The core material covers the syllabus in depth, and can be exploited in different ways with different types of class.
Extra sections at the end of each issue, and after the Grammar review and Grammar practice sections, provide further opportunities for language practice and development.
How a unit works
There are 12 units in each book.
Each unit takes the form of an issue of Streetwise magazine.
Individual issues develop in three parts which form the core of the course.
Part 1 uses a listening or reading text to revise grammar that students will probably have met before.
Part 2 introduces a new grammar, and includes a functional component.
Part 3 concentrates on productive skills with writing and speaking exercises related to Parts 1 and 2.
Optional extras
Over to you!sections at the end of every issue offer ideas for project work.
Topics in Streetwise Intermediate include superstitions; advertising; and film posters.
At Upper-Intermediate level, projects include consumer surveys; poetry; and analysing TV news.
Language awareness sections explore the nature of language and communication, and can be used in class or for self-study.
Streetwise Intermediate explores such subjects as how children acquire their first language; gestures; and varieties of English.
Streetwise Upper-Intermediate explores metaphors and proverbs; rhythm and stress; and the language of persuasion as used in advertising.
A further ‘extra’ in the Upper-Intermediate book is the Wise up!sections.
At this level students are often thinking about taking important examinations in English and these sections help students to develop effective examination strategies.
They also focus on how students can become more efficient language learners and better communicators.
‘The book is excellent.
Students love Streetwise, especially because of the current issues.
I was looking for the perfect book and I found it.’
…and consolidates and extends language skills
The Streetwise syllabus is the product of careful research into the needs of teenagers at intermediate level.
Revision and recycling is a prominent feature of the course, pulling together all strands of students' learning to date.
Streetwise builds on what students already know, and extends their knowledge by:
its thorough treatment of grammar
Streetwise provides vital grammar coverage — revision, extension and practice.
Teaching points arise from the listening and reading texts so that students see how structures function in real contexts.
Grammar quiz sections in Part 1 of each issue revise key grammar points.
Improve your grammar sections in Part 2 of each issue offer more extensive grammar work, and cover structures likely to be new to students.
Six Grammar review and Grammar practice sections consolidate and practise the points covered in the previous two issues.
Lots more practice is provided by the Workbook.
its balanced development of all four skills
Each issue gives balanced treatment to the four skills, with the emphasis always moving from receptive to productive skills.
Each issue contains authentic reading texts, a variety of listening and speaking activities, and carefully structured writing exercises.
Vocabulary development is encouraged through the Improve your wordpower sections in each issue.
The Workbook has tasks which focus on word sets, easily confused words, collocation and word building.
Pronunciation sections cover word and sentence stress, weak forms, intonation, and phonemes.
its focus on functional language
The Getting streetwise!sections focus on functional and situational language, as well as strategies for conversational English.
A new formula……the old magic
You can't argue with
SUCCESS
The new edition
Building on SUCCESS: the new edition
When you have a course that works, you don't sit back and watch the grass grow — you set to work to make it even better.
The best way to do this is to go to the experts, the people who use the course every day, the teachers and the students.
So that's what we did.
We asked for their advice (not all of them, there are nearly half a million users!) and the question that we asked was…
…
What is better than Success ?
The answer was much simpler than we had expected.
Of course there were a lot of details to put right.
But for over seventy-five per cent of the people we spoke to the answer was very clear.
What is better than Success ?
More Success !
The new formula
So the authors wrote the Workbook , and added to and updated the Student's Book wherever there was space.
The Workbook is 96 pages of text that is thematically related, unit by unit, to the Student's Book .
The authors put in what our research showed to be most needed: more authentic reading texts to revise and extend the target vocabulary, more revision of language structures, and four complete Progress Tests …
warm-up questions which also provide practice for the Interview, Paper 5
colourful, attractive pictures to provoke discussion
an authentic reading passage
…
Our research also told us that the Student's Book had to be in colour, so we took out the pictures and began again — using two pictures instead of one wherever possible — so that we stay up to date with the latest modifications to the Interview , Paper 5.
We have also added nine new Listening Tests (on a new Listening Tests cassette) and included a lot of new work on the Guided Writing question of the Use of English paper, Paper 3.
The old magic
What we have not changed is what has made the book so popular with your students, in particular the themes which combine so well the requirements of the exam with the interests of students at this age.
Each unit is still divided into five Focuses so that everyone in the classroom knows what kind of work to expect on each page.
And Focus Four is still entirely dedicated to composition models and practice — giving a total of twenty pages of composition work.
Each exercise in language use is still cross-referenced to the Grammar Summary at the back of the book.
Take a look at how one of these Focuses works in practice.
exam practice for Paper 1B
cross-reference to the Grammar Summary at the back of the book
exam practice for Paper 3
The most comprehensive and up-to-date First Certificate package available
There is something in the new package for everybody, and for every aspect of the exam.
The components include
Student's Book: now in colour, this is a complete 192-page course with its own Grammar Summary.
Teacher's Book: this contains many new classroom ideas plus some new photocopiable Revision Tests for the teacher.
Workbook: as well as revising and extending grammar and vocabulary, this book includes many new authentic reading passages and four new Progress Tests.
Cassette: the original cassette, unchanged from the previous edition.
Listening Tests: a new cassette with the nine new Listening Tests from the Student's Book.
To supplement the course
Practice Tests 1 & 2: ten complete Practice Tests
The Interview: a video and Video Guide with authentic scenes from a genuine First Certificate interview.
For students who wish to concentrate on particular areas of the exam, the new ‘Successful’ series will be invaluable.
Learner-training is an important feature of these books, helping students to analyse what they need to answer the exam questions, and showing them how they can improve.
Now available are  
New Primary Titles From Oxford
TOY BOX
A positive first encounter with English
TOY BOX is a cheerful new activity book for young children.
It aims to build up listening and speaking skills through a variety of activities which children can join in happily and with confidence.
It contains no reading or written work, so that children who are just learning to read and write can concentrate on developing these skills in their own language first.
Toy Box is the ideal introduction to learning English and can be used as a foundation to any main primary course.
Toy Box ensures that a child's first encounter with English will be a positive one.
Activity-based syllabus
TOY BOX develops audio/oral skills through activities which are enjoyable and familiar to young children.
In many of the exercises pupils are required to follow simple instructions which involve colouring, cutting out, and sticking.
Most of the pages in the book have been specially designed in black and white so that children can fill in and complete the illustrations themselves.
The eight centre pages are in full colour and feature attractive cut-outs for use in the activities and games.
Toy Box aims to teach a limited amount of basic vocabulary, such as greetings, colours, numbers, food, clothes, and toys.
The book's immediate appeal to young children is enhanced by the friendly central character: Coco the clown, and his exotic clown family.
Sample pages from Toy Box Pupil's book
Learning to listen, learning to speak
Children learn to listen by following instructions for the activities, which are recorded on the accompanying cassette.
They learn to speak by joining in the songs, rhymes, and numerous games.
Reading and writing are optional activities which can be introduced when appropriate.
The teacher can encourage word recognition by using games like matching words to pictures or copying words.
A helpful picture dictionary can be found at the back of the book.
Cassette
The activities are recorded on the cassette, so that even non-specialist English teachers will be confident that their pupils are exposed to the correct pronunciation.
The cassette also contains a lively selection of specially composed rhymes and songs.
Teacher's Book
As the Pupil's Book contains no written instructions, the Teacher's Book is indispensable.
It offers a high level of support for the teacher, with detailed lesson plans, suggestions for further activities, and an introduction to teaching methods.
Sample page from the picture dictionary at the back of Toy Box Pupil's Book
Chatterbox
ACTIVITY RESOURCE PACK
100 activities to try with your class!
Chatterbox , a course for young beginners aged seven or more, has rapidly proved to be a firm favourite with children and teachers alike.
Now, with the Chatterbox Activity Resource Pack , you can add to the many games and activities in Chatterbox 1 and 2 .
The Chatterbox Activity Resource Pack contains large, brightly coloured flashcards for the presentation and practice of vocabulary in Chatterbox 1 , a welcome asset to any busy language teacher.
In addition, there is a thirty-two page Teacher's Guide.
This contains fourteen pages of photocopy masters for picture playing cards, domino cards, and other games, puzzles and craft activities.
As well as notes on how to use the flashcards and the masters, the Teacher's Guide offers a wealth of suggestions for further activities, games and projects to use with each unit of Chatterbox 1 and 2 .
MYSTERY TOUR
OXFORD'S NEW INTERMEDIATE VIDEO!
MYSTERY TOUR is an exciting new intermediate level English language teaching video.
Based on an original script by Bob Baker, a leading television writer, and with an English language teaching adaptation by Peter Viney and Karen Viney,Mystery Tour combines a gripping mystery thriller with sound teaching methodology.
THE SYLLABUS
The syllabus of Mystery Tour has been specially created to provide all the essential elements of an intermediate level course.
The video and the student's Activity Book together provide powerful reinforcement of the more difficult structural areas of this level as well as revision of language that students will have already met.
Accordingly Mystery Tour can be used as a supplement to any course at this level (for example,Streamline Destinations ,Headway Intermediate , or Fast Forward 2 ) or as the sole basis for a short course at this level.
It provides a third level of classroom video following on from A Weekend Away and A Week by the Sea .
THE VIDEO
Mystery Tour is an atmospheric mystery thriller filmed entirely on location in the city of Oxford and in the Oxfordshire countryside.
It is a high quality 60-minute television film divided into 10 short episodes for classroom exploitation.
The whole programme is divided into two 30-minute video cassettes.
THE ACTIVITY BOOK
The student's Activity Book has been designed to ensure that language presented by the video will be practised and assimilated.
It contains a wide variety of stimulating material to be used both for intensive viewing and for extension activities that develop the language areas covered by the video.
For each episode of the video the Activity Book has:
two pages of activities for before and after viewing plus further activities for detailed work while reviewing the episode in four sections
two pages of exercises offering a variety of skills work
a page designed primarily for speaking or writing activities based on the story so far and the developing mystery
a page of language study that summarises the main teaching points of the episode
a transcript of the dialogue.
The Activity Book is in full colour and is heavily illustrated with photographs of scenes from the video.
THE VIDEO GUIDE
The Video Guide provides teachers with complete lesson plans that will ensure the most effective use of the video and Activity Book.
For each episode there is the choice of three different lesson plans which enable Mystery Tour to be readily adapted to a variety of different teaching situations.
The alternative plans allow for each episode of the video to provide the basis for one, two or four lessons.
Additionally, the Video Guide explains techniques such as the use of freeze-frame and silent viewing that can be used to add to the effectiveness of the video.
COMPONENTS
The video is available in VHS, Betamax, and U-matic formats, in PAL, SECAM, and NTSC standards.
Please specify when ordering.
WOW!
WOW!
What is it?
WOW! is a new three-part course for teenagers, designed to meet the challenges of teaching young beginners and bring you the rewards of success.
WOW! addresses the world of young people today within a clear, sound learning framework.
Wow your students!
WOW! looks at learning firmly from the student's point of view.
The course is based on a lively TV programme,Window on the World , which is always relevant and fun for young teenagers.
There are quizzes, travel reports, documentary features, interviews, cartoons, game shows, music, songs, comedy…in short, a wealth of activities to grab the attention of your students' lively minds, while systematically presenting and practising the structures they need.
From the cover to the cartoon strips, WOW! looks thoroughly modern and ‘young’.
So your students will relate to their coursebook and will eagerly look forward to the next activity!
1 An exciting feature on the WOW!
TV programme involves students straight away in the new language point
2 A consistent focus on grammar and pronunciation is provided in the first part of each unit
3 Daredevil photos stimulate the controlled language practice
4 The unit progresses in logical stages, each of which is clearly signposted
5 Students practise the new structure by talking about what they are going to do
6 Ways of making suggestions are given a clear context with a dash of lively humour from the irrepressible Dangerous Brothers!
For the teacher
The beauty of WOW! lies in its clarity of design.
Each level consists of 20 short teaching units divided into three parts, each of which conveniently provides you with the material for a 45–50 minute lesson.
Each part has a clear learning focus and language points are consistently signposted through the use of headings.
So both you and your students can find your way around without any difficulty.
The first two parts of a unit deal with new structures and functions within the framework of the appealing and up-to-date TV programme.
New language is presented and practised with every opportunity given for students to talk about themselves and topics which interest them.
In WOW! 1, the highly entertaining slapstick cartoons of The Dangerous Brothers provide a strong emphasis on functional language in a motivating context.
In WOW! 2, the cartoons presenting the new functions feature Pandora and her rise to fame as a pop star.
The third part of a unit recycles new language — in WOW! 1, through an intriguing picture story, The Search.
Your students will be absorbed by the adventures of Peter: how he copes with the problems of learning English and the hostility of his classmates, and how he discovers his true identity.
In WOW! 2, motivating reading and listening texts provide the focus for integrated skills development.
After every second teaching unit there is further revision and extension.
This takes the form of an ‘extra’ section in WOW! 1.
In WOW! 2, your students will happily identify with the teenage exploits of two pen-friends, Mike and Sandra.
This constant and natural consolidation of knowledge can only promote confidence, and give both student and teacher a solid sense of progress.
In WOW! 2, students learn functional language while following the rise to fame of the pop star, Pandora.
In The Search, your students will identify with the fortunes of Peter, while consolidating new language.
WOW! works
The backbone of WOW! is a structural syllabus with a firm emphasis on use .
There is controlled development of all four skills from the start of the course, to build students' confidence in using English.
As a teacher, you can be secure in the knowledge that WOW! has been researched and piloted in the classroom, in other words, WOW! works!
And you don't need to worry about excessive demands on your resources and your preparation time: WOW! is clear, comprehensive and easy-to-use.
Cassettes and Teacher's Books are available to accompany WOW! at each level.
Henry of The Dangerous Brothers in Workbook 1, and Pandora in Workbook 2, will guide your students through revision and extra tasks, so reinforcing the WOW! concept of learning made enjoyable!
WOW!
WINDOW ON THE WORLD
BEGINNER TO INTERMEDIATE
The three-year language programme preparing the young teenagers of today for the challenge of tomorrow
Series now complete
Reliable, clear, fun
A reliable syllabus, a clear classroom routine, and plenty of fun on the way: these are the ingredients that have made WOW!popular with countless teenage classes.
Teachers who know WOW!have found the course a pleasure to use and will be delighted to know that all three levels are now available.
The assurance of a reliable syllabus
Grammar
The backbone of WOW!is a crystal clear structural syllabus which provides students with a systematic and thorough foundation in grammar — from the simple present to the third conditional.
Examine any of the colourful units from the WOW!
Students' Books and you will be reassured to note that grammar points are clearly identified, explained, and practised.
Pronunciation and Vocabulary are also covered in a clear, straightforward manner.
Communication
WOW!covers grammar thoroughly and develops communication.
Language is not only presented and practised in context, but through a range of topics that appeal to teenage concerns and interests.
The language presentations take the form of quizzes, cartoons, reports, and interviews from WOW!— a teenage ‘magazine’ TV programme — all of which will motivate your students to communicate.
Each book also has a regular cartoon feature which introduces everyday functional language and provides students with an opportunity to develop speaking skills.
Skills
During our extensive research on WOW!teachers asked us to provide skills work from the beginning.
Right from level one there is a balanced mixture of the four skills — reading, writing, listening, and speaking — all of which are carefully developed throughout the series.
Revision
Each of the three levels of WOW!has special revision sections built in after every second unit.
These facilitate further vocabulary and skills development, and recycle grammar in a challenging and enjoyable context.
Language is presented in context — here as a WOW! interview
The ‘Menu Box’ previews the grammar and topics covered in each unit
Thorough grammar practice, here focussing on future forms
Colour coding indicates separate lessons
Comments:
What teachers have already said about WOW!
‘…a good attractive book which is well-structured, both within units (using all the skills) and as a book as a whole…’
‘…motivating contexts’
‘It's full of activities that will capture the imagination…’
‘Simply perfect!’
A clear classroom routine
Students expect the security of a routine in the classroom and WOW!provides a clear pattern that the teacher can follow in class.
The aims and contexts of each unit are clearly stated, and each unit, in turn, is divided into lessons which are colour-coded for clarity.
Each lesson consists of different activities, which again are clearly signposted in terms the student can understand — grammar, listening, speaking, and so on.
Regular features — the WOW!
TV programme, the serials, and the revision units provide friendly characters and familiar activity types which encourage a secure and enjoyable learning environment.
And plenty of fun on the way…
As well as the friendly company of the young Window on the World TV presenters, there are a number of entertaining features that keep interest and motivation high throughout WOW!.
In Book 1, students are gripped by ‘The Search’— an adventure story in twenty episodes, and entertained by the absurd ‘Dangerous Brothers’ who stumble their way from one comic situation to another.
In Book 2, it is Pandora, a glamorous popstar who entertains us with her adventures and in Book 3, Alfred, a shy teenager, meets lively Natasha in ‘Speak out!’.
Teenage Topics
WOW!draws on the interests of today's young teenagers — music, fashion, sport, romance, and encourages students to draw on their own experience in speaking activities and class projects.
Window on the World
WOW!does, however, as its full title suggests, aim to do more than teach youngsters to discuss their favourite clothes and poop groups.
Many sections in WOW!stimulate students to think about other countries, different cultures, the global environment: in this sense, it aims very definitely to provide a ‘window on the world’.
Grammar boxes — the target structure explained and exemplified for clarification and for reference
The lesson progresses in logical stages, each of which is clearly signposted
Functional language presented in an enjoyable context
Learn English from a wizard…
Wizadora is a young wizard who hasn't yet mastered her magic spells — and as a result her magic often goes wrong!
The Very Old Fish, who is so old he can't remember his age, Hangle who spends most of his time hidden in the wardrobe, and the Drawer People, who are forever sneaking out to make mischief, are just some of the very odd characters who share Wizadora's house and her often chaotic adventures.
A magical learning experience!
Wizadora is a new video-based teaching package for children learning English.
It combines real people and puppets to capture the imagination of youngsters and to get them actively involved in language learning.
Based on a syllabus for children in their first year of English,Wizadora helps the teacher conjure up a rich learning experience from the basic elements of language covered at primary level.
Much more than just watching TV!
Naturally, as children watch Wizadora , they learn to recognize the sounds of spoken English, and their meaning.
But Wizadora gets children to do much more than just watch telly!
For instance, each episode contains a language review section.
Then the Activity Book introduces games and exercises, with songs and pronunciation activities recorded on the audio cassette.
Full advice for the teacher
The Video Guide gives advice on how to use the video and exciting ideas for activities to try in the classroom.
Components
2 × 40 minute Video Cassettes, divided into a total of 8 episodes, with a review section at the end of each episode to reinforce the essential language points
Activity Book for pupils, with games and exercises to help them gain full benefit from the video
Video Guide for teachers, with practical suggestions on how to use the video to greatest effect
Audio Cassette, with additional songs and pronunciation activities
Wizadora can be used:
As a supplement to any first-year course for children
As a supplement to Chatterbox 1
Streamline ENGLISH VIDEO
A Weekend Away
A Weekend Away is a sparkling situation comedy that effectively combines the best in television entertainment with sound teaching practice.
It is presented in eight episodes on two thirty-minute video cassettes and is accompanied by an Activity Book for students and a Video Guide for teachers.
A Weekend Away is ideal for
all classes in their first year of English.
A Weekend Away is a fun and motivating supplement to any modern beginner's course
all users of Streamline English Departures.
The video successfully consolidates and revised the syllabus of the book using new contexts
all learners wishing to revise their elementary English in small groups or on their own at home.
The Video
The video has been written with the interests and expectations of the young adult learner firmly in mind.
It follows the fortunes (and misfortunes!) of a group of characters on a lively weekend minibus trip to Oxford.
The characters represent a range of ages and have a variety of accents, including authentic American.
The dialogue in the video follows precisely the syllabus of Streamline English Departures , and provides extremely useful natural examples of the language in use.
The video has been made using a highly-experienced cast of comedy actors and a top television light entertainment director.
Filmed entirely on location in and around Oxford, the setting provides an attractive backdrop to learning.
The video is presented in eight short episodes of six to eight minutes.
Each episode practises the language of ten units of Departures : Episode 1 covers Units 1 to 10, Episode 2 Units 11 to 20, and so on.
The episodes are ideally suited to classroom use, both in terms of length and content, and can be integrated flexibly into the school timetable.
The Activity Book
The Activity Book for the student contains a wealth of material which ensures that the maximum benefit will be gained from the video.
For each episode there are
two pages of ‘before’ and ‘after’watching activities.
The activities are based first on the complete episode, and then progress to more detailed work on each of the four sections into which the episode can be broken down
two pages of exercises which develop the teaching points of the episode
one page of transfer activities such as role-play, writing and mini-surveys
one page of language summaries
two pages of video transcript.
The Video Guide
The Video Guide contains detailed advice for the teacher on how to exploit the full teaching potential of the video.
It describes a number of techniques that the teacher can use to involve students in active viewing.
These include suggestions for prediction and reviewing work, role play and the correct use of the video controls which permit freeze-frame, silent viewing, and fast-forwarding.
Step-by-step suggestions for incorporating the video into the teaching programme are provided.
They show how to combine normal classroom methodology with the special video techniques, and will increase the confidence of teachers who may be unfamiliar with the medium.
A unique feature of the Video Guide is that it offers alternative lesson plans.
Two classroom periods per episode are suggested in the main plan.
But for teachers who wish to use the video on the basis of a fuller teaching programme, there are also lesson plans for four periods per episode, and, where access to a video recorder or time in the teaching schedule may be strictly limited, ideas are included on how to use just one classroom period per episode.
Contents
EPISODE 1 THE NOTICE
Gary lives in a block of flats.
He plans a weekend in Oxford by minibus.
We meet the other five characters.
The next Friday they load up the bus and set off for Oxford.
EPISODE 2 THE FIRST STOP
Friday afternoon.
They stop at a motorway services.
They have food and drink in the restaurants.
EPISODE 3 AT THE HOTEL
Friday evening.
They arrive at the hotel.
Kevin and Sharon look at their room.
An evening at the hotel.
Making plans for the weekend.
EPISODE 4 SHOPPING
Saturday morning.
Everyone goes shopping in Oxford.
Kevin and Sharon go to a boutique, Mrs Wilson to a toy shop, and Margaret and Nicholas to a computer shop.
They all meet.
EPISODE 5 THE DRIVE IN THE COUNTRY
Saturday afternoon.
They go for a drive, but the minibus runs out of petrol, Kevin goes for petrol, but there's a problem…
EPISODE 6 OXFORD
Sunday morning.
Gary, Margaret and Nicholas go sightseeing in Oxford.
They go round St. John's College.
Margaret loses her umbrella.
EPISODE 7 THE GAME OF FOOTBALL
Sunday afternoon.
They're on their way home.
They stop, and have a game of football.
Kevin has an accident.
They take him to the hospital.
EPISODE 8 THE PHOTOGRAPHS
Two weeks later.
Gary invites everyone to his flat.
They look at photos of the holiday.
Coming soon!
A video to accompany Streamline English Connections
STREAMLINE ENGLISH VIDEO
A Week by the Sea
A Week by the Sea is an exciting new English language teaching video designed for pre-intermediate and intermediate students.
Like A Weekend Away , for students at beginner level, it combines the best in television entertainment with sound teaching practice.
Both videos are situations comedies made by a top television light entertainment director and an experienced cast of comedy actors.
The script provides natural examples of the language in use and was written after considerable research into video teaching methods.
A Weekend Away and A Week by the Sea each consist of two thirty-minute video cassettes accompanied by an Activity Book for students and a Video Guide for teachers.
The language syllabus of A Week by the Sea is based on Streamline English Connections , so the video and its accompanying books are suitable for any pre-intermediate learners who are following on from Streamline English Departures or are studying any other course at this level.
The Video
A Week by the Sea is an amusing and motivating supplement to any pre-intermediate or intermediate course.
The video is divided into eight episodes each approximately seven minutes long.
Each episode covers the syllabus taught in ten units of Streamline Connections .
The main uses of A Week by the Sea will be to consolidate this material, or the video may be used on its own as a rapid revision course.
The Video Guide
The Video Guide gives teachers advice on how to make the best use of the video.
It fully describes a variety of stimulating exploitation techniques that will involve students in active viewing.
These include prediction, review, and role play activities.
In addition, there are instructions on the use of the video recorder for freeze-framing, fast-forwarding, and silent viewing.
There are also step-by-step suggestions for incorporating A Week by the Sea into the overall teaching programme.
These show how to combine traditional classroom techniques with the use of video and will increase the confidence of teachers who may be unfamiliar with the medium.
A special feature of the Video Guide is that it offers a variety of lesson plans to fit different teaching situations.
The basic plan provides for two classroom periods to be spent on each episode.
There are alternative plans, however, to expand an episode to four periods or, for situations where time is restricted, to spend only one classroom period per episode.
The Activity Book
The student's Activity Book includes a wide range of materials which together make sure that full and effective use is made of the video.
For each episode there are:
Before You Watch activities
After You Watch activities for the Episode in its complete form, and for each of the four Sections.
There are also:
Exercises which give practice with the teaching points of the episode using a variety of exercise types, pair work, and group work
a Tell The Story activity using photographs of the episode
Reading activities which develop this skill in the context of the subject matter introduced by the episode
a Language Summary of the main teaching points
a complete Transcript of the video dialogue
The Activity Book is in full colour and is designed to make the connection between the book and the video absolutely clear.
Contents
EPISODE 1 SUMMER HOLIDAY
Friday.
Kevin and Sharon are at work.
It's the last day before their summer holiday.
Saturday morning.
They're packing.
They arrive in Dorset and Kevin sets up the tent, but Sharon has a different idea.
EPISODE 2 BESIDE THE SEASIDE
Saturday afternoon.
Kevin and Sharon arrive in Weymouth and check into the hotel, where they meet Clive and Alison.
They go to the beach.
EPISODE 3 GOOD SPORTS
Sunday morning.
Clive and Alison at breakfast.
Clive and Kevin play golf, while Alison and Sharon play tennis.
They all meet later, and Kevin gets his revenge.
EPISODE 4 A GHOST IN THE CASTLE
Monday.
Kevin and Sharon go to Corfe Castle, where an old man tells them a story.
Then there are strange happenings in the castle…
EPISODE 5 TROUBLE IN STORE
Tuesday.
Kevin and Sharon are sightseeing in Poole.
They meet Sally from the hotel.
She tells them that Clive and Alison have hired a boat in Poole.
They meet, and make plans for the next day.
Kevin and Sharon go to a supermarket to get food for a picnic.
EPISODE 6 THE LAST BOAT LEAVES AT SIX
Wednesday.
Kevin and Sharon meet Clive and Alison and take a boat trip to Brownsea Island for the day.
But the last boat leaves at six…
EPISODE 7 HOUSE FOR SALE
Thursday.
Kevin and Sharon are visiting Wimborne Minster because it's raining.
They decide to go and look at a new house they passed earlier in the day.
Later they tell Clive and Alison what happened.
EPISODE 8 A LOOK INTO THE FUTURE
Friday.
Sharon and Kevin go to visit a fortune teller.
They meet Clive and Alison at the beach, and tell them about it.