

The Emergence and Growth of the Headhunting Business
THE ORIGINS OF HEADHUNTING IN THE USA
Since the Second World War, executive search in the US has developed from a small cottage industry into a $ multimillion, multinational business which has deeply penetrated American corporate life.
During that time, as in the case of many other trappings of modern America, it has crossed the Atlantic and subsequently emerged in Britain.
But the reasons for the origins and growth of headhunting in the USA are significantly different from those which explain the establishment and continued development of the search industry in Britain.
American search is examined here as an introduction to the arrival of this phenomenon in Britain; this analysis owes much to research published by John Byrne in The Headhunters .
Headhunting in the USA is a product of the post-war boom.
A sudden and unprecedented demand for a large number of new executives to accommodate and take full advantage of this growth coincided with a need for technical experts at management level to develop further the new products and technologies stimulated by the demands of war.
At the same time, military service had taken its toll in many American Boardrooms: inevitably, far fewer returned than had originally joined up, their ranks thinned by death on active service, by the desire to stay on in uniform and by retirement.
The great demand for executive talent brought about by the wealth of opportunities created under the post-war Pax Americana soon exhausted the supply.
This was experienced by the largest and most outstanding US corporations, all manner of industries grouped together as ‘smokestack America’, and by the powerful banks and finance houses.
All had prided themselves on training and nurturing their own people, and all boasted many employees who had notched up decades of faithful service.
Now, for the first time, they found they needed large numbers of new people, with new skills, and they needed them quickly.
There was no time to hand pick and develop enough trainees, and the only solution was to capture them from other firms.
This immediate post-war shortage ushered in what may be identified as the first phase of the emergence of headhunting.
This emphasis on the demand by companies for executives, as opposed to a demand from would-be executives for jobs, marked a crucial turning point in the origins of the executive search business.
Before the war, the most common intermediary between a potential employee and an employer was the employment agency.
The first real headhunting firms — in the first phase of headhunting — insisted that they were working for the company, not the candidate, and the company was paying the bill.
The early history of headhunting in the USA, in terms of the individual companies, is discussed in greater detail in John Byrne's The Headhunters .
THE FIRST HEADHUNTERS
The first firms, such as Boyden and Handy, who emerged to accommodate this demand did not appear overnight.
Their roots lay in another relatively new corporate phenomenon, that of management consultancy, which was gaining credence at the same time.
Booz, Allen & Hamilton and McKinsey & Co. dominated this business, which sought to find guidelines for company regeneration and solutions for management problems.
Their suggestions often begged the question as to who would actually implement the necessary corporate revolutions which they recommended.
This led to the second phase of the emergence of headhunting, in which management consultants, and with them accountancy firms, developed their own in-house headhunting functions.
Boyden and Handy arrived on the scene just as this was beginning to happen.
Jack Handy had been with McKinsey in the 1930s before setting up his own management consultancy and ‘executive recruitment’ business as early as 1944.
Handy had left McKinsey over the issue of the status of the executive search function within the organisation.
He complained that recruitment was being carried out under the banner of a management consultancy service without being accounted for or charged for separately.
Handy, an ex-stockbroker with a respectable, almost aristocratic, background and connections, did much to establish the credibility of executive search as a valuable business tool in its own right.
But he established another less welcome precedent which became common in headhunting firms in the future: he took a professional, workmanlike and effective attitude towards solving the corporate problems of others, but at the same time failed to keep his own house in order.
For this reason, Handy was forced to sell out in the late 1960s.
Sydney Boyden, after seventeen years with mail-order giant Montgomery Ward, had joined Booz, Allen & Hamilton's executive recruitment division, rising to become its manager by 1941.
A powerful, outgoing character, he felt cramped in a large organisation, and had much greater  confidence than his employers in the future of headhunting.
The formation of his firm in 1946, like Handy's two years before, showed a shrewd sense of timing.
Both firms had been influenced to a certain extent by an even earlier headhunting business, started by one Thorndike Deland in 1926, which proved to be considerably ahead of its time.
Deland, a dapper and sophisticated character whose varied career included a stint as a part-time magician, came to executive search through working for an upmarket recruiting agency.
From 1920 he ran an ‘executive placement bureau’ for the Retail Research Association, a trade group of retailers, placing over a thousand managers and executives within the buying and merchandising sector.
Setting up on his own six years later to provide a service for companies recruiting people in this field, he charged a $200 non-returnable retainer, which was subsequently deducted from his commission: 5% of the successful candidate's first year's salary.
Deland evangelically promoted his firm and its concept to a public not quite ready for it, but his moment came when war broke out and he was summoned by the US War Department to help recruit executives for the Army Service Forces.
Deland's business survives to this day but, then, as now, it concentrates on lower-level search rather than on chief executives and Board directors.
Boyden and Handy were more successful than Deland in spreading the idea of headhunting among the higher reaches of corporate America; but it was never easy to convince clients of the independent and unique value of their work.
Running his business from his own apartment in Bronxville, New York, Boyden — despite his preference for receiving fees on a retainer basis — was forced to operate on the contingency principle, whereby his fees were contingent on the success of the search.
Thus he found himself working within the grey area between employment agencies and headhunters.
That many of his clients saw him in the former category is suggested by the fact that they frequently passed to him details of their restless and unsuitable executives in the hope that he would redeploy them.
THE ORIGINS OF THE BIG FOUR
The third phase of the emergence of headhunting in the USA was marked by the formation of the Big Four headhunting firms, the search industry's equivalents of the Seven Sisters of the oil world and the Big Eight of the accountancy profession: they are Heidrick and Struggles, Spencer Stuart, Russell Reynolds and Korn/Ferry.
Fundamental to the development of headhunting was the general acceptance of the payment of fees on a retainer basis, so that employing a search consultant  was rendered comparable with that of engaging accountants, solicitors, or any other outside professional advisers.
This requirement was formalised in the official policy of the Association of Executive Recruitment Consultants, headhunting's first professional body, formed in 1959.
The Big Four emerged from the second phase of headhunting: they developed from the search departments of the major management consultancies and accountancy firms.
Heidrick and Struggles, formed in 1953, originated, like Boyden, from Booz, Allen & Hamilton, as did Spencer Stuart three years later.
Korn/Ferry, set up in 1969, came from Peat Marwick Mitchell; Russell Reynolds was the exception with a banking background.
Several other firms emerged at the same time and by the same process, such as Lamalie Associates in 1967 from Booz, Allen & Hamilton, and Ward Howell and Canny Bowen, in 1951 and 1954 respectively, from McKinsey.
The fourth phase of the development of headhunting may be identified as the splintering of individual consultants from existing firms, to set up on their own, such as Haley from Ward Howell and Egon Zehnder from Spencer Stuart, both in 1964.
This fourth phase, which reflects a desire for equity and a fairer distribution of the proceeds on the part of consultants vis-à-vis the founders and managing partners, also occurred — and still occurs — in Britain.
THE EARLY GROWTH OF THE BIG FOUR
The development of fully-fledged headhunting firms owes much to a growing conflict of interest between different sectors of their business experienced by the management consultants and accountants who operated headhunting departments.
Booz, Allen & Hamilton was forced to close down its executive search division in 1980, when serious problems surfaced as a result of trying to carry on a recruiting business whilst at the same time having 3000 management consultancy clients on their books, who were more or less off-limits from the point of view of providing candidates for headhunting.
McKinsey and Price Waterhouse also left the search industry, with only Peat's — of all the firms identified as forming the second phase of the history of headhunting — remaining in the business.
Their role in executive search is no longer of much significance, with only 5% of their headhunting clients ranking within the Fortune 500 companies.
David Smith, one of Korn/Ferry's top New York consultants, left Peat's in 1979 on this very issue.
Accused of a conflict of interest between its headhunting business and other functions, Peat's were subjected to investigation by the American governing body for accountants, with the result that they decided to turn down headhunting work for their existing accounting clients.
Smith, who had  managed much of Peat's search activities, found his volume of business reduced to a fraction overnight.
Another powerful factor behind the early success of the Big Four — and the mushrooming of nearly a thousand individual headhunting firms in the USA alone by the mid-1970s — was the scarcity of managerial talent due, quite simply, to the low birth rate in America during the Depression.
By the mid-1970s, managers and executives in the late 30s to late 40s age group were thin on the ground.
Third, the personnel function within many companies was becoming more complex, with recruiting seen as increasingly time-consuming.
Problems were encountered when personnel officials — generally lacking in senior and especially Board status — were being asked to advertise for, interview, help select and then appoint executives to positions considerably higher than those they held themselves.
These officials also soon discovered that direct approaches to rival firms for executives could be embarrassing, especially when they were turned down.
Such experiences clearly demonstrated the need for search consultants, and not surprisingly many new headhunting firms emerged and existing businesses flourished in this atmosphere.
Simultaneously, Boardrooms across the USA began to accept that it was not always possible or desirable to rely entirely upon home-grown talent, and that managers and executives could be interchangeable between apparently quite different types of business.
A similar sea change in corporate thinking was to take place, much later, in Britain.
Fourth, American government regulations protecting the privacy of the individual became significantly more stringent in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
A candidate could refuse to answer certain personal questions posed directly by a potential employer, a problem partially overcome by employing a search consultant as an intermediary.
A fifth factor favouring an increase in business for search firms was the spread of American multinationals overseas.
Not only has this phenomenon led to a concomitant spread of branches of the major search firms overseas to the major world capitals — which will be discussed at greater length in Chapter 6 — but also the pressure on multinationals to employ local executives has caused a worldwide reverse diaspora.
Increasingly, American expatriates are finding themselves returning home and, as part of the same process, many US executives have found opportunities with European and other foreign firms based in the USA who also favour the employment of nationals.
Between 1967 and 1977 the number of American executive appointments in which headhunters played a part quadrupled from 4000 to  16000 per year.
Over a quarter of these were handled by the Big Four, who dominated the top end of the market, being responsible for over 50% of searches for the $100 000 + positions.
Since then, the number has continued to increase, with the Big Four consolidating their lead in top-level recruiting.
THE FIRST MODERN HEADHUNTING ASSIGNMENT
Ironically in view of their later slip down the headhunting league table, the firm of Boyden was responsible for one of the first major searches, a landmark in the history of executive search and a vital precursor of the work of the Big four.
The theory that success breeds success is particularly appropriate to the rise of headhunting: the early searches played a crucial part in promoting the concept of executive search as a necessary tool of modern business, acceptable in even the most conservative American Boardrooms.
This historic search of 1959 was an assignment to find a Chief Executive for ITT, the powerful but then rather dormant telephone equipment corporation, which had been run by a dynasty of ex-service leaders.
The incumbent ex-military man, General Edmund Leavey, who had succeeded founder Colonel Sosthenes Behn on his death in 1957, did not welcome the arrival of the headhunters.
He did not relish the prospect of his impending retirement two years hence, and refused to consider any of the candidates whom Boyden put forward.
Boyden was considerably surprised when, instead of losing the assignment, he discovered that the determined ITT Board had dismissed Leavey and the search was still very much on.
As many search consultants were to become after him, Boyden had been the instrument by which a group of directors had removed an unwanted leader.
This search also marked the payment of large headhunting fees for the first time.
Boyden received $25 000, equal to 20% of his successful candidate's starting salary.
He had originally charged only 10% back in 1946, at a time when he was principally concerned with much lower-level searches, and had frequently experienced total losses when he had been unable to complete an assignment satisfactorily.
The ITT job of 1959 was also the first instance in which headhunting was shown for all to see as directly proving its value.
This point is emphasised by John Byrne in The Headhunters , who described how the carefully-chosen new chief executive, Harold Geneen, ‘the General Patton of American Industry’, effectively turned ITT around.
By the time he retired in 1977, ITT's sales had reached a record $17bn with earnings of an unprecedented $562m.
HEIDRICK AND STRUGGLES
The first of the Big four to be established was Heidrick and Struggles, in Chicago in 1953.
They emerged as the early leaders of the still embryonic search industry, but were not to maintain this dominance for very long.
Gardner Heidrick, like Sydney Boyden, originally came from Booz, Allen & Hamilton, having joined them in 1951; John Struggles, also like Boyden, had been Vice-president of the mail-order house Montgomery Ward.
Heidrick took the initiative in persuading his more cautious partner to take the plunge and set up their own headhunting operation; he chose an opportune moment.
In 1953, start-up costs were still low, and the partners were able to begin business on a capital of less than $25000, from a tiny office, employing their wives as secretaries.
Their initial growth was slow.
Seven years passed before they opened their second office, in Los Angeles.
Heidrick and Struggles' business took off only with the advent of Gerry Roche, a fiercely ambitious, restless, workaholic  whizz kid of the 1950s who had gained a night-school MBA taught by Peter Drucker.
Discovered by Heidrick in the course of a search, he rose quickly from associate in 1964 to partner by 1968, in charge of the recently-opened New York office.
By 1973, Roche was running Heidrick and Struggles' entire East Coast operation.
His reputation as a superstar of search, as the king of Manhattan headhunters, grew rapidly, partly through effective self-promotion but mostly because of a series of prominent, high-level successful search assignments, in the course of which he placed more CEOs and presidents of top American companies than any other consultant.
He showed immense energy in completing assignments and generating new business, and was especially successful at convincing clients of the wisdom of his choices and candidates of the importance of the opportunity on offer.
Working at the top end of the market as he did, Roche was taking on the most difficult assignments, but they were also the most remunerative and had the greatest publicity value.
One of Roche's most famous clients was the mighty CBS, for whom he undertook four CEO searches in the nine years between 1971 and 1980.
It is unusual for a major organisation to change its chief executive four times in less than a decade and the fact that they chose Roche each time — in a highly competitive market — is an impressive record in the headhunting world.
His reputation, style and personal charm enabled him to recover from serious mismatches, such as the ill-advised moving from ITT to RCA of Maurice Valente, who lasted a mere six months in his new job.
In the end, it is always the client who has to carry the can, and fortunately RCA backed up Roche by continuing to retain his services.
By 1978, thanks largely to Roche, Heidrick and Struggles were earning  higher total fees than any other search firm; charging 33.3% of the successful candidates' remuneration, these reached $13.5m.
They then seemed destined to suffer the same fate as Jack Handy's firm: a sharp decline due to financial extravagance and a lack of closely controlled management.
Ironically Roche, who was so effective at creating business, appeared unable to manage it, and almost drove the firm to bankruptcy when he became its president.
He was over-ambitious in his programme of opening new branches; he installed a new computer system costing $100000 which many considered to be inferior to the previous manual system; and he imposed a rigid form of hands-on management without a fair distribution of equity.
Dissatisfaction, exacerbated by the non-payment of the usual bonuses, led to a mass exodus and mutiny.
This eventuality was almost inevitable, given the independent, entrepreneurial spirit of Roche and many of the new consultants he appointed, who felt they were not receiving a fair share of the profits.
One was heard to complain ‘we were shipping the money to New York in boxcars and getting it back in tips’.
Roche was forced to return to search work only and take the title of Chairman, to the relief of all, and not least himself.
The firm had been profoundly shaken: it had lost $1/2m. on its overseas branches, suffered a decline in profits of 80%, and had lost 25 consultants in thirteen months.
Both the founders sold out, and over the last decade Heidrick and Struggles has undergone a long and painful reorganisation.
Its recovery has been helped by the incentives provided by a fairer distribution of earnings, and Roche's old skill in winning prestigious assignments.
His recruitment of John Sculley from Pepsi to Apple was a headhunting coup as historic as the ITT job of 1959.
By 1983 Heidrick and Struggles' fee income had recovered to $20m., only marginally behind Russell Reynolds, Spencer Stuart and Egon Zehnder.
By 1985 it had overtaken the latter, reaching $25m., and retained its position in 1986 with $30m. and in 1987 with $35m.
In the 1987 figures published by Fortune , Heidrick and Struggles ranked fourth worldwide with $38.9m. and third in the USA with $27.8m.
Business Week , in February 1989, also ranked them in fourth position, with 1988 revenues of $55m. earned from 1185 searches by 118 consultants.
SPENCER STUART
One of Heidrick and Struggles' early recruits to its ranks of consultants was one Spencer R. Stuart, yet another former employee of Booz, Allen & Hamilton.
Stuart stayed only ten months before setting up on his own in 1956.
The firm's pattern of growth, as in the case of Heidrick and Struggles, was very dependent on individual personalities, and also  suffered from the fact that the most successful headhunters are usually the worst managers.
Stuart was more committed to the establishment of an international network than his rivals, and in this was considerably more successful.
By 1973, the overseas offices accounted for more than half of the fee income, but the firm found itself poorly represented in the USA with only two of its nine branches established there.
Some of its expansion plans backfired, including a subsidiary set up to recruit minorities — women and non-Americans — which was perhaps too far ahead of its time; it folded after four years, having made heavy losses.
These were to some extent offset by the firm's success in pre-empting new markets.
For example, Spencer Stuart's Australian office opened in 1970 with virtually no competition and is now, with Egon Zehnder, dominant in the local search market.
In the early 1970s, Spencer Stuart himself considered selling out to a general consulting business.
A group of senior Spencer Stuart consultants raised with him the possibility of a sale to the consulting staff instead.
In 1973 a deal was concluded: although ‘Spence’ left, the firm could continue to use his name and the ownership of the business would be widely spread amongst all the existing consultants worldwide.
Peter Brooke (who had opened the London office) became Chairman and Jean Michel Beigbeder (then manager of the Paris office) became Chief Executive.
from this point on, Spencer Stuart became a genuinely international firm owned by its own consultants (none of whom may hold more than 2% of the stock) and managed by a Chairman and a Chief Executive, each of whom is elected to the position for a defined period.
Spencer Stuart is the only firm which has, so far, achieved the full transition to a structure where control of the business and the appointment of its management is genuinely in the hands of its consultants.
This has been a major factor in the stability which Spencer Stuart has achieved in its offices.
Beigbeder was elected Chairman in succession to Brooke in 1979 and Thomas Neff, then manager of the New York office, became Chief Executive.
Neff built up the firm's business in the USA not by dint of one overwhelming individual personality, as Roche had done for Heidrick and Struggles, but by exemplifying the success of the Spencer Stuart method of problem-solving in management crises across a range of corporate sectors.
Neff's approach was to produce corporate performance charts of his firm's most successful clients, indicating that their fortunes had been turned around by the strategic recruitment of executives headhunted for them by Spencer Stuart.
This, and the extensive publicity which Roche attracted to his most celebrated assignments, is in great contrast to the nature of the executive search industry in Britain, where the majority of clients are most reluctant to be publicly  associated with named headhunting firms.
Yet advertising their track record in detail worked for Spencer Stuart, especially in one particularly significant shoot-out in which they beat four other firms competing to win the assignment to find a chief executive for the American Council of Life Insurance.
Neff's presentation, videoed for posterity and for future Spencer Stuart trainees, enabled his firm to break into the insurance sector.
It was especially important for Spencer Stuart to enter a new field because they were already facing the problem of blockage (too many clients in one sector and insufficient companies left in which to search).
Spencer Stuart have never suffered the violent fluctuations in fortune experienced by Heidrick and Struggles, and have maintained a pattern of steady — if unexciting and generally unpublicised — growth and expansion.
Total fee income doubled between 1977 and 1983, and Spencer Stuart firmly established its position as third of the Big four by 1985, with $33m. maintained in 1986 with $43m. and in 1987 with $56m.
Figures published by Fortune , for the calendar year 1987, show Spencer Stuart's recruiting fees worldwide as over $56m.; they are marginally behind Heidrick and Struggles in the USA with $26.2m.
Business Week ranked Spencer Stuart in third place for 1988 with revenues of $81.7m. based on 1800 assignments carried out by 137 consultants.
RUSSELL REYNOLDS
Both Russell Reynolds and Korn/Ferry were founded in 1969, and now dominate the top end of the global search business.
From a slow start, Russell Reynolds emerged as a strong second to Korn/Ferry in terms of fees generated worldwide.
If Heidrick and Struggles may be identified as the most individualistic and entrepreneurial search firm, Spencer Stuart as the most discreet and quietly professional — in this sense closely related to Egon Zehnder — and Korn/Ferry as the most aggressive, then Russell Reynolds may be seen as the most elite, preppie and, according to Byrne, even arrogant, of headhunting firms.
Indeed, this is precisely what Russell Reynolds himself set out to achieve in modelling his business on top service organisations like Morgan Guaranty — where he had worked before entering search — and Morgan Stanley and McKinsey.
The firm has generally attracted Ivy League types, Reynolds having originally set up with $130 000 contributed partly by himself and partly by old Yale friends.
Known for its blue-blooded, polished, privileged, yuppie snobbery, the carefully-cultivated image of being the best has been generally convincing.
However, although Reynolds' headhunting PR is effective enough in the USA, it could be argued that the firm has not achieved quite the same level of consistent quality as Spencer Stuart in all its overseas branches.
Reynolds — a particularly single-minded, determined entrepreneur — quickly gained a reputation for headhunting in the financial services sector, gaining large fees on large salaries.
He always charged the full 33.3% fee, however enormous the successful candidate's remuneration — a policy shared by Gerry Roche — to the extent that Byrne quoted an observer as saying ‘he has never been known to leave a nickel on the table’.
Unlike the founders of the older firms, Reynolds did not come from a management consultancy background; after his early financial services work, he spent three years with William H. Clark, a headhunter from the price Waterhouse fold.
He introduced the taping of telephone calls — then seen as unprofessional, now absolutely the reverse of this — and brought in so much business that he bluntly asked Clark for the presidency of the firm.
Clark refused, thinking that Reynolds' increase in salary from $22500 to $75000 over three years was sufficient to mark his contribution.
Specialising in the financial sector has given Russell Reynolds class and style, and provided them with prestigious contacts reminiscent of the British old-boy network, but has also been the cause of its major problems.
Their Rolls Royce image was dented for a while by accusations of unethical behaviour in raiding from clients, but was restored once the business had expanded into other sectors and gained a name as a generalist.
Reynolds' strategy for developing and maintaining his prized elitist image was an obsessive attention to detail, high standards and team spirit; but his practice of circulating all the office paperwork as a system of mutual quality-control, combined with Roche-style hands-on management on occasion, occasionally backfired and some consultants left.
The awarding of cash credits to consultants helping their colleagues on searches was one effective way in which Reynolds could imbue his firm with team spirit.
He also developed the concept of ‘assists’, whereby detailed records were kept of all international and interbranch assignments, showing which consultant was responsible for which aspect of the search; those ‘mentioned in dispatches’ in this way received due credit.
Russell Reynolds suffered another knock with the arrival of Windle priem at Korn/Ferry, who effectively took much of the firm's vital financial services business in New York in the late 1970s; but they recovered as a result of the build-up of their overseas branches, and several successful big name searches.
A particularly controversial assignment, which added a new dimension to headhunting and was a foretaste of things to come, was the recruitment of Thomas Barrow from Exxon to Kennecott in 1978.
Barrow was a White Knight — headhunted to fight off a corporate raider — for whom Kennecott had to pay over  $1m. in order to match a clause in Barrow's contract with Exxon which allowed him bonuses in line with the rising price of the company's stock.
Russell Reynolds were to take on a not dissimilar problem when their London office headhunted Ian McGregor for British Steel in 1980.
Hobson Brown, in Russell Reynolds' New York office, maintains that his firm, more effectively than the other headhunters, has attracted the first real career-search consultants, graduates from business schools who have deliberately chosen to make a career in executive search; it was always the goal of Reynolds himself to build up a business as prestigious and high-powered as Morgan Guaranty, in which an ambitious graduate would seek to work right through to retirement.
Reynolds wanted new consultants from business schools and commerce or industry, not from other headhunting firms.
Russell Reynolds' predominance in headhunting in Britain, and its spectacular increase in business with the Big Bang, has contributed to its continuing growth of fee income.
By 1983, with world fees totalling $22m., it was battling equally for second place behind Korn/Ferry.
This position was assured by 1985, when Russell Reynolds earned $37.5m. to Korn/Ferry's $50m., and confirmed a year later when the total world earnings were $45m. and $60m. respectively.
Worldwide recruiting fees reached $67.7m. by the end of 1987, with $44m. in the USA, according to Fortune .
Revenues rose to $91m. for 1988 (Business Week figures), with 181 consultants handling 2000 searches.
KORN/FERRY
If Russell Reynolds' position in world headhunting has become assured by its reputation for quality and its elite image, Korn/Ferry's premier standing is maintained by dint of sheer hard work, aggressive marketing and the building of a large volume of business.
Korn/Ferry perhaps appeals more to aggressive, fast-growth conglomerates than to old-fashioned, traditional companies.
It has, overall, captured less big-name, big-salary work than Russell Reynolds, but it has become well known for the efficient and speedy handling of a wide range of assignments within its pioneering structure of speciality divisions.
The Korn/Ferry name is most widely known and publicly quoted of all search firms — Lester Korn is seen as the man who brought headhunting out into the open — and thus the firm can guarantee almost instant interest from potential candidates.
It is famous for its tremendous resources and ability to get the job done, but other firms suggest that it has a less than enviable success rate.
Korn/Ferry is still majority-owned by the founders, two former Peat Marwick Mitchell partners, Lester Korn and Dick Ferry, who hold 27.5%  of the equity each.
Korn became the front-man of the organisation whilst Ferry was in charge of the back room; both were previously involved in Peat Marwick Mitchell's headhunting branch.
Korn may be seen as in considerable contrast to Reynolds; he was no Ivy Leaguer, and learnt the principles of economics and entrepreneurship in his parent's grocery store.
He developed the classic personality of the tycoon: huge ambition combined with enormous charm and total ruthlessness.
His apprenticeship was in the Big League, as a trouble-shooting  whizz -kid at the Bank of America, and he then became Peat Marwick Mitchell's youngest-ever partner in 1961, aged only 30.
Korn met Ferry when the former was directing Peat Marwick Mitchell's West Coast headhunting division; Ferry had arrived from Haskins & Sells and the Financial Corporation of Arizona.
By the late 1960s, Peat Marwick Mitchell's headhunting division was earning $2m. annually with 20 consultants, an impressive performance considering the much lower salaries paid at that time; but it clashed with their accountancy clients, and the top management did not care much for Korn's apparently pushy style.
When the two partners first set up on their own — according to Byrne, with only $5000 capital and giving up a secure future — they did so under the guise of an employment agency, so that they would not appear to be in direct competition with their ex-employers.
But this was merely a cover, and the partners began in search from the start, subsequently headhunting many of their ex-colleagues, despite Peat Marwick Mitchell's threats of legal action.
But they, with other accountants, were soon to leave the search business — which they found ‘10% income 90% headache’— and the field on the West Coast was left wide open for Korn/Ferry, whose only competitors were Heidrick and Struggles in Los Angeles.
Korn/Ferry's strategy was to maximise their profit margins by handling all aspects of the work, and they were fortunate to gain such prestigious clients as Rockwell and Norton Simon in their early days; but the concept of headhunting was less well-established on the West Coast than in Manhattan and the partners, fighting for all the fees they could earn, were forced to undertake contingency work to help build up their volume.
Yet, more so than the other major search firms at this time, Korn/Ferry was established as a structured business, with six levels of professionals, offering formalised career development to new consultants.
Within three years their efforts paid off.
In the period November 1969 to April 1970, Korn/Ferry had made profits of $56000 on a fee income of $281 200; by 1973, when the firm employed a staff of 42, they were earning profits of $431200 on total revenues of $3.5m.
These figures were revealed when Korn/Ferry decided to go public and sell 25% of their equity to outsiders; but when the stock price fell soon after, they took fright and bought their shares back.
Once Korn/Ferry's annual fee income — growing at an annual rate of 30% — had overtaken that of Heidrick and Struggles by 1978 and Boyden by 1979, they sought overseas expansion.
This was initially achieved by taking over existing firms, such as G. K. Dickinson in London and Guy pease in Sydney, and there was much speculation about a possible merger with Egon Zehnder, which came to nothing.
With success inevitably came enemies, and Korn/Ferry, disliked by its competitors and seen as interested only in quantity, not quality, was banned from the headhunters' club, the Association of Executive Recruitment Consultants.
In an attempt to offset these attacks on its image, the firm employed top PR consultants to supply prestige media coverage, published a three-monthly National Index of Executive Vacancies and sponsored Yale and UCLA business schools.
In a business dominated by personalities, Korn/Ferry benefited considerably by the arrival of Windle Priem in New York in 1976, who fought and unseated Russell Reynolds' consultants as the leaders of headhunting on Wall Street.
But Korn/Ferry have not developed the teamwork approach that has become a hallmark of Russell Reynolds.
Why does priem — who dominates his firm's East Coast financial sector — stay with Korn/Ferry?
If anyone had the individual headhunting kudos to survive as a one-man band it would be priem or, of course, Roche.
He stays — he says — mainly for the access to the resource base, and he no doubt receives a generous salary and has future payments and bonuses guaranteed.
Korn/Ferry, whose world fee income achieved a fivefold increase between 1977 and 1986, and is confidently expected to pass the $100m. mark by the 1990s, is sometimes criticised in the USA for being dominated by the central management, for its ‘big factory’ image where the seniors do the selling and the juniors do the work, and it has also suffered much at the pen of headhunting newshound Jim Kennedy, who produces Executive Recruiter News .
Yet with its impressive lead in fee income over other firms worldwide, such criticism must inevitably contain an element of sour grapes.
Its growth can only continue with the now almost entirely entrenched position that headhunting has achieved in American corporate life.
As Lester Korn — never at a loss for a quote — told Fortune , ‘Business has become too complicated, and the stakes have become too high, for a board chairman who needs executive talent to rely on his friends or his friends’ recommendations.
He wants the best man available, not the best man visible.’
The firm's stand has been borne out by the earnings figures published by Fortune : for the calendar year 1987, Korn/Ferry's recruiting fees reached $64.6m. worldwide, of which $45.2m. was generated in the USA.
The 1988 figures confirm Korn/ Ferry's leading position with $91.5m.; although now facing strong competition from Russell Reynolds, they have far more consultants  (258).
The fact that they carried out substantially more searches (2350) for very similar revenues suggests a lower level of work than their rivals.
THE EMERGENCE OF HEADHUNTlNG IN BRITAIN
The executive search industry in Britain has come of age.
Although it has not yet achieved an acceptability on a par with headhunting in America, it has now established a recognised niche in British business, and is thrusting deeper into the corporate jungle.
But, despite the fact that headhunting originated in the USA, and that the Big four have gained a strong presence in the British search market, the headhunting business in Britain has evolved not by aping the American fashion but in its own way, with its own style, priorities, emphasis and approach.
It is now a very different business from its transatlantic equivalent, and arguably always has been.
In what way was the economic environment which fostered search in Britain different from the preconditions of headhunting in the USA?
What role did the Big four play in the beginnings of headhunting in Britain, compared with home-grown firms?
The origins of the search business in Britain may be explained by a combination of long-term and short-term factors.
In the long term, there has been a gradual but clearly identifiable change in the attitude of British business since the Second World War, which may be summed up in a single word: management.
In the short term, acting as a catalyst, there was the creation of a specific demand for executive search skills by a number of enterprising and determined individuals, working both at the behest of the Big Four and on their own personal initiative.
There are parallels here with the beginnings of search in the USA, but in Britain the concept of headhunting, as indeed with other features of modern business practice, was pushed, not pulled.
It did not spontaneously emerge with the need to solve specific management problems; those management problems had first of all to be defined and identified.
In Britain, there had to be the recognition that a problem existed long before that problem could be effectively tackled; American businessmen had already reached this point and had gone beyond it.
Headhunting in Britain was imposed — seeming alien at first— in the search for remedies for Britain's national corporate ills; in America it had burgeoned at a time of growth and prosperity.
Search in Britain has achieved maturity during the turnaround in economic conditions of the 1980s — as discussed in the following chapter — but it began in entirely different circumstances.
THE DEMAND FOR HEADHUNTING: THE LONG-TERM PERSPECTIVE
So, what were the long-term preconditions for headhunting in Britain?
The most crucial were the appreciation and acceptance of, first, the significant role of management in the economy and society and, second, the belief that individual skill in business and management could be nurtured by appropriate training and was thus transferable.
These developments in British economic thinking are shown by the publication of two remarkable business texts, which were widely read and discussed in the early 1960s. first, appearing under the title Management's Mission in a New Society , were 20 provocative papers, originally written in celebration of the first 50 years of the Harvard Business School.
The opening chapter and most pace-setting of these contributions was by the only Englishman featured in the book, Arnold Toynbee.
He examined the problems of ‘How Did We Get This Way — And Where Are We Going?’, arguing that since the last war Britain especially has presented management with a host of entirely new problems.
Second, an equally influential management text of this period was international businessman Roger Falk's The Business of Management .
He quoted a remark frequently heard 20 years before, in Britain in the 1930s and 1940s, that ‘You can't train managers!
They're born, not made.’
’ The provision of the men who were eventually to take over responsibility for the management of an enterprise was regarded as a matter of making sure that enough young men entered business at the foot of the ladder,’wrote Falk of the old days.
‘When the need arose, those who became managers were the people who had best survived the struggle up the rungs to the top.
Character was the main help up the ladder and character was the main qualification for management.’
Significantly, Falk then wrote, ‘And yet today the training of managers is one of the liveliest topics of discussion.’
The recognition of management techniques underlay a new trend of employing external consultants: a parallel in government, closely related to industry, was the advent of Lord Beeching in British Rail.
Once the plunge had been taken to call upon outside expertise for a temporary and specific problem, employing outside expertise on a regular basis was not such a great mental jump.
The recognition that managers needed training in order to acquire the necessary skills to manage effectively implicitly accepted that such skills could be moved around and injected into businesses when required.
This explains why British industry, which had never conceived of employing professional consultants to recruit and select executives and managers, came to terms psychologically with the idea of using headhunters.
The professionalisation of management in the late 1950s and early 1960s coincided with other economic trends, which may be seen as providing fertile ground for the seeds of the search industry.
British companies were, generally speaking, increasing in size through mergers and consolidation, so the stakes were that much higher and they could not afford to get things wrong; they needed new management teams to run taken-over businesses; industrial plants were growing in scale; finance was becoming more complex; business was tending to be more and more international; American operations were penetrating many European markets; and Britain was facing a host of unprecedented economic pressures and new competition with the post-war recovery of Germany and Japan.
British industry suffered a major crisis and needed to reorganise and rationalise at all levels.
The long-term prerequisites for headhunting were, in the case of Britain, negative rather than positive.
THE DEMAND FOR HEADHUNTING: THE SHORT-TERM VIEW
In the short term, the development of the British executive search industry owes much to a mixture of both demand and supply factors.
Arguably, the growth of headhunting in Britain stemmed from the success of the sales and publicity efforts of individual headhunters themselves, operating in newly responsive market conditions where a need for change had already been recognised.
There entrepreneurs identified the existence of a seller's market just waiting to be developed, and created their own demand, which gathered its own momentum and benefited from a snowball effect.
At the same time, technological changes were encouraging increased scale, pressures and stakes.
But, at the end of the day, selling companies to people and people to companies requires an ability to sell oneself too.
promotion is the name of the game in headhunting in more ways than one.
Much of this form of headhunting impetus obviously came from the USA after the opening of branches in London by the Big four.
They were eager to capitalise on the partial  Americanisation of British business and the acceptance in many quarters of American management approaches and techniques; they also closely followed and matched the globalisation strategy of their major multinational clients.
Yet British search firms played an equally, if not more, important role in the emergence of the headhunting business in this country in the 1950s, 1960s, 1970s and 1980s.
These firms had either splintered off from American companies — as in the case of Norman Broadbent — or they had been set up on their own from scratch, in a variety of forms such as MSL, EAL, Tyzack, Alexander Hughes, Goddard Kay Rogers, John Stork, Merton and Whitehead Mann, to name but a few.
How did the  individuals behind these businesses manage to promote their services so effectively?
How many more fell by the wayside in the process?
THE INTERNATIONAL HEADHUNTERS COME TO BRITAIN
Spencer Stuart
Spencer Stuart was the first of the American headhunting giants to open a branch in London, in 1960–1.
Peter Brooke, who left the firm to enter politics in 1979 and became Chairman of the Conservative party, set up the firm's British base in prestigious but not overtly showy offices in park Lane.
Followed by John Broadbent Jones, Christopher Wysock Wright, Kit power, Tim Scriven and David Kimbell, Spencer Stuart have discreetly and subtly developed a sound reputation without seeking wide publicity, enjoying many very senior assignments and a high level of repeat business.
The firm is well known for its painstaking research, which may mean that assignments are completed less quickly than by rival headhunters, but they are certainly carried out more thoroughly.
Spencer Stuart's success rate — proportion of assignments successfully completed to the client's satisfaction within the specified time — has been independently estimated at 80%, much higher than many rival firms.
Unlike most of its competitors, the firm has tended to inspire loyalty on the part of its consultants — who, since Stuart sold out in the 1970s, may enjoy a share in the equity — and has achieved a remarkable stability of gradually improved performance, still at a rate of 35% per year.
One drawback of Spencer Stuart's long-established position in London and its low turnover of consultants — otherwise seen as great advantages — is the inevitable ageing of its directors and the problem of regeneration.
The average age of Spencer Stuart directors is older than that of other Big four consultants, but is being lowered by new recruits.
The firm and its individual consultants have not unduly specialised in any one sector, and have made inroads into the new headhunting fields of working for non-profit-making organisations and the recruitment of non-executive directors.
By 1980 the firm already had eleven consultants in the UK in addition to its directors, and this has since increased to twelve.
Spencer Stuart has been variously estimated as holding a market ranking of fourth position, with its annual fee income now exceeding £4m.
Like Egon Zehnder, fees are charged on the basis of time and difficulty of each assignment, and not on the successful candidate's salary; a minimum fee of £20000 is quoted.
Despite its unhurried style and careful attention to detail, the firm achieved 170 placements with eleven consultants in 1979; now, with thirteen consultants, the firm  annually completes far more, but is not necessarily seeking to maximise its volume, and certainly not at the expense of quality of service.
Spencer Stuart's business in London and Manchester owes much of its success to its Britishness, to the fact that its consultants are at home in even the most conservative Boardrooms; the firm works in direct contrast to the style apparently adopted by Korn/Ferry, for instance.
Thus Spencer Stuart has not been unduly dependent on the multinational business it originally brought with it, and has many loyal British corporate clients on its books.
If ever the Royal Warrant were to appear on a headhunter's letterhead, it would be Spencer Stuart's, except that they would be too modest and discreet to make it public knowledge.
Boyden
Boyden followed Spencer Stuart in 1965–6 but has suffered varying business fortunes since then.
Few of Boyden's early British headhunters have survived to the present, and its level of business declined and failed to take off significantly in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
For instance, during 1979, with three consultants only 30 placements were achieved in the UK, compared with Egon Zehnder's 80 and Spencer Stuart's 170 in the same year.
The number of placements had marginally increased by 1981 to 40.
The business did grow after the arrival of Michael Curlewis in 1982 when billings were still below £300 000; according to the accounts filed at Companies' House, in 1985 Boyden, with only three consultants, achieved a turnover of £490258.
This increased to £779750 for the year ended 30 June 1986, but the firm was still substantially behind the Big four and Egon Zehnder.
However, billings have risen to £1.06m. for the year ended 30 June 1987, reflecting a dramatic recovery.
The modest premises in Buckingham palace Road have been deliberately maintained to keep Boyden's minimum fee down.
Instability and lack of direction from Head Office may explain the absence of growth in the early 1980s.
Other explanations suggested have included lack of a share of the increased City work with Big Bang.
The decision to avoid this sector was consciously taken, but now Boyden is moving into recruiting in investment banking.
Boyden worldwide has become stronger, with revenues of $34.6m. earned from 1150 searches by 100 consultants; this may lead to an increased presence in the British market.
Heidrick and Struggles
In 1968 — the same year that Gerry Roche became a partner — Heidrick and Struggles arrived in London, as part of a perhaps ill-advised and over-ambitious strategy of global expansion, and the London office  encountered considerable difficulties in trying to achieve an impact on the British market in the face of profound instability back in New York.
It too lost many early consultants — including Michael Curlewis, who went to Boyden — and did not achieve significant profitability and an important stake in the headhunting business of the capital until taken over by Dr John Viney, then aged 37, in 1985.
Previously with the prominent British executive search firm of Whitehead Mann, he had spent eight years in industry, and had worked in general consulting with HAY-MSL after a distinguished academic record at Cambridge.
Keen on promoting venture capital, Viney owns a chain of wine bars as a sideline.
Other headhunters, he has pointed out, have similar outside business interests, such as Stephen Rowlinson's (Korn/Ferry) bicycle company and David Norman's tennis racquet import agency.
Since 1985, Heidrick and Struggles in London has more than tripled its number of consultants — from five to fifteen — most of them at first new to search and comparatively young.
As a result of the Viney Revolution fee income per year has increased four-fold to over £4m., based on over 150 assignments annually.
The structure of ownership allows the individual consultants a high level of personal profit; they can receive almost half of the billings.
This rapid growth has been achieved by dint of strong and imaginative leadership pushing the firm into new areas, reflecting an almost evangelical aim to break down the old-boy network and cut out the dead wood from British industry.
The firm's estimated successful assignment completion rate of 80% compares well with other leading firms.
Heidrick and Struggles places a strong emphasis on research, employing as many researchers as consultants, and has successfully promoted researchers to become consultants.
New consultants are thus coming from the ranks of the research consultants as well as from industry and, recently (with less success), from rival headhunters.
The firm is looking for further growth, especially overseas, chiefly by acquisition and joint venture; now with several clients in Australia and elsewhere in the Far East, the London office is feeling the lack of branches in that area, despite its comparative strength in the USA.
Heidrick and Struggles in London is an entirely different organisation from what it was 20 years ago.
This transformation has been consolidated by the firm's move away from gloomy Old Burlington Street to literally ‘Ritzy’ 100 Piccadilly.
Egon Zehnder
Egon Zehnder was founded in Switzerland by the still-practising Dr Zehnder, who was originally with Spencer Stuart.
As a strongly international business it is more appropriate that it appears beside the Big  Four rather than with the British consultancies.
Established in London in 1970 in King Street, St James', then from 1975 operating in upmarket Jermyn Street, the firm is in many ways similar to Spencer Stuart.
Egon Zehnder has established a reputation for high quality and absolute discretion, charges fees based on work to be undertaken and not on a contingency or percentage of salary basis, and has retained practically all its senior staff.
The five Zehnder consultants of 1979 have now doubled in number but, nearly ten years later, the original partners are still loyal to the firm.
Egon Zehnder has only ever employed 140 consultants, and 100 of those are still with the firm.
Two of the few consultants lost were Michel Carre and Georges Orban, who went on successfully to form their own firm, Carre Orban.
Another rare loss has been that of Mark Weedon, the Managing Director in London until the autumn of 1988, now at Heidrick and Struggles.
Bearing in mind that Egon Zehnder's London office was established almost ten years later than Spencer Stuart, they do not face the same regeneration problem; only now are their oldest consultants coming up to retirement.
Egon Zehnder is currently the most powerful in Europe (in terms of number of offices, consultants and fee income) of all the London headhunters, with a strongly European culture and, in keeping with its Swiss origins, has gained a reputation for being very expensive and ultra-professional.
Egon Zehnder consultants tend to play down the headhunter image, now freely accepted by most of the Big Four's directors, and see themselves, like their European colleagues, as management consultants.
Their research resources clearly play a vital role, and the firm takes a great interest in the latest technical developments which can facilitate this department's work.
The firm's number of assignments has doubled since 1979 — from about 70 carried out by five consultants to around 150 handled by nine — and its annual fee income in London now exceeds £3m. profits are shared equally by the partners worldwide, and all new consultants are taken on with the view that they will ultimately become partners.
The firm is perhaps more strongly committed to growth than Spencer Stuart, recently taking on more new consultants and expanding into the stylish Devonshire House development opposite the Ritz Hotel in Mayfair place.
The emphasis on research, however, is less marked than at Heidrick and Struggles, and there is no movement upwards from the ranks of researchers.
Korn/Ferry
Korn/Ferry came to London in 1973, and was unique among the Big Four in taking over an existing British firm rather than setting up its own branch, a policy since dispensed with.
One advantage of acquiring G. K. 
Dickinson, however, was the older, distinctly British roots this provided: the firm had been founded six years earlier by a group of ex-Spencer Stuart consultants.
The connection proved useful as Korn/Ferry was initially strongly dependent on the multinational clients that its American offices supplied.
However, the Dickinson team had been left to run their own show, and the London office failed to match the pace of expansion of the rest of Korn/Ferry.
With the arrival of Stephen Rowlinson as London Managing Director in May 1985, total staff were reduced from 42 to 24, and consultants were replaced, mostly by other McKinsey people: Rowlinson had spent seven years with McKinsey and had been CEO of a group of manufacturing companies.
He brought to the London office the sort of uncompromising determination that has been Korn/Ferry's trademark everywhere else.
By determined marketing Korn/Ferry has now developed and maintained a high and increasing level of placements and fee income, moving into more high-earning assignments.
It apparently sets great store by creating business and completing assignments relatively quickly.
As part of an international group, Korn/Ferry's accounts have been filed at Companies' House, which show an impressive rise in fee income during the present decade.
fees in 1981 totalled £501 461; in 1982, £698507; and in 1983, £1 106446.
An accounting change then took place, with the fee figure substituted by that of turnover; this totalled £1 278 120 in 1984, £1761405 in 1985 and £2060979 in 1986.
Yet, despite its prominence in headhunting in the USA and its global dominance as the highest-earning executive search firm in the world, Korn/Ferry is still a long way from being number one in fee income in Britain.
Despite the efforts of Rowlinson and his undoubtedly substantial contribution to the growth of the UK business over the last few years, Korn/Ferry has not yet adapted to the British corporate scene quite as successfully as Egon Zehnder or fellow members of the Big Four.
Rowlinson's latest move — in December 1988 — was to merge with John Stork International's London and Scandinavian offices, a return to the earlier growth-by-acquisition strategy.
Russell Reynolds
Russell Reynolds was the last of the Big Four to enter the London market — in 1972 — but has been far and away the most consistently successful.
It was helped enormously by its expertise in financial services at a time when the demand for headhunting services in this sector was reaching unprecedented heights.
This enabled it to survive the mass defection of four consultants — equal to almost half their team — led by David Norman in 1982–3.
The annual fee income, now approaching £6m. in the UK alone, has been helped by its success not only in handling high-salaried  financial appointments, but also in its many chief executive assignments.
As we shall discuss later, David Norman, head of Russell Reynolds in 1980, was responsible — helped by international teamwork — for finding Sir Ian McGregor for British Steel, the first time in Britain that headhunters had been called in to find a new boss for a nationalised industry.
Russell Reynolds also handled the celebrated search on behalf of Lord Keith of Beecham which resulted in the appointment of Bob Bauman, then one of the most highly-paid CEOs in Britain on a £1m. salary.
In 1984 an impressive 59 assignments, accounting for 42% of Russell Reynolds' fees, were for CEO and MD appointments, each receiving salaries in excess of £50 000; by 1986 the firm handled 65 assignments in this category, with over half of their placements that year for positions receiving at least £60 000.
The elitist image that Reynolds himself so carefully nurtured has been successfully transplanted in British soil, principally through the efforts of David Norman, David Shellard and, more recently, Roddy Gow, ex-Trinity College Cambridge, the Scots Guards and Barclays Bank: clearly the British equivalents of the Ivy Leaguers back in New York.
Russell Reynolds has achieved the highest fee income in the British market through adapting to the British way of doing things whilst retaining an American approach to marketing and business development; it has achieved the former as effectively as Spencer Stuart and the latter as profitably as Korn/Ferry, to produce a combination more successful than either.
It does, however, share Korn/Ferry's possible future problems of the need for a wider distribution of equity, and blockage from too many clients in one sector.
Russell Reynolds' premier position in the British search market seems assured.
Its closest competitors are not only other members of the Big Four, but a number of successful home-grown British firms.
How and why is this the case?
THE ORIGINS AND GROWTH OF HOME-GROWN BRITISH EXECUTIVE SEARCH
In addressing the problem of how British headhunting firms, in competition with the multinational search companies, were able to create and develop a sustained demand for headhunting services, it would be unnecessarily long-winded and tedious to examine every one in detail, yet at the same time it would be sketchy and uninformative to list them all briefly without analysis, and the basic information is given in the Select Directory.
So individual examples have been chosen as representative of many others, followed by a statistical appraisal of the entry and drop-out rate of all firms in the British headhunting business over the last four decades.
THE 1950s: MANAGEMENT CONSULTANTS AS THE PRECURSORS Of SEARCH
There are many contenders for the title of first headhunter in Britain, and claimants include Charles Owen and Harry Roff, of EAL and MSL respectively, who entered the business in the mid-1950s.
These two pioneers were followed soon after by John Tyzack and by four of the big management consultancies: PA, PE, AIC and Urwick Orr.
Yet Owen, Roff and their contemporaries were not at this point working as real headhunters in the American sense of the word.
They adamantly believed that ‘at that time it was not done to ‘’ poach'’settled executives in any direct or overt way'; but they may be seen as the precursors of headhunting in Britain, in so far as they acted as consultants in executive selection and advertising, within a general management consultancy practice.
They entered the pure search industry much more recently, and still offer their previous range of services.
MSL forms the principal recruitment consultancy of Saatchi & Saatchi plc, one of the world's largest business services groups.
Charles Owen sold his interest in EAL in the mid-1960s.
The firm now concentrates on search, only occasionally using selection.
There were two main hurdles to the development of headhunting in Britain in the 1950s, besides that of the perceived need for completely undercover operations.
First, press advertisements were traditionally used for all levels of appointments.
This was not a problem which American headhunters — working in a vast country with few national newspapers read throughout the land — had had to face.
Second, the old-boy network offered a time-honoured alternative to advertising, particularly for the most senior appointments.
Such a system, based on social class and the old school tie, had never become quite so entrenched across the Atlantic in the first place, and had largely broken down by the end of the 1950s.
THE 1960s: THE BEGINNINGS OF ‘PURE’ SEARCH
This decade, which saw the arrival in London of Spencer Stuart, Boyden and Heidrick and Struggles, also witnessed the origins of the first home-grown headhunters.
Tyzack, Clive & Stokes and Alexander Hughes were formed by enterprising individuals seeking to enter this still largely untried market.
The birth of the search industry in Britain was officially recognised in the media, with the first authoritative article on search appearing in The Director in 1961.
The early search firms were dominated by two types of individuals.
First, there were the blue-blooded man-about-town types who had  perhaps not — generally speaking — enjoyed the greatest success in their commercial and professional careers, who were restless, and saw executive search as an institutionalised old-boy network, in which they could make the most of their old contacts and make money without the need for major capital investment, and who misguidedly thought that it would be an easy living.
By the end of the 1970s, such of these early headhunting characters who still survived could be found occupying the positions of non-executive directors and chairmen of search firms, lending respectability and weight but not necessarily being called on for practical help; by the 1980s most had disappeared.
Yet they played an important part in providing an entrée for headhunting to the Boardrooms of Britain.
Cricketing celebrity and journalist Robin Marler is a good example of this genre.
Korn/Ferry had Viscount Montgomery of Alamein and Sir John Trelawney; Boyden had Viscount Slim.
The consultants referred to in the earliest issues of The Executive Grapevine include many hyphenated surnames, aristocratic titles and senior military, naval and air force ranks.
The best of this breed were able to break down bastions of prejudice against headhunting, and show that the systematic and research-based recruiting of executives could be combined with sensitivity and an appreciation of the corporate culture; the worst were incompetent and snobbish.
The second type of individual headhunter was the practical, down-to-earth type with more management experience at different levels than the blue-bloods, who identified the existence of a demand for skills in senior recruiting but who was not pretentious or elitist about it in any way.
Executive search was a more scientific — and more profitable — rarefied form of more general appointment selection, a natural corollary of management consulting.
A client prepared to bring in management consultants could, in theory at least, be interested in headhunting.
This second interpretation of the originally American concept of search, and how it could be applied to Britain, sees the business more from the client's point of view than that of the would-be consultant.
Alexander Hughes, 1965
An example of this second type of headhunter is Bert Young of Alexander Hughes.
Although he spent his early career teaching, including seven years as a headmaster, he moved into management consultancy work at the beginning of the 1960s, using a variety of selection firms on behalf of his clients.
Frequently dissatisfied with the results, he argued that the need for scientific executive search was already apparent.
When Young subsequently became the Chairman of Alexander Hughes, then in its original guise as an insurance company advising pension fund  managers, he pushed them into entering the headhunting business.
He formed Alexander Hughes & Associates in 1965, which was hived off when the parent company was sold to Hogg Robinson in 1967.
Young maintained contact with his previous management consultancy clients who were already half-way convinced of headhunting, but he was prepared for much knocking on familiar and unfamiliar doors and cold-calling to drum up more business in a practical way.
As soon as he had completed a few successful assignments, word was passed around and more business came his way.
The appointment of an executive search firm to an assignment was very largely dependent on that firm being recommended by a satisfied client within an informal corporate network; shoot-outs were rare in the 1960s and many companies were loath to give business to a firm on the basis of their literature and/or presentations by consultants; so the success of early searches was crucial.
Young found that the potential clients most amenable to the idea of headhunting were those who had a particularly confidential recruitment problem on their hands, situations when it was essential that no one either inside or outside the company knew what was going on ‘’ the real cloak and dagger stuff’.
Headhunting 1960s-style tended to make consultants feel conspiratorial, shady and slightly suspect even if, like Young, they were wholly convinced of the ultimate value of executive search to a company's efficiency and performance.
Many clients saw headhunters as taking on the dirty work, and many candidates obviously shared this view.
Those on the receiving end of Young's telephone calls, instead of enthusiastically welcoming the possibility of a new opportunity, were frequently openly rude and abusive; many immediately cut him off and contemptuously slammed down their receivers.
Meanwhile, the consultants did all their own research, both by telephone and in libraries.
It was not until 1970–1 that Alexander Hughes established its own research department.
Unlike the large international headhunting firms, Young never sought to develop as much business as possible, preferring to maintain tight control of a specialist practice which also offered a form of management consultant-type counselling.
By the end of the 1960s, the firm had established a reputation in the electronics and motor industries, and in the early 1970s it expanded into oil, petroleum and chemicals, and established a foothold in the merchant banking sector.
By the end of the 1970s, Alexander Hughes' seven consultants were undertaking between eight and twelve assignments per year each, achieving between 60 and 70 placements annually, and have maintained this level of work, based on at least 70% repeat business.
The greatest changes have occurred in the average salary of candidates placed — from £25000 to £70000 — and in the firm's international links, which have  extended from two European offices to membership of the globally spread E. S. International Group.
Alexander Hughes has survived, when many like firms have disappeared, through a combination of timing, a practical approach, a realisation of the need to specialise yet take advantage of special demand — as in financial services — and the provision of international contacts.
It has been lucky in its track record, having apparently never had the necessity of reinstating a completely failed assignment.
The fees, based on time and difficulty rather than on salary level, have been kept competitive; the firm's offices, first in High Holborn, then in New Cavendish Street, then in Harley Street and back to new Cavendish Street again, are presentable and functional rather than opulent or ‘space age’.
perhaps a final factor has been the differing styles of the individual consultants, so that the firm appeals to a wider spread of clients.
If Young is an example of the second type of early headhunter identified, then the firm also has a representative of the first, in Vice-Admiral Sir Ian McIntosh.
THE 1970s: EXECUTIVE SEARCH COMES OF AGE
The third type of headhunter, more appropriate to the increasing professionalism of the business, is epitomised by David Kay and Dr Anna Mann, who entered executive search with strong commercial, professional and academic qualifications, and set about forming businesses which would continue to grow and capture an important stake in the British — if not the greater world — market.
Especially towards the end of the decade, the third type of headhunter was viewing the search business as a profession in its own right, as dynamic as the talent they were seeking, rather than as just an extension of management consultancy.
This was a function of the increasingly competitive international economy, and the crises which many stalwarts of British corporate life were facing.
Goddard Kay Rogers, 1970
Goddard Kay Rogers (GKR) is now among the leading eight firms in the British search market.
Although much of its growth may be accounted for by the rapid increase in headhunting in financial services in the mid-1980s, the firm's capability and success in this market stemmed from its secure reputation established over the preceding decade.
In the 1980s, search won many new customers; but these were precisely the companies who had been most reluctant to call on headhunters, and most cautious in using them.
GKR — long established, entirely British, and  with a name for utter discretion and high quality work — was able to win over the most conservative and privacy-obsessed Board directors.
GKR's consultants were then, and are now, similar in style, qualifications and background to those at Russell Reynolds and Spencer Stuart, but without any of the American trappings, and certainly without the aggressive marketing and obsession with business development which marks many of the international firms.
At the same time, GKR has not been sold out and swallowed up by a larger organisation, as have MSL by Saatchi & Saatchi and Norman Broadbent by Charles Barker, although there is an element of outside shareholding.
When David Kay, Roy Goddard and Fred Rogers established their business in 1970, they were one of the first British firms to operate in the same way as Spencer Stuart, Heidrick and Struggles and Egon Zehnder.
from the outset GKR concentrated exclusively on executive search, unlike Alexander Hughes and many other 1960s contemporaries, who clung either to management consultancy or selection as a sideline.
Again in contrast with many firms of the 1960s, GKR sought a general business coverage rather than specialisation in any particular sector.
If it did specialise, it was more by function, concentrating especially on CEO and MD assignments.
Advertising was practically never used, even in the early 1970s when the use of search by companies was much less widespread.
Like its multinational headhunting rivals, GKR aimed to deal with assignments with some speed, with eight consultants making over 80 placements by 1979, a rate later much increased.
GKR was able to avoid the problems of the pioneering phase of headhunting in the 1960s, and appreciated the importance of a strong research department from its foundation onwards.
Like some of the multinational headhunters and unlike many other British firms, researchers are encouraged to accompany consultants at client briefings and become closely involved in the assignment, rather than being treated as a mixture of secretary, librarian, PA and headhunting dogsbody.
GKR claim to have developed a uniquely effective research procedure, but it is such a closely-guarded secret that its uniqueness and efficacy is impossible to judge.
GKR laid the foundations of a world network in the 1970s which broadened in the following decade from Europe to the Far East.
Besides these wholly-owned GKR offices, the firm established links with American affiliates.
Now the lack of more overseas offices is perceived as a weakness, and the firm is particularly interested in a greater US presence.
GKR's business in London dominates its income, although it has Northern and Southern offices, in Leeds and Bath respectively.
GKR's growth in terms of fee income and number of consultants, although showing modest progress in the 1970s, did not take off dramatically in this particular decade.
The rate of entry of new firms in  executive search was increasing and the business was becoming more competitive, but there was not yet the demand to support them all.
However, GKR began to flourish in the early 1980s, not so much in financial services as across the board in industry.
It is one of the very few search firms whose results are published in Kompass , which reveals not only the firm's rapid rise in turnover but a striking rate of return on capital employed, indicating the potentially very profitable nature of the headhunting business.
From August 1982 to August 1984, GKR's turnover increased from £963000 to £2.5m., and profits from £46000 to £439000.
Capital employed increased from £152000 to £591 000, and the return on capital employed,(ROCE) from only 30% in 1982 to 74% by 1984.
The firm's turnover by mid-1987 reached at least £5m., with a pro rata rise in profits and ROCE.
Total worldwide fee income exceeded £6m. by 1989.
The impact of Big Bang on GKR was especially profitable for the firm because it was well prepared.
Ronald Begley, a consultant working in this sector, explained that back in 1981 GKR began establishing a team — they recruited three new consultants — to work specifically in financial services.
The team was able to win some very prestigious senior assignments during this time, deliberately dissociating itself from the wholesale movement of dealing and broking teams, an aspect of search of which GKR strongly disapprove.
So keen are GKR not to be identified with the less ethical and aggressive end of the search market that it maintains it frequently turns down business; from any other search firm, this statement might be questionable, but GKR's standing in the market, and the obvious importance of its untarnished reputation in gaining that position, suggests that it is probably the truth.
John Stork, 1973
John Stork, until recently also an entirely British-owned search firm, has established a significant niche in the British headhunting business but, unlike GKR, it has concentrated less on building up a large volume of business in London and more on expanding into Europe.
It now has wholly-owned offices in Paris, Amsterdam, Brussels, Frankfurt, Geneva, Stockholm and Gothenburg, is a shareholder in a well-established US firm and has associate arrangements in the USA and elsewhere, enabling it to sustain an annual growth rate of between 20% and 30% which is now generating annual total fees of up to £5m.
Although John Stork International became, to all intents and purposes, a pure search business, this was not always the case, and it still maintains other interests, including two management assessment firms, who employ several psychologists.
John Stork — when in his mid-30s — became aware of headhunting when he found himself on the receiving end of a headhunter's call for  the first time; in due course he became the successful candidate, but did not take the job, staying on as a member of the international Board of Masius Wynne-Williams advertising agency, where he had earlier been head of research.
The agency was enjoying considerable success on a worldwide basis at the time and, when there was a change in ownership, he considered starting his own business in marketing consulting.
The headhunting business as a whole, although it promotes the idea of systematising personal networks, still owes much to chance, coincidence and Lady Luck.
In this context, Stork came into contact with headhunting again, through his leisure interest in sailing.
At the time he was racing a boat on the international circuit and his crew member's cousin was none other than David Kay of GKR; Stork followed up the contact and, because of his research, marketing and overseas experience, the newly-established GKR offered him a job to develop their search business in Europe.
Stork was attracted to the idea of headhunting, but less to the idea of working for GKR, so he decided to set up on his own, working at both headhunting and marketing consulting.
Stork was not entirely sure how the headhunting process worked; indeed, there were no guides to the subject and all the existing purveyors of search are more or less self-taught.
With his international research and marketing background Stork (and a number of his contemporaries) argued that there must be a more effective approach than the ‘who you know’ networking in current use in the 1960s and early 1970s.
Stork's approach, as it has evolved, is marked by a preference for more experienced consultants with line management experience rather than younger graduates who just have MBAs; and for sending two consultants on every assignment, who handle the job 70/30 %.
Stork maintains that researchers should be strictly focused on research, working on one assignment at a time, with little movement of staff between researcher and consultant, believing that distinctly different skills are involved.
Stork set up the firm in 1973, becoming operational with three employees in 1974.
The investment of £25 000 was returned in profits in just over twelve months.
The 1970s saw considerable growth, the decade ending with Stork employing nine consultants, an increase of four from the previous year, completing at least 60 assignments annually, charging fees on a retainer basis, with a — now slightly ridiculous — minimum fee of £5000.
The number of consultants overseas continued to grow and the emphasis of the business moved more and more to Europe.
Stork until recently has personally maintained his hold on the majority of the equity in order, he says, to help set the direction of the firm.
He initially did not appear worried that he might lose staff as a consequence, in the way that Egon Zehnder left Spencer Stuart and Norman, Broadbent et al .
left Russell Reynolds.
He argued that consultants were tending to stay put  by the mid-1980s because of the much higher start-up costs now involved in setting up an executive search firm, which he estimated as at least £250 000, or ten times the figure he invested back in 1973.
However, John Stork & partners Ltd (as it was then styled) itself suffered a disastrous blow in the autumn of 1986 when two of its star consultants, Anthony Saxton and Stephen Bampfylde, suddenly left with no warning, taking one of the two senior researchers, Tim Roberts, with them.
Yet the firm recovered and continued to grow, generally due to a high level of repeat business and its role as an alternative to the large international search firms in shoot-outs for European-based assignments.
This emphasis on its international business was officially recognised by a change of name to John Stork International.
In a surprising development in December 1988, John Stork merged his London and Scandinavian offices with Korn/Ferry; the European businesses would appear to be still operating independently.
Although there are few certainties in the headhunting business, those firms which survived the 1970s are largely still in existence, and will probably continue to prosper, through building up a loyal client base.
Many companies prefer to hand search assignments to consultants they know, and thus will continue to support a firm, whatever happens.
As experienced by the largest international headhunting companies, the value of a ‘name’ to act as an umbrella, providing clients, research services and inter-consultant support, is vital and is becoming increasingly important.
Yet ambitious and confident consultants, especially those good at business development and successful at winning shootouts, are still able to branch out on their own, and it would not be healthy for the industry if this were otherwise.
Merton, 1976
This hitherto little-known independent British firm has recently gained considerable prestige and a dramatic rise in fee income — of over £2m. for 1988 — through specialising in a limited range of sectors.
Merton's success in its principal specialty, the London property world — the firm undertook search assignments in connection with Rosehaugh Stanhope's celebrated Broadgate development, for example— suggests that such a strategy of specialisation may become more and more common in the British headhunting business in the future.
Merton is the second of two major ventures in the recruiting business which have been set up by entrepreneurial Michael Silverman.
Well connected in the city and an enthusiastic supporter of the Conservative party — he is the Librarian at the Carlton Club — Silverman's professional career began with Procter & Gamble.
In the early 1960s — as John Stork had done — he joined Masius Wynne-Williams, a leading British  advertising agency, and developed a strong belief in the value of qualitative market research.
(His claim to fame in these years was the slogan ‘Kleenex Kitchen Towels mops up like a sponge’ for client Kimberley Clark.)
This influenced Silverman's first commercial venture, a forerunner in the search consultancy business, Lloyd Executive Selection, which offered a contingency service, employing market research techniques and limited advertising to recruit specialist managers in accountancy, law, banking, insurance and marketing.
Operating from one room above Bishopsgate Fire Station from 1968, by the time Silverman sold out in 1976 it occupied five floors in High Holborn, employed nearly 100 staff and was earning nearly £1m. annually.
He also set up two associated businesses, Lloyd Advertising Agency and the Lloyd Institute of Management.
Lloyd Executive Selection had risen in this period to become a major contender alongside MSL and PA.
Merton itself, as a result of Silverman's experience in selection, advertising and research, was first conceived as a high-level recruitment consultancy which then evolved into a management consultancy and executive search practice; he based his approach — ahead of its time in Britain in the mid-1970s — on the concept of building up a profile of ‘the ideal candidate’ by using the most sophisticated industrial market research techniques, approaching a recruitment programme in the same way as he had devised and implemented a marketing plan.
One of Silverman's earliest partners, who is now Merton's chairman, was Air Vice-Marshal Bill Gill; as head of manpower for the Royal Air force, he was one of Merton's early clients.
First based in Queen Victoria Street, by 1977 Merton had moved to Grafton Way, near many other independent British firms elsewhere in W1; the overheads of Piccadilly and St James' are affordable only by the large multinational firms.
Now with a total of twelve consultants in London and an office in Leeds, Merton has doubled its business since the mid-1980s through its policy of specialisation, according to the experience of its partners.
But this is not as narrowly based as it might first appear.
For instance, Air Vice-Marshal Gill has handled a large number of controversial searches in the defence and aviation sectors.
One, reported in Flight International , was to find three senior aerospace engineers for Canadair, the leading Canadian aeronautical manufacturer, well known for its Challenger corporate jet, CL-215 water bomber and advanced military surveillance systems.
Gill naturally began probing top British Aerospace personnel who, facing redundancy and compulsory relocation away from the Home Counties to the North of England, were interested in the opportunities on offer.
Not surprisingly, the switchboard at British Aerospace, alerted to what was happening, refused to put through any  of Gill's telephone calls; the positions were filled after Gill strategically leaked the story to the local press covering the area near the British Aerospace factories.
Michael Silverman himself, who handles assignments in the firm's property sector — which now accounts for over a quarter of its business — has also established a reputation in the retail industry.
His firm was called on by Tesco plc, now one of Britain's leading supermarket chains, when Ian MacLauren was building up his new team.
The transformation of Tesco in the mid-1980s owed much to the company's new finance director, headhunted from International Stores, and the new productivity director, who was recruited from Safeways.
One problem of working in limited specialty areas is that existing clients might be averse to the idea of employing the same search firm as their rivals; so Merton, approached by another major retailer with an assignment, cleared the matter with Tesco first.
Specialisation can also result in blockage, with so many clients in a narrow field that the scope for search is limited; this problem can be solved by specialising only in large sectors, and also widening the range of services on offer, such as management consultancy products, including manpower planning advice, executive assessment and salary surveys.
Even-more significant for their future growth, Merton has expanded the field of candidates open to them by being able to search globally, as a member of Transearch, a group of internationally affiliated consultancies in fifteen major business centres.
Silverman argues that no British-based search firm can offer an effective service and earn substantial total fees without the support of an overseas network; few would dispute this.
Whitehead Mann, 1976
Whitehead Mann has established a very professional and assertive business, now generating an annual fee income of over £4m.
It is among the least publicity-seeking and therefore among the least well known of the major firms, but enjoys a very high reputation within the executive search industry itself.
Dr Anna Mann — her PhD is in psychology — is clearly one of the pioneers of high-quality search in Britain.
She was only 28 when she set up on her own in 1976, after starting her career as a researcher.
In the mid-to-late 1970s, while building her business, she had to cope not only with prejudice against headhunting, but with prejudice against her as a woman.
When faced with one ‘old boy type’ executive' who on meeting her with a view to beginning an assignment declared that there was no place for women in his business, she announced that as he was obviously only looking for someone just like himself, he could do that  better than she could.
He changed his mind and called her back, and is now one of the firm's most long-standing clients.
Dr Mann's attitude is tough, determined, meticulous and very businesslike.
She has strong views on ill-informed observers who think that headhunting must be a glamorous life of leisurely meetings with prestigious clients and candidates, punctuated by breakfast at the Savoy, lunch at Claridges, and dinner at the Ritz.
As she told a journalist on the newspaper Today — who was obviously rather disappointed —‘I never feed my candidates.
If they want to meet me at 8am, they can have breakfast before they arrive — they don't need breakfast at the Savoy.
It is far more efficient and professional to do business in my office or theirs.’
Whitehead Mann has built up an enviable concentration in the top end of the market, attracting some particularly senior and thus highly remunerative assignments.
The firm's profits are the subject of some speculation in the business, because of its comparatively small number of employees and relatively modest premises in Welbeck Street.
Whitehead Mann has taken on some of the highest salaried job searches in Britain, comparable with Russell Reynolds' recruiting of Bob Bauman for Beecham; an assignment on behalf of a major British company looking for a chief executive to run their operations in Australia earned the firm £333 000, according to the popular press (on the basis that the successful candidate was to be paid an annual salary approaching £1m.).
Dr John Viney, now managing director of Heidrick and Struggles in London, who originally worked at Whitehead Mann, estimated that with modest overheads Mann herself personally bills at least £1m.
Whitehead Mann's prominence shows that it is not necessary to wholly own a large number of overseas offices to gain and handle top assignments successfully; its membership of the Ward Howell Group covers its international search needs without incurring the capital expenditure and risk that the Big Four have undertaken.
This is one of the largest, most effective, and most highly reputed of the global inter-headhunter associations, with over 100 consultants in 29 offices in seventeen countries including Australia and Japan.
In the USA it has recently slipped in rank to eighth position.
The firm has achieved such a profitable business largely through its efficient and meticulous research, on which Whitehead Mann places much emphasis.
This has enabled a low-profile firm to have one of the highest profiles in terms of revenues.
The strategy of teamwork on each assignment of a director, consultant and a researcher has worked well in producing an impressive completion rate and concomitant large amount of repeat business.
Whitehead Mann's dynamic and determined style and no-nonsense approach have appealed to the most sophisticated users of search; Dr Mann is seen as the thinking businessman's headhunter.
THE 1980s: HEADHUNTERS THRUST DEEPER INTO THE JUNGLE
The fourth type of headhunter combines the professionalism of the third with a practical and dynamic 1980s entrepreneurialism.
This is manifested in a strong desire to break away from corporate environments seen as financially restrictive, especially those businesses which are obviously very profitable but where the profits are not fairly shared out among those who are helping to generate them.
Many headhunters see setting up on their own as an ultimate ambition, despite the risks of flying from the safe nest of a large firm with many clients and a high level of repeat business.
Although individual client executives tend to favour dealing with known consultants, if those consultants leave their firms, they are not necessarily then seen in the same light, or as having the same resources at their disposal.
Yet the dramatic increase in the volume of headhunting business in the 1980s has enabled many individual consultants to make this leap.
Norman Broadbent and Saxton Bampfylde may be regarded as 1980s examples of the same trend which influenced Dr Egon Zehnder to leave Spencer Stuart in 1964: a desire both for autonomy and for profit.
A second phenomenon within the headhunting business in the 1980s is the transition of firms from advertised/selection-based recruitment to search; this was achieved by the old-established British firms Clive & Stokes and Tyzack & partners.
Clive & Stokes, 1980
Clive & Stokes was originally founded at the beginning of 1959 when John Stokes, who had been in personnel management in ICI and Courtaulds and was later to become the Mp for Halesowen and Stourbridge, joined Robert Clive Associates, a small recruitment company.
Clive, descended from Clive of India, together with Stokes developed close personal working relationships with a number of blue-chip companies and did not plan to expand the firm.
Their approach was to run a business similar to a small City firm of solicitors, maintaining close relationships with a few senior people for whom they would provide a personal service and gain good repeat business.
Robert Clive had family ties with Banque Worms, an influential French private bank, and worked in the City mainly for the clearers, but also had close working relationships with companies such as Distillers and Bowater.
The practice included recruitment through advertising and personnel management consultancy besides recruiting through a direct approach.
In the early 1970s Charles Barker, who handled all their advertising, took a 25% interest with the aim of developing a consulting division.
Although Clive & Stokes took on one partner from Barker, Peter Bingham (who had been personnel Director  of Bowater), the strategy was not successful and in 1986 the connection with Barker was severed.
Clive and Stokes then took stock of their position: Clive was now over 65 and looking to retire; John Stokes was 61 and very much involved in public life as the MP for Halesowen and Stourbridge.
They felt they should either bring in new blood or sell the company.
Hamish Kidd — previously with Heidrick and Struggles — was introduced to them in 1978, and it was agreed that he would work with them for a year with the aim of establishing that a sale could be arranged.
This was finally effected in the spring of 1980.
The meeting was timely because Hamish Kidd, a Cambridge chemical engineer who had spent a long period in general management consultancy with P-E Consulting Group, had developed systems to introduce executive search into P-E when it was sanctioned as an allowable technique by the Management Consultants Association (MCA).
prior to 1972 the MCA had strictly forbidden member firms to use executive search when recruiting for their clients.
Kidd reflects that at the time he was not given the unqualified support by other members of P-E who felt that the search approach was still inappropriate for a consulting firm with resident consultants on client premises and that it could injure the firm's consulting practice.
P-E had on occasions recommended clients to Lyn Brua, an American who had founded the London office of Heidrick and Struggles, and it was through that connection he decided to join the executive search industry.
After two years in the London office of Heidrick and Struggles, Kidd felt that he would prefer to work for a British firm and employ the systems he had designed.
At Kidd's arrival Clive and Stokes concentrated solely on executive search, but it has since undertaken organisational consulting assignments.
The practice has a strong industrial and commercial base and has progressed steadily, investing most of the profits in sophisticated research and information systems.
Bryan McCleery, previously the Otis personnel Director, joined in 1980, followed by Malcolm Campbell in 1981, who joined from Touche Ross.
The firm was but rarely in the area of financial services until Michael Springman joined in 1986 to head a City practice.
He had moved earlier from Heidrick and Struggles to found the executive search division of MSL.
In 1987 Alan Tipper also joined from the London office of Heidrick and Struggles.
In order to maintain a close relationship with northern clients, a small office was opened in Manchester in 1985 and a Leeds office was opened in 1988.
It was apparent in the 1980s that, to provide a complete service to multinational clients, it would be important to match their international spread with a network of offices.
In conjunction with several American firms, Clive and Stokes has been involved in developing ISA (International Search Associates) which aims to find firms who will adhere to  a strict set of rules and co-operate in a manner which will enable the client to have the benefit of local know-how, with less restrictive off-limits constraints, but at the same time have an international outlook.
The firms which have joined ISA have usually been formed by consultants with experience in the major international search firms, who wish to remain independent but adhere to the same ethical standards of the majors.
It is actively seeking to extend its network: currently it has been in discussion with firms in Austria, Greece, Italy, Spain and South Africa.
The Far East is also an important area but it has been difficult to find firms of the requisite standard who are independent.
Clive and Stokes has survived in business for nearly three decades only because of its adoption of modern search techniques, as in the case of Tyzack.
Tyzack, 1981
Founded by its eponymous chairman in 1959, who had previously started up MSL with Harry Roff, the business enjoyed a pre-eminent position in senior recruitment through advertising until the end of the 1970s.
Tyzack's advertisements, especially in the Financial Times , were eagerly studied by those seeking better opportunities in the pre-headhunting days.
John Tyzack provided for his comfortable retirement in Oxford by selling the business to Henderson Administration, the well-known investment trust.
Management was passed to Tony Barker, a law graduate of Yale, who had formerly worked with BOC.
By the turn of the decade, the partners and a specially created employee trust bought the business back from Henderson Administration — by way of a cash payment and a short-term fixed interest debenture — long before the term ‘management buy-out’ became part of everyday business vocabulary.
The arrival of a few younger consultants prompted the decision to change Tyzack into a totally executive search business, in order to maintain its market position.
In the nadir of the recession in 1981 the strongest brand name was removed from the recruitment advertising pages and became, for the first time for 20 years, an unseen operator.
After twelve months of reorganising and repositioning, Tyzack began to emerge as a contender in the top echelons of executive search.
During this transition, the retirement age was brought down by five years, staffing numbers were reduced, the unprofitable office in Edinburgh was closed, procedures were modified and attitudes changed, a research department was established, some shuffling of the partners took place, and the youngest of them, Nigel Humphreys, was appointed Managing Director.
An Oxford graduate, he had moved into general management in manufacturing and then into international construction  and consultancy from which he had been headhunted by Richard Addis, now one of his senior partners.
Since that time, the research department has grown to twelve, and several new partners (for example, Peter Bryant from Eurosurvey) have been appointed from competitors; chief executives from major institutions like Chemical Bank — Alex Gibson — and Grand Metropolitan — Peter Ohlson — have been hired to add weight to operational skills.
Nevertheless, there is considerable stability in this firm, and average partner service exceeds seven years.
Despite the passage of time since 1981 — their biggest billers are those of the original core who remain.
As far as Humphreys is concerned, firms which occupy the high ground in executive search are not necessarily limited in the variety, volume or type of search work that can be undertaken; for example, Tyzack's recent work includes finding the chairman of London Transport, looking simultaneously for three chief executives for an international trading company in the Far East, Europe and the US (none of whom was to earn less than US$450 000), searching for the chairman of the Monopolies & Mergers Commission, tracking down the chief executive of a building society and the MD of a conglomerate which, during the search, was defending itself against likely take-over bids.
Assignments can be especially challenging as in the case of the Director-General of a national charity, the chairman of a county council, the MD of a small airline perilously close to the Official Receiver, the chief executive of gunmakers Holland & Holland and — last but not least — the chef de cuisine for one of London's most famous eating places.
In order to serve corporate decentralisation and nascent prosperity outside the South East of England, Humphreys believes in regionalism.
In addition to London, Tyzack has an office in Bristol and will shortly be opening a third UK branch in the North.
It has also now established a network of offices — some of which it owns and others to which it is closely affiliated — in New York, Paris, Frankfurt and Hong Kong.
Assessment by psychometric testing, according to Humphreys, will become either an intrinsic part of more searches or a stand-alone service contributing further to management development and appraisal techniques.
Remuneration planning remains an activity of growing importance for search firms such as Tyzack, as companies agglomerate and national compensation characteristics clash.
Tyzack's UK turnover in 1988 was £2.5m. and world-wide billings around £7m.
Heavy investment in research, data base management and information systems has been made in anticipation of continued growth in a wider, more international, but more competitive market.
The company came a long way in the 1980s, but only because the leopard changed its spots by making the transition from selection to search.
Norman Broadbent, 1983
David Norman — a graduate of Eton, McGill and Harvard Business School — had already made a controversial impact on the British search business before setting up his own firm, which now enjoys an annual fee income of over £5m., ranking in second place behind Russell Reynolds in the pecking order of Britain's highest-earning headhunters.
In 1980, when Norman was UK Managing Director of Russell Reynolds, he was approached by Sir Peter Carey, then permanent Secretary to the Department of Trade, to find a new chief executive for British Steel.
When Norman recruited Sir Ian McGregor, this marked the first time in Britain that a nationalised industry chief had been appointed through executive search.
The impact of this assignment on the history and development of headhunting may be compared with that of the ITT job of 1959.
John Byrne, in The Headhunters , describes the British Steel search in detail: more than a hundred candidates from Europe, North America, South Africa and Australia were interviewed over the course of ten months.
The difficulties of persuading a businessman to take on the running of such an ailing industry — it was losing at a rate of £2m. a day — and handle its relationship with the Government and the unions was exacerbated by the comparatively low salary on offer.
Norman had pointed out from the beginning that this financial package would not necessarily be sufficient to attract the highest quality executive, and warned the Government that they should be prepared to pay more.
But he could not forestall a major parliamentary outcry on the news of McGregor's appointment.
It was not the issue of his salary alone.
McGregor, aged 67, had recently retired as Chairman and Chief Executive of AMAX, Inc., but was still a partner of Lazard Freres & Co, a New York investment bank.
Although McGregor was to be paid £50 000, the same as the man he replaced, the British government had to pay Lazard Freres $4.1m. over five years to compensate them for losing McGregor.
MPs described the payment as ‘monstrous’, ‘farcical’ and ‘disgraceful’, but the appointment showed an official acceptance of headhunting as the only practical solution to recruiting at such a high level, and an acknowledgement that top-quality executive talent was worth paying for.
The fees charged by the search firm were arguably minimal in this context.
As far as Norman was concerned, the British Steel job marked ‘the first coming of age’ of executive search in Britain.
Assignments such as this — and the recruitment of Colin Marshall from Avis to the newly-privatised British Airways for Lord King by Miles Broadbent — made an important contribution to Russell Reynolds' global earnings, and especially to the growing personal wealth of Reynolds himself, still holding a 60% stake in the equity.
This drove Norman to consider putting the reputation and earning power which he  had developed for the company to his own use, and in 1982 he formed Norman Resources Limited.
A year later — by mid-1983 — three of his former colleagues — Miles Broadbent (who replaced Norman as London managing director of Russell Reynolds), Julian Sainty and James Hervey-Bathurst — also defected, and Norman Broadbent International was formally established, helped by the credibility they had acquired from these prestigious assignments.
An accurate picture of the growth of the business was revealed when the partners — although maintaining their day-to-day management intact — sold their equity to Chatles Barker in 1986, for an initial consideration of £3.16m., finally equal to £9m.
This has provided a rare insight into the profitability of headhunting in Britain in the 1980s, which is now on a vastly larger scale than ever before.
In 1985, Norman Broadbent's chairman and seven consultants were responsible for the completion of 143 assignments — 53% in financial services and 47% in industrial and commercial services — which, at an average of £23000 per assignment, produced a turnover of £3.3m. and a trading profit of £1m.
This reflects an eightfold increase on their first year's business, when turnover was £416 000 and the trading profit was £111 000.
This growth rate has continued, with 224 assignments in 1986, a 51% increase in volume on the previous year.
The following year 202 assignments were completed, with a further 109 in Hong Kong; 24% of Norman Broadbent's business is now of an international nature.
profits have continued to represent about one-third of the turnover; this is seen as not necessarily the highest proportion of profits to income in the headhunting business as a whole, where estimates of 60% have been made in some cases.
The particularly rapid growth of Norman Broadbent owes much to the partners' skill and luck in their sense of timing in the formation of the company; it is unlikely that this could now be repeated quite so successfully.
They entered the business and developed a reputation at a time of unprecedented and unique demand, offering an independent British alternative to Russell Reynolds, with a younger and more up-market, polished and highly qualified team than GKR seemed to have.
Their income rocketed with the Big Bang demand for specialists in sales, trading, research and corporate finance.
Of Norman Broadbent's City assignments 21% were for jobs paying over £100000, and 14% of their industry business was also at this level.
This rose to 35% and 20% respectively by 1987.
During 1986 and 1987, more than two-thirds of their work was repeat business; in 1985 it had been 80%, so much of the increase in volume was due to winning new clients.
Norman Broadbent has been more successful in offering the benefits of an international network than its rivals GKR, through a combination of its own companies — as in the manner of the Big Four — and membership of a well-known established group (as with Whitehead  Mann).
Through cross-shareholdings in The International Search partnership, Norman Broadbent are represented by their own offices in New York, Hong Kong, Tokyo and Sydney, and share those of Eurosearch in Dusseldorf, Milan, Paris and Zurich.
Besides City work, Norman Broadbent has continued to attract the same high-powered assignments which came its way when it was with Russell Reynolds: 40% of its assignments were at CEO and MD level in 1987, compared with 24% in 1986.
Thus it has been able to overcome the major hurdle of the possibility of losing top contacts and clients when it was set up on its own.
for instance, in May 1987 it found John Craven of phoenix Securities to be the new chief executive of Morgan Grenfell, another assignment on behalf of Sir Peter Carey, who has since moved from the Department of Trade to become chairman of this major merchant bank.
Saxton Bampfylde, 1986
Saxton Bampfylde represents a more recent example of a breakaway this time from John Stork — suggesting that there is still scope for start-ups in headhunting.
Anthony Saxton's management training began with a major international cosmetics company, and he became Managing Director of an advertising agency before joining John Stork in 1978, where he ran the UK division.
Saxton, a doyen of British headhunting, is Chairman of the Executive Recruitment Association, formed in 1985 to link together a variety of search firms; as yet, it would appear that few of the largest are interested, but this body could form a foundation for a professional association of headhunting in Britain.
Stephen Bampfylde is by far the younger of the partnership, and contrasts Saxton's industrial and commercial experience with strong academic qualifications.
His First from Cambridge was followed by a short career in the Civil Service, commercial experience with IBM, and work with another search firm before he joined John Stork and met and worked with Saxton.
In the autumn of 1986, when Saxton and Bampfylde abandoned their previous employers, they had already prepared their future strategy: to work with only a selected and comparatively small number of clients in certain market sectors only, with an emphasis on finding the people needed to satisfy a client's strategic needs rather than on the level of appointment.
The market sectors in which the partners are most keen to establish an impact revolve mainly around services such as retailing, advertising and finance.
Most of their work to date has been with blue-chip companies, but they have also handled assignments from leading merchant banks and fashion retail houses.
Saxton Bampfylde's office in Westminster is staffed by five consultants and eight researchers.
Three consultant psychologists are on hand to provide independent assessments of short-listed candidates.
It thus has a strong research bias to its approach.
from the beginning, the partners set out to offer a global service, establishing a European and North American network of associated consultancies, shortly to be extended to the far East.
In offering any new product on the market it is essential to have something which is new and different; with the number of headhunting firms now established, how can any one firm be really unique?
Saxton Bampfylde tries to be extra sensitive, open and considerate, not only to the clients who are its bread and butter, but also to candidates, who frequently feel they have been ridden roughshod over and hard-done-by in the search process.
perhaps Saxton Bampfylde's approach is an indication of the new style executive search of the 1990s and beyond?
AN OVERVIEW: THE ENTRY AND DROP-OUT RATE OF FIRMS IN EXECUTIVE SEARCH
As outlined in the Introduction, this book specifically and deliberately concentrates on the upper end of the British search market, and is not concerned with firms specialising in lower-level appointments, selection and advertising, except when this accompanies some higher-level work, as in the case of MSL.
The following analysis is based on an annual guide to search and selection firms published since 1979,The Executive Grapevine .
This source can provide an approximation of the number of firms in Britain but cannot allow a differentiation of firms according to their standing in the senior recruitment market.
For 1986,The Executive Grapevine listed 324 firms, compared with only 212 in the previous issue, in 1984.
Forty-eight of the firms listed in 1984 had dropped out by 1986; the real increase in new firms between 1984 and 1986 — fuelled by the Big Bang — was thus 160.
This represents a rate of new entries of 80%, compared with a fall-out rate of 23%.
Such a rate of increase has not lasted, however; 357 appeared in the 1987 issue of this guide, most of them representing new growth, but at a steadier rate.
The 1988–9 volume lists 583 including many firms previously omitted and many newer, lower-level selection firms.
The 1989–90 volume is even larger with nearly 700 entries; presumably the same applies, but there is an expanded European section.
Which years saw the greatest growth in headhunting?
According to this source, and obviously excluding those firms who did not give a year of formation, only fifteen firms were established in the 1960s.
Nine were set up in 1970 alone, and this rate was maintained through the decade of  the 1970s, rising to fourteen in 1973 and dropping to seven in 1977.
But the first real headhunting boom began in the late 1970s and early 1980s, when the recession really began to bite; executive search may be seen as one of the few industries which grew in this period.
Between 1979 and 1981, 39 new search firms emerged, and thereafter the rate declined.
It is impossible to  analyse from this source the rate of entry in the last few years, because brand-new firms are reluctant to advertise their newness in case this dissuades clients and candidates from trusting them and taking them seriously.
CONCLUSION: LONG TERM OR SHORT TERM, CHICKEN OR EGG?
It is clear that although the long-term factors which favoured the professionalisation of British management and the acceptance of using outside consultants helped to prepare the ground for the spread of headhunting, the leading executive search firms themselves played a vital part in creating this new business out of nowhere.
The Big Four provided the patterns of organisational structures and methodologies in an untried and untested industry, but they did not provide people.
From the start, it was realised that for the branch of an American headhunting firm in London to gain credibility and attract clients unused to search, it was necessary to appoint British consultants and researchers rather than Americans, but nevertheless with strong support and detailed advice from the corporate headquarters across the Atlantic.
As in the case of the early home-grown British firms, many of the Big Four's consultants were of the first two types of headhunter we have identified: either the aristocrat with the old-boy network contacts or the practical selection and management consultant type whose experience was more in personnel than commerce and industry.
Therefore it took some time to penetrate the Boardrooms of British industry, because many of the early headhunters did not really speak the businessmen's language.
At the same time, the shake-out of British industry did not gather momentum before the late 1970s.
The emergence of more professional search consultants coincided with the increased need for headhunting services to help rationalisation and reorganisation; but arguably as the search industry was maturing, headhunting could attract better-qualified candidates, and as their earnings rose and headhunting became more profitable, executive search was increasingly being seen as a viable alternative to a line-management job.
Headhunters were also forced to become more professional because of the growing complexity of the corporate problems they were called  upon to solve; those consultants who were less sophisticated than their clients soon went out of business.
British companies rarely welcomed headhunters positively; they engaged them out of desperation, but it gave the good firms the chance to rise to the occasion.
Many clients became disillusioned with search in the 1970s, receiving some indifferent service and assuming that all headhunters were the same; this view is rapidly disappearing in the 1980s, although many search practices current during the Big Bang gave search a bad name, such as wholesale movement of trading and broking teams, for instance.
Overall, headhunting did create its own demand, and it is still arguable that many companies can do without it; indeed, many do.
But except for the very largest corporations with the most extensive resources, the majority of organisations have seen the wisdom — and overall cost-benefit — of bringing in outside experts when required.
It has become a recognisable stage in the growth process to use external consultants.
Single entrepreneurs just starting up, with little capital, may prepare their own advertising literature and letterheads; do all their own bookkeeping; organise their own promotion campaigns; carry out their own market research on new products; find out for themselves about new customers and, when the business begins to grow, handle their recruiting problems by advertising or asking around.
As a business becomes more sophisticated, as the founder is more pressed for time and is earning more money, the concept of outside help becomes more acceptable and, ultimately, desirable.
The real achievement of headhunting in Britain, which indicates the new maturity of the industry, has been a gradual but discernible change in the attitude of the majority of users of search.
At first, economic pressures pushed clients to a grudging, reluctant use of search consultants, and a realisation that they were acceptable and tolerable on the grounds that they could save time and hassle and ultimately even money, and could carry out confidential corporate dirty work in tight spots.
Therefore long-term factors played a strong part in convincing client companies to experiment with headhunting for the first time.
But the greater professionalism of the top search consultants and their measurable success in the business by the 1980s has influenced a significant number of clients to go beyond a basically negative attitude; and in the words of one regular user of search, to see headhunting not just as a convenient time and money saver, but as an objective, imaginative, innovative, creative and even indispensable management tool.
2
The Nature of Headhunting in Britain in the 1980s
The 1980s have seen a significant change in the fortunes of the major executive search firms in London.
Although most of the major firms now at the top of the executive search market were present in London before 1980, their position, structure and influence was relatively small compared with their growth in importance in the 1980s.
The London market may be seen to be increasingly dominated by eight firms, five of whom are true international firms — owning and controlling a wide network of offices worldwide — and three local firms.
The international firms are Egon Zehnder, Russell Reynolds, Spencer Stuart, Korn/Ferry and Heidrick and Struggles; the UK firms are GKR, Whitehead Mann and Norman Broadbent.
A number of smaller British firms are also making an important contribution, such as Tyzack, Merton, John Stork and specialists like City headhunters Baines Gwinner.
The recession of the early 1980s did much to improve the fortunes of executive search firms.
The downturn in business in a wide variety of sectors called for outstanding management talent in order to regenerate British industry.
It called — on the whole — for people different from those associated with the old-boy network, generally different from the type of people who responded to advertisements, and required a new approach to recruitment.
It came to focus on a headhunting approach to find this talent, not necessarily people who had gone to the right schools and universities.
Rather, the recession called for candidates who were above all young, sharp, bright and who had the necessary track record of success to turn businesses around.
It required fewer people who could pass the port in the right way, and more people who would have the drive, energy, initiative and sheer guts actually to make money for the shareholders and themselves in a recessionary environment.
Once a number of these people were in place, naturally they wanted to build teams in all the major functions — finance, marketing, personnel, production, R & D — more in their own image.
Thus the hunt was on for heads of functions who could deliver results, and executive search was seen to be the only truly effective way to actually define and attract this key talent.
During the recession of the early 1980s, many traditional British firms began using executive search in a significant way.
Executive search consultants became, for the first time, acceptable rather than an odd, maverick collection of people that most companies did not really like to admit using.
It also marked the beginnings of a true differentiation between the advertisements placed in the Financial Times, The Sunday Times , the Daily Telegraph and those jobs that were sourced by headhunters.
Prior to this, in the 1960s and 1970s, most senior jobs had in fact been advertised and senior people, even at chief executive level, would expect to find their next opportunity by looking in The Sunday Times .
In the 1980s it became apparent that an increasing number of the senior jobs were handled by executive search and this increased during the decade until the late 1980s, when 80% of all senior jobs in the UK sourced outside the company were covered by the search firms.
If one looks at the newspapers one rarely sees jobs advertised at over £80 000.
In addition to the traditional British company using headhunting firms, the financial services community (always a large user of executive search) was pulling even more strongly.
High-technology (hi-tech) businesses, with an open attitude to recruitment, have also been large users of executive search and today almost all sectors of British industry use this facility to some extent.
In the USA the not-for-profit sectors dealing with heads of major museums, art galleries and universities are increasingly searched by headhunters and this may well be a sector in Britain that uses search in the future, particularly if more of those organisations continue to receive increased levels of funding from the corporate sector, as would seem to be the case.
Another reason for the increased acceptability of the use of executive search firms by a wide range of industries has been a noticeable improvement in their quality.
In the 1960s and 1970s, the ranks of executive search consultants included many people who had largely failed at what they had previously undertaken.
A not untypical background of an early headhunter was someone who had had general management experience and had worked in one or more functional roles, and then found themselves, for the best of reasons, on the market.
Many thus went into executive search as it seemed an attractive, lucrative and not unpleasant way to earn a living.
These people had little training in interviewing, in handling client relationships and in understanding what a service business was about, and many clients were understandably put off by such individuals.
In the 1980s, however, things have changed.
The large executive search firms in the UK have attracted many high-quality people from a diverse range of backgrounds.
One of the notable features is that executive search consultants are a good deal younger than previously.
Many have strong academic qualifications, such as an MBA, and a significant number have experience  in general consulting as well as a number of line management roles.
However, the great difference is that the executive search consultant of today sees this as a career rather than just something to move into because they have failed in one or more previous jobs.
A significant number of the executive search consultants in the major firms have chosen, for the best of reasons, to come into this role and find it a challenging and stimulating career in itself.
SPECIALISATION OF EXECUTIVE SEARCH SERVICES
A further feature of the growth of the executive search market has been specialisation.
With increasing professionalism and sophistication, the buyers of headhunting services have become more astute, often having a great understanding of how executive search firms operate and the similarities and the differences between them.
They are well practised in choosing what they believe to be the right firm to handle a particular assignment and nowhere is this more clear than in the area of specialisation.
Increasingly in the late 1980s search consultants who present themselves to clients are being asked about their background, their particular specialisation and what they have to contribute.
Specialisation can be seen in two broad ways.
Specialisation could be in terms of industry, for instance, financial services; experience in a particular area of banking; in high technology; in consumer products; in working for the international general consultancies; or in working in chemicals, engineering or pharmaceuticals.
Knowledge of a particular industry can be a major factor in a specialist firm being selected by a potential client to undertake a search.
The only difference here is at the most senior level when search firms are asked to undertake assignments for CEOs, MDs, non-executive directors or, indeed, chairmen.
Here, experience of a particular sector is less important as a previous record of achievement in searching for such individuals than having the necessary weight and calibre to be able to attract those people.
The other way that specialisation is becoming apparent is in terms of functional discipline.
Many headhunters now specialise in the finance function, recruiting financial directors and financial controllers for a wide range of interests.
Other examples in the 1980s include information technology directors, marketing directors, sales directors or, indeed, human resources directors.
This form of specialisation is attractive to potential clients, particularly where the executive search consultant has undertaken many assignments successfully and has a functional discipline that works across a diversity of industries.
Some search consultants span these two worlds and have both a functional and an industry discipline.
What is increasingly clear is that for a large number of headhunters in the major eight firms — and many of the more profitable smaller ones — this functional or industry specialisation is a key to success.
Most of the top-flight executive search consultants who now operate at the very top end of the market have developed their search careers by some functional or industry specialisation and there is evidence that this will continue to be an important factor.
It is now becoming difficult for consultants to call themselves generalists covering all functions and all industries, and still be credible in today's highly professional and competent search market.
An example where this is very clear is in the City.
Financial services have a diversified range of job openings; some call for broad marketing knowledge, some for human resources management skills and many call for specialists in the area of arbitrage, mergers and acquisitions, swaps, corporate finance, equity trading and research.
The financial services community knows more than any other sector of British business which consultants really have that functional specialisation in executive search and will employ them accordingly.
Another factor that has become an increasing part of the business scene in the 1980s is the changing relationship between seniority and salary.
It used to be taken for granted that the person who earned the highest salary in an organisation was the general manager or managing director: the one at the top, the one that most people look to as the boss.
In this changing world, this is no longer so.
There are many cases in service industries, in consultancies, in the financial services and in high technology where heads of functions and sales-driven people who generate tremendous sums of money for their companies are paid more than the person who is actually managing and running the business.
Examples of this are nowadays quoted in most of the newspapers — the 25–30 year-old trader who is earning £200 000–£400 000 whilst the person who runs the whole department may be on a salary of only half this.
What is not so readily understood is that many of these people are paid extensively on commission.
If they make the money they get paid, but if there is a downturn in the market or their performance is not as strong as it was a year ago, then their salary will be reduced accordingly.
Likewise the top sales performer in a hi-tech company can earn, by a mixture of base earnings, commission and stock options, more than the sales director and indeed more than the managing director.
In many service businesses there is a growing number of people who do not necessarily want to progress in traditional career terms.
They would rather continue earning this money for a few years with the hope of becoming financially independent, thus broadening their options and opportunities.
Increasingly management is not seen as an end or goal in itself.
Headhunters, who mostly have a fee based upon one-third of the  first year's guaranteed compensation, did very well for themselves in the 1980s by recruiting many of these people who can make an outstanding contribution in terms of revenue to their organisations.
The headhunters' fees are large because of the very real difficulty of attracting key people and because bringing in these outstanding people can add millions of pounds' revenue to client organisations, which makes the headhunter's fee appear small in comparison with the overall potential gains.
COMPANIES THAT NEED SEARCH
The worst possible environment for business for the executive search consultants is a steady state, i.e. one where there is little change in the business climate.
With significant opportunities for growth, or even in a recession, all this change provides business for executive search.
Search consultants are often called in when an organisation is considering going into a new business sector, as Marks & Spencer did when they went into financial services with their credit card; as when BP were trying to diversify their business and spot winners by developing new technology; as financial services institutions do when they wish to launch a new product or enter new markets.
Similarly organisations that find themselves in difficulty; where the profits are not coming through, where there is pressure from shareholders for a significant improvement in profit performance; here again, the chairman and the Board are likely to reach out to executive search consultants to find them new talent.
A further example is when an organisation which has been trading for many decades finds itself increasingly out of touch with the market and the organisation's internal culture and style is no longer appropriate to the markets it is trying to address.
Again, changing the culture of business is no easy task.
One of the elements it nearly always requires is a new senior team.
Attracting the best possible talent and developing a team of people who can work really effectively together and restore the fortunes of the organisation is a particular province of the executive search consultant.
A further example is when companies wish not only to grow internally, but also to acquire other companies as a means of strengthening their market position or indeed of entering new markets.
Often there is insufficient management talent on board to achieve this objective, or it might be stretching the existing team too much so that their existing businesses may suffer.
Again, because of the confidentiality and the need to attract the best possible talent, executive search firms are often called in.
A further example where executive search firms are often used is in  the question of size of business.
If an organisation is market leader and has a size and presence which can ensure that manpower planning is possible so that most jobs can be filled from graduate entry, then the need for an executive search firm is probably limited to a few specialist or technical appointments.
If, however, we are talking about the number two or number three in a particular market, they may not be of sufficient size to achieve these objectives.
They may have a requirement where they are looking for a very high return on capital employed and need to attract and retain the very best people in order to achieve that.
They may be a branded goods company which does not have the strongest brands in the markets in which they operate.
To reinforce these brands by attracting and retaining the best talent available is a key objective.
If you are the number one in the market and have the strongest brands it could be argued that you do not necessarily need to have the strongest people!
Clients often expect to make a mixture of appointments, some internally and some from outside their organisation.
An interesting point here is that certain organisations have won a reputation for attracting and retaining senior management talent.
They become known by the headhunters as a likely place in which to find appropriate candidates for other searches.
There are a large number of organisations where the converse is true: it is not possible to find much talent and they do not occupy the time and effort of executive searchers.
Again a significant point is the culture of the company.
Some companies are fairly closed and resist the change induced by bringing people in from outside.
This has been the case with many traditional British companies and it is only now that they are really being exposed to greater change.
It is also notable that where a chairman or chief executive has been brought in from outside to those organisations, this may be followed by many changes in senior management and so, from the headhunters' point of view, putting a chief executive into an older-style organisation is usually an opportunity for them to work with the newly appointed chief executive to build the new senior management team.
COMPANIES WHO DO NOT USE HEADHUNTERS
There are a number of major organisations who make only very limited use of executive search and yet are successful on a worldwide basis.
This is certainly true of many of the largest oil companies, such as Exxon, Shell and BP.
It is true to a large extent for IBM and it is true for a branded goods company like Procter & Gamble.
All these organisations are mainly targets for the executive search fraternity, as they make only limited use, if at all, of the search firms' services.
This is because they are  able to attract a wide range of able, graduate-level entrants; they expect to (and do) lose a significant number of those but have the ability to retain the ones that they see as candidates to fill their senior management positions.
Their manpower planning is sophisticated enough to ensure that there will be an adequate number of candidates of sufficient calibre to reach the highest levels in those organisations at any future time.
They are able to do this because they have a dominant position in many markets and have the financial resources, excellent graduate training schemes, pay competitive salaries and offer a broad range of opportunities for young would-be executives to gain early experience.
Middle-sized and smaller organisations find it truly hard to compete.
These major companies are very stable, with an organisational structure which has been developed over many years and, like the Japanese Zaibatsu, they have a large-core business which is able to withstand changes in the market place.
Smaller and more volatile businesses do not have this luxury and often find themselves unable to attract the best people, and therefore have to go outside to recruit for senior management.
The culture of these non-search-using companies is often very strong, and moulds and forms people in particular ways.
Procter & Gamble influences people in terms of quality brand experience, and IBM in terms of broad sales and systems support training in computing and related areas.
The secret of these organisations is that they have a power which enables them to keep the key people which they want, even if executive search consultants potentially and actually try to lure them away.
It is well known in the executive search world that it is hard to prise really good people out of IBM or indeed attract those out of IBM whom IBM truly wish to keep.
However, these steady-state type of organisations, when they enter new markets, do then use executive search consultants to find people with particular skills.
There are no ultimate advantages or disadvantages, and such companies offer a very successful but different approach to organisation and management development which minimises the need for executive search consultants.
ORGANISATIONS WITH THEIR OWN IN-HOUSE SEARCH FUNCTIONS
Some organisations have developed their own executive search function internally to cope with their recruitment needs.
An example here is fidelity, the world's largest mutual fund manager, based in the USA.
They have their own search company which they have developed as a service business.
However, it tends to work for other companies  rather than their own, although — not unnaturally — they make use of it.
A number of other organisations have their own executive search division, often in broadly-based consultancies or in service businesses.
Saatchi & Saatchi bought Hay Associates which has a recruitment business, MSL, with an advertising, selection and search arm.
They certainly use MSL for some appointments but, as is well known, they have gone outside to use a number of the major search firms for many of their senior appointments.
It is not always easy to use their own in-house people if the chairman or chief executive wants to find a very senior director: then they nearly always go to outside professional advisers for confidentiality, for objectivity and often because the senior headhunters in the major firms are the best, of the highest quality and are paid accordingly.
Many of the in-house executive recruitment and search people are paid only relatively modestly and in many cases that is unfortunately a fair reflection of their ability.
THE BUSINESS CULTURE OF THE HEADHUNTING WORLD
The business culture of the large, international headhunting firms working at the top of the market plus a number of leading UK companies varies considerably but may be broadly defined.
Inevitably, in any market where there are competitors, the market, at some stage, will mature.
The USA is a mature search market; and the UK is now showing early signs of a maturity of the product.
Classic business theory tells us that it is increasingly difficult when the market begins to mature for new entrants to gain a significant position at a realistic cost.
The style of many of the executive search firms in the 1970s was entrepreneurial: it had to be, because the market was embryonic and growing rapidly, and the firms run by entrepreneurs grew with the market: for instance, David Norman at Russell Reynolds, David Kay and Roy Goddard at GKR and Anna Mann, founder of Whitehead Mann, are good examples of that style.
Another example could well be Peter Brooke who, though not having quite the same entrepreneurial approach, certainly had the business instincts and connections to build a significant position for Spencer Stuart in the UK, principally among the more traditional British organisations.
Those firms who did not have one strong business driver building the operation were often unable to establish a business base in the late 1970s.
These included Heidrick and Struggles, Korn/Ferry and Egon Zehnder.
By definition, any national or so-called boutique business must have a business-mover.
Failure to have that person will almost always mean that there is an inability to build the business sufficiently quickly to attract new high-quality people or retain existing staff, and build a profit base.
In the mid-to late 1980s, the position had changed.
Russell Reynolds and Spencer Stuart, both with strong UK businesses, had reached a position where being entrepreneurial was not the only thing that mattered.
Maintaining their position involved having consultants with a broad range of business and managerial skills.
Almost always, where there is a strong market position in a mature consulting environment, the needs are consolidation, client management and strong attention to quality rather than going out and finding new clients.
Egon Zehnder has a not dissimilar approach, but a more cautious and longer-term perspective, putting quality of people and of work above everything else and truly trying to build a worldwide firm with a recognisable cultural identity.
Other firms still see themselves as totally entrepreneurial: Korn/Ferry and Whitehead Mann must be seen in that category.
The pitch for new business and the winning of new business are being extremely highly regarded and valued within those organisations even now.
Heidrick and Struggles, which had previously never really made much of an impact in the UK scene, although they were strong worldwide, reorganised in the mid-1980s and attracted a strong team which is now giving them a significant presence in the UK search market.
There are other ways of looking at the culture of executive search firms.
Some may be characterised as predominantly transaction orientated: that is, obtain the brief from the client and work as hard and fast as possible to fill that particular job, that being both the goal and the result.
Other firms have much more of a consulting bias, in particular Egon Zehnder and Heidrick and Struggles, who see themselves predominantly as advisers rather than just recruitment specialists.
Their recruitment policy reflects this in the type of people they hire.
Another way that firms may be characterised is by their use of research consultants.
There is growing use of research consultants by executive search firms, but how they are used shows vast differences between the major firms.
Some use researchers mainly as librarians, keeping all the contact with clients and with potential candidates with the consultant who is handling the assignment.
Other firms use researchers to do most of the contacting or cold-calling.
In particular, four firms are very large users of this latter type of research approach: namely Heidrick and Struggles, Whitehead Mann, GKR and Tyzack.
for instance, in Heidrick and Struggles there are more research consultants than there are consultants, and in Tyzack the numbers are about equal.
Saxton Bampfylde and Baines Gwinner also put much emphasis on research in this way.
Over and above these differences there are also cultural variations between the firms.
It is common currency within executive search that  consultants who are successful with one national or international executive search firm may find it very hard to be successful in others just because the expectations and culture, way of operating and behaviour may be vastly different.
It is no easy matter to define these differences, but the clients who often use more than one of the major firms notice significant variations.
The perception of Dr John Viney of Heidrick and Struggles — and that of the clients with whom he has spoken — is this: to be recruited as a consultant in Egon Zehnder one needs a strong first degree, plus a business degree, usually an MBA.
In Heidrick and Struggles there is a strong disposition for potential consultants who have a mixture of general consultancy experience and relevant industry knowledge.
In Korn/Ferry, it would appear that the focus is strongly on sales performance.
Most headhunting firms, especially Korn/Ferry, will take the view that if people are interested, willing, motivated and tenacious enough to make a success then they will support them.
However, if they do not find it an attractive business or one that they are successful at, they are likely to be asked to leave.
A further major difference between many of the search firms is whether a consultant is really working under the umbrella of a big name in the executive search business or working truly as part of a team.
One approach — more like traders in financial services — is where they work almost independently, having their own cluster of clients and work with only a secretary.
The other end is where there is a strong culture and willingness to integrate the client in the business, put more than one consultant on a search assignment and make sure that all the consultants work together for the long-term future of the business.
Two of the international firms with a particularly well-developed cultural identity are Russell Reynolds and Egon Zehnder.
Russell Reynolds is characterised by people with a strong educational background in the UK who may well be ex-public school and Oxbridge.
This is a blue-blood organisation, very keen on people with style, contacts and a good record in industry usually working for prestige, high-quality organisations.
The more well known or international they are, the better.
Much emphasis is put on style, class and polish.
Egon Zehnder, typical of a Swiss-based search organisation, is more low key.
It is clearly prominent among executive search firms in Europe and has a strong, worldwide, one-firm concept.
Typical Zehnder consultants will, as mentioned earlier, have a First degree, an MBA and a strong consulting element in their background, as well as successful line experience.
Much less flashy and class orientated in a UK sense, they have more of a general consultancy view of the world, with a problem-solving approach rather than just an interest in completing a job.
There is a discernible culture in Egon Zehnder, whether one is in Australia or mainland Europe.
Their recruitment policy has worked very well for them and they are by far the largest outside America, although they are still having great difficulty establishing themselves in the USA.
A further difference in style between the firms is whether the culture of the organisation is centred around one or two key people or is broadly based and spread across all the consultants.
An example of a narrow-based firm is Whitehead Mann, where Dr Anna Mann has a strong market presence and is the visible outward sign of the firm and defines its culture and approach to the market place.
The other consultants in the team are expected to integrate around that style and there is pressure for them to be seen to do so.
Much the same could be said, though not as strongly, of GKR where one of the remaining founders, David Kay, is attracting most of the business and defines the overall style of the firm.
perhaps it is not too strong to say that in national firms or boutiques the culture is defined by the owner or founder of the business.
This is not the case, interestingly, in Tyzack, who are now one or two generations removed from their founder and, although working on a small scale internationally, have managed to create a strong collegial style, with a low turnover of consultants.
With the large international search businesses, inevitably there is no one view.
Many of the international firms have a broad range of consultants who have differing styles and philosophies and therefore potentially appeal to a wide and diversified range of clients.
In this sense many of the international firms will try to be all things to all people.
This has the positive advantage of giving them a broad-based appeal across a diversified range of industries and functions and always having somebody in the team who can potentially suit the chemistry of a particular client.
John Viney maintains that the exception to this among the major firms in the UK is his own firm, Heidrick and Struggles.
There, the team would attempt to have a narrower range of appeal but a greater oneness with the clients to whom they are trying to appeal.
The great advantage to them of this approach is that it has a strong one-firm concept, where most of the values arid styles of the consultants are compatible, thus making it potentially easier to integrate as a consultancy team.
Here the philosophy is to go and find the clients in a range of sectors which have a compatible style and approach leaving the other clients to seek their executive search needs elsewhere.
The aim of Heidrick and Struggles' approach is to build a team that can truly work and integrate together over a number of years.
Much has been written on how to keep a team of consultants in a service sector together.
Shared values among the team and a common approach is often at the core of success.
Again, Egon Zehnder have, in no small measure, managed to keep their team together worldwide by having one strong culture and recruiting people who really integrate with it.
THE FAILURE AND DROP-OUT RATE OF FIRMS
In any dynamic market there is always a movement of positions and differences in firms measured in fee income.
The loss of a top person in an executive search firm can radically alter the business and their fortunes.
Many firms that had a significant executive search presence in the market place in the 1970s and early 1980s are mow not even visible in the market.
However, with the maturity of the business, these changes will become less noticeable and frequent.
WHY BECOME AN EXECUTIVE SEARCH CONSULTANT?
There is no one easy answer to this question.
In many cases candidates have been attracted to the search business through being in contact with a search firm while discussing an assignment they are handling.
perhaps the assignment is not appropriate to them but the managing partner of the search firm may well feel that he or she has potential to be an executive search consultant.
However, there are always attendant risks with taking people out of an environment where they have been successful and moving them, mid-career, into a completely different style and sector and trying to make them successful there.
Every executive search firm clearly has had their failures.
Below is printed the specification for an Executive Search Associate, compiled by Heidrick and Struggles.
It is not that different from many of the needs of the top executive search firms.
ASSOCIATE, HEIDRICK AND STRUGGLES
After initial training, the Heidrick and Struggles Associate will be expected to undertake entire search assignments with minimal supervision and coaching from the Office Manager and/or partners.
This involves definition of the job specifications with the client; laying out a search strategy with the Research Department, the development of potential candidates through sourcing, interviewing, making a final recommendation to the client; and handling both client and candidate in the delicate final stages of the negotiation to ensure a positive end of the assignment.
Any Associate is recruited with the prospect that he or she will be eligible for partnership after a few years: business development abilities, superior counselling skills in the field and a deep commitment to the firm and its progress are qualities which will rapidly become determinant.
Compensation is made of a base salary and a bonus.
Base salary is commensurate with the remuneration this person would earn in a top paying industry in view of his or her  educational and professional experience.
The bonus is discretionary but linked to performance: billings, acquisition of business (new and repeat), and general quality of work.
Age: late 30s to early 40s.
Education: postgraduate degree level from a leading university.
Languages: all Heidrick and Struggles Consultants should be fluent in English.
persons whose mother tongue is English should preferably have another language.
An international attitude and frame of mind are important, including an ability to understand, accept and work with other cultures.
Experience: persons who have been in other types of consulting seem to adapt more rapidly to executive search and this should be an important source of consultants for Heidrick and Struggles.
On the other hand, consultants from other search firms have very often failed in Heidrick and Struggles but this has not always been the case.
Some line experience appears a main criterion.
Experience in selling goods is certainly a plus.
The candidate's professional career must show a clear progression and unquestionable achievements.
Unusual interests, off the beaten track experiences should be of interest.
Good presentation: dress standards of a person working at the highest levels of large corporations.
Above-average communication skills: to the point, concise, convincing without being too talkative: a good listener but not passive.
Quick to understand the hidden points of a conversation.
A good sense of humour is a great plus.
Intelligence and intuition.
Empathy and judgement.
Good critical mind, but not to the point of cynicism.
Deep-rooted emotional stability.
Strong resistance to stress.
Resilience.
A person who is quickly back on his or her feet after a serious blow.
Self-motivated and self-starter. fairly independent and autonomous personality.
Achievement driven.
Intellectual honesty.
Service-minded and strongly dedicated to solving the client's problem.
But not a loner.
Capacity to attach to a firm, a team.
His or her ambition should be to become a recognised professional in the field, to handle more and more prestigious assignments rather than to acquire the powers of a line executive.
Entrepreneurial spirit.
Good at managing one's own time.
A strong interest in people and what makes them tick.
Attentive to quality: high standards for oneself and others.
Not willing to compromise with what is merely acceptable.
In the 1970s most people who joined executive search firms came from a career in industry.
Most were in their 40s to 60s in age and were of an Establishment style and type.
In the 1980s there are people from a number of different backgrounds.
John Viney at Heidrick and Struggles came from a general consultancy and two other executive search firms before coming to Heidrick and Struggles.
Mark Weedon had a period in general management consultancy with McKinsey and experience in a major international company before coming to Egon Zehnder.
John Grumbar, who replaced Weedon at Egon Zehnder, is an exception having a financial services background with the Stock Exchange without previous consulting or recruiting experience.
David Shellard had previous recruitment experience before joining Russell Reynolds.
Anna Mann at Whitehead Mann had a background in research and previous experience in another executive search firm before founding her own firm.
Nigel Humphreys, before joining Tyzack, was engaged in international consultancy, advising governments.
Thus, the managing partner of these firms of the 1980s usually has either a recruitment or management consultancy background, rather than just having worked in industry.
They are also much younger.
WHAT MAKES A SUCCESSFUL SEARCH CONSULTANT?
This is a very hard question to answer but one which the executive search firms would like to answer in a really strong and substantive way.
On the one hand ability to sell is needed but perhaps more important is the ability to manage client relationships at a very senior level.
That particular task needs a more outgoing personality.
However, there are more reflective tasks: for example, interviewing.
A headhunter needs to be an excellent listener, receptive, willing and able to see the difference in peoples' backgrounds and how those people might fit into a very different environment.
A strong measure of creativity is required, not just an ability to see the obvious.
In addition, a strong administrative capability is desirable in order to be able to manage themselves and the large amount of work, in a quality-conscious and timely fashion.
Apart from that, a consultant should have the ability not just to be an egotist but to integrate with a team of people; they should also have the strength of purpose to be able to get results and to keep going through adversity.
Another important attribute is the ability to work for long periods almost independently and not feel alienated but, on the other hand, also be able to integrate with the team.
One of the interesting aspects of the executive search business is that it has enabled some people, who have not been truly successful at other careers they have  undertaken, to be more than successful in executive search.
A high-quality academic background, experience in consultancy and line management and qualities such as weight and drive are by no means a total guarantee of success.
THE NATURE Of EQUITY HOLDING IN EXECUTIVE SEARCH
In the national executive search companies, the equity holding is principally with the founders of the business.
None of the big eight firms in the UK — Heidrick and Struggles, Russell Reynolds, Egon Zehnder, Spencer Stuart and Korn/Ferry (the international firms) or Whitehead Mann, GKR and Norman Broadbent — is directly quoted on the Stock Exchange.
Norman Broadbent, 2½ years after they were founded, was acquired by Charles Barker plc, a quoted company, as discussed in Chapter 1.
At the time of writing none of the other firms is quoted on the Unlisted Securities Market or the Stock Exchange.
In the early 1970s — as we saw — Korn/Ferry had a market quotation for a period but the partners soon bought all their shares back.
Thus the equities in these businesses are based at present on net asset value: that is, the value of the leases or freeholds, the furniture, the carpets, computer equipment and so on .
That value is small compared with the potential value that a search firm would have if it had a market quotation; there would be a significant number of new millionaires were that to happen.
However, with a flotation come outside shareholders and a proportionate loss of control.
Also there is more outside scrutiny as to what consultants and owners of the business are paid.
In the UK the top six to eight performers in executive search earn well in excess of £250 000 per annum plus a range of benefits.
Investing some of this money in pension plans or other equities can — and has — made a number of top executive search consultants financially independent.
However, the question of equity and the marketability of equity is a contentious problem and can be looked at in two ways, from the perspective of the international firm and also the national one.
In international firms like Heidrick and Struggles, Spencer Stuart or Egon Zehnder the partners of the firm have equity in the enterprise: that is, they own a proportion of the shares.
However, none of these firms is a true partnership in the way that some of the accounting or legal firms are.
They are often registered overseas.
partners own equity in those businesses and as they thrive and prosper and grow the value of that equity increases.
However, it is based only on the net asset value and there is no market in the shares.
When executive search consultants leave or retire, they are forced to sell back the equity to other partners who, on election to the partnership, are encouraged to purchase stock at  an agreed rate.
Within the major firms this stock has been rising in some cases at over 20% per annum, and has proved to be a very good investment in spite of not being on the market.
It does provide an effective way for partners ‘to accrue capital’.
However, it will never make them rich in the same way that potentially having an independent company and taking that to the market would have.
THE NATIONAL COMPANY
The problem of taking a national executive search firm to the market is that they have been, up to now, a one-product company.
The Blue Arrows and Michael pages of the recruitment world have found it much easier because they have had a variety of products and services, and encompass a number of sectors.
The average national executive search firm, in order to come to the market, needs a broader range of products, However, having a broader range of service products creates problems of conflicts and interests.
for example, it is very hard to set up a general management consultancy with a broad range of clients and then allow the executive search firm to poach people out of them.
If that opportunity is denied the search company then they will have significant problems convincing their clients that they can do a good job.
The three major national firms are each trying a different solution.
GKR are trying to make the business an international one by opening in Japan and in Germany, and hope to build an international business of wholly-owned subsidiaries of GKR.
They believe having an international executive search business is the way to go, although they are late in starting and face formidable competition from the major international search firms.
Whitehead Mann take a completely different view and do not see themselves diversifying overseas with wholly-owned subsidiaries.
Instead they are interested in building on a range of other products, thus broadening their base.
Norman Broadbent, after remaining alone for 2&1/2 years, have, as we have seen, backed their business into Charles Barker, which came to the market in 1985/86.
In Charles Barker they are one of a range of public relations and advertising businesses and time will tell if this is a truly successful strategy.
Tyzack and other smaller national firms have formed regional offices in the UK and have established international networks, usually through associates.
With the exception of Tyzack, the fundamental difference between these two types of firm is that, at some stage, the owner will have to sell out.
They can sell to the other people in the business but will probably require a much higher price than net asset value for their shares.
That may put a large and possibly intolerable strain on the firm and may not be an attractive option for the other consultants in the business.
Perhaps  the Tyzack route of the founder selling to an institution and then the partners and staff buying it back by way of a management buy-out is one that might be followed.
Boyden too did this more recently.
The international firms see themselves remaining independent although the founders of Korn/Ferry and Russell Reynolds are still large holders in their businesses, and how these organisations are going to resolve the equity issues, so that the founders of the firm are paid an acceptable return for having started the business is being watched with interest.
Russell Reynolds himself is in his 50s, and this is already becoming an issue.
Korn/Ferry are likewise addressing this problem.
It may yet prove attractive for one of those two international firms to be purchased, and there would be substantial competition in order to acquire an executive search firm with such a famous international brand name.
Heidrick and Struggles had a difficult time when the founders, Gardner Heidrick and John Struggles, left the firm in the early 1980s and there was a period of turmoil until an international partnership structure emerged.
Spencer Stuart went through this process a few years earlier in a more effective way.
DEFECTIONS FROM THE MAJOR INTERNATIONAL COMPANIES
In the UK, the most notable defection from an international company to set up an independent search business has been that by David Norman and Miles Broadbent, who were both previous Mds of Russell Reynolds in London, and who took with them other colleagues to found Norman Broadbent.
Whitehead Mann and GKR are different as their consultants did not come from any of the major search firms.
When Heidrick and Struggles had difficulties worldwide in the early 1980s there were many defections, both of individuals starting up their own businesses (principally in the USA), and also key performers defecting to other international search firms.
There is still some poaching between the major executive search firms and Korn/Ferry founded their worldwide business on doing this in a very successful way, but more recently they have had a number of losses themselves both to Russell Reynolds in the States and Heidrick and Struggles in Europe.
Most of the good performers in the international search companies enjoy the prestige of being part of a large firm.
Many of them do not see the benefits of moving to a smaller, nationally based firm.
Moving is always traumatic, especially in wondering whether clients will follow them, although the major firms have strong, legally enforceable clauses regarding poaching of clients.
This all goes to dissuade consultants in the major firms from leaving.
The spark that does often make people go is when there are changes in the international  organisation or indeed a change in the fortunes of the company.
However, most of the international firms are getting more practised at this now, and as the major international firms become stronger, brand loyalty from their clients and stronger images worldwide will make it proportionately less attractive for key performers and partners to leave.
Top headhunting firms will become, in essence, more like the international law and accounting firms, and to a lesser extent the advertising fraternity.
Considerable prestige will increasingly be enjoyed from being part of those international businesses.
THE INPUT Of HEADHUNTERS TO A COMPANY
Why use headhunters?
The reasons for using some form of external assistance in recruiting key people are often quite clear: the confidentiality, the know-how and the experience are all obvious factors; why bring in a headhunter rather than use an advertising consultant is sometimes more difficult to explain.
Often a headhunter will advise the client to advertise if in his or her judgement it is the most appropriate way of identifying suitable people.
The last thing an executive search consultant wants to do is to take on an assignment which is not achievable and which he or she cannot complete.
No one is going to be happy with that situation.
The job has to be at a senior enough level and it has to be constrained enough to enable the job to be searched.
If there are potentially 5000–10000 people who can do the job, then it is almost certainly more appropriate to advertise, even anonymously.
However, when the market is sharp and clear and there is a need for very strong, talented individuals to fill the position, when the client is looking for someone with outstanding ability to run the business or to be a senior director, then talking to a headhunter may well be the best first step.
Executive search is one of those products which has a large degree of elasticity.
That is, the person who is selling the product and service can persuade potential clients to buy the service, and it is only really limited by the quality of people selling the service.
A good headhunter potentially has significant awareness of how other companies have solved this problem, and knowledge about the market place in which to look for an individual.
Often, if they have a disposition to broader problem-solving, the search consultant can provide views on several issues: the potential organisational structure; how the individual would fit in; the likely scope of his or her responsibilities; if the tasks he or she will be set are manageable and possibly whether candidates can be found in the market who meet a particular specification; whether the search can be a UK-based search or needs to be international; whether any of the top candidates can be attracted for the remuneration or does  the remuneration of the senior team need reviewing; is the nationality of the candidate important; could a woman do the job; what happened to the last job holder; did he or she move on to a bigger job or was he or she fired, and was that person successful in the role?
The headhunter may well feel that there is a need to bring a more general consulting focus to bear in order to solve the organisational issues before an executive search is undertaken.
Sometimes the consultant feels that there is so much ambiguity regarding the appointment that it is unlikely to be successful as presently structured.
There may well be differences of view amongst Board members on the matter of the type of person required and the future role.
Again the perceptive executive search consultant can help resolve those issues, often working with and alongside the chairman and MD.
Sometimes the Board can be changed and the need for the job eliminated.
Sometimes the headhunter receives a fee for that advice without even undertaking an executive search.
In the 1980s, the personnel departments of many organisations are a lot slimmer than they were in the 1970s.
In fact, many organisations have reduced this and other functions to such an extent that they use consultants for a wide variety of activities whether it be for strategy advice, for marketing, production, organisation development, training or indeed executive search.
It is generally true that if organisations try to set up such functions in-house, they are unlikely to keep and retain the best people; thus there is always a gulf between the in-house employees and their performance and what can be obtained in the way of services by using external consultants to undertake the job.
The sophistication and professionalism of the chairman, chief executive or personnel director varies considerably.
However, in the major publicly quoted firms and in a growing number of the smaller firms, there is a high level of understanding and increased professionalism.
If there is a relationship with an existing search firm the client may well use a known firm when making further appointments.
If there are doubts about the search firm's ability to work at a senior level, say to find a chief executive, the client may well invite two or three firms in to pitch competitively and see who has the best overall track record and appears most attractive and experienced to the Board.
Clients are very well aware of levels within an organisation and, if they have a smaller headhunting firm working at one level in the organisation, they may well not use that firm when a very senior appointment arises.
This is why, in a large number of instances, the major, large executive searches go to the top firms rather than those that are smaller.
It is one thing to trust a middle-management appointment to an executive search consultant within a small firm; it is quite another to trust him or her to find a new group chief executive.
Overall, clients  are likely to go to the executive search firm they feel most comfortable with, which has the most appropriate range of experience and is closest to the image of the type of people they wish to recruit.
It is a truism that the executive search consultant hired has a stronger influence on the person eventually put on the short list of candidates than the client.
The search consultant who comes nearest to the Board's idea of the chief executive they wish to hire may well be successful in winning the assignment.
The dominant issue in most searches is how well the executive search consultant understands and relates to the culture of the client.
It is not easy with new clients to truly understand their culture and to find a range of people for a short list who would truly fit into that organisation.
As ever, the acid test for search consultants is not getting the people hired, but whether those people are doing an effective job two, three or four years later.
An even better test is whether, after two years, the successful candidate is promoted again or given a larger international role.
Bringing a very senior candidate into a new organisation right at the top is always a very difficult matter.
There may need to be a large number of meetings and discussions between the consultant and the client even after the candidate is appointed to ensure that things are running smoothly.
HOW IS AN EXECUTIVE SEARCH CONSULTANCY INVITED INTO A COMPANY?
Clearly the firm has to be known, and a well-informed personnel director or even chief executive has often developed a number of relationships with executive search firms.
The ones that study the search market even more closely will know who is particularly good at what and who has done recent searches.
He or she may even know the number of consultants within a particular firm, how it has been performing, what are its key issues, how it has grown over the past year and generally what it is doing and how successfully.
The executive search consultants are usually good at keeping these relationships and informing decision-makers on changes in their organisation as well as general information about the search business.
There is nothing more interesting to a busy chief executive or personnel director than knowing what the competition are doing, what they are being paid and who is moving where.
The perceptive executive search consultant (a) keeps in contact with clients, both actual and prospective, and (b) is very effective at giving them this sort of information.
When the need arises to review the search firms they are using or when there is a particularly sensitive issue, then which firm is contacted is clearly a very important issue.
In a recent large UK search the company in question called on five of the major search firms, and invited them all in to make a competitive pitch to decide who was going to be successful at finding them a group chief executive.
However, having said that, the best way of getting new business is by referrals from satisfied clients rather than completely new assignments with completely new clients.
In summary, it is clear that the nature of headhunting in the UK is changing.
It is a great deal more professional than it was a few years ago comparable with the standards of other types of consultancies and partnership firms, and is attracting an altogether higher quality of person than was previously the case.
In turn, clients' expectations are growing; they are more informed, more knowledgeable about the process, much more likely to adopt an open style, and want to know the key facts, expecting a high level of overall professionalism.
Very few of them believe there is any magic (if ever there was) in the business and almost all of them want to understand the process and expect executive search consultants to provide that knowledge.
There is now no room for the amateur or the dilettante in the business.
In conclusion, it is clear that the market in the UK is maturing and the executive search product is starting to come to age.
Executive search is becoming the most effective way to recruit senior management talent into organisations.
It is expensive for clients but, in relation to the potential benefits which a strong appointment can produce, the fees and expenses involved appear very small.
A future interesting trend may well be the ‘poachers turning gamekeepers’ syndrome on both sides.
There is some recent evidence of executive search consultants moving from major positions in search firms to become group personnel directors or even MDs of large firms or service businesses.
Some executive search consultants are now becoming non-executive directors in businesses where there is no potential conflict.
The opposite side of the coin is that group personnel directors or chief executives are moving from the corporate world to join executive search firms which can offer a wholly different but very satisfying way of earning a living.
After all, having some fun, earning some money and getting better at what one does have got to be three of the key elements in business and, potentially, a career in executive search (in the right environment) offers all three.
Client and Candidate Experiences of Headhunting: A Survey
THE QUALITY OF SEARCH FIRMS
Do users of search — a significant sector of British industry — agree that most headhunting firms offer a professional and high-quality service, and thus see no need for the official regulation of the executive search industry?
Official regulation of headhunting in Britain, in contrast with the USA, has not been developed and no widely accepted written body of rules exists.
Neither is there any organisation to which all the major firms subscribe.
Is this situation acceptable, or should it be changed?
Most users of search believe that, on the whole, headhunters do a good job, and that the industry is effectively self-regulating because, given the grapevine spread of information, poor work would quickly result in loss of business.
However, an outspoken minority of executives responsible for recruiting felt strongly that the industry has a disreputable, cowboy element that is potentially damaging to client users and to professional and respectable search firms alike.
This was the first problem addressed in the following survey, which also asked the following questions: why do companies use headhunters instead of their own in-house recruiting facilities and personnel function?
How much use do individual companies make of headhunters?
What is the relationship between companies' usage of large international headhunting firms compared with smaller, specialised consultancies?
What is the attitude of companies to headhunters poaching their people?
Have they experienced the phenomenon of poacher-turned-gamekeeper or gamekeeper-turned-poacher?
Was recruiting by companies affected by the Big Bang and/or the stock market crash of October 1987?
How did the companies first come across the headhunting firms they employed?
Finally, the survey sought to gauge the views of candidates; this was much more difficult, as very few were prepared to contribute their views, despite an extensive mail-shot.
The results of the client survey are appended to this chapter.
On the matter of the quality of search firms, companies were asked: were the candidates selected by headhunters appropriate to the agreed  briefs?
Would the company comment on the performance of individual executive search firms with whom they had worked?
And were they aware of any leaks of confidentiality or illegal use of information by search firms at any time?
The survey showed that, on the whole, most companies reported good experiences of search.
The mail-shot received a high response rate of over 43% — 13 replies from 30 enquiries — so a higher number of negative responses was expected, bearing in mind that people are generally swifter to complain than to praise.
Yet the questionnaire responses were usually favourable.
Most negative criticisms of the quality of search work were expressed verbally on home territory to the author; relatively few clients were prepared to commit themselves to serious discontent on paper, even anonymously.
In all, 30 companies contributed; in addition to the 13 questionnaire replies, nine were prepared to speak on the telephone, of a total of 25 called, and eight were visited and interviewed in more detail.
Responses pointing to especially good search work emanated from Grand Metropolitan, Plessey, Kingfisher plc, Cadbury Schweppes, BICC, four companies who preferred to remain anonymous and the majority of the financial services users.
Tesco, Midland Bank, an international holding group, two large international banks and three other anonymous respondents commented on mixed performance.
Only one contributor, a human resources director, expressed herself as entirely anti-headhunting, during a two-hour interview at British Airways' Heathrow-based central office, and she may be seen as principally involved in lower-level recruitment.
Peter White, main Board director of group personnel at Midland Bank, was more justified in complaining that the banks in the City had suffered during the Big Bang as the result of excessive leverage enjoyed by headhunters in a tight market.
David Tagg at Grand Metropolitan, the drinks, hotels, brewing, retailing and food-producing giant ranking number 10 in The Times 1000 and employing nearly 150 000, spoke cheerfully of his general liking of headhunters.
He remarked that if they did not exist he and many others in his position would have to invent them!
He believed that combining the selective use of headhunters with sound internal management development was the most effective way to establish a management team.
Michael Brookes of Nomura, the leading Japanese securities house, considered that the use of search consultants had helped Nomura to integrate into the London financial market.
Tagg would not classify headhunting firms as good or bad, but spoke of the need to find an individual consultant who would fit into the company's style and culture.
He thought that headhunters were kept on their toes by the generally-held view — expressed frequently both inside and outside the headhunting industry — that a consultant is only as good  as his or her last assignment.
Tagg looked for prompt and well-considered short lists of candidates, shrewd advice and help in drawing up the brief and specification, and some form of guarantee and after-sales service.
The few inappropriate appointments in his experience were, Tagg felt, probably more the fault of Grand Metropolitan than the headhunters concerned, and reflected very rapid changes in the organisation at that particular time.
He was confident that search consultants stuck to their rules of good conduct and professional service without the need for the kind of official regulation in force in the USA, as laid down by the Association of Executive Search Consultants,(formerly the Association of Executive Recruitment Consultants).
Peter White of Midland Bank was less convinced, complaining of the failure of some large firms to adhere to a strict off-limits policy, and described an even worse practice of advancing a candidate who has undertaken to engage the headhunter involved at a later date if he or she lands the job.
Adrian Gozzard, formerly Director of Human Resources of Plessey, the telecommunications and electronics giant (number 93 in The Times 1000 and employer of over 30000), who has had long and extensive experience of search, has turned time and time again to headhunting firms, despite having used a full-time, in-house recruitment manager, and working hard on internal management development.
Writing in The Executive Grapevine , he sees natural competition between search firms as enough to foster and maintain their quality, and considers that the last few years have witnessed a weeding-out of the less professional outfits resulting in fewer and better consultants.
Retail giant Kingfisher — number 51 in The Times 1000 with over 56 000 employees — has been, according to Peter Samuel, Director of Organisation and Management Development, a wide and extensive user of search.
Over recent years, headhunters have helped to make consistently good appointments without major cause for complaint.
Confectionery, food and soft drinks manufacturer Cadbury Schweppes — ranked 60 in The Times 1000 and with nearly 27500 employees — was also prepared to give credit to headhunters.
Graham Shaw, then Group personnel Director, regarded the quality of search work he had experienced as satisfactory, without leaks or indiscretions; he agreed that headhunters who could not be trusted would soon be finished.
Cable manufacturers and engineers BICC, rated 49 and employing 45 000, considered that there were probably far too many headhunting firms around, but users could learn by experience and then stick to those they knew best.
A leading wines and spirits producer and distributor wrote of generally good candidates and satisfactory performance.
Two completely anonymous respondents agreed with this view of overall high-quality work, one confidently but paradoxically remarking that the firm would not have been hired otherwise!
A large venture  capital organisation, who refused to comment on individual headhunter performance, wrote that on the whole good candidates had been put forward, but that they would not know if there had been any leaks or illegal use of information by search firms.
Most of the respondents answered this question in a similar manner; it is perhaps disturbing that most companies feel they would have no way of knowing if a headhunter had abused their trust.
One large car-hire company, who expressed mixed feelings about headhunters, had a suspicion about a possible leak by a search firm: ‘we believe there was but we could not sustain it’ with any evidence.
They also pointed out that headhunters were ‘only good if managed tightly’.
A past personnel director of an international trading group agreed.
He said that a company could suffer bad headhunting experiences if it was not entirely sure exactly what it wanted the search consultant to do.
Unsatisfactory results would then be its own fault.
Although headhunting generally was gaining a professional reputation, he continued, in London especially the business was still seen as ‘rather dodgy’.
The suspicion surrounding headhunting was not helped by what he and many others saw, and still see, as the frequent movement of individual consultants between rival headhunting firms and in and out of industry.
Headhunters are, by definition, enemies of long-term company loyalty and, because they spend so much time persuading people to move, it is hardly surprising that they themselves do not hesitate when they see an exciting new opportunity.
Thus many companies see them as a threat to their holding on to their good people, and instilling corporate loyalty into new appointees.
The successfully transformed supermarket chain and multiple retailer Tesco — ranked 22 in The Times 1000 and employing 71 000 — similarly described headhunters as good servants but bad masters: their work should be closely defined and controlled by the client.
Although some search firms were undoubtedly first rate, a spokesman felt that it was unwise to stick to just one, especially for a company like Tesco, hitherto unused to search.
There was a need for a trusting relationship between client and consultant, he agreed, but he was not prepared to rely on any headhunter completely, maintaining that they pretended to act according to codes of conduct only when it suited them.
He was also involved in lower-level search and was attached to more traditional methods.
The director responsible for recruitment at a leading French bank spoke of generally successful placements through search, but warned that choosing the wrong headhunter could be a disastrous mistake.
A Far Eastern bank's personnel spokesman agreed that generally good candidates had been found but, in common with two anonymous respondents, he would not comment on specific firms and expressed a lack of confidence in many of them.
Lynda Philamore, head of assessment and recruitment at British Airways — ranked 26 in The Times 1000 and employer of 44000 — was exceptional in this survey in expressing almost entirely negative views about the executive search industry, despite the publicity surrounding the success of headhunted chief executive Colin Marshall.
She called for an exposure of the headhunting industry as a whole, accusing consultants of a variety of sins: of perpetuating another form of updated old-boy network, of ignorance about systematic interviewing practice, of poor report writing, of rushing through assignments as quickly as possible and of an inability to handle complex, highly specialist assignments: they would either fail to find anyone or send someone completely unsuitable.
She emphasised that, as far as she was concerned, headhunters were rarely useful to high-quality, prestigious companies — such as BA, presumably — but did serve a function for low-profile businesses with image problems, whom they could puff up, and flatter candidates into joining.
She denied that search consultants observed any professional ethics beside the obvious one of not poaching from clients for at least two years, and noted a complete absence of clear standards of approach and guarantees to do the job properly.
There should be official training courses for headhunters, she suggested, and the industry should be properly regulated.
Why did other companies not complain as she was doing?
They were loath to attract adverse publicity by criticising headhunters for an unsuitable or even disastrous appointment, or felt it might be a reflection on them if they chose an unsuitable firm.
She maintained that bad headhunting practice was thus allowed to continue unchecked.
Such views about the executive search industry are relatively uncommon, yet these views should not be entirely ignored.
The feeling of disquiet about the practices and methods of some headhunting firms in terms of ethics, reliability, quality of work and total professionalism is such that the possibility of setting up an official self-regulatory association ought to be investigated.
It would be effective only if all, or at least a majority of firms — especially the large international search businesses — agreed to join.
Such an organisation could take the form of a formal association which would arrange qualifying examinations and the provision of certificates, like the legal and accounting professional bodies, or at least operate in the manner of the existing MCA.
HEADHUNTING OR IN-HOUSE RECRUITING?
Why do companies use headhunters instead of their own in-house recruiting facilities and personnel function?
It should be established at  the outset that many large blue-chip companies do not actually use search at all.
In this survey, replies were received to this effect from three such businesses.
Shell International petroleum's Head of Group Recruitment, Adrian Loader, wrote that: ‘The Shell Group very rarely uses headhunters to recruit and the exceptions are limited to quite specific cases.
In fact, in my time in central recruitment we have not used headhunters in any way, and there is little prospect of our doing so in the near future.’
Peter Dutton, Corporate Recruitment Manager at Procter & Gamble's UK head office in Newcastle, wrote: ‘We do not use Headhunters at all, because we have a policy of recruiting only at the first level of management (usually graduates direct from university) and filling all more senior management positions by promotion from within.’
J. Boyett, Manager of Central Services and Special projects at Standard Chartered Bank, replied that, ‘The Bank's experience in using Headhunters is so limited that a response to your questionnaire would be worthless.’
Procter & Gamble and Shell in particular, together with several other giant organisations like IBM and Unilever, have their own completely adequate recruiting and training resources, and what is more they follow a policy which actually discriminates against outsiders.
Of course, as far as headhunters are concerned, these companies fall into the category of poaching grounds.
Venture capital giant 3i had not used executive search at all in the past four years but mentioned that they had lost a number of people through headhunters.
As we have just seen, British Airways also suggested that their need for search was minimal, and that many other large, highly professional concerns felt the same.
As companies became more sophisticated, they argued, organisations could handle most, if not all, their recruiting problems.
But it is possible — and equally convincing — to argue precisely the reverse: that the most advanced companies recognise the value of the strategic use of consultants generally — including headhunters — in running a business as efficiently and effectively as possible.
David Tagg of Grand Metropolitan saw the rise of headhunting as part of a growing trend of employing outside consultants for specific problems.
A Phillips & Drew spokesman said that his organisation uses search very rarely but thought that this could well change in the future, especially through the influence of his firm's parent company, the Union Bank of Switzerland.
Adrian Gozzard, ex-Plessey also valued headhunters in their role as external consultants.
Through their objectivity, he argued, search consultants were able to provide what he saw as conceptual help in defining a business need and translating it into the sort of people who could fulfil it; actually searching for people was perhaps less important.
Most clients were too close to their organisation — they could not see the wood for the  trees — to solve many of their senior recruiting problems.
Headhunters were also more likely to offer a dynamic rather than a static solution, Gozzard suggested: they would be looking for what was to happen to the company in the future, not just today, and the role of the successful candidate in effecting change.
Indeed, most companies responding admitted to employing headhunters principally for such strategic positions as Gozzard indicated, so inevitably their usage of search was exceptional rather than everyday.
Additionally, management functions attracting a small field of candidates and/or subject to supply volatility, such as financial, marketing and trading positions, were most likely to be recruited by search.
BICC spoke of employing headhunters when looking for ‘rare birds’ for specialised jobs as ‘horses for courses’.
Sainsbury's, only occasional users of search, would make exceptions in the cases of jobs currently hard to fill, such as top accountants and systems analysts.
Other employers referred to the advantages of employing search consultants for particularly sensitive appointments; obviously a personnel director could not be expected to try and find his or her successor.
Several companies spoke of the special value of headhunters when moving strategically into new business and/or geographical areas.
Gozzard, when he was with Allegheny, called on search consultants to develop its brand-name business, including Wilkinson Sword, Bryant & May, Sunbeam and Rowenta.
The French bank used both search consultants and job agencies — depending on the level of the position — without in-house recruiting at all; this was mainly for convenience, as they had no experience of recruiting or advertising for jobs in Britain.
They did not necessarily believe that employing such consultants was more cost-effective than in-house methods, just quicker and easier for an overseas branch.
All their offices abroad used outside recruiting consultants as a matter of policy.
They were not the only respondent of the survey who identified another clear advantage of headhunting, especially for the most senior positions: that staff who were prepared to move jobs actually prefer to be headhunted, rather than face the time-consuming task of ploughing through advertisements or the slightly demoralising task of putting their names down with agencies.
Many executives who would not consider these second and third options would actively welcome the first.
The element of ego-boosting and prestige associated with the headhunter's call has not been lost on employers, even those who were not headhunted themselves.
Many users of search also appreciate the fact that an approach to an executive by an intermediary partly removes any moral dilemma employees may face about being disloyal.
After all, the executives cannot then be accused of directly approaching their employers' rivals.
This  ‘poaching’ by headhunters — criticised so often by employers on the receiving end — is recognised as a great facility by experienced users of search, one of whom wrote of the value of search consultants in ‘winkling out talent which may not respond to advertisements’.
Graham Shaw, ex-Cadbury Schweppes, said exactly the same.
Peter Cole, personnel Director of SBCI Savory Milln spoke of employing search consultants as intermediaries, not just for the confidentiality and anonymity, but for the benefit of a more structured search.
Those respondents who insisted on strict anonymity — to the extent of removing coding on the questionnaires and sending them back in plain brown envelopes — not surprisingly pointed to the anonymity factor as an attractive feature of headhunting when compared with in-house recruiting.
Although, as discussed in Chapter 4, most search consultants encounter difficulties in attracting candidates on behalf of clients who insist on remaining anonymous for at least the initial stages of the search, many clients see this as a real plus in using headhunters in the first place.
A large investment conglomerate replying to the survey suggested that the main advantage of employing headhunters occurred ‘when the position to be filled is sensitive internally and externally’.
Cadbury Schweppes would turn to headhunters when ‘we don't want anyone to know we're looking’.
Such confidentiality about the client was also seen as particularly important by Tesco.
Similarly, David Tagg of Grand Metropolitan referred to using headhunters when he had an eye on a specific person within another company: a headhunter could discreetly and confidentially find out if that person might consider moving, before the name of the interested party, i.e. Grand Metropolitan, need be revealed.
An indication that the acceptability of the concept of headhunting has made great progress among employers in Britain is the fact that many of the respondents attested to search consultants' knowledge of the executive market place, gained over a number of years, and their expertise in certain specialised sectors.
A spokesman for a large nationalised service industry wrote of headhunters being able to provide them with ‘the feel of external experience’ and an appreciation of the stature in the market place of their existing staff and the organisation itself, together with a more extensive network of contacts than they could possibly have at their disposal.
Sainsbury's, ranking 17 in The Times 1000 with 82 000 employees, when considering appointing a senior departmental director, chose to use headhunters for ‘political reasons rather than convenience or speed’ because they could then be informed in detail about the market for candidates.
Otherwise, Sainsbury's considered that they had good connections in the retail trade — especially through their joint-venture with British Home Stores — and thus their own recruiting facilities were usually adequate.
As suggested in the cost-benefit analysis of headhunting in the Introduction, the majority of respondents considered that using search consultants was certainly more expensive than in-house methods.
Yet many qualified that statement: Peter Samuel welcomed the way that headhunters could put all their resources into one search at a time and avoid Kingfisher having to maintain expensive overhead staff unnecessarily.
Other employers thought that on costing their executives' valuable time and all the overheads involved in do-it-yourself recruiting, the differences in total expense were probably marginal.
Peter Christie of Midland Montagu said that he would always take a separate commercial decision on each assignment, according to fees quoted.
Many others would do the same.
The element of time-saving is seen as significant by many employers, and one respondent identified it as the main motive for taking a recruiting problem to a search consultant in the first place.
Tesco agreed that one of the great advantages of using headhunters was their speed in short-circuiting and short-cutting — but not skimping — all the work involved.
David Tagg of Grand Metropolitan said the same, fully accepting that his company did not have a research department comparable with that of a major headhunting firm, and neither was this necessarily desirable.
An experienced headhunter could narrow the field down to short-list stage much more quickly and cost-effectively, Tagg argued.
Adrian Gozzard, ex-Plessey, saw the reduction to its essentials of the complex and time-consuming task of senior recruiting as one of the most important functions of the headhunter.
The human resources director of a large UK wines and spirits business also suggested that once total costs were taken into account, it could be argued that headhunters were not necessarily more expensive than using home-grown methods.
An anonymous respondent wrote perceptively that it ‘depends on how you cost internal opportunity cost, etc.’.
He concluded that the methods probably cost about the same; ‘but that's if they [the headhunters]are successful, but they are not always’.
Graham Shaw, ex-Cadbury Schweppes, said he always gulped when he received a headhunter's bill, and certainly took cost into account in choosing between the methods.
He would always think twice about how to recruit for a position paying £30000-£35000, i.e. a job on the borderline between the marzipan and the icing.
David Tagg of Grand Metropolitan considered that employing headhunters was probably not economical below this level except in specialised cases.
He agreed that headhunters were indeed expensive, but then one is, after all, dealing with an expensive commodity — one's senior personnel — and it is not wise to cut corners on such vital issues.
financial services users of search placed greater emphasis on the costs of headhunting, with more justification, as they were paying out more.
Michael Brookes of Nomura  suggested that headhunting firms, to justify their charges, should be prepared to accept that part of their fees reflect a performance-related element.
A final instalment could be paid when the candidate starts work, or even a year later, if that candidate has stayed with the firm and/or performed well.
In making the choice between headhunting or in-house recruiting, it is clear that the crux of the matter is the level of appointment involved; most employers do see a place for both methods.
This factor determines the answer to our next question, that of the frequency and extent to which companies use search firms.
RATE OF USAGE OF SEARCH
How much use do individual companies make of headhunters?
It has not been easy to establish the numbers of appointments — and hence fees paid out — for which clients engaged search consultants.
Clients are apt to minimise numbers of assignments, whilst headhunters maximise them, and neither are willing to divulge exact figures.
To the question, ‘Do you use headhunters regularly or on specific occasions only?’, respondents admitting regular usage accounted for only 15% of the companies surveyed.
How did they define ‘regular’ or ‘specific’in this case and did this vary over time?
This latter consideration seems to be especially important, since fluctuations in headhunting usage by clients would appear not to be constant but to rise and fall with internal and external changes in demand for staff, as one would expect.
In this sense, Peter Samuel wrote that no particular departments of Woolworth had significantly different levels of requirement, but that early in 1988 they had ‘made a number of senior financial appointments from external sources via Executive Search Companies.
The large mining conglomerate responding to the survey wrote that none of its sectors made appointments using headhunters frequently; but, on the other hand, the government service organisation questioned spoke of particular usage of search in finance, marketing and information technology.
These seemed to be especially important recruiting areas in early 1988; executives in these fields — together with sales — were also being particularly sought by the wines and spirits company in our survey.
The large industrial investment group questioned identified ‘mainly front line operating departments’ as their most frequent users, and an anonymous respondent referred to research and marketing as sources of headhunting demand.
Cadbury Schweppes revealed that the average yearly number of headhunting assignments initiated by the company would be between eight and ten, divided equally between generalists and specialists.
Like  many other blue-chip companies, Cadbury Schweppes employ headhunters exceptionally and sparingly, giving more attention to internal promotion and internal management development; yet they still acknowledge the value of executive search.
Sainsbury also claimed a comparatively modest rate of usage of headhunting, preferring to concentrate even more on long-term policies of training up graduates.
David Tagg of Grand Metropolitan referred to more extensive usage, perhaps on a par or slightly more than Cadbury Schweppes, depending on timing of demand for staff.
He considered that there must be very few large firms who never needed headhunters at all.
financial services have long been among the heaviest users of search; Michael Brookes at Nomura referred to 20 major assignments in less than three years with many more slightly lower-level searches.
Headhunting in Britain apparently received a great boost from the deregulation of the stock market, the so-called Big Bang of October 1986, within which the movement of teams of executives between merchant banks and other City businesses received especially extensive media publicity.
However, this particular aspect of headhunting activity is very much the exception rather than the norm.
None of the companies in this survey — although a number of banks and other City concerns were included — had actually ever employed search consultants to recruit whole teams, although two said that they would if the need occurred.
The large government service organisation consulted accepted that although it had not needed to recruit a team yet, ‘we may do’.
Most other respondents categorically refused to entertain the possibility.
The headhunting phenomenon of moving teams gained itself a bad name, and it is clear that such a practice is still scorned by many of the most reputable executive search firms and by many companies too, although it is accepted that it happened comparatively rarely.
The survey also asked companies about the salary level of executives recruited via headhunters.
Kingfisher quoted the £30 000-£80 000 range, the large car-hire firm questioned mentioned their policy of maintaining a bottom limit of £30 000, and the international mining conglomerate which responded to the survey stated a top limit of £100 000.
The government service organisation quoted a narrower range of £30 000 to £40 000 and the wines and spirits company £35 000 to £50 000.
The industrial investment group also employed headhunters for positions at £30 000 upwards, and the two anonymous respondents quoted £30000 to £80000 and £35000 to £80000.
Cadbury Schweppes and Sainsbury would not consider calling in headhunters to search for jobs paying less than £35000: Sainsbury once considered employing a search firm for a £25000 post as manager of a depot, but decided this would be a waste of money, and gave the assignment to one of Britain's largest search/selection/advertising  businesses, MSL.
As we discovered in asking why clients would use search consultants rather than in-house recruiting, the salary attached to the job has to be above a certain ceiling to justify the fees involved.
Exceptions occur when a position is so specialised or obscure that search is the only way; but by the laws of demand and supply, such jobs as these usually attract high salaries in any case.
A decision to use search is primarily dictated by the size of the population of candidates in the sector in question, related to the current level of demand.
Peter Christie of Midland Montagu uses search for most £40 000+ appointments, and especially for heads of departments, frequently in great demand in the City.
Are the salary levels of those recruited by headhunters likely to go up or come down?
To what extent are headhunting firms moving into lower-level recruiting in order to maintain their own momentum of growth, and how is this being incorporated with their higher-level work?
Alternatively, are they likely to concentrate even more on the top end of the market, because their fees will rise pro rata with salaries and thus increase their fee income?
These and connected questions will be addressed in Chapter 7.
SMALL IS BEAUTIFUL?
What is the relationship between companies' use of large international headhunting firms compared with smaller, specialised consultancies?
The top multinational search firms, according to users, have a number of advantages.
Obviously, when a post cannot be filled by a British executive because it requires a more cosmopolitan background a client would turn to headhunters with a strong overseas network; and there was a general feeling that in these cases long-established major international search firms were preferable.
Such consultancies were seen as being prestigious in the eyes of candidates, having a wider field from which to chose, an extensive research resource immediately to hand, and the largest data banks.
The smaller, specialised firms, on the other hand, offered more personal contact and service; charged lower fees; and, because they had fewer clients than the large consultancies, had access to a wider range of candidates because fewer executives were off-limits.
The consultant whom the client first met to discuss the assignment would be the same consultant who would undertake the work.
It was widely felt that smaller firms offered a better service for nationally-based positions.
Specialised assignments were often given to smaller firms offering particular expertise in that sector, with generally good results.
The balance of usage between the two types of consultancies in the  survey varied according to the salary level and functional area of the position involved, and the experience of the executive handling recruitment in terms of contact with search consultants.
Frequent use of search was often marked by a period of experimentation with a variety of firms in the first instance, followed by a settling down to regular work with a smaller number of firms with whom the client had achieved a modus vivendi .
Some users are reluctant to employ more than one search firm.
Peter Cole of SBCI Savory Milln, considering that trust was crucial, thought that to employ a number of headhunters ran the risk of losing trust.
The leading French bank in the survey, an experienced and extensive user of search, worked with a combination of large and small firms.
Russell Reynolds had been called in on occasion, and a smaller firm — seen as a very good specialist — for specific assignments in commodity finance.
Other specialist firms were employed when required.
Michael Brookes of Nomura and Peter White of Midland Bank did the same, using one of the Big Four for Board-level work and a specialist firm such as Baines Gwinner for the level beneath.
A spokesman from BICC was dismissive of the large choice of search firms available, considering that there were far too many; once he had learned by experience and found good firms, he would stick to those he knew best, regardless of their size or type.
British & Commonwealth Holdings especially favoured smaller search firms; they had received generally good service and quick results from those they had used, and appreciated the personal contact and cheaper price.
The Far Eastern bank interviewed took an entirely different line; they always worked with the large international firms, claiming that neither they nor candidates had any confidence in the smaller firms.
Peter Samuel of Kingfisher, who quoted the names of nine search firms he had employed (including two major international consultancies, Heidrick and Struggles and Norman Broadbent), argued that he used both large and small firms because of the variety of assignments he handled.
His choice between the two would depend on his assessment of each particular position for which he was recruiting, and the relevant qualities and strengths of each specific headhunting firm.
He did not see size of firm as a particularly important factor in his choice.
He also showed a willingness to give business to new firms, such as Saxton Bampfylde, as well as more old-established businesses like GKR and Clive & Stokes.
The large car-hire firm in the survey also used both, but — without mentioning any names — showed a marked preference for the large international firms, arguing, perhaps slightly unfairly in some cases, the ‘top level targets do not like back-street companies’.
An anonymous respondent, similarly reticent about details of search firms' names, agreed that ‘large buys prestige in the eyes of candidates’, but warned that using these firms ‘tends to restrict the choice of employer’ from which to hunt and find candidates.
All the other respondents referred to specific firms, with the mining conglomerate expressing satisfaction with service from multinational firm Korn/Ferry as well as a number of smaller, British-based firms who nevertheless have overseas offices: Canny Bowen, Tyzack and GKR.
MSL were used for a variety of recruitment problems at various levels.
The client's choice of search firm in this case depended on the nature of the requirement.
The only advantage identified from using the largest headhunting firms was a ‘bigger candidate bank’; it is unclear whether or not this means general pool of candidates open to the firm, or the size of their data bank.
The government service organisation questioned would not comment on the quality of the headhunting service it had received but, of eleven firms it cited, mentioned only one top international consultancy, Spencer Stuart.
The corporate personnel director concerned stated a preference for employing UK search firms, but accepted that large firms could provide the resources for proper support of the assignment and following through the appointment with a form of after-sales service.
The large wines and spirits business in the survey referred to two UK firms who had shown good performance — EAL and Whitehead Mann — but apparently had no experience of the largest firms.
The director involved thought that perhaps larger consultancies offered more credibility among candidates, but he was not convinced.
The industrial investment group replied that it had employed both Korn/Ferry and Russell Reynolds, but wrote that although the type of firm used depended essentially on their need, ‘our experience is that in our opinion we receive better service from smaller, local firms for positions which do not have an international content to the job’.
An anonymous respondent quoted six firms — Heidrick and Struggles, Spencer Stuart, Tyzack, GKR, MSL and Boyden — and etc., etc., you name them'.
The search firm chosen depended on a mixture of the clients own requirements for the assignment, its past experience with individual headhunters — based on how good the particular consultant doing the work had been — and ‘how we like their presentation’.
The larger firms usually had a ‘wider range of contacts and resource immediately on tap’, but the respondent did not express a preference for them.
This particular client seems to follow the policy of staging a shootout or competitive pitch between firms for each assignment, and trying out an increasing range of firms, rather than just sticking to those it has known and worked well with in the past.
Tesco, on the other hand, had received good service from UK-based Merton and had used them again and again.
They remarked on the  personal service, from the same senior consultant whom they had first met, comparing them with a larger firm who had acted in a heavy-handed way towards them and who had subsequently sent a junior consultant actually to handle the work, after they had dealt with the most senior partner at the beginning.
Adrian Gozzard, ex-Plessey, also expressed a preference for consultants who took responsibility for all parts of the search, bringing in the business in the first place and the, closely supervising the research.
Tesco accused the same large headhunting firm with whom they had dealt of adopting a blasé attitude caused by processing a too rapid and too large turnover of assignments, whereas Merton had apparently provided individual attention and a fresh approach to the problem.
Large firms generally, they considered, had a conventional outlook and data base whereas small firms could be more imaginative in the range of candidates presented.
Graham Shaw, when at Cadbury Schweppes, also expressed loyalty to particular search firms, quoting regular use of only three.
He identified his main recruiting problem as this: the relatively small number of companies in the confectionery business meant that certain search firms would have to declare that certain specific potential hunting-grounds were off-limits, and this restricted his choice of headhunter.
In any case, his use of search was not so extensive as to merit using a large number of firms.
David Tagg of Grand Metropolitan mentioned a wider range of headhunters, naming Heidrick and Struggles and a number of smaller search firms, used according to the salary level of the appointment.
Unlike Tesco, he had not experienced a heavy-handed or demanding manner from any of them, and was convinced by the value of the work they had done, without expressing a preference for any particular one.
Thus there is clearly room for a variety of search firms in the market place, with the smaller firms being able to overcome the disadvantage of fewer contacts and less international experience by offering a cheaper, more personal and more specialised service.
Yet, in the case of really senior assignments, the prestige and resources of the top firms are obviously essential.
Adrian Gozzard, ex-Plessey, spoke for many executives responsible for recruitment in Britain's largest companies when he argued his preference for broad-based search firms, rather than those specialising by functional discipline.
He thought that the latter were potentially too narrow, and their consultants were not experienced enough in business generally.
Gozzard wanted to deal with headhunters who were businessmen and businesswomen in their own right, and this was much more important than even the most sophisticated data banks.
Nevertheless, good research departments whose staff had conceptual ability as well as research skills would be needed more than ever, and these were more likely to be found in the large, broad-based search firms.
IS POACHING PREVENTION POSSIBLE?
For every company that initiates and completes a search, inevitably there is another which loses an executive.
The balance between gaining and losing is by no means even; many infrequent users of search are seen as prime poaching grounds, whereas companies constantly recruiting may not necessarily be losing people, but experiencing rapid growth.
The few non-users of search, however, are seen not only as good at training people but also keeping them.
Many headhunters frequently speak of the difficulty of extracting people from such strong corporate cultures as Procter & Gamble, Unilever and IBM.
Companies in the survey were asked if they used any mechanisms to protect themselves against poaching by other businesses employing headhunters.
Overall, most employers felt that it was impossible completely to prevent an executive from moving.
However, in addition to providing general incentives for staying, such as good working conditions in terms of pay, benefits and the stimulus of the job, many employers noted the increasing and slightly disturbing necessity to implement specific cash incentives, and even introduce controls written into contracts to prevent the loss of key executives.
The Big Bang has certainly encouraged the trend towards offering Golden Handcuffs — to maintain the Golden Hellos — and the insertion of exclusion clauses in contracts to prevent executives going over to the competition.
This is now less prevalent.
Peter Samuel of Kingfisher was prepared to insist on such restraint clauses when necessary.
The car-hire company, and one of the anonymous respondents, did not consider such methods and questioned how poaching could be prevented at all.
The mining conglomerate, the government service organisation, the wines and spirits company and the industrial investment group simply answered ‘No’ when asked if they had any poaching-prevention plans.
The remaining anonymous respondent wrote of the ‘normal contractual requirements, good management and good conditions of employment’ as the only strategy for protection against poaching.
Graham Shaw, when at Cadbury Schweppes, spoke in more detail about the problem.
He looked at it quite philosophically, seeing poaching as an irritant but also as an inevitable occurrence; in headhunting, all's fair in love and war.
The only effective poaching prevention strategy was systematically identifying and nurturing one's most vulnerable executives.
In regular manpower audits, Cadbury Schweppes pick out their most susceptible employees — usually around 50 or 60 in number — and watch them carefully, ensuring that they are happy at work in terms of the demands and responsibilities of their jobs, and how well they are paid.
Keeping especially useful people — Shaw spoke of an  outstanding taxation specialist employed by Cadbury Schweppes — is seen as a challenge rather than a difficulty.
David Tagg of Grand Metropolitan also acknowledged that headhunters will try quite naturally to seduce good people away from such companies as his own; but, he maintained, headhunters overall did a good job for him and he was not frightened that they might take his staff.
Some large companies, unsure if they are rewarding their top people adequately, have been known to commission firms to find out what the competition are paying; who better to ask to undertake this research than the headhunters themselves?
GAMEKEEPERS AND POACHERS
The phenomena of poacher-turned-gamekeeper and gamekeeper-turned-poacher are rare but not unknown.
Most headhunters originally left their positions in industry at the behest of a headhunting firm who needed more consultants and saw them as fitting the bill.
Comparatively few consultants had directly approached search firms for a job, but this is becoming more the case, especially in the USA, and will become more common as executive search becomes more generally accepted and regarded as an attractive career in its own right.
Poacher-turned-gamekeeper — a headhunter going back to industry, especially via an assignment he or she is handling — is rarer.
Only one company questioned, who insisted on complete anonymity, had taken on an ex-headhunter into a position it had been seeking to fill, and admitted that it had been a disastrous mistake.
On the other hand, there have been successful cases of poacher-turned-gamekeeper.
Spencer Stuart was certainly the loser when one of their senior consultants in Hong Kong, Paul Cheng, was searching for a director of corporate affairs for overseas trader Inchcape and decided to join them.
HEADHUNTING IN THE BIG BANG AND AFTER
In seeking to establish the role of headhunting within the general economic environment, the survey questioned whether or not the Big Bang of October 1986 and the stock market crash of a year afterwards affected companies' recruiting policies and usage of headhunters.
Search consultants themselves claimed that their business did markedly increase — in the number of new clients as well as in terms of the number of individual assignments — as a result of the Big Bang, and that the level  of their work has continued to grow steadily, in spite of subsequent national economic changes.
Is this true from the clients' point of view?
Media reports indicated an enormous increase in headhunting activity on the eve of the Big Bang.
A favourite quote was from County Securities: ‘We got to the stage in our institutional room where headhunters came on the phone so often we put them over the loudhailer because it was such a huge joke.’
Salomon Brothers, who trebled their staff to 600 in less than two years, had employed headhunters to help fill all their professional posts.
The banks questioned in the survey argued that although the level of headhunting activity had indeed risen with the Big Bang, from their point of view it had then fallen off; whilst many non-financial users of search, such as BICC, suggested that claims of noticeable changes in recruiting as a result of either event were wildly exaggerated.
Peter Samuel of Kingfisher agreed, having experienced no direct impact on either occasion.
Many felt that possibly as a result of Big Bang more people generally were changing jobs, and the mining conglomerate questioned wrote that: ‘we have had to review salaries etc. of staff vulnerable to approaches from the City.
The downturn is too recent to assess from the point of view of recruiting, but it may make people more cautious about moving to the City.’
The car-hire firm considered that it was too early to tell.
The government service organisation considered that a shortage of legal and estates professionals may have been influenced by the Big Bang, but nothing was visible as a result of the Crash, and they had not been particularly affected themselves either way.
The wines and spirits company thought that the Big Bang had made recruiting more difficult but agreed that the effects of the Crash were hard to discern.
The industrial investment group identified a stronger pressure on recruiting candidates with MBAs, and expected recruiting to be slightly easier as a result of the Crash, although it was difficult to judge.
Both anonymous respondents claimed that both events had had no impact whatsoever on their recruiting.
External economic changes would seem to have a specific and localised impact on businesses within the particular sectors most immediately affected: neither the Big Bang nor the Crash has necessarily triggered off either an expansion or diminution of headhunting across the board in British companies generally.
The Big Bang may have encouraged a greater familiarity among companies with search firms, simply because it was the first occasion when they had called on their services, often reluctantly and as a last resort.
The personnel director of SBCI Savory Milln, Peter Cole, confirmed that this was his view of headhunters; he would employ a search firm only when he had exhausted his own supply of personal contacts.
It is likely that the  headhunting business in Britain will continue to expand as a result of its increased acceptability generally, and due to the existence of an increasingly competitive business environment.
Overall, use of search is now widespread enough to enable search firms to ride out storms in specific sectors.
SEARCHING FOR A SEARCH FIRM
Finally, because this book seeks to assist users of search in selecting a good headhunting firm for their particular needs, the survey asked how companies had come across the headhunters they had employed.
The replies suggested that the choice of consultant and search firm was initially quite random, which partly accounts for the unsatisfactory performance occasionally experienced.
The French bank originally heard about the headhunters they had employed by word-of-mouth contact, and BICC had based their choice — perhaps more dangerously — on a review of headhunting firms' own literature.
Peter Samuel of Kingfisher cited two different routes: a recommendation of a consultancy from a referral source, i.e. an executive who has come into contact with the headhunter on a previous assignment; and by direct experience of a particular search firm from the user point of view from a Kingfisher executive who had employed that firm on a previous occasion, before he worked for Kingfisher.
The car-hire company referred simply to ‘years of contacts’, as did the mining conglomerate, the wines and spirits company and the industrial investment group.
The reference guide The Executive Grapevine had been used by the government service organisation and one of the anonymous respondents; the latter had also responded to mail-shots from headhunters seeking business.
Overall, search firms were chosen by trial and error and informal contacts, often without much knowledge of their reputations and specialisms.
The Select Directory at the end of this book seeks to make this choice more systematic and to reduce, at least partially, the inevitable element of risk.
THE CANDIDATE'S POINT OF VIEW
The candidate survey differed from the client survey in three respects: first, the rate of response was slightly lower, despite the fact that it was carefully based on the Financial Times listings of movements of executives and on firms where much headhunting was known to have taken place; second, the views of headhunters were more negative; and third, none would mention the names of specific search firms or venture opinions on them in particular.
Some of the less professional search firms have been known to treat candidates shoddily, and even the leading firms would admit that a few of the candidates they had encountered would be justified in feeling hard-done-by.
The headhunting process itself inevitably leaves in its wake a number of disgruntled executives and would-be executives.
for every successful candidate there are bound to be at least two who were pipped at the post, who jumped the final fence only to find that the client had chosen one of their fellow front-runners: and these were the ones who — by and large— responded to the survey rather than the successful ones.
Although this is hardly the headhunter's fault, the candidate will naturally feel annoyance or even anger that his or her expectations have been raised and then dashed, often without much explanation.
The failed short-list candidates are surrounded by increasing circles of other disappointed souls: to continue our horseracing imagery, the front-runners are followed by the minor placings, those who met the headhunter and talked at length about the opportunity, who were among the top ten, but not the top three or four.
Beyond them are the also-rans, other disaffected characters, who were on the receiving end of tempting, exciting, ego-boosting telephone calls which were never subsequently followed up, from headhunters of whom they never heard anything again.
Even further out, with less reason for antagonism towards search consultants but still known to bear malice, are the hopefuls who never appeared on the race card at all, who sent in their CVs and waited in vain for a response.
Many candidates all down the line think of headhunters as privileged individuals able to hand out plum jobs willy-nilly to those in their favour; at the same time — somewhat contradictorily — they regard them as dodgy, cowboy characters who have arrived at their coveted positions in life after having failed at everything else they have attempted.
One particular candidate responding to the survey went to a great deal of trouble to commit his decidedly anti-headhunting views to paper.
Working in the very competitive insurance industry, principally at Lloyd's, he had been approached four times by four different headhunting firms, only one of whose names he remembered (one of the smaller UK-based consultancies).
He argued that because Lloyd's, as a market place, had its own effective communications network by word of mouth for anyone seeking a change of job or a company looking for a specialist, any use of headhunters was immediately suspicious.
A company seeking to recruit in this specialty area would, if they used a search consultant, immediately reveal themselves as not having the right contacts in the market.
Headhunters have no place in such an environment, he suggested.
This candidate and others also in a similar position saw search  consultants as a tool of ignorant companies seeking insider-knowledge; and he thinks they are no better than their employers.
He feels that there is no way that an external agency can obtain the feel of a market place like Lloyd's.
Another criticism generally expressed was that headhunters, having approached a candidate and then been turned down, did not hesitate to make the most of the contact they had made despite the rejection and go on to ask, ‘Well, can you recommend someone who would be interested?’
One particular candidate's reaction was amazement at their nerve, and he would always immediately refuse ‘to do the headhunters’ job for them'.
Although they usually listen to what headhunters have to sell, many candidates were irritated by the questions they were asked.
‘Would you be interested in moving jobs?
Are you happy?
Does your present job offer you sufficient challenge?
Would you like greater fulfilment in your job?’
One candidate considered that headhunters would waste a lot less time if they immediately admitted which company they were acting for.
‘I know they need to protect their client's confidentiality but there are certainly many companies I would not consider working for and that ought to be got out of the way early on.’
After all, in view of the calibre of candidates they approach, they should be able to expect them to keep their confidence if asked.
Many candidates showed little appreciation of the problems from the headhunter's point of view.
It is easy for many candidates such as one of those quoted above to criticise headhunters: they feel they have no need for them, because of the nature of the internal communications network at Lloyd's and because recent changes in the City and the resulting increased need for various financial specialists appear to have had no impact on Lloyd's insurance jobs.
The candidate quoted above — along with many clients — values stability in business and considers that once a company (presumably in the Lloyd's insurance market) has established a successful formula, it then strives hard to keep the status quo.
He thinks this is more important than a high turnover of staff, despite the fresh minds and attitudes this may encourage.
Much of this and several other candidates' arguments are not convincing because their remarks reveal contradictory opinions and a lack of principles.
Many candidates would think nothing of taking advantage of headhunters by accepting a free overseas trip and free entertainment such as drinks, lunch or dinner, whilst having no intention whatsoever of changing jobs.
Finally, despite all the pejorative remarks and many statements along the lines of ‘I personally do not think very highly of headhunters’, most accept fully that the headhunting business in Britain is here to stay.
Other respondents to the candidate survey were less negative.
One, for example, had been approached by four or five recognised firms  without result but, significantly, had made more progress with an intermediary.
He described his experience thus:
There are two types of approach falling into two separate categories.
Those who give the impression that they are fishing for information; they may be looking for a recommendation for somebody else who may be suitable to approach.
Or they may give the impression that they are not quite sure if you are the right candidate, i.e. they have not done their homework.
The most professional approach which I had was in fact via an intermediary who was acting on behalf of an existing customer of the company who employed me and whose objective was to sound out general interest without disturbing the importance of on-going business relationships.
Although detailed discussions did take place and were finally unsuccessful, this careful approach managed to maintain an on-going business relationship…
The general approach which they make is extremely varied, from being quite clandestine to being rather pushy. 1 think the more senior one becomes, the more serious any headhunting approach becomes.
The manner with which one deals with any such approach may well have an important bearing on an opportunity at some later date.
In contrast to the respondent quoted earlier, this candidate saw headhunting as ‘an important way of progressing, particularly for individuals who work for smaller companies or in very specialised fields’.
He was above the idea of taking advantage of headhunters through accepting free lunches and trips without intending to move: ‘Time is one's most valuable commodity.’
Many headhunters themselves accept that some candidates are justified in considering that they have had a raw deal.
As we suggested, this applies even to the largest and most prestigious search firms.
One leading search consultant described how he had once mistakenly presented the wrong candidate for a job.
The client concerned wanted both a finance director and a managing director; the headhunter had found a good candidate with an accountancy background to be MD, before deciding that the same man would be better in the finance director position.
Unfortunately, the headhunter forgot to inform the candidate, so the meeting between the candidate and the client collapsed in misunderstanding.
The candidate thought he was going for an interview to be MD when the client thought he was to meet the proposed finance director.
But in this instance, the client was more offended than the candidate, and stormed out of the meeting, leaving the candidate puzzled but generally philosophical and according to the headhunter, ‘he was quite amused and delightful about it.’
Most headhunters argue that the candidates who criticise them do so because they, the candidates, have been unsuccessful.
It is sour grapes, they say, because the candidates no doubt sent in many copies of their CV without response; fell by the wayside in competition with better candidates; failed to convince the would-be employer that they were right for the job; or were just plain unlucky and not in the right place at the right time.
Headhunters' favourite candidates, often those who have subsequently become users of search in their own right, are the winners.
(Part of the survey of client usage of executive search appeared in Euromoney in September 1988.)
QUESTIONNAIRE
1.
May I quote you or your company or do you prefer total anonymity?
2.
Do you use headhunters regularly or on specific occasions only?
3.
Which departments in your firm frequently require executives?
Do you ever ask headhunters to recruit a whole team?
4.
What is the salary range of executives recruited?
5.
Are candidates selected generally appropriate given their level of salary and the expenses incurred?
6.
Do you use international or UK search firms, or does this depend on your particular requirements at the time?
What are the advantages of using a large over a small firm?
7.
Which search firms have you used over the past five years?
Do you have any comments on their performance?
8.
How did you find out about these firms in the first place?
9.
What are the advantages of using executive search companies over employing your own recruiting facilities?
Do you find them more expensive?
10.
Do you employ any defence mechanisms to protect your firm against poaching by other firms via headhunters?
11.
Have there been any breaches of confidentiality or illegal use of information by search firms you have employed in the past?
12.
Have any headhunters joined your firm to fill in a position they were initially asked to search for?
13.
How did the Big Bang and the recent Crash affect your recruiting?
Thank you very much for your co-operation.
RESULTS FROM 30 COMPANIES
1.
Request for Anonymity:
Yes 11
No 19
2.
Use of Headhunters:
Regularly 14
Specific occasions only 9
Very rarely 6
3.
Departments of companies with greatest usage of search (can be more than one):
Financial 11
For entire teams 0
Marketing 6
Information technology 2
New sectors 6
No specific department 15
4.
Salary range recruited (only lower limit noted):
Above £30000 5
Above £35000 7
Above £40000 8
Above £50000 3
A separate decision is taken in each case 7
5.
Candidates presented by headhunters:
Generally appropriate 24
Not always appropriate 6
6.
Use of international and national search firms:
Mostly international firms 13
Mostly national firms 4
Combination of both 13
7.
Use of particular named search firms:
Confidential information 11
One or two named firms 2
One or two unnamed firms 1
Three or four named firms 3
Three or four unnamed firms 4
Several named firms 5
Several unnamed firms 4
8.
Source of information on search firms (often more than one):
Direct approach from search firm 8
Advertisement by search firm 2
Recommendation from a previous user 8
Direct experience of a senior executive 8
Years of personal contacts 11 The Executive Grapevine 2
9.
Advantages of using executive search (often more than one):
They have wider range of contacts 7
They save time 6
They provide an external view, knowledge of the market 11
Ensuring complete confidentiality 5
Able to concentrate on one search at a time 1
Avoiding maintaining own recruiting department 1
Can be used jointly with in-house recruiting 7
Senior executives do not read advertisements 5
Senior executives prefer approach from an intermediary 11
9A.
Cost of using executive search compared with in-house recruiting:
Search more expensive, and too expensive 14
Search more expensive, but worth it 8
Search less expensive 1
Works out about the same 7
10.
Defence mechanisms against loss of executives through headhunters:
Exclusion clauses in contracts 7
Good conditions of employment 11
None used 5
None possible 7
11.
Confidentiality of search firms used (often more than one):
Adequate 17
Not completely trusted 7
No way of knowing 11
12.
Search consultants joining companies who hired them for search:
Not in our case 28
Has happened 2
13.
Impact of Big Bang on recruiting:
More recruiting 14
Less recruiting 0
No difference 16
13A.
Impact of Crash on recruiting:
More recruiting 0
Less recruiting 12
No difference 18