

THE SUBJECT-MATTER AND MATERIALS
One big difference between ourselves and our predecessors centuries ago, is our acceptance of historical change.
We are no longer surprised by it; it is taking place all the time, and more rapidly and widely than ever before.
The growth of population in the last 200 years is enough by itself to make much of previous history seem almost static.
Yet this is the sort of change of which comparatively few people, perhaps, are aware; there are others which have been more spectacular.
Since the first edition of this book was published, men have gone to the moon and walked about on it.
Yet among those who watched them on television screens as they did so were many who had been born before there were aeroplanes, and even before the motor-car had become a familiar object.
Another great change which has come about since 1880 has been the establishment of communications and international relations which have made the whole globe ‘one world’.
In 1880 the Americas were in large measure still untroubled by political events in other continents.
Great tracts of them were, if not undiscovered, still unexplored.
The rest of the known world was mainly dominated directly or indirectly by a few European states.
Their dominance outside the Americas grew into a world supremacy which reached a climax at the beginning of the first world war and began to crumble before the end of the second.
As it crumbled, a new world appeared in which Europe was overshadowed by two super-states and jostled by a throng of new nations.
These great innovations, roughly speaking, are what this book is about.
Because these changes were worldwide, Europe's history is inseparable from world history between 1880 and 1945.
Yet we can still distinguish a ‘European’ history with themes of its own in these years.
At least until 1917, and to some extent even until 1945, Europe was the decisive arena of world power, as it had been for centuries.
Since the Muslims turned back from Tours in the eighth century, the decisions made in Europe had increasingly been the decisions which altered the history of the world.
However many millions it ruled, Akbar's Empire in the end changed history less than the foundation of the East India Company, and the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen had greater repercussions than the thousand-volume encyclopedias of China.
The omission from this book of the history of most of the globe can therefore be defended, because political power was the most important determinant of European history.
For all her heritage of shared civilization, Europe was not an economic, nor a social, nor a racial or national entity.
Such identity and unity as she possessed in these years was essentially the identity and unity of a system of power, though one beginning to decay.
Europe contained, for most of the years between 1880 and 1945, the most important forces in world politics, and was the focus of the arrangements which governed the world: these arrangements left unregulated only the western hemisphere (and even there the British Royal Navy tacitly provided the under-writing of power needed by the Monroe Doctrine).
The nature of these arrangements was determined mainly by events in Europe itself, and not outside it.
So, European history is a distinguishable topic in these years.
At some time after 1880 came a turning point in world history.
By 1945 the decisions taken in Washington and Tokyo were already as important as those taken in London, Moscow or Berlin (a little later, the decisions made in Peking would be important too).
But this book includes only such non-European history as is necessary to explain the shattering of the European preponderance of power.
Traditionally, historians of Europe write about Russia and this principle covers that country: she was a European before she was a world power.
The history of the United States, on the other hand, has to be left out.
Important as it is to the understanding of the world today, it was in these years only  occasionally decisive for Europe.
For most of the time the United States played little part in the organization of world power except in the Far East.
At the same time, while Europe has the limelight, the stage of this history must be worldwide.
The steamship and the railway, the legacy of the colonial past and the expansive power of commerce make this inevitable.
If one theme of this book is the ebbing of Europe's pre-eminence in the system of world power, another must be the passing of an epoch in European civilization.
It is not easy to characterize the cultural and mental style of civilizations.
They contain contradictory elements, importations and survivals from other cultures, and it is very difficult to delimit them geographically or chronologically.
Yet a civilization existed between 1880 and 1945, reaching its greatest coherence and strength just before 1914, which was European in its origins although already transplanted to North and South America and the British white colonies and although unevenly spread among European countries themselves.
Its essential features had few clear and unqualified expressions, but it was a civilization which had come to be distinguished from others by the emphasis it placed on the individual, by its increasing separation of social and political institutions, by its material wellbeing, and by its growing rationality.
Another way of characterizing it is to describe its fundamental institutions, such as the sovereign state, the self-regulating market and the scientific method.
We can call it liberal bourgeois civilization, and a fuller picture of its nature will emerge later in this book.
All we need do here is to remark that by 1914 it had carried the control of violence and unreason in national and international life further than ever before, and brought Europeans to a previously unmatched level of material and mental achievement.
But this success was followed by a decline in the vitality of this civilization.
It was also followed by an intensification of a process which had already begun, the adoption of European institutions and standards in other parts of the world.
European civilization was the first to impose itself on the whole surface of the globe.
In 1880, some of its greatest successes in diffusing its institutions and  ideas were still to come.
When they did, the clarity of outline of European civilization gradually blurred into a world culture and in this way, too, its distinction was increasingly lost.
This cultural change is the second major theme of this book, but it is not easy to separate it from the political story.
This book is not, therefore, divided on traditional lines and a mixture of analytical and narrative chapters has been adopted in order to bring out, whenever possible, the general rather than the local and particular, characteristics of European history in this period.
Wherever possible, statistics have been cited to condense general changes which cover long periods.
The criteria of relevance to the central themes of European history have led me to set aside some topics often included in textbooks of this kind.
The history of the Ottoman Empire, for example, is only dealt with here in so far as it immediately affects non-Turkish Europe.
The smaller nations get short shrift on somewhat different grounds: in so far as they are affected by general trends, their history recapitulates that of the major states.
The criterion of historical effectiveness must almost always mean that their history has to be ignored to give space to explain that of bigger and more effective nations.
This is not mere deification of success; many of the most important facts of European history have been its great failures.
They have, none the less, been failures which have affected large numbers of people, and this is the only standard of importance which, in the long run, the historian can discover within the confines of his own subject.
International relations pose special difficulties.
There is much more to them than diplomatic negotiation.
Yet the diplomacy itself must be adequately rendered, and it is its nature to be very detailed and complicated.
Mr Kennan, who has written one of the major works of diplomatic history of this century, noted this.
‘The more I saw of…the doings of an official generation slightly older than my own’, he writes, ‘the more it was borne in upon me that the genuine image of the diplomatic process is hardly to be recaptured in historical narrative unless the lens through which it is viewed is a sharp one and the human texture of which it consists becomes visible in considerable detail.’
Coming as it does from a historian who spent many years as a  professional diplomatic officer, this judgment must command respect.
But narrative on the scale which it demands is impossible in a book like this.
Accepting, therefore, that selection must falsify, I have adopted the compromise of treating diplomacy only within a general context of international relations.
The main concern of the chapters on international relations is with facts revealing the changes of states' attitudes.
I have tried to confine diplomatic narrative to major episodes to which diplomacy was central.
At such points, quotation and a slightly closer narrative attempt to give the reader some idea of the reality behind the colourless abstractions of ‘England’, ‘Germany’ or ‘Russia’.
THE PROBLEM OF SOURCES
The series of which this book is a part was intended to go beyond the conventional textbook by introducing its readers to sources and methods.
Recent history raises no fundamental or peculiar questions of historical criteria.
There is no reason to re-fight battles over history and moral judgment in this book.
Perhaps it may now be accepted that so long as a historian is acting as a historian, his criteria must arise from his own study and must not be imported from some other autonomous field.
He must make decisions about what was historically important, not about, let us say, what was theologically or aesthetically important, significant though that might be to a believer or an artist.
This means he must look for what had the most far-reaching effects.
History is not the story of success, but the story of what was effective, for good or ill, in modifying men's behaviour.
(This is one reason for giving more attention to economic movements and social structure than our predecessors would have done.)
In this book, that means more analytical and less narrative material than there would have been in a book written half a century ago.
Problems of content nonetheless go beyond questions about criteria.
In the first place, the historian of recent times has a subject-matter different in kind from that studied by some of his colleagues.
Recent history has, for example, a mass character more marked than the history of earlier times.
The historian has to concern himself more and more with the disentangling of mass trends and less and less with the exploration of the work of  individuals.
This does not mean that individual men do not count.
The twentieth century would have been very different without the decisions taken by  Hitler and Stalin, the speculations of Freud and Einstein.
But we have become more aware of the web of necessity in which even exceptional men must move, especially if they are men of action (as, indeed, recent discussion of the role of Hitler abundantly makes clear).
We are more aware, too, of how much greater, usually, is the influence of social and economic institutions — the strategic factors shaping society — than that of conscious policy.
 Nor , we realize, do statesmen operate in a private mental world; climates of opinion, received ideas, even intellectual crazes and failures, all influence them, sometimes unconsciously.
One way in which modern history is distinctive is that it deals with societies which are increasingly aware of such facts as these, and therefore try to come to terms with them.
The self-consciousness of modern Europe raises another problem.
Some of the emphasis which is placed on general and mass trends in modern history arises from a sort of optical illusion, because we have so much more information about the general nature and working of recent societies than we have for earlier periods.
This is one of the difficulties posed by the evidence available to the modern historian.
The ancient historian or the medievalist has often to wring his conclusions from fragmentary and inadequate sources.
At best, his work is defined by what is known to be available as source material.
His characteristic attitude is one of close scrutiny and interrogation; he puts his documents on the rack, as it were.
Where evidence is thin, individual men seem to stand out heroically, taking decisions which drastically and simply shape historical events.
The modern historian, on the other hand, tends to see individuals in conflict with the inertia of history and society.
The concentration and technical improvement of the apparatus of power have been perfected, but our awareness of limits on the exercise of power has also increased.
THE PROBLEM OF EVIDENCE
Copious information is far from being an unmixed blessing to the recent historian.
The abundance of his sources is, in fact, his  central problem.
They are, quite simply, unmanageable.
There is no simple answer to the question ‘What are the sources of the modern historian?’ because the only defensible one would be the logical but nonsensical ‘everything’.
And although this may conceivably be an acceptable answer for an earlier period, it is now useless because of the weight of evidence about the recent past.
More documentation is generated by the modern world than by its predecessors, and more of what is generated is preserved.
Spreading literacy has meant more printed materials of all kinds, whether books, pamphlets or periodicals.
This has been obvious since the seventeenth century.
But the output of ‘papers’ which form the conventional primary materials of the historian has also risen.
In part the reasons are technical (the typewriter and camera — and now the computer tape — have made the keeping of records easier), but it is also a result of the increasing complexity of social organization.
All social and economic organisms now produce documents on a vast scale.
The greatest of them is the state, which has everywhere taken on more and more tasks in recent decades which have swollen its administrative archives.
Nor is that the whole story.
Speedier communications and the existence of more sovereign states and international bodies have swollen diplomatic records.
Legislation has not only so multiplied that it is now the characteristic activity of the modern state, but it has been addressed to complicated matters which have increased the complexity and bulk of individual statutes so that they often go unread even by the legislators who pass them.
Most European countries, too, have had parliamentary institutions during at least some part of this period and the debates and proceedings of these bodies have usually been printed.
The result has been intimidating.
A few instances quickly convey an impression of it.
When, for example, historians began to prepare the official civil histories of Great Britain in the second world war, the records of twenty departments, some of which contained 2 million files, confronted them.
When Germany was defeated in 1945, 400 tons of material from the German foreign office alone were seized by the Allied authorities.
A comparative example provides another good illustration; in 1959, we are told, French archives of diplomacy already held more documents for  the years since 1914 than for the whole history of French diplomacy backwards from that date to its foundation under Richelieu.
Once the line between the conventional primary source and the secondary study is crossed, the flood is even worse.
In Russia, something like 20,000 books have already appeared about the second world war.
This mass of paper is the most obvious difference between the problems facing the recent historian and those facing his colleague who studies earlier periods.
Yet it is not the only abundance which confronts him.
Industrial society has multiplied not only written documents, but artifacts of all kinds.
This material abundance gives the modern historian a quite different range of experience from that of his classical or medieval colleagues.
We do not have to go far to see the houses of the men of 1880; many of us are still living in them.
For the historian of modern urbanization, scores of cities are available for direct inspection, while the ancient historian has to make do with a few fortuitous survivals.
Of course, the historian may find irritating gaps even in this abundance.
Collections of aircraft, for instance, are few, and far from complete.
But a historian of modern transport can go to an enormous mass of recorded and photographed information when he cannot find a surviving model of an early bombing aeroplane; the historian of, say, medieval navies has infinitely smaller resources.
The photographic record alone, indeed, has still to be exploited fully by historians.
Our collections of still photographs take us back to the Crimean War, but for this century we have millions of feet of movie record, much of it unexplored.
Other means of recording have received even less attention, but there are signs that this is beginning to change.
Conscious preservation has also done much to prevent these copious records from undergoing erosion by destruction and loss on the scale which might have occurred in other centuries.
Rats are fewer, buildings drier and fire precautions more effective than in the past.
Occasionally, a bombing raid or a battle does something to reduce the mass, but such incidents are hardly significant.
French foreign office records were destroyed in great quantity in  Paris in May 1940 to prevent their capture, and even mere were accidentally burnt in fighting four years later, but most of the lost material has been reconstructed from duplicates in embassies and missions abroad.
Germany was the scene of some of the heaviest fighting of the last war, yet its records, by and large, survived.
The typewriter, carbon-paper and the camera have made duplicates of important papers readily available.
Archivists and curators are devoted to preserving what might otherwise perish.
Their position reveals another source of the difficulties of the recent historian.
This is a cultural fact, the obsession with the past which has marked European civilization more and more strongly since the romantic era.
It has led not only to the preservation and publication of documents — in the narrow and conventional sense of the term — on a colossal scale, in an age when they are more plentiful than ever before, but also to the reverential preservation of monuments from the more distant past by learned societies, governments and interested private persons.
Indeed, mere preservation is no longer thought to require justification; every local history society thinks it has an unanswerable case when it seeks to protect what is left of the past.
Even living statesmen are now encouraged to record on tape their comments on events which they have observed for the benefit of archives of sound-recording.
Much of this is pointless.
Like the reverential preservation of every scrap of paper written on by secondrate men of letters, it is an example of a flight from discrimination.
But it is also an example of the dangers inherent in the assumption of positivist historians that, if enough facts are piled up, a changeless, timeless historical ‘truth’ will emerge.
A false historical-mindedness in this way enslaves the historian to the fetish of the Facts.
Of course, not all concern to record and preserve evidence is like this.
Consciously accumulated record has always given the historian evidence of enormous value; inscriptions are an example.
One recent instance was an enquête orale into the French Resistance which interrogated 2,000 witnesses in a standard manner under central direction.6 Nor, for all the abundance, is the evidence of recent history without its gaps: historians can still argue about the nature and origin of Hitler's decisions on policy.
Some destruction has been effective, papers still private conceal the sources of some  important decisions, and few states permit access to their most recent archives.
Only the defeat of Germany in 1945 made it possible for a satisfactory study of German war aims in the first world war to be undertaken.
None the less, such a mass of available material has made nonsense of the old dream that historical judgment might, in principle, be preceded by a complete survey of every available piece of evidence.
This ambition always had its logical weaknesses; its impracticability is now manifest.
In so far as the historian must now ask himself rigorously when confronted with new evidence, ‘evidence for what?’, this is an excellent thing.
But it presents a major difficulty at the outset to the writer of general history.
There is just too much to read, or even to scan.
Nor does it seem that systems of information retrieval will come to his help for a long time, if ever.
Something has been done to help the historian to make sense of this abundance by publishing selections of material on certain important topics.
The influence of growing literacy and the competition of rival claims to belief and allegiance have increasingly driven states to abandon the assumptions of privacy which governed their relations in more aristocratic ages, and this has provided more published material for the historian to study.
Unfortunately this is by no means always unambiguously helpful.
Governments interested in publicity and propaganda have published much under the impulse of the urge to justify themselves and vilify their opponents.
Even when such a selection of documents for publication is reasonably impartial, a historian must consult other materials in order to evaluate it properly.
This can be obvious in an instance like that of the huge mass of evidence assembled for the trial of war criminals at Nuremberg; revealing though it was, it is hardly the whole story about Germany after 1933.
Collections of diplomatic documents concerned with the origins of the Great War have also had their built-in weaknesses.
The big German series,Die grosse Politik der europäischen Kabinette , was begun in the 1920s and reflects the contemporary preoccupation with ‘war guilt’.
Nor was this the only subtle and half-conscious bias which shaped this great  collection.
When it became possible to study the German foreign office records after 1945, says an American scholar, ‘tests did not reveal essential documents…that were not printed by the editors of Die grosse Politia ,[but]they did reveal that the editors, in making their selection, were influenced by a desire not to make the task of the rulers of the Weimar Republic more difficult, and not to injure the reputation of foreign statesmen who were still active after World War I and who were sympathetic to Germany’.
Other collections have been more conspicuously tendentious than this.
The Russian Livre Noir was a collection of documents published by the Bolsheviks to discredit Tsarist policy.
The ‘Nye Report’ of the American Committee investigating the munitions industry in 1935 printed a mass of documents on the entry of the United States to the Great War with the intention of influencing American policy.
Other publications emanating from official enquiries, such as the French National Assembly's postwar investigation of the events of the 1930s, may without being corrupt, nevertheless reflect special interests and be to that extent unrepresentative.
Collections of this sort often cut across the old distinction between primary and secondary sources.
But, so, oddly enough, does much of the statistical and purely ‘factual’ material which has become more abundant as the state extends its role.
Where policy has to be settled over such matters as public health or education, statistical and factual material is needed.
It is put together in accordance with criteria of relevance which are those of a certain group of interested persons.
From this point of view, the resulting surveys are sometimes like historical studies.
Reports such as those of British Royal Commissions or the Italian agricultural enquiries are both primary evidence for the historian of policy and sometimes secondary monographs on the background of their own recommendations.
There are many available from non-governmental sources, too, for it was an important achievement of European culture to invent the social survey and social studies and they have proliferated since 1880.
Such ambiguities, of course, are not peculiar to recent history.
But they may be more  dangerous there, because of the great bulk of official paper which sometimes supplies tempting shortcuts.
Yet in spite of the enormous output of historical books and articles on modern subjects, the general historian does not always have good secondary studies by specialists to cut a path for him through material which he has not time to study at first hand.
Often this is because the materials are not available, whether because they have been destroyed or not yet revealed.
Even in such circumstances, none the less, much can be found out by the judicious interrogation of the sources and witnesses which are available, as the history of the Suez crisis shows.
Gaps may well be there because no one has yet troubled to fill them.
When this book was first written, for example, no comprehensive study existed of the effects of land reform in eastern Europe after 1918 although many states then embarked upon schemes for the break-up of the great estates which had been the framework of economy and society in the east since the seventeenth century.
The changes must have been as great as those in western Europe after 1789, but their impact could only be traced piecemeal.
Undoubtedly, some of the missing studies would prove very difficult to carry out.
If we think about Freud and his influence it is not hard to find out what he wrote and said, and it is easy to guess that it must have been important.
But how important?
What part, for example, did his teaching play in the increasing secularization of modern society?
Was it more important than, say, anticlerical propaganda or urbanization?
Such questions cannot be answered without many more secondary studies.
We can assess roughly the impact of Freud's teaching and doctrine on the academic and clinical mind, but it is an immense task to document the slow, informal irrigation of society at large by new ideas.
Yet millions of Europeans who may never have heard of Freud's name are now affected by his work, even when this is grotesquely misinterpreted.
Further, when his influence on educated people is considered, there remain huge problems of discrimination.
It seems likely, for instance, that some of Freud's work affected widely held views on sexual matters.
Most educated people in this country now believe, in a vague sort of way, that we ought to be less sexually prudish than the Victorians are alleged to have been, and that sexual morality should be guarded rather by example and exhortation than by penal sanctions.
The change is revolutionary, and it is difficult to believe that Freud had nothing  to do with it (though, possibly, through misunderstandings of what he said).
Yet it may also owe much to John Stuart Mill, to the decline of religious discipline, or to the invention of cheap and efficient contraceptives.
When intellectual influences of this sort have to be considered by the general historian, he cannot go far for himself.
Yet he must make a tentative judgment on inadequate evidence, for such a matter is of fundamental importance.
Modern communications make the diffusion of ideas in a largely literate population so rapid that Freud was undoubtedly a name more widely known in his own lifetime than was Newton's a hundred years after his death.
Moreover, ideas and assumptions circulate in disguised and concealed forms, once they have achieved a certain currency.
Novels, newspapers and films feed the public with the ideas of a Freud without ever invoking his name.
This suggests another difficulty.
Mass literacy has meant, in most countries, a mass press whose output is enormous in bulk and difficult to assess.
Newspapers no longer serve the historian mainly as a chronicle of reported fact, but also provide material which may illuminate that culture of the majority previously so hard to observe.
The reactions of an educated élite, the study of whose reading matter has so often given social and cultural historians their main access to the past, no longer remains the only documentation by which we can get at the culture of ‘the common man’.
The medievalist has had to accept the limitations, as well as the advantages, of having as his subject matter a culture with only a small literary élite.
An age of mass literacy similarly presents advantages and limitations.
The crucial question about a mass press —‘who read it?’— is often hard to answer.
Yet, if we can answer it, we can understand the twentieth-century city-dweller as we can never hope to understand his medieval counterpart.
And that is very important in an age whose cultural life  is divided between ‘high’, minority, activity and ‘low’, mass, activity as never before.
AIDS TO STUDY
This brings us back, uncomfortably, to the problem of overabundant evidence.
Acton's vision of a final version of history became impossible long ago simply for practical reasons, even had it remained intellectually acceptable.
But there have also been compensations.
The modern historian can use works of reference written after the lessons of scholarship had been learned and while respect for accurate learning was at its height.
Whatever gaps may remain, scholarly investigations have gone forward since 1880 as never before.
This has been partially a result of literate Europe's historical-mindedness; one of its first manifestations was the rapid appearance of a number of new historical journals at the end of the nineteenth century.
It is also in part a result of the demands of modern life which have made access to ordered information more and more necessary.
The rest of this chapter will describe some of the resultant advantages for the historian of recent times.
Indispensable help can be found in many unspectacular but invaluable summaries of factual information.
Besides the obvious encyclopedias, most countries produce several annual or periodical repertories of useful information; a well-known British example is The Statesman's Yearbook , which began to appear in 1864.
There also exist many handbooks containing valuable data on more specialized subjects, such as the League of Nations economic reports.
They can be supplemented by biographical dictionaries.
Many of these have been published as national biographical repertories, but not all are complete (that for France, for example, had reached the letter D when the first edition of this book appeared and has now, nineteen years later, almost completed G, Italy, in the same time, has got from B to C. Works for reference  such as these form the scholarly end of a spectrum of contemporary works which runs at its other extreme into straightforward journalism.
Between the two extremes stand intermediate classes of books, such as the Chatham House series of annual surveys of international affairs,The Annual Register , the American United States in World Affairs , or the French L'Année politique (which was published only from 1874 to 1905).
One valuable series of hybrid books is the Carnegie Foundation's 200 volumes of Economic and Social History of the World War , directed by J. T. Shotwell; many of these were written by participants about processes they had witnessed.
The factual content is high, yet these books are neither simple repertories of data, nor objective scientific studies.
Such publications must be treated critically; Namier provided a good example of the deflation of a quasi-official authoritativeness in his review of the Survey of International Affairs, 1938 published by the authoritative Royal Institute of International Affairs (Chatham House).
The dangers of overlooking the admixture of interpretative comment and factual information is much less in more frankly individual reporting like that of The Annual Register ; the comments on the Prime Minister and Archbishop of Canterbury in the 1938 volume, for example, readily disclose the writer's sympathies.
Nevertheless, whatever their weaknesses, and although such books must be read critically, they contain an immense amount of information, and enormously simplify the task of the student.
Many of these works contain important statistical material, but there exist also many purely statistical digests and collections.
Few of them, however, go back as far as 1880, though historical reconstruction can often supplement them.
But over most of the period covered in this book there are continuous records of some sets of figures, even if they are not always reliable.
In all countries, governments and businessmen have become aware of the importance of statistics.
Where there are gaps (for instance in the  Russian population statistics for the second world war), skilled statisticians can sometimes carry out very elaborate reconstructions of the missing data by using what is known.
Unfortunately, the flood of statistics is very large; nothing more can be done here than to indicate some of the most useful summaries available.
For population figures, the U. N. Demographic Yearbook is the best starting point.
It began to appear only in 1949, but has some retrospective material.
Most countries have periodic censuses and also publish such other demographic material as is available in publications like the British Annual Abstract of Statistics , the Annuaire statistique de la France or the Annuario statistico Italiano .
These publications are very valuable, even when they require correction, but they only make up a tiny part of the huge body of statistical information now available in print.
Much other statistical and record material also appears from time to time in major newspapers and economic commercial and industrial periodicals.
So far, this has indicated the most elementary sort of raw evidence which the historian needs to use, but it is rarely satisfactory to describe it as ‘primary material’ in the old sense of ‘sources’.
It has already been ‘processed’ and digested.
Primary sources also exist in their traditional form, and they are, inevitably, the crucial material in the investigation of many diplomatic or political questions.
A great deal of documentary primary material is now quickly published because it is needed for reference.
Many diplomatic documents, for example, appeared in the Staatsarchiv (published from 1861 to 1919, with a last volume in 1928), in the annual documentary collections of Chatham House, and in similar collections published in other countries.
More selective collections on specific topics are likely to be the student's most convenient first references in searching this class of material.
The diplomatic collections referred to above are only one example of them; others are such convenient scholarly compilations as the Chatham House collection of documents on the Comintern.
Such collections are listed in the main historical bibliographies and there is no point in trying to list them here.
But it is worthwhile to reiterate that, in a sense, every book published about recent history is of value as a source and the conventional ‘official’ documentation does not necessarily occupy in recent history the commanding place which its comparative isolation in a sea of illiteracy gives it in earlier epochs.
Some memoirs, too, take us much further than official material; those of de Gaulle are a case in point, while British official documents which in their original form remained hidden from the historian by the thirty-year rule were printed in the books of Winston Churchill and Eden, or have been unearthed in private collections by scholars able to disregard the consequences of publication.
Where sources are unpublished and accessible, there are usually official guidebooks available.
Private collections also simplify research in some topics; Moscow may be closed, but there are the Trotsky papers at Harvard.
A collection for the study of socialist history exists at Amsterdam.
Specialization has often assembled both primary and secondary material for a specific area or topic in a centre such as the Hoover library at Stanford in California, and there has been a plenteous growth of specialist periodicals and learned societies.
If the historian is lucky enough to be working on a topic falling within the scope of one of them, his task is greatly simplified.
Even when no such help exists, many bibliographical handbooks simplify the initial labour of research.
The indispensable starting point is the annual International Bibliography of Historical Sciences which began to appear in 1930 and is now published at Paris with the assistance of UNESCO.
Of many other periodical bibliographical guides, only one needs to be mentioned here as a useful first quarry for the student: the American Foreign Affairs Bibliography published by the Council on Foreign Relations, whose first volume appeared in 1933.
It has a brief description and critical comment on each item listed.
EUROPE IN 1880
STATES AND PEOPLES
Europe's political structure in 1880 had been given its shape by the Congress of Vienna, the wars of the middle decades of the century and the Congress of Berlin.
The states which made it up can be classified in several ways, but there is much to be said for distinguishing European states which had already existed in 1815 from those which had come into existence later.
Such a division into ‘old’ and ‘new’states is useful and not merely chronological; it draws attention to a great difference between the Europe of Bismarck and that of Metternich.
The new states were all organized on the basis of nationality.
It was coming to be generally accepted by 1880 that the state was the proper political expression of the nation.
Europe, of course, still contained many nations which had no state to express, far less to guarantee, their political existence; the Poles were the glaring example.
There were also two great monarchies, Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire, which, whatever  concessions they might have to make to nationality in practice, could not accept that statehood went with nationhood.
Russia, on the other hand, accepted the principle while denying its application to its own subject peoples.
Nevertheless, in spite of such qualifications, Europe was by 1880 mainly organized as a collection of nation states.
Nationality is the key not only to the structure but also to the sources of change in European politics between 1880 and 1914.
It had already produced great wars and upheavals; even greater ones were to come.
The separation of one nationality from another, virtually achieved in the west by 1880, was to be much harder in eastern Europe.
There, a mosaic of national and racial groups and the sensitivity of great powers made it impossible to find either simple or peaceful geographical solutions to political problems.
Explosions of some sort were almost unavoidable if the principle of nationality was to be extended beyond the states which embodied it in 1880.
Such states were a majority of the twenty or so units making up political Europe.
They divided between them about one-fourteenth of the land surface of the globe (if we exclude Asiatic Russia).
Not all of them enjoyed full sovereignty nor were very united or coherent in structure.
But they all counted as pieces on the diplomatic chessboard and enjoyed some sort of self-government; it is convenient to regard them at this point as comparable entities.
The Atlantic states, Portugal, Spain, France and Great Britain, had centuries of national unity behind them.
Also, whatever their dissimilarities, they all had the advantage of good geographical definition (the only exception being France, whose eastern frontier had been carried to the Alps by Napoleon III, but which had lost Alsace and Lorraine to Germany in 1871).
Except in Ireland, barely recognized yet as a national problem, and, less importantly, in Catalonia and Wales, none of these nations contained any large national ethnic minorities likely to disturb their political life.
All of them still possessed big overseas empires, in spite of the losses sustained by Spain and Portugal, and they were all heirs to traditions of worldwide enterprise.
One of them, Great Britain, far outran the others in colonial possessions, though the partition of Africa and the final absorption of south-east Asia were still to come.
These nations shared another characteristic: they were all in form constitutional states (see below, Ch. 5).
Moreover, in spite of nineteenth-century changes in their constitutions — and Great Britain's had changed none the less radically because it had not changed violently — all these states were old, their consolidation achieved well before 1815.
To the north and east, from the Rhine valley to the western boundaries of Russia, great changes had taken place since 1815.
Belgium and Holland may be considered together; both were ‘new nations’ created by splitting the kingdom of the Netherlands set up in 1815.
Holland had both a tradition of national independence to which it could look back, and important colonial possessions, but, like Belgium, was formally ‘new’.
Both, also, were constitutional monarchies.
A difference between them was the existence in Belgium of two racial groups, the Flemings and the Walloons.
Their neighbour, Germany, was the greatest of the new nations.
The German Empire had been constituted only m 1871 and formally it was a federal structure of twenty-six kingdoms, duchies, free cities and other units.
Supremacy among them and the effective direction of imperial policy belonged to Prussia; the king of Prussia was Emperor.
His Empire contained big national minorities, of which the most important was a population of 2,500,000 Poles in Prussia itself; 250,000 Frenchmen lived in Alsace and there were also substantial numbers of Wends, Danes and Lithuanians within the Empire.
The kingdom of Italy, the second big new state to emerge from the wars of the mid-century, had only to deal with a few French-speaking communities and some Germans in Venetia; it did not yet have to face a minorities problem.
Italy's boundaries also enclosed a tiny anomaly — the republic of San Marino.
To her north lay Switzerland, a republican confederation of anciently-rooted cantons long protected by geography.
There were old traditions of Swiss independence, but the new cohesion given to the Confederation by constitutional changes in 1848 and 1874 almost made it a new nation.
The three other small states of Europe, the Scandinavian countries, had before 1815 been two, but in 1815 Denmark surrendered Norway to Sweden, and the two northern countries were united in a personal union under the same king, although  each had its own representative institutions.
Each of the three was a constitutional monarchy.
Alone among them, Denmark had substantial overseas possessions in Iceland and Greenland but these territories hardly strengthened her hand in Europe.
There was little likelihood of Denmark being able to regain control over the Danish populations lost to Germany in 1864, nor of Sweden regaining Finland, a Russian province, where there were still large numbers of Swedes.
It was in eastern and south-eastern Europe, the area of the dynastic empires, that the national minorities problem was most intractable.
The Russian Empire was the colossus of European politics.
Of uncertain extent, population and resources, economically backward, she could not always exercise her full weight in international affairs.
Within her boundaries were 4,500,000 Poles; among her important non-Slav minorities were 4,500,000 Finns, 2,750,000 Lithuanians and 750,000 Germans.
There were also the Ukrainians or Ruthenes, a distinct Slav group.
As a predominantly Slav power, Russia positively influenced racial problems elsewhere, too.
Other Slav peoples tended to look to her, especially if they shared her Orthodox religion.
One other peculiarity she shared with the four Atlantic states: she had great extra-European interests, though they lay across land frontiers in Asia rather than across the sea.
Strictly speaking, the Dual Monarchy of Austria-Hungary was a new state, yet most of its components were ancient and had long been ruled by the same family.
The dual system was an anomaly based on the Ausgleich or ‘Compromise’ of 1867 which guaranteed the independence of both Austria and Hungary except in certain matters of common concern (see p. 202).
This was a concession to the Magyars at the expense of other peoples within the borders of the Dual Monarchy; Germans, Slovaks, Serbs, Croats, Ruthenes, Rumanians, Poles and Czechs were among the most numerous.
The Dual Monarchy also ruled Bosnia and Herzegovina although they remained formally under Ottoman sovereignty.
The crumbling of the Ottoman Empire had already produced a number of new states in the Balkans.
Three principalities, Serbia, Montenegro and Rumania, obtained their formal independence at the Congress of Berlin, where each was bound to maintain certain constitutional safeguards.
The kingdom of Greece had a longer history; the Greeks had been the first subject people to break free from Ottoman rule after 1815.
Bulgaria was  an autonomous though tributary principality under the suzerainty of the sultan; it may be regarded as an independent state although a weak one.
Finally, there was the Ottoman Empire itself, still in 1880 formally suzerain also over Bosnia and Herzegovina, and still administering the Sanjak of Novi Bazar (between Montenegro and Serbia) although Austro-Hungarian troops occupied it.
The Turks still held Macedonia (Rumelia) and in eastern Rumelia exercised authority through a Christian governor, appointed by the sultan; Turkish troops might be maintained there and forts garrisoned, but the province was officially ruled under ‘conditions of administrative autonomy’.
Over Crete, Turkish control was firmer.
All these complicated arrangements of status and privilege contained plenty of combustible material.
Most of the new Balkan governments were irritable, ambitious and anxious to exploit the rivalry of great powers for their own ends.
Large numbers of Greeks, Albanians, Bulgars and Serbs still under Turkish rule could provide the new states with pretexts for making trouble.
If they did, then because of her strategic position, because of her great extra-European interests and because of the problem of filling the vacuum left by her withdrawal from the Balkans, the fate of Turkey would once again involve the interests of all the great powers.
This political framework filled a continent whose physical characteristics were a long and indented coast, few very high mountains, moderate rainfall and temperature and much fertile land.
Over the centuries, these conditions had built up a large population with a high level of energy.
Population history ignores political or military chronology; it requires a long view and it will be helpful to take one at the outset by considering the years between 1880 and 1945 as a whole.
The population of Europe, including Russia, had grown steadily since the seventeenth century, and continued to do so after 1880.
As a result, Europe's share of the total world population does not vary greatly between then and 1945: it fell slightly, but continued to provide about a quarter of the world's people.
Moreover, during those years, Europe sent great numbers of  people to other continents, above all to the Americas.
This means that its power of reproduction was greater than its growth in numbers suggests.
This is all the more surprising because almost from the start of this period the birthrates of many European countries began to go down.
What is more, they continued to go down.
Whether we take as our measurement the crude birth rate or the net reproduction rate (N.R.R.), this tendency is marked and continuous in most countries since the late 1880s.
This simple picture requires elaboration.
The reproduction rates of some countries, regions and classes dropped more steeply than others.
Some achieved peak rates even after 1880.
East and south-east Europe show declines much less sharp than the industrialized north and west.
An estimated German N.R.R. of 1.48 between 1907–12, for example, had sunk to 0.98 in 1940, while Poland, whose N.R.R. in 1927 was 1.30, still enjoyed a rate of 1.11 in 1934.
Most east European countries seem to have had N. R. R. s of above unity for most of the years covered by this book.
An example of regional differentiation within a country was Italy, where a strikingly sharper drop in fertility appeared in the north than in the south in these years.
England already showed evidence of significant differences of fertility between classes in the 1880s.
The trend towards slower population growth appeared more and more in wealthier countries and regions.
An inverse relation appears between natality and economic wellbeing.
Why was this?
It may be that growing wealth meant that more people came to have access to modern contraceptive techniques.
Nonetheless, different social and religious traditions make the influence of this very difficult to assess.
The details of the change form too  complicated a problem for discussion here.
What is not in doubt is that in spite of huge emigration, steadily dropping natality and enormous wartime losses, the European population as a whole still went up throughout this period (see also pp. 367–68).
Why did it not go down?
The main reason was that mortality rates dropped very sharply.
This can be illustrated easily by taking figures which show extreme cases at the beginning and end of our period.
The first and most striking thing about these figures is the sharp fall which they show.
The next is the disparity between different countries.
Roughly speaking, the country with the highest mortality rate in the 1940s had achieved a level comparable with that of England, but not as good as the lowest rate, in 1880.
Its mortality was still at the end of the period about double that of the countries with the best (that is, lowest) mortality rates.
The geography of this gap is striking, too, and reflects a division between north and west European countries and those of the south and east which will appear in other matters.
This drop in mortality was above all a drop in infant mortality.
More babies were surviving their precarious first twelve months.
This is the fundamental explanation of the continuous growth of population and its full effects were not to be felt in some countries until the 1930s.
Although the number of births might fall, there was throughout this period an excess of births over deaths — and, indeed, an excess over deaths plus the loss by emigration.
In explaining the fall in mortality, some weight must be given to the increasing wealth of Europe which made possible better  feeding and better housing — however slight the improvements may have seemed to the poor.
But more is due to medical and sanitary science.
Without these, the dense urban populations of the twentieth century would not have been possible.
The greatest achievements were obtained in the fight against communicable disease.
Many of the great killers were mastered, either by reducing their prevalence or by cutting down their case-fatality rates.
Spectacular victories were won over children's diseases.
Diphtheria, whooping-cough and scarlet fever rapidly declined in advanced countries.
In England the death rate from scarlet fever was reduced almost to nothing.
This was largely done by driving down the case-fatality rate (as was done also with diphtheria) but by cutting the prevalence of diseases even greater successes were won.
Germany between 1901 and 1931 cut her diphtheria rate from 39.1 to 6.4 per 100,000 inhabitants.
Typhoid and paratyphoid death rate fell similarly, although there were great contrasts between, for example, England, where it fell from 15.5 in 1901 to 0.4 in 1941, and Spain, whose rate dropped only from 51.3 to 16.1 in the same period.
In spite of such differences, the general advance was enormous.
Some diseases were virtually wiped out.
There was no plague after slight outbreaks in Spain and south Russia in 1899.
Though fever and diarrhoea still linger as killing diseases in parts of southern and south-eastern Europe, and malaria was only beginning to give way before D.D.T. in 1945 these diseases now linger on only in backward districts.
Between 1880 and 1945 European society succeeded in mastering its health environment in a way which was historically unprecedented.
The huge growth of its towns and cities would have been impossible without the medical advances of these years and the action by governments, singly and in concert, which supplied new health and welfare services, and imposed new standards of health, sanitation and accommodation.
Declining mortality rates meant people lived longer.
Again, the improvement was uneven.
An Englishman's expectation of life at birth in the 1880s was 43.7 years, a Frenchman's a little over 40, and a German's a little under.
By 1940 the first two might  expect to live 60.2 and 55.9 years.
These figures may be compared with those for India; in 1881 male life-expectancy at birth was 23.6 years there, and in 1931 this figure had risen to 26.9.
It is worth recalling that on the eve of the French Revolution the French peasant's expectancy is thought to have been rather below that of the Indian in 1881; so far had Europe already come in the ninety years before 1880.
Such an increase meant, of course, a much older population (and this tendency may have been exaggerated by the emigration of young people), and that more people were going to die of the diseases of old age.
Medical science did not make the progress in mastering cancer, heart ailments and mental and nervous disorders which it had made in dealing with communicable diseases.
On the other hand, its considerable success in controlling tuberculosis, pneumonia and influenza benefited the old.
When human life could be expected to last two or three times as long as it had done in the Middle Ages, great changes were bound to occur in the way men thought about themselves.
Such changes are hard to describe and this is not the place to discuss them.
But it is important to see that the great European population changes which are almost entirely the work of the last century and a half are not just of statistical interest.
Europeans were consuming more in these years, they were dying of different diseases at later periods of life, their physique (taking rough measures such as those of height) was improving.
It is difficult not to infer that they grew to suffer deprivations more impatiently and to believe more strongly that earthly happiness was attainable.
That belief, in the last resort, is one which separates modern from medieval man.
Europeans were divided in 1880 into states as small as Montenegro, with less than a quarter of a million inhabitants, and as large as Russia, with between 90 and 100 million.
But four-fifths of Europe's population was to be found in six states.
Russia, Germany, Austria-Hungary, England and France were the ‘great powers’(or their lineal descendants) which had made the Vienna settlement.
The sixth, Italy, was to prove something of a lame duck in their company, because of her lack of resources.
Being a ‘great power’ meant being able to conduct a big war.
Several factors came into this equation, but population was fundamental.
The rates at which populations grew were therefore  very important.
All six powers were getting bigger, but at very different speeds.
Russia grew fastest between 1880 and 1910, increasing her population by between 50 and 60 per cent.
Germany was next, going up by 43 per cent and her ally Austria-Hungary came in third place with an increase of 35 per cent.
Great Britain was rising more slowly; she added over 26 per cent to her population, and Italy added 24 per cent.
A long way behind everyone else came France, with an increase of only a little more than 5 per cent.
This registered a very important change in France's international position.
Once the wealthiest and most populous of the great powers, in 1880 she had 15.7 per cent of the European population.
In 1900 the fraction was 9.7 per cent and it was shrinking fast.
This accounts for some of the hopefulness with which France was to look to her African possessions for military manpower in the twentieth century.
In some countries, national and racial minorities meant that total population figures do not tell the whole story about military strength.
Russia's Poles were not necessarily a military asset.
On the other hand, Irish recruiting to the British army provided it with some of its finest soldiers.
The worst problems were those of the Dual Monarchy.
In each half of it, the dominant race was itself a minority.
In Austria the Germans made up 36.8 per cent of the population.
In historic Hungary itself, the Magyars provided 41.2 per cent of the total, but they were much thinner on the ground in the Croatian provinces which were also part of their half of the Monarchy.
In 1910, all the other minorities, to which had been added the Muslim Serbo-Croats of Bosnia-Herzegovina (annexed in 1909), outnumbered Germans and Magyars combined and provided about 58 per cent of the subjects of the house of Habsburg.
Besides its political and racial distribution, population density varied greatly.
Europe as a whole was thickly populated but the mass was unevenly distributed.
In Scandinavia, the more mountainous south, and the plains of the east it was thinly scattered; the north-west was thickly populated and more urbanized.
The most densely populated countries in 1880 were Belgium (481 per square mile), Holland (304) and the United Kingdom (279).
But there are difficulties in speaking of national averages, because such figures hide differences as great, say, as those between Lancashire and Inverness-shire, or between the Ruhr and Posnan.
Urbanization is another index which may be misleading if unqualified.
There are difficulties in deciding exactly what constitutes a town.
Some states counted administrative areas as urban units, and some counted agglomerations of a certain number of people.
Nor is it easy to say whether the number of towns or the size of the biggest is the better index of urban development.
Great Britain and Russia, for example, led in numbers of towns, but were very different societies.
None the less, some features of the urban pattern of 1880 are fairly clear.
In the first place, the number of very big cities was growing rapidly, as it had been since about the middle of the century.
In 1880 only London, Berlin and Paris had more than a million inhabitants.
By 1910, four more cities had been added to this list — Glasgow, Vienna, Moscow and St Petersburg.
The new big cities tended to accumulate in a comparatively small number of countries.
If we count cities of over 500,000 inhabitants as ‘big’, fourteen out of twenty-three of them were to be found in five countries, the United Kingdom (6), Germany (3), France (3), Belgium (1) and Holland (1).
The other nine were shared between Spain (2), the Dual Monarchy (2), Italy (2), Russia (2) and Poland (1).
The existence of one big city in so small a country as Belgium or Holland was, of course, of far greater significance than, say, the existence of one in Poland.
Great Britain and Germany led the rush to the cities.
(The French population tended to shift to the towns much more slowly; we are told the rate was about 3 per cent per decade down to 1911, and this had been true for a century.)
Some general stimuli seem to have been the persistence of higher birth rates in  rural areas (which meant pressure on land), the attractions of city life, better public transport, which made it easier for cities to recruit labour from a wider area, and, above all, the creation of employment as industry grew up near supplies of raw materials and important transport centres.
Later technical changes in transport were to make it possible for the city to change its nature by spreading out great suburban dormitories, and electrification would help to decentralize industry.
But at first the cities simply increased in number, grew in population and became more densely packed.
As they did so, they created new service industries for their feeding, lighting, cleaning and maintenance and so offered yet more chances of employment.
Sometimes these clustered around an old governmental or cultural centre, but in most cases, the character of the new cities was dominated by industry.
We can add to our knowledge of the European from 1880 onwards the fact that he is more and more likely to be a city-dweller, and to live in an industrial city.
Millions of Europeans still worked on the land, and the absolute numbers of those dependent on agriculture for a livelihood did not begin to fall until very recently, yet the tendency for population to increase and to accumulate in a few densely populated and highly urbanized regions had already begun to alter the patterns of earlier centuries.
To understand the sources of the new ways of life, we must turn to economic history.
THE ECONOMY BEFORE 1914
Although there are great contrasts between the countries and regions in which they live, most Europeans enjoy moderate temperatures and good rainfall.
Very roughly, about one-third of the 2,500 million acres of the world's land which are naturally suitable for cultivation are in Europe.
Most of them were growing food or timber in 1880, although not all of them were as productive as they were later to become.
Underground lay huge mineral resources and abundant supplies of energy in the great coal belt which runs across the northern hemisphere and is richest and most accessible in Europe.
From 1880 to 1945 coal was the  greatest single source of energy for her industry.
Coal gave Europe the industrial supremacy which enabled her to commandeer petroleum supplies when she later needed them, but even in 1939 coal was still her fundamental source of power.
Her vast deposits were in 1880 still largely unexplored; those of Silesia alone were believed to be even greater than the huge fields already opened in Great Britain.
Iron, too, was abundant; only Ireland, Switzerland and Denmark had no ore, and Europe's deposits were supplemented in the 1890s by huge discoveries in north Sweden, whose ore was twice as rich as that of Lorraine.
Later, when the development of ferro-alloys made new minerals necessary, tungsten, chrome, manganese and bauxite could be found in Europe, although more and more rare metals had to be imported.
To exploit these resources there was a large labour force, recruited from the rising population and rich in experience and technical skills.
However backward in some respects, its educational level was high, and it was certainly better adapted in 1880 to the demands and discipline of industrial life than the population of any other part of the world except North America.
Such human resources were soon to be available elsewhere — notably in Japan — but for some decades they guaranteed to Europe and North America a monopoly of technical invention and discovery.
Not one important industrial process was produced by Asia or Africa during the period covered by this book.
Almost as important as her mineral and human resources, was Europe's physical position.
A long, indented coastline, with many harbours on both the Atlantic and the Mediterranean, gave her easy access to the oceans and had made her the economic centre of the world.
Transport costs were low because of the cheapness of water carriage.
It cost 60 francs to send a ton of freight from London to Braila, on the Black Sea, by ship; to take it the much shorter distance from Vienna to Bucarest by rail cost 160 francs.
Grain went from Rumania to Danzig by sea, all the way round Europe, and still cost 30 per cent less than overland by rail.
The accessibility of the seas led the maritime countries of Europe to build up huge fleets of ships, amounting to about six times as much tonnage as the rest of the world (most of whose ships belonged to the United States) and this predominance was to increase later.
In 1880, even on the British register, most of these ships were still under sail but steamships were common.
Fishing, which centuries of experience had made into a great food-supplying industry, and which was blessed by the exceptionally rich fishing grounds of the North Sea and the North Atlantic, also employed ships and provided a livelihood for thousands of men.
These were the foundations of Europe's wealth.
They were exploited by an economic system which was in 1880 increasingly characterized by capitalist organization, large-scale production for the market and specialization.
These tendencies had gone furthest in industry, but had also changed Europe's agriculture very deeply.
The superseding of medieval forms of agricultural exploitation had taken centuries (and was still going on in some parts of Europe in 1880), but the decisive changes were over; the worker had been freed from indissoluble ties with the land, that land itself was increasingly treated as a commodity like any other, and it absorbed more and more capital to make higher and higher production possible.
Without this slow agricultural revolution, which still had a long way to go in many European countries in 1880, food production would not have been able to keep up with population growth.
As it was, Europe had not been able to supply herself with all her needs since the middle of the nineteenth century.
Even France was not self-supporting in wheat after 1880.
Germany's supplies of rye, barley and oats usually had to be augmented from outside.
The most dramatic dependence on imports was that of the United Kingdom, which imported four-fifths of her grain on the eve of the first world war.
But all the more advanced European countries tended to increase their dependence on imported food between 1880 and 1914.
Not all of it, of course, came from outside Europe; some went from one European country to another.
But self-sufficiency was becoming rarer.
Germany, for example, saw the cost of her food imports multiply roughly four times in this period, when prices were not, on the whole, rising very much.
Imported food was needed not only because populations were growing, but because some Europeans were eating more and better.
The differences between what is eaten in the richer countries of the northern hemisphere and what is eaten in much of Asia and Africa is now a commonplace; it was already becoming visible.
Most food imports went to comparatively few countries.
The western European had by 1880 begun to eat more wheaten bread, and more meat (it was in 1878 that the first cargo of frozen meat was successfully landed in Europe) and he was beginning, also, to consume more agricultural produce indirectly through industrial products which depended on animal or vegetable supplies.
In spite of spectacular increases in productivity, Europe's farmers would be able to supply less and less of the needs of her growing populations.
By 1939 Europe could meet her own needs of agricultural products only in olive oil and wine; in 1880 she could still do much better than this.
Only after 1945 would Europe move back towards self-sufficiency again.
Agricultural productivity varied from country to country with its structure.
It is impossible to generalize about so complicated a subject.
At one extreme was the highly capitalized and specialized agricultural industry of Denmark, and at the other the huge latifundia of Andalusia or south Italy, with their poverty-stricken swarms of landless peasants working for day wages when they could.
The properties farmed by tenants or owners in the United Kingdom and some parts of west Germany also used wage labour, but it was better paid, better housed, technically more skilled, and less of it was needed.
This produced different social patterns from those of, say, south-eastern Europe, where there were still peasants who remembered Robot , the servile labour service surviving from the feudal era, and who lived in a poverty like that of Calabria or the Guadalquivir valley.
Some of them supplemented wages from the great estates with tiny holdings, where they were lucky enough to have them.
But even among peasants, there were distinctions.
In east Germany and Prussia, for example, the peasant was not quite so poor as elsewhere, but he was disciplined to the estate by legal devices which seem to have been as powerful a stimulus to rural emigration as poverty.
On the other hand, the land was less crowded: migrant foreign labour was needed on the Prussian estates at some seasons.
Still other patterns of agricultural life could be found in western Germany, France and Switzerland, where a high degree of subdivision of the land among peasant proprietors was already in 1880 the rule, and was to increase.
The holdings varied greatly in size: some were almost small farms while others were plots too small to support their owners.
In 1892 in France there were  2,250,000 peasants with less than 2.5 acres each.
(The average British holding of the same date was 66 acres.)
In 1907 about 2,250,000 German peasants had from 5 to 250 acres apiece, most of them less than 50.
And in this varied picture there were even some share-croppers still to be found, though everywhere they were dwindling in importance.
Generally, peasant proprietorship or sharecropping meant low productivity.
The production of grain was highest on the big, well-capitalized estates of east Germany.
Peasants tended to be conservative in technical matters.
Even in 1939 there could still be found peasant holdings in eastern Europe where the old pattern of division of open fields into scattered strips survived, and it was commoner still in 1880.
Individual proprietorship was to show great powers of survival and was even to spread further before 1939.
Land-holding affected demographic trends.
Everywhere in Europe there was a drift to the towns, but it was less marked in areas with large numbers of peasant proprietors and tenants — in France and west Germany, for example— than elsewhere.
In southern and eastern countries a high rural birth rate and pressure on land was driving the masses either to the towns or abroad, although in 1880 legal restraints still hampered the Russian who wished to leave his village.
In France, where more peasants owned land, the rural population between 1886 and 1896 fell only from 64 to 60 per cent of the whole.
In Germany, the drift was more rapid: whereas 35.8 per cent of the population of 1895 was connected directly with agriculture, in 1907 this figure had sunk to 28.6 per cent.
Substantial though such rural populations were, both France and Germany had to call on immigrant agricultural labour.
Such movement from the land caused alarm.
There were frequent attempts to check it.
In England, Radicals claimed that the establishment of a smallholding peasantry would provide ‘the only natural barrier against socialism’; both Conservative and Liberal governments brought in legislation to create smallholdings in England and Ireland.
Stolypin had much more success in Russia (see Ch. 6).
In Prussia, too, there was legislation to encourage the smallholder, but the motive was in that case a different one: peasants were supposed to make better soldiers.
The drift from the land still went on.
Great though improvements in European agriculture had been and were to be, it was industry which gave Europe world leadership, as it was later to give it to the United States.
It was the single great strategic factor which shaped Europe's economic and social life and, through her, that of the world.
For nearly two centuries a political framework had existed which had made it increasingly easy to tap Europe's resources and savings.
By 1880 the result was already a highly concentrated and mechanized industrial system.
Its modernity is so impressive that it is important to remember just how much of an older economic world was still interlocked with it.
South and south-east Europe, for example, was still covered with primitive peasant industries.
In both France and Germany, too, there were little pockets of old-fashioned methods and organization, for example, in the cutlery trade.
Even the factory system, the characteristic form of production of the new industrialized Europe, must be understood in a special sense: in 1898 there were 8,500 power-using ‘factories, in London, and they employed an average of only forty-one workers each.
In 1896 France had 575,000 manufacturing établissements ; they had an average of 5.5 workers each and only 151 of them employed more than a thousand people.
With all these qualifications, the industrial Europe of 1940 can be seen in that of 1880.
Its key elements were the ‘heavy’ industries: steel, and its supporters, coal and iron.
For practical purposes, the Europe of these industries was a Europe of four states: the United Kingdom, Belgium, Germany and France (Russia's contribution would later become significant, but was not in 1880).
In each of these products, Europe accounted for more than half of the world's output; most of the rest came from the United States.
The location of European industry was dictated partly by the availability of capital and markets, which meant that countries which were rich before industrialization tended to become richer, and partly by the deposits of the raw materials, coal and iron.
These materials had not always been associated; it was only in the nineteenth century that iron smelting came to the coalfields because of technological and economic convenience.
England first showed the pattern and with this juxtaposition the ground-plan of industrial Europe was settled.
France, Germany and Belgium were the main places outside England where coal was raised in 1880.
Germany predominating, they also shared the iron ore deposits of the Saar basin and Lorraine (these last had only just come into use, because of the discovery by an English chemist, Thomas, of a way of making steel from iron ore with a high content of  phosphorus ).
France and Belgium were the two lesser industrial powers and although France had been a big eighteenth-century producer of coal, her resources were unable to provide her with the fuel she needed for industry on the German scale.
Germany's coal reserves were huge and were concentrated in a few large fields.
Nearly all of them lay in the Ruhr and Silesia; those in the latter area were to become more and more important because of the ease with which they could be worked and the quality of Lower Silesian coking coal.
But although these advantages soon overcame the early handicap of Silesia's remoteness from markets, in 1900 the Ruhr still produced nine-tenths of Germany's coal.
It was in the United Kingdom and Germany that the mature industrial complex was furthest developed.
Russia was later to exploit her mineral advantages and other countries were to be linked to this mass of industrial power as was, for example, Sweden as a supplier of iron ore, but heavy industry was in 1880 mainly concentrated in western Europe.
Most of it lay in Great Britain, in a northern belt running from Lens and Lys in France across Belgium to the Ruhr, and in the Lorraine-Saar-Luxembourg region.
This was only slightly less true of the industries unconnected with coal and iron.
In bulk output, Great  Britain was outstandingly the biggest producer of textiles, for example.
Between 1880 and 1914 the economy based on these industrial elements expanded enormously.
Nevertheless, the era opened in despondency.
Since the middle of the 1870s a world monetary depression had thrown trade into confusion.
A long deflation lasted until about 1896.
During this period, most commodity prices fell about a third, rates of interest dwindled to vanishing point (as it appeared to those who remembered the inflationary middle decades of the century), and banking and commercial disasters multiplied.
The roots of this deflation are too complicated for discussion here.
That there were many factors to be considered is shown by the fact that in 1880 the depression was only just beginning to be felt by industry, while it had already hit agriculture badly.
All over Europe, the flood of transatlantic grain in the 1870s had brought grain prices tumbling down.
In addition, there had been several successive bad harvests, and a phylloxera epidemic which devastated the vineyards.
The impact of the slump was felt most heavily where costs of grain production were highest, in England, but all countries suffered.
Emigration overseas shot up, and most countries clapped on tariffs to protect their farmers.
The French duties on wheat, for example, rose steadily from 1881 to 1897 and behind them French agriculture improved its methods and cultivated new products as specialities for urban and foreign markets.
Although her wheat area decreased, the crop France took from it grew.
The wine industry recovered from the phylloxera by 1905.
This policy meant a sacrifice of agricultural exports, since French grain prices could not compete with American, but France preserved her farming industry.
From 1906 to 1912 France had to import only one-thirteenth of the grain she needed.
The German grain-growers had felt the transatlantic threat, but also wished to protect themselves against Russian grain, cheaply produced and easily distributed by rail.
The tariff which came into operation in 1880 was a direct response.
There was also an important element of war insurance in German thinking about agricultural duties: not only was food important, but so was peasant manpower for the army.
The duties gradually rose.
Germany had to import more of her food than did France but her  landowners were saved as the French peasants had been.
A high social price was paid in a lower standard of living for the industrial worker and the economic and social power of the Junker class.
This was hard on other Germans, yet something of value was preserved with the maintenance of a substantial agricultural sector in the German economy.
Production rose with population, too: between 1880 and 1912 4 million more acres came under the main food crops.
British arable farming was the hardest hit by the slump.
Exposed to the same hazards as the continent —.
but with some bad bouts of livestock disease instead of phylloxera — England, because of her political and social structure, had to do without tariffs.
The results were revolutionary.
Almost at once a rapid shrinkage of the arable area began.
By 1885 the area under wheat was already 30 per cent smaller than it had been in the previous decade.
It went on falling steadily, although not so rapidly as this.
Between 1897 and 1912, the wheat crop of the United Kingdom fell by 6 per cent while that of Germany rose by 38 per cent.
The area of cultivated land in Great Britain also dropped by 9 per cent.
The repercussions of such a decline were far-reaching.
Movement from the land faster than in any other country helps to explain the United Kingdom's high rate of emigration in the last two decades of the nineteenth century.
The agricultural industry had ceased to be the greatest employer; in 1914 about 43 per cent of the occupied population was working in agriculture in France, 35 per cent in Germany, 22 per cent in Belgium and only 8 per cent in Great Britain.
This is a striking change.
Its first effects fell on the landowners, the tenant-farmer and the Irish peasant rather than the agricultural labourer, who, like his urban contemporary, benefited from lower food prices.
The level of British farming declined sharply and it was only in the first decade of the twentieth century that it began to get on its feet again by shifting its emphasis to specialities like beef-fattening and vegetable-growing.
A strategical handicap of increased dependence on imported  food and the incalculable cultural loss involved in commitment to an overwhelmingly industrial society were other results to be set against a higher standard of living for the majority.
England s response — or lack of one — to the problem of overseas competition was, none the less, unique.
Other countries used protection to promote specialization and increasingly intensive production for urban markets.
Denmark, for example, was quick to turn her farmers into industrial agriculturists, processing imported grains and concentrates into bacon and dairy products which kept her fully competitive in a specialized market.
Fertilizer consumption shot up.
Such changes partially offset the increasing dependence of Europe on imported food.
In 1914 Europe including Russia still took only 6 per cent of her grain from outside.
Industrial growth, too, suffered from depression, but when a new period of inflation began in the 1890s, it was soon clear that the European economy as a whole was expanding at a rate unsurpassed except in the United States —.
an exception which must be remembered.
Although Europe was growing, she was falling behind relatively; her share of world manufacturing output was decreasing and until 1914 most of the rest of that output came from the United States.
In 1880 Europe produced 63 per cent of the world's steel; in 1910 48 per cent.
Meanwhile, the United States increased its share of the world production of steel from 29 to 43 per cent.
By 1913 the United States was producing about one-third of the total manufacturing output of the whole world: this was as much as Great Britain, France and Germany together.
It has also to be remembered that although in the early years of the twentieth century, the advanced countries of the western European industrial ‘base’(Great Britain, Germany, France, Belgium and Luxembourg) still provided the bulk of European production, industry was growing in other countries.
Russian output was still small, but had grown quickly; the Russian rate of growth, indeed, was very high.
The Russia of 1880 lifted less than 1.5 per cent of Europe's coal; to the greatly enlarged production of 1900 she contributed 3.6 per cent— about four and a half times as much.
She made 2.9 per cent of Europe's pig-iron in 1880, and 11.4 per cent in 1900.
When it is remembered that  at the same time the beginnings of large-scale industry could be discerned in Japan, it can be seen that a big absolute growth in this period masks a significant change in Europe's relative position.
It must not be exaggerated; the growth of the United States was enormous, but even that giant's stride did not deprive Europe of the economic leadership of the world by 1914.
The United States was too busy exploiting the possibilities of her own vast domestic market.
In 1914 Europe still dominated international trade, and Europe, richer than ever before, was still growing fast.
The expansion of productive capacity already existing in 1880, especially of the heavy industries, was one sign of her growing wealth.
By 1914 Great Britain alone was producing as much coal as the whole of Europe had done in 1880.
In the thirty years before 1910, Europe's pig-iron output trebled; even more spectacular was the expansion in steel, whose production increased tenfold.
There were no new fundamental discoveries after 1880 to explain this.
This great expansion is to be explained by newly available resources — available in Lorraine because of the Thomas process, in Scandinavia because of railway-building — a fall in costs thanks to a better transport network, the development of integrated plants and improvements in fuel technology.
Above all, the heavy industries, growing faster than other sections of the economy, benefited from a growing demand.
Ship-building was a great consumer of steel; by 1914 Great Britain alone had as much steam tonnage as had the whole of Europe in 1880 and was launching another 2 million tons a year.
The production of textiles was still going up; in 1913 two-thirds of the whole world's imports of cotton goods still came from Great Britain.
Factory expansion kept up the demand for machines and power which fed the heavy industries.
Just as significant for the future were new industries springing up beside the old.
Some of them were closely connected with those already in existence but they also sprang from advances in science and technology.
The rapidity of expansion in the last quarter of the nineteenth century makes it possible to treat the chemical industry, for instance, as virtually a new creation.
Previously, her raw materials and industrial demand for heavy chemicals — especially alkalis, bleaches and sulphuric acid — had made Great Britain the main chemical producer of the world.
After 1880 she was displaced in Europe by Germany.
The  explanation lies partly in German access to certain patents, partly in a heavy commitment of capital in England to obsolete plant, partly in better business management, but, above all, in Germany's superior level of education and technical instruction.
The chemical revolution was based on fundamental research in organic chemistry and, later, in electrochemical processes.
Germans did more of this work and did it better than the British.
Yet it is ironical that the most startling changes in industrial chemistry came in dyestuffs, because the fundamental discoveries in this field had been made as far back as 1857 by an Englishman, and England and France dominated aniline dye production until 1870.
Ten years later the Germans had taken the lead.
Besides meeting a potentially huge demand for cheap, fast colouring, the chemistry of dyestuffs opened the way to innumerable new synthetics.
By 1914 they already included drugs, plastics, explosives, anaesthetics, rubber.
This huge industry was dominated by Germany.
The expansion of heavy chemical production was also enormous, and in this business, too, the Germans excelled, although the fundamental achievement here was Belgian: the ammonia process of soda manufacture.
Electrolytic production of alkalis and improved methods of making sulphuric acid soon followed.
The resulting increase in heavy chemical output mainly took place in Germany although some smaller producers, such as Austria-Hungary and Russia, made their appearance.
A rough but convenient index of heavy chemical production is provided by sulphuric acid, because it was used to make dyestuffs, fertilizers, and many other chemicals.
Between 1900 and 1913 production in Europe rose from 2.5 to 6.3 million tons annually (but here too, United States production meant that the later figure represented a smaller proportion of total world output than the earlier).
New metal industries also appeared which were based on scientific research, but the most revolutionary result of the  marriage of science and technology was the spread of electricity.
It was to change the life of the human race as much as had steam.
Its first two major applications were as light and motive power and they are still the most familiar; both can be conveniently dated in 1879, when Edison perfected the incandescent lamp and Siemens made his electric tram.
The names are significant; from the start Germany and the United States dominated the new industry and the invention in 1882 of Edison's system of generating power in a central power station launched electricity in both countries on an enormous wave of growth.
Factories no longer had to generate their own electricity; more of them were willing to invest in electrical machinery when they could draw on central power supplies.
Europe began to equip itself with electrical power stations; London's first was the Edison Holborn Viaduct station of 1882.
This meant much greater freedom in the siting of industry; small workshops could now equip themselves with power tools.
The worker was eventually to benefit from better conditions of work; for the moment, electricity probably affected him most by providing transport for travel to his work from greater distances.
Electricity was not taken up everywhere with the same rapidity; central European cities were ahead of Great Britain, for example, with their electric trams.
But it was everywhere beginning to change life before 1900.
It was to be of great importance to countries like France and Switzerland where a shortage of mineral fuels could be offset by an abundance of hydroelectric power.
One other conspicuous feature of the modern scene also appeared in these years.
This is the motor-car.
The first internal combustion driven machine appeared in 1885, and the recognizable ancestor of the modern car is first to be seen in the 1894 Panhard.
By 1914, France and Germany were already producing a fair number of motor-cars.
England lagged behind.
But in Europe as a whole the car was still a rich man's toy.
A lead in volume of unit production was soon established by the United States and it has been maintained ever since.
Not all the new industries — and there were others — seriously affected the European economy before 1914.
None the less they were at once a part and a symptom of a great expansion of European wealth.
The world trade in manufactured goods doubled between 1900 and 1913, and Europe still produced the bulk of what was sold.
Not all of Europe shared equally in this  expansion.
Its benefits were felt most strongly in a small number of advanced countries in northern and western Europe.
In 1913 a half of the total trade of the world was made up of the exports and imports of seven European countries which enjoyed the advantages of a highly developed science and technology, well-established basic industries, and access to capital for investment.
Expansion fed the imbalance in Europe which these conditions implied.
These countries became more specialized as they became richer, interchanging more and more products with one another and the world.
Yet some of their wealth spread to their more backward neighbours.
Industrial nations needed more primary materials as their consumption rose and they could provide the capital for investment in poorer countries.
The relations of the advanced countries to one another were also changing.
The United Kingdom's economy continued to expand, but more slowly than other nations.
Foreign competition alarmed English manufacturers, who thought it the explanation of their difficulties.
There were deeper causes.
The outcry over declining profit margins seems to show that British commercial enterprise had been sapped by decades of trading on advantageous terms as the only great exporter of manufactured goods.
It is also significant that the steam turbine and the pneumatic tyre were the only major British innovations of this period; in the new industries she was a long way behind Germany and the United States and by 1914 was falling behind even in the older industries in which she had first established her supremacy.
Germany had by then passed her in pig-iron and steel production and the United States could out-produce her in coal and iron ore as well.
Yet the British standard of living was maintained and, indeed, went on rising.
Great Britain still had great industrial resources: there were specialized skills available among her workers, she still had huge supplies of her excellent coal, she had opened up new markets as fast as she had been pursued into her old ones by her competitors, and she had an enormous income from investments overseas and from the services which she supplied — in transport, banking and insurance, for example— to the rest of the world.
All these kept her rising with the tide, even if she rode lower in the water than Germany.
Germany's was the great industrial achievement of these years and her metals industry was the basis of her strength.
About three-quarters of it was concentrated in the Ruhr and Saar-Lorraine area and by 1913 she could meet all her own metal needs except in tinplate.
Between 1880 and 1910 her steel production grew twentyfold.
She dominated Europe's electrical engineering.
In 1900 she made between 80 and 90 per cent of the world's dye and had quintupled her sulphuric acid production since 1880.
The pace of her expansion was matched only by Russia's, but Russia's was on a much smaller scale and depended on foreign capital, some of it German.
French industrialization had been slower than German or Belgian.
An early start had been checked by a lack of cheap fuel and she fell further behind by 1914.
The loss of Alsace and Lorraine had taken away not only the greater part of the French iron industry but also some of her oldest-established textile mills; this cut into the market for France's own dyestuffs industry which, after a good start in the 1860s, dwindled away, and French textile manufacturers soon met their dyestuff needs from Germany or Switzerland.
By 1914 France's main industrial exports were textiles and iron ore.
The pig-iron, crude steel and semi-finished metal products from the minette area went to other parts of France.
Her average manufacturing establishment of 1912 used only 53 h.p.: her investment in hydroelectric plant had not by then compensated for her lack of fuel.
In 1914 France still imported most of the coal she needed for smelting, together with machinery and transport equipment.
She had begun to export alkalis but had to import other chemicals.
A better balance than elsewhere between industry and agriculture was the advantage she derived from slower industrial growth; she also owed to it some of her resilience and powers of recovery after two world wars.
Almost everywhere, industrial growth, like agricultural recovery, took place behind protection of tariffs.
This was  encouraged by the long depression of prices.
Protection usually began at fairly low rates.
The French manufacturers had to wait until 1892 for the Méline tariff, which meant an average duty of about 34 per cent on British goods.
The Germans, too, began with tariffs more favourable to farming than industry, and it took the McKinley tariff in the U.S.A. and the enormous Russian protective duties to convert the German rulers to protection for their manufacturers.
After 1902 the duties on British manufactured imports to Germany were on the average about 25 per cent.
Such tariffs undoubtedly made the lot of the British manufacturer much harder and the American tariffs hurt him most of all.
One way of summarizing the results of European economic progress before 1914 is to group nations roughly according to their increase in wealth.
They can be arranged in three classes.
The first and smallest was that of true industrial nations, committed above all else to sharing the fate of their manufacturing industries.
They differed greatly in size and structure, but Great Britain, Belgium and Germany fell into this group.
Then there were mixed economies which enjoyed a fairly high standard of living and whose diversified resources included some heavy industry, but where no one branch of the economy predominated.
Into this group fall France, the Netherlands and Sweden.
The third group was still in 1914 the largest.
It embraced all the other European nations and in them, however its preponderance might vary, agriculture was dominant.
Per capita distribution of wealth roughly followed this division, the industrial countries having the highest standard of living and the agricultural nations of the south and east the lowest, but the figures do not exist for precise comparisons.
Roughly speaking, too, this tripartite division would reflect a division between capital-exporting and capital-importing countries.
The richest nation in the world, in any case, was the United States, a mixed economy on a continental scale, and a capital-importer.
It is impossible to confine a discussion of Europe's economy solely to Europe; it was already by 1880 a part — the dominant part — of a world economy whose organization was to be elaborated even more before 1914.
The last prewar years have been called ‘the golden age of international economic specialization and exchange’, and the organization which made this golden age possible, an intricate and massive structure tying, for the first time, every continent into one economic process, was completed  between 1880 and 1914.
Its indispensable framework was the machinery of communication which now united the globe.
The problems of bulk transport had been solved before 1880, with the coming of the steamship and the railway, and it only remained to spread and perfect them.
The railway systems of Europe, outside Russia, were all complete by 1910.
In the 1880s there had begun to run on them the transcontinental luxury expresses which were to dominate long-distance land travel until the second world war.
In 1888 it was for the first time possible to go by train the whole way from Constantinople to Calais, and the Trans-Siberian railway was completed in 1904.
Water transport also improved.
The gradual replacement on ocean routes of sail by steam increased the volume of traffic faster than the number of ships; steamships could make more journeys in the same time.
The Panama canal was not opened until after the outbreak of war in 1914, but may stand for the completion of the world sea communications system.
Hamburg and Bremen had become great oceanic ports, and France and Germany began to compete in the ocean liner traffic; soon there were regular services to every part of the world.
Germany's progress in oceanic commerce was especially rapid, but Great Britain remained the greatest international carrier.
France and Germany also drew economic benefit from the use of their internal waterways for heavy industrial goods.
Both countries carried out improvement schemes to take advantage of their rivers.
About one-fifth of French and German domestic freight went by water in this period.
In each country, politics complicated development, but German interests finally obtained an east-west canal to link Berlin with the Ruhr and by 1905 ships of 2,000 tons could go up the Rhine as far as Mannheim, a very important change since the Ruhr by then needed more than German ore.
These improvements lowered costs and extended markets.
It was equally important to  a world economy that information could move as freely as commodities.
The cable system which united the world was already almost complete by 1880; its completion made world prices a reality.
The market economy which had been exported by western Europe was now worldwide.
Locally, the telephone was also speeding up business.
Transport and communications could soon after 1880 meet most needs of European commerce.
This was not quite all that was required for the smooth working of the world economy which was at its height in 1914.
It assumed also an absence of political interference.
On the whole, in spite of governmental interest in some special areas and in some kinds of investment, and in spite of tariffs, economic life was more free from interference and more completely self-regulating than at any other time, before or since.
Capital could flow about freely to seek investment, and labour could migrate to look for work.
Property and persons enjoyed almost complete security throughout Europe.
World prices might be distorted by tariffs, but a world market existed.
The gyroscope of this system was the world's financial capital, London.
Organization and expertise were available there for the financing of increasingly complicated business.
The medium of world commerce was often the sterling bill of exchange, which provided something like an international currency.
Behind it stood the international gold standard.
Europe had rapidly adopted the institutions of developed capitalism, and spread them through the world.
The joint stock company, the characteristic device for the mobilization of capital, became more and more the usual pattern of business organization and the freely transferable share a more and more common form of property.
Commodity and stock exchanges multiplied as dealing by sample became easier thanks to technical improvements and standardization.
Older trading institutions such as the Fairs which had served Europe since the Middle Ages, were disappearing, at least in their old forms.
Legal reforms were everywhere taking account of the new needs of international society; patent protection was improved.
There were also signs of new industrial developments, for which the theory of classical  capitalist political economy had no place; cartels and trusts began to interfere with the process of unrestricted competition.
By 1914 there were known to be 114 of them.
Industrial firms in the heavy industries tended to grow in size as the integration of manufacturing processes made further economies possible.
Capitalism was getting bigger, and changing its nature as it did so.
Bureaucratic skills were becoming as important to it as commercial flair, and the change of scale was introducing economists and businessmen to the idea of centralized planning.
New forms of quasi-public enterprise began to appear; town corporations appointed directors to boards of German companies and ‘municipal socialism’ appeared in England.
The increased scale of industry meant, too, that management was increasingly separated both from labour and from capital.
The old-fashioned owner-manager was rarer and specialized management techniques were beginning to be studied.
All these things were signs of the elaboration and growth of the economic order of which Europe was the centre in 1880.
Expansion and elaboration more and more justifies our consideration of Europe as an economic whole before 1914.
It was a discernible unity, embedded though that unity might be in the economic order of the rest of the world.
In spite of their tariffs, European nations were interdependent.
In 1914 only the United Kingdom sent more of its manufactures to non-European nations than to European; yet she was also Germany's best customer, and Germany came second only to India as a buyer of British goods.
British coal and tinplate went to Germany, and German sheet steel to the shipyards of the Tyne and Clyde.
Almost 60 per cent of the ore smelted in the Ruhr came from abroad (mainly from Sweden and France, but some from Spain, too) and some minerals crossed frontiers in both directions, German ore going to France, Belgium, Switzerland, Holland and Austria, while Welsh steam coal went to Hamburg and Bremen.
In 1906 a fifth of the coal burnt in the Berlin area was British.
More specialized exports  such as French woollens, German chemicals, Belgian locomotives or British machinery formed still more complicated patterns of exchange.
Ownership and control also crossed frontiers.
The tradition of foreign investment was an old one and the spread of shareholding in joint stock companies and the practice of floating foreign loans in London, Berlin or Paris, all tied the economic affairs of one European country closely to those of others.
Even tariffs may have helped by making it better business to own factories inside a market than to try to break into it from outside: the Germans and Swiss supplied the French textile industry in 1900 from eight factories inside France, Germans made chemicals in Russia, and other Germans invested heavily in the coal mines of French Lorraine.
In 1914 the building of blast furnaces in Normandy with German capital was going forward; Norman ore was to have been smelted there with Ruhr coal, transported cheaply by sea.
Some international trading agreements began, like cartels, to regulate markets and production regionally as well as nationally.
Professional journals and institutions quickened the international flow of information.
Innovations crossed frontiers more quickly in an age of easy communication, and processes could be exported by the entrepreneur to the place where they would find the resources and markets they needed.
As an economic system, Europe, in spite of its internal contrasts and competition, remained a unity down to 1914.
EUROPE AND THE WORLD
In 1880, ‘the civilized world’ was a phrase readily understood.
It meant Europe and those countries which inherited European traditions and values.
The Europe-centredness of civilization was easier to distinguish then than it is today, but Europe's relations with the rest of the world were already complicated.
In those relations European nations as units, European civilization as a whole, and elements of the same civilization mediated by agents not geographically European all played their parts.
The result was an informal, sometimes unrecognized, domination of the world by European culture and institutions.
This cultural and institutional hegemony must always be distinguished from the more transient political and economic  supremacy of European nations.
It showed most obviously in certain political institutions, above all the sovereign state and representative government, in some central ideas, of which the most potent were ultimately drawn from Christianity or the Enlightenment, and in a powerful technology, based on experimental science.
The civilization founded on these existed in mature form in the United States of America in 1880, and had just been extended, at last, to the whole of Europe itself outside the extreme south-eastern corner.
Elsewhere, after three centuries' growth only one big geographical region was still untouched by it: the mass of Central Africa.
Soon this was to be entered and then only Tibet and Ethiopia would remain for a time unresponsive to European politics, ideas and technology.
Everywhere else, European civilization was already predominant although there were important differences in the forms it took.
The United States, Central and South America (with a few small exceptions), Liberia and Japan were politically independent of Europe.
Other nations stood in ambiguous or changing political relationships to Europe; they were invalids, infants or fossils, like the Ottoman Empire, Persia, Morocco, Egypt, China or Korea.
A British viceroy of India spoke of them as ‘those countries which must inevitably have attracted the attention of Europe, partly from increasing infirmity, but still more from the opportunities suggested by their latent though neglected sources of strength’.
They could either become clients of European nations, or resist them by adopting European ideas and methods; in either case the cultural dominance of Europe was implied.
A third class of territories was ruled by European countries as colonies.
Some of them were disputable cases, such as the British colonies which were really independent nations of European stock — an illustration that Europe's world supremacy had many different forms and many different agents.
Colonies were the most obvious expression of European political supremacy.
Africa and south-east Asia had still not been completely apportioned into outright possessions or Spheres of  influence, but great European empires already existed.
The world's leading colonial power was Great Britain, ruling not only the biggest non-European population gathered under one sovereign government of Europeans, in India, but, formally at least, the largest colonies in area also.
In 1880, Queen Victoria's dominions fell roughly into three groups.
First were the self-governing colonies with large white settler populations which can almost be regarded as independent: Cape Colony, Natal, Australia, New Zealand and Canada.
India was a second class by itself, unique in size and in the complexity of its problems, and governed by a special department of state.
Then there was a large number of Crown Colonies, ruled by governors with or without local advice, and subordinate to the colonial office in London.
Some of them were strategic harbours, coaling stations or communications centres, like Gibraltar, Malta and Aden.
Others had grown up around old-established trading posts, such as those on the Gold Coast or in Sierra Leone.
Still others were old plantation colonies in the West Indies and the Caribbean.
In the Far East there were the Straits Settlements and Hong Kong.
British rule was even being extended again (under pressure from Australia and New Zealand) into the South Pacific, where Fiji had recently been acquired.
The next colonial power in size was France.
She still had Caribbean colonies but the bulk of her possessions were in Africa, where she ruled Algeria, part of Gambia, the French Congo and French Somaliland and was about to acquire (in 1881) a protectorate over Tunis.
In the Far East she had protectorates in Cambodia and Indo-China and ruled Cochin directly; further south and east were her numerous South Pacific stations.
Another important power in southeast Asia was the Netherlands.
Java and Sumatra were the core of the Dutch empire which still had colonies in the West Indies as well.
In 1880, Spain still held Cuba and Puerto Rico; in Africa she had Rio do Oro and in the Far East the Philippines.
The only other great colonial power was Portugal, ruling a huge area in Angola, Portuguese Guinea and Mozambique, and oriental footholds in Macao and Goa.
This is not a full list but it shows the extent and solidity of Europe's direct political control.
All these colonies belonged to powers whose empire-building had begun in the age of the great discoveries; Germany and Italy had not yet entered the picture.
The only really important nineteenth-century extension of European rule before 1880 had been the acquisition of a new African  empire by France after the losses of the eighteenth century and the revolutionary wars.
In most of the other colonies, Europeans had ruled for a long time.
Direct rule was not the only way Europeans exercised political power overseas.
Besides the intermediate stage of setting up protectorates over local political units, there was considerable open interference in the affairs of some formally independent countries.
Extraterritorial privileges, which removed Europeans from the operation of the local judiciary, existed in Japan, China and parts of the Ottoman Empire.
In Egypt a European commission administered the Egyptian national debt — which was largely owed to Europeans — and therefore played a big part in the financial policy of the khedive's government.
In this case, the interference helped to stimulate a nationalist movement, but this in turn led to further European control after 1880.
Even more drastic intervention was to take place in China; its roots went back to the control of the Chinese government's revenue by foreign supervision of the Customs from 1858 onwards.
Intervention of this sort occurred in most areas where European powers showed interest.
Korea and Persia were both to have foreign ‘advisers’ and officials.
China is perhaps the best example of the way in which European influences operated in many forms because political power, both direct and indirect, was mingled there with economic exploitation (for Egyptian and Chinese affairs; see below, pp. 107, 124).
The world's economic relation to Europe has already been touched on; it was not simply a matter of one-way domination.
The United States was too important for this to be true.
Especially in South America, American economic weight was to count more and more.
Gradually, American exports of manufactured goods grew; the exploitation of their own domestic market by Americans, too, was bound to affect the outlets for European goods.
Yet in one sense even the United States might be said to have been part of an economic system controlled by Europe down to 1914 in that she remained a capital-importing nation, and that capital came from Europe.
International commerce was more than just an exchange or European manufactures for primary produce from the rest of the world.
The trading pre-eminence of the United Kingdom, the only European nation which in 1914 was selling more outside Europe than inside it, made possible a more flexible and roughly triangular system.
British purchases of  European manufactures and other products were paid for with cash, with British manufactures, and with overseas produce.
To the rest of the world Great Britain exported capital and manufactures, and provided services.
Some of her earnings she took in food and raw materials, some in cash.
Because of this, Europe's economic relationships with the rest of the world were complex.
But if, remembering this qualification, we consider Europe as a unit — as it often appeared to the rest of the world — then Europe's main economic role in the world economy was to be a supplier of capital and manufactured goods; the rest of the world absorbed that capital and those manufactures and supplied Europe with primary materials.
The influence of this economic system on the non-European world was, in the end, revolutionary.
Some of its effects were to be much condemned.
Expropriations in Indo-China, forced labour in the Congo and ruthless exploitation of resources in Java and Sumatra all left behind them hatred and bitterness.
But unrealized potential was exploited as well as people and European economic intervention was not always at the expense of the non-European.
He benefited from the creation of new industries and new chances of employment.
European companies provided the managerial and entrepreneurial services needed to make the best use of existing resources.
Europe provided a huge and growing market for primary produce.
The needs of commerce and government created a native middle class (from which were later to come the leaders of nationalist movements).
But the most important resource Europe offered to the rest of the world was capital.
From 1900 to 1913 European investment abroad ran at an average of £350 million a year, to the real benefit of the receiving countries.
European investment tended to follow the flag.
Great Britain exported capital to the Far East, India, the Middle East and North and South America.
The Dutch put their money into Indonesia, the French into West Africa, Indo-China — and Russia.
Germany was less keen on overseas investment; she preferred eastern Europe and, increasingly, the Ottoman Empire.
There was some rivalry between nations in this process, as there was in all economic penetration.
But, as the case of China showed, there were plenty of opportunities for both trade and investment.
European nations had a common interest in opening the world to commerce.
Even their colonies were not always reserved to the sovereign nation: the French imposed a close protective system  on theirs, but those of Great Britain were good markets for the Germans.
Furthermore, so many traders were involved in non-European countries independently of their governments that it is misleading to think of world trade only in national terms.
The growth of the European economy had also some more subtle and pervasive long-term effects.
Migration followed the establishment of a world economic system: Indians spread all over the British Empire; Chinese went to Singapore and Indonesia.
Crops appeared where they had not grown before: rubber was carried from Brazil to become the staple of the Malayan economy, and soon to be very important in Indonesia and Ceylon.
Steamboats, railways and telegraphs broke down geographical isolation.
Together with drugs and drainage they checked the effects of disease and famine, while the imposition of order and the creation of new employment began the slow demographic revolution which long prevented many countries from cashing their new wealth in the form of a higher standard of living.
Sometimes traditional economies were broken up by European competition: the cultivation of indigo, for example, collapsed with the discovery of synthetic dyestuffs.
Such effects emphasize that the immediate economic dominion which Europe appeared to enjoy in 1880 was really less important for the future than the gradual integration of the whole world with the European industrial and commercial system.
The institutions of manufacturing capitalism gradually spread worldwide.
Banks, factories, joint stock companies began slowly to replace the traditional economic machinery of Asia and Africa, as they had already replaced that of pre-industrial Europe.
This was part of the cultural revolution which has gone on ever since.
Non-European countries were more and more to take up the methods and manners of Europe.
It was not merely a matter of European machines or European clothes (though the adoption of such uncomfortable dress in tropical countries is certainly a testimony to the prestige of European civilization).
What was important was the sometimes unconscious assimilation or half-assimilation of the mental furniture of the European.
In some cases this happened by the direct emigration of European ideas and institutions.
In North America, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa there were already in 1880 ‘civilized countries’ cut from the European stock.
In South America the same thing had happened; even the continuing presence of a large native population  and wars of liberation had not much differentiated their institutions from European models.
At least formally, the Roman Catholic Church and the State were the dominant institutions of that continent.
Algeria and Tunisia attracted immigrants from France and Italy so that a fringe of European society already existed on the southern shore of the Mediterranean.
Emigration to all these areas — except the United States — had been defined by strong national preferences and traditions, but emigration everywhere meant the emigration of the ideas and assumptions of Christian, legalistic Europe.
After 1880 there was still a great wave of emigration to come.
Its distribution was uneven.
In the 1890s about 60 per cent of European emigrants went to the United States, but this proportion tended to drop while South America's share grew steadily.
Australia and New Zealand did best between 1900 and 1914.
Such figures as we have need careful scrutiny, because they rarely take account of those who came back.
Nevertheless, it seems justifiable to call the period ‘the Great Resettlement’ of European stocks.
The main reason for the flow of emigrants was the farm crisis in Europe, and the circumstance that made it possible was the availability of cheap steamers.
In round figures, about 26 million people emigrated from Europe between 1880 and 1910.
To this figure should be added another, uncertain, number (perhaps 31 million?) who went to Asiatic Russia.
Such a dispersion was enormously important.
Whatever the ‘frontier’ might do to emigrant traditions on the ranchlands of Uruguay, in the island of Sakhalin, or the mines of the Rand, the institutions and ideas which were being adapted there were European.
European languages were spread by this emigration, and by colonial rule and economic intercourse.
English was the most far-flung language in 1880; not only in new nations, but in British colonies where it was the language of official life and therefore a language of record and social advancement for the native.
French was widely used over North Africa, the Middle East and southeast Asia, and had the additional advantage of being the language of diplomacy.
Spanish and Portuguese dominated South America (leaving a tiny island of Welsh-speakers in Patagonia), and Italian was a widely understood lingua franca in the eastern Mediterranean.
However mangled they might be — in pidgin, for example— European languages took with them European concepts.
One of the major influences in this diffusion of European ideas was the missionary movement.
The nineteenth was the greatest century since the first for the spread of Christianity.
What the missionaries spread was not merely the doctrine and practice of Christianity.
Their schools, hospitals and dispensaries also brought with them secular ideas and techniques.
Their quarrels with one another did not really compromise these benefits, any more than quarrels between European nations prevented colonial administrators from giving much of the world the framework of European law and order.
But here generalizations are especially dangerous.
Where direct rule had been established a long time — in India, for example— it provided a framework in which there could grow an acceptance of European ideas of political organization.
In an extreme case such as Algeria, there might even be an almost complete formal assimilation of administration and government to the metropolitan structure.
Elsewhere, only a sector of administration, such as the Chinese Customs or the Egyptian judiciary, would disseminate European influence.
Sometimes such influence was exercised by invitation.
A British captain at one time ran the Chinese navy and the Persian government tried to get an American to run its finances.
Colonial forces such as African askaris , Indian sepoys , or Algerian goumiers were another channel through which European ideas reached non-Europeans.
There were also western schools and universities.
The British government organized universities in India; Americans helped to found schools and colleges in the Far East.
The Lycée of Galata Serai had been founded by Frenchmen in Turkey and English public schools were imitated on the Gold Coast.
In the long run, the most durable achievements of the age in which Europe dominated the world may seem to have been brought about less by political dominion than by such impalpable but irresistible influences as these, by the corrosive effect of its economic institutions, or even by the simple desire to imitate.
The world paid Europe the flattery of imitation because of Europe's success.
Some nations, faced with the European political, economic and cultural offensive, drew the conclusion that they must adopt Europe's weapons if they were to resist.
Almost everywhere, westernization was advocated by reformers and resisted by conservatives.
Many nationalist movements were to appear before 1914.
The Egyptian nationalists were crushed in 1882, but their cause survived and was even helped by the improvement of  Egyptian life under Cromer's proconsulate.
In 1907 the first Egyptian Nationalist Congress met.
In Persia, the nationalist movement was anti-European and by 1906 it produced the first Majlis and a liberal constitution.
Indonesia's first nationalist movement appeared in 1908.
India's first Nationalist Congress met in 1886 and Indian M.P.s were even elected to the Imperial parliament.
In China the dying Tso Tsung-t'ang's memorandum of 1885 pointed the way to reform on western lines but nothing important was achieved until the Hundred Days of reform in 1898.
The Boxer rebellion was a reactionary, xenophobic movement, but the adoption of a western instrument, the boycott, against American trade in 1904 is more significant.
By 1908 China had a draft constitution and in 1912 she was a republic.
In this process of adaptation, what was really wanted was European power: the demands of the Hundred Days had been for arms, railways and  schools .
Even firmly traditionalist states could not resist this.
Turkey seriously set about reform under Abdul Hamid and at last the sultan of Zanzibar abolished slavery in 1897.
Only a few states held out against Europe as staunchly as did Ethiopia.
Of all the westernizing nations, Japan had the greatest success in adopting European institutions and technology.
The Meiji period (1868–1912) began with the surrender of feudal fiefs to the Emperor; ‘thus the country will be able to rank equally with the other nations of the world’, concluded the memorial of the lords who initiated this step.
The last important resistance to modernization was crushed in the Satsuma rebellion of 1877.
After that, European ideas and instruments flooded into Japanese life.
The Gregorian calendar; European officers to train her armed forces; steam power for her industry; central banking; a new peerage specially created so as to make orthodox bicameral  government possible by providing the material for an Upper House; the codification of her law; a representative system: these were all pieces of the structure of a new Japan which was at last crowned by alliance with one European power and victory in war over another (see below, Ch. 8).
Such borrowing from European civilization had only just begun in 1880.
It went ahead later on such a scale and at such a pace that  it can now be seen as one of the most important facts of modem history.
Taken with others, it explains the displacement of Europe from world hegemony.
It cannot be the subject of this book, which has to be about what happened in Europe.
But it must never be forgotten that the political, economic, cultural transformation of the world by European influences went on right down to 1945 and beyond.
Of those influences incomparably the most important was the spread of nationalism; it is ironic that this European idea was eventually to be the most powerful force undermining Europe's colonial supremacy.
Yet it, too, was a registration of the triumph of European culture; down to our own day the political life of the world has increasingly been debated in the terms forged by European history and in a European idiom.
Whether the voice is Mazzini's, or that of Marx, the ideas those of 1789, or those of 1848, they are always European.
But that triumph can be seen in small things, just as in great.
The final testimony to the vitality of European civilization in this period is the small concession which it made to reciprocal influences from the world outside.
Diplomatically and politically non-Europeans could be ignored by Europe down to 1914, except in the western hemisphere, where United States influence was paramount, and in the Far East, where Japan became increasingly important and the Americans had interests which might require respect.
Apart from this, the non-European world was, diplomatically speaking, simply that area of the world where European powers could quarrel with one another less dangerously than at home.
Economically, Europe had conceded more than she knew; she was already dependent on products from certain areas and would become more dependent in the age of the internal combustion engine.
Culturally, too, there were signs that Europe was beginning to be receptive again, as she had not since the sixteenth century.
Anthropology had begun the slow erosion of certainty of the absolute superiority of European civilization, although only a few were aware of what was happening.
The artists began to hint at change; Japanese prints were re-educating the European  eye and African masks attracted the attention of the sculptor and painter.
Yet though the reciprocal interplay of European civilization and the world was to continue, Europe remained, on balance, an exporter of culture.
When non-Europeans revolted against colonial rule, they would do so with the slogans of the Rights of Man and national self-determination on their lips.
They would seek to liberate themselves with European machinery and European techniques.
Eventually, they would even turn for expression to European artistic forms like the novel, or abstract painting.
But this could hardly have been foreseen in 1880.
THE ANCIEN RÉGIME Ideas and institutions were just as much a part of the ‘given’ facts of European society between 1880 and 1914 as were geography, or political and economic structure, but they are much harder to measure.
What has to be described is the sort of thing which Europeans took for granted as they went about their daily lives.
But things taken for granted attract less attention than the striking and untypical.
The early feminists make more of an impression on us than the overwhelming mass of their contemporary sisters who took it for granted that their place in society would be one of legal and social inequality to men.
The nobility of the ancien régime from which twentieth-century Europeans emerged was one of deeply entrenched attitudes which were often hardly made explicit — because they did not need to be.
It was republicans who argued their case, not those who took monarchy for granted.
Moreover, which Europeans?
Given the racial, regional and economic diversity surveyed in the last chapter, how can there be such a thing as ‘European’ assumptions?
One answer to this could be that articulate Europeans, however much they differed, were formed by a common educational heritage and thought of themselves as Europeans when they looked at the rest of the world.
Even the ‘civilized world’ meant, effectively, the world of nations of European stock.
Another answer would be that economic or racial diversity could not mask a common drift in all countries towards similar economic arrangements.
Cartels, churches and the Scandinavian and Latin monetary unions straddled political frontiers.
A few Europeans even cherished federal dreams.
But the strongest argument for attempting to identify, however  arbitrarily, some general assumptions in so complicated a structure, is Europe's success: she imposed a pattern of civilization on the rest of the world.
Some, at least, of the fundamentals of this pattern were accepted throughout almost all Europe, whatever qualifications have to be made.
That pattern can also be called liberal, or bourgeois, civilization and it was most developed in the industrialized countries, least in the agrarian east and south.
It profoundly shaped European society, politics and religion.
SOCIETY
Social institutions — property arrangements, for example— could be very different in agrarian south-east and the industrialized north-west of Europe; nonetheless, common economic tendencies were already producing common ways of conceiving society.
The German Empire might be the extreme case of industrialization but even Russia was beginning to produce a recognizable capitalist industrial structure.
In a traditional Spain Catalonia had long been an industrial region.
As there was a rough, though by no means exact, correlation of social power with wealth, this meant that the élites of European society tended to be more and more permeated by members of the financial, industrial and professional bourgeoisie which had emerged increasingly as the dominant class in progressive societies since the seventeenth century.
Nevertheless, however blurred the lines between them, two roughly defined but distinct models of society can be discovered in Europe before 1914.
For convenience, one can be called ‘market’ society, and one ‘status’society; the crucial distinction between them is that in one privileges and obligations were increasingly distributed through competition in the market, and in the other by the operation of an acknowledged and traditional hierarchy of status.
In one, rewards and influence went to wealth and enterprise, in the other to rank and birth.
Of course, no society in 1880 perfectly embodied either principle, but this division is a useful rough guide.
Some societies straddled it; others fell obviously on one side or the other of it.
This distinction was roughly mirrored in a major division in Europe's economic geography (which was also, outside England, one between those  directly affected or not by the French Revolution and the changes it brought).
In the agrarian south and east of the continent, the character of society was dominated by two classes of very different size: a body of wealthy landowners, still often enjoying the prestige and privilege and sometimes the legal and noble status of its feudal forebears, and a huge mass of subordinate peasants, some of whom might be freeholders, but by and large economically dependent on the landowners.
In such countries, city-dwellers were not very important in setting the style and tone of life which reflected instead the old-fashioned, patriarchal assumptions of a long-established way of doing things.
Authority, in such countries, was drawn from tradition and prescription and was usually buttressed by religious belief and practice.
In the economically more advanced countries of northern and north-western Europe, things were already very different.
The most important social division ran between a dominant class based on the legal ownership of industrial and commercial capital (and sometimes having little to do with either management or labour) and a population most of which worked for wages.
This was in its organization and principles an increasingly ‘bureaucratic’ pattern of society, in which authority was usually legitimized by results.
Class, in such societies, more and more bore an economic connotation and left behind the older ideas of timeless social ‘orders’ or ‘estates of the realm’.
Nonetheless, for all these differences, it was taken for granted in both agrarian and industrial Europe that society was split for its practical working into a small élite which ran things, and a large mass which was subordinate.
The economic significance of this division was that it made possible a very high rate of saving.
Although standards of living rose in the advanced countries, the economic gap between élite and mass remained everywhere enormous.
Both eastern and western Europe accepted such a gap, though some people regretted and some hated it.
The two parts of society lived different sorts of lives.
This could be seen in standards of literacy and taste.
It could be seen, also, in the localized life of the masses, in the residue of superstition in their thinking, in the size of their families, and in their health.
It appears most vividly in dress.
Because photography was already well established in 1880, this is easy to see.
In city or countryside in 1880, dress was an almost infallible denominator of social class.
The Colonel's Lady and Judy O'Grady might be sisters under their skins, but they went to different shops.
The poor workman's clothes might well be better than those of earlier centuries, but they were badly cut, ill-fitting and drab.
The Rumanian or Andalusian peasant went in rags.
Yet the social élites of different countries could differ dramatically from one another.
Some were outright extensions of traditional hierarchies, while others were predominantly recruited from the new plutocracy and professions.
This sometimes made for superficial complication; the Third Republic conferred no titles of nobility, yet more were used than ever before in France, thanks to the inflation and confusion of aristocracies which had flowed from the creations of Bourbon, Orleanist and two Imperial régimes.
Proust's Faubourg St Germain was acutely aware of differences between them, but they tell us little about the distribution of power in France.
Such distinctions mattered more in Russia or the Dual Monarchy, where the capitalist and professional classes had still a long way to go before winning social acceptance by the old nobility.
Even in Germany, the social disqualification of middle-class origins might still have to be purged by a reserve officer's commission — hence, in part, the wide acceptance of the military tone of German society.
Medieval hierarchies survived into an epoch of industrial capitalism; feudal military castes presided over national states and industrial societies whose needs they did not understand.
The result was confusion about ends and policy (as in Russia or Germany) and the survival of aristocratic assumptions in political life.
Formal distinctions of rank can sometimes provide a very rough index of the resistance of status society to market society in the Europe of 1880, but the line between them was already blurred.
In the United Kingdom, for example, the peerage began seriously to take up directorships of commercial companies in the 1880s: by 1896 directorships were held by 167 members of the House of Lords.
The enormous Spanish nobility, luxuriant with the growth of centuries, absorbed in the nineteenth century still larger additions of yet newer nobles drawn from the army, banking and politics.
But constitutional states had left few of the old privileges of rank untouched; elsewhere, even when their formal legal status was beginning to be challenged, concessions to aristocratic tradition were still expected in practice.
Some were even embodied in law, as well as in custom.
Duelling, one index of the survival of the values of barbarism, had been forbidden in the British Army since 1844, but the Russian officer corps was specially exempted from the laws prohibiting it.
In certain circumstances German officers, too, were allowed to duel and membership of a good duelling club as a student was to a large degree a sine qua non for promotion in the higher German civil service.
Much of the past, indeed, survived in the special traditions and interests of soldiers and although the outstanding example was Germany, as the Zabern incident was to show (below, p. 212), it was recognized even in Great Britain that the Guards had the privilege of avoiding the duller overseas stations.
In the Curragh Affair of 1914 some British officers appeared to claim to stand for a special national interest above that asserted by civilian politicians and their attitude would have been understood by professional soldiers in other countries.
The French army before Dreyfus appealed especially as a career in which it was possible to offer patriotic service untainted by compromise with the Republic.
Such survivals in attitude and custom, however, cannot obscure the fact that the fundamental direction of European society had  been for decades moving increasingly into the hands of a bourgeoisie whose assumptions were at bottom not those of aristocratic society, even if it aped aristocratic style.
Bourgeois society took for granted the sanctity of property, the supremacy of the market as a social regulator, the propriety of individual self-improvement and self-advancement, the abandonment of the traditional and irrational where they stood in the way of utility, and a belief in progress.
This last was not merely material; progress had a moral and ethical content, which spelt hope for mankind.
Bourgeois society traded on the intellectual capital of optimism inherited from the Enlightenment; science and moral values were not yet in conflict.
And if some of these assumptions were harsh in their operation they were tempered by a humanitarianism which stemmed from the same eighteenth-century roots.
Violence was believed to be declining; the last war involving more than two great powers had been fought in the Crimea, far away, and the assumptions which governed fighting were more humane than ever before.
Another expression of humanitarianism was a growing concern with the poor.
Nineteenth-century philanthropic endeavour, if inadequate and ill-coordinated, was nevertheless conducted on a large scale.
It did something to spread awareness of the way the majority lived, and therefore to spread dissatisfaction and alarm about a potentially destructive force.
Yet, except for their poverty, it is not easy to generalize about the poor: their attitudes and assumptions are harder to disinter than those of the dominant and vocal élites.
Economic and political change has now blurred differences between ways of life then distinct.
Variations of economic pattern were then more striking; rural society was a matrix much more localized and resistant to change than it is today.
And  many of the town-dwellers of 1880 were recent immigrants from the countryside.
Nevertheless, the trend towards standardization could be discerned in countries where industrialization had gone furthest.
In spite of local differences, modern mass society was beginning to appear.
Conscription and working-class political movements supplemented the factory and the city as homogenizing and disciplining agents.
Nor do terrible exceptions offset the generally standardizing effect already achieved in 1914 by rising real wages, cheaper consumer goods, big stores and central markets.
Hours of work were falling — by 1900 most western European countries were down to about sixty per week for adult men — and social services and welfare legislation were becoming more usual.
Reciprocal arrangements to promote similar labour legislation were more frequent.
Sweating remained, child labour survived, and reformers could still find terrible poverty to expose, but improving conditions meant rising expectations, even though these were at first limited to a few.
Greater wellbeing showed itself in new pleasures; the appetite for holidays grew with cheap transport.
Savings banks and cooperatives spread new ideals about independence and thrift.
A new literacy and cheap newsprint spawned the monster newspapers which were the first cultural artifact of mass society.
France had Le Journal from 1892, and the Daily Mail appeared in 1896.
Finally, and most important, came the great spread of popular education which, though it might destroy old habits, also created a new discipline.
All these things helped to diffuse common ideas and assumptions.
As selfconsciousness and literacy grew, so did the permeation of the mass society by bourgeois standards.
The process was bound to be self-accelerating, as new cities provided new opportunities for greater cultural contact.
It has been simply expressed in a mathematical form.
A population density of 35 per square mile gives less than 1,000 possible contacts within three miles to any individual: a density of 10,000 per square mile gives him 280,000 possible contacts in the same radius.
This makes clear the  importance of urbanization in disrupting attitudes rooted in a highly localized culture.
In the great cities, people had to make more choices for themselves as traditional social institutions like the family and the church lost their grip on the individual.
Bismarck was right to distrust the cities as breeders of socialism, but wrong to exaggerate the danger.
New disciplining agents were at work in them, and a new kind of politics was to give outlet to their grievances.
POLITICS
Few Europeans would have contested the view that they should be organized politically in sovereign states.
They felt, that is to say, that within a given territory, there should be one authority with an ultimate monopoly of coercive power.
There were still people who resisted the idea of a sovereign law-maker with the right to invade any vested interest and set aside any restraining principle, but, by and large, the supremacy of the State was acknowledged after centuries of dispute.
Political argument was usually about particular forms of the State, about the grounds of its legitimacy, and about the way its power was used.
Some European nations still gave much weight to traditional authority, but most of them also showed a growing tendency to seek to legitimize such authority on other grounds.
This was a part of the general movement of progressive societies towards replacing non-rational by reasoned arrangements, a movement which goes beyond politics.
The family, for example, was at the same time tending to lose some of its authority and responsibilities.
By the end of the nineteenth century, the political side of this process was far advanced.
More precisely, it meant that discussion about the organization and use of state power turned  more on means and less on ends.
This did not mean there were not still big divergences of belief about ends.
Views held widely, but by no means universally, about monarchy, nationalism and democracy were questioned because of this, just as much as because of their results.
Monarchy was almost the rule in Europe, which had many republicans, but few republics.
France and Switzerland were the only two which mattered in 1880; Portugal joined them in 1910.
New states, as they appeared, were given kings; Albania came last, getting hers in 1914.
This kept alive the nineteenth-century export trade in cadets of major ruling houses.
As late as 1915 Masaryk could only envisage a monarchical future for a Bohemian state.
Monarchy was as widely taken for granted at the end of the nineteenth century as is universal suffrage today.
Some of its appeal undoubtedly lay in its ritual and spectacular trappings; in an age when pageantry was declining elsewhere and when a new mass public was appearing, royal marriages, funerals and coronations were welcome as stirring displays.
Monarchy became itinerant as it had not been since the Middle Ages, but the reason for this was not administrative but political and diplomatic.
State visits had become easier in the age of the railway; photography, cheap prints and ceramics diffused the human images of rulers more widely than ever before.
Monarchy also appealed because it was the logical development of a hierarchical view of the universe which might be waning but which was still immensely strong and very widely understood.
The monarch stood at the top of a pyramid of aristocracy in a period when most people still assumed society must be run by élites.
To many people, monarchy seemed to offer greater stability than other political forms; the record of republics was not very impressive.
This accounted for the distrust felt for Great Britain in more autocratic states.
The British crown lacked power; Alexander III of Russia described it as ‘hardly to be counted as a monarchy, but rather as a Crown by election’.
Because of this, British policy  was constantly a source of apprehension, and the democratic overthrow of British society was sometimes foretold abroad.
Fears of revolution and subversion were widely held in 1880.
The French Revolution had begun less than a hundred years before; the Paris Commune was only nine years away.
Political assassination was frequent.
Both Spain and Italy had near-revolutionary crises at the end of the century.
Even in England there were riots which needed cavalry charges to contain them and when the period opened Fenians were letting off bombs.
Law and order seemed fragile when opposed to the growing danger of the huge new slums whose populations were feared as classes dangereuses .
In these circumstances, conservatives clung to monarchy as a tried institution, and monarchs clung to one another.
They did not all put it quite as bluntly as William 11, but there existed a European society of kings which had real importance for its members.
Expressed in the Dreikaiserbund and in the hands of a Bismarck, the self-interest of monarchs could be of European significance as a force for peace.
When William I was to meet Alexander III in 1887, Bismarck provided him with notes which included the words ‘Au temps où nous vivons plus qu'ä aucune autre époque de l'histoire, il est de l'intérêt des grandes monarchies d'éviter la guerre…même en Allemagne — si contre toute attente nous venions à ètre vaincus — les chances de la république dêmocratique ou sociale gagneraient considérablement par notre défaite .’
The self-interest of monarchs, however, could also operate in a more provocative way.
Dynasticism was not dead; for some rulers, promoting family interests was as important as it had been to a Tudor or a Valois.
The outstanding example was the Habsburg monarchy, forever subordinating all the practical and sentimental realities of its components to the interests of the dynasty.
In the middle of the Great War, the Emperor Charles told his foreign minister Czernin that he wanted neither a military nor an economic agreement with his ally, Germany, because that might fit the Hohenzollern design to make of Austria a second Bavaria.
But there were milder examples.
Queen Victoria pressed upon her  government her sympathies for Alexander of Battenberg in Bulgaria.
Prussia had a dynastic interest in the same question, as Bismarck recognized when he opposed Alexander's marriage to a Prussian princess: ‘English policy’, he said, ‘has an interest in our being on bad terms with Russia, and a Prussian princess on the Bulgarian throne would be a fairly sure way of achieving this.’
He also blamed the English family connexion of the crown princess for opposition to his politics at court.
The institution of monarchy at the end of the nineteenth century provides some of the best illustrations of the overlapping, or the incapsulation within one another, of ideas drawn from different ages.
Dynasticism still operated in societies governed increasingly by nationalism, and both were challenged by other ideological influences.
It was an age when Russian soldiers still carried into battle and jealously guarded the picture of the tsar, when Englishmen could still respond emotionally to the title ‘king-emperor’; yet it was also one in which assassination had become an occupational hazard of royalty.
Family and proprietary considerations still loomed so large that the Kaiser could in 1891 give orders for a mobilization to be carried out if his mother was insulted in Paris, yet it was also an age in which monarchs had more and more to personify national and even democratic causes.
Nationalism enjoyed enormous prestige.
Politically, it was the master idea of the nineteenth century, drawing on the need of men to feel linked to other men at a time when market society tended to make them feel isolated beings.
It thrived on the irrational, almost magical, appeal of kinship, on the rubbish talked about international struggle by men like Treitschke, on the intensification of economic rivalries, on the need for myth and colour.
Its prestige also had a basis, as a political doctrine, in the liberal idea of self-determination.
Nationalism had been primarily supported by liberals, because the emergence of self-governing nations had seemed to be a final step towards the effective protection of individual rights.
Gladstone saw nationalism in this light, and it was the same impulse which led, for example, Menotti Garibaldi, the great hero's son, to try to raise an Italian legion to help Arabi Pasha in Egypt.
It was assumed that Europe (outside the Dual Monarchy and Russia) ought to be organized on national lines.
From the Treaty of Berlin onwards, the states emerging from the Ottoman Empire were theoretically, though not very successfully, demarcated by nationality.
In 1905 Norway separated from Sweden peacefully, a step of great interest to Magyars who considered the Dual Monarchy too constricting a framework.
The Magyar example itself much impressed the Irish; in 1904 a Sinn Fein leader published a book on The Resurrection of Hungary .
Frustrated national movements like those of the Irish, or south Slavs of the Dual Monarchy, of the Armenians in Turkey or the Poles in Russia, could usually rely upon a reflex of ready sympathy in at least some foreign countries.
Sometimes the struggle for political autonomy stimulated a search for cultural identity; the great achievements of the Irish literary revival of the end of the century are its monuments (they are, of course, written in English).
Nationalism also produced degenerate offshoots and analogies in various forms of racialism.
A literature of white supremacy appeared between 1880 and 1914.
The vogue for this owed much to a bastard Darwinism; Latin nations were less taken in by it than were Slavs and Teutons.
Perhaps its most coherent exposition was a book called The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century , published in 1899 by Houston Stewart Chamberlain, an Englishman naturalized as a German.
Racial doctrine was far more influential in German official thinking than in that of any other country: even the ‘White Book’ published by the German government to justify its acts of 1914 invoked racialist arguments.
In England, Joseph Chamberlain dreamed of an Anglo-Saxon-German alliance and scholarships founded by Cecil Rhodes expressed the same aspiration.
The Slav version of this sort of thing was the complicated bundle of phenomena lumped together as panslavism.
By 1880 this was more and more a matter of Great Russian chauvinism within the boundaries of the Russian Empire, and tsarist imperialism abroad, but it had great sentimental appeal among Slavs living under non-Slav rulers who were encouraged by it to look to this ‘big brother’.
Its ideological origins were complex.
Darwinism entered into the panslavism of Danilevsky as it did into panteutonism.
But panslavism had little practical effect on  policy: it was a matter of popular mood rather than of official ideology.
One other form of racialism, a negative one, must be mentioned.
Antisemitism was not the creation of the nineteenth century but it revived in intensity about 1880.
This was the beginning of a great revival; it followed decades during which the legal position of jews had, on the whole, steadily improved.
In the Treaty of Berlin, for example, almost every Balkan country was obliged to legislate for their protection.
Yet in 1880 a German antisemitic league was founded and an antisemitic meeting was held under Christian Socialist auspices at Berlin.
In the following year, the police stood by and did nothing when students rioted against Jews.
By 1914, antisemitism was strong and widespread in Germany.
Its first political use had been by extreme conservatives against Bismarck; during his struggle against the socialists antisemitism spread to all parties on the Right.
It found support in the professional and middle classes, and Treitschke gave it intellectual respectability.
The Germans of the Dual Monarchy, too, were particularly susceptible to political antisemitism.
This is partially to be explained by the influx to Vienna, the heart of German Austria, of Jewish immigrants from the east.
By 1911 two-thirds of the German votes in Austrian elections went to anti-semitic parties.
Middle-class people and intellectuals, as in Germany, were greatly attracted; student organizations at the universities were quick to exclude Jews, forbidding their members to take cycling or walking trips with them.
(Another of their bans, on duelling with Jews, may seem less deplorable because of its practical results, but it must have been even more humiliating.)
Antisemitism also drew support in both countries from working-class people disturbed by the impact of industrialism and large-scale capitalism, and possibly because of the success of big business houses with Jewish names.
This helps to explain why such figures as Stöcker, the court chaplain in Berlin, or Karl Lueger, the demagogic Christian Socialist mayor of Vienna, were able to couple antisemitism and social reform in anticipation of the Nazis.
The new antisemitism bit less deeply in France, but even there Drumont's best-seller La France juive had over a hundred printings in the 1880s, and antisemitic journals proliferated.
Ruined Catholic investors blamed Jewish (and Protestant) financiers for the collapse of L'Union Générale , a great Catholic bank, in 1882, and Jewish names were prominent in the Panama  scandal.
The Dreyfus case produced grave excesses, when Frenchmen were urged to ‘arroser du sang des Juifs l'arbre de la liberté ’ and a Papal Nuncio reminded a French diplomat that ‘la religion catholique avait en reserve des indulgences spéciales pour ceux qui, lorsque la bonne cause le réclame, versent le sang des juifs et des paiens ’.
Whatever justifications were invoked, sentiments of this sort show a new violence in antisemitic feeling quite different from the traditional popular dislike of Jews exploited, for example, by a Russian government looking for scapegoats which led in 1881 to a terrible series of anti-Jewish riots, followed by legislation creating new ghettoes.
This was condemned in western countries, but feeling against jews was common everywhere: Freud's father had his hat knocked off by a Gentile who shouted at him ‘Jew, get off the pavement’, and Jewish shops were smashed by miners in Tredegar in 1911.
A bill to legalize the marriage of Jews and Christians was thrown out by the Hungarian Diet in 1883.
Yet the new antisemitism went further.
It was often a lower middle-class phenomenon, and was always fiercest in central and eastern Europe where the great mass of the population had little commitment to capitalist society or to the liberal values it generated.
Much disillusionment has followed the discovery that formal democracy, as the case of antisemitism shows, has no necessary connexion with tolerance and freedom, the liberal ideals.
In 1880, this had already been discerned, but most men gave a growing acceptance to democratic institutions because they seemed to provide not a threat to, but a guarantee of, liberal standards.
This may seem surprising in view of the widespread acceptance of monarchy.
Yet, as Sir Henry Maine, no friend of democracy, pointed out in 1885, ‘Russia and Turkey are the only European states which completely reject the theory that governments hold their power by delegation from the community’.
In 1900 only  these two states and Montenegro did not have parliamentary institutions of some kind.
Further formal evidence can be found in the spread of wider suffrage qualifications.
In 1880 both the German Empire and France had universal adult male suffrage (in Germany, over the age of twenty-five).
In Britain, the rural worker got the vote in 1884, and Holland extended her franchise in 1887 and 1896.
Spain adopted universal male suffrage in 1890 and Norway in 1898.
In the Dual Monarchy, Austrian men obtained the vote in 1907.
The movement towards a democratic franchise was clearly under way everywhere by 1914.
With this went other liberal innovations such as the limitation of the power of the House of Lords in the United Kingdom and the initiation of parliamentary government in Russia.
In 1908 the Ottoman Empire acquired a parliament, and even where such institutions were a sham (for example, in Austria) lip service was paid to the spread of democratic and liberal ideals.
The century had also brought the acceptance of other liberal assumptions.
One of these was that the state should make laws as required.
‘It is not often recognized’, said Maine in 1885 ‘how excessively rare in the world was sustained legislative activity till rather more than fifty years ago’, but law-making had by 1880 already become the characteristic activity of the modern state.
Legislative vigour was still tempered in many countries by vested interest, the rule of law and respect for individual rights, but traditional limits on state activity were weakening as the state took on more and more duties.
One obvious symptom was the growth of bureaucracy.
Comparisons are not easy, but Germany's civil service, for example, grew from 450,000 to 1,180,000 between 1881 and 1911, and Great Britain's from 81,000 to 644,000.
These employees not only ran new economic, welfare and educational services, they also cost money, and the burden of government expenditure had by 1880 already risen to heights undreamed of in 1800.
Until the 1890s income tax was virtually unknown outside Great Britain; indirect taxes still bore much of  the burden in other states in 1900, but by then Germany, Italy, Austria and Spain all had some form of income tax, and Russia and Great Britain had taxes on inherited wealth.
This change in the nature of the state's role did not go unresisted, but it was more often deplored than checked.
The widening of electorates, the spread of parliamentary institutions and the making of new demands on the state brought the appearance of a democratic political style.
In many states, the political framework could be described as ‘constitutional monarchy’, but only Spain and Sweden shared the two-party conflict with which Great Britain seemed to make the system work.
Elsewhere, multi-party systems proliferated, though in some states the technique of organizing mass parties was beginning to be seen as the key to political power.
The first systematic studies of political parties belong to the end of the nineteenth century.
Wider suffrages, urbanism and growing literacy were forcing new techniques and new institutions on the politicians.
RELIGION
Much of what matters most in religious experience and belief is personal and private.
So, it is inaccessible to the historian.
Even such observable facts as churchgoing are hard to interpret.
The study of religious behaviour must, inevitably, be largely the study of the records of organized groups, the Churches.
Yet these define their ‘membership’ in such different ways that it is hard to draw conclusions from their figures.
Figures of religious observance are harder to come by.
England's only census of churchgoers was taken in 1851 and there was no systematic enumeration of religious practice in France until a survey of attendance at mass in one area in 1903.
They are harder still to interpret: what does a large attendance at Easter communion imply?
Which is more significant, a drop in regular churchgoing or the enormous efforts of the Churches in the nineteenth century in the mission field?
Occasional statistics sometimes throw light on the problem; in 1875 Gladstone's pamphlet on the Vatican Decrees sold 100,000 copies and it is difficult not to see in this a level of religious interest which later declined.
Statistics of baptism, civil marriage and civil funerals, too, in some countries, may help, but they can  only be used with difficulty.
Moreover, traditional and historical factors can do much to localize the significance of even such evidence as seems firm.
Gladstone's pamphlet was published in a country where anti-popery was the religion of many people.
It was also a country which consciously rejected the ‘continental Sunday’ and whose Grand Lodge of Freemasons severed contact with the French Grand Orient when French freemasonry no longer required of its members a belief in the Grand Architect of the Universe.
Liberalism in most European countries meant anticlericalism, while in England it was a movement led by a High Churchman with the devoted support of many Nonconformists.
1880, moreover, is not a date in religious history, even if the French abolished military chaplains and the British parliament opened parish churchyards to nonconformist burial services in that year.
Almost every European country still had an Established Church.
But religion had long been losing its power to shape and control behaviour and external forces had long sapped the traditional theocentric views of Europeans, even if it was only in 1882 that Nietzsche pronounced the notorious words: ‘God is dead’.
Yet it is easier to sense the swing of history against traditional religion than to measure it.
It was helped by the de facto secularizing of the state since the Reformation, by the growth of towns, by the rise of positivism, materialism and a belief in natural science, some of whose exponents were militantly and bitterly anticlerical.
A rising standard of living may have weakened the tendency to turn to religion for explanation or comfort.
More self-knowledge meant that it was easier to see man as one natural object among many.
The English Free Church Year Book of 1911 probably spoke for many communions when it said ‘the truth is — and we must face its startling reality — the educated middle class, especially the young people, are losing touch altogether with the House of God’.
Intellectual revolt was one source of militant anticlericalism.
It also grew from the old rivalry of Church and State which had brought a life-giving tension to European history since the days of Hildebrand.
This quarrel had been renewed and intensified as the modern state emerged and is easier to narrate than the shifting of the foundations of belief.
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, enlightened despotism, secularism, nationalism and liberalism had all fanned the flames.
And apart from this exacerbation of old quarrels at the level of official and formal relations, religion lost some of its hold on the masses as it did less and less to provide channels for social protest.
The new popular movements of revolt, anarchism and socialism, were not only as anticlerical as any enlightened despot, they were often antireligious as well.
The growth of liberal assumptions of free speech and tolerance meant that the anticlerical challenge came just when religion had been deprived of much of its legal protection.
Religious liberty was cherished in the nineteenth century, but it implied toleration of religious debate.
Different traditions experienced this change in different ways.
Roman Catholics have grown in numbers in modern times, but it is not easy to use figures to compare the Roman Church's position in 1880 with that of say, a century before.
Nineteenth-century concordats had improved the legal position of Roman Catholicism in many countries and often left the clergy considerable powers over such matters as education, yet Papal Infallibility, the Syllabus of Errors and the Church's resistance to the conclusions of biblical criticism alienated intellectuals.
Ecclesiastical institutions were still, in countries such as Spain, outstanding examples of corporate privilege.
No Roman Catholic movement of the left had appeared to help Rome in its political  struggles at a time when the suffrage was spreading; in spite of a few ‘Christian socialists’, Roman Catholicism still seemed to be tied to social and political conservatism.
Finally, in Italy and Germany, it had to live down decades of struggle against the nationalist movements.
In Italy in 1880 Catholics were still ordered to abstain from political activity; in Germany, the Kulturkampf , a struggle whose origin lay in a quarrel between Bismarck and Catholic Germans opposed to Prussian dominance of the new German Empire, was still under way.
Between 1870 and 1880 the Jesuits had been expelled from Germany, religious orders dissolved, the State had interfered with the discipline of the clergy, civil marriage had been made obligatory and Prussia had withdrawn its financial support from Catholic churches.
Germany's bishops were in exile when Bismarck, in 1879, began to consider a restoration of relations with the Papacy, a process which took several years (see also below, p. 220).
The Kulturkampf was easily the most spectacular quarrel with Rome.
Anticlericalism elsewhere was sometimes simply a matter of anti-Roman pinpricks, as in Great Britain, when agitation arose about aristocratic conversions to Rome and the British Reformation Society could protest to the government over the appointment of a Roman Catholic viceroy of India and a Roman Catholic lord chamberlain.
But in France, as in Germany, anticlericalism inflamed a confrontation of Church and State at many points, from educational policy to marriage laws, and was to finish in disestablishment.
The quarrel of the Italian government with the papacy nearly led to an anticlerical league of governments around about 1880.
Later, the Portuguese revolution of 1910 created a bitterly anticlerical republic which expelled religious orders and, as in France, finished by separating Church and State.
The Spanish anticlericals, too, fought stubbornly against the Church, but, as Spain showed, the Roman Church did not always lose.
In Belgium the clerical party won the 1880 elections and held power for the next twenty-five years, repealing an earlier secularization of education and making instruction in the Roman Catholic faith obligatory in all publicly maintained schools in 1895.
Dutch anticlericalism produced in 1889 a curious coalition of Calvinists and Roman Catholics to defend State support for denominational schools.
As these examples suggest, the pontificate of Leo XIII (1879–1903) saw something of a recovery in the political fortunes  of the Papacy.
Much of it can be attributed to his astute realization that it was possible to break with the disastrous tradition of Pius IX without compromising on essentials.
No State, it was clear, was going to help the Papacy recover the Temporal Power; meanwhile, bad relations with the governments of France, Italy and Germany were endangering the spiritual and material welfare of millions of Roman Catholics.
Leo quickly began to apply emollients, abandoning the Catholic separatists who rejected Prussian hegemony in Germany, dropping the French monarchists and urging the loyal acceptance of the Republic by French Catholics (the policy known as Ralliement).
‘None of the several forms of government is condemned in itself.’
said the encyclical Immortale Dei (1885), ‘in as much as none of them contains anything contrary to Catholic doctrine, and all of them are capable, if wisely and justly managed, of ensuring the welfare of the State.’
Even in Italy, though Leo never ceased to assert the Papal claim to the Temporal Power, there seemed a prospect of conciliation between Church and State in the mid-1880s.
Already by 1890 there had been a big improvement in the relations of the Papacy with governments conscious of Roman Catholicism's contribution to social order in a time of revolutionary fears.
And Leo had also been taking steps to revivify the influence of religion at other levels.
In 1880 St Thomas Aquinas was acknowledged the patron of all Catholic schools and learning, and a great revival of Thomist scholarship began which was to do much to integrate Catholic dogma with the advances of natural science.
In 1891 came the publication of the encyclical Rerum Novarum .
This pronouncement on social policy upheld the institution of private property, but acknowledged that limitations might rightly be laid upon its rights so as to protect the poor and weak.
It even approved the formation of trade unions and reminded employers of a moral duty to pay adequate wages.
The way was thus cleared for the emergence of a Catholic social policy suited to mass society.
Nevertheless, Leo's pontificate did not realize the hopes it awoke.
The dawn of good relations in Italy proved false; under Crispi's first ministry (1887–91) the Pope even considered leaving Rome.
In 1898 he repeated his predecessor's injunction that Italian Catholics should abstain from political activity.
Although the  gains in Germany were preserved (the symbol of agreement to end the Kulturkampf was the completion and consecration of Cologne Cathedral in 1880, in the presence of the Emperor and all the reigning German princes), those of the Ralliement in France were blown to the winds by the Dreyfus Affair.
Pius X opened his pontificate (1903–14) amid an uproar which brought about the end of the Napoleonic concordat (1905).
He reacted with a revived authoritarianism.
New disciplinary measures and recommendations asserted his authority over clerical and lay Catholics.
Leo XIII's approach to social and economic questions was qualified and priests were ordered to submit to their bishops on social and political matters.
There was a relaxation of the ban on Catholic participation in Italian politics, it is true, for Pius was convinced of the importance of defending the social and moral order and foresaw the possibility of a Catholic majority in the Italian parliament.
New confessional political parties emerged in other countries, too.
But such acceptance of the possibilities afforded by modern political institutions was opportunist; Pius remained implacably opposed to the assumptions of liberal bourgeois civilization.
This became most strikingly clear when the encyclicals Lamentabili and Pascendi in 1907 condemned the ‘modernists’.
‘Modernism’ was a name which covered the individual' efforts of several Catholic clergy, many of them French, to reconcile Catholic dogma with the discoveries of science and scholarship.
It owed something to the atmosphere of Leo XIII's innovation (but even in 1893 Loisy, a leading French biblical scholar and modernist, had lost his chair at Paris, and an encyclical had been published affirming the complete inerrancy of the Bible).
Pius's encyclicals killed Modernism.
Loisy was excommunicated in 1908 and what one scholar has called ‘a reign of terror’ began in the intellectual life of the Roman Church.
A young Italian nobleman had already summed up the dismay felt by liberal Catholics in 1906 when he wrote, in a famous letter, ‘Since the death of Pope Leo the Roman Curia has assumed towards the world of thought a reactionary attitude reminiscent  of the days of Pius IX, when the Church was at war with everything and everybody.’
Protestantism's strength and influence at the end of the nineteenth century is even harder to assess than that of Roman Catholicism, because of its diversity.
There were established Protestant churches in the United Kingdom, Scandinavia and Germany as well as millions of protestants in unestablished denominational connexions.
protestant theology, under German leadership, had more readily accepted the implications of Biblical criticism than had Roman.
‘Liberal’ protestantism had done much to recreate an accepted image of the ‘historical’Jesus, even if its theological validity was soon to be exploded.
In both England and Germany, too, the ‘social gospel’ was preached with increasing vigour.
In 1877 Anglicans founded the Guild of St Matthew, the first organization inside the Church of England to address itself to the social implications of Christianity since the 1850s.
In 1889 the more academic Christian Social Union was founded and the effect began to be felt in attacks on ‘sweated’ labour and other social abuses before the end of the century.
In Germany a Christian Socialist movement was built up by Stöcker, the court chaplain, and Naumann (later the theoretician of Mitteleuropa ) publicized the ‘social gospel’.
Yet, in spite of these accommodations to the spirit of the times, established and traditional protestantism does not seem to have been better able than Roman Catholicism to meet the challenge of industry and the big towns.
Anglicans were still too heavily committed to an organization suited to a predominantly rural society.
German towns were not adequately equipped with clergy or churches (Berlin in 1880 had churches for only 25,000 worshippers).
In Germany, too, the clergy were distrusted still by the workers as ‘black police’ and the most powerful Socialist movement in Europe was avowedly antireligious.
Nor did divisions and bickering between Protestants lend prestige to their faith.
It was only in 1880, after fierce quarrels, that English dissenters were given the tight to burial in the parish churchyard by their  own pastors.
A proliferation of pentecostal and evangelical sects, and the success of the Salvation Army (founded in 1878) seemed to show that though the masses could still be moved by religious fervour, they could not find it in the established churches.
In Orthodox Europe, mass religion seems to have decayed less than in the west.
Enlightened anticlerical views could only spread among a fairly small educated élite and in Russia, in spite of some ultraconservatives, it was the ruling class which was alienated from the church rather than the mass of the people.
The church ran primary education, and even among the intellectuals Orthodoxy was not without vigour: the early twentieth century brought remarkable conversions to Christianity among Russian Marxists.
The Jewish faith was affected by liberalizing tendencies, but the most important development it fostered during these years was not theological but political.
It is hardly surprising that the Zionist movement should have appeared in the violently antisemitic atmosphere of the Dual Monarchy.
In 1896 Theodore Herzl's Der Judenstaat proposed the re-establishment of the Jewish people in a national, territorial state as the only workable solution to the Jewish problem.
In 1897 the Zionist Congress was founded by Herzl at Basle.
The first wave of Jewish reimmigration to Palestine had already taken place and these events marked an epoch in the history of Jewry, the replacement of assimilation by nationalism as an ideal.
It was a change by no means welcome to all Jews, but its assertion of the primacy of national ties was characteristic of the age.
Some Jews regretted the abandonment of the essentially liberal road of peaceful assimilation by the extension of civil equality to Jews in more and more countries.
Zionism, too, was thus in this way a challenge to the assumptions of liberal culture.
It fed both on a new nationalism, and a revivification of orthodoxy in the face of the challenge of science and materialism.
INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION, 1880–1901
THE SETTING OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
An English radical commented in 1887 that ‘the present position of the European world is one in which sheer force holds a larger place than it has held in modern times since the fall of Napoleon’.
Yet after the end of the Franco-Prussian War (1871), none of the great powers fought one another for more than forty years, although these years were full, if not of wars, at least of rumours of wars.
The fundamental reason for this was that between 1880 and 1900 there was coming to an end that Concert of Europe which, in spite of the wars of the mid-century, had avoided a general war since 1815.
How this happened is the subject of this chapter.
It was known that a change was taking place and Perhaps it was felt the more because of the very success of the Concert; humanitarian impulses and liberal assumptions had disguised the fact, axiomatic to professional diplomats, that the interests of states often conflicted.
New occasions of conflict were now appearing and would eventually break up the long peace, and as this became clearer so did the essentially competitive nature of the European system.
The objects of competition varied: the traditional ones were territory, wealth, prestige and the power which these gave.
The competition for them was not bound to result in the use of force, but it kept force in view.
Great power status was in the last resort the ability to wage war.
As that ability was still, in 1880, much more purely a matter of armies and navies than it was later to become, it is worth while to consider them briefly before turning to the diplomatic story.
An approximation of relative strengths can be seen in the following table:
Among the great powers of 1880, only Great Britain was not a land power; armies were more important than navies to continental countries.
Land warfare sixty-five years after Waterloo would still have been comprehensible to Napoleon.
Brightly-coloured uniforms and gleaming breastplates were not kept for the parade ground, but were meant to be worn in battle.
Although breechloading weapons had been generally adopted, the small-bore rifle, the machine-gun, and the quick-firing fieldgun had not yet altered military thinking; they had only increased the range at which fighting would take place.
Battles had begun to be much more dispersed affairs, but the internal-combustion engine had not yet scattered them over hundreds of miles.
Signals were still largely a matter of horsed despatch-riders and flags; the heliograph and electric telegraph were the only important additions to the repertoire at Napoleon's disposal.
Ancillary services such as engineers and field hospitals had become a little more elaborate, but an army was still essentially composed, as was Napoleon's, of the three great arms: artillery, cavalry and  infantry.
Artillery was to prepare the way for the infantry assault; the cavalry was to provide reconnaissance, occasional shock intervention in the battle if circumstances were favourable, and, it was hoped, effective pursuit of the defeated enemy.
The strategic and tactical doctrines of 1880 were also recognizably Napoleonic.
The aim which obsessed military thinking was the winning of a decisive battle soon after the outbreak of war.
Local superiority of numbers was thought to be the key to such a victory.
This belief had been reinforced by the experiences of 1866 and 1870; it was assumed that these showed the future pattern of warfare.
The fact that the American Civil War had lasted five years was overlooked or discounted.
In this vision of rapid warfare there was still a place for great fortresses to provide temporary protection for frontiers and strategically vital areas during the crucial, disorganized days at the beginning of the campaign while the armies were assembling.
At this point appeared a major difference from Napoleonic warfare: much more skilled staff work was now required.
Organization was the key to successful and rapid mobilization, and the Prussian army had set new standards for all armies by its performances against Austria and France.
‘The Moltkean Revolution’, as it has been called, a led to the adoption everywhere in continental Europe of what were believed to be the secrets of its success — compulsory military service to provide a short-service army with a large trained reserve, and the creation of a permanent, highly-trained general staff.
The old long-service, professional army survived only in the United States and Great Britain; everywhere else the ‘nation in arms’ was the ideal.
Effective deployment of the larger reserves which this system made available required intricate staff work.
The railway was used to assemble the army as near to the decisive theatre as possible; it was the big contribution of nineteenth-century technology to warfare, because of the strategical mobility it provided.
Once away from the railhead, however, the army was back in the age of Napoleon and moved at the pace of horse and man.
At this point, planning provided little guidance to what would follow; the difficulties of extemporizing new manoeuvres were enormous and helped to reinforce the prevailing view that the overriding aim must be an early victory obtained essentially by good initial deployment.
Within this general consensus, the armies of individual states made plans for their own circumstances.
The strength of each was a function of three variables; the strategic tasks to be carried out, numbers (weapons and equipment did not differ importantly), and the level of organization and training.
Great Britain's was a peculiar case.
She could do without large conscript armies to defend land frontiers and needed long-service troops who could be employed overseas for long periods.
As a result, the small British army had a high degree of expertise in irregular and colonial warfare, could be deployed easily over great distances by sea, and had a rank-and-file which was possibly better trained than that of any other great power.
Its corresponding defects were that it was almost insignificant in Europe, retained out-of-date weapons adequate only for colonial use, and paid little attention to training its senior officers for large-scale operations.
It had no permanent general staff.
The French army, formed of a selected number of conscripts serving five years, was still digesting the lessons of 1870.
Its morale had recovered far too well, in that its officers and instructors were turning to a doctrine of offensive warfare at all costs.
Yet France's only probable land enemy, Germany, was certain to enjoy numerical superiority.
If France remained without an ally who could force Germany to fight on two fronts she would find it impossible to match German numbers because of the difference in the birthrate of the two nations.
The German army itself was in theory a composite force of Prussian, Saxon, Bavarian and Württemberger troops; this diversity meant little more than differences of name and uniform, for the Prussian staff controlled the whole apparatus as a unified system and made it the best army in the world.
Beside the French and German armies, those of Austria-Hungary, Russia and Italy were second-rate.
None of these nations could afford to mobilize its whole strength.
Russian organization and training were poor, although her soldiers always showed great hardihood and endurance, and she had to find forces to defend a frontier from the Baltic to the Black Sea, as well as detachments for the Caucasus, central Asia and the Far East.
The Austro-Hungarian forces were fragmented by the complicated constitutional arrangements of the Dual Monarchy.
The Italians were more united, but the traditions of the old army of Sardinia had been diluted by the disgruntled soldiers of other pre-unification states.
Navies had changed much more than armies during the nineteenth century.
The Industrial Revolution affected them in many ways, by providing iron and steel for shipbuilding, by applying steam to propelling the ship, by developing more powerful guns and harder armour.
Some odd-looking monsters had been produced by designers striving to come to terms with these innovations, but by 1880 warships were already essentially what they were to be for the rest of the century, armoured, steam-driven and screw-propelled, with their main armament in revolving turrets or carried broadside.
Signalling was by flag.
The main classes of vessel which made up a fleet were first-class armoured ships (which were to hand out and absorb the punishment of a pitched battle), other ironclads used for cruising, coast-defence and the many functions of the old sail frigates, and the ‘flotilla’ of smaller ships, of which the commonest were gunboats and the newest, torpedo-boats.
The British Collingwood class of battleships, laid down in 1880, represented the best contemporary design; they displaced 9,500 tons, could steam at a maximum of 16½ knots on coal-fired engines, and carried 18 inches of armour on their sides.
Their armament consisted, as did that of almost all battleships for the next two decades, of four big guns (12-inch in this case) mounted in two pairs and a secondary broadside battery of half-a-dozen 6-inch.
Battleships would grow bigger after this, but the essential formula of the heavily armoured ship with four big guns making about 16 knots was unchanged until 1906.
No other ship could stand up to their guns, but some sailors thought they might be defeated by the new weapon of the torpedo.
This self-propelled weapon was not yet a serious threat; it still had an effective range of less than a mile, but the tiny torpedo-boats which were beginning to make their appearance heralded a whole new range of warships for the future.
The submarine, which was eventually to provide the best means of delivering the torpedo, was still an infant; only one or two curious submersible craft had been built  and they had not yet affected naval thinking.
That thinking was still cast in the mould of a hundred years before; the methods of conducting war at sea were still those of blockade, commerce-destroying and protection, and still depended ultimately on the ability to win a pitched gun-battle with the enemy fleet.
In numbers, the Royal Navy was the strongest in the world, although its superiority was not so great as it was later to become.
Its weakness was its technical conservatism; although in 1880 the Admiralty agreed to reintroduce breechloading guns on heavy ships, the armoured cruisers Impérieuse and Warspite , which were laid down in the same year, were still designed to carry a full spread of sail.
Moreover, the tasks of the Royal Navy were greater than those of other navies.
While it was stretched over the whole length of imperial communications, its most dangerous possible rival was the more easily concentrated French fleet; the prospect of a descent on the Channel ports still preoccupied the Admiralty.
But even the French navy had to divide itself between the Mediterranean and the Atlantic coasts and the Russians had to maintain a small separate fleet in the Black Sea.
The Austrian, Italian and the German navies could be ignored in 1880.
Although armed force lay in the background of every statesman's consciousness, it was not the normal instrument of competition between states.
Governments had many other weapons; some were economic.
Statesmen were rarely the tools of business in this period; sometimes they made businessmen do their work for them and they were alive to the possibility of political influence being spread through such economic channels as chartered companies.
In other circumstances, commercial agreements, tariffs and loans might give diplomatic leverage.
There is no simple and general pattern to be discerned in the interplay of politics and economics in the eighties.
It would be unreasonable to expect one, given the complexity of the national interests involved in the competition of international relations.
Moreover, not only are national interests complex, but they change.
At the end of the nineteenth century, dynastic influence could still cut across them.
Yet certain facts tended to dominate the making of foreign policy in each country.
British foreign policy started from the incontestable and  apparently unchanging facts that the United Kingdom was an island, depended on sea-borne commerce and communications, and had large overseas possessions.
As Lord Salisbury once put it to a German, ‘nous sommes des poissons ’.
The consequences of this often seemed to be a neglect of Europe, but the impression was misleading.
It was true that many British interests, lying overseas, were not affected by events in Europe.
But it was also true that Great Britain could only view events in Europe with detachment or indifference if the balance of power there remained undisturbed.
British interests demanded peace and prescribed respect for the independence of all other countries because that was the best insurance against disturbance of the peace.
The classical British attitude towards Europe was to intervene decisively there only when there was a danger of one Power threatening the independence of others.
That this had always been in the interest of Great Britain did not alter the fact that such interventions had tended since 1815 to favour liberal and nationalist causes.
Apart from this, a few more specific British interests touched other European powers; they usually concerned three important regions, the Mediterranean, the Straits of Constantinople and central Asia.
The last two made her suspicious of Russia, and even ready to fight her in the 1870s.
The navy was the guarantee that Great Britain's interests elsewhere could be looked after and gave her enormous strategical advantages outside Europe.
To these facts has to be added the special susceptibility of British public opinion to liberal and humanitarian appeals.
This might hamstring the government and its operation was sometimes confusing to foreign observers.
The empiricism and opportunism of British foreign policy, its reluctance to embark on long-range plans, its dislike of large commitments and its responsiveness to public opinion all gave it a deceptive appearance of unprincipledness.
German foreign policy in 1880 had very different sources.
Great Britain and Germany were only alike in one respect; they were both at that time contented powers.
As Bismarck put it, Germany was ‘saturated’.
Her population, geographical position, army and industrial strength made her the leading continental nation.
The Empire had been made by the wars of the mid-century, and  Bismarck wanted peace to consolidate it.
His method, however, was to preserve peace by keeping Europe in a state of discord and alarm.
Whether a man of his temperament, faced by the threat of French recovery, could maintain peace indefinitely was another matter.
But it was clear that the isolation of France was in the interest of Germany.
This meant the maintenance of good relations with Russia and Austria-Hungary, who might again come into conflict in the Balkans.
So, for German foreign policy, the over-riding concern was not the French question, but the Balkan.
Bismarck wanted Germany to maintain the conservative alliance with Vienna and St Petersburg whose roots went back to 1815.
He could make concessions to his allies and all would be well so long as they did not come into conflict with one another.
This suited the prejudice which he shared with ruling circles in Germany against liberal, constitutional, and above all, republican states.
Even Great Britain was, in Bismarck's eyes, a nuisance because her foreign policy might change with each general election; reliable agreements with her were impossible.
French policy was dominated by Germany's demographic and military superiority.
‘Nous ne faisons plus d'enfants et nous n'avons pas de frontiére, comment voulez-vous que nous vivions ?’ enquired one French diplomat of a German colleague.
The disparity of the two countries provoked a rough division of French politicians into two schools of thought.
One school clung to the dream of revanche , the recovery of the lost provinces of 1871 and a Rhine frontier.
If the dream were to become reality, France must be militarily strong and find an ally so that she need not face Germany alone.
The other school drew a different conclusion.
Believing revanche to be either unrealizable, or not worth the price to be paid, it looked to colonies, social progress and economic expansion for French achievement.
These alternatives weaved in and out of French policy until 1902.
Both were compatible with the republican-radical ideals which made up the official ideology of the Third Republic and which in 1880 meant in the main a deep distrust of Russia, the oppressor of the Poles.
Austro-Hungarian foreign policy was both simplified and complicated by her forcible exclusion from Germany in 1866–7; this ended a struggle opened by Frederick the Great's seizure of  Silesia.
Her exclusion from Italy was less important, but had also tidied up a dangling thread of history.
From this time she was a south-eastern power.
But by the Ausgleich the Habsburgs took into partnership one of the racial groups of which the empire was composed.
Hungarian influence on foreign policy meant, in effect, subordinating foreign policy to the maintenance of the racial settlement of 1867.
It meant that no more Slavs should be taken into the Dual Empire, because that would distort the balance of races there.
It meant also that the consideration which more and more came to dominate the Dual Monarchy's foreign policy was the need to check Russian influence over the Slavs of the Balkans.
This might have been less dangerous had the Ottoman Empire held together, but it was crumbling fast and something was bound to take its place.
Whether it would be Russian or Habsburg influence was in 1880 still uncertain.
No one in authority in Vienna wished to have the question posed.
The Dual Monarchy's best hope, if she could not solve her internal racial problems, was that no further changes should take place in the Balkans.
Russian interests are harder to assess.
The autocracy counted for something; personal friendship between the Romanoff and Hohenzollern dynasties was important under Alexander II.
Traditionally, her rulers had pressed towards the Straits.
Traditionally, they exploited their special relationship with the Christian subjects of the Sultan.
Traditionally, they looked to the preservation of a conservative alliance against revolution in Europe for the continued enjoyment of their Polish booty.
This alliance had always embraced Prussia, and had lately reincorporated Austria-Hungary, in the Dreikaiserbund .
Across all this now fell the force of panslavism, a force hard to define, but increasingly expressing purely nationalist feeling, hostility towards Austria-Hungary and readiness to abandon the entente with Berlin.
Panslavists felt aggrieved and humiliated by the settlement of the Congress of Berlin.
Another factor which made Russian foreign policy different in kind from that of the other Great Powers in 1880 was that, like Great Britain (with whom she often came into  conflict over them), she had great extra-European interests, both in the Far East and central Asia, where her territories, influence and commerce had been growing steadily for twenty years.
In defending these interests, other forces, uncontrollable by the ministry of foreign affairs, such as the soldiers and provincial governors, were often decisive.
In 1880 Russia remained what she had often been, the least predictable of the great powers.
The least important of them in 1880 was Italy.
Poor, lacking cohesion, she could not pursue a vigorous foreign policy.
The cardinal points of her compass card were friendship with Great Britain (partly because of traditional and sentimental reasons and partly because of a long coastline) and watchfulness towards her neighbours, Austria-Hungary and France.
The Habsburgs were the traditional enemy and still ruled ‘unredeemed’ Italians.
Nevertheless no Italian government envisaged war or subversion to obtain Trent or Trieste.
It was an important fundamental assumption of international life in 1880 that no great power contemplated the use of revolutionary methods to break up its rivals.
All of them, it was presumed, would continue to exist, adjusting their claims against one another from time to time, and extending their influence, sometimes, into areas where, as yet , no equilibrium of forces existed.
The most important such area was the Balkans.
The eclipse of a great power by another was conceivable.
But the total collapse or disappearance of one was never seen as an appropriate goal of foreign policy.
One other characteristic of the 1880 system is also remarkable.
Although the speculations of a few Italian statesmen about the African shores of the Mediterranean hinted at the patterns of future international rivalry, the powers for the most part displayed in 1880 an almost complete preoccupation with European interests and lack of sensitivity about the rest of the world.
While the interests which ruled the foreign policies of European states might differ, the machinery which put them into effect did not.
Since the Congress of Vienna, a general diplomatic system had provided the accepted channels of international relations.
The professional diplomatists had the duties of representing their own states, of negotiating for them, of observing, and of keeping their governments informed.
They represented sovereign states; no international authority existed which was superior to these  states and the governing assumption of their conduct was that their primary aim was the promotion of their own national interests.
On the whole the professional diplomatists ran this machinery themselves.
The participation of heads of states, and even meetings of foreign ministers, were rare, though their personal susceptibilities might influence policy.
Only an occasional great congress or conference — such as that of Berlin in 1878 — brought momentarily into existence something palely anticipating the ‘summit’ diplomacy of the twentieth century, and even then the major decisions tended to be made before the great men met.
Even the freemasonry of European royalty could not displace the professional machine in the transaction of international business.
This was just as well.
Not only did professionalism provide an efficient conduct of business, but it may also have tended, by its nature, to some mitigation of the competitiveness of international life.
The facts that diplomatists were all drawn from similar levels of society and, by training and by experience, developed a professional sense, helped to strengthen common assumptions, confidence and agreement on common interests.
They even spoke a common language — French.
Although they were the servants of governments whose interests it was their duty to uphold unreservedly, it was easier in such a setting than it is today to recognize certain common interests.
The balance of power was one of these, the Concert of Europe another.
In varying forms, at one time strong and another weak, the assertion of these principles was the history of nineteenth-century diplomacy.
They were distinct, and might conflict, but at the core of the idea of the Concert lay the idea of community of European nations.
The fear of the effects of war had been diminished by the quick struggles of the mid-century decades, but warfare was still known to be expensive and the Paris Commune had revived old fears that war might bring revolution.
There were, therefore, powerful tendencies resisting unrestrained international competition at work inside the machinery of the system itself.
Unfortunately, other forces were at work outside which  increased the danger of conflict.
One of them was the influence of ‘public opinion’ on policy.
In part, this was because of the spread of liberal ideas and institutions since 1815; governments were tending to be less the oppressors of the governed than identified with them, though this process had still far to go in 1880.
The appearance of mass electorates, the idea of the ‘nation in arms’ which underlay military service, and the growth of literacy all made statesmen give more thought to public opinion.
Liberals might welcome this; yet the effects, as they varied from state to state, were by no means reassuring.
In constitutional states, the need to placate electorates cramped the officials; a British diplomatist's freedom of action was diminished, for example, if a problem involved national self-determination.
Even in more authoritarian states public opinion could be a real force.
Governments had to live up to the mythical images of themselves which were part of their acceptability.
‘The power of Russia is wielded by a single man’, said Dilke, but went on, ‘or should I say, by two — the Emperor and the Moscow newspaper emperor, Katkoff.’
Russian statesmen had increasingly to take account of panslavist agitation, and no French statesman could directly affront the ideal of revanche .
Questions of prestige, irrational though they might be, received new emphasis when more people identified themselves with the nation.
‘Nowadays’, said Bismarck in 1884, ‘no Government is strong enough to stand the reproach of having sacrificed its own national interests as a favour to a friendly Power.’
Increasingly conscious use would be made of public opinion on international affairs.
Gladstone did so in his electioneering, Bismarck in his use of the press.
Together with improvements in communication, above all in the use of the telegraph, this meant closer control of professional diplomatists by their governments.
International relations were therefore changing in 1880, but the extent of the change must not be exaggerated.
It was Canning, after all, who had been the first virtuoso of diplomacy by public opinion.
A more obvious change in diplomatic activity, perhaps, was the increasing assumption by foreign offices of responsibility for commercial and economic business.
This hints at changes which were eventually to destroy the balance of power itself (the two most important were industrialization and imperialism), though their bearing on international affairs was not yet discerned in 1880.
BISMARCK'S EUROPE
Between 1880 and 1890 international relations were dominated by the system which Bismarck built on the Berlin settlement of 1878.
The equilibrium of this system lived after it; its remnants were only finally blown away in 19l4 although it had begun to disintegrate long before.
It roots lay far back, in the rise of Prussia to the position of leading power in  Germany , but there is no need to go back beyond the Congress of Berlin.
It had dealt successfully with yet another of the many crises arising from the slow dissolution of the Ottoman Empire.
Like all the others since the beginning of the century that crisis involved two separate problems: the interests of great powers and the claims of Balkan nationalists.
The Treaty of Berlin partially settled the first by handing out bits of Turkish territory to the powers mainly concerned; Russia was allowed Bessarabia and some of Asian Turkey, Great Britain obtained a lease of Cyprus, and the Dual Monarchy was allowed to occupy and administer the Turkish provinces of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to garrison the Sanjak of Novi Bazar.
To Great Britain and Austria-Hungary it was more important to check the expansion of Russia than to win territory.
The attempt in the Treaty to reorganize the Balkans as a stable structure of national states appealed to them for this  reason.
Rumania, Montenegro and Serbia all therefore had their national independence recognized.
In addition, Bulgaria, though left formally under the suzerainty of the sultan, became an ‘autonomous and tributary principality’ with a Christian government and a national militia of its own.
Its prince was to be elected by the Bulgarians, confirmed by Turkey with the assent of the powers, and was to belong to none of the great reigning houses of Europe.
Further south, eastern Roumelia was left within the Turkish Empire but with a Christian governor and in ‘conditions of administrative autonomy’.
Except for the Albanians, each of the main nationalities of the Balkans had now, therefore, a territorial core of its own.
Finally, the aspirations of the Greeks of Crete were met by a Turkish promise at last to put into force constitutional reforms announced ten years before.
This comprehensive settlement was to be buttressed by reforms in those parts of European Turkey not otherwise dealt with.
The Turkish government was to uphold religious liberty and equality; the recognition of the governments of Serbia and Bulgaria was made conditional upon their doing the same.
Special reforms were promised to the Armenians.
Two commissions were set up to regulate the Danube, on which no warships were to be allowed below the Iron Gates.
The signatories could congratulate themselves in not forgetting important details in their concern over large aims.
Yet the Berlin settlement was less stable than it looked.
It had three defects: it left the Balkan states disgruntled, it annoyed the Ottoman government, and it had, in the long run, a bad effect on the relationship of Germany and Russia.
Most of the Balkan states were irritated about territory.
Greece had hoped for a more favourable frontier with Turkey; she got some of what she wanted in 1881.
Rumania, too, improved her frontier in the Dobrudja in 1880, but still regretted the loss of Bessarabia and her obligation under the Treaty to grant citizenship to Jews.
Serbia had done well out of the Congress, but disliked the Austro-Hungarian occupation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (resistance to which was suppressed by force).
Montenegro and Bulgaria were aggrieved to obtain less at Berlin than they had won earlier by fighting.
Montenegro had to make do with about three-fifths of her earlier gains but Bulgaria with less still.
Macedonia and an outlet to the Aegean were taken from her, and other territory went to Serbia and Rumania.
A further grievance was  that eastern Roumelia remained under the Turks.
Most Balkan states could not afford to disturb the general peace, but Bulgaria was a Russian satellite and might be tempted, therefore, to make trouble, under Russian protection.
Moreover, a violent irredentist movement in Eastern Roumelia was ready to struggle for union with Bulgaria.
Austria-Hungary and Great Britain opposed this.
They thought the division of the two provinces a check on Russian influence.
When the question of union was next raised, therefore, the interests of the great powers were again likely to be involved.
The second defect of the Treaty was its humiliation of the Ottoman Empire.
Certainly the Turks would have loft more without it, but the Berlin settlement added the sting of interference in their internal affairs.
The British, supposedly their friends, not only took Cyprus, but obtained the appointment of Englishmen as military consuls in Asia Minor, to work under an English Inspector-General of Reforms.
The guarantees of the safety of the Armenians were humiliating, too.
Moreover, the Austro-Hungarian occupation of Bosnia and Herzegovina was in the end blamed on Great Britain.
Soon there were to be further strains on the Anglo-Turkish relationship in Egypt.
This was ironical.
Internal reform, which only Great Britain took very seriously, was probably the only way in which the Ottoman Empire could have been kept on its feet.
If it went on crumbling, its instability was bound to endanger the good relations of the great powers.
Finally, the Berlin settlement had damaged Russo-German friendship.
The traditional sympathy between Berlin and St Petersburg went back to the partitions of Poland.
Strengthened in the revolutionary crises of the nineteenth century, it was central to Bismarck's policy.
But its implicit premise, since Prussia's defeat of Austria, had been the avoidance of collision between Habsburg and Romanov interests in the Balkans.
At the Congress of Berlin the ‘honest broker’ avoided a Balkan conflict, but only, Russians thought, at the cost of letting down his friends.
As early as 1877, the tsar had begun to complain about a lack of German  support.
Panslavists were soon talking of the Congress as a conspiracy against the Russian people.
Russo-German relations did not, of course, change overnight.
Too many forces were still in favour of the traditional link.
Alexander II's nationalism was outweighed by his successor's fear of revolution.
Nevertheless, the first crack in the Bismarckian structure had appeared.
Bismarck's overriding aim was peace; he was a conservative who feared the revolutionary effects of war.
When the Congress of Berlin met, the German Empire was barely seven years old.
This made an alliance with Vienna seem attractive.
It could provide additional security against France and underwrite the Dreikaiserbund (the latest form of the Holy Alliance).
So, in October 1879 the Dual Alliance was signed.
Its terms, secret at the time, have seemed odd: if one of the signatories were to be attacked by Russia, the other was to come to her support.
Yet Germany was in no conceivable danger from Russia, unless already at war with France.
Nor would Germany, if she were attacked by France alone, obtain more than the benevolent neutrality of Austria-Hungary.
This has led to the view that Bismarck's real aim was to stifle Austro-Russian conflict by attaching Austria-Hungary to Germany, so that he could hold her back and prevent the two autocracies from mutual destruction.
The overriding aim of peace would thus be achieved.
If the alliance is to be understood as a means to that end, it was also an announcement that the kleindeutsch solution of the German problem had come to stay; the Habsburgs had no more to fear from Prussia and the corpses of Königgrätz were buried at last.
The tsar was personally reassured by the kaiser but by adding to the shadowy Dreikaiserbund a special relationship with Austria-Hungary, Bismarck had begun the slow elaboration of alliances which were to divide Europe more and more down to 1914.
‘He had made a deadlock and called it peace’.
Moreover, alliances bind both parties; the kaiser properly reminded Bismarck that he had in the past ‘always opposed  tieing our hands through alliances’.
It was the first long-term peace-time alliance for many  years.
Nevertheless, although its terms were unknown, Europe welcomed it.
Bismarck followed it up by putting out a feeler to Great Britain, but nothing came of it.
In 1881 and 1884 he renewed the Dreikaiserbund and the Russians were assured of German and Austro-Hungarian help if they needed to coerce Turkey into keeping the Straits open in wartime.
The Russians for their part promised to recognize the annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina by Austria-Hungary when it seemed appropriate and Austria agreed not to oppose the union of Bulgaria and eastern Roumelia, if circumstances brought it about.
In 1882, this elaborate system was extended further.
The French gave Bismarck the opportunity for this.
With British and German encouragement a French protectorate had been established over Tunis (Treaty of Bardo, 12 May 1881).
The Italians, their own African ambitions stimulated by the fact that 20,000 Italian settlers were already in Tunisia, could do nothing.
Popular outcry only revealed how powerless the Italian government was against France.
It looked round for an ally, and found one in the old hereditary enemy, Austria-Hungary.
Bismarck pushed the Dual Monarchy towards Italy — he was momentarily upset by a burst of panslavism which made him worry about a Franco-Russian rapprochement — and the result was the Triple Alliance (20 May 1882).
Germany and Austria-Hungary promised to help Italy against a French attack, and Italy promised Germany help against the same danger.
The advantage was Italy's; unless France was involved, she would not be pulled into a conflict with Russia; she obtained a special declaration that the treaty was not directed against England; finally, the association proved that Italy was a great power.
Other buttresses to Bismarck's system were an alliance between Austria-Hungary and Serbia, which virtually made the smaller country a Habsburg satellite during the reign of King Milan, and the accession of Rumania to the Triple Alliance, which guaranteed that country against Russian attack.
Bismarck had in fact increased the likelihood of Russo-German conflict by these elaborate commitments.
The peace of Europe now rested more heavily than ever upon his ability to control his allies.
Yet Europe appeared much more stable because Germany's  one likely enemy, France, was more effectively isolated than ever and therefore presented, for the moment, no danger.
There were also reasons why tension between France and Germany might decline in the early eighties.
As Tunis showed, French interest was turning overseas and there she was likely to come into conflict with Great Britain.
The first place where this happened was Egypt.
The French had invested money there, had built the Suez canal and recalled Napoleon's expedition of 1798.
The British also had financial interests, were the principal users of the canal, and remembered Napoleon's threat to India.
Both countries were entangled with one another willy-nilly because of the lack of sound government in Egypt, which was nominally under the suzerainty of the sultan, ruling through the khedive.
This had led to the setting up of a joint system of financial control.
But this in turn helped to stimulate an Egyptian nationalism which threatened the security of European residents, their investments, and the canal.
The French and British could not agree about what to do and the situation drifted; the one thing which the French were determined not to have was a permanent British occupation.
Yet this was the outcome.
In June 1882 riots at Alexandria killed many Europeans.
The British hoped that the Turks would restore order and break the nationalist movement; the French were more ready to come to terms with its leaders.
The nationalists strengthened their position until the British admiral commanding the naval force at Alexandria decided that he must destroy its fortifications if his ships were to be safe.
When his French colleague refused help and sailed away, he bombarded the forts of Alexandria (11 July).
More riots followed and more diplomatic pressure on the Turks to assert their authority.
The French Chamber of Deputies killed the chance of Anglo-French cooperation by refusing to vote money for a joint expedition.
The results were momentous; a British force landed by itself, defeated the nationalists and began an occupation which was to last seventy years.
The crumbling of Turkish rule produced no alternative which seemed likely to guarantee the security of the canal and the good management of the Egyptian debt.
Nevertheless, the British occupation, once it had begun, obsessed French statesmen and  destroyed the chance of Anglo-French cooperation for twenty years.
This suited Bismarck.
He could enjoy good relations with a France at odds with Great Britain.
Of course, French demands for revanche had not ceased.
Some deputies had voted against an Anglo-French expedition because they thought that Egypt was a distraction from the proper concern of a French government over the lost provinces; other Frenchmen already envisaged an understanding with Russia.
But the ‘line to St Petersburg’ from Berlin was still open, the tsar detested the French Republic as a nest of revolutionaries and French radicals detested the tsar as the oppressor of the poles.
Tunis had driven Italy into Bismarck's arms.
There was, therefore, no reason for him to be worried about France, still isolated in the first half of the decade.
Danger to the stability of his Europe appeared, instead, for the first time in the Balkans, where it was impossible to muffle forever the basic clash of interest between Austria-Hungary and Russia.
The Dreikaiserbund was again renewed in 1884, but panslavism was becoming more strident.
The first crises came over Bulgaria.
After 1880, Russian behaviour towards her satellite quickly destroyed Bulgarian goodwill.
As relations deteriorated, Russia ceased to favour the eventual union of Bulgaria and Roumelia, and forced Prince Alexander of Bulgaria, nominally an autocrat, to accept Russian generals as ministers.
In 1883 he decided to shake off his controllers by restoring a more liberal constitution.
This made him popular at home, but enraged Alexander III.
Russian illwill grew when the Prince wanted to marry a Prussian princess, a granddaughter of the kaiser.
In spite of Queen Victoria's sympathy, the match fell through; Bismarck would not permit it because he was not going to risk offending the tsar (see above, p. 69).
Angry though the prince was about this, he was still trying to repair the damage which had been done to Russo-Bulgarian relations when Roumelian irredentists took the game out of his hands.
Their secret organizations had long planned a revolution; it took place on 18 September 1885, when the Turkish governor-general was expelled, and a telegram sent to Prince Alexander welcomed him to his new realm.
Anxious not to offend the tsar further, he hesitated; after three days he gave way, went to Philippopolis and the union of the southern and northern Bulgars was proclaimed.
The Turks cautiously did nothing except invite the powers to  maintain the Berlin settlement.
The British ordered their consuls to recognize the new régime de facto ; conflicts with the Russians in Asia had just reawoken a Russophobia which reinforced Salisbury's desire to strengthen Balkan nations against Russian pressure.
This may well have saved the new Bulgaria.
Russian objections led the Dreikaiserbund to ask for a conference of ambassadors at Constantinople to summon the prince to withdraw.
Bismarck hoped this would enable him to avoid an Austro-Russian quarrel by showing that the implicit assignment of Bulgaria to a Russian sphere of influence still held good.
The Austrians joined in because it seemed to them the best way to avoid a resuscitation of ‘big Bulgaria’.
But the idea came to nothing because the British would not cooperate.
The next stage of the crisis was precipitated by the Serbians, who declared war on Bulgaria to get compensating advantages (14 November 1885).
They were heavily defeated; Bulgarian soldiers were about to enter Belgrade when they were halted by the threat of Austrian intervention.
peace was patched up on the basis of the status quo but military victory made it impossible to destroy the new Bulgarian union.
In April 1886 the powers recognized the prince as governor-general of eastern Roumelia for five years; this ‘personal union’ was a face-saving recognition of the new state.
The crisis should now have been over except for a brief and unwise Greek sally against Turkey which produced a spasm of concerted action by the powers, pleased to find themselves able to agree in holding Greece back.
A dangerous corner seemed to have been passed.
But the Concert of Europe had been undermined.
Everyone, it seemed, was doing well out of the erosion of the 1878 settlement except the Russians, for whom that settlement had been a defeat in the first place.
The tsar expressed his annoyance by a gesture; he repudiated the free-port status which had been given to Batum by the Treaty of Berlin.
But his animosity was above all directed against Prince Alexander.
In August he was kidnapped by Russian officers, hurried out of the country and bullied into abdicating.
Bulgaria's effective government was from this time in the hands of a Regency under Stambouloff.
A newly elected Bulgarian  assembly turned out to be very anti-Russian.
It enthusiastically supported Stambouloff in opposing a Russian who had been sent to rule them.
It became clear that nothing had been gained by removing the prince, especially as another ruler had now to be found.
With each provocation it seemed that the next step would be an outright Russian invasion.
This was a grave danger, for anti-Russian counsels were beginning to be heard in Vienna, where the Dreikaiserbund was attacked as a sacrifice of Magyar interests.
It was obvious that Austria-Hungary would not allow the Russians to invade Bulgaria; a year before she had disliked the possibility of a united and strengthened Bulgaria, even if it were on bad terms with Russia, and the prospect of one under Russia's thumb was even worse.
Bismarck was alarmed; he did not want to have to choose between his allies in a Balkan quarrel.
He hoped Great Britain would support Austria-Hungary against Russia and that Germany could remain on the fence.
The British position was simpler; Russia was to be kept away from the Straits and Austria-Hungary was to ensure this, if possible.
The British did not want to act themselves if they could avoid it.
The panslavists fanned the flames in Russia, and in Bulgaria the search for a new ruler went on throughout the winter.
The outlook remained gloomy well into 1887.
Bismarck stayed uncommitted as long as possible.
He used a tiff with France as an excuse for military preparations he might need in the east.
But the kaiser pleased the tsar by vetoing Prince Alexander's return to the Bulgarian throne.
Giers, the Russian foreign minister, was still anxious to keep the line to Berlin open and responded, in spite of the attacks of the panslavists.
Even so, the renewal of the Dreikaiserbund was impossible.
Its successor was another dual arrangement, the Reinsurance Treaty between Russia and Germany (18 June 1887).
Germany promised to support a Russian seizure of the Straits and to be neutral unless Russia launched an attack on Austria-Hungary; Russia promised to remain neutral unless Germany attacked France.
Meanwhile, the  British edged closer to the Triple Alliance and might still be persuaded to take the strain of direct opposition to Russia, if Russia moved.
When the Bulgarians chose the Coburg Prince Ferdinand as their ruler (7 July 1887), it was Salisbury who warned the powers not to eject him unless they had an agreed successor ready.
The Bulgarian succession problem, indeed, was gradually settling itself under the noses of the mighty opposites, because each day made joint action on Bulgaria less likely.
The Austrians would not accept an eviction; the Russians could only remove Ferdinand, if he did not resign, at the cost of a general war.
Russia was in the last resort not prepared to fight and the crisis fizzled out; no one paid any attention to the Turkish contention that Ferdinand's title was illegal.
The two years' Bulgarian crisis had complicated results.
In the Balkans it meant that for the next few years Bulgaria under Stambouloff would look to Austria-Hungary (and even, a little, to Turkey), for fear of Russia.
A Bulgaria which was a client of the Habsburg monarchy was a convincing refutation of the old view that independent Balkan nations would automatically look to Russia.
In a longer perspective Austro-Russian rivalry in the Balkans had superseded the old Straits question as a detonator of European explosives.
Here was the real importance of Bulgaria's troubles.
Furthermore, that rivalry clearly arose from Hungarian fears of any extension of Slav influence in the Balkans.
Finally, the crisis killed the already enfeebled Dreikaiserbund .
The Reinsurance Treaty was not a good enough substitute, and Bismarck knew it.
The Russian panslavist press had long been advocating a Franco-Russian alliance and in November 1887 Bismarck had forbidden the Reichsbank to float a Russian loan.
It was also true that the renewed Triple Alliance of the same year was soon buttressed so as to isolate France and Russia still more.
The first Mediterranean Agreement (February 1887) promised to Italy the support of Germany in a war with France over Mediterranean questions, while Great Britain exchanged with Italy mutual guarantees of the Mediterranean status quo and support.
In other words, the British fleet would defend Italy against the French  navy while Italy would support Britain in Egypt.
Further agreements in December 1887 and May 1888 extended the guarantee of the status quo to the integrity of the Ottoman Empire and Turkish rights over Bulgaria, while Spain agreed not to support France against the Triple Alliance.
Both Russia and France were thus made more and more aware of their loneliness.
Yet although the hardening of lines seems ominous in retrospect and the thin tie of Reinsurance could hardly have linked Russia and Germany for long, it could be argued that in 1888 Bismarck's system was still successful.
It had weathered the storms of the Bulgarian crisis.
Germany was still in touch with both Russia and Austria-Hungary; France was still isolated and still embroiled with Great Britain over Egypt.
Great Britain had been associated with the stabilizing system by a skilful use of her Mediterranean fears, although Bismarck failed to turn association into alliance in 1889.
The danger for the future lay in the fact that the conflict between Austria-Hungary and Russia in the Balkans was still there.
And for how long could France be kept isolated?
This became a more and more pressing problem in Bismarck's last years.
Earlier French governments had not felt drawn to Russia.
In 1885 the two countries had even been on bad enough terms to recall their respective ambassadors.
But colonial troubles, Franco-German tension and the Bulgarian crisis began to change this.
Common cause against Great Britain was the first step.
When an Anglo-Turkish convention over Egypt was concluded in May 1887, the Russians and French cooperated in bullying the sultan into rejecting the draft.
A change of atmosphere was noticeable; ‘l'empire des Tsars est à la mode ’ wrote the Belgian chargé from Paris in 1888.
When a Russian loan was over-subscribed in Paris in the following December, a bigger change was implied than was recognized at the time.
Yet when Bismarck left office in 1890, Franco-German relations seemed to improve.
From a distance this looks paradoxical, because although Bismarck's fall was not in itself decisive in changing the course of German foreign policy, it removed the most important restraint upon it.
It opened the way for the transformation of the European system which Germany had dominated since 1871.
But other forces were necessary to bring that  system to an end.
One of them, spreading across both the decade of Bismarck and that of his successor, was important in bringing about a Franco-Russian alliance.
This was the new concern of European states with other parts of the world which is usually called imperialism, a concern which had meant almost nothing to Bismarck.