

Life in the towns
THE DEVELOPMENT OF TOWNS IN CRETE
Towns developed at the same time as the great lowland temples, and are identifiable from about 2000 BC.
Sinclair Hood (1971, p. 50) mentions the theory that the temples (though he treats them as palaces) at Knossos and Phaistos were founded by foreign dynasts who invaded Crete at the beginning of the Middle Minoan period; according to this view, urbanization occurred in Crete as a result of the arrival of already-urbanized conquerors.
There is evidence of the arrival of migrants at various stages in Crete's prehistory, but it seems too facile to attribute each change in the island's culture to the arrival of a new group of immigrants.
In any case, a study of neolithic Early Minoan buildings very strongly implies that the temples were not an implant but the result of a long period of indigenous development.
The first neolithic settlers on the site of Knossos probably lived in wooden huts, of which only the post-holes survive in the archaeological record.
By level 9, i.e. by about 6000 BC, Knossian houses were made of mud or mudbrick; some level 9 bricks seem to have been deliberately hardened by firing, which — remarkably — was never again to be the practice in neolithic or bronze age Crete.
These houses, the homes of the first pottery makers on Crete, had rectangular rooms and were made without  stone footings.
Later neolithic houses were normally built on a stone footing and this system — building the lower part of the walls of stone, the upper part of mudbrick — became standard in the bronze age.
A level 3 (middle neolithic) room was preserved a metre or so below the surface of the Central Court at Knossos.
It was 5 metres square with a bin made of stone slabs built against the north wall: a similar bin in the north-east corner held a large storage jar.
There was a fire-hole in the centre of the room, presumably for warmth in the winter.
A 1.8-metre-square platform in the south-east corner is thought to have been a bed.
The walls were smoothly plastered.
By the late neolithic, Knossian house plans had become quite elaborate, with square fireplaces set against a wall or in the centre of the room, and with neighbouring dwellings juxtaposed to make a cellular layout familiar in Early Minoan villages such as Fournou Korifi (Myrtos) and the temples that were to be built in the Middle Minoan.
It is tempting to see the House on the Hill at Vasiliki as a half-way stage in development between the informal village plans and the rigorously organized plans of the temples.
Vasiliki is a cellular arrangement of rectangular chambers disposed round two sides of a courtyard: the temples were larger cellular structures disposed round all four sides of a rectangular courtyard.
Obviously, there was a quantum leap of some sort in the development of Minoan culture at the time when the temples were built, just as there was a quantum leap when the towns were built.
Even so, the direction of the indigenous developments on Crete during the neolithic and Early Minoan periods is enough to show a continuity into the Middle Minoan.
The quantum leap expressed itself partly in population levels.
As we saw in Chapter 3, the population of the village of Fournou Korifi was probably only 25 or 30.
Mochlos, one of the smaller towns on the north coast, is estimated (by Todd Whitelaw, 1983) to have had a population ten times greater, living in an estimated fifty-five houses.
Early Minoan Phaistos, over one hectare in area, may have had a population of 300–450, Early Minoan Mallia, with its area of 2.58 hectares, had a population of 700–1,000, and Early Minoan Knossos was almost twice as big as Mallia, with a maximum extent of 4.84 hectares and a population estimated to be between 1,300 and 1,900.
The towns were thus much larger than the rural villages, and they were to expand even more once the temples were built.
The town of Knossos had reached a size of not less than 45 hectares by the time its first temple was built in 1930 BC, which would have given it a population of 12,000–18,000.
Vasiliki, with its curious L-shaped half temple on a ship-shaped hill on the Isthmus of Ierapetra, was 20 kilometres north-east of Fournou Korifi and may have served as something of an urban centre for the villagers.
Nevertheless, the main centre for the Isthmus of Ierapetra region was to develop not at Vasiliki, but at Gournia, close to the north coast some 6 kilometres north-west of Vasiliki.
Gournia (Figure 18) was excavated by the pioneer   Minoan archaeologist Harriet Boyd at the turn of the century and the entire plan of the town stands completely exposed.
Narrow paved streets that are little more than alleys wind informally round a low ridge once densely packed with houses.
The town is dominated by the ruins of a modest temple with customary rectangular bull-court, together occupying the south-west quarter of the site.
The Gournia houses are quite small, composed of perhaps five small chambers at ground floor level, although they almost certainly had at least one upper storey.
The form of the Minoan town house is known from several ivory and faience plaques depicting house elevations.
The faience plaques Evans discovered in the East Wing of the Knossos Labyrinth probably originally fitted together, jigsaw-fashion, to make a picture of a complete town; it may have been a town under attack from invaders, like the town shown on the silver Siege Rhyton found at Mycenae.
The faience plaques of the so-called Town Mosaic from Knossos show what the Knossian houses of the seventeenth century BC looked like.
There was a small top storey, a room on the flat roof which may have functioned as a sleeping place on hot summer nights: there were similar roof chambers on Egyptian houses too.
There were windows on the first floor, though not (at least in the Town Mosaic) on the ground floor.
Evans suggested that if the complete picture showed an attack on a city the houses depicted may have been part of an outer defence wall in which no ground-floor doors or windows would have been possible.
In fact, several plaques do show doors on the ground floor, though not windows.
It may be that having no windows on the ground floor was a simple security feature, a precaution against burglary.
An ivory plaque of a slightly later date shows a house with a doorway flanked by narrow slit windows.
The houses, and the temples too, had horizontal beams let into each face of the wall.
The beams were linked at intervals by uprights and tie beams; they were fixed to the walls and probably to each other by means of wooden pegs.
This technique, which shows clearly in all the house plaques as well as in the remains of the buildings themselves (for example, the north wall of the so-called ‘Lobby of the Stone Seat’ in the Knossos Labyrinth and in Room 11 of House A at Tylissos), was standard in Minoan Crete (Plate 7).
Its original intention is unknown, but it has been suggested that the timber framing gave walls the combination of strength and flexibility needed to withstand earthquakes.
The timber bracing was built into stone and rubble walls as well, as can be seen at many points round the Knossos Labyrinth, so it seems likely that earthquake-resistance was the likely purpose.
In major buildings like the temples, dressed stone sawn with long bronze saws was used, particularly for sections of wall that would be seen.
At Knossos and Phaistos, an extra refinement in the masonry of the West fronts was a foundation course of very large blocks: the rest of the wall was stepped back a centimetre or two to make a feature of it.
At Mallia, the foundation course projected far enough from the rest of the wall to make a ledge that  was wide enough to sit on.
The fine masonry extended up to the top of the ground floor, but it seems likely that the upper floors — however many there were — were usually made of mudbricks.
Some of these bricks were 50 × 40 × 12 centimetres.
Occasionally entire houses were made of mudbrick, but usually the ground floors were stone and the mudbricks were reserved for upper floors and partition walls (Plate 8).
Wooden columns, often painted red, were used on a lavish scale in the temples, though less commonly in smaller buildings.
The largest column, which was at Phaistos, had a diameter approaching 1 metre.
The columns normally tapered downward, the broad end of the inverted tree trunk supporting the capital and architrave beams.
To stop the foot of the column from slipping sideways, the stone base was often given a roughened top or a shallow mortise pit into which a tenon projecting from the foot of the column fitted.
The columns were usually smooth and circular in section (Plate 11), but some were ribbed or fluted: some were even given spiral flutes like sticks of barley sugar.
The frescoes show us what the colonnades looked like and capitals of varying designs can be inferred from them; some of the stone pedestal lamps seem to be miniature versions of the full-sized timber columns.
So far, no large stone capitals have been identified, although a small capital has survived in the house ruins to the south-west of the Knossos Labyrinth.
Evans' ‘reconstituted’ columns at Knossos have a typical cushion-shaped capital, but some were evidently cuboid.
The columns carried hefty ceiling or roof beams, sometimes spanning 5 metres, but usually less.
Some of the beams, at the Temple Tomb for instance, were 50 centimetres square in cross-section.
It is clear from the lavish way in which timber beams were used, both in houses and temples, that plenty of timber was available in Minoan Crete.
The Minoans made flat roofs by laying branches and brushwood across the rafters and adding layers   of earth and stamped clay on top.
No doubt the roofs of the more prestigious buildings were coated with layers of cement.
Interior walls were normally coated with a fine lime plaster.
Sometimes, where a richer effect was required, a veneer of thin slabs of veined gypsum was added.
Sometimes a fresco was added to the plaster above a gypsum dado.
Floors were sometimes plastered, especially in light-wells or courtyards, with small pebbles mixed in with the plaster.
Other floors were made of beaten earth, wooden boards or flag stones.
Sometimes a chamber was given a floor of mixed materials, with a flagstone edge and a panel of painted plaster, occasionally adorned with a fresco, in the middle.
How far stone was used decoratively is hard to judge.
The ruins of the Knossos Labyrinth have yielded some stone friezes carved with rosettes, spirals and half-rosettes carved in relief, but these seem to have been exceptional.
At Knossos too the wall and ceiling plaster was in some rooms modelled into relief forms, sometimes abstract, like the spiral reliefs found in the North Sector, sometimes representational, like the Bull Relief from the North Entrance Passage or the Bull-Grappling Fresco from the East Wing.
Ensuring the water supply for the towns during the dry Cretan summers must always have been a problem.
The Minoans built cisterns or water tanks    and lined them with water-resistant plaster.
Often these were circular, as at Zakro and Tylissos, with flights of steps leading down into them.
Whether the cisterns were purely for water supply or had some ritual function as well is open to question.
Certainly the plumbing arrangements in the Minoan towns were elaborate.
There were covered stone slab-built drains at Knossos to carry away sewage.
The remains at Knossos show clearly how rain-water was led down from the roof by way of light-wells to flush out sewage from three lavatories in the East Wing (Figure 20).
The Room of the Plaster Couch was apparently a vestry, robing room or cloakroom: the ‘couch’ was probably a stand for water ewers.
Water was poured through the hole in the floor immediately outside the lavatory door: an under-floor channel linked the hole with the vertical soil pipe under the lavatory seat.
The lavatory could thus be flushed even during a rainless summer, either by an attendant outside the lavatory or by the user (Figure 21).
There were also jointed clay pipes, each one a tapering tube with lugs on its sides so that it could be tied to the next.
It was an ingenious system, by which the pipes could be laid straight or in curves, not unlike the rubbish chutes used in the building trade today.
Evans thought the clay pipes at Knossos were used to bring water into the palace from outside.
This would have been very difficult, because the site is on a low hill and some means would have had to be found for overcoming the unfavourable gradients; a siphon effect has been suggested, but that would have involved making the whole length of piping airtight, which seems scarcely credible.
An alternative is that the pipes were carried across the valleys from higher ground on the far side by means of high (and now completely vanished) aqueducts.
An elaborate system of rain-water drains can be seen, reconstructed by Evans, at the East Entrance.
An open clay channel runs down one side of the  labyrinthine staircase.
On each landing, a small rectangular settling tank was provided as a sediment trap.
More substantial stone drains were fitted into the light-wells, cellars or courtyards known as the Room of the Stone Drainhead and the Court of the Stone Spout.
Water travelled along well-made open stone drains 25 metres from the former to the latter, and from there into a vertical soak-away (Plate 9).
The interiors of some houses, shrines and temples were richly decorated with frescoes.
The earliest known frescoes date to the time of the second temples, i.e. from 1700 BC onwards.
Walls seem to have been painted in flat colour washes even earlier.
There are Early Minoan fragments of coloured plaster from Knossos, Vasiliki, and Fournou Korifi; the favoured colour then was a dark red, a colour which, later at any rate, came to symbolize the underworld.
From the beginning of the first temples, around 1900 BC, walls were sometimes decorated with simple geometric patterns in white and red.
It was only when the new temples were built that pictorial frescoes were attempted.
The Saffron-Gatherer Fresco, found in the Lotus Lamp Sanctuary at Knossos, is reckoned to be one of the earliest.
Against a background of dark red we see a blue monkey gathering crocuses into a pot.
The head is missing, and Evans originally thought that the figure was that of a boy; it is now seen as a monkey.
Blue was the conventional colour for monkeys in ancient Egypt and, apparently, in the Minoan culture too: monkeys in the Minoan frescoes on Thera were also painted blue.
The monkey in the Knossos fresco was evidently a pet: it wears a red leather harness.
The art of the fresco painters developed from this beginning over the next 300 years to produce some of the most vivid and original images of the ancient world.
The scale varied considerably.
Sometimes whole walls were treated, or even whole rooms.
Sometimes long narrow friezes were designed to run along the upper part of a wall.
Sometimes small panels were painted, apparently so that a sequence of tableaux could be shown.
Human figures vary in size from more than life size down to only 3 or 4 centimetres in the so-called Miniature Frescoes.
Most of the frescoes have been found at the Knossos Labyrinth and the ‘palace’ of Agia Triadha, but it is likely that many other buildings also had frescoes originally.
It seems that frescoes were also executed on floors.
The Dolphin Fresco in the Dolphin Sanctuary at Knossos may originally have graced the floor of an upper chamber in the East Wing.
The floor of a shrine beside the Agia Triadha palace had a similar floor-fresco showing dolphins, octopus and fish.
The technique for producing the Minoan frescoes varied.
Some were frescoes in the truest sense: colours were applied to wet plaster and left to sink into it as the plaster dried.
Others were painted on to a dry plaster surface.
Still others were produced by means of a curious inlay technique.
After the initial fresco painting had dried, some areas requiring more   detailed work were cut away, and refilled and recoloured with fresh wet plaster.
In some set-piece frescoes, life-sized figures of men, bulls, and griffins were moulded in low relief; this seems to have happened in the period 1550–1470 BC, but not later.
The famous ‘Priest-King Fresco’ is of this type.
The colours used for fresco painting were for the most part easily obtained: red ochre, yellow ochre, black (either from charred bone or from carbonaceous shale) and blue (from a copper-tinted glass).
An analysis of the paints used on the Agia Triadha sarcophagus shows that some paints had a more exotic origin: the blue seems to be ground lapis lazuli.
Sinclair Hood (1971) says that some of the fresco subjects were secular, but the evidence points increasingly to a pervasive religious content.
Even the landscapes, birds and animals may have had a religious significance (see Chapter 6).
Landscapes are treated unusually, in frescoes and also in sealstones, as if seen from the air or through a fish-eye lens.
Rocks and plants project into the pictures from the top as well as from the bottom, rather like stalactites and stalagmites in a cave.
It is a very different approach from that of the ancient Egyptians.
The naturalistic treatment of plants and animals is deceptive: it is often quite inaccurate.
The rock-rose, for instance, is given six petals instead of five.
Some plants defy identification.
The mythic animals are an even stronger reminder that the fresco artists were depicting another world than the everyday one; it is a symbolic world where general concepts such as fecundity were more important than accuracy of detail.
A favourite plant in the frescoes is the papyrus, treated in various decorative ways: but the papyrus did not, as far as we know, grow in Crete in the Minoan period, so the frescoes do not factually depict the Cretan landscape.
The papyrus may have been a borrowing from Egyptian art which to the Minoans held some symbolic value.
Certainly we should not see the Minoan frescoes as simple interior decoration.
From the Minoan colony of Thera, where more complete frescoes survive, comes strong evidence that frescoes were indicators of a precise ritual function for a chamber.
The position of the frescoes mattered a great deal and also, according to Nanno Marinatos (1984), their visibility: it was important that certain frescoes should only become visible at certain stages in the ritual — hence the pier-and-door partitions.
URBANIZATION IN THE FIRST TEMPLE PERIOD, 1900–1700 BC
One problem in tracing the development of Minoan towns is that the Later Minoan buildings in many cases replaced and obliterated every sign of the Middle Minoan buildings, which in turn effaced Early Minoan buildings.
We can see clearly what life was like in Early Minoan Fournou Korifi, because the site was more or less abandoned after that period.
Nevertheless, we can   gain some insight into Minoan town life in the First Temple period from boreholes and test pits dug through the ruins of later buildings.
Another problem is the apparent incompleteness of the map of Minoan Crete (Figure 22).
It seems peculiar that Minoan sites are concentrated in central and eastern Crete, while western Crete is, apparently, relatively empty.
Were there really no major settlements in western Crete other than Kydonia, Aptera, and Rethymnon?
On the evidence, it would seem so, but it may be that more intensive archaeological prospecting in western Crete will reveal many more Minoan sites.
One that is emerging as a likely temple centre is Monastiraki, in the Amari valley to the west of Mount Ida.
On a low hill, houses were clustered round an important building with store-rooms, storage jars, and a collection of seal impressions; it seems logical to interpret this large building as a temple, even if smaller in scale than the temples found in other Minoan towns.
In the centre of the island, at Knossos and phaistos, a Middle Minoan I — II temple also dominated a growing township: at the eastern end of Crete, the same thing was happening at Zakro.
At this time the agricultural techniques and crafts seen in the Early Minoan period were developed further.
In the Early Minoan, the villages were oriented principally towards subsistence production.
Now, in the Middle Minoan, they were geared to the production of surpluses.
The style, level of organization and the contents of the urban temples strongly imply  control over a rural hinterland, although the precise nature of that control is a matter for speculation.
It may be that the temples, through their bureaucracy, were able to set quotas on production in the rural villages; these may have been specified taxes, or tribute, or they may have been expressed as required offerings.
Alternatively, the power of religious belief may have been such that each community gave as much as it could afford.
But, however it was organized and expressed, the extensive store-rooms of the temples needed a very large inflow of produce from the rural areas to fill them.
At Knossos, the West Magazines of the New Temple (built around 1700 BC) are thought to match closely the area of the store-rooms in the Old Temple (built in 1930 BC).
At Phaistos, some of the pithoi and store-rooms from the First Temple Period survive, projecting 5 metres further to the west than the storage area of the later temple, and extending under its West Court.
The large temples, Knossos, Phaistos, Zakro and Mallia, must have depended on an income of agricultural produce from fairly extensive rural hinterlands, from many villages, many estates.
On the other hand, small temples like the one at Gournia and those towns, like palaikastro, which apparently managed without temples, may have organized the agricultural   production of their own estates near by on a scale that was commensurate with their size and rate of population growth.
A very significant change in the towns of the First or Old Temple Period was the development of the temples as major craft centres.
The concentration of craftsmen and skills in the temples had profound effects.
Isolating the craftsmen in this way implies that they were, by this time if not before, full-time specialists under temple patronage.
Concentrating and juxtaposing the different crafts also had the effect of cross-fertilizing ideas, both artistic and technical, and paving the way for striking and ambitious new developments.
Fine pottery was manufactured in the temple workshops, and it was destined to travel far, both in Crete and overseas.
But this movement into the temples must not be overstated.
There continued to be local craft centres scattered round the island.
There must, for example, have been an industry in the Mesara Plain to supply the large numbers of votive figurines that are found in the tombs of that region.
The temple building at Mallia was, as at Knossos, preceded by the development of an important Early Minoan village into a small township.
The first temple at Mallia, raised in about 1900 BC, was equipped with storage rooms, but it is clear that other buildings, apparently houses, in the town of Mallia were also equipped with store-rooms.
In other words, agricultural produce coming into Mallia was not all destined for the temple: some at least was going into private houses, presumably town houses belonging to the owners of estates in the countryside around Mallia.
Henri van Effenterre (1983) has tried valiantly to reconstruct Mallia's economic pattern, but with no conclusive results.
He draws attention to Aristotle's description, in Politics , of food gathering and distribution in Crete.
Although this seems to refer to a significantly later period, it can be made to relate to Mallia's early economy, in which some surplus food was stored in the larger private houses.
Large houses existed in the north-west of the town of Mallia, round the agora and in the Mu quarter; they had their own store-rooms and their own clay tablet accounts.
In other words, at this stage the organization was not completely centralized.
There was a mixed economy, with a proportion of the agricultural production routed through the temples and a proportion through the private houses.
Aristotle noted a distinction between income from the public land and that from the citizens' private estates.
Henri van Effenterre estimates that, if the population of Mallia was between 5,000 and 10,000, the neighbouring lowland district stretching from Stalis in the west to Milatos in the east would have provided the town with enough olive oil and to spare.
This assumes a low consumption level of 15 litres of oil per person per year: in fact the citizens of Mallia may have used significantly more than this.
The assumed grain requirement was 3 hectolitres per head per year.
The district has a grain production potential of  around 6,000 hectolitres per year, which would not have been adequate to supply Mallia's Minoan population.
The large shortfall may have been met by supplies of grain from outside the immediate district.
The most likely tributary area is the Lasithi plain.
It may be that as the town of Mallia grew, it outgrew its local territory and annexed the adjacent Lasithi territory.
This is, at any rate, a possible scenario for the New Temple Period.
It is nevertheless worth emphasizing that the estimates of population, storage capacity, agricultural yields and food consumption are all based on incomplete evidence; so, interesting though this line of thought may be, no conclusions can be reached yet.
We have, for example, no quantified evidence of seafood-gathering or livestock-rearing at Mallia.
TOWNS IN THE SECOND (NEW) TEMPLE PERIOD, 1700–1470 BC
In 1700 BC, the first temples were destroyed, possibly by earthquakes.
The destruction of the temples and the towns round them led directly to a rebuilding programme.
It is principally the ruins of the New Temple and Late Temple Periods that we see at Minoan sites today.
In the New Temple Period, the towns remained important foci for large areas.
The temples in their turn were elaborated and apparently enlarged: their importance in relation to the towns and the rural hinterlands continued to be at least as great, if not greater.
In general, the patterns established in the First Temple Period were maintained.
The plans of the towns, for instance, continued to follow the irregular plans established before 1700, but they were extended.
Most of the towns were on or near the coast and they exploited their site advantages, capitalizing on their access to sea routes and on the fertile soils of their hinterlands.
Palaikastro in eastern Crete typifies dozens of small Minoan towns.
It covered at least 22,000 square metres and possibly twice that area, consisting of rather irregular blocks of houses separated by cobbled streets.
The ground-floor rooms were used for storage, cooking and other work: from them stairways rose to the living and sleeping quarters upstairs.
Pseira, located on an island close to the north coast, was a similar sort of town — a town without an identifiable temple.
Knossos, Mallia and Zakro belong to a second type of Minoan town: one where the settlement surrounds and is dominated by an important temple.
Adjacent to the temple there were further important buildings, some perhaps houses, others perhaps sanctuaries.
At Phaistos, Gournia and Myrtos Pyrgos, these intermediate buildings seem to have been absent: instead, a temple or equivalent large building stood on a hill summit, dominating a town quarter of small houses.
The architecture of the great Minoan temples is too large and complex a subject to deal with here, and a discussion of the temples' religious function  is reserved for Chapter 6 below.
Here, the focus is on the temples' place in the growth of the towns.
At Mallia, the Central Court existed in the First Temple Period, with rooms ranged at least along its western side; as at Phaistos and Knossos, the new temple was apparently preceded by an earlier one on the same site.
But the Mallia site (Plates 10 and 11) may prove to be more complicated than this, in view of the fairly recent discovery made to the west of the ‘Second Temple’ site; there was a large building, at least 1,700 square metres in area, with at least 60 rooms and open light-wells or courts, although no great courtyard, the distinctive feature which typifies the Minoan temple.
The large early building dates to the First, or Old, Temple period and is the best-preserved building of that age so far found in Crete.
What its function was and what relationship it bore to the building-complex which then stood on the site of the later temple has yet to be established.
The Phaistos temple rivals the Knossos temple in splendour; although it is smaller and seems, to judge from the remains, to have been decorated less lavishly, it has a spectacular location on a precipitous hilltop offering views across the Mesara Plain to the east and south-east and to Mount Ida in the north.
It has many features in common with the Knossos Labyrinth.
It was rebuilt in about 1700 BC, although to a significantly different plan and at a   higher level, so that the lower wall-courses of the earlier temple and its west façade are still visible on the west side, now that the site has been excavated to the earlier courtyard level.
The West Court has a paved entry from the north, but by way of steps down rather than a ramp up.
There are two flights of broad steps at right angles to each other, descending to the paved courtyard: the arrangement is reminiscent of the Theatral Area at Knossos, though at Phaistos it is located in the north-east corner of the West Court.
There are corridor-like store-rooms in the West Wing, though not as extensive as those at Knossos.
There is a bench-lined sanctuary opening out of the west side of the Central Court, but without a throne and without an antechamber or en suite lustral basin.
A major suite of chambers with pier-and-door partitions, colonnades and light-wells comparable to the so-called ‘royal apartments’ at Knossos is located in the northern sector, not in the East Wing: it has a lustral area attached to it.
There is also a workshop area.
The architectural parallels are numerous and striking enough for us to assume that the large buildings at Phaistos and Knossos had a similar function.
If the Knossos Labyrinth was a temple-complex, then so too was the large building at Phaistos.
The differences between the two buildings seem to be mainly differences of style and emphasis, not differences of overall purpose.
There is, for instance, a showy and large-scale entrance to the Phaistos temple at the north-west corner; at the equivalent point in the Knossos Labyrinth there seems to have been no entrance at all , in spite of the arguments of Arthur Evans and James Walter Graham (see Castleden 1989, pp. 12 and 189).
There was also a straight and direct access route by way of a corridor in the middle of the West Wing, whereas at Knossos there was a long and circuitous route by way of the Procession Corridor, which doubles back on itself before arriving at the southern end of the Central Court; the Phaistos entrance seems closer in spirit to the more direct west-east access corridor of the Knossos First Temple.
It seems as if the Central Court at Phaistos was rather more public than that at Knossos.
Although it is smaller, Phaistos has an additional court, the Peristyle Court, to the north of the Central Court: there seems to have been no comparable courtyard at Knossos.
A peculiarity of Phaistos is its two sets of ‘royal apartments’, one in the northern sector, one in the East Wing.
The existence of the two suites argues strongly against the royal apartment interpretation.
The idea that the northern suite was used in summer and the eastern in winter does not convince.
A significant difference between Phaistos and Knossos arises because virtually the whole of the first temple at Phaistos was replaced when the site was redeveloped after the 1700 BC destruction: only the Central Court remained.
As a result, the new temple was built to a single co-ordinated design, and the site levelled and terraced to allow it to extend over a wider area of the hill summit.
It is hard to disentangle the building sequence at Knossos, but the final layout seems not   to be the result of a single overall plan, but to have grown by accretion and piecemeal development.
The temple at Knossos was, so far as we know, the most ambitious building the Minoans attempted.
The overall plan, extending about 140 metres from north to south and the same from east to west, is roughly square; the outer walls have extensions and indents that imply design from the centre outwards.
The clean outline of the rectangular Central Court was established first and the sanctuary suites aggregated round it.
The Knossos Labyrinth (Castleden 1989) gives a detailed account of the temple's design and function.
The completed building, as it stood in about 1400 BC, was a sprawling maze of chambers and corridors developed in different places to heights of two, three, or four storeys.
One of the most striking features of the Knossos Labyrinth was the richness of its decorations and ritual equipment.
The interior walls were covered with elaborate frescoes depicting scenes from mythology and ritual, scenes of bull-leaping, processions of tribute-bearers and religious emblems, all designed to emphasize the building's religious dedication and to sign the function of individual rooms.
In the Procession Fresco, the fabrics worn by the Minoans were painstakingly covered with grids, apparently marked into the soft plaster with taut string; the resulting grid lines were used by the fresco painters to construct detailed textile patterns (Figure 6).
Some of the patterns shown are so elaborate that it seems doubtful that they were woven: some may have been printed with blocks, while others may have been produced by a mixed-medium method, combining printing, embroidery, and appliqué work.
Fragmentary and damaged though they are, the Knossos frescoes have yielded a vast amount of information about the world of the Minoans.
One miniature fresco fragment shows a woman, perhaps a priestess, leaning   on a balustrade rail; behind her is a net hanging across a window.
Perhaps nets were hung over windows and doorways in the temples to keep out birds, and possibly dragon-flies and locusts.
The cult equipment of the Knossos Labyrinth was also very elaborate, and it demonstrates the extraordinarily high quality of Minoan craftsmanship; all kinds of vessel were used for offerings and ritual, made of pottery, stone, and faience.
The temples were much more than centres of worship.
The tribute that poured into the temple store-rooms, dedicated variously to deities and sanctuaries, had to be recorded and redistributed.
The clay tablets of the Knossos temple archive record such large quantities of produce that it seems as if the temple was at the very centre of the organization of the Minoan economy.
As I have argued elsewhere (1989, pp. 169–71), the temple functioned rather like a great medieval abbey, drawing and re-allocating large revenues from the surrounding area and thereby developing into a major centre of wealth and power.
Some of the pottery found in the temple at Knossos says that it is ‘royal’, but this may mean no more than ‘state’ or ‘official’or even that the pottery was made by state potters (Haskell 1983).
The king is but rarely mentioned even in the archive tablets, where the preoccupation is with lists of offerings and the deities and sanctuaries to which they were dedicated.
The implication is that the king was housed elsewhere.
There were doubtless all kinds of subtly poised relationships between the royal household and administration on the one hand and the temple priesthood and its administration on the other.
It may be that some of the produce offered to the temple for the gods and goddesses was discreetly diverted to the royal household; it may also be, as with many later monarchies, that the royal authority depended on the religious establishment for validation.
The Labyrinth dominates our thinking about Knossos, but it must not be forgotten that the temple was surrounded by a Minoan city, most of which remains unexcavated.
Some of it has been disturbed by later developments: the site of the Early Iron Age, classical and Hellenistic city of Knossos overlaps with that of the Minoan city (Hood and Smyth 1981)— but nevertheless much remains to be excavated.
The best-known part of the Minoan city is the so-called ‘Royal Road’ which runs from the Theatral Area at the north-west corner of the temple towards the Bull's Head Sanctuary (or ‘Little Palace’) 200 metres away to the west-north-west (Plate 12).
The road is typical of the Minoan roads of Knossos.
There is a central lane 1.4 metres wide, which is made of two lines of large rectangular stone slabs.
On each side there are slightly lower and narrower lanes made of smaller unshaped stones.
Quite how these three lanes were deployed in Minoan times is not certain, though the differences in level imply that the central lane was kept dry in wet weather by draining to the side lanes.
A similar lane design is apparent in the short section of curving roadway which has survived at the  Minoan village of Tylissos, just to the west of House C (Figure 13 and Plate 13).
At Tylissos there are also ‘sleeping policemen’— slabs crossing the entire roadway and rising some 3 centimetres above its general surface level — but their function is not clear.
Was their purpose to debar wheeled vehicles from a congested part of the village, or to slow down and reduce the destructive effects of runoff during torrential rainstorms?
The Royal Road passed through what seems to have been a densely built-up area of the Minoan city.
To one side were houses, including the House of the Frescoes, and workshops.
The Late Minoan debris of an ivory carver's workshop was found to have been destroyed by fire.
On the other side were more houses and a large building tentatively identified as an armoury or arsenal.
After running dead straight for about 160 metres, the Royal Road reaches the modern road from Heraklion.
At this point the Minoan road reaches a crossroads; the Royal Road continues (underground now) westwards past the south fronts of the Bull's Head Sanctuary and Unexplored Mansion and past more Minoan houses, including the House of the Sacrificed Children, discovered by Peter Warren in 1979.
The northern fork, branching off the Royal Road, runs along the east front of the Bull's Head Sanctuary.
The road leading south from the crossroads seems to have followed the course of the modern road and may have led to the south-west corner of the Labyrinth's West Court, where a part of an access road has been exposed.
The Knossian roads were laid out in straight sections, but without any overall geometric plan.
Curiously, the contrasting paved/cobbled texture of the road surface continues into open courtyard areas round the temple.
In the Theatral Area and the West Court, raised linear pathways of well-made slabs pass through open areas of irregular cobbling, and show us clearly the main lines of movement through these courtyards: they emphasize the North Entrance and West Porch of the temple as important destinations.
From the Labyrinth's south-west entrance a paved ramp, now eroded beyond recognition, led down to a bridge over the Vlychia stream; on the south side this was supported on a finely built stone viaduct, which carried the road on south-eastwards along the north front of the Pilgrim Hostel and then southwards between yet more Minoan houses.
On the southern edge of the Minoan city, the road passed through a cemetery: the Temple Tomb was the principal building in this area.
Immediately to the north of the temple stood several substantial buildings: the North-East House, North House, North Pillar Hall and Balustrade Sanctuary (or ‘Royal Villa’).
Further off in that direction, on the site of the modern village of Makroteichos, there were Minoan houses and traces of Minoan houses have been found as far north as Palaiomilo, some 600 metres north of the temple precinct: beyond this area was the northern cemetery of Zafer Papoura.
The archaeological evidence is necessarily very incomplete, but it suggests that the temple was at the centre of a town whose built-up area  was approximately 1,200 metres from north to south and 800 metres from east to west.
At Zakro, both temple and town have been excavated.
The temple is easily identifiable by its long, rectangular Central Court, in this case oriented north-north-east to south-south-west.
A large room at its northern end was a kitchen and there was probably a refectory above it, on the first floor.
The West Wing contained chambers which Sinclair Hood (1971, p. 66) interprets as state apartments, although they might better be interpreted as sanctuaries; the chambers behind are admitted, by their excavator, Nicolas Platon (1971, p. 257), to be ritual in nature.
A collection of cult equipment came from one room and an archive tablet collection from another.
From the upper floor of the West Wing came bronze tools, bronze ingots and elephant tusks.
It is not clear whether there were actually craft workshops in the West Wing at Zakro but, if so, it seems to be a significant departure from the pattern observed at the other temples, where the votive workshops were in the east, as at Knossos, or north-east, as at Phaistos.
The East Wing rooms have been interpreted by Platon and Hood as royal living quarters, like those at Knossos; a lustral basin is represented as a bathroom connected with these.
Nevertheless, there is every reason to see the lustral basin, originally embellished with unequivocally religious frescoes, as a special chthonic shrine.
The East Wings of both Knossos and Zakro make better sense interpreted as sanctuaries (see Castleden 1989, pp. 48–51, 90–2).
Steps in the south-east corner of the Central Court led down into a well which was used, at least in the temple's final days, for offerings: there were many small clay vases, one of which still had olives in it when excavated.
The alleged royal suite opened onto a colonnade to east and west: that to the east led to a square courtyard with a circular spring chamber in it.
A rectangular spring chamber nearby seems to have been accessible only from outside the temple.
These may have been used for normal, secular water supply, or they may have had some cult use.
The visible temple remains at Zakro seem to belong entirely to the New Temple Period.
Its site was evidently occupied beforehand — the outer walls near the main entrance in the eastern corner extend across the remains of earlier houses — but it is not yet known whether a temple stood there.
As at Knossos and Mallia, the temple grew up symbiotically with its adjacent town, but at Zakro we can see the whole urban structure.
A paved road ascends the gentle gradient from the east, leading from the now-drowned site of the Minoan harbour, through the lower town to the main gate of the temple.
This gate must have been a conspicuous structure, since its footings project some 8 metres from the eastern corner of the temple.
Curiously, the Zakro temple is oriented with its corners, not its sides, facing the cardinal compass points: in this respect, it is reminiscent of the early ‘proto-temple’ at Vasiliki.
The paved road continues westwards past the main temple gate and connects with the road network of the upper town.
Another road leads away at right angles to it, in front of the temple gate, and ascends the hillside.
A large area of the town has been excavated and left continuously exposed, stretching some 80 metres along the slope and 40 metres up it.
The layout is very similar to that of Gournia, with narrow cobbled alleys weaving irregularly among blocks of houses, many of which had rather small chambers, cellars perhaps, on the ground floor.
Where it differs significantly from Gournia is in being situated in the bottom of a steep-sided valley instead of on a low hill; in a sense, the Zakro site is the mirror image of that of Gournia.
The Gournia temple crowns a hill summit, with a commanding view of the Mediterranean.
The Zakro temple lies in the lowest part of the valley, frequently half-submerged by the rising water-table, and threatened by further sea-level rises.
CRAFT WORKERS IN THE TOWNS
Crafts underwent a long evolution during the Early Minoan, an incubation that prepared the way for major developments in the Middle Minoan temples and towns.
We have, for example, the potter's workshop at Fournou Korifi, the carpenter's tool-kit found at Khamaizi and the three almost identical dog-handled schist jars; these instances show a significant degree of craft specialization in the Early Minoan (Branigan 1983).
Most of the evidence we find for full-time craftsmen nevertheless comes from the temples of the Middle and Late Minoan periods, so we should see the main period of craft industries as belonging to an urban society and in particular to the temples within that urban society.
There were lapidaries in the temple workshops at Knossos, Mallia and Phaistos, bronze-smiths at Phaistos, seal carvers at Knossos, ivory carvers at Zakro.
Craft specialization is often subsidized at the redistribution centre in a chiefdom society, so we should expect to see crafts flourishing in the temple culture of bronze age Crete: we should also expect to see craftsmen gathering in the temples, where the agricultural surpluses and imports were collected and redistributed.
From the economic and organizational standpoint, it was very natural for the craftsmen to have become concentrated in workshops in the temples.
At the same time, there were craftsmen working outside the temples.
For example, ivory carvers and stone vase makers worked in premises along the Royal Road in Knossos.
Whether these craftsmen were independent or worked under the aegis of the temple, which was close at hand, is hard to judge.
Certainly there were part-time specialists operating in settlements like Palaikastro which had no temple, so it was possible for them to work geographically separate from the temple centres.
But even there it is hard to be sure that there was no ultimate control from the temples.
We know from  the temple archives at Knossos that the geographical reach of the administrators was exceptional, so it is possible that ivory carvers in Palaikastro were employed and controlled by the Zakro priests.
Concentrations of workshops, such as those along the Knossos Royal Road, in the East Wing of the Knossos Labyrinth, and in the Northern Quarter of Gournia, suggest another possibility — that there were guilds of craft workers.
The evidence so far gathered is very inadequate, so we could not be sure, but there does seem to be some tendency to concentrate.
Guilds could be the answer, or alternatively some form of temple control: either way, the tablets imply a minutely ordered society.
Makers of stone vases
In the manufacture of stone vases, the Minoans displayed enormous patience, as well as very high levels of confidence and skill.
It was a craft that evolved into an art form, as they attempted more and more ambitious shapes in a widening range of materials.
Perhaps the most extraordinary creation was a libation vessel in the form of a shell, yet made out of a block of hard and brittle obsidian.
The great majority of the vessels made were simpler.
The first stage in making a stone vase was to rough out its external shape: then the interior was hollowed out by a combination of drilling and chiselling.
Sometimes a ring of holes was made and the core knocked out, and sometimes a larger solid drill was used instead.
The drill might be made of wood or bronze, using sand or emery, imported from Naxos, as an abrasive.
The exterior of the vase was then finished and both surfaces, inside and out, were ground smooth with a stone.
The initial idea of making vases out of solid stone was probably a foreign import.
Egyptian stone vases reached Crete before the bronze age began; the Cretan industry, which had started as early as 2500 BC, nevertheless post-dated the arrival of these foreign vases.
To begin with, the Cretan vases were made out of chlorite or chlorite schist, but the vase makers soon branched out into other materials, favouring especially the relatively soft and easily worked serpentine which can be found in various parts of central and eastern Crete.
By the time the first temples were built, in 1900 BC, craftsmen had the confidence to attempt harder stones which had more attractive colours and textures, such as mottled breccias and orange stalactite.
The technique had developed to such an extent by the New Temple Period, beginning in 1700 BC, that vases were being made out of obsidian and rock crystal: for example, the beautiful crystal rhyton from Zakro.
Perhaps the commonest stone vessels were those that were compact in form, like birds' nests, but more ambitious forms were attempted even from the beginning, such as the circular pot-lids with handles in the form of a reclining dog, made, apparently in some numbers, at Mochlos in around   2500 BC.
Very large numbers of stone vases were deposited as grave goods in the early communal tombs of the Mesara plain; there were some fine examples deposited in early tombs at Mochlos too.
Often the earliest jars and vases were decorated with hatched incised triangles and spirals in relief, in much the same style as the cosmetic jars made in the Cyclades: probably the designs were copied from Cycladic models.
Although some of the designs and the technique of vase making were borrowed from abroad, the Minoans developed the technique in a quite extraordinary way.
By the time of the first temples, the making of stone vases had become widespread, with the production of buckets, jars, bowls and lamps designed to be used both in the house and the temple.
It was in this first temple period that the Minoan vase makers began to tackle hard exotic stones, like the rosso antico from the Greek mainland and the white-speckled obsidian from Yiali near Karpathos in the Dodecanese.
A typical stone vase maker's workshop from this period has been identified at Mallia.
It was in the period after 1700 BC that the stone vase makers' art reached unparalleled heights.
The dark, blue-black serpentine which had been popular before was still used a great deal, but now new materials were tried out as well — alabaster, gypsum, limestone, marble and breccia — and some extremely hard rocks like porphyry.
A plain black obsidian which the Minoan craftsmen tried may have come from the Siftlik area of Cappadocia.
The green speckled Spartan basalt used at Knossos came from the south Peloponnese; a store-room in the East Wing of the Knossos Labyrinth held a supply of Spartan basalt blocks at the time of the temple's abandonment in 1380 BC.
Some relatively soft Egyptian alabaster was imported and at least forty vases were made from it by Minoan craftsmen.
Occasionally, Minoan vase makers took Egyptian vases and adapted them, often painstakingly and  with great ingenuity, to suit the tastes of their Minoan masters and mistresses.
One, that was eventually exported to Mycenae, had been turned upside down, transforming its mouth into a pedestal base, and its original base had been sawn off and replaced with a moulded rim of gilded bronze; then a pair of wooden handles and a spout were added, completing the transformation of the Egyptian vessel into a Minoan jar.
The relief-picture offering vases or rhytons were probably the most remarkable of the vase makers' creations.
They were designed for ritual use and some of them were coated in gold leaf.
The Harvester, Boxer, and Chieftain Vases and the Peak Sanctuary Rhyton are all made of a close-grained black steatite and decorated with highly detailed reliefs showing ritual scenes (Figure 56).
By the end of the New Temple Period, the art of making vases out of stone had become a very specialized and rare craft.
It had become purely a temple art.
The final chapter of the vase makers' story is shrouded in mystery.
The art seems to have died out in Crete altogether, yet mysteriously reappeared in Mycenae in the thirteenth century BC; Sinclair Hood (1978) has suggested that after the conquest of Minoan Crete by Myceneans, the finest craftsmen may have been taken by force to the mainland and made to work for new masters.
Workers in metal
The existence of metal vases and bowls can be inferred from pottery objects which imitate metal models, sometimes even to the extent of having fake rivets and fake chain-links added.
The direct survival of the metal originals has been patchy, but there is evidence of a fairly large-scale metal-working industry in Minoan Crete, producing copper and bronze vessels.
A hoard of 153 silver cups and one gold cup found at Tôd in Upper Egypt may have come originally from Minoan workshops; the vessels appear to be Middle Minoan IB work, which was produced in Crete between 2000 and 1900 BC, and were found in an Egyptian deposit which has been dated fairly precisely to about 1920 BC.
The Tôd cups were apparently offered as tribute from a Syrian king, perhaps the king of Byblos, which implies that there were complex and long-distance exchanges of goods in the twentieth century BC.
Another metal object of Minoan origin, a spouted jug dating from 1850 BC, was found among the grave goods of a prince of Byblos.
Certainly by the year 2000 BC, the tables of the Cretan rulers shone and glittered with drinking cups of gold and silver and, even in the century before the first temples were raised, those rulers were wearing elegant gold ornaments, not imported, but produced by Minoan craft workers.
By 1500 BC, the metal workers of Crete were producing a large range of cooking and storage utensils, including some large cauldrons made by riveting together several bronze sheets: some fine examples were found at   Tylissos.
Sheet bronze was also used for making armour.
Hammered or cast, bronze could be made into tools: single-edged knives for cutting meat, razors, axes, adzes, axe-adzes, double-axes, double-adzes, chisels, sickles, hammers and saws.
Throughout the Minoan period, Cretan craftsmen went on making stone axes and maces.
Sometimes the workmanship in these archaic stone artefacts was very fine, and it is possible that they were used as insignia of rank, in much the same way as stone maces in the Wessex Culture in southern England; if so, it is curious that the same obsolete tool became associated with rank in two cultures that were geographically so widely separated.
Copper was found in Crete itself, especially in the Asterousi mountains bordering the Mesara plain, and some may have come from Chrysokamino, near the coast east of Pachyammos, but the demand for metal artefacts is likely to have been high enough for imports of copper to be necessary.
The most likely foreign source is Cyprus.
The bronze was cast in standard ingots that were about 0.9 metres long with inward-curving sides that made them easier to carry on the shoulder, as shown on one of the contemporary Egyptian tomb paintings depicting Minoan emissaries.
Gold was reserved for making ornaments, jewellery (pins, rings and bracelets) and decorative inlays of various kinds.
Some of the stone vases were partially coated with gold leaf.
Sometimes the ivory figurines of deities   and bull-leapers were given details such as loincloths in gold.
The overall effect of, for example, a group of elaborately dressed and bejewelled priestesses conducting a rite with carved and gilded cult objects against a background of inlaid furniture, brightly painted pillars and multi-coloured frescoes must have been one of dazzling opulence.
The temple goldsmiths at Mallia seem to have been outstanding.
The celebrated Wasp Pendant (Figure 28) came from a rich burial at Mallia, and it is generally believed that at least some of the Aigina Treasure — found at Aigina, but of unknown provenance — came from Mallia too.
The nature-god pendant found at Aigina looks very much like Middle Minoan III work, dating from about 1600 BC; it may have been robbed from the Chrysolakkos tomb at Mallia in antiquity.
The large building to the west of the Mallia temple yielded a gold-handled dagger with cut-out designs on its hilt, while the temple itself yielded some magnificent long swords: one of them had a pommel covered in gold sheet modelled to depict an acrobat (Figure 29).
The swords may have been ceremonial, or they may have been used in an acrobatic ritual sword dance.
The gold used by the Minoan smiths to make   all these fine objects was imported from the Egyptian gold mines in Sinai, from the Arabian desert and from Anatolia.
The gold cups found in a burial at Vaphio near Sparta on the Greek mainland were probably made by Cretan craftsmen, although Sinclair Hood (1978, p. 167) takes the rather odd position that one of the cups is of Mycenean origin, one of Minoan origin.
There are slight stylistic differences in the execution of the relief work, and it may be that one cup is an exotic, a Minoan import, and the other was made by a Mycenean craftsman to make a pair; on balance, I think it more likely that both are Minoan (Figure 31).
A set of silver vessels was found in the Silver Vessels Sanctuary (Evans' South House) at Knossos, but relatively few vases made of precious metals have been found in Crete.
This seems to be because temple, villa and tomb sites have been plundered — mainly in antiquity — rather than because of any original dearth.
It is possible that a high-status tomb may yet be found entirely intact and that many gold and silver objects remain to be discovered by excavation.
Nicolas Platon (1968, pp. 167–8) mentions the remarkable technique, perfected by the Minoan metal workers, by which superbly decorated daggers were produced.
The technique, known as damascening, involved the addition of inlays of threads of silver and gold to bronze blades and hilts, and set off by patches or pools of black enamel; the designs depicted hunting scenes (Figure 10).
Many artefacts decorated in this way   have been found in royal tombs on the mainland.
Platon is convinced that the technique crime from Crete; if that is so, it is likely that at least some damascened daggers await discovery at Minoan sites on Crete.
The bronze workers, in addition to making weapons, tools and utensils, were also producing figurines as votive offerings.
Typically, the figurines which they made are 20 centimetres high and depict worshippers in attitudes of adoration, or reclining goats, or cattle.
They were cast in solid bronze, apparently by the cire perdue method.
The original model was made in wax; it was then encased in a clay mould and molten metal poured in through the feet; the hot metal melted the wax and displaced it, filling the mould.
The metal filling the pouring hole was usually left untrimmed after it had cooled, so that many of the figurines have a peg under their bases: even the best figures — and some of them (see Figures 2 and 30) are very fine — may seem rather unfinished to modern eyes.
The rough, bubbly surface often seen is possibly due to a shortage of tin in the alloy, which meant that the metal did not flow well.
Even allowing for this, the surface was left just as it came out of the mould.
The explanation may be that the figurines were not intended for use as ornaments but were votives to he left in shrines: they had a symbolic, not an aesthetic, role to play.
Many were recovered from dark caves and rock crevices where they were not intended to be seen by mortal eyes.
Makers of faience
The manufacture of faience objects was another highly specialized craft closely associated with temple worship; many of these objects have a religious significance and were probably made for cult use.
The Minoans may have learnt the art of making faience, a glaze technique, from the Egyptians in about 2000 BC.
The glaze consisted of a core of crushed quartz grains coated with glass, usually tinted blue or green by adding small amounts of copper compounds; the result was a richly glazed finish.
At first, the technique was used for relatively simple objects, such as pendants and heads, but later it was applied to vases, statuettes and plaques.
The most outstanding collection of faience from the Minoan period is the one that was found in the Temple Repositories in the West Wing at Knossos, where cult vases, plaques, and the famous Snake Goddess statuettes were all treated in this way.
The miniature faience robes are almost certainly votives standing for full-sized ceremonial robes that were offered to a goddess, either to dress an idol or to dress a priestess for a ceremony in which she somehow became the goddess.
In the classical period and earlier it was quite common for statues of goddesses to be annually reinvested with robes.
In Book 6 of the Iliad , we are told of an embroidered robe carried by a procession of old women to the Trojan Athena.
At Athens itself, around the summer solstice, the image of Athena Polis was veiled, taken down, disrobed and wished, before being ceremonially reclothed in a new robe  specially woven by the arrhephoroi .
A similar rite seems to have taken place at the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus.
The faience robes tell us that something similar happened in the Knossos Labyrinth too.
The Minoan faience artists achieved very high levels of technical ability.
Quite how independent they were of other craftsmen, particularly in the temples, is impossible to judge, but the fact that many objects — and especially the cult objects — required the shared expertise of several different crafts implies collaboration.
Potters, faience artists, pot painters, clay figurine makers, stone carvers and the priesthood probably worked closely together, sharing ideas that would glorify their deities.
Shell and ivory workers
In the New Temple Period (1700–1470 BC), inlays made of shell were applied to wooden chests and other furniture.
Often only broken fragments of these inlays survive, and nothing of the item of furniture to which they were attached, so it is difficult to visualize the original effect or even the extent of the shell decoration.
A plaque from Agios Onoufrios near Phaistos shows the head of a man with moustache and beard.
A rectangular plaque from the Phaistos temple shows, in relief, four animal-headed figures in long robes with tasselled belts; it was originally fixed to a curving surface, probably of wood, by means of nails at the four corners (Figure 49).
An irregularly shaped plaque from the Throne Sanctuary at Knossos shows a sheathed dagger hanging from a decorative belt.
The shell used for this decorative work was probably the oyster-like Spondylus gaederopus , which is native to the Aegean.
The Minoans did not invent the technique of carving shell: it was used earlier, in the Cyclades, for making figurines and bracelets.
The craft of the ivory carvers has attracted more attention.
Some of the early ivory seals made on Crete seem to have been strongly influenced by Syrian originals, which suggests that the craft may have been introduced from Syria.
Ivory was used, like shell, to decorate wooden boxes and other pieces of furniture.
Probably the most spectacular example of this is the large gaming or divination board found in the East Wing of the Knossos Labyrinth: it was covered with plaques of ivory, plated with gold and further decorated with plaques of crystal backed with silver or blue paste.
The wooden box to which all these fittings were fixed probably contained the gaming pieces, which were as likely as not also made of ivory.
The early temple at Phaistos yielded some small ivory pieces carved in the shape of a bull's leg and a lion's head: the lion's mane was coated in gold.
The temples seem to have had their own ivory carvers, but it is known that ivory carving also went on at Palaikastro, where there was no temple.
Some finished ivory plaques were found there, as well as a piece of unworked tusk.
Generally, though, ivory seems to have been concentrated in and near the  temples.
At Zakro, there were ivories shaped like double-axes.
In the Silver Vessels Sanctuary at Knossos there was an ivory of a griffin biting a bull's leg.
During the period of the later temples, there was a remarkable output of large ivory figurines at Knossos.
The most celebrated of these is the Boston Goddess, a highly detailed representation of the Snake Goddess with details picked out in gold.
Some of the figures represent bull-leapers.
They have tiny holes drilled in their heads for the insertion of twisted pairs of gold-plated bronze wire to represent tresses of waving hair.
They probably had gold loincloths too.
It is possible that the bull-leaping figurines belonged to a cult model showing a tableau of bull-leaping.
Some at least of the Knossos ivory figurines were made in the workshop beside the Royal Road.
The carefully assembled figures, some of them 40 centimetres high when complete, exploited the same colour and texture contrasts between polished gold and carved and polished ivory that were achieved in the large chryselephantine (literally ‘gold and ivory’) statues of classical Greece.
Some of the smaller ivory pieces are just as impressive as displays of technical skill and aesthetic control.
A small cylindrical ivory box found at Katsamba, and dating to 1450–1400 BC, shows a group of men attempting to capture a bull in a wild landscape.
After the (assumed) conquest of Crete by the Myceneans, large quantities of Minoan artworks may have been transported to the mainland.
The light, portable ivories would have been particularly attractive as loot.
There is some doubt about the provenance of the fine ivory sculpture found at Mycenae, depicting two goddesses and a small boy-god.
It was found in a Late Helladic IIIA context, dating to 1400–1300 BC, yet it seems to be of Minoan workmanship or inspiration; it may well have been brought to the mainland by proud Mycenean conquerors as booty.
Sculptors of statues
The Minoans made large numbers of statuettes in clay, faience, ivory and bronze, but no large-scale stone reliefs and no large statues in any materials have survived.
It may be argued from the evidence that the Minoans did not make large statues.
Whilst this is possible, it would be odd; the plaster relief frescoes, such as the one at Knossos depicting a temple attendant leading a large beast, show that the Minoans were interested in large-scale modelled representations of people, bulls and mythological animals.
The Minoans had the skill to make life-sized statues in stone or wood — or even ivory — if they chose: the elaborately carved stone vases and fragments of high quality frieze work in carved stone show this very clearly.
The Minoans also had diplomatic and trading contacts with Egypt, where stone carvers were making representational bas-reliefs and larger-than-life-sized statues.
Both the models and the technical skills were available, so it would be strange if no large statues were attempted.
It is possible that some were  made but later destroyed or stolen.
Ironically, the more striking and distinctive objects are, the more likely it is that they will have been stolen and therefore absent from the archaeological record.
Lord Elgin found (and took) two fragments of carved slabs showing reliefs of bulls at Mycenae.
They may have come from the inner chamber of the tholos tomb known as the Treasury of Atreus.
The subject matter suggests Minoan Crete, but more to the point is the material of which the carving is made: it is gypsum, which is not found near Mycenae, but is found on Crete and was used extensively by the Knossians for embellishing their temple.
It is thus possible that, just as we are suggesting for some of the other finds at Mycenae, it was taken from Knossos: if so, the implication is that other pieces of statuary and relief carving from Minoan Knossos were also removed — by some Mycenean equivalent of Lord Elgin, perhaps.
Some carved stone heads rather less than half life-size have been found in Crete, for example the Middle Minoan II head (1900–1700 BC) which was found at Monastiriako Kefali.
The absence of trunks or limbs to go with the heads implies that they were mounted on clay or wooden bodies which have subsequently disintegrated, probably simple wooden xoana.
Other evidence, such as the votive faience robes mentioned earlier, tells us that elaborate dresses were offered to deities and it is probable that statues of deities were clothed in these.
If so, the timber structure need have been little more than the simplest type of tailor's dummy.
Evidence of clay feet found at the Anemospilia and Mallia temples suggests that the robes were floor length or nearly so, with the feet fitted loosely under the hem.
These goddesses were very simple, and may have been armless, like the earliest wooden idols on mainland Greece.
Some bronze and clay fittings imply that there were at least two large statues on Minoan Crete, i.e. life-size or larger.
One stood in the Great Goddess Sanctuary in the East Wing of the Knossos Labyrinth: bronze curls from its head were found in the cellars.
The other was enshrined at the Mount Juktas peak sanctuary not far away to the south.
Hood has suggested that the statue at Knossos may have looked like the snake goddess shown in faience in the Temple Repositories.
This is possible, though a simpler rendering without raised arms is more likely.
The statues were probably made of cypress wood; it was commented in later times that this was the most suitable material for cult images because it was so long-lasting (Pausanias, VIII; Theophrastus,Historia Plantarum , V).
Seal makers
The locks the Minoans fitted to their doors were little more than wooden bolts with pegs to hold them in place.
They were fairly clumsy devices and only offered security from one side: anyone could unlock them from the other side.
The seals which the Minoans devised were a simple way of  ensuring security.
A loop of string or even thread securing a door or a wooden chest could be ‘locked’ with a lump of clay stamped with the owner's personal seal.
The seal might be broken, the string might be cut — but not without the owner discovering later that his privacy had been invaded.
The designs carved on the sealstones were very varied.
They often showed scenes from Minoan mythology or religious symbols, which gave the sealing the extra dimension of defence by superstition.
Frescoes show that the seals were worn on string or leather thongs looped round the owner's neck or wrist.
As such, they functioned as portable signature stamps, identity tags, and possibly even as credit cards.
The magico-religious content of many of the seal images makes it likely that their owners treated them as amulets as well.
How far down the social scale the possession of seals extended is not known, but the carrying of personal identification tags is exactly what we would expect of such a minutely organized society.
Seals were manufactured at many settlements, both towns and villages.
Half-finished seals were even found at the early settlement of Fournou Konh.
There must have been concentrations of seal makers at the great temple centres, serving the larger populations of the towns.
Some seals are cylindrical, and in the earliest period, from 2500 BC onwards, the designs were carved on the flat end, not on the curve as in Syrian and Mesopotamian seals.
After some examples of these foreign seals were imported to Crete in the Middle Minoan, some cylinder seals of the eastern type were tried out by Cretan craftsmen, but the standard seal shape in the Early Minoan period was i simple button shape: a very short cylinder with convex ends.
This later evolved into a thin lens, with designs on one or both faces.
Other shapes were used too, such as cones, prisms, stamps, and even animals and birds.
In the Late Minoan period (after 1600 BC) carved stone seals were replaced to an extent by metal signet rings.
These seem to have been designed to be worn on the finger, although the oval design-disc was so big as to he unwieldy; possibly they were normally worn on a string round the neck, or simply reserved for a leisured elite.
The signet rings were probably the prerogative of the rich, as they were often made of gold or silver.
They were engraved with elaborate scenes of myth and ritual and consequently provide us with valuable information about the Minoans' religious beliefs (see Chapter 6).
Most of the seals were nevertheless made of bone, ivory, steatite, banded agate, or orange carnelian.
By the mid-point of the Minoan civilization's development, the seal makers had some quite sophisticated tools at their disposal: cutting wheels, fast-twirling drills and gravers of bronze.
They also had magnifying glasses to help them with the extraordinarily fine detail which they worked into the seal images: some lenses were found in a Middle Minoan tomb at Knossos.
In fact, many of these images could only have  been created with the aid of magnifying glasses.
They must have been used by the painter of the bull depicted on the flat side of a crystal plaque found at Knossos.
Since the seal carvers needed both hands free for their work, the lenses may have been mounted in some way, either on stands on the work-bench or on something like spectacle frames.
In the New Temple Period, from 1700 BC onwards, the seal carvers achieved their finest work.
Designs incorporating fish, birds, bulls, people, gods, goddesses, schematized buildings of various kinds, ships, and elaborate ritual scenes were carved into an astonishing range of materials: ivory, bone, agate, carnelian, haematite, jasper, chalcedony, lapis lazuli and even rock crystal, amethyst and obsidian.
The images on the seals reached new heights of sophistication.
Before, the individual elements of the design were simply placed side by side.
Now, they were combined and synthesized on aesthetic principles which apparently did not always depend on the content of the subject matter, although it is difficult to be certain in an area such as this.
What we certainly can see is a tendency towards synthesis and dynamic development, a typical feature of Minoan civilization.
During the Post-Temple Period (1380–1000 BC) the art of seal cutting gradually declined.
Invention flagged and a handful of traditional designs was repeated over and over again.
Waterfowl and stylized papyrus flowers recur, as do simplified outlines of chariots.
The carving had by this time become careless and clumsy.
Limbs were often not properly joined with bodies and the long necks and rigidity of attitudes recall the shapes of the clay idols of the period.
The art of the Minoan seal cutters, like other aspects of the culture, was falling gradually into decay.
Scribes
It is possible to see the development of Minoan civilization encapsulated in the developments of the urban centres, and the administrative control of the whole territory's economy was central tot hat urban development.
Unfortunately, the exact location of the territorial boundaries is not known, but it is possible to make statistically based estimates of their approximate positions (Figure 23).
It is reasonable to assume that the territory governed from Knossos, for instance, extended eastwards for roughly half the distance between Knossos and Mallia and southwards for roughly half the distance between Knossos and Phaistos.
Problems arise when we come to consider the smaller centres, such as Arkhanes; could they have had territories which were on the same footing as those of the major temple-centres?
On the whole, it seems unlikely that Knossos' territory extended only half-way to Arkhanes, only 8 kilometres to the south of Knossos.
Clearly, devising a political map of Minoan Crete is fraught with problems.
The administration of each territory was finely tuned and certain aspects of it were recorded on clay tablets at the urban centres.
The scribes were an  important group of people: there were at least seventy of them working at Knossos in 1380 BC, to judge from the number of scribal hands identified in the clay tablets.
In the heyday of the temples, the scribes used at least two linear scripts, and the evolution and interpretation of those scripts are matters of continuing controversy among scholars.
The potters of the Early Minoan period were already occasionally putting sign-like marks on certain clay vessels.
From their shapes, these marks seem to have been a form of writing.
By about 2100 BC, a new kind of script had appeared.
It consisted of sub-realistic images of, for instance, a fish, a leg, or a double-axe.
Combinations of these hieroglyphs were carved on sealstones.
Evans called it a pictographic' script, and its origin is still uncertain.
Some of the signs resemble symbols from a Mesopotamian script pre-dating cuneiform, which suggests that the script was imported from the east.
On the other hand, most of the signs are peculiar to Crete and that argues for a local origin.
The overlaps between the Cretan script and other scripts, such as the hieroglyphic scripts of Cyprus and the Hittite lands of Anatolia, may suggest an alternative possibility, that they all evolved from a common ancestor, a now-lost script perhaps originating in Syria.
Alternatively, it may yet emerge that the similarities simply represent marginal additions and that the Cretan script was essentially a native creation after all.
Curiously, seals with these signs were still being made at the end of the Middle Minoan, around 1600 BC, and were entombed in buildings destroyed in 1470 BC, well after the appearance and general adoption of both Linear A and Linear B scripts.
It may be that the old pictographic signs acquired a special magic power associated with the remote past.
Evans listed 135 hieroglyphic signs; although the total is actually rather greater than this, there are still not enough for the system to have been a purely ideographic one, with one sign for each idea.
Equally, there are too many for them to have been purely phonetic or syllabic.
Therefore, as Professor Alexiou has said (undated, p. 124), the system must be some sort of half-way house, with some of the signs qualifying the meanings of others.
Further difficulties arise because it is by no means clear what objects the signs are intended to represent, but even if it were, decipherment would still be a very long way off.
To judge from the pottery found with it, the famous Phaistos Disc dates to about 1700 BC.
It carries a double spiral statement composed of pictograms imprinted on the clay with 45 possibly wooden but more likely metal stamps.
The signs at first sight seem to be completely different from those of other scripts found in Minoan Crete, and they are often for this reason said to be an import: the disc itself is sometimes explained away as a foreign curiosity.
Yet there are some related inscriptions which seem to be Minoan in origin.
There are inscriptions which are presented in spiral form, such as that on a gold ring from Mavro Spilio.
There are comparable signs too, cut into an  offering table at Mallia and engraved on a bronze axe left as a votive offering in the sacred cave of Arkalochori.
It may be that the script on the Phaistos Disc represents a chance survival of a script developed for some special, possibly religious purpose.
Probably there were other scripts too, scripts of which no trace has survived.
We have to remember that in many cases it was, ironically, only accidental hardening by destructive fires that preserved caches of clay tablets as samples of the Minoan scripts.
Some groups of signs on the Phaistos Disc are repeated; these may be refrains, suggesting a song or hymn, or they may simply be recurring words.
It may represent a list of deities, a list of soldiers, or a discussion by a Hittite king of the building of the temple at Phaistos: all these suggestions have been put forward, though none of them has convinced even a quorum of scholars.
Colin McEvedy has even proposed (1989) that the Phaistos Disc is a modern fake, a more successful Aegean equivalent of the Piltdown hoax, but this seems unlikely in view of the recurrence of some of the symbols on other Minoan artefacts.
For the time being, the Phaistos Disc remains an unsolved mystery.
Between the eighteenth and fifteenth centuries BC, i.e. at the time when the Phaistos Disc was made, the Linear A script was in general use on Minoan Crete.
This was, in John Chadwick's (1976) opinion, another native Minoan script.
It was used for keeping accounts and also for dedicatory inscriptions.
Some of the contents of the Linear A inscriptions are accessible, because some of the signs were borrowed, together with their meanings, for inclusion in the later Linear B script.
Linear B is generally agreed to be an early form of Greek, but Linear A was a different language, which has so far evaded identification.
Tablets in Linear A have been found at Knossos, Mallia, Phaistos, Agia Triadha, Tylissos, Palaikastro, Arkhanes, Zakro, and what seems to be the site of the temple archive chamber at Khania.
The script consists of about 70   characters.
So far, too few inscriptions in Linear A have been recovered for translation to be possible.
Nevertheless, by applying phonetic values known to be valid for the Linear B script, a number of interpretations have been attempted.
Some say that Linear A is related to the Phoenician and Palestinian languages, and that the texts contain lists of people and quantities of produce; but it would be premature to assume this.
Most probably the Linear A inscriptions are in the pre-Hellenic language of the Minoans, which may well have been related to languages spoken in south-west Anatolia, such as Luvian or Hittite.
Short Linear A inscriptions are found on tables of offering and ritual vases, and the word A-sa-sa-ra, conjectured to be the name of a goddess, recurs in these ritual inscriptions at Palaikastro, Knossos, Arkhanes and Psychro (Alexiou, undated, pp. 127–9; Palmer 1961, pp.235–6).
Relatively few Linear A inscriptions have survived, but the situation with Linear B is very different.
At Knossos alone fragments of over 3000 Linear B tablets were recovered — nearly ten times the total number of Linear A inscriptions so far recorded.
Tablets with the Linear B script have been found at the mainland city sites of Pylos, Mycenae, Tiryns and Thebes, as well as at Knossos, Khania (Kydonia) and elsewhere on Crete.
Sinclair Hood (1971, p. 113) suggests that Linear B was developed at Knossos during the period following the ‘1450’ disaster.
Both the script and the language are the same at Cretan and mainland sites and there is general agreement that the language is an early kind of Greek.
Some scholars are uneasy about this interpretation because the sign-groups give only approximations of words and can therefore be made into several different words: the sign-group ‘po-lo’, for example, can be made to mean as many as eight different Greek words.
Another problem arises from the form of the inscriptions; most are lists of short, terse statements — objects, numbers and dedicatees — and many of the words are proper names, so it is possible to make false interpretations without the errors becoming apparent subsequently, as they would in a longer and more connected text.
It nevertheless seems likely, since increasing numbers of tablets make sense when interpreted as a form of Greek, that Michael Ventris was right.
It is to be hoped that a longer, sequential text will eventually be discovered: a piece of poetry or prose would test the hypothesis conclusively.
There are tantalizing hints in the archaeological record that the Minoans may have written longer, non-bureaucratic texts on parchment.
It is known that they used ink — there are clay cups with ink inscriptions inside them — and it would have been natural to use that ink for cursive writing on a material such as parchment or papyrus.
In addition, some of the clay sealings have traces of vegetable matter adhering to them, implying that they were attached, possibly as signatures, to documents written on some perishable material.
There is also the supportive evidence of a later Greek tradition that skins had at one time been used as writing paper.
Unfortunately, as far as is  known, no written parchments have survived from the Minoan civilization, and it may be that the finest Minoan thoughts were never committed to writing.
It is believed that the whole of Homer may have been passed on by oral tradition for several generations before being written down in the ninth century BC.
If this seems unlikely, it is recorded that, in January and February 1887, a Croatian minstrel recited from memory a series of lays amounting to twice the combined length of the Iliad and the Odyssey (Thomson 1949, p. 529).
Potters
Minoan potters produced an astonishing variety of wares.
One of the earliest Minoan pottery styles, dating to 2700 BC, was a type called Pirgos ware, named after a site on the coast to the north-east of Knossos.
Typically, this ware had a pattern burnish on a red, grey or light brown surface, and it was applied to goblets with tall narrow stems or conical pedestal bases.
Pirgos ware bears a closer relationship with late neolithic wares made on the Greek mainland and in the Cyclades than with any Cretan forerunners, and the style may have been imported (Figure 32A).
Soon to follow were pots with simple linear designs in black, brown, or red on a pale yellowish background.
These Early Minoan II vessels were made around 2500 BC and are known as Agios Onoufrios ware after a site near Phaistos.
At about the same time, two new styles appeared.
One was a range of curious vases shaped like birds and animals, amongst which we might   include the Myrtos Goddess vase.
The other was Vasiliki ware; this marked the end of the pattern burnish technique and the beginning of a new finish, a reddish-brown wash deliberately applied unevenly in order to simulate the mottled texture of the stone vases that were at that time so fashionable in eastern Crete (Figure 32C).
The Vasiliki ware included some peculiar long-spouted ‘teapots’ and jugs: the spouts have distinctive upturned sides and a curious joint or articulation before they join the main body of the vessel.
As the development of the towns continued apace in the phase immediately before the building of the first great temples, there were crucial developments in the potters' craft.
They started to use the fast wheel, which enabled them to create new and far more refined shapes with thinner walls.
They also began firing in built kilns rather than in open fires, which ensured a more even and consistent firing, and more predictable results (Alexiou, undated).
Many of the shapes that had been developed in the Early Minoan nevertheless continued in use, especially the one-handled cup and the jar with a short spout on its shoulder, bridged by the rim.
The growth of the towns meant that the urban potteries had to produce large quantities of plain ware for ordinary everyday use, such as cooking pots, storage jars of all sizes and lamps.
The decorated ware was given a black lustrous surface with spiral patterns in white, purple, orange and red: some of the patterns were elaborate, clever and confidently executed, showing a sophisticated understanding of the difficulties of designing for a curved surface.
This polychrome type of design seems to have been invented at Knossos, where it was fashionable for some time before it was adopted generally in the east of Crete.
Perhaps the spiral designs originated in the ‘Bandkeramik’ of the Danube basin and arrived in Crete by way of the Cyclades, where stone pyxides were made with spiral ornaments; but Stylianos Alexiou thinks it more likely that the spiral came from the Middle East, where it was used in gold wire jewellery from an early date.
It was during the Middle Minoan II period, when the first large temples were raised, that the greatest developments in pottery took place.
The gathering and concentration of craft workers into the temples seems to have stimulated technical advances of many kinds.
The Kamares ware consisted of polychrome-decorated thin-walled vessels.
The fine cups with their egg-shell thin fabric imitated metal originals.
Beautifully made and beautifully decorated, Kamares vessels are of a quality and refinement never again to be achieved in the Aegean world.
But it was a relatively short-lived style: by Middle Minoan III, beginning in 1700 BC, the potters had stopped making it.
Since this was also a period of great affluence, it can only be assumed that the wealthy customers who commissioned the Kamares cups — aristocrats and priestesses among them — could now afford cups of precious metal instead.
There was also, around 1600 BC, a striking new development in pottery style, with marine reliefs added to some vases at Knossos and Phaistos, reliefs depicting shells, crabs, seaweed, rocks and dolphins.
By 1500 BC  another decorative style, the tortoise-shell ripple, had appeared.
The potters decorated cups with closely set vertical stripes, painting them on a wet slip, deliberately causing the edges to blur.
They may have intended, as with the earlier Kamares pottery, to imitate metal originals: in this case the shimmering surfaces of metal flutes.
The temples fell and were rebuilt after 1470 BC.
The potters of the new temples produced yet more new styles.
Now designs were recognizably drawn from nature, but stylized in such a way that they formed bold patterns.
There were distinctive Floral and Marine styles and some of the vessels decorated in this way were very fine indeed (Figure 33).
Even so, most of the pottery made in Crete at this time, including Knossos itself, was rather carelessly decorated.
A jug from Palaikastro, for example, is bold and effective, but casually executed.
Peter Warren (1975, p. 42) has suggested that the Marine Style vases were all made at Knossos, in a single workshop.
Some of the earliest examples of Floral Style vessels also came from Knossos; they are gracefully shaped vases decorated with stylized but recognizable white lilies and recalling the famous Lily Fresco from Amnisos.
Perhaps the finest and technically most assured essay in the Floral Style, though, is the ewer found at Phaistos, which is completely covered with grey-green sprays of olive leaves.
Vases in the Marine Style, including rhytons, bridge-spouted jugs and three-handled amphoras, are decorated with triton shells, argonauts, octopuses, starfish, rocks and seaweed — all of them treated in a free and fluid way.
The most perfect example of the Marine Style is the pot from Gournia with an octopus sprawling all over its surface.
In the Late Temple period, when Knossos dominated most of Crete, the temple potters worked in a different spirit, producing more formal, symmetrical and grandiose work.
The so-called ‘Palace Style’ amphoras were at first made and used only at Knossos itself, which strongly suggests that they were made for the use of the ruling elite.
Sinclair Hood (1971, p. 45; 1978, p. 41) sees at this time many signs of mainland influence; new forms were introduced to Crete from the Greek mainland, including stemmed goblets decorated in the Ephyrean style.
In this late period, some of the traditional motifs used in Minoan pottery decoration became stiff, straight and symmetrical; the papyrus and even the octopus were organized into symmetrical shapes.
Subject matter draws widely on marine motifs, as well as vegetation, helmets (Figure 7B), shields, double-axes and, for the first time, birds.
The earlier vitality and sense of powerful movement disappeared from Minoan pottery.
It was replaced instead by a restrained, disciplined formality that seems foreign to the Minoan spirit, but it was nevertheless hieratic, powerful and rich, and it continued into the post-Temple period (Late Minoan IIIA, dating to 1400–1300 BC).
At every stage in the development of the Minoan culture, the potters — and especially those working in the temple-precincts — were producing work to please their patrons.
The seemingly kaleidoscopic changes of fashion in pottery shapes and decorative styles must reflect significant changes in their patrons' tastes and preoccupations.
It is for this reason that the work of the potters is of such interest, in giving us an insight into shifts in taste and, possibly, shifts in the power base too.
Yet all the time we have to remember the inherent, native dynamism of Minoan culture; all the way through there are changes, experiments, alternations between abstraction and naturalism; all the way through, Minoan art is freely ranging, ever searching for new forms of expression.
In the fourteenth century BC, the decorative motifs became more schematic.
The octopus tentacles, sometimes reduced to six or four in number, were made disproportionately long: the papyrus flowers became degenerate.
For the first time birds became a common motif.
In the thirteenth century, the technical quality of the fabric was uniformly good, a well-fired reddish-brown colour, but the gradual impoverishment of the designs continued: the octopus was simplified to a wavy line encircling a vase.
This was the time when the Mycenean influence over the Aegean world was at its peak.
Finally, in the twelfth century BC, the Granary Style appeared — a very meagre type of decoration in horizontal bands — and the Close Style, in which the designs were hemmed in by dense fringes, bands, and multiple borders; the purely decorative aspect makes it difficult to identify the motifs.
The octopus on a pot from the Diktilian Cave has twelve tentacles and is scarcely recognizable.
The style of the clay figurines of goddesses also changed, and there is a startling contrast between the tense and dramatic naturalism of the Snake   Goddess figurine from the Temple Repositories at Knossos and the rigid and simplified idol from the Late Dove Goddess Sanctuary in the East Wing of the Labyrinth.
The late idol's skirt was reduced to a simple cylinder, crudely painted with a black on white slip, and the raised hands exaggerated in size to emphasize the hieratic gesture.
In the following phase, as in the very late idols from Karfi (Figure 34), the necks became grotesquely long, the faces harsh and ugly, with curious detachable feet peeping out through an opening in the cylindrical skirt; these figurines show, more than any other single artefact, the signs of decadence.
In the mountain-top refuge of Karfi, a few straggling survivors tried to keep the Minoan way of life going, but it had fallen into lifeless stereotypes.
It had run its course.
Style and the urban craft worker
At the civilization's zenith, the Minoan towns gathered together craft workers with widely varying skills and enabled them to learn from one another.
There are all kinds of art objects which display collaboration between different sorts of craftsmen.
The ivory inlays that decorated wooden furnishings, for example, show that the ivory carvers were working in close collaboration with the joiners.
Physical closeness in the temple workshops may have stimulated friendly rivalry to produce ever-finer works and thus stimulated technical and artistic development.
Enough has survived for us to be able to trace the developing skills and aspirations of some groups of craft workers, but we can be sure that there were many crafts and other activities in the city of Knossos which have left no archaeological trace.
Very little, for instance, has survived of the carpenter's  or joiner's craft.
The stone chair in the Throne Sanctuary at Knossos seems to imitate a wooden precursor; the frescoes show folding wooden stools with cushions, such as were used in ancient Egypt; there is indirect evidence, in inlay work and bronze hinges, of storage chests, cabinets and chairs; presumably there were also low wooden beds of the same type inferred from a cast discovered at Akrotiri on Thera.
The larnaxes or burial chests were apparently imitations in clay of wooden chests.
A wooden lid carved with a winged griffin and a deer in a rocky landscape was found at Saqqara in Egypt; Sinclair Hood (1978, pp. 115–16) suggests that it may be the work of a Minoan wood carver working in 1450–1400 BC, perhaps as a captive in Mycenae: if so, it is a rare survival of Minoan wood carving.
The craft workers reached levels of technical skill and artistry so high that some of their works rank among the finest ever produced in Europe.
The purely aesthetic value of their work is easy to appreciate.
It is instantly appealing because of the Minoans' delight in grace, movement and natural forms — in short, their delight in life.
Sometimes it is difficult to penetrate beyond aesthetic appreciation.
The purpose of some of the objects crafted is difficult to understand because many of the finest had a religious significance.
Sealstones and frescoes often depict cult scenes; stone vessels were often intended for cult use; the finest faience figurines were idols; the metal and clay figurines and miniature double-axes were intended as offerings to deities; the recurring marine motif on the pottery and in frescoes may have had a cult association with the worship of Poseidon.
But the purely secular products of the workshops were often made with comparable skill and sensitivity.
During most of the long development of the civilization, there was an overt delight in the natural world and its forms.
Usually there was a vitality apparently drawn from nature itself.
Even this, though, can be seen as a facet of the Minoans' religious orientation.
Their world-view was essentially animatistic: every living thing and every outwardly inanimate thing too was a part of the living cosmos, and therefore imbued with something of the divine spirit.
The craft workers loved complicated and attractive patterns and looked constantly for new ways of elaborating old motifs, like the papyrus, and for new sources of artistic inspiration.
Often their work appears to depict the fleeting moment.
The dog-handled pot-lids from Mochlos, for example, seem to show a particular dog relaxing on a particular afternoon in the hot bronze age sunshine; the crowds in the miniature frescoes seem alive with the excitement of the spectacle they are witnessing, and seem to have been caught mid-shout; the hoopoes in the Pilgrim Hostel fresco seem at first glance to have fallen from the pages of some bronze age edition of Audubon.
But this immediacy is deceptive.
When we look closely at the plants and animals depicted on frescoes and vases, many of them are not really very lifelike.
Often the species is elusive.
The monkeys are blue and all the facial profiles in the fresco crowds are identical; the human beings depicted were, with a few very noteworthy exceptions, not shown as individuals.
In this sense, much of the artwork is as abstract, generalized and impersonal as that of the ancient Egyptians.
What gives it the illusion of immediacy and modernity is the sense of movement and vitality, and the spontaneity of the individual craft workers.
They were, one senses, hot-blooded creators, these citizens of the Minoan towns.
THE URBAN SYSTEM
Precisely how the urban system worked is still open to speculation.
The fragmentary archives preserved in the temples at the time of their destruction imply minutely centralized control and a high degree of order.
The traditional interpretation of the large buildings at the major urban centres as palaces argues for a simple pyramid society, with all the produce and services coming into the king's administrators' hands for redistribution.
The interpretation of the large buildings as temples makes the system more complex.
If large volumes of raw materials and possibly manufactured and semi-finished goods were routed through the temples, what role does that leave the secular authority?
In fact, once the evidence that Minos lived and ruled in the Labyrinth at Knossos has been seen as hopelessly insubstantial, it begins to look as if there might have been no king at all.
Whilst that remains a possibility, it would be an extreme position to adopt, and it is still possible to visualize a full role for a dynasty of Minoan kings.
The temple was at the centre of the city of Knossos, geographically and economically, of that there seems little doubt.
Agricultural produce flowed into it from the surrounding rural territory, some from estates which seem to have been owned by the temple, the rest in the form of tribute or offerings from the owners of private estates.
The central administration of the temple, presumably the priesthood, redistributed the produce.
In some cases the produce was earmarked for a particular deity or shrine, and therefore, by implication, the priests and servants of a particular sanctuary.
In others, the dedication was more general.
‘To the Daidalaion’(Knossos tablet Fp 1) would have allowed the administrators at Knossos to use the offering in any way that would benefit the Labyrinth.
Also flowing into the temple were imported raw materials such as silver, tin, copper, ivory, gold, lapis lazuli, ostrich eggs and plumes, exotic stones, and so on.
Within the temple, and clustered round it, were craft workshops where the locally gathered and imported raw materials were made into manufactured goods.
Some of these were to be offered as votives in the temple's sanctuaries: others entered a trading network which might take them to the farthest ends of the island or overseas.
Exports included cloth, olive oil, pottery and metalwork of various kinds.
There was no money as such, so some of the produce was redistributed in the form of rations or wages.
Within the temple, it is likely that some sort of  allocation was made to the priests, priestesses, scribes, servants and craft workers.
Whether payments were made out of the temple's revenues to sustain the king's household is not known.
It is possible.
It is also possible that the king held his own country estates and was, to that extent, self-supporting.
The precise nature of the temple's relationship with the town is also a matter for speculation.
For instance, it may be that some craft workers, particularly those working very close to the temple, were operating under temple jurisdiction and supervision, whilst others were free to work independently.
Certainly the temple depended on the town for its worshippers, for manpower in its many building and refurbishing projects, and for transport and trade.
The king, living in a residence apart from the temple, where — significantly — he is rarely, if ever, mentioned in the archives, probably had charge of the secular administration of the town and the surrounding territory as well as control over relations with other states on Crete and overseas.
He also had a role to play in public ceremonial and it is likely that a carefully constructed ceremonial relationship existed between king and temple to ensure mutual support in the eyes of the people.
As a secular leader, the king may have had charge of the army, although this may have been only a ceremonial role, since the tablets seem to tell us that there were generals.
Much depends on our interpretation of the word ‘Lawagetas’, which was discussed in Chapter 2, pp. 21–9, ‘Social structure’.
The picture that emerges, at least as a possibility, is of something close to the idea of a constitutional monarch, a king whose power was substantially restricted by the overwhelming spiritual, political and economic power of the priesthood.
How much political and economic activity took place outside the control of the priesthood or the king is unclear.
As Alexiou says, the concentration of the economy in ‘royal’ hands — however interpreted — leaves little margin for private enterprise.
Nevertheless, the excavations at Mallia may provide evidence that Minoan society had other dimensions.
To the north of the temple's West Court, an open square in the town has been interpreted as an early example of an agora, a place where citizens might Father for public meetings.
A large building nearby, also to the north-west of the temple, has been interpreted as an assembly room and banquet hall for the leaders and representatives of the people, comparable to the prytaneum of the later Greek cities.
The implication from Mallia is that free enterprise may have played some part in the Minoan economy, alongside the clearly dominant role of the temple.
Systems comparable to this operated in the east, in Ugarit and the land of the Hatti, where ‘guilds’ of artisans were able to pursue their various callings in the town bazaars, and some development along these lines may have been possible in Minoan Crete.
It may well be that future excavations at Mallia and Knossos will add substantially to the complex picture that is emerging.
Life in the harbour towns and overseas
THE PORTS OF BRONZE AGE CRETE
From the very beginning, the Minoans were in contact with people of other cultures, and the only way that contact could happen was by sea.
Even in the neolithic period, a skein of east-west trade routes was established across the Aegean.
Andel and Runnels (1988) have identified three early trade routes: a northern route from Anatolia to Attica by way of Samos, Ikaria, Mikonos, Tinos and Kea, a central route running from Anatolia by way of the Cyclades to Argolis, and a southern route which went by way of Crete.
This southern route followed the arc-shaped line of islands which forms the outer limit of the Aegean world, an island-hopping route connecting Anatolia, Rhodes, Karpathos, Kasos, Andikithera and Lakonia, taking in the neolithic settlements of the eastern and northern coasts of Crete on the way.
It was natural that these coastal settlements would later become important trading centres in their own right, especially when Cretan influence stretched out across the whole Aegean world and beyond.
It was also natural, given that Crete was on the southern edge of that world, that most, though not all, of the ports were on the north coast.
In the west there was Kydonia, a port and temple-centre in its own right.
Further to the east, there was a Minoan settlement at Rethymnon which may have been a port.
Not far  from Heraklion, at Agia Pelagia, the remains of a Minoan settlement were discovered in the 1970s on the edge of a low cliff on the west side of the bay.
In the hills close by is the site of the later Greek city of Kyteon.
It seems likely, therefore, that the newly discovered Minoan harbour town at Agia Pelagia was the ‘Kytaiton’ mentioned in the archive tablets at Knossos.
To the east were Katsamba and Amnisos, the two harbour towns serving Knossos.
Katsamba harbour coincides with the eastern part of Heraklion harbour, and the ancient site is obliterated by modern port development and the unattractive suburb of Poros.
Amnisos (Plate 5) appears to have had two harbours separated by a rocky promontory which was probably the heart of the town.
The western harbour, now silted up, was evidently a substantial bay in Minoan times.
The foundations of Minoan houses are still visible on the beach and under the water at Amnisos, showing that this section of coast has subsided since Minoan times.
The ‘House of the Lilies’ is the most complete Minoan building to have survived there: its footings are well preserved on the eastern flank of the rocky promontory (Plate 14).
On the western side, the impressive remains of the much later temple of Zeus Thanatos stand on foundation courses of large blocks of stone which look like Minoan masonry: certainly many of them have the distinctive Minoan ‘mason's marks’, the branch, the star and the trident, which supports this view.
Twelve kilometres to the north is the embayed island of Dia, which had its own port; with a southerly aspect, it may have been used in emergencies when persistent north winds would have prevented ships intending to dock at Amnisos, Katsamba, or Agii Theodhori from leaving port.
Under these circumstances, it would have been possible for a ship sailing south from Thera to dock at Dia, unload and set sail again for destinations to the east or west.
Ships docking at Amnisos could well have found themselves trapped there by a north wind, just as Odysseus claimed he was.
Further east along the coast was the port of Agii Theodhori, at the western end of Vathianos Kambos, about I kilometre to the west of the better-known ‘villa’ of Niru Khani.
There is a tombolo at Agii Theodhori where the ruins of a harbour settlement can be seen on the beach and extending out under the water (Plate 15).
On a small rocky islet is ‘Kolymba’, a rectangular cavity 40 metres long by 12 metres wide, carefully sawn out of the limestone to a depth of almost 2 metres (Plate 16).
Kolymba is believed to be a Minoan dock basin, and it may be that Minoan ships were built and repaired here.
The Agii Theodhori shipyard and port may have served Knossos or Mallia, or it may have had its own hinterland on the boundary of the two major territories.
The size of the Agii Theodhori harbour town is unknown, but it seems unlikely to have extended all the way to the temple at Niru Khani.
Modern excavations are revealing that Mallia was a substantial city, extending all the way to the shore (Figure 24).
Remains of its quays have survived, as at Agii Theodhori and Mochlos (Faure 1973).
Further east still, and clustered round the Gulf of Mirabello, were the ports of Priniatiko Pyrgos, Pseira and Mochlos.
Mochlos had the advantage of possessing two harbours, one facing east, one west: if strong winds put one harbour out of commission, the other could be used instead.
On the east coast itself were the ports of Palaikastro and Zakro, which were well situated for trade with Anatolia, Cyprus, the Levant and Egypt.
The discovery of copper ingots from Cyprus and the tusks of Syrian elephants at Zakro confirms the reality of these eastern trading links.
The south coast of Crete can boast only three proven ports: Koufonisis, on a small island off the south-east corner of Crete, and Kommos and Agia Triadha, which both served the prosperous Plain of Mesara.
FISHING
Fishing was one of the major activities for Minoans living on the coast, but there is as yet no evidence for the way in which they organized their fishing.
The rich variety of marine motifs on the frescoes and in pottery design implies that the Minoans felt a deep familiarity and empathy with marine life.
A gold ornament found in the Knossos Labyrinth seems to represent the Cretan skaros or parrot wrasse, which is now quite rare in Cretan waters but still highly regarded as a dish (Figure 36c).
There are gemstones which show the skaros too.
One, a cornelian intaglio, shows the fish on its own among seaweed.
Another, a chalcedony intaglio, shows a muscular fisherman proudly holding a skaros in one hand and an octopus in the other (Figure 35).
Sealstones and a Minoan fresco at Phylakopi show flying fish, and the use of the octopus as a decorative pottery motif is well known.
The remains of fish are rare, as we would expect, although Evans' excavators found fish vertebrae in a cooking pot at Knossos.
Some well-made metal fish-hooks were found at Gournia (Figure 36B), together with a lead sinker for a fishing line and some stones which could have been used for weighing nets.
These finds suggest at least two methods of fishing, with line    and net, and there may have been others.
A peculiar bronze double-headed spear found at Agios Onoufrios near Phaistos has been interpreted as a fish spear.
This may have been used in conjunction with a net, or on its own from an open boat.
Tuna are sometimes landed when they try to swim through holes in fishing nets and get their teeth caught in the mesh; once trapped in this way, they can be dragged on to the beach with the net.
Ann Guest-papamanoli (1983) suggests that the design on a Kamares vase at Phaistos shows this fishing method.
Tuna were once caught in large numbers in spring and autumn in the Mediterranean and it may be that the Minoans organized large-scale tuna fishing in a similar way.
The octopus was a popular and recurring artistic motif, which suggests that it too was fished; the chalcedony intaglio mentioned above confirms that this was so.
The octopus may have been speared by torchlight at night, just as it is today.
Sponge-fishing may also have gone on from the ports, though there is no direct evidence of it.
Certainly the sponges would have been useful; they could have been used as a filling for cushions and mattresses, and as a protective padding inside boots and helmets.
Evans thought the Minoans used sponges for painting, and felt he could detect that the plastered walls of the early temple at Knossos were decorated with sponges dipped in paint.
SHIPS
The vessels that sailed in and out of the Minoan harbours, whether bay-hopping round the Cretan coast or bound for far-distant ports, were generally rather small.
Usually, they had a single mast stepped amidships and were rigged with a single square sail.
Often they were equipped with fixed oars as well.
No recognizable remains of Minoan ships have yet been identified on the sea-bed, but they are frequently represented on seals.
Plate 1 Oil or wine press at Vathypetro
Plate 2 The Minoan village of Tylissos
Plate 3 The Mount Juktas peak sanctuary
Plate 4 The Skotino cave sanctuary
Plate 5 The Square of the Altars at Amnisos
Plate 6 The entrance to the Diktaian Cave
Plate 7 Tylissos, House A, showing slots for tie-beams
Plate 8 Minoan mudbrick wall at Mallia
Plate 9 A stone drain at Knossos
Plate 10 Mallia.
The temple ruins in the foreground, peak sanctuary in the middle distance, and the mountains of Lasithi on the skyline
Plate 11 Mallia.
Part of the east front of the West Wing, with stairs leading into area VI (right) and up to the first floor (left)
Plate 12 The Royal Road at Knossos, terminating in the Theatral Area (left) and the North Entrance and North-West Portico of the Labyrinth (right)
Plate 13 Tylissos.
The Minoan village street passing along the west side of House C
Plate 14 The Villa of the Lilies at Amnisos
Plate 15 Minoan buildings on the beach at Agii Theodhori
Plate 16 Kolymba, the Minoan dock at Agii Theodhori
Plate 17 The Diktaian cave
Plate 18 Pillar Crypt at the Balustrade Sanctuary (Evans' Royal Villa)
Plate 19 Phourni.
The Minoan cemetery in the foreground: the town of Arkhanes in the background
20 Plate The Tomb of the Lady of Arkhanes
The earlier ships had high stems to breast the waves and low sterns: the keel projected from the stern, apparently to make the ship run straighter, although this feature was dispensed with later.
There were other variations too: some ships had low prows and high sterns, whilst others were high at both ends.
The large steersman's oar, which must always have been located at the stern, is the only clear indication of the vessel's orientation.
Many of the Minoan sailing ships were probably small enough to drag out of the water on to a beach, but some seem to have been very large.
One ship is shown with a row of fifteen oars along one side.
A standard vessel in the later Greek period was the peniekonier , the fifty-oar ship, thought by Bury (1951) to have come into use in the eighth century BC, and it may be that the seal showing a vessel with thirty oars was intended to represent the Minoan forerunner of this Greek type of warship.
Curiously, the Phaeacians, the legendary people in the Odyssey who sound like the Minoans in so many ways, were described as the kings of sea-craft; they were also credited with sailing galleys with fifty oars, in other words, larger ships than Bury credits the Homeric Greeks with possessing.
The Greek warships were designed for speed, and built longer and narrower than cargo vessels.
A Pylian warship of the twelfth century BC is shown on a vase painting to have high ‘castles’ at each end connected by a raised gangway along the centre.
Above its ram are two bowsprits and a large flag or model in the form of a fish.
This sort of vessel could well have existed four centuries earlier in the Aegean.
From the admittedly fairly   simplified drawings on the Cretan seals, it looks as if the Minoans were in fact building this type of vessel by about 1600 BC.
That being so, it is also likely that they were building it for the same military purpose.
Thucydides credited the Minoan kings with organizing the first naval fleet, and it is possible that the Minoans did indeed have a squadron of specially designed and equipped warships that were ahead of their time.
The sleek warships contrasted with the stubbier lines of the freighters, but there were other vessels as well.
A Minoan fresco from Akrotiri on Thera shows a different sort of ship again, with a lightly-built superstructure amidships covered by an awning and offering some shelter from showers and the beating sun to varying numbers of seated passengers.
There was a special, elaborately canopied seat high on the stern, which we may suppose was intended for the ship's captain, and a row of twenty oarsmen on each side of the ship.
These rich passenger vessels, if that is what they are, have a high prow and a relatively low stern; a carved representation of a leopard or lioness stretches and peers out over the stern.
The Theran ships vary in size: the smaller ones are shown with no mast and only five oarsmen on each side, the larger ones with twenty or more oarsmen.
Some were elaborately decorated, with painted designs on their hulls, garlanded canopies, ‘figure-heads’ in the form of leopards or lionesses and ensigns in the form of large flowers.
There is no reason to suppose that these beautifully caparisoned vessels were in use only round the coast of Thera; they were probably not intended for long voyages on the open sea, but we can imagine that very similar passenger ships plied round the coasts of Crete, gliding elegantly from bay to bay.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF A MINOAN TRADING EMPIRE
In Greece, the tradition was well established by the fifth century BC that Minos, king of Crete, had ruled the Aegean Sea and its islands.
Archaeology seems to support the idea of widespread Minoan trading contacts and a significant number of thorough-going Minoan colonies.
The distribution of the place-name ‘Minoa’ in the Aegean and in the eastern and central Mediterranean also seems to imply Minoan colonies.
The name makes some sense as an enduring survival of bronze age Cretan influence, but we must not lose sight of the fact that it was Evans who gave the Minoan civilization its name and not the Minoans: they almost certainly called  themselves something completely different.
If, however, the bronze age Cretan king and trader-in-chief was known by the title ‘minos’, it is possible that the king's colonies were named ‘Minoa’ after him.
There were important trading links between Crete and its neighbours in the neolithic and early bronze age.
During the First Temple Period, between 1900 and 1700 BC, the Minoans were exporting their distinctive pottery and stone vessels to Egypt and the Near East as well as to islands in the Aegean, but there was a massive expansion of trade after the temples were rebuilt.
The main thrust of colonial development seems to have followed in the wake of this major rebuilding programme, in the period between 1650 and 1500 BC.
The colonial development manifested itself in three ways: the spread of Minoan artistic and cultural influences, the diffusion of exported Minoan products, and the establishment of Minoan settlements beyond the Cretan shores.
Naturally, there has been controversy concerning the status of these Minoan settlements, but they are identifiable by their coastal location, irregular street plan, Minoan style of architecture, Minoan burial customs, Minoan shapes worked in local pottery wares (and thus not imported from Crete), and Minoan religious ritual.
There is a short but significant list of Aegean settlements which fulfil the requirements.
Kastri on Kythera seems to have been one of the earliest, if not the first, Minoan colony, and it was set up well before 2000 BC.
There were Triandha on Rhodes, and Iasos and Miletus on the Anatolian coast; there was a tradition that the original colonists of Miletus came from Milatos, a Minoan settlement just east of Mallia.
Naxos and Karpathos are thought to have had Minoan colonies too, and a very strong Minoan influence is seen at Agia Eirene on Kea: perhaps it was an existing town that was taken over by Minoan traders and administrators.
It is probable that Phylakopi on the island of Melos was similarly adopted, and not actually founded, by Minoans.
These changes seem to have occurred about a hundred years after the Cretan temples were rebuilt; then, quite suddenly, in about 1600 BC,all the pottery at Phylakopi was Minoan in style.
One of the most remarkable colonies was the one closest to Knossos, Akrotiri on the island of Thera.
Spyridon Marinatos emphasized the Cycladic features of the settlement there, but many of the finds are more typically Minoan: the house plans are not dissimilar to those at Tylissos, with typically Minoan pier-and-door partitions, lustral areas, and Minoan pottery forms in local ware.
Akrotiri was built in about 1550 BC (Late Minoan IA) and is likely to have been a Minoan foundation.
It developed its own distinctively ‘Theran’ artistic spirit, which was a development from the Minoan, while remaining in close and continual contact with Crete.
The frescoes, for example, show many elements that are borrowed from Minoan Crete, but handled in a way that turns them into distinctively Theran compositions.
We can speculate from the handful of known Minoan colonies that there were probably several more, possibly on the mainland of Greece itself.
The status of Mycenae at this time was almost certainly politically independent of the Minoans, but culturally and artistically Mycenae was strongly influenced by them.
Possibly the idea of the tholos tomb was exported to Mycenae from Crete.
The Minoans were, in a very real sense, the Americans of the bronze age Aegean, exporting style and tone as much as products.
The Minoans exported lead figurines to Kambos, bronze figurines to Agia Eirene and Phylakopi, gold cups to Sparta, and swords to Mycenae.
Rich gold, silver and bronze vessels and decorative ostrich eggs with faience mountings — shades of Fabergé — were exported to Mycenae and Thera.
But above all the Minoans exported large quantities of decorative, painted, and distinctively shaped pottery — the finest pottery in the civilized world — all over the Aegean region.
The densest concentrations of Minoan produce were found in the Aegean islands, Argolis, Messenia and the Dodecanese.
It is thought that some of the grave goods found in the shaft graves at Mycenae were Minoan imports.
Significant levels of trading went on outside this inner area, and scattered finds of Minoan products have been made as far west as the Lipari Islands off the coast of Italy, as far north as Troy (stone lamps), and as far east as Egypt and Syria, where Minoan vases made of precious metal have been found.
Some raw materials and perishable commodities such as food and cloth were probably exported as well.
At Knossos, several different kinds of textile or garment were stored and doubtless some were exported; the tablets describe them variously as ‘with wedge pattern’, ‘with white fringes’, and ‘of better quality’(Driessen and Macdonald 1984).
Sinclair Hood (1971) suggests that woollen cloth and timber were sent to Egypt in exchange for linen or papyrus.
The Minoans were capable of producing a large surplus of olive oil which could have been exported; some of the oil filling the store-rooms of the Knossos Labyrinth at the time of the 1380 BC fire may have been awaiting export.
There were probably invisible exports too: exports of technical skill and artistry, exports of medicine and magic.
The Egyptians valued magic and we know that the Cretans of the classical period had acquired a legendary reputation as seers and astrologers (Castleden 1989, p. 127).
Counterbalancing the outflow of products and services was a large range of imports.
The Minoans seem to have been self-sufficient in terms of basic needs, which must have put them in a position of trading strength, but they relied on imports for supplies of exotic raw materials for the manufacture of luxury goods.
There was a port called Minoa on the south-west coast of Sicily which may have been a Crete-controlled trading station.
Quite what the Minoans wanted from the west is not known.
Their interest may have been in Sardinian copper or Etruscan tin; the Minoans needed tin to make bronze, and the sources of their raw materials are unknown.
The tin may have come  from Etruria, Bohemia, Spain, or even Britain.
Britain may also have been the trade-source of the small amount of amber found in Crete.
A gold-mounted disc of amber found at Knossos may have come from the Wessex culture of southern England.
But the Minoans traded far more with their neighbours on the Aegean islands and coastlands close at hand.
They imported via Kythera two fine ornamental stones, Spartan basalt and rosso antico , from Lakonia on the Greek mainland.
They had contact with the Argolid cities too, although it is not clear from the archaeological evidence what, if anything, they imported from them: possibly the relationship was mainly a political or diplomatic one, or possibly — following the later Greek legends — the imports were archaeologically invisible, taking the form of slaves or tribute-children.
The Minoans probably sent wine or olive oil to Mycenae; numbers of stirrup-jars made in or near Kydonia have been found at Mycenae and Tiryns, as well as Thebes, implying a regular export trade from Crete (Catling 1980).
There seem to have been relatively few trading links with Attica, which is surprising, although a scatter of finds at Thorikos suggests that the Minoans may have been interested in the silver ores there; if so, the island of Kea could have been used as a trading station for their transfer to Crete.
Naxos supplied Crete with emery, which was needed for drilling and polishing the stone bowls and vases.
Yiali in the Dodecanese supplied Crete with the white-speckled obsidian wanted for the fabric of the bowls; possibly the obsidian came by way of Triandha as a trading station.
From Anatolia, Minoan traders brought black obsidian, possibly tin and exotic sealstones: from Cyprus, probably copper.
From Syria, they brought back lapis lazuli originating ultimately in Afghanistan, as well as ivory and Babylonian sealstones.
From Egypt came veined white alabaster, amethyst, carnelian, and possibly the eggs and plumes of ostriches.
It was from Egypt, too, that the Minoans imported a limited range of manufactured goods; the fact that nearly all the imports of manufactured goods were Egyptian reflects the Minoans' admiration for Egyptian culture: possibly it was the only culture they regarded as the equal of their own.
Scarabs, beads, pendants, and ivories found their way to the Minoan temple sites.
An ivory furniture inlay showing a sphinx at Mallia is thought to have come from Egypt, as are two ivory figurines of boys found at Palaikastro.
Archaeological evidence from Egypt confirms that there were political or cultural links between Egypt, mainland Greece and Minoan Crete at the close of the Late Temple Period, 1470–1380 BC.
At the base of one of the statues in the funeral temple of Amenhotep III (died 1369 BC) at Thebes, there is an inscription which includes a list of nine place-names.
Four belong to the kingdom of Pylos: the important town of Pa-ki-ja-ne, and the districts of Na-pe-re-wa, Me-za-na, and Wa-e-ro.
One belongs to Kythera, which lies on the trading route from Pylos to Crete.
The remaining four were places in Crete: Knossos, Amnisos, Lyktos, and Dikte (Nixon 1968).
In the early days of Minoan studies, this widespread network of trading links was seen as evidence of a powerful Minoan navy, a wholesale conquest by sea and political subjugation of the tributary lands.
It is clear that this was not necessarily the case.
Certainly at the beginning of the New Temple Period, about 1700–1600 BC, there was a major economic and possibly demographic expansion on Crete which supplied the thrust outwards; Minoan colony settlements were set up in a band right across the southern Aegean from Kythera to Iasos.
Further off, the Minoans established or developed trading relationships with communities in Messenia, Lakonia, and Argolis on the Greek mainland, as well as Cyprus and Egypt: in these areas, there is no firm evidence that they founded colonies.
Then there was an outer fringe area, an area of occasional and perhaps very infrequent   trading contacts, including Syria and possibly Palestine in the east, Miletus, Didyma, Iasos, Knidos and Troy in Anatolia, Attica and Delphi on the Greek mainland and Sicily-Lipari in the west.
How much further west the Minoan merchantmen sailed remains a matter for speculation: possibly as far as southern Britain.
The development of this ‘trading empire’ should be seen as directly associated with the development of the Minoan civilization on Crete.
The Minoans had advanced technically and artistically far beyond any o& their neighbours.
It was natural that their products should be in great demand.
The trading empire was, in large measure, demanded by the Aegean world rather than imposed upon it.
Population growth on Crete may have played its part in giving an impetus to the foundation of the colonies.
Calculations of Mallia's food requirements (see Chapter 4) show a significantly large shortfall in wheat.
Possibly this shortfall was met by grain production on the Lasithi Plain, but if Lasithi was not tributary to Mallia, the city would have had to look overseas for grain, ‘buy’ it from neighbouring territories, or go hungry.
There are some indications that the population of Crete was rising significantly around 1550–1500 BC (Late Minoan IA), with new settlements appearing in previously unpopulated areas such as the Zou valley to the south of Sitia and the south coast between Arvi and Myrtos, where at least five new settlements were founded in Late Minoan I. Meanwhile, the old established centres had expanded greatly.
The recent survey of the Knossos area (Hood and Smyth 1981) shows that the occupation area there had, by Late Minoan I, increased over ten times, albeit over a 1,000-year period since the Early Minoan.
The push of rising population levels and increasing economic production capacity combined with the pull of widespread demand for products are enough to explain the rapid growth of the trading empire between 1700 and 1500 BC.
The only real mystery is the precise mechanism by which the inner band of Minoan colonies was established.
Were the Minoan colonists welcomed and supported by the native Kytherans when they founded Kastri?
Still more to the point, were they welcomed by the Melians when they took over the existing settlement at Phylakopi?
Or was the colonial thrust resented and opposed?
It may be that the foundation of the chain of trading posts had to be established by force, but it is probably only in this very limited sense that the Minoans imposed their will on the Aegean world outside Crete.
Sinclair Hood (1982) nevertheless gives us a  salutary reminder that the Minoans lived in a world where might was right, where Egyptian rulers boasted of their subjugation of foreigners, of the cities and territories they had sacked and laid waste, and where Hittite kings boasted of holding their lands ‘with a strong arm’, and of capturing the idols of their enemies.
The Hittite king Hattusili I, who ruled from about 1650 BC onwards, described his own march on northern Syria in these terms:
It was a ferociously aggressive world, and the Minoans lived successfully and competitively within it.
There is no reason to suppose that they were very different from their neighbours in their attitude to military aggression.
We nevertheless only need to postulate the forcible imposition of that inner band of Minoan trading settlements — not the whole trading empire.
We can, moreover, be fairly sure that these contacts with other communities had effects which went far beyond the Minoans' original intentions.
It seems that many of the communities trading with Minoan Crete caught something of the flavour of its culture, whether material or spiritual, and developed it in their own way.
Nicolas Platon (1968, p.51) suggests that it was contact with the Minoan civilization which led to the development of the Phoenician civilization in the Levant.
The Philistine culture too, developing further south on the coast of Palestine, may have roots in the Minoan trading empire; Bury (1951) mentions that an ancient name for Gaza was Minoa, which implies that it too was once a Minoan trading station.
Precisely how the Minoan merchants carried on their trade is uncertain.
Money did not exist in the Minoan scheme of things.
It has been assumed that goods and services were traded by exchange, although relative values would have been complicated and difficult to agree.
Sinclair Hood (1971, p.125) proposes that goods were paid for with an agreed weight of gold or silver.
That bronze scale pans and lead weights were found as grave goods indicates that they were perhaps regarded as in some way central to life.
John Chadwick (1976, p. 157) agrees that transactions would have been easier if prices were agreed in terms of a base-commodity — whether gold or silver or something else — but there seems to be no evidence of this in the archive tablets.
Some tablets used the word ‘o-no’, thought to be ‘wonos’(= price), with a commodity and then followed with an amount of some other commodity, such as olive oil or wool.
This implies, if not a transaction, at least an evaluation of some produce.
But there is no need to suppose that the ways of the Minoan traders were simple, straightforward, or even efficient.
The tablets reveal the Minoans as lovers of minutely recorded detail; their labyrinthine architecture reveals a love of complexity and puzzles.
It may be that the Minoans enjoyed the social and diplomatic aspects of long-drawn-out negotiations over the price of a cargo with Egyptian, Cypriot, or Trojan merchants.
That love of haggling is still there in the Mediterranean economy, and maybe it began with the Minoan traders.
THE RELIGIOUS LIFE
THE MINOAN BELIEF-SYSTEM
What ultimately gives a culture its character is its thought, and that — in a prehistoric context — is the most elusive characteristic of all.
Nevertheless, the Minoans left thousands of clues to guide us.
To begin with, a very large number of the objects recovered from archaeological sites had a ritual function, and many of the images carved on sealstones and painted on wall plaster and pottery show religious symbols, rituals, or mythic events.
It is becoming clear now, from such studies as those of Nanno Marinatos (1984) at Akrotiri on Thera and of Mark Cameron (1987) at Knossos, that even some of the apparently purely decorative schemes on Minoan walls are actually religious in intention.
What emerges from the archaeology is a culture steeped in religion.
When the largest and most ambitious building projects, the so-called ‘palaces’, are interpreted as temples, that preoccupation with religion is thrown into even higher relief.
The Minoan belief-system was extremely complex and we can, in the absence of detailed, first-hand, documentary evidence, only make inferences about it.
What is clear is that it evolved out of the neolithic Cretan religion and that the religion of the classical Greeks at least in part grew out of it.
Some of the names of pre-Hellenic deities are mentioned by Greek and Latin authors: Diktynna and Britomartis, for instance, were Minoan goddesses.
It seems to have been a religion that was in transition, which may explain some startling contradictions or apparent contradictions.
There are  some identifiable developed deities; there are some incongruously primitive daemons too, which may look back towards an earlier period of religious feeling; there are also some images of divinities which seem to be relatively poorly assimilated foreign imports.
We also have to recognize that the Minoans' view of their gods may have changed significantly during two millennia of worship and religious experience.
As Nilsson (1949) says, ‘gods also have their history and are subject to change’.
Some scholars have assumed that the Minoans worshipped a Great Goddess, the Mediterranean ‘Magna Mater’, and that they later divided her up into a series of more specialized divinities.
But this, as Nilsson says, would be the reverse of religious developments observed in other cultures, where various deities are combined or where one deity is given ever-stronger and more all-inclusive attributes and thus supersedes all the other deities.
John Pendlebury's (1939) view was that the Minoans always tended to combine their goddesses into a single deity.
Even so, the starting-point, so far as we can find one, was polytheistic.
The ‘Magna Mater’ goddess is named ‘Potnia’, ‘The Lady’, in the archive tablets, and she had shrines or sanctuaries in many places.
She was worshipped, in the later part of the Minoan period at least, on the mainland as well , so perhaps cult practices and deities were among the Minoans' exports.
At Knossos, there are dedications of offerings to ‘The Lady of the Labyrinth’: ‘Potnia’ occurs repeatedly as the main goddess's name; later on, in the classical period, the term was used as a respectful, honorific title in addressing women of rank, but it originated as the proper name of the principal Minoan goddess.
In her aspect as a domestic goddess, guardian of households and cities, Potnia survived, transformed, in Athena, Rhea and Hera.
In fact, there is even one occurrence at Knossos of the name Potnia in conjunction with the epithet ‘a-ta-na’.
The incomplete tablet V52 + 52b + 8285 has been reassembled from three fragments and gives a list of dedications, including offerings to the gods Poseidon and Paiawon, who was an early forerunner of Apollo.
The dedication to ‘a-ta-na po-ti-ni-ja’ on the same tablet unfortunately breaks off after this momentous invocation.
The meaning of the epithet ‘a-ta-na’ is not known, but it suggests that the Minoan goddess was already being addressed, among other things, as ‘Athena’.
John Chadwick (1976, p. 87) comments that the word ‘Athena’ has a form suggesting a pre-Greek place-name, so it may be that Athena originated as the Potnia worshipped at a place called Athens or something similar.
In classical times, Athena had become the warrior-queen of her city on the mainland.
A millennium earlier we can assume that her personality and role were less specifically defined.
The double-axe was probably potnia's symbol, and possibly the pillar and the snake were her symbols too.
The snake, living in crevices near the hearth, made a natural symbol for the earth-dwelling Earth-mother; the  ‘house-snake’ cult survived into modern times and the snake was sometimes known as the Master of the House or House Mother.
Tablet Gg 702 from the Knossos archive refers to an offering of honey dedicated to ‘da-pu-ri-to-jo po-ti-ni-ja’, meaning ‘Potnia of the Labyrinth’.
This tells us that Potnia had a sanctuary dedicated to her in some part of the Labyrinth at Knossos, since this temple — and only this one — was referred to in antiquity as the Labyrinth, at least as far as Crete was concerned.
We can be fairly sure that there were sanctuaries dedicated to Potnia in the other major temples as well, at Kydonia, Phaistos, Mallia and Zakro.
How far the other goddesses in the Minoan pantheon were separate independent deities is very hard to tell.
In the first instance, it is probably simpler, and in evolutionary terms truer, to deal with them as separate.
One goddess was concerned with fertility and procreation; the dove, proverbially the most amorous of birds, was her symbol.
She is often shown with doves perching on her; sometimes birds are shown perched on sacral horns or on a double-axe, as if to suggest the invisible presence of the goddess.
Another and possibly separate goddess was concerned with renewal and the central rites of the vegetation cycle.
Since the goddess herself was not permitted to die, the annual death and rebirth were acted out by a young male Year-spirit, a small and inferior deity who took the roles of son and consort, and represented the important principle of discontinuity in nature.
In the Minoan period he remained subordinate to his goddess, but at its end, as Zeus, he became much more important; his original Minoan name, Velchanos, seems to have endured into the classical period as one of the titles attributed to Zeus on Crete.
Zeus Velchanos was also known on Crete as ‘Kouros’, ‘The Boy’.
Velchanos was always subject to the goddess and always shown in attitudes of adoration.
The two ivory ‘Divine Boy’ figurines described by Evans as probably having come from the Labyrinth, may well be representations of Velchanos before and after puberty.
The older boy, leaner and more muscular, has shorter hair and a small skull-cap which may conceal a tonsure.
It is known that youths grew their hair long in preparation for a ritual offering of a lock of hair to the deity.
The older boy appears to have gone through this initiation ritual, but still stands erect with arms raised in a gesture of worship and submission.
Professor Stylianos Alexiou reminds us that there were other divine boys who survived from the religion of the pre-Hellenic period — Linos, Plutos, and Dionysos — so not all the young male deities we see depicted in Minoan works of art are necessarily Velchanos.
Jacquetta Hawkes (1968) suggests that perhaps there were once seashore shrines dedicated to a Sea Goddess.
If so, they have been washed away by the sea.
Nilsson (1949), thinking along the same lines, proposes that there was a Goddess of Navigation.
A gold ring from the port of Mochlos shows a goddess sailing on a boat with a shrine apparently built on to the afterdeck   conveying a portable shrine from one coastal site to another.
The lost ‘Ring of Minos’ similarly showed a priestess steering a shrine-laden boat across a bay (Figure 39).
On the rocky shore in the background, no less than three separate shrines or temples were shown, one with a presiding goddess indicating the sacral horns on her altar, and two with sacred trees growing out of them.
The genuineness of the Ring of Minos has been questioned by Nilsson, but now that it is lost, allegedly buried somewhere in the garden of Nicolaos Pollakis, the priest of Fortetsa, who for a time shortly after its discovery was its owner, the question will probably never be resolved (Warren 1982).
The ritual imagery of the Ring of Minos is nevertheless consistent with what we know of Minoan religious practices and it does offer some additional support for the idea of a sea-shore cult involving both fixed shrines built on the land and portable shrines ferried coastwise by priestesses.
Perhaps deities were transported in ships to describe a magic circle of divine protection round the whole island.
The idea of a sea-journeying goddess may be the origin of the earliest known version of the legend of Ariadne, according to which she was abducted and taken to the offshore island of Dia, where she died.
Willetts (1965, p. 136) believes that leaping into the sea was a feature of some Minoan initiation rituals.
Some mythic elements seem to be transformations of this cult practice, for example the episode where the young goddess Britomartis leaps into the sea to escape the clutches of Minos, or the  contest at Aptera between Muses and Sirens which ended in the defeat of the Sirens, who then threw themselves into the sea.
Willetts detects in these later stories a reminiscence of a Minoan initiation ordeal.
The Mistress of Wild Animals or Queen of Wild Beasts was a chaste and free hunting-goddess, a forerunner of the Artemis and Diana of the classical period.
Her province was terrestrial, the mountains and hillsides where wild animals needed her protection for their nurture.
It may be that this goddess was worshipped at the peak sanctuaries, where it is known that pyres were lit; the later Artemis cult also involved mountain-top bonfires.
This goddess survived little changed into the classical pantheon.
Even her Minoan name, Britomartis, or ‘Sweet Virgin', seems to have survived in a slightly spoonerized form in the later Greek name, Artemis.
Willetts suggests that the cults of the goddesses Britomartis and Diktynna were connected, and that Britomartis and Diktynna were related to each other in much the same way as the later Persephone and Demeter.
Diktynna's name links her with Mount Dikte, and she was portrayed in the classical period as a mountain mother.
A major centre of Diktynna-worship in the classical period was the Diktynnaion, a great temple on a peninsula to the west of Kydonia.
According to some sources, the death of Apollonius of Tyana took place at the sanctuary of Diktynna.
He visited the sanctuary late at night, finding it guarded by Diktynna's ferocious sacred dogs.
Instead of barking and attacking him, though, the dogs greeted him as a friend.
The sanctuary attendants arrested Apollonius at once as a magician and a robber, suspecting that he had tamed the dogs with the intention of stealing the sanctuary treasure.
But Apollonius freed himself, shouted to the attendants so that they should witness what was about to happen, and ran to the doors of the shrine.
The doors flew open to admit him and then closed behind him.
From inside, the sound of a female choir could be heard announcing Apollonius’ ascent to heaven (Philostratus,Life of Apollonius , Book 8).
The Temple of Diktynna was certainly a celebrated holy place in the classical period; whether the site was a centre of her worship in the Minoan period is not known, but it seems likely.
Britomartis had a male companion, whether son, brother, or consort is unclear, and he is referred to as the Master of Animals.
Both Master and Mistress of Animals are shown between pairs of attendant animals or walking accompanied by a lion or lioness.
Nilsson believes that the offerings of weapons at some sanctuaries may be fetishes, representing limbs or extensions of the god.
As a hunter-god and protector of animals, he was armed with spear and shield — sealstones show him so — and his weapons became religious symbols.
We should therefore see shields on their own as aniconic representations of the deity; the shield motif in the frescoes at Knossos is a religious, not a military, symbol.
A gem from Kydonia shows the Master of Animals grasping two lions as they apparently sit upright, just as if he was holding a pair of pups by the scruff of the neck; the image speaks   clearly of the god's dominion over wild beasts.
The Aegina Pendant, which probably came originally from the tomb of Chrysolakkos at Mallia, again shows the Minoan Master of Animals grasping a pair of creatures by the neck.
This time he is holding water-birds against a strange background apparently consisting of snakes (Figure 1).
The Minoan Goddess of the Caves was associated with childbirth and the underworld.
As a literal Earth-mother, she may have been the prototype of the Rhea of the later myths, but we also know that at least in the fourteenth century BC the Minoans knew her as Eleuthia.
She was referred to in the temple archives at Knossos, although as far as we know her nearest sanctuary was the Cave of Eileithyia at Amnisos (Figure 16).
Nilsson suggests that there was a Tree Goddess.
There was certainly a tree cult, and it may be that priestesses performing rituals in front of the tree were regarded as epiphanies of the tree deity.
Probably different kinds of trees were regarded as sacred.
Alexiou (undated, p. 89) believes that he can identify the sacred tree shown on the Agia Triadha sarcophagus (Figure 47, right) as an olive.
If so, it would be easy to explain.
The olive tree lives to a very great age; it appears to be indestructible, sending out shoots from a distorted, dry, and seemingly lifeless trunk, reviving annually to bring forth its fruit.
Alternatively, the Minoans may have singled out particular trees as sacred by the alighting of birds on their branches, since they regarded birds as epiphanies of deities.
Possibly there was a link between the tree cult and the sanctity of the pillar.
In the Egyptian myth of Osiris, the dead body of a vegetation god was enclosed in a tree trunk; at the palace of Byblos in Syria, a tree trunk allegedly containing the god's corpse was used as a pillar.
Often Minoan worshippers tore branches or boughs from a sacred tree and venerated them on altars or planted them in the sockets between sacral horns.
Sometimes, they built shrines round sacred trees, apparently providing access to them by means of double doors and safeguarding them by means of wooden fences or stone walls.
In some ceremonies, an attendant, often male, tore a bough from the shrine-tree to the accompaniment of gestures of lamentation from the priestess and others present; this over  wrought scene, shown on several rings, seems to have symbolized the death of the young god and may conceivably have been followed by the sacrifice of the male attendant who represented him.
The Mochlos ring shows a sacred tree growing out of the shrine being ferried along on the priestess's ship.
The Snake Goddess was another of the Minoans' underworld deities.
Snakes living in crevices are easy to understand as symbols of the life within the earth.
Two figurines from Knossos show the goddess brandishing her snakes.
Sometimes we are given hints that the goddesses blended with one another, adopting each other 's attributes.
The Dove Goddess from the Late Dove Goddess Sanctuary at Knossos, for instance, stood on a bench altar strewn with beach pebbles, which suggest dominion over the sea.
The Snake Goddess figurines found in a sanctuary at Kannia had snakes wreathing their crowns; one had snakes on her arms as well and a dove on her cheek.
If the Minoan deities merged as this evidence suggests, reliable identification is made much more difficult.
We may eventually come to think in terms of a Minoan Universal Spirit, which manifested itself in many different transformations, each with a different name, character, and function, and which yet somehow was regarded as a single deity.
Certainly the edges were blurred.
Nilsson suggests that there was a Cult of the Heavenly Bodies.
Some of the sealstone images and rings show a moon-sickle or a rayed sun-disc: sometimes both.
Sometimes there is a curious line of dots curved into an arc shape, which may be taken to represent a rainbow or perhaps the Milky Way.
The sun and moon frequently appear in mythic tableaux and they are clearly there in some symbolic role, as epiphanies of one or more deities.
On mainland Greece in the Mycenean period the principal god was Poseidon, a name deriving from an earlier (possibly Minoan) form, ‘Poteidan’ or ‘Potidas’.
Poseidon's power was at this early time far greater than that of Velchanos: he received large-scale sacrificial offerings at Pylos, and may well have been a major deity on Minoan Crete too.
There is one tablet from Knossos which lists several deities including Potnia and Enualios, a name which later was used as an alternative to Ares, the Greek war-god; it also has the first part of Poseidon's name, ‘po-se-da-’, but the end is broken off.
Probably Poseidon was worshipped in three aspects, with roles in the heavens, on the earth and in the underworld, just as in the later Orphic literature the phases of the moon were viewed: ‘When she is above the earth, she is Selene; when within it, Artemis; when below it, Persephone’(Servius ad Verg.
A.4).
The subterranean manifestation of Poseidon was in the form of earthquakes and tsunamis; the terrestrial aspect was seen in the form or a bull; the celestial was the sun and moon.
Occasionally the last two aspects are combined.
There is a bull's head rhyton from Mycenae with a gold rosette or sun-burst on its forehead.
The bull's head rhyton from the Bull's Head Sanctuary at Knossos has a less conspicuous disc-shape carved into the black stone of its forehead: that too may be meant for a sun-disc.
The clay sealing from Kydonia (Figure 41) showing a god dominating a sea-shore temple or city may also combine two or more aspects of Poteidan.
There is the human form of the god, shown as the epitome of young Minoan manhood, and there is, floating in the sky behind him, what seems to be the head of a bull.
In the foreground, sea waves break at the temple- or city-gates.
G. Kopcke (Tzedakis and Hallager 1987) has gone so far as to suggest that the curious high ‘rock’ formation in the centre of the picture may actually represent the tsunami or tidal wave generated by the great Thera eruption of 1470 BC.
If so, the iconographic link with Poteidan, lord of earthquakes and tsunamis, is strengthened.
The equally odd banner which the god is holding may also contain a symbolic reference to the god's domain; the large terminal shape appears to be a stylized fish.
The Bull God was the Sun God, and he was also the Earth-shaker.
In the tablets he was called Poteidan, sometimes King Poseidon, Lord of the Earth.
He could appear in several different forms and have several  identities, and it seems that other deities had the same ability.
At least one deity manifested in the form of a bird.
The Agia Triadha sarcophagus shows birds perched on double-axes, indicating the presence of a deity.
The clay model of a priestess in a swing, also from Agia Triadha, shows birds perched on the swing-posts, as if the act of meditative swinging itself had induced the epiphany (Figure 42).
Several small terracotta birds were found with goddess idols in a shrine at Agia Triadha.
The goddess figurine from the Late Dove Goddess Sanctuary at Knossos shows a bird alighting on the goddess's head; perhaps what we are being shown is the ecstatic moment in a religious ceremony when the sequence of ritual acts reached its climax, and the priestess herself was transformed into the goddess.
The birds are generally referred to as doves in the modern literature, but as Nilsson points out there is often little evidence of species.
The birds on the Agia Triadha sarcophagus have been identified as eagles, black woodpeckers, ravens and even cuckoos by various scholars.
It is possible that there was a connection between the idea of bird epiphanies and the sacred tree cult; birds descending from the heavens as messengers or transformations of deities were seen to alight in trees, which conferred sanctity on the trees as the act suggested that the gods themselves had chosen the trees as their shrines.
A clay tree with seven clay birds perching on it is clearly a ritual presentation of the idea.
In this way, the Minoans may have seen the enshrined trees as divinely appointed trysting-places where gods and mortal men and women might meet.
The human epiphanies are rather easier for us to understand.
Some religious images show a god or goddess hovering in the air: this may imply a connection with bird epiphanies.
A gold ring, now in the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford, shows a priestess dancing and another woman apparently worshipping or dreaming as she reclines in a trance against some boulders.
In the background is a smaller figure, a god with a bow, standing very erect, with one arm stretched high in the air as if waving or saluting.
He seems to be holding a dagger.
The bow suggests that he might be the Master of Animals or Enualios, the god of war.
A disembodied eye and ear, perhaps symbolizing the spirit forms of an all-seeing, all-hearing, prayer-answering deity, float in the air above the worshipping woman.
A curious feature of the scene is that the worshipping woman seems to be naked apart from an anklet and what may be a sacral knot tied round her neck.
The nakedness itself is unusual.
Is she perhaps a sacrificial victim?
The god above and behind her seems poised to stab her (Figure 43).
There are many images of religious ceremonies which show epiphanies of a goddess.
Often she is a small figure appearing, as if in the distance, behind or above a group of ecstatically dancing priestesses.
Sometimes the goddess appears in the midst of the priestesses, manifesting as one of their number.
We should visualize a common form of religious ceremony in which a group of priestesses sang, danced, chanted, and performed sacrifices and other rituals, as a preamble to a climactic event in which the leading priestess — the one Mark Cameron (1987) called the ‘goddess-impersonator’— actually became the goddess.
The Minoans also regarded certain inanimate objects as incarnations of a deity.
Evans was among the first to recognize that single pillars were treated as idols.
There are several images, which are clearly icons, showing isolated pillars with a pair of attendant heraldic beasts.
At Mycenae, the pillar is shown attended by griffins, which in Minoan Crete at least were the customary attendants of the goddess Potnia.
At Mycenae, too, is the famous Lion Gate, which shows the pillar mounted upon a Minoan-style altar and flanked by protecting lions.
In Minoan Crete, Potnia is shown with attendant lions or griffins.
It is a short deductive step to equate the pillar with the goddess Potnia or the Mistress of Animals.
The same line of reasoning confirms the sun-disc as a manifestation of a deity.
There is a gem in the Heraklion Museum showing two rampant lions with their forepaws perched up on an altar: at the centre, in place of a pillar or some other representation of the deity, is an unmistakable rayed sun which, as we have already seen, is one of the manifestations of Poteidan (Figure 44).
The architectural design of the Tripartite Shrine takes on new layers of meaning once the column is seen as an idol or as an actual incarnation of a deity.
The shrine's form, a raised central cella with two flanking cellae a metre or so lower, symbolizes the three realms of the cosmos.
The colouring of the cella back walls as shown on the Grandstand Fresco from Knossos indicates that the three cellae represented the underworld (red), earth (yellow ochre), and heavens (blue).
Each cella had a corniced roof supported by one or two centrally placed columns, symbolizing the deity's presence in and dominion over that realm.
Whether the Tripartite Shrine was dedicated to a particular deity or was sacred to all the deities of the Minoan pantheon is hard to tell.
The fresco fragments at Knossos which seem to show the Tripartite Shrine at the centre of the Knossos Labyrinth have rows of sacral horns along the cornices and two pairs of sacral horns inside each cella.
If the Bull God was Poteidan, and the sacral horns are bull horns, there is a prima facie case for believing that the shrine was dedicated to Poteidan.
Yet, like the Christian cross, the sacral horns were used in a general symbolic way, and it may be that the Labyrinth was, as a whole, dedicated to Poteidan even though individual sanctuaries and shrines within it were dedicated to other deities, in much the same way that within a cathedral there may be chapels dedicated to a variety of Christian saints.
The sacral horns appear in a great many images of religious significance.
They are found painted on  larnaxes (clay coffins), engraved on bronze tablets, painted on frescoes, depicted on rings and gemstones.
They are frequently mounted on altars or on shrine cornices in a way which strongly implies that they were a central, universal religious symbol.
But they were also used architecturally, to add interest to the horizontal line of a cornice.
Nilsson quotes the carved steatite vessel found at Knossos, showing the stepped balustrade of a ceremonial staircase; the staircase was obviously not itself a shrine, yet the balustrade's cornice is decorated with sacral horns   (Figure 52).
In the foreground of the picture, though, is a procession of worshippers carrying offering bowls stretched out in front of them.
They are clearly approaching a shrine or altar of some kind, or they would not be behaving in this way; in addition, our new view of the whole of the Knossos Labyrinth as a temple allows us to argue that even a staircase, as part of a temple-complex, might well be in a general sense dedicated to a presiding deity.
The many fragments of clay and stone sacral horns found on the site suggest that the Labyrinth at Knossos bristled with sacral horns.
Certainly they were decorative and they must have added a barbaric vibrancy to the temple's complex roof-line, but they also indicate a general dedication of the building to Poteidan.
Fragments found in the southern sector and in the north-west corner of the Knossos Labyrinth belonged to pairs of sacral horns that may originally have been a metre or more high.
Horns at Niru Khani were mounted on a stepped base, evidently an altar, at the southern edge of the temple's large East Court.
Evans was right to assume that the sacral horns represented bull's horns.
A vase from Salamis on Cyprus shows a double-axe alternately between sacral horns of a purely Minoan type and the horns of a realistically rendered bull's head.
Nevertheless, other origins for the sacral horns have been proposed: the raised hands and arms of the goddess, or the sun-disc rising between two mountains, a symbol which in Egypt stood for Elysium.
It is likely that the Minoan sacral horns acquired these and possibly additional symbolic meanings, becoming a layered symbol, in much the same way that the Cross of Christ has been transformed in religious art to take on all sorts of new overtones.
The so-called ‘sheep bells’ found at Knossos, Poros, Tylissos and Vorou illustrate this point.
These curious drum-shaped clay objects characteristically have two perforations on one side and two or three stalks rising from the top.
The two side stalks may be taken to represent bull's horns, the drum as the bull's head, the perforations as its eyes.
Yet it is also possible to see the form as a stylized if rather primitive representation of the female deity.
The central stalk is her head, the longer side stalks are her upraised arms, the drum her body and dress, the perforations in her chest the nipples.
In this way, the stylized clay objects may be seen as early forerunners of the more recognizable goddess-idols of the Late Minoan period.
They were certainly not bells of any kind.
Nevertheless, the situation is made more complicated by variations in the design: several of the objects have four eyes or nipples instead of the expected two, so there is probably some additional layer of symbolic meaning that has yet to be penetrated.
Perhaps the religious symbol most strongly associated with the Minoan culture is the double-axe.
The double-axe was an everyday implement, and yet the great majority of those that survive were intended for ritual use; some were made of very thin sheet bronze, some were very large, some were  very small, some were made of lead or of soft stone.
Sometimes the blades were elaborately ornamented.
Sometimes the edges were doubled, to turn the emblem into a quadruple-axe, either for artistic emphasis or to symbolize some kind of union or symbiosis.
Their earliest known appearance was at Mochlos, around 2500 BC (Early Minoan 11), and large numbers of them have been found at later Minoan sites.
It may be thought odd that no large bronze double-axes were found at Knossos or Phaistos, but this is probably because the sites were ransacked in antiquity and plundered of their usable and precious metal objects.
Any large bronze objects will have been taken and melted down long ago, probably in the fourteenth century BC.
Even so, pyramid-shaped stone bases for medium-sized double-axes survive in the Labyrinth, proving that double-axes were scattered about the building, like crucifixes in a church.
From the evidence of a fresco found in the north-west corner of the Knossos Labyrinth, small votive double-axes were stuck into the flanks of wooden columns.
Evans argues that this practice was paralleled by that of sticking double-axes into crevices in the stalactite pillars in the lower cave at Psychro (Plate 17).
The implications are interesting.
The frescoes and furnishings of the Throne Sanctuary were intended to simulate the environment of the peak sanctuary at Juktas; perhaps the treatment of the many pillars supporting the ceilings was intended to symbolize the stalactites of the cave sanctuary at Skotino (Plate 18).
The overall intention of the Minoan priestesses seems to have been to house the whole pantheon in the Labyrinth, luring deities from their various shrines and sanctuaries in outlying areas.
The meaning of the double-axe is not known.
Possibly it was the weapon used for sacrificing the bulls.
On Minoan pottery, the double-axe is sometimes painted over a bull's head.
Later, in the classical period, heifers sacrificed to Dionysos at Tenedos were slaughtered with a double-axe.
Alternatively or additionally, the axe may have symbolized the Sky-god or Thunder-god.
In Caria in later times there was a Zeus Labrandeus, who was a god wielding a double-axe.
Contemporary with the Minoan deities was the    Hittite Weather-god Teshub, who carried a double-axe in one hand and a thunderbolt in the other.
There may have been some generic connection between the Anatolian deity and the Minoan deity whose symbol was also the double-axe.
Teshub was a Hurrite god whom the Hittites adopted and developed.
Zeus Labrandeus, also worshipped in Anatolia, but at a later date, may have been a further development of the Hurrite-Hittite god.
Gods also have their histories.
Perhaps the double-axe was, like the sacral horns, an epiphany or symbol of Poteidan, but on the other hand there are many images of a priestess-goddess wielding a double-axe.
Although the Greeks were later to picture both Zeus and Poseidon wielding a double-axe representing a thunderbolt, the weapon was earlier held only by Rhea.
According to Robert Graves (1960), in the Minoan and Mycenean cultures the double-axe was forbidden to males, which is certainly consistent with the Minoan iconography.
A mould from the Minoan town of Palaikastro shows a priestess or goddess holding a double-axe aloft in each hand.
The implication of images such as these is that the double-axe was the symbol of a powerful female deity, probably Potnia.
Another important religious symbol was the sacral knot.
This consisted of a strip of patterned cloth with a fringe at each end, a knotted loop in the middle and the two ends hanging down like a modern neck-tie.
It appears as a motif in pottery decoration and models of it in ivory or faience were found at Knossos, Zakro and Mycenae.
A sacral knot appears in a fresco at the temple of Niru Khani, and also on the so-called ‘Parisienne’ fresco fragment from Knossos (Figure 46).
The priestess in question wears the knot at the back of her neck, and it is likely that she is one of the celebrants in a rite of sacred communion: other fragments of this fresco show alternate standing and sitting celebrants, mostly women, some offering, some (the seated ones) accepting the communion chalice.
Mark Cameron (1987) felt that the knot symbolized possession by a man, a token of the collective sacred marriage which all young people had to go through as the culmination of their initiation sequence.
Although this is possible, the fresco iconography does not really supply enough evidence to support it.
It seems more likely that the knot symbolized the bond between the communicant and the deity, or that it was an attempt to bind the deity by magic, which is much the same thing.
Shields and helmets, depicted in certain contexts, were also religious symbols.
Deities are sometimes shown with sword, spear, or shield; sometimes the objects appear alone, as if standing in for an absent deity.
Large figure-of-eight shields were depicted on the walls of the East Wing of the Labyrinth, possibly to indicate that the building was under divine protection; the dappled hides of which the shields were made presumably came from the bull, the sacred beast, and this may have given them additional prophylactic value.
Some ritual vessels have shields painted on them.
A symbol of lesser importance was the cross and its variants such as the star, wheel and swastika.
One of the most startling finds at Knossos was a marble Greek cross found in the Temple Repositories.
Probably the cross stood for the sun.
A stone mould from Sitia combining the cross, the wheel and the flaring sun-disc all in one symbol tends to confirm this (title illustration, Chapter 1).
The Minoans worshipped many gods and goddesses in a wide variety of forms, both animate and inanimate; they regarded the whole cosmos as animated by deities and spirits.
In the religious paraphernalia and artwork of their culture, we see a religion half formed, with elusive nature spirits appearing and disappearing in all kinds of manifestations, now taking on the status of a fully-fledged deity, now evaporating into an atavistic mist.
The Minoans gave their gods, goddesses and spirits names, areas of responsibility and probably personalities and personal histories, and yet — to judge from the iconography — the deities were capable of endless overlapping transformations.
This should not surprise us, if we remember that, even after another millennium of evolution Zeus was still credited with the ability to transform himself into an infinite number of forms: a bull, a swan, thunder and lightning, and a shower of gold.
SACRED ENCLOSURES
No less diverse were the places where the Minoans worshipped.
We saw earlier, in Chapter 3, that widespread and elaborate cult practices centred on the peak and cave sanctuaries.
The Minoans also had rural sanctuaries in open sites that were unconnected with peaks or caves.
The archaeological evidence for these sacred enclosures is slight, but Bogdan Rutkowski (1986) argues that the images carved on sealstones and rings are sufficient proof that they existed.
The images show vegetation in the foreground and  background, and sometimes rocks too, but there is little evidence of a more precise location.
Occasionally we may be able to identify a palm, fig, or olive tree, but even this is not enough to limit the location to a particular ecological zone; oak trees, for instance, can be found from 680 metres down to sea-level.
The minor sacred sites may have been fairly informal in layout, precincts hallowed by some long past and barely remembered appearance of a deity, but not separated off from the rest of the landscape in any visible way.
Sometimes, we may imagine, boundary stones or small cairns were used to mark the edge of the precinct, or a rough, low drystone wall.
The more important sacred precincts were probably bounded by more substantial walls: the Gypsades Rhyton seems to show one of these.
The sacred tree cult mentioned earlier led to the building of enclosure walls round individual trees or groups of trees thought to have been visited by deities.
Several seal impressions and rings show a high wall with a double cornice surmounted by sacral horns, or a high fence surrounding a tree.
Within the enclosure, which may have been quite small, there were sometimes cult buildings, sometimes not.
A clay model from Arkhanes, and dating from the very end of the Minoan civilization, shows the sort of modest shrine that may have been erected in a sacred enclosure: an oval hut with a conical roof, entrance doors and a cult idol inside.
These were lightly built and have not survived well in the archaeological record; nevertheless, the remains of cult houses measuring about 4 metres across have been found at Gazi, Kefala (in the Pediados district), Plai tou Kastrou near Kavousi, and at Pachlitsani Agriada.
Some of the sacred enclosures may have had much more elaborate structures like the tripartite shrines at Juktas and in the Knossos Labyrinth.
As well as cult buildings, the sacred enclosure may have contained altars of various shapes, as shown on the Gypsades Rhyton, and decorated with plaster and paint, as shown on the Agia Triadha sarcophagus.
There were probably also sacrificial tables and statues of deities, like the clay goddess found at the sacred enclosure of Sachturia.
Here, as in the temples, priestesses danced.
The iconography necessarily shows rather small numbers of dancers; generally the seals and rings only allow space for three or four figures, but we should assume that we are being shown only the nucleus of a larger religious ceremony.
The dancers appear to whirl energetically about with their hands on their hips, flung wildly out into the air, or waving high above their heads.
A gold ring from Kalyvia shows a naked woman pulling down a bough of the sacred tree and another worshipping at a boulder.
Another image shows a priestess beside an altar, summoning a deity by blowing a triton shell (title illustration, Chapter 2).
Each image shows just one key event in what was evidently a complex series of rituals.
We are never shown a complete ceremony.
The frescoes allow more scope, but even they show little more than one event at a time.
What  the Sacred Grove and Dance Fresco does show us, though, is that large numbers of dancers and spectators were involved in the ceremonies.
Occasionally we are shown men dancing.
The Gypsades Rhyton seems to show two men involved in a line dance of some kind, whereas the clay model from Kamilari shows four naked men in a ring dance within a circle of sacral horns: the rim of the model appears to represent the boundary of the sacred enclosure.
SACRAL ROBES
Occasionally, as in the Kamilari model just mentioned and the two women on the Kalyvia ring, the celebrants are naked, but this seems to have been exceptional.
More often, religious ceremonies required special clothes.
The Agia Triadha sarcophagus shows men and women involved in a funerary rite; some of them have an animal skin wrapped round as a skirt.
It falls straight from the waist and the hem is rounded, but with what looks like a short tail at the back.
The men and women who wear this garment are naked above the waist.
The untreated, untrimmed, unadorned sheepskin was probably the first human garment and may therefore have been associated in the Minoan mind with the distant and primeval past.
Interestingly, the draped xoanon representing the deity on the Agia Triadha sarcophagus is apparently wearing a full-length sheepskin robe; this may be to emphasize his antiquity or his rustic origins (Figure 47).
Other figures participating in the same religious ceremony wear a cloth robe covering both upper and lower parts of the body and falling straight down without folds or flounces to the ankles.
This robe has a triple-striped band on the shoulder and a similar band running down the side under each arm: another band decorated the hem.
The robe could be in various colours — blue, orange, white — and might be held at the waist by a belt or cord.
Another and very peculiar sacral garment was the cuirass.
This is the dress   worn by the priest on the Harvesters' Vase.
It covers the upper part of the body and consists of bands of semicircular scales all pointing upwards, ending at the lower edge in a belt from which hangs a broad piece of pleated cloth.
The garment is so peculiar that we might dismiss it as a quirk of the rhyton carver's imagination, but for the fact that it features again on a seal impression from Agia Triadha, where the rhyton also originated.
It is by no means certain what this garment is.
The only way the scale effect could have been achieved is with layers of shaped leather or metal: either would have made the garment extremely heavy and unwieldy.
It also seems unconnected with any military use.
The scales suggest the scales of a fish rather than armour; was the priest perhaps a priest of Poteidan?
The lower half of the Harvesters' Vase priest is broken off, so we have no way of knowing how his lower half was clothed, but the seal impression shows that underneath the pleated skirt the man was wearing the sacral hide garment.
The overall effect is visually complicated and inelegant, and could only be explained by recourse to arcane ritual references, which at this distance of time we have little hope of tracing.
The priestesses wore a double garment.
It consisted of the straight robe mentioned above, with an elaborate flounced and layered over-skirt tied on at the waist.
The detailed structure is detectable from the Theran frescoes (Marinatos 1984).
The bodice of the robe has a deep cleavage plunging to the navel.
The belt tying the skirt on drew the bodice edges in round the breasts (if they were to be exposed) and presumably lent them some support from the sides and from below.
The striped and layered skirt was open at the front to reveal the braid-decorated robe beneath.
The overall effect, with head-dress, necklaces, bracelets, rings and so on, must have been barbarically opulent.
When numbers of priestesses dressed in this way and danced themselves to a pitch of religious ecstasy, the sight must have inspired awe among the beholders.
It is easy to identify with the excited crowd of onlookers in the miniature frescoes.
It was the priestesses who dominated religious ceremonies.
In the iconography, they far outnumber the priests and male attendants, and it may be significant that on Side A of the Agia Triadha larnax the lyre player is a male dressed in a priestess's robe.
This suggests that there was a subordinate caste of priests who were transvestite, who became nominal priestesses in the service of the deity: they were probably eunuchs.
Perhaps as a result of Syrian influence, companies of eunuch priests may have inhabited the Minoan temples; in a later period, it is known that eunuch priests served Cybele and Attis in Anatolia.
In the Minoan temples, it was usually the priestesses who conducted the ceremonies, performed the sacred dances and occupied the most important spectator seats for major rituals.
In both the Sacred Dance and the Grandstand Frescoes, the priestesses are shown seated in places of honour, centrally, prominently and with a clear view of the ceremonies being conducted before them.
Among other functions, priestesses probably chanted prayers and invocations to the deities.
In open-air ceremonies, they apparently used a triton shell to amplify and distort their voices.
There is a seal from the Idaian Cave showing a priestess holding a triton shell to her lips as she stands on a step in front of an altar decked with sacral horns and sacred boughs (title illustration, Chapter 2).
The triton shell was used right through into modern times in Crete by rural postmen and shepherds, both as a megaphone and as a horn.
Probably it served the same functions in the hands of the Minoan priestesses.
Triton shells are frequently found in shrines, and with the narrow end cut away to make a mouthpiece.
Votive offerings include elaborately decorated model robes representing the sacred vestments worn by priestesses when they conjured up the goddesses they served.
By putting on special clothes and performing certain rituals, a priestess might be transformed into an epiphany of the goddess.
It is probable that Minoan citizens offered real robes to the temple for this purpose: some may have been woven in the temple itself, given that loom-weights were found in the cellars of the East Wing of the Labyrinth.
Probably the finest of these garments were used to adorn wooden cult images of the goddess.
There were many ways of inducing the deities to reside in the shrines and temples.
A recently proposed reconstruction of the Procession Fresco from the Knossos Labyrinth (Hägg and Marinatos 1987) shows one of the leaders of the procession presenting a fringed garment, presumably the ritual overskirt, to the priestess who is about to become the goddess.
This clever and inventive suggestion makes sense of the otherwise inexplicable presence of a fringe hanging in the air between the two figures.
Above all, the Minoans wanted to see their gods.
Somehow, the deities had to be made to appear before the worshippers, and this appearance might take many different forms.
Gods and goddesses could appear in the form of boulders, trees, birds, snakes, or pillars, but we can be sure that an appearance in human form had the greatest emotional impact.
The later Artemis of Ephesus was confidently expected to show herself in specially designed windows of appearance placed high in the temple's pediment.
Probably a priestess took on the role of Artemis and became the epiphany of the goddess.
This type of ritual was already a very ancient custom by the time the famous Temple of Artemis was built, around 600 BC; it had been a common practice in Anatolia, Syria, Mesopotamia and Egypt (Trell 1988).
Nanno Marinatos (1984) has argued persuasively that windows of appearance were used in Minoan rites at Akrotiri on Thera, so it is very likely indeed that they were used in Crete itself.
The architects who designed the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus were, moreover, Knossians; Khersifron and his son Metagenis grew up within sight of the Knossos Labyrinth's crumbling walls.
It is likely that there were windows of appearance located on the first floors of the Minoan temples, overlooking both West and Central Courts.
DANCING AND DAEMONS
Dancing, as we have already seen, formed an integral part of the ceremonies that led up to an epiphany.
The priestesses' complete abandonment to the dance, as depicted in some of the ring images, shows that they were using dance, just as the dervishes were to use it much later, to induce a state of religious ecstasy.
It is known that Dionysos was worshipped at Pylos shortly after the Minoan period on Crete and it is possible that his orgiastic cult was preceded by a Minoan proto-Dionysian cult.
Beer or wine may have been used to help produce the euphoric state.
Drugs may have played a part too.
Poppy-growing started early in Anatolia and certainly spread to Crete during the Minoan period.
There is a Minoan seal showing a goddess holding three poppy seed-heads.
The famous late figurine of a goddess found in a small rural shrine at Gazi wears a diadem embellished with three carefully depicted poppy seed-heads, and they have been cut as if for the extraction of opium.
This figurine, aptly nicknamed ‘The Poppy Goddess’, dates from about 1350 BC and makes a clear connection between the manifestation of the deity and the taking of opium.
Whilst the orgiastic dancers may have been stimulated by alcohol, it is likely that   opium was used to heighten the states of meditation during long vigils and bouts of prayer, the curious seclusions which the ancients called ‘incubation’.
These opium-induced trances may have produced states of awareness and revelation which explain some of the fantastic imagery of Minoan religious art, and which may even go some way towards explaining the extraordinary architectural achievements of the temple-builders.
Thomas de Quincey paid a very revealing tribute to the power of opium in his Confessions of an English Opium Eater (1821).
First he was at pains to deny opium's power to intoxicate, asserting that the drug produced a static, ‘chronic pleasure’ lasting perhaps ten hours.
Then he invoked opium directly, leaving no doubt as to the limitless power which the drug-user feels he has been given:
But the opium-taking habit led de Quincey on to far less pleasant and exhilarating experiences, and we are justified in assuming that the Minoans too suffered the adverse effects of opium.
This is, at least, one way of explaining an otherwise very peculiar aspect of Minoan religion — the daemons.
Some of these daemons are shown as followers, guardians and attendants of deities and sacred objects; others are fantastic composite monsters which seem to be spontaneous creations of the unconscious mind.
There is a dog-headed creature that recurs in several images.
Evans sees it as an adaptation of the Egyptian dog-ape, possibly developing from the monkey frescoes in the Knossos Labyrinth; the monkey was not native to Crete and the animal may have been taken for a monster and so given an impulse to the creation of other monsters.
A tablet from Phaistos shows an orderly but sinister procession of four daemons, each with its left arm hanging down and its right arm raised, holding a staff (Figure 49).
One has a dog's head, another a boar's head, a third a bull's head and the fourth a bird's head.
Possibly they are priests or temple attendants wearing animal masks: the Minoan religion had certainly not developed so far that such things were incongruous.
Nilsson (1949) points out that the Phaistos daemons are similar to daemons shown on Babylonian and Assyrian amulets, believing that the Minoan daemons were simply copies of these foreign monsters.
There are nevertheless many images which seem to be spontaneous Minoan creations — strange and haunting images like the one on a sealstone depicting a daemon carrying two animal carcases on a pole.
Is he a deity bearing off animals that have been sacrificed to him?
Another shows a large and lordly daemon with a wasp-tail, standing between two human   attendants.
Another shows the converse, a humanoid god standing between two daemons: he is mastering them by grasping their tongues.
The daemons are closely linked with religious cult activity.
It seems that they are not gods exactly, but made of the same stuff as gods.
Sometimes they stand in for a deity, haunting the sacred places and occupying a position midway between gods and men.
Perhaps the Minoans regarded them as fearful intermediaries — essential but frightening go-betweens.
In this sense, they may have occupied the same position in the Minoan religious system as angels and demons in the Christian belief-system in medieval Europe.
The Minoan religion was itself in transition, and we can see the humanoid deities as more evolved than the daemons, who were older nature-spirits.
The daemons roamed the forests and mountain sides, lurked in the caves and rock crevices, fostering nature under the supervision and ordinance of the evolved gods and goddesses.
We should not treat the daemons as foreign implants, yet they do nevertheless have what Nilsson describes as an ‘antithetic’ quality compared with the rest of the Minoan pantheon.
The opium-taking may well be all that is needed to explain this.
De Quincey wrote that habitual opium-taking reawakened the childhood capacity that we all recognize and remember, for conjuring up monsters in the dark.
It was ‘a power of painting, as it were, upon the darkness, all sorts of phantoms….
At night when I lay awake in bed, vast processions passed along in mournful pomp; friezes of never-ending stories…’
This nightmare of processing phantoms reminds us of the procession of daemons from Phaistos, which could have been seen in the sort of opium trance de Quincey described.
De Quincey reported that these endless processions produced in him feelings of deep melancholy and gloom.
He was not merely frightened: he became profoundly and suicidally despondent.
It may be this kind of experience that led some Minoans to submit willingly to sacrifice.
A belief in daemons or evil spirits led on naturally to a need for exorcists; exorcism, it is reasonable to assume, became one of the priestly functions.
The Minoan priests and priestesses became so expert in this art that they became famous for it throughout the Aegean world.
An exorcism relating to  a disease, and allegedly written in the tongue of the Keftiu, survives in an Egyptian papyrus of the fourteenth century BC (Alexiou, undated, p. 108).
No doubt there were formulae for getting rid of evil spirits, and it may be that the mysterious painted symbols written inside two cups from Knossos are spells of this kind.
THE TEMPLES
The activities of Early Minoan priestesses were focused on the peak and cave sanctuaries and the sacred enclosures, but after 2000 BC they focused increasingly on the temples.
Relatively little is known of the first great temples, which were built between 2000 and 1900 BC and destroyed by earthquakes in 1700 BC, except that they stood on the same sites as the later temples.
The foundations of the later temples largely obscure the plans of their predecessors but, from the patchy remains that have been investigated, the older temples seem to have been similar in style, scale and layout to the later temples, although they were perhaps slightly less complicated.
The ruins seen today are essentially those of the ‘second’ or ‘new’temples, built in 1700 BC and destroyed in the Thera eruption of 1470 BC.
Only one of them, the Labyrinth at Knossos, was restored and repaired so that it could continue to use after 1470, and it was more or less completely abandoned some ninety years later after a major fire.
After that, the Minoans appear either to have lost interest in temple-worship, or to have restructured their economy in such a way that it could no longer sustain — or no longer needed — large temple-complexes.
The Labyrinth at Knossos is generally recognized to have been one of the greatest architectural achievements of the ancient world.
Had its fabric endured with its frescoes undamaged for just a few centuries longer, it might well have been ranked as one of the world's Seven Wonders.
Its outline plan, as recovered by Sir Arthur Evans' excavations, is a ragged square roughly 150 metres across, covering an area of about 20,000 square metres.
The footings and parts of the walls of around 300 chambers have survived on the ground floor; the presence of several staircases implies the existence of upper storeys and, taking into account the destroyed upper floors as well, the original temple may have had a thousand chambers altogether.
The Knossos Labyrinth was exceptional in its size and complexity, but there was a strong family likeness among the Minoan temples.
The large buildings at Zakro, Mallia and Phaistos possess plans that have many features in common, though with significant variations; their designs may have been based loosely on that of Knossos or they may have evolved independently from a common set of functions.
They are really not similar enough, either to each other or to Knossos, for us to assume that they were copied from the Knossos Labyrinth as a model.
The temples' most distinctive common feature was the large rectangular  Central Court oriented roughly, but not exactly, north-south and measuring about 45 by 23 metres.
In The Knossos Labyrinth (Castleden 1989), the evidence is summarized for believing that it was in the Central Court that the bull-leaping ritual took place, a ceremony that was itself central to the Minoan belief-system.
From the significant number of representations of bull-leaping on frescoes and sealstones, it is possible to reconstruct with some confidence the events that took place in the Bull Courts.
To begin with, it is important to recognize that the various images represent different stages of more than one acrobatic feat, and that in some instances there is an element of idealization.
Teams of bull dancers were evidently involved and they rehearsed a repertoire of spectacular and dangerous-looking feats for the benefit of a host of onlookers: there is little doubt that the crowd of spectators shown in the Grandstand Fresco is watching a display of bull-leaping, and the Tripartite Shrine fixes the location as the Central Court of the temple.
Some members of the team distracted the bull by turning somersaults on the paved court: while the beast's attention was diverted, an acrobat might leap crosswise over its back.
Other team members, the bull-grapplers, hurled themselves on to the bull's horns to pad them with their own bodies and make the beast lower its head (Figure 50).
While the bull's head was low, the bull-leaper might dive between the horns to land, head and hands first, on the bull's back: momentum carried him on over the bull's tail, to land on his feet behind the bull.
In a variation on this feat, the bull-leaper performed the ‘Diving Leap’ from a vantage point; the large, stepped stone block in the north-west corner of the Bull Court at Phaistos was probably used for this purpose, and there may have been similar free-standing vaulting blocks at Knossos and Mallia.
Some images, like the bronze statuette thought to have come from Rethymnon, show a bull-leaper landing upright on his feet on the bull's back.
To have reached this position, he must have somersaulted over the   bull's head.
Gaining enough height and momentum for the somersault would have required the energy of a team of acrobats to propel him up and over the horns.
Acrobats are shown, independently of bull-leaping, on a number of Minoan artworks.
A sealstone shows two acrobats performing handstands.
A gold sword hilt from the temple at Mallia shows an acrobat performing a back somersault (Figure 29); perhaps, as Professor Alexiou suggests (undated, p. 49), in reality this feat was performed over the self-same sword planted in the ground, point upwards.
Feats of this sort were probably performed as a preamble and as an accompaniment to the bull games.
Whether the boxing and wrestling matches shown on the carved rhyton from Agia Triadha, a miniature fresco from Tylissos and certain sealings were part of the same or a different festival is not known: the way they are depicted suggests that they too had the quality of ritual struggle.
Controversy has always surrounded the Minoans' bull-leaping exploits, and there are many who are sceptical that they ever took place.
But the surviving works of art can be interpreted in such a way that credible acrobatic feats may be reconstructed.
Certainly it is hard to believe that bull-leapers grasped the horns, and relied on the tossing movement to get them safely over the bull's head.
Although at first sight the Bull-Leaping Fresco found in the cellars of the Labyrinth's East Wing seems in its present reconstruction to show, on the left, a bull-leaper waiting to be hoisted into the air, the figure is in fact a bull-grappler and represents a group of two, three or four grapplers whose job it was to pad the horns, keep the bull's head low and the rest of its body still during the leap.
It is the second figure, in the centre, who is the bull-leaper, the star performer.
The third figure, on the right, represents another group of helpers waiting behind the bull to catch the leaper after the successful vault.
If a single leaper had grasped the horns and hoped to be thrown neatly over the bull's head, the chances of achieving a successful vault would have been very low.
Bulls usually shake their heads erratically, lowering them vertically and twisting them sideways as they jerk them up to inflict the maximum injury.
In this situation, Minoan bull-leapers could never have cleared the horns.
The whole manoeuvre would have been far safer if the leaper did not touch the horns at all, by using either the ‘Diving Leap’ or the ‘Somersault Leap’described above.
Feats as daring as those shown on the frescoes and sealstones are certainly possible and they probably were really performed, but it seems likely that they were carefully choreographed and presented to make them seem as dangerous as possible.
The skill of the teams of acrobats, performing all manner of diversionary handstands and somersaults on the ground between the bull and the spectators, must have convinced those watching that they were seeing something infinitely more perilous and spectacular.
No doubt the bull-leapers and their teams used the power of suggestion as well as enormous skill and daring to excite their audiences.
Parallels between Minoan bull-leaping and Spanish bull-fighting, for instance, should not deceive us into seeing bull-leaping as mere ‘theatre of cruelty’ entertainment.
It was not a game, but a serious and central ritual in the Minoan belief-system.
The bull was a manifestation of Poteidan, and dancing with the most powerful god in the Minoan pantheon was no light matter.
Probably the bull dance expressed the interweaving of human and divine destinies; there were elements of collusion and elements of struggle with the deity.
Probably the rite was an ordeal, one of many rites of passage that young Minoans, girls as well as boys, had to undergo in order to achieve higher status.
Many colonnades, staircases, doorways and corridors open on to the Central Courts and, if the bull dance really did take place there, they must have been protected in some way from the rampaging bulls.
At Phaistos, there is evidence that doors closed off some of the openings.
On the east side of the Bull Court at Mallia, there is evidence of a series of rails supported on stout wooden posts, and a door closing off the northern end of the colonnade.
The Bull Court at Knossos is not well preserved, but it is possible that a fence of some kind ran round its edge; a fragment of fresco found in the Labyrinth shows a strongly made three-rail wooden fence with a priestess or attendant leaning on it, watching the spectacle.
Ranged along the western sides of the Bull Courts were suites of important cult chambers built in stone and mudbrick, and framed with horizontal and vertical timbering.
The interiors were plastered and decorated with frescoes which developed a complex cycle of religious ideas.
Mark Cameron (1987) came to believe, after studying these frescoes intensively, that the  West Wing of the Knossos Labyrinth in particular was given over to a whole programme of initiation rites and ordeals.
There was usually at least one chamber in the New Temples with a gypsum bench along its walls.
At Knossos, the two main chambers of the Throne Sanctuary and the principal chamber of the Snake Goddess Sanctuary had bench-altars; at Phaistos, there were two chambers with benches opening from the Central Court.
There were also pillar crypts in the West Wing.
Although the sacred character of the pillar crypts has been questioned, there is plenty of evidence that they too were cult structures.
In a pillar crypt belonging to a building on the Gypsades Hill at Knossos, 200 small conical offering cups were found, still containing remains of vegetable matter.
Under the floor of the pillar crypts in the West Wing at Knossos were deposited the ashes of animal sacrifices: the pillars above were incised repeatedly with the sacred double-axe symbol.
The crypts were small, too small to have needed a central pillar to support the ceiling, so we can only presume that the pillar had a symbolic significance to the Minoans (Plate 18).
Ferguson (1989, p. 5) mentions the idea that the pillar might have been a representation or reduction of a sacred tree.
Certainly, instances of stone worship are not unknown in antiquity, and they may preserve a vestige of the even earlier belief-system of the megalith-builders.
The Old Testament speaks of a stone raised by Jacob on the spot where he experienced a mystic vision; Jacob worshipped the stone and anointed it with oil.
Similarly, liquid libations were offered to the pillars in the pillar crypts by the Minoans, to judge from the rectangular depressions in the floor beside many of them.
On the east side of the Central Court at Knossos and Phaistos, there were suites of chambers separated from each other by pier-and-door partitions.
At Mallia, a similarly designed suite was located in the north-west corner of the temple.
At intervals round each temple there were adyta, sunken and secluded rectangular areas which are thought to have been used for important ceremonies (Marinatos 1984).
Suites of store-rooms occupied a large area of the temple.
They were used to store the very large volume of offerings and tribute that came in from the townspeople and from the people living in the surrounding countryside; administrating the inflow and redistribution of this temple tribute was a major function of the Minoan temple.
There were small sacristies and strongrooms for storing precious cult equipment; there were vestries where the priestesses put on their ceremonial dress in readiness for ritual, and refectories for the priests, priestesses, initiands and temple servants; there were service areas and kitchens.
A detailed study of the Knossos Labyrinth (Castleden 1989) shows that its design resolves into a number of distinct functional areas; using this kind of analysis, it is possible to identify several separate sanctuary suites within the temple.
It may be possible to analyse the plans of the other ancient Cretan temples in the same way.
It seems that neither temple nor town was fortified, so it was possible for the temples to grow outwards from the nucleus of the Central Court virtually without restraint.
The only restrictions to growth were the topography of the site and the West Façade.
Fronting the West Court, which was an important ceremonial area in its own right, the elaborately indented West Façade was a fixed backcloth for ritual.
In front of it, large-scale and public religious festivals took place, bringing temple and town together.
As Nanno Marinatos has perceptively argued (1987), the common architectural features of the West Courts at Knossos, Phaistos and Mallia imply a use for harvest festivals.
In each West Court there were large cylindrical granaries, and the curious pattern of paved causeways suggests that the granaries, as well as the temple entrances, were focal points.
A notable feature of the temple was the unobtrusiveness of its entrances.
Knossos had seven or eight entrances, all different in design, all more or less inconspicuous.
The entrances led into passageways that followed more or less devious routes towards the Central Court; it may be that the twists and turns of these passages had some magico-religious significance.
To the casual eye, there is little sense of planning.
All appears chaotic, yet comparisons among the temples reveals that, although complicated, their plans are ordered and carefully thought through.
The Minoan architects clearly intended to produce an effect that was bewildering, impressive and  disorienting.
Their intention was to create a narrative experience for the pilgrim or initiand, an experience full of unsettling incident and surprise.
It was one of the temple's functions to produce these effects and they are part and parcel of the Minoan religious experience; the temple itself was in a very real sense an extreme expression of that experience.
De Quincey's opium dreams were full of daemonic pomp and circumstance: they also included architectural nightmares which paralleled Piranesi's neurotic and obsessive drawings of complex, claustrophobic interiors.
De Quincey frequently dreamt of a fantastically elaborate and labyrinthine building.
The Minoans, under the influence of exactly the same drug, may well have had visions of a fantastic, maze-like building, and based the design for the Labyrinth on their visions.
De Quincey's dream was, on his own account, of a building vision described by Wordsworth in The Excursion , Book 11:
Some such vision, provoked by religious ecstasy and zeal, stimulated by opium, may have lain behind the elaborate and dizzying designs of the Minoan temples.
As the temples increasingly absorbed the Minoans' religious vitality, so the cults of the peak sanctuaries declined.
They were still visited; sacrifice was still made; the deities were still honoured; but the real seat of religious power now lay in the temples.
It was a natural enough development.
Secular, economic power gravitated towards the lowlands and to the urban centres in particular.
It was inevitable that spiritual power should devolve on the urban temples.
Probably the priestesses systematically brought the peak sanctuaries and other rural shrines under their control, just as Solomon was to do a thousand years afterwards, building an urban temple and then extending his power over the high places.
When the temples were rebuilt in 1700 BC, the pottery style reflected a change of philosophy of some kind.
The Marine Style, with its fish, seaweed, shell and octopus motifs, shows a concern for the abundance of life in the dark waters of the Mediterranean; implicitly, it invokes the god Poteidan or  Poseidon, to whom the Knossos Labyrinth was dedicated (Castleden 1989, pp. 112- 13, 138–9).
The twilit subterranean chambers carried undertones of the cave sanctuaries.
The Throne Sanctuary at Knossos was specifically designed to simulate the peak sanctuary environment.
Gods and goddesses were lured to the towns.
It was as if a diffuse religious power permeating the whole island was gathered and transferred from the mountains and hillsides to the temples and then, after the destructions of 1470 BC, to just one temple, at Knossos.
After the virtual abandonment of the Knossos Labyrinth in 1380 BC, that power retreated underground, to the cave sanctuaries.
It was in this late period, between 1380 and 1200 BC, that the cave cult really came into its own, acting as a night-safe for the whole fund of Minoan religious beliefs.
From this cave cult sprang the peculiar, complicated, mixed-origin myth of the birth of Zeus Cretagenes, ‘Cretan-born Zeus’, as it was told by the Greeks in the fifth century BC.
BURIAL CUSTOMS
The care which bereaved Minoans sometimes lavished on their dead suggests a belief in the AFTERLIFE, and the idea of an Elysium, a pleasant Heaven awaiting people at the end of their earthly lives, is thought to have been a Minoan creation.
It is not known whether the Minoans had any concept of reward or retribution in the afterlife, though they seem to have believed that the human soul survived death.
The butterfly, a common motif in Minoan art, is thought to symbolize the soul (Alexiou, undated, p. 121).
The fact that the butterfly is engraved on circular gold weights from a tomb at Mycenae may indicate that, at least in the Mycenean period, there was a belief in the weighing of souls to determine their fate after death.
Bronze scale-pans have been found in Late Minoan tombs in Crete itself.
Since most burials have been robbed, archaeology rarely gives us the sort of fine detail about the Minoans that we would like to have.
The Agia Triadha sarcophagus is invaluable in showing us the funeral ceremonies that were offered for some important person around 1400 BC.
They consisted of an elaborate sequence of libations poured into a large vessel on an altar between two double-axes mounted on painted pyramidal bases; grave-goods were dedicated to the sheepskin-draped statue of a god in front of another altar; offerings of food and drink were dedicated at a third altar set up in front of a sacred tree shrine; music was played and an ox and two goats were sacrificed.
The Early Minoan burials were mainly in collective tombs, each one a family grave that continued in use over several generations.
A small settlement might have just one tomb: Knossos was ringed by such tombs.
Nearly all the burials were inhumation burials.
The isolated cremations found in the Ailias cemetery on the eastern fringes of Knossos and dating to around 1600 BC may be the graves of foreigners from Anatolia, where  cremation burials were the norm.
More usually, the body was bound up in a folded position, with the knees under the chin.
Then it was simply laid on the floor of the tomb, or forced into a large storage jar which was laid on its side in the tomb; a third alternative, which became more popular with time, was to place the trussed corpse in a clay box or larnax.
The earlier collective tombs were cut, like artificial caves, out of the soft limestone.
They had no particular design, often had several connecting chambers, and continued in use right through to the Late Minoan period.
A large rock-cut tomb dating to 1600–1500 BC has been excavated at Katsamba; its grave-goods included pottery cups, engraved seals (one imported from Syria), and inlaid gold rings.
In some parts of Crete the rock was too hard to carve in this way, so caves or built tombs were used instead.
At Mochlos, there were some rectangular tombs which belonged to wealthy families.
In the Mesara Plain the built tombs were usually circular.
A classic example of these is the Kamilari tomb near Phaistos, which was built around 2000 BC and was in use for several hundred years.
Its massive cyclopean ring of masonry still stands to a height of 3 metres.
Perhaps it was never roofed: if so, it must have had a very high corbelled vault, either in stone or in mudbrick.
On the whole, the evidence points to these Mesara round tombs having been roofed; the surviving wall stumps are very thick and have faces that slope inwards, and there are sometimes fallen wall blocks in the interior, suggesting a collapsed beehive vault.
Vaults with a ground-level diameter of 9 metres or so, such as the one at Platanos (Figure 53C), were certainly technically feasible; they must have been imposing structures in their original state.
The Mesara tombs often had annexes as overspill ossuaries and cult rooms built onto them.
The Apesokari tomb (Figure 53B) had burials in the corbelled circular chamber and in some of the outer chambers: it also had a rectangular cult room.
In the vestibule was a niche with a small bench-altar to support a piece of stalactite as an idol.
Outside the tomb entrance was a larger, rectangular altar which may have been used for sacrificial offerings.
The vaulted tombs at Lebena, or Lendas, on the south coast have a similar layout to those in the Mesara Plain, with a round main chamber and rectangular cult rooms adjoining.
There has always been a tendency to build houses for the dead to resemble houses for the living.
The curious thing about the Minoans is that they were, in Mesara at least, building round tombs and rectangular houses: the rooms were rectangular even in the neolithic period.
It may be that the round tombs are a reference back to a very ancient and primitive type of house, long-since abandoned except for tomb architecture, or they may be an exotic, a design imported from a foreign land where both tombs and houses were round.
In favour of the latter explanation is the sudden appearance of the Cretan round tomb in about 3000 BC: they are not known in Crete before that time.
It may be, then, that the idea of the circular tombs was brought in by the   immigrants who arrived in Crete from Anatolia at the beginning of the bronze age.
At the beautiful ridge-top site of Phourni, above the Minoan town of Arkhanes, there is an extraordinary Minoan mortuary-complex which seems to have been in use continuously from 2500 to 1250 BC (Plate 19).
It is still not fully excavated, but it has already emerged as one of the richest and  most extensive prehistoric cemeteries in the Aegean.
It has several circular tholos tombs, of which one, ‘E’, dates to the Pre-Temple Period, 2500–2000 BC.
But of all the tombs so far uncovered at Phourni, Tholos ‘A’, which is located well to the north of the two main mortuary houses, is the most spectacular.
It dates from about 1390 BC, just a few years before the fall of the Labyrinth on the plain below.
It consists of an 8-metre-diameter beehive tomb, with a large square capstone still in place, and a 20-metre-long entrance passage on the east side; it is like a simpler, trial-run version of the great tholos tombs at Mycenae, and it may well be that the Mycenean tholos tombs originated as a Minoan idea (Plate 20).
Phourni's Tholos ‘A’ had its main chamber robbed in antiquity, but in 1965 the side chamber yielded the first untouched high-status burial of Minoan Crete.
Among the grave goods were 140 pieces of gold jewellery, which had originally adorned the corpse of an important woman, who may have been a queen or a high priestess.
With the great lady's body were the remains of a sacrificed bull and horse.
Near this tomb are several large rectangular mortuary-complexes, consisting of many small rectangular chambers, and these seem to have evolved as family tombs for the Minoan township of Arkhanes, whose distant successor Phourni still overlooks (Plate 19).
The Temple Tomb on the southern edge of Minoan Knossos is a tomb like no other in Crete (Figure 53E).
The tomb chamber is a relatively small square chamber cut out of the living rock of the Gypsades hillside.
Its walls and floor were sheathed in gypsum slabs, whilst its ceiling was painted blue and supported by a gypsum pillar.
The original burials, placed there around 1550 BC, were unfortunately robbed in antiquity.
All that was found in the tomb chamber when it was excavated was the apparently hasty, late burial in a pit under the floor of an old man and a child.
Was the man the last Minoan king or the last Minoan high-priest of Knossos?
The date of this burial, around 1380 BC, may be very significant, for it was then that the Labyrinth was virtually abandoned and the development of Minoan culture took a new direction.
Sinclair Hood (1971, pp. 144–5) writes of the Temple Tomb as the only certain example of a Minoan royal tomb, but its status is so peculiar that we cannot be sure who was buried there, either at the beginning or at the close of its period of use.
The building attached to the front of the tomb chamber included another pillar crypt (later partitioned and turned into an ossuary), some cult rooms, a walled courtyard and a portico.
The Temple Tomb was evidently a very special tomb, but its precise original function seems to be impossible to ascertain.
It may, at the time when it was built, have been intended as a final resting-place for the priestesses of the Knossos Labyrinth, rather than, as is often assumed, for the Knossian kings.
Another allegedly ‘royal’ tomb is the Great Tomb at Chrysolakkos, which   stands at the northern edge of the Minoan town of Mallia, a little inland from the cliffed headland, and it is thought to have served as a family vault for Mallia's royal family in the New Temple Period (for instance, by Hood 1971, p. 145).
This was a large rectangular building in the same tradition as the mortuary houses at Phourni, with a rabbit warren of small chambers inside and a colonnade along the east front; it differs from the Phourni mortuary houses in having been built all at once.
The surviving lower courses of the outer wall are of smooth, beautifully cut and polished blocks of dense grey stone.
It is obviously significant that many of the Minoan tomb entrances open towards the east; the Temple Tomb and the Tomb of the Lady of Arkhanes both face east, the direction from which the rising sun's resuscitating rays shine.
The east-facing Chrysolakkos colonnade probably had the same ritual significance.
Unfortunately, the burials were thoroughly plundered for their precious grave-goods in antiquity, and we must be thankful that at least the Wasp or Bee Pendant survived the looting (Figure 28).
The local name of the place, the Gold Pit, implies that a good deal of gold was robbed from the site before the French archaeologists started excavating it in the 1920s, and there is good reason to suppose that the so-called Aegina Treasure, which is now in the British Museum, originated here.
The ‘Royal Tomb’ at Isopata was a later rich tomb, post-dating the Thera eruption.
The Isopata Tomb, dating to 1450–1400 BC, was an impressive chamber tomb with a large, corbelled, rectangular chamber and a high stone vault.
It had a long entrance passage sloping down from the east.
The Isopata Tomb was wrecked in 1941–2, during the Battle of Crete, by being turned into a gun emplacement by German soldiers, so drawing British shellfire upon it.
The collective burials continued, but the size of the tombs gradually diminished.
By the time of the Thera eruption in 1470 BC, most of the burials were in small tombs holding at most four members of a family.
Usually the burials were accompanied by some personal grave-goods, such as a sealstone or a metal signet ring, but they were also usually robbed soon afterwards.
In the Late Minoan period new styles of burial came in, the larnax burials.
The larnax was a clay sarcophagus, often with panelled sides and gabled lids, and elaborately decorated all over with painted images.
From their shapes, they were apparently copied from wooden originals, and it seems likely that the clay coffins are really copies in clay of wooden clothes-chests.
Just occasionally, wooden chests were used as coffins, but only for very wealthy people.
The Agia Triadha Sarcophagus is a superb example of a larnax, though made of stone coated in plaster.
It is beautifully painted with scenes of the dead person's funeral along the sides, and scenes of Elysium, or the way to Elysium, on the ends; smiling goddesses in plumed head-dresses ride along in a chariot drawn by a griffin on one end, and by a goat on the other, presumably ready to convey the human soul to Elysium, to live ever after with the gods.
The Agia Triadha sarcophagus is a marvellous work of Minoan art; but it is also a positive and glowing affirmation of the Minoans' beliefs concerning human mortality and the life after death.